THE CRISIS 
LABOR NUMBER 
ONE DOLLA R A YEA R 
September 
1919 TE N CENTS A COP Y NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
Presiden t 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Chairma n Boar d o f Directors 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Actin g Treasure r 
MAJO R J . E . SPINGAR N 
Secretar y 
JOH N R. SHILLAD Y 
Directo r o f Publication s an d Researc h 
DR . w. E . B . DUBOI S 
Fiel d Secretar y 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Assistan t Secretar y 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
FACIN G FACTS — 
The war is ended—the peace terms signed by Germany—President Wilson 
is home again after fighting for the rights of the oppressed peoples of 
Europe— 
YE T I N AMERICA — 
Thirty-six Negroes are known to have been lynched since the armistice 
was signed last November—one of them a woman—six of the others lynched 
by being burned at the stake. 
Negroes are disfranchised in whole or in part in at least fourteen states of 
the Union. 
Negroes are "Jim-Crowed" in all states of the South. 
Negroes are deprived of their just share of school funds. 
Negroes are robbed and exploited and then dared to resent it. 
Negroes are kept out of lucrative and dignified positions in many instances 
for no other reason than their color. 
D O YO U BELIEV E THA T DEMOCRAC Y IS ONL Y FO R TH E 
WHIT E RACE ? 
If you do, then you should riot be a member of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People. 
But, if you believe that justice and freedom belong to all races then you 
should be a member. 
HEL P EN D TH E FARC E MASQUERADIN G A S DEMOCRAC Y 
B Y JOININ G TH E ASSOCIATIO N WHIC H IS FIGHTIN G 
T O EN D DISCRIMINATIO N BECAUS E O F RACE — 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPL E National Office, 70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Dat e 1919 
Th e CRISI S is sent without furthe r charge to member s payin g two dollar s or more . 
Majo r J . E. Spingarn, Actin g Treasurer , 
70 Fift h Avenue , New York , 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year in the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People , wit h the stipulation tha t one 
dollar of any amount remitted herewith in excess of one dollar is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
Nam e 
Street 
Cit y and State LABO R NUMBE R 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol. 18—No. 5 SEPTEMBER, 1919 Whole No. 107 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . A Drawing. Laura Wheeler. 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 245 
NEGRO LABORER S 250-251 
SOL BUTLE R 255 
TH E EMBASS Y FRO M ABYSSINIA 258 
ARTICLES 
TH E OPPORTUNIT Y OF NEGRO LABOR . Dr. George E. Haynes 236 
A N APPEA L T O BLAC K FOLK . The Secretary of Labor 239 
TH E NEGRO AN D TH E LABO R UNION. A n N. A . A . C. P. Report 239 
TH E RIOTS. A n N. A . A . C. P. Investigation 241 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 231 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE 239 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 244 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 246 
TH E HORIZON 252 
COMING ISSUES OF THE CRISIS 
Th e October CRISI S will be our annual Children's Number. Pictures must reach us before 
September 1. 
Th e November CRISI S will begin our Tenth Year. Wit h that issue the size will be increased 
to sixty-eight pages and the price to One Dollar and a Half a year, Fifteen Cents a copy. 
Th e December CRISI S will be our annual Christmas Number. 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADL7RESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks* 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating tn colored people arc desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1010, at the post office at New York, New York 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 228 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
NEXT TER M OPENS SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohio 
(Established 18Bf) 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science 
and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Government for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' 
Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. 
Courses of Study—College (Scientific, Classical and Educational) ; Normal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theological (Regular and English); Academy 
—Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 
gymnasium just completed. 
School opens September, 1919. For 
information address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, 
President. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Next regular term begins 
Thursday, September 18, 1010. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July 1. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 229 
Atlanta University 
l a beautifull y located i n the Cit y o f Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, normal 
School and College, wit h Manua l trainin g and domesti c science. Amon g the teacher s ar e graduate:. 
o f Tale , Harvard , Dartmout h an d Wellesley . Fift y 
year s of successful wor k have been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the south. Grad ­
uates ar e almost universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA . GA . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA. 
Three Departments, College, Theological and High School. Work 
of highest grade. Pre-medical 
course in College. Thoroughness 
and accuracy emphasized. New 
year begins September 29th . For 
information address the President. 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1919 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildings with modem conveniences; talented faculty; 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories; co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Course s o f Study : 
Domestic Science, Public speaking, Music; 
Pre-Academy. Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four yeare with diploma. 
Pre-Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, four years with A B degree. 
Fiftieth year opens September 24, 1919. 
Expenses, $15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expenses. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E 
Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Noted fo r Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following' departments: College , Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science 
and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses ver y reasonable. 
Fo r catalo g and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KEUL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville, Tenn . 
WILE Y UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class by Texa s 
and Louisiana State Boards of Education. Harvard , 
Yal e and Columbia represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
RIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHAHLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the unice s of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School. Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course Is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Science* offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific. German Is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics unde r faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training . Sewing, Printing and Tailoring . 
First Semester begins September 10 , 19W, 
Fo r further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHO P J. S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISIS, 230 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MEDICAL COLLEGE OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
Next Session Opens October 1, 1919 
ADMISSIO N 
Candidates for admission must be graduates of approved Colleges or Scientific 
Schools with two years of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, 
chemistry and biology, English, mathematics and French or German, or graduates 
of recognized high schools with two years of instruction, including laboratory 
work, in physics, chemistry and biology, English, mathematics and French or 
German. 
INSTRUCTIO N 
The course of instruction occupies four years, and especial emphasis is laid 
upon practical work in the laboratories, in the wards of the Freedman's Hospital 
and in the Dispensary. 
Full corps of instructors, well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital 
facilities. 
The Medical College is rated in Class A by the Council on Medical Education of the American Medical Association and is a member of the Association of 
American Medical Colleges. Recognized by the Conjoint Board of England. 
TH E DENTA L COLLEG E 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school 
course. The course of instruction occupies four years. Unexcelled facilities for 
practical work. 
TH E PHARMACEUTICA L COLLEG E 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school 
course. The course of instruction occupies three years and leads to the degree of 
Pharmaceutical Chemist. 
The annual announcement, application blanks and additional information concerning either course may be obtained by addressing 
WILLIAM C. McNEILL, Secretary 
Fifth and W Streets, N.W., Washington, D. C. 
A. and T. COLLEGE 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
The NEGR O AGRICULTURA L and TECH ­
NICA L COLLEG E offers to the Negro youth 
of the state opportunitie s that none can 
afford to neglect. 
1. Th e Englis h Departmen t offers practica l 
course s i n Literar y Training . 
2. Mechanica l graduate s an d undergradu ­
ates tak e hig h ran k i n Mechanica l pursuits 
suc h as Carpentry , Bricklaying , Plastering , 
Blacksmithing , Auto-Mechanic s an d Broom -
making , etc. 
3. Th e Agricultura l Departmen t give s students carefull y arrange d wor k bot h i n theoretica l an d practica l branche s o f agriculture , 
as Dairying , Greenhous e Work , Poultry , Be e 
Culture , Fiel d Crops, etc. 
4. Th e Teache r Trainin g Departmen t pre ­
pare s youn g me n to mee t the demand s fo r 
traine d indust ria l teachers. Graduate s will 
find a usefu l an d remunerativ e field. 
6. Th e Reserv e t Ifficcrs' Trainin g Corps, 
unde r direc t supervisio n o f U . S. Officers give s 
Physica l an d Militar y Training . Fre e uni -
form s i n fou r years (4) wort h abou t $160.00, 
an d thos e wh o successfull y an d satisfactoril y 
complet e the first tw o years wor k casli fees 
allowe d amountin g to ove r $100.00 annually . 
Graduate s fro m this divisio n wil l be eligibl e 
fo r a commissio n fro m the Presiden t o f the 
Unite d State s fo r positio n a s Secon d Lieu ­
tenants i n th e V. S. Army . 
6. Nigh t Schoo l fo r thos e wh o canno t atten d the Day Classes. 
Fal l Ter m begin s Septembe r 1st, 1910. 
Lodgin g capacit y limite d to 150 student-. 
Thos e preferrin g to roo m o n campu s shoul d 
arrang e Lodgin g Reservation s at once . 
Fo r furthe r information , address 
J . B . DUDLEY , President 
THE FLORIDA AGRICULTURAL AND 
MECHANICAL COLLEGE 
TALLAHASSEE - - - FLORIDA 
NATHA N B . YOUNG , Presiden t 
DEPARTMENTS : 
1. Academic 
a. High School. 
b. Normal School. 
c. College. 
d. Music. 
2. Agricultural. 
a. General. 
b. Vocational. 
3. Mechanic Arts 
a. Technical. 
b. Vocational. 
4. Home Economics 
a. Domestic Arts. 
b. Domestic Science. 
c. Nurse-Training. 
EQUIPMENT : 
1. 250 Acres. 
2. 21 Buildings. 
3. 42 Officers of Instruction and 
Administration. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 18—No. 5 SEPTEMBER, 1919 Whole No. 107 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. Du Bois 
LET US REASON TOGETHER 
BROTHER S we are on the 
Great Deep. We have cast 
off on the vast voyage which 
wil l lead to Freedom or Death. 
Fo r three centuries we have suffered and cowered. No race ever 
gave Passive Resistance and 
Submission to Evil longer, more piteous trial. 
Today we raise the terrible weapon 
of Self-Defense. When the murderer 
comes, he shall not longer strike us 
i n the back. When the armed lynchers gather, we too must gather 
armed. When the mob moves, we 
propose to meet it with bricks and 
clubs and guns. 
But we must tread here with solemn caution. We must never let 
justifiable self-defense against individuals become blind and lawless offense against all white folk. We 
must not seek reform by violence. 
We must not seek Vengeance. 
"Vengeance is Mine, " saith the Lord ; 
or to put it otherwise, only Infinite 
Justice and Knowledge can assign 
blame i n this poor world, and we ourselves are sinful men, struggling desperately with our own crime and ig ­
norance. We must defend ourselves, 
our homes, our wives and children 
against the lawless without stint or 
hesitation; but we must carefully and 
scrupulously avoid on our own part 
bitter and unjustifiable aggression 
against anybody. 
This line is difficult to draw. In 
the South the Police and Public 
Opinion back the mob and the least resistance on the part of the innocent black 
victim is nearly always construed as 
a lawless attack on society and government. In the North the Police and 
the Public wil l dodge and falter, but 
in the end they wil l back the Right 
when the Truth is made clear to them. 
But whether the line between just 
resistance and angry retaliation is 
hard or easy, we must draw it carefully, not i n wild resentment, but in 
grim and sober consideration; and 
then back of the impregnable fortress 
of the Divine Right of Self-Defense, 
which is sanctioned by every law of 
God and man, i n every land, civilized 
and uncivilized, we must take our unfaltering stand. 
Honor, endless and undying Honor, 
to every man, black or white, who i n 
Houston, East St. Louis, Washington 
and Chicago gave his life for 
Civilization and Order. 
If the United States is to be a Land 
of Law, we would live humbly and 
peaceably in it—working, singing, 
learning and dreaming to make it and 
ourselves nobler and better; if it is 
to be a Land of Mobs and Lynchers, 
we might as well die today as tomorrow. 
"And how can man die better 
"Than facing fearful odds 
"For the ashes of his fathers 
"And the temples of his gods?" 
LABOR OMNIA VINCIT 
LABO R conquers all things— 
but slowly, 0, so slowly. Eve r 
the weary worldlings seek 
some easier, quicker way— 
the Wa y of Wealth, of Privilege, of 
Chance, of Power; but in the end all 
that they get—Food, Raiment, Palace 
and Pleasure—is the result of Toil, 
231 232 THE CRISIS 
but not always of their own toil. The 
great cry of world Justice today is 
that the fruit of toil go to the Laborer 
who produces it. In this labor of 
Production we recognize effort of all 
sorts—lifting, digging , carrying, 
measuring, thinking, foreseeing; but 
we are refusing to recognize Chance, 
Birt h or Monopoly as just grounds 
for compelling men to serve men. 
In this fight for Justice to Labor 
the Negro looms large. In Afric a 
and the South Seas, in all the 
Americas and dimly in Asia he is a mighty 
worker and potentially, perhaps, the 
mightiest. Bu t of all laborers cheated 
of their just wage from the world's 
dawn to today, he is the poorest and 
bloodiest. 
In the United States he has taken 
his fastest forward step, rising from 
owned slave to tied serf, from servant 
to day laborer, from scab to half-recognized union man in less than a 
century. Armies, mobs, lynchers, 
laws and customs have opposed him, 
yet he lurches forward. His very socalled indolence is his dimly-conceived 
independence; his singing soul is his 
far-flaming ideal; and nothing but organized and persistent murder and 
violence can prevent him from becoming in time the most efficient laboring force in the modern world. 
Meantime, in the world round him, 
the battle of Industrial Democracy is 
being fought and the white laborers 
who are fighting it are not sure 
whether they want their black fellowlaborer as ally or slave. If they could 
make him a slave, they probably 
would; but since he can underbid 
their wage, they slowly and reluctantly invite him into the union. But 
can they bring themselves inside the 
Union to regard him as a man—a 
fellow-voter, a brother? 
No—not yet. An d there lies the 
most stupendous labor problem of the 
twentieth century—transcending the 
problem of Labor and Capital, of 
Democracy, of the Equality of Women 
—for it is the problem of the 
Equality of Humanity in the world as 
against white domination of black 
and brown and yellow serfs. 
THE BLACK MAJORITY 
SEVERA L times ' TH E CRISIS 
has engaged the fickle attentions of the United States 
Congress. The last occasion 
was when Senator James Reed, of 
Missouri, discovered to his horror 
that the proposed League of Nations 
would have seventeen "colored" and 
only fifteen "white" nations: 
"First, How wil l Senators from the 
South who represent states which 
have contended that the white race 
alone is fit to control the destiny of 
the States of America , who have, 
therefore, contended that the black 
man of the South should not be permitted to cast his individual ballot to 
be counted against the ballot of the 
white man—how can they contend 
that Liberia , Haiti, and other Negro 
or semi-Negro nations should be permitted to sit at the council table of 
the world and each cast a vote equal 
to that of the United States? 
"And , Senators, you wil l have that 
question to answer to your people; 
and at that point, to show you that 
it is a living question and that you 
are playing with fire, I call your attention to TH E CRISIS, a Negro publication, which, I understand, is a 
paper of wide influence and power. 
I read an editorial from the Ma y 
number 
"How shrewdly this man has 
looked into the situation! I venture 
to say that the majority of the men 
in this room did not anticipate that 
truth. 
" 'What we cannot accomplish before the choked conscience of 
America, we have an infinitely better 
chance to accomplish before the organized public opinion of the world. 
Peace for us is not simply relief from 
wars like the past, but relief from the 
specter of the great wa r of races, OPINION 233 
which wil l be absolutely inevitable 
unless the selfish nations of white 
civilization are curbed by a great 
world congress, in which black and 
white and yellow sit and speak and 
act. The refusal to adopt the 
Japanese race equality amendment is 
deplorable, but it is an argument for, 
and not against, a nation of nations. 
It is the beginning of a mighty end.' 
"Chew on that quid in your reflective moments, you men of the South!" 
But McKellar , of Tennessee, 
brushes all this pleasantly aside: 
"The argument is idle. I think the 
Senators from South Carolina and 
Mississippi will compare favorably 
with the Representatives of other 
States in this body, regardless of the 
black majority in each of these 
States." 
But can Mississippi and South 
Carolina forever disregard the "Black 
Majority" ? Can the dark majority 
of mankind always be ruled by the 
white minority? An d if not, will not 
a little thinking and forbearance now 
save a world full of future strife 
and horror? 
A t any rate, the dark people of the 
world have this grim satisfaction: 
The white world wil l be so busy fighting and hating itself during the next 
century that it will have scant leisure 
to keep black folk in their place. 
TH E AMERICA N LEGIO N 
THE American Legion is composed, as President Wilson 
tells us, of "the men who have 
served in the Army , Navy and 
Marine Corps, and who are now banding together to preserve the splendid 
traditions of that service." 
The Legion was formed at preliminary meetings, held in Paris and St. 
Louis, and sought to settle the inevitable color question by giving all authority as to admitting posts to the 
state bodies. The South promised 
faithfully to treat Negroes fairly. A s 
a result, in South Carolina "our committee was told flatly by the Exe ­
cutive Committee of the state organization that it was a white man's organization and that Negroes would 
not be admitted." In Louisiana, 
Negroes were also excluded; but 
Virginia caps the climax by offering to 
admit Negroes on condition that 
Officers of state organization be 
elected by whites. 
Executive Committee be elected by 
whites. 
Time and place of meeting be fixed 
by whites. 
Delegates to national convention to 
be appointed in " equitable" 
manner between whites and 
blacks by the Executive Committee. 
Constitution may be amended by 
two-thirds vote of whites. 
This action and other considerations have given impetus to several 
all-Negro veteran associations,—The 
Grand Army of Americans in 
Washington, D. C.; The League for 
Democracy in New York; and The 
American Alliance in Richmond. There is 
room and work for such colored bodies, but every Negro soldier and 
sailor should fight to join the 
American Legion. Do not give up the battle. Organize throughout the North 
and South. In the North there wil l 
be little, if any, opposition. In the 
South every subterfuge wil l be 
sought, but force the fight. Make 
the Bourbons refuse in writing, and 
then take the question to the national 
convention. Do not help the rascals 
to wi n by giving up. 
SIGNS FRO M TH E SOUT H 
THER E are signs—faint and 
few, but hopeful—that the 
South is slowly learning the 
inevitable lesson that no true 
democracy can be confined to a sex 
or a race and live. 
In Putnam County, Ga., because a 
Negro made "some insulting remarks 
about serving white people and not 
serving a Negro," the enraged whites 
burned five Negro churches, two Ne-234 THE CRISIS 
gro schools and one schoolhouse. Immediately the more decent whites offered $1,100 reward for the criminals 
and started a fund of $5,000 toward 
rebuilding. Of course, no one wil l 
ever be punished for the arson, but 
the community did speak out in clear 
condemnation. 
In Alabama, twelve men have been 
convicted as lynchers—two to long 
jail terms. This is excellent, but we 
must add that the victim was a white 
foreigner and the lynchers were ignorant fishermen without wealth or 
influence. 
Finally, in Washington County, 
Miss., Sheriff Alexander writes to the 
public concerning a colored prisoner: 
" I have been asked by the Governor 
of the State if I wished to remove 
Williams from the county for safekeeping, or if I desired assistance 
from him in the protection of him. 
I have replied that I did not wish 
to remove the Negro and that I 
needed no outside help to protect 
him 
"No friends of mine, and I count the 
citizens of Washington County my 
friends, wil l attempt to take a prisoner out of my hands, and no man 
who is not a friend of mine and of 
law and order can do it." 
FORWARD 
WE black folk easily drift 
into intellectual provincialism. We know our 
problem and tend to radical thought in its solution, but do 
we strive to know the problems of 
other forward forging groups whose 
difficulties are inevitably intertwined 
with ours? 
Here, for instance, is the question 
of the ownership of public utilities— 
the railroads, the telegraph and telephone and the street cars—utilities 
used largely, if not primarily, by the 
working class, and businesses which 
have yielded immense fortunes to private owners in the past. 
What do we think of these questions—are we studying them? Ar e 
we intelligent on the facts? Do we 
know that the United States is almost the only civilized country that 
does not own its railroads and wires, 
and that the municipal ownership of 
street transportation is widespread? 
Or take the battle of Nort h Dakota 
under the Non-Partisan League; are 
we swallowing easily the gossip of a 
prejudiced press, or do we realize 
that these western farmers are resolutely grappling with the mightiest 
problem of present-day life—how to 
prevent the necessities of the poor 
from being simply the opportunity 
of predatory wealth to amass dangerous fortunes? Nort h Dakota is 
putting her government into the business of banking and publishing, running grain elevators and stockyards, 
packing-houses and flour mills and 
overseeing mines. Wil l she fail? 
Perhaps, but her efforts are worth 
watching, and failure never yet 
proved wrong right. 
Beyond these questions lie the 
Suffering Groups—Ireland, India, 
Russia. 
From long tradition—since the 
draft riots of the Civil War— 
Negroes have had no sympathy with the 
Irish. Bu t they must not rest in this 
unreason. Le t every colored man 
read this month a history of Ireland. 
If he does not rise from it bitter wit h 
English cruelty and hypocrisy, he is 
callous indeed. 
The cry of oppressed India sounds 
right in our own land in the persistent attempts of England to secure the 
transportation of Hindus accused of 
the treason of tryin g to make their 
country free. 
And , finally, the one new Idea of 
the World War—the idea which may 
well stand in future years as the one 
thing that made the slaughter worth 
while—is an Idea which we are like 
to fail to know because it is today OPINION 235 
hidden under the maledictions hurled 
at Bolshevism. 
It is not the murder, the anarchy, 
the hate, which for years under Czar 
and Revolution have drenched this 
weary land, but it is the vision of 
great dreamers that only those who 
work shall vote and rule. 
TH E CRISIS 
DURIN G the existence of TH E 
CRISI S (November, 1910, to 
July 1, 1919) there have been 
sold 3,885,899 copies of the 
magazine. The average net-paid 
monthly circulation has been as follows: 
1910 (2 months) 1,750 copies 
1911 9,000 
1912 22,000 
1913 27,000 
1914 31,450 " 
1915 32,156 " 
1916 37,625 
1917 41,289 
1918 75,187 
1919 (6 months) 93,650 
The total monthly net-paid circulation in 1919 has been: 
January 83,000 copies 
February 85,000 
March 92,900 " 
April 97,000 " 
May 100,000 " 
June 104,000 " 
The annual cash income has increased from $6,572 in 1911 to $23,-
865 in 1915, and $57,367 in 1918. 
This year the income wil l probably 
reach $72,000. 
These figures are gratifying and 
impressive, but the cost of publication is also high : 55% of our expense 
is for publishing, which includes paper, printing, engraving, binding, 
etc.; 23.9% goes for salaries; 10.6% 
for postage; 8.3% for general expenses, including rent; and 2.2% for 
stationery and supplies. 
TH E CRISI S costs a dime; five cents 
of that goes to the agent; the other 
five cents goes a little over half to 
the publisher, nearly a quarter to the 
employees and of the other little less 
than a quarter, half goes to postage 
and half to general expenses, stationery and supplies. 
The number of employees of THE 
CRISI S has been gradually increased, 
but we have not yet as many as we 
ought to have for the handling of 
the work. In the office there are at 
present twelve employees, including 
the Editor and the Business 
Manager. Two or three extra persons 
are brought in to help in the mailing. 
In the field there is a force of 1,200 
agents. 
The expenditure for postage has 
increased rapidly during the last few 
years. In 1913 we spent $1,615 for 
postage; in 1916 we spent $2,042; in 
1918, $4,559. Durin g six months of 
1919 we have spent $3,618, which 
means that for the year our expenditure wil l be about $7,000. 
This represents not simply an increase in the amount of mailing, but 
a large increase in the mailing rates. 
The increase in the various items 
of publishing has been large: The 
cover paper a year ago cost $8.00 per 
hundred and now costs $9.50; the 
inside stock formerly cost $6.80 and 
now costs $7.25. In December, 1917, 
composition and presswork increased 
10% ; in November, 1918, it increased 
20 % upon this. Binding which was 
$2.30 per thousand in October, 1917, 
now costs $5.25 per thousand. 
This means that the margin between income and expense is not only 
dangerously narrow, but that any increase in our size necessitates in ­
crease in price. 
In November, therefore, we are 
adding sixteen pages to our size. 
This wil l mean more illustrations, 
poetry and fiction as a permanent 
feature, and above all, one or two 
solid articles monthly on historical 
or sociological subjects affecting the 
Negro. 
May we ask that our increase to 
$1.50 a year and 15 cents a copy wil l 
not cause us to lose a single one of 
our 105,000 buyers? TH E OPPORTUNITY OF NEGRO LABOR 
DR . GEORG E E . HAYNES , 
Director of Negro Economics, U. S. Department of Labor 
AMERICA is probably facing the greatest agricultural, industrial and commercia l expansion i n he r history. Fo r this 
purpose, there must be labor, unskilled, 
semi-skilled and skilled. The cessation of 
immigratio n durin g the wa r and the emigratio n of aliens now give no promise of an 
adequate supply of laborers from abroad. 
The Negr o people furnis h the largest potentia l supply available . This situation offers the long-sought economic opportunity 
fo r the Negr o worker. It emphasizes, 
however, question s 
of relations of white 
workers, whit e employers and Negro 
workers on terms of 
ful l justice and opportunity. I n the 
light of recent riots 
and the question 
of Negroes i n the 
Chicago stockyards, 
thes e statement s 
ma y seem too optimistic . Bu t a brie f 
sketch of the facts 
given here wil l indicate some of the 
grounds for faith . 
Le t us look more 
i n detail at the 
facts: Americ a faces 
a great economic expansion. She has 
already been called 
upon to furnis h supplies for rebuildin g 
and feeding Europe. The markets of 
Africa, Asia and South America are open to 
her as never before. The home market, 
after the self-denials of war, is callin g fo r 
the products of the factory and the farm. 
To buil d and command ships, to produce 
ra w materials from the fields, the forests 
and the mines, and to manufactur e for the 
markets, call fo r laborers. 
A n adequate labor supply is not availabl e 
through foreign immigration . A t the close 
of the wa r Americ a wa s mor e tha n three 
millions short of Immigrant laborers. 
Today, aliens in this country are going back to 
Europ e by the thousands, as fast as they 
can get passports and ocean passage. 
Investigations of the Department of Labor 
have shown tha t i n man y cities full y 50 per 
cent of aliens pla n to retur n to their na ­
tive lands. Man y of them ar e goin g because they have not hear d from their relatives durin g the war. Others desire to 
settle the estates of 
relative s killed i n 
the war, or to gai n 
lan d and other opportunitie s under 
their new governments. Furthermore , 
there is a stron g 
pressur e fo r additiona l laws restrictin g immigration . 
Mexican , Chinese 
and Japanes e laborers are alread y excluded from the 
Unite d States. 
The Negr o work ­
ers of the Nation , 
who form about oneseventh of the tota l 
workin g population, 
constitute an important availabl e source 
of labor from whic h 
to meet the increasin g demands of agriculture , industr y 
and commerce. 
Already in at least six states, where Negroes 
are an importan t labo r factor, there is a 
labor shortage. 
A n importan t change i n the occupationa l 
condition of Negr o workers took place durin g the wa r and seems likel y to continue. 
Precedin g the wa r the large majorit y o f 
Negr o workers were engaged i n domestic 
and personal service and i n agricultura l 
pursuits. The y found then a muc h more 
restricted opportunit y i n trade and transDR , GEORG E E . HAYNE S 
236 TH E OPPORTUNITY OF NEGRO LABOR 237 
portatio n and manufacturin g and mechanica l pursuits tha n durin g and since the war. 
Durin g the wa r the doors to industria l occupations swun g open, particularl y i n the 
iron and steel industries, i n foundries, i n 
slaughterin g and meat packin g plants, i n 
automobile and automobile accessory plants, 
i n bric k and cla y product industries, in cokemakin g and i n coal mines. 
The shiftin g of large numbers of workers, whit e and colored, from agricultur e to 
industr y has created a shortage of labor 
on the farm. Planters and farmers are, 
therefore, havin g to offer increased inducements i n wages and other terms for tenants 
and laborers. Some land owners are offerin g to Negroe s lan d ownership on adjoinin g tracts, as a means of securing parttime workers fo r their own land. 
Wit h the comin g of these economic opportunities fo r whic h the Negr o has waited and 
worked, there arises, naturally , the question 
of practica l plans fo r successfully graspin g these opportunities. Th e entrance of 
the Negr o into these new fields of wor k in ­
volves far-reachin g questions of his relationship wit h whit e employers and white 
workers. These questions must be met and 
successfully solved i n the local community 
on the basis of standards and needs of the 
wage-earners of the nation, whit e and black. 
Th e Departmen t of Labo r took steps durin g the wa r to secure the co-operation and 
help of the three group interests involved 
i n adjustin g such questions. The Secretary 
of Labo r stated as the basic principl e of 
the plans tha t since Negroe s constitute 
about one-seventh of the wage-earners of 
the Unite d States, it seems only reasonable 
and righ t tha t they should have representation i n council when matters affecting 
their welfar e are being considered and decided. 
Th e plans pursued recognized also that 
the majorit y of Negr o workers are employed by whit e employers on jobs or i n 
occupations wit h whit e workers, and that 
the racia l difference is the occasion fo r 
fears, misunderstandings, prejudices and 
suspicions, thus producin g problems callin g 
for action on a co-operative basis and i n 
the ligh t of nationa l standards and ideals. 
These loca l questions have a nationa l bearin g on the welfar e of wage-earners, whit e 
and colored; on the interests of employers 
and on the interests of al l the people. 
Followin g out these principles, the Department of Labor formed co-operative 
Negro Workers' Advisory Committees by 
states, counties and cities. Servin g upon 
these committees were representatives of 
Negr o wage-earners and, either upon them 
or co-operating wit h them, whit e employers 
and, whereve r possible, whit e wage-earners. 
I n this way, connecting link s were established between whit e workers, whit e employers and the existin g organizations of 
Negr o workers, such as churches, lodges, 
labor unions, women clubs, betterment 
agencies, etc., through which the feelings, 
desires and activitie s of Negr o workers are 
expressed. 
To make these committees effective i n 
each state, the Secretary appointed 
Supervisors of Negro Economics. The Woman 
i n Industry Servic e of the Department appointed two nation a l agents to look after 
the interests of colored women in industry. 
Throug h these co-operative advisory committees the welfar e of Negr o wage-earners 
was advanced and amicable and helpful relations were established wit h white employers and whit e workers i n ten states and 
about 250 localities. 
A s indications of the results achieved, 
mention may be made here of some of the 
varied and helpful activitie s carried on by 
these committees and supervisors. Bi ­
weekly reports were made on the demand 
and supply of Negr o labor i n different localities. Fo r example, such reports were 
made regularl y from thirty-one cities and 
counties i n Ohio, from fourteen i n Michigan , 
and from sixt y i n Virginia . Throug h cooperation with the U. S. Employment 
Service, the Committees and Supervisors helped 
i n recruitin g and placin g thousands of 
workers and i n opening new lines of industries and new plants to Negr o workers, both 
male and female, i n Ohio, Michigan , Illinois, 
Virginia , Nort h Carolina , Pennsylvania , 
New Jersey, New York, Florida, and 
Mississippi. Numbers of employers in these 
states, as i n others, were advised about improvements and methods of dealing wit h 
Negro workers. The supervisors in 
Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, New Jersey, North 
Carolin a and Mississipp i gave a large 
amount of such advisory service. 
Complaints about the conditions and treatment 
of Negr o workers were brought to the attention of employers. Followin g the armistice, special assistance wa s given i n formin g and makin g effective for Negr o soldiers 238 TH E CRISIS 
the Placement Bureaus for Returning 
Soldiers and Sailors. For example, in Illinois 
volunteer workers solicited b y telephone or 
persona l calls more tha n a thousand employers i n the interest of returnin g Illinois 
Negr o troops and about 5,000 letters i n 
their behalf wer e sent out. 
Conferences wit h employers and leaders 
of Negr o workers wer e held i n man y localities, often i n co-operation wit h local organ ­
izations and authorities. Fo r instance, i n 
Mississipp i durin g December and January , 
more tha n thirt y conferences of from 75 
to 300 Negr o school teachers and ministers 
wer e visited i n co-operation wit h the Boar d 
of Educatio n of tha t state. Precedin g the 
establishment of the state and loca l committees i n the ten states, state conferences 
were held. Fou r of these were called and 
presided over by the governors of the states. 
Sixteen sectional conferences were held. 
One informa l nationa l conference, wit h 
representatives from forty-five welfar e 
agencies, boards and organizations, Nort h 
and South, dealing wit h the welfar e of 
Negr o workers, was held i n Washingto n last 
February . A t these conferences programs 
of wor k and plans of co-operation were 
adopted and put into operation. A t the in ­
forma l nationa l conference such a program 
and plans nationa l i n scope were adopted 
and recommended to the Departmen t and 
are now bein g pu t into operation. 
One of the most significant pieces of wor k 
begun, but not yet completed on account of 
failur e of appropriations, was the study of 
the experience of employers i n industrie s 
tha t employed Negr o workers durin g 1918-
19. This study was begun before the close 
of the wa r 'and continued into the present 
year. U p to the time it was stopped, records from 244 typica l plants employin g 
Negroes i n seven states wit h a tota l of 
about 35,000 workers, whit e and colored, 
had been secured. A ful l report on Negr o 
Migratio n i n 1916-17 was edited and published. 
The figures are not yet available, but 
two genera l indications have already been 
announced by the Department: First , that 
i n al l these plants Negr o workers and whit e 
workers wer e employed wit h apparently 
good feelin g on both sides. Second, wit h 
here and there an exception, the Negr o 
workers i n the matte r of turnover, absenteeism, wag e scales, quantity and qualit y of 
the wor k on whic h they were employed, 
compared favorabl y wit h the whit e work ­
ers i n the same plan t on the same work . 
Her e is substantia l answe r to the old charge 
of shiftlessness and laziness. 
Wit h the new expansio n of America n 
agriculture , industr y and commerc e an d 
wit h the prospect of a labor shortage durin g the next decade, adjustments must be 
made whic h wil l assure ful l opportunit y 
and justic e to Negr o workers, whic h wil l 
safeguard the struggle s of whit e workers 
fo r highe r standards of wages, hours and 
workin g conditions, an d whic h wil l give due 
consideration to the productive interests of 
employers and the economic interests of the 
entire nation. To those wh o have considered the question carefully , the experiment 
already made b y the Departmen t of Labo r 
demonstrates tha t practica l results to this 
end ca n be achieved throug h the co-operative Negr o Workers' Advisor y Committees, 
described above, linke d wit h and workin g 
through existin g organizations, or throug h 
simila r plans. Eac h communit y has felt 
the freedom of loca l autonomy, has ha d the 
experience of other communitie s as examples and inspiratio n and ha s ha d help of 
nationa l standards, needs and policies 
through the Federal Government. The 
Secretary of Labor has continued the 
Department of Negro Economics even after the 
failur e of appropriation s asked fo r it from 
Congress. Man y individuals and organiza ­
tions have endorsed his action. 
The problems of the futur e are man y 
and wil l cal l fo r racia l good wil l and cooperation on a basis of fai r pla y and justic e 
to all . Th e Negr o needs help i n buildin g 
up a leadership tha t wil l guar d his interest 
and guide his steps towar d thrift and efficiency. Livin g conditions, such as housin g and sanitation, recreation, schools an d 
communit y life , must receive attention. 
Bette r relations between whit e workers, 
whit e employers, and Negr o workers on a 
basis tha t wil l insur e a man's chance, equa l 
wages, hours and conditions of labo r fo r 
Negr o workers requir e some means by 
which they ma y meet i n council. 
A s the Negr o faces the responsibilitie s of 
these new opportunitie s the plans of labor 
adjustment carrie d out b y the Departmen t 
of Labo r furnis h a meetin g groun d to al l 
under impartia l auspices wher e employers 
and employees of the two races ma y meet 
and not only adjust their differences, but 
form constructive plans fo r mutua l help. A N APPEAL T O BLACK FOLK 
TH E SECRETAR Y OF LABO R 
M y dear Dr. Haynes: 
SO importan t do I consider the informa ­
tion, advice, an J departmenta l aid furnished through your work as Director of 
Negro Economics, a war service of the 
Department of Labor, which I created in order to 
harmoniz e the labor relations of white workers, Negr o workers and whit e employers, 
and thereby to promote the welfar e of all 
wage-earners i n the Unite d States, that I 
hereby request yo u to continue the service. 
Owin g to our failur e to get the appropriations asked for from Congress, it wil l be 
necessary for yo u to continue without the 
field staff that would enable you to gather 
informatio n and give assistance more 
promptl y and fully . Ba t I need your assistance i n this wor k of conciliation and wil l 
mak e such provision fo r retainin g it as is 
possible. 
I hope that the white and colored citizens, both Nort h and South, who have so 
heartily and beneficially co-operated wit h 
you, wil l continue their co-operation under 
the difficult circumstances in which the 
Department is involved due to curtailed funds. 
B y correspondence wit h such citizens, you 
ma y enable the Department of Labo r to 
continue i n some degree the valuabl e service 
you have rendered i n dealing wit h the delicate and difficult problems touching Negr o 
labor, and thus to serve employers and 
workers of both races and al l sections. 
Le t me supplement this request wit h the 
most emphatic assurances of my apprecia ­
tion of your personal qualities as well as 
the value of your work. 
Yours very truly , 
(Signed) W . E . WILSON , 
Secretary. 
TH E NEGRO AND TH E LABOR UNION 
A N N . A . A . C. P . REPOR T 
IN his study of the "Negro Artisan," 
Atlanta University, 1902, Dr. DuBois 
sums up the matte r of the relation of the 
Negr o to the labo r union i n the followin g 
statement: 
"Th e rul e of admission of Negroes to 
unions throughout the country is the sheer 
necessity of guardin g wor k and wages. I n 
those trades where large numbers of 
Negroes are skilled they find easy admittance 
i n the parts of the country where their 
competition is felt. I n all other trades they 
are barred from the unions save i n exceptiona l cases, either by open or silent color 
discrimination . Ther e are exceptions to 
this rule . Ther e are cases where the whites 
have shown a rea l feeling of brotherhood; 
there are cases where the blacks, through 
incompetence and carelessness, have forfeited their righ t to the advantages of organization . Bu t on the whole, a careful, 
unprejudiced survey of the facts leads one 
to believe tha t the above statement is true 
approximatel y al l over the land. " 
This view is as correct i n 1919 as it wa s 
i n 1902, but the position of the Negr o artisa n has, i n the meantime, greatl y changed. 
Wit h the Europea n Wa r and its shortage 
of immigran t labor, the colored ma n has 
entered into the industr y of the Unite d 
States. Nort h and South he no longer 
stands at the foot of the ladder, doing only 
the heaviest unskilled work ; he stil l performs man y of these tasks, but thousands 
have moved up the rungs and are competing wit h the whit e ma n i n well-paid 
skilled labor. This makes his organization 
necessary to the labor movement of the 
Unite d States, and it explains the extra ­
ordinar y interest and even enthusiasm man ­
ifested fo r him at the recent annua l conference of the American Federation of 
Labor. 
The conference met i n Atlanti c Cit y i n 
June and on the thirteenth of tha t month 
the Negr o members made themselves heard. 
They spoke i n no uncertain terms. Ther e 
were twenty-three of them, where the preceding yea r there had been only six. Amon g 
the group were the representatives from 
the Freight Handlers and Helpers, 
Memphis; the Shipbuilders' Helpers, Tampa; the 
Janitors, Charleston ; the Stationar y Fire -
239 240 TH E CRISIS 
men and Oilers, Denver. 'Me n came from 
the Texa s oil fields, from the railroad s of 
Mississippi, and from the shipyards of 
Norfolk. 
Joh n A . Lacey , Secretar y of the Labo r 
Council of Norfolk , declared tha t a serious 
condition existed i n man y cities where the 
labor organizations refused to take Negr o 
laborers—tha t the Negr o i n the Unite d 
States had received dirt y treatment. "W e 
don't ask any favors, " he said, "we ask 
fo r a chance to liv e lik e men, wit h equal 
rights and democratic rule. The Negr o 
can read now, and the ma n who can read 
can think. " 
Complaints came from the Negr o Freigh t 
Handlers and the International 
Longshoremen of discrimination on the part of the 
Brotherhood of Railwa y Clerk s through ­
out the South. Th e Chie f Executiv e of the 
Brotherhood, aroused by this, admitted tha t 
his organization did not give ful l rights 
to the Negroes, but hoped tha t at their 
next executive board meeting ful l rights 
would be allowed them. 
The Committee on Resolutions then introduced a resolution that "the Executive 
Council give particular attention to the organization of colored workers everywhere 
and assign colored organizers wherever possible; and that in cases where International 
Unions affiliated with the A. F. of L. refuse 
admittance to colored workers, the A. F. of 
L. organize the workers under charters from 
the Federation." 
This resolution was followed by a demonstration such as made the onlooker believe 
tha t the Negr o had at length come into his 
own i n the labor world . Fort y heads of 
Internationa l Union s arose and welcomed 
black men into their ranks. 
Molli e Freedman , of the Internationa l 
Ladies' Garmen t Workers, was the first to 
speak, declarin g that he r union had six 
thousand colored girls i n its membership 
and wa s proud of them; Seymour Hastings, 
of the Motio n Pictur e Players' Unio n of 
Lo s Angeles, declared, "W e draw no distinction as to race or color" ; and the Mea t 
Cutters and Butchers Workmen's Unio n 
announced large membership of Negroes 
employed i n the packin g plants and five 
Negr o organizers on the road. Amon g others who arose to testify to their hearty welcome to the Negr o were also the Carpenters, 
Plasterers, Bricklayers, Bric k and Cla y 
Workers; Hod-Carriers, Steel and Iron 
Workers of the Buildin g Trades; the Unite d 
Min e Workers; Mill , Min e and Smelte r 
Workers; Textile Workers; Laundry 
Workers; Upholsterers, Leather Workers; Boot 
and Shoe Workers; Fu r Workers; Tailors, 
Garmen t Workers; Brewer y Workers an d 
Cigarmakers; Teamsters, Fireme n and 
Pilers, Street Railwa y Employees, Seamen 
and Maintenance-of-Way Men; Federal 
Employees, Postal Employees, Letter Carriers; 
Stage Employees; Motion Picture 
Operators; Car Builders; Molders, Quarry 
Workers; Printers, Stereotypers, Barbers; and 
the Professions of Music and Civil 
Engineering. 
This was the demonstration. An d since 
the America n Federatio n of Labo r alway s 
desires more power, more money and more 
men, it is likel y to use pressur e whe n necessary upon its loca l units to brin g i n the 
thousands of colored workers, whose dues 
wil l help swell its treasur y and theirs. It 
knows, too, tha t the colored men have 
learned to organiz e and constitute a dange r 
outside the Federation . It is not difficult 
to forget racia l prejudic e whe n a hig h wage 
is at stake. 
Wha t has the N . A . A . C. P . done on this 
matter ? 
I n January , 1918, at the cal l of the Urba n 
League, representatives from tha t body, the 
N . A . A . C. P. , the Slate r Fund , the Jeanes 
Fund , and Tuskegee presented the followin g memorandum to the A . F . o f L. : 
"W e wis h especially to address ourselves 
to the America n Federatio n of Labo r whic h 
at its recent convention i n Buffalo, N . Y. , 
voiced sound democrati c principle s i n its 
attitude towar d Negr o labor. 
"W e woul d ask the America n Federatio n 
of Labor, i n organizin g Negroe s i n the various trades, to include :(1) skille d as well 
as unskille d workmen ; (2) norther n as wel l 
as southern workmen ; (3) government as 
well as civilia n employees; (4) wome n as 
well as men workers. 
"W e woul d have Negr o labo r handled by 
the America n Federatio n of Labo r i n the 
same manne r as whit e labor: (1) when 
workme n are returnin g to wor k after a successful strike ; (2) whe n shops are declared 
'open' or 'closed'; (3) whe n Unio n workers 
apply fo r jobs. 
"W e woul d have these assurances pledged 
not wit h words only, but b y deeds—pledged 
by a n increasin g numbe r of example s of 
groups of Negr o workme n give n a 'squar e 
deal.' 
"Wit h these things accomplished, we 
pledge ourselves to urge Negr o workingme n 
to seek the advantage s of sympatheti c cooperation and understandin g between men 
who work. " TH E RIOT S 241 
This has been the stand of the N . A . A . C. 
P . fo r a yea r and a half. Mr . Shillad y has 
appeared i n committee before Mr . Gompers 
and his executives and now at last, through 
pressure from withou t and within , the A . 
F . of L . has made a good beginnin g at the 
"square deal. " 
Fro m the correspondence wit h our 
branches we realize tha t the choice between 
organizatio n and non-organization is not always so simple as it seems. At 
Birmingham we learn that the employers treat their 
colored workme n fairly , but throug h agents 
urge them not to join the union. The 
President of the Branch adds: "Thus far the 
Negroe s have found it profitable to stay out 
of the unions, fo r they have given him a 
cold deal. " A letter from Austin , Tex., 
says: "Ther e seems to be genera l unrest between the races and i t is thought tha t labor 
agitation, the admission of Negroe s into the 
America n Federatio n of Labor, is the 
cause." 
Especiall y interesting has been a long 
correspondence wit h a member at Balbo a 
i n the Cana l Zone who is strongly i n favo r 
of union organization, but wh o has been 
tellin g us of the efforts of whit e union men 
i n the Zone to prevent the organization of 
colored men. The A . F . of L . sent two men 
to Panam a especially to organiz e colored 
labor. These men, shortl y after their arrival , were informed that the whit e workers 
were against them, tha t they did not wis h 
Negr o laborers to have the permanent 
status organizatio n would give them, and 
whit e union officials even went so fa r late r 
as to ask the Governo r to have the organiz ­
ers deported. This was not done, and next 
an unsuccessful attempt was made to have 
them recalled from United States 
Headquarters. The organization of black men 
continued, however, and wil l continue, 
though at Atlanti c Cit y a whit e representative sent up from the Zone offered a resolution against the unionizin g of Negr o labor 
at Panama . Th e resolution was received 
and referred to the Executiv e Committe e fo r 
investigation, where, it is believed, i t wil l 
remai n indefinitely. The A . F . of L . seems 
earnest in its desire to brin g to America n 
colored labor i n the tropics a decent wage. 
A press report from Chicago says tha t a 
committee of prominent Negroes, speaking 
on the riots, urges the colored men whenever possible to joi n the labor unions. We 
believe this is wise advice. Whe n colored 
labor enters into competition wit h whit e 
labor, as it is doing increasingly today, it 
must demand the hours and wages of the 
whit e worker, or be counted a scab. To 
underbid fo r any length of time is to pul l 
down the standard of livin g of the workin g 
class. The opposition of the whit e worke r 
on racia l lines becomes insignificant whe n 
the rea l issue, the issue "to live lik e men, " 
as Joh n A . Lace y put it, is before him. Fo r 
his selfish purposes he must admit 
America's hundreds of thousands of black workers into his Internationa l Brotherhood. 
The Labo r Unio n is no panacea, but it 
has proved and is provin g a force tha t i n 
the end diminishes race prejudice. A democracy prospers when laborers of al l races 
wor k together. Wher e a despotism is at its 
height, as i n the old days of southern slavery, cracke r and black are kept apart, hatin g one another, ignorant and ragged work ­
ers goin g about their unskilled, wastefu l 
tasks. 
It was an immense advance towar d harmony between the races when fo r a half-hour 
at Atlanti c Cit y the Negr o was invited into 
the ful l and equal privilege s of organized 
labor. It is now his business to accept this 
invitation, to see tha t given i n the heat of 
enthusiasm it is not withdrawn , to follow 
it up and to go hundreds strong to the next 
meeting of the Federation . 
TH E RIOTS 
A N N . A . A . C. P. INVESTIGATION 
I REACHE D Washingto n earl y i n the 
evening of Jul y 22. A s the trai n neared 
the capita l I could feel the tenseness of 
the situation grow. It showed itself i n the 
air of the passengers as they read the newspapers, wit h their glarin g headlines tellin g 
of the awfu l nigh t before and intimatin g 
that the worst was yet to come. A s I 
passed through the cars on my wa y to the 
diner and back, men and women glanced 
up at me wit h wha t seemed to be a look 
of mil d surprise ; wit h a glance which 242 TH E CRISIS 
seemed to say, "This man must indeed have 
very important business in Washington." 
The porters and waiters plainly showed 
the strain under which they were doing 
their work—the strain of suppressed excitement with, perhaps, an added sense of 
dread of going into something, they knew 
not what. They moved about quietly, in 
fact, grimly and entirely without their customary good humor and gaiety. One of the 
porters who knew who I was questioned the 
wisdom of my going through with the trip. 
I may have felt that his question was not 
absolutely without reason, but I did not admit it. When I left the car he said to me, 
"Take good care of yourself." I assured 
him that I would spare no effort to do so. 
I had made many trips to Washington— 
some as a mere visitor, some as a member 
of the Government's Foreign Service, some 
for the purpose of placing for the National 
Association matters affecting the race before men high in authority and position; 
and so I had experienced varied emotions 
on making the trip to the Nation's Capital, 
but none like the emotions experienced on 
this trip. I knew it to be true, but it was 
almost an impossibility for me to realize as 
a truth that men and women of my race 
were being mobbed, chased, dragged from 
street cars, beaten and killed within the 
shadow of the dome of the Capitol, at the 
very front door of the White House. It 
was almost an impossibility for me to realize that, perhaps, my own life would 
not be safe on the public streets. 
When we reached the Northwest Section 
of the city, I found the whole atmosphere 
entirely different. I had expected to find 
the colored people excited and, perhaps, 
panicky; I found them calm and determined, 
unterrified and unafraid. Although on the 
night before shots had blazed all through 
the night at the corners of Seventh and T 
Streets and Fourteenth and U , I could detect no signs of nervousness on the part 
of the colored people living in the section. 
They had reached the determination that 
they would defend and protect themselves 
and their homes at the cost of their lives, 
if necessary, and that determination rendered them calm. 
Still, under the outward calm, there was 
a tautness that could be sensed. Wild rumors had been circulating all day forebodingterrible things; and these things, whatever 
they might be, the colored people had made 
up their minds to meet. But as darkness 
came on, the rain began to fall, and later 
it fell in torrents; so it may be that the 
rain had something to do with the things 
that did not happen. 
That evening I met with a half-dozen of 
the influential colored men of the city. We 
talked over what had happened and discussed the steps already taken by the authorities and by the colored citizens and 
such steps as we thought it well to take 
on the following day. 
The next morning Mr. Seligmann and 
I had a conference with Major Pullman, 
Chief of Police, regarding the protection 
of colored citizens. A t this interview Mr. 
Seligmann secured for the information of 
the National Office and for purposes of 
publicity data regarding all the alleged 
cases of attacks on women which had been 
put forward as the cause of the riots. Our 
conference with Major Pullman lasted an 
hour; he expressed a desire to have us 
talk with Commissioner Brownlow and made 
an appointment with him for us at two 
o'clock in the afternoon. Before we left 
Major Pullman's office a committee consisting of Dr. A . M . Curtis, young Dr. 
Curtis and Mr. Emmett J. Scott, accompanied by Captain Doyle of the 8th Police 
Precinct, came to ask that the Police Department swear in a number of colored men 
as Special Officers to aid in preserving law 
and order. Mr. Seligmann and I remained 
and gave our support to the committee. 
However, it was plain that Major Pullman 
was not favorable to the plan. He suggested that the committee take the matter 
up with his superior, Commissioner Brownlow. Mr. Seligmann and I then informed 
the committee of our appointment with the 
Commissioner at two o'clock, and invited 
them to go. 
In the afternoon we had a long conference with Commissioner Brownlow. The 
whole situation was gone over, and the plan 
of commissioning colored men as Special 
Officers was brought up. The Commissioner 
was stronger in his opposition than the 
Chief of Police. 
In the evening I attended a meeting of 
the Executive Committee of the Washington Branch to learn what the branch had 
done and was doing, and to offer such suggestions as I might. I found that the 
branch had been active as far back as July 
0, when it sent a strong letter to all four TH E RIOTS 243 
of the Washingto n dail y papers, callin g 
their attention to the fact that they were 
sowin g the seeds of a race riot by their 
inflammatory headlines and sensational 
news articles: Afte r the outbreak of the 
riots a committee had been appointed whic h 
went before Commissioners Brownlo w and 
Gardne r and before Majo r Pullma n to urge 
that effective action be taken to prevent 
assaults upon defenseless colored people who 
were the victims of the attacks. Members 
of the Lega l Committe e had spent considerable time i n court i n connection wit h the 
trials of the men who had been arrested 
for carryin g weapons for their protection. 
A committee was set at wor k obtaining affidavits from victims of the riot who had 
been wounded or injured. An d at this 
meeting the Lega l Committe e was authorized to interview al l colored persons charged 
wit h riotin g and offer them lega l assistance. 
On the followin g mornin g I went to the 
Capito l and talked at length wit h three 
influentia l Senators. I went over the whole 
situation, not only local, but national, wit h 
these Senators, and did m y best to show 
them wha t I considered to be the principa l 
causes of the trouble. I also spoke to 
each one of them regardin g a Congressiona l 
investigation of the whole question of mob 
violence. I wa s able to secure from one 
of these Senators, who has been in 
Congress for twenty-five years and is a member wit h experience and prestige, and who 
is also a stron g advocate of justice fo r the 
Negro , the promis e tha t he would fathe r a 
resolution callin g fo r such an investiga ­
tio n and a printed report on the same. 
I n the afternoon I went to the office of 
the Washington Post and talked w,ith the 
city editor. It was the Post which on 
Monday morning had published the 
"Mobilization for Tonight" call to the idle service 
men i n Washingto n to meet near the 
Knights of Columbus hut, on Pennsylvani a 
Avenue , and organiz e a "clean up. " Whe n 
I handed the cit y editor my card, he appeared gla d to see me. H e seemed to be 
under the impression tha t I had come down 
from Ne w Yor k fo r the express purpose 
of tellin g the colored people i n Washingto n 
to be "good. " H e called a reporte r and 
asked me to tell him wha t the Associatio n 
was doin g and proposed to do i n the matter. 
I lost no time i n tellin g him that the 
organization whic h I represented stood for 
law and order; that all the fights it had 
made i n behalf of the colored people had 
been made through and under the law ; but 
that my reason for callin g on him was not 
to discuss chat phase of the situation. I 
then proceeded to tell him frankl y and directly how responsible were the 
Washington Post a:.' the other Washington dailies 
for wha t had taken place. 
I talked wit h him for, perhaps, half an 
hour. Durin g the whole time he stood as 
one struck dumb ; at least, he answered not 
a word. I realized that the man was scared 
through and through. He asked me before 
I left i f I thought the riots were over. I 
told him I thought they were, unless the 
whites agai n took the aggressive. I wa s 
surprised to see the next mornin g tha t the 
Post published some of the things I had 
said. 
Th e next day, accompanied by Mr . R. C. 
Bruce , I made simila r visits to the offices 
of the Washington Times and the 
Washington Star. In the afternoon I talked again 
wit h one of my Senators. A t nigh t I left 
for Ne w York . 
I returned disquieted, but not depressed 
over the Washingto n riot; it migh t have 
been worse. It migh t have been a riot i n 
which the Negroes, unprotected by the law, 
would not have had the spirit to protect 
themselves. 
The Negroe s saved themselves and saved 
Washingto n by their determination not to 
run , but to fight—fight i n defense of their 
lives and their homes. If the whit e mob 
had gone on unchecked—and i t was only 
the determined effort of black men that 
checked it—Washingto n would have been 
another and worse East St. Louis. 
A s regrettable as are the Washingto n 
and the Chicago riots, I feel that they 
mar k the turnin g point i n the psychology 
of the whole nation regardin g the Negr o 
problem. JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . 
MAJOR J. E. SPINGARN reached 
Chicago, on his way to the West, July 30 
and fo r twenty-four hours did active wor k 
for the Association . A t his suggestion a 
committee called on Governor Lowden , on 
Jul y 30, and among other matters discussed 
the appointment of a commission of five or 
eight to study race troubles and to formu ­
late a definite program on race relations 
for the state, 244 TH E CRISIS 
On July 30 Mr. John R. Shillady, 
Secretary, and Mr. Herbert J. Seligmann, Director 
of Publicity , reached Chicag o and at once 
plunged into wor k relatin g to the riots. A 
grea t amount of publicit y i n the dail y press 
under the Association's name is due to 
Mr. Seligmann's tireless work. Mr. 
Shillady sends the following notes: 
Ther e wa s formed upon my initiativ e a 
Join t Emergenc y Committe e to deal wit h 
the situation as regards the needs of the 
colored community, i n so fa r as all elements wil l wor k through this committee. 
This committtee is a committee of an executive character, on matters of policy 
and action, but leavin g constituent organizations free to do such part of the 
wor k as they ma y be willin g and able to 
do. The committee consists of one each 
from the Cook Count y Ba r Associatio n 
(colored lawyers' organization), the 
Urban League, the Y. M. C. A., the N. A. 
A . C. P . and Ministers-Socia l WorkersCitizen s Conference, the last a grou p 
whic h has been meetin g dail y a t Olive t 
Baptist Church , 31st an d South Par k 
Avenue . Further, each representative 
membe r is to have a n alternative , so tha t 
some one wil l alway s be availabl e to meet 
as often as is required. 
The lawyers furnis h free one of their 
numbe r to be at each police station and 
court every morning , to take charge of 
the lega l defense of an y colored person 
needing such service. Headquarters have 
been arrange d fo r at Olive t Baptist 
Church , where two lawyers, a t least one 
stenographer, and necessary investiga ­
tors, pai d and volunteer, wil l be stationed 
to receive relative s and friends of men i n 
jai l and unde r arrest. 
Men of the Month. 
THRE E PREACHER S 
THE Rev. Dr. W . Sampson Brook s is a 
Methodist preacher from Calvert 
County , Md . H e stands today i n the forefront of remarkabl e colored American s because he has paid for old St. Peter's Church , 
at Baltimore . A t the last rall y his people lai d $30,000 on the table, whic h is certainl y a record. It is now Bethe l A . M . E . 
Churc h and cost $90,000 i n all. 
The Rev. W . H . Jernagin , Pasto r of Mt . 
Carme l Baptist Church , Washington , D . C , 
has been foremost i n organizin g successful 
race conferences for the Capita l City , and 
is a member of the Permanen t Committe e 
of the Pan-Africa n Congress. H e wa s bor n 
i n Mississippi. 
Th e other preache r was not a preacher, 
but a soldier—Lieutenant Thomas J. 
Bullock, one of the "Buffaloes," who gave his 
lif e i n Franc e for America n freedom, and 
thus "being dead, yet speaketh" to every 
riote r i n Washingto n and Chicago. H e was 
born i n Nort h Carolin a and educated at 
Lincoln . 
TW O WOME N 
IN Cleveland, they swea r by Jan e Hunter. 
She began as a nurse-girl, at fifty cents 
a week, Afterwar d she became a trained 
nurse and finally the founde r of the Phillis 
Wheatle y Home , whic h houses on a n average of 375 women a yea r and finds places 
i n industr y fo r over 600 a month. Fo r this 
Miss Hunte r raises $21,000 annually . 
Antoinett e Smyth e Game s received the 
degree of Bachelo r of Musi c at the Chicago 
Musica l College, i n 1919, and the Diamon d 
Meda l fo r voca l efficiency. 
Thu s our women ventur e into greate r 
fields of socia l service and art. 
TW O BUSINESS ME N 
A. B . CAMPBEL L has a genera l merchandise store i n Salem, Va. , whil e 
Isaac M . Carpe r is a contractor i n Charleston, W . Va . Fo r twenty-five years the 
Campbell store has been one of the finest 
stores i n this beautiful, littl e town ; and i f 
yo u go to Charlesto n and pass the grea t 
Government Projectil e Plant , yo u wil l find 
tha t i t wa s Carpe r who painted this build ­
ing , at a cost of $5,192. Afte r that, at 
Nitro , Mr . Carpe r received a contrac t of 
$10,576 from the Thompson-Starrett 
Company for some more painting, which was 
completed i n sixty-si x days. 
Meantime , the loca l Painters' Unio n refuses Mr . Carpe r admission. REV, DR. W. S. BROOKS TH E LAT E LIEUTENAN T BULLOCK REV. W. H. JERNAGIN 
ANTOINETTE S. GARNES 
A. B. CAMPBELL JAN E E. HUNTE R I. M. CARPER 
245 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
THER E is a poor, blind Samson in 
this land, 
Shorn of his strength and bound in bonds 
of steel, 
Who may in some grim revel raise his hand 
And shake the pillars of this common-weal, 
Till the vast Temple of our liberties, 
A shapeless mass of rubbish lies." 
L ONGFELLOW . 
WE have received " The Steel Makers 
and Othe r Wa r Poems " (privatel y 
printed), by Leo n R. Harris, who has some 
gift i n the makin g of verse, and " Songs 
of M y People " (The Cornhil l Company), by 
Charle s Bertra m Johnson, whic h sings tunefull y here and there. 
Ther e are two books tha t have long lai n 
on our desk whic h deserve more than passin g notice—one is " The Question Befor e 
Congress " (A . M . E . Book Concern), by 
George W . Mitchell . This is one of the 
.most interesting pieces of origina l research 
into the Congressional history of the 
Negro problem which we have seen. Its chief 
' value lies in its excellent exposition of 
Congressional action concerning the Negro before, durin g and just after the Civi l War . 
Students of Reconstruction should study 
particularl y Chapters XII I to XXIV . 
Mau d Cuney Hare's "Th e Message of 
the Trees " (Th e Cornhil l Company), is an 
anthology whic h has received and deserved 
wide notice. Fo r those of us who woul d at 
times escape from our own problem into 
the grea t heart of nature, here is a chance 
to wal k beneath the trees holdin g the hand 
of one who loves them. 
WOMEN AND 
AS fo r lynching , 
it is, i n nearly 
every case, a rude 
form of vengeance 
for that crime 
against womanhood 
which America n men 
cannot forgive.— 
New York Herald. 
* * * 
Lynchin g is th e 
only protectio n 
whit e women i n the 
South have against 
the bruta l black 
LYNCHING 
AMON G the colored victims of 
[SO years' lynching 
in the United States] 
35.8% were accused 
of murder; 28.4% 
of rape and "attacks 
upon women" (19% 
of rape and 9.4%- of 
attacks upon women) ; 17.8% of 
crimes against the 
person (other than 
those already mentioned) and against 
fiends you of the 
Nort h wis h to protect. 
In th e cit y of 
Washingto n severa l 
bruta l assaults and 
rape s by Negroe s 
have taken plac e 
withi n the past 
month, and not one 
has bee n captured 
and brought to justice. 
La w wa s made to 
protect the innocent, 
not savage s wh o 
commi t fiendish 
crimes. Her e i n Ne w 
Yor k a whit e gir l 
was shot to death i n 
cold blood by a Ne ­
gro fiend because she 
repulse d his advance s , and the 
brute is charge d 
wit h homicide, not 
even punishabl e b y 
death.—J. L . Gree n 
i n the Ne w Yor k 
Globe. 
On the other side 
the whit e race has 
taken the gri m determinatio n 
that there shall be 
no mixtur e of stock. 
Tha t is by no means 
a n eas y tas k to 
maintain , even i n a 
country lik e ours. 
Ho w much more difficult i n those states 
where the black populatio n is rapidl y 
threatenin g to outnumbe r the white ! 
Bu t so deep is the 
determination tha t 
the whit e ma n refuses to han d over 
this matte r to the 
process of law. Th e 
purit y of the stock 
in these states is defended by a litera l 
system of " w h i t e 
terror, " whic h ha s 
become part of the 
customs of the country . Lync h law, i n 
other words, has become an institution . 
—Harol d Spender i n 
the Montrea l Standard. 
property; 12% were 
charged with miscellaneous crimes; and 
in 5.6% of cases no 
crime at all was 
charged 
Further , it may 
fairly be pointed out 
that in a number of 
cases where Negroes 
have been lynched 
for rape and "attacks upon white 
women" the alleged 
attacks rest upon no 
stronger evidenc e 
than "entering the 
room of a woman" or 
brushing against 
her. 
N . A . A . C. P . 
Publications. 
Woul d it surpris e 
Si r Ralp h William s 
or the Britis h people 
i n genera l to know 
tha t ther e are i n 
South Afric a 600,-
000 half-castes who 
are the offspring of 
whit e men and black 
women, and tha t a 
simila r numbe r of 
half-castes wit h a 
lik e parentage are 
to be found scattered 
over the variou s 
West Indi a Islands ? 
Ar e we to take it, 
then , tha t Sir 
Ralph's fine sense of 
honor and delicacy is 
not shocked a t the 
intimat e immora l 
associations between 
whit e men an d blac k 
women ? Speakin g 
myself as a ma n of 
color, I migh t say 
tha t I am voicin g 
the feelings of my 
own race whe n I declare tha t m y whole 
min d revolts against 
the seduction of m y 
women and girls by 
whit e men — youn g 
girls of thirtee n and 
fourteen year s of 
age are used to gratif y the base lust of 
whit e seducers and 
are left wit h halfcast e childre n on 
their hands to mour n 
246 TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 247 
"Whit e Wome n 
Assaulte d by Ne ­
groes i n Washing ­
ton " is wha t we all 
have noticed i n our 
every-day papers as 
eac h publi c ation comes into our 
hands. But , my fellow citizens, as I 
glanced through the 
papers last evening 
and saw where our 
soldiers, sailors and 
ntarines have take n 
the matte r into their 
own hands, i t filled 
my heart wit h joy. 
Ar e we goin g to allow Negroe s to assault our sisters , 
wive s and possibly 
mothers? I wil l say 
no, never, not i f it 
cost s the lif e of 
every true Ameri ­
can. 
Allo w me to say, 
dear editor, that I 
am no t prejudiced 
towar d the Negr o 
race, but when our 
women, who m we 
crossed the sea to 
fight and die for, are 
assaulted here i n our 
own country, it boils 
the bloo d i n our 
veins, and i f the Po ­
lice Departmen t i n 
Washingto n are in ­
capable of protectin g ou r women , 
then our service men 
who crossed the sea 
to protect them will , 
if need be, protect 
them i n our gran d 
and glorious capital. 
Allo w me to say 
thft i n m y opinion 
our capita l is today 
being ru n by Ne ­
groes, and a whit e 
ma n has about as 
much chanc e of 
accomplish -
in g anythin g as a 
Bolshevik has. Wh y 
are whit e men being 
discharged from positions i n variou s De ­
partments i n Washington and Negroes 
put i n their places? 
I recollect one case 
wher e an Assistan t 
Libraria n of one of 
our Government Li ­
braries, wh o ha s 
the "honor " of the 
civilize d whit e man. 
—F . E . M . Hercule s 
i n the Londo n Times. 
+ * * 
The whit e men 
went after these colored girls; the girls 
ra n under the porch 
and hid . These whit e 
men broke down the 
door and tore up the 
floor. Th e old wid ­
ow got frightened, 
ra n and jumpe d i n 
the well, and the 
children screame d 
fo r help. 
Berr y Washing ­
ton, colored, seventytwo years old, ra n 
out wit h his shotgun 
i n his hand. Whe n 
he got near the hall, 
he met both of the 
whit e men. Joh n 
Dandy , twenty - five 
year s old, wit h a 
wif e and two children, asked the old 
ma n wha t he came 
out for. H e said : 
"To see wha t was 
the matte r wit h the 
wome n and children, " then Joh n 
Dand y fired at him 
and said : " I wil l kil l 
you, old man. " The 
old ma n fired and 
kille d him (Joh n 
Dandy ) first. H e 
fell wit h his pistol 
i n his righ t hand 
and a cigarette i n 
the other , and a 
flask of liquo r fell 
out of his pocket. 
Th e other whit e man 
ra n (Lewis Evans) . 
Anothe r colored 
ma n came out and 
advised Washingto n 
to go uptown and 
wak e the Chie f of 
Polic e and give himself up. The policeman's name is 
Stuckey. He sent Washington to McC r a e 
Jai l at 2 o'clock on 
the nigh t of the 24. 
H e stayed i n jai l unti l Saturda y night, 
the 25, at 12 o'clock. 
A mob of seventyfive or one hundred 
brought him back to 
Milan . The y carrie d him to the same 
held tha t position 
fo r a numbe r of 
years, was thrown 
out and replaced by 
a Negro . I n every 
Government Department i n Washingto n 
ther e are Negroe s 
who are holdin g 
high positions, and 
when a soldier, or 
allow me to say a 
veteran , of thi s 
grea t war, who has 
spent sleeples s 
nights, days, weeks 
and months goin g 
down to the depths 
of hell i n those horribl e trenche s of 
France , and who 
upon retur n to his 
home country happened to wal k into a 
Government Office i n 
Washingto n on 
crutches and there 
to his astonishment 
see a Negr o huggin g 
a whit e gir l whom 
he was dictatin g a 
letter to as she was 
seated i n his lap, do 
yo u wonde r wh y 
some peopl e are 
prejudiced against 
Negroes? — "J. " i n 
the Baltimore Sun. 
spot where he shot 
Dand y and lynched 
him. H e was hanged 
to a post, his body 
shot into pieces and 
left hangin g ther e 
unti l 2 o'clock Sunday morni
26.—Atlant a Constitution. 
He * * 
I wonder i f i t is 
commonly know n 
that i n the Sout h 
there is littl e or no 
lega l protection fo r 
the colored girl . A 
typica l case came to 
m y knowledg e 
i n Richmon d las t 
winter. The gir l wa s 
a good colored girl . 
Th e ma n wa s white . 
I wil l not attempt to 
describe his mora l 
status! Bu t he wa s 
punished to the extent of a fine of $25, 
and the gir l wa s left 
to shift fo r herself. 
One can easily see 
the connection between this sort of 
crime and the fac t 
that there is no law 
requirin g marriag e 
between the races. 
Unquestionably, if 
the races of the two 
had been reversed, 
there woul d hav e 
been a lynching.— 
M . S. Watts i n the 
Springfield Republican. 
RACE WAR 
The Cause 
THE Evening Sun of Baltimor e claims 
that the Washingto n riot started because: 
Negr o soldiers returnin g from the wa r 
inflamed their people wit h stories of race 
equality i n Europe , especially the lack of 
discriminatio n i n social intercourse. 
The Ne w Yor k Times discovers 
some evidence whic h goes fa r towar d suggesting that the Bolshevist agitation has 
been extended among the Negroes, especially 
those i n the South, and tha t i t is bearin g 
its natura l and inevitable fruit. 
Th e Baltimor e American thinks that the 
spirit of riot is because: 
Unfortunately , a spirit of hostilit y to 
work at the wages that were pai d before the 
wa r is widespread. 
An d that the discharged Negr o soldier 248 TH E CRISI S 
has come to feel a sense of dislike for 
employments tha t now have fo r hi m a servile nature . 
In Chicago : 
"It's only workin g people who are fightin g 
each other and killing, " said E . K . Foote, 
Secretar y of the "miscellaneous " loca l of 
the Stockyard s Labo r Council, today. "W e 
are considerig a bi g mass meeting to be held 
on the south side wit h representative trades 
union men of whit e and colored races discussing wha t a foolish thin g it is for workin g people to go after each other wit h guns 
and knives. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Evening Post brushes 
muc h of this aside: 
Bu t wh y should we pa y attention to dubious and obscure reasons fo r alarm when 
there is a glarin g one i n front of us? The 
efficacy of tons of "red " literatur e and pla ­
toons of speakers i n inflamin g Negroes is 
not to be compared wit h a single hour of 
such outrageous violence as it required the 
whole Chicago police force yesterday to suppress. White bathers began stoning 
Negroes; they chased one man who drew a 
revolver, and the struggl e wa s carrie d from 
the beach into a Negr o quarte r of the city. 
Events of recent weeks woul d show tha t it 
is not the Negr o who is to be feared as 
trouble-maker, but the irresponsibl e whit e 
man . The southern Negr o has gained muc h 
i n recent years and has every righ t to look 
forwar d to gainin g more. H e has come into 
ou r norther n cities i n growin g numbers. 
Trea t hi m well, and we can laug h at tales 
of violent propaganda , as we laughed at 
those of Germa n propaganda ; treat him 
unjustly, and no propaganda wil l be needed 
to arouse him. 
Bu t it is the Jim Jam Jems, a freak journa l published i n Nort h Dakot a and usuall y 
rabidl y anti-Negro , that gets down to the 
rock-bottom truth : 
Loo k righ t down into the black record— 
blacke r than the duskiest skin. Trut h 
harms none but the guilty . I n the thirt y 
years last past upward s of three thousand 
America n Negroes—citizens of this land— 
have been brutall y mutilated, tortured, 
butchered, unsexed, burned and lynched. 
Onl y recently a Negr o woma n wa s disemboweled and her unborn babe torn from he r 
quiverin g flesh. Almost withi n sight of the 
Whit e House, at Alexandria , Va. , a Negr o 
was most brutall y lynched. A t Springfield, 
111., where rest the ashes of Abraham 
Lincoln, and almost within sight of his tomb, a 
Negr o was burned. Last yea r at East St. 
Louis, 111., over fort y Negroe s were barba ­
rousl y slaughtered. And , i n addition, i n the 
past yea r thirty-one Negr o men and one 
Negr o woma n were barbaricall y lynched. 
Negroe s have been burned at the stake even 
i n Joh n Brown's own State of Kansas. An d 
mar k this: I n just two places i n this worl d 
has the smoke from livin g huma n torches 
ascended heavenwards—a t Rome under Ne ­
ro and i n the Unite d States of Americ a 
under the Sta r Spangle d Banner! 
Loo k further. Th e Unite d States—wit h 
the aid of the America n Negro , too—protested wit h al l its might, wit h al l its bil ­
lions, wit h million s of its men, on sea, on 
lan d and i n the air, against the awfu l atrocities, mutilations, defilements, butcheries 
and outrages perpetrated overseas. 
America's strong arms—upheld by American 
Negroes, too—spanned the seas and throttled 
to its death barbari c atrocitie s abroad. 
Aren' t burning s at the stake, mutilations, 
tortures, unsexment, hangings, disembowelments, crucifixions and huma n torture s just 
as atrocious i n Americ a as they ar e overseas? Wh y visi t barbaritie s wit h fire and 
sword overseas and tolerate them i n our 
own land? Americ a idealizes, enshrines 
and worship s justice—justic e to al l abroad 
and at home. Is he r arm lon g enough to 
span a n ocean, and too short to throttl e he r 
own Satyrs of bestiality ? 
Most America n Negroe s ar e poor; but 
who stole their toi l fo r generations and stil l 
pays them but a pittance ? Man y America n 
Negroes are ignorant ; but who kep t them 
so fo r generations and stil l doles out education with niggardly hands? Many 
American Negroes are not ideal citizens; but 
woul d an y other race be an y better barely 
half a century ungyve d and unmanacled? 
Man y America n Negroe s are lustful ; but 
are they the only ones, and i f so, whence 
come al l the million s of mulattoes ? 
Ther e ar e ten millio n America n Negroe s 
i n this land—their ancestors brough t here 
were kidnapped to ministe r to America n 
idleness—and but few voices are raised i n 
their behalf. W e raise our voice. 
If America n Negroe s are good enough, 
brave enough, courageous enough, patrioti c 
enough, to fight—as they have fough t lik e 
dusk y demons—in every America n war, 
aren't they good enough to be protected at 
home? 
Ough t the- America n Negroe s havin g battled—against fearfu l odds withi n and with ­
out their ranks—heroicall y abroad fo r freedom, to retur n home to battle against a 
resurrected K u Klu x Klan ? W e say NO ! 
The Remedy 
THE Ne w Bedfor d Evening Standard 
asks: 
Does the Negr o i n this countr y get a 
square deal? 
If the natio n is candid enough to answe r 
tha t question truly , it should be the first 
step m an effort to solve the Negr o problem 
tha t has become so ugl y since the war. . . . 
Ther e wil l be a Negr o question as lon g as 
the Constitutio n is subverted and the Negr o 
is denied his rights. It wil l gro w worse in ­
stead of better. Unless .i t is met fairl y 
and honestly, some da y it wil l end i n a race 
war. 
Th e Springfield Republican declares that : 
If there is the least dange r of the Negr o 
race being influenced b y revolutionar y prop -TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 249 
aganda against the existin g institutions of 
the country, wha t is the best preventive 
measure tha t could be taken? The answer 
is so easy tha t no one reall y needs to be told. 
Stop the lynchings and burnings of 
Negroes! Prove that the law was made for 
them as well as for other citizens, that the 
Government wil l protect the black i n the 
most elementary rights as well as the white. 
WHAT OUR LEADERS SAY 
Submit 
I HAV E alway s 
warne d my people against any sort 
of rebellion.—Bishop 
Evans Tyree. 
Pa y no attention 
to incendiar y and 
retaliator y advices 
of pretende d 
friends.—Bisho p 
Joshua H. Jones. 
Yo u ma y be sure 
tha t the riotous happenings of the past 
do not i n any wa y 
represent the sentiment of our best colored people—Bishop 
W. L. Lee. 
Advis e our people 
to be sober and sane 
and take no advice 
from those wh o 
would counsel violence. — Bishop W. 
H. Heard. 
Th e advice to our 
people to use violence on the part of 
our leaders is, to my 
mind , extremely unwise and is to be 
condemned by the 
wisest and best of 
us. — Bishop G. W. 
Blackwell. 
• • • 
[Al l of these extracts are from the 
Ne w Yor k World, 
except Mr. 
Robinson's.] 
Fight 
THE tim e has 
com e whe n 
thoughtful whit e 
an d colored people 
alike wil l not tolerate wholesale mobbin g of innocent Ne ­
groes because of the 
alleged crime of one. 
—R. R. Moton. 
I believe my people should defend 
their homes and 
family . — Bishop G. 
C. Clement. 
Protec t thei r 
homes at any cost.— 
Bishop L. J. Coppin. 
Ou r back s have 
been forced against 
the wall. — Bishop C. 
L. Smith. 
If whil e exercisin g these virtues, 
however, his assailants wil l not desist, 
but rathe r persist i n 
molesting him, let 
him do wha t self-respecting peopl e 
would do — namely, 
use his gun wit h effect and impose respect.— Bishop John 
Hurst. 
Before the 
Negroes of this countr y wil l again submit to man y of the 
injustices which we 
have suffered, the 
white men wil l have 
to kil l more of them 
than the combined 
numbe r of soldiers 
tha t were slai n i n 
the grea t world war. 
—Rev. C. J. 
Robinson in an open letter 
to President Wilson. 
IN FRANCE 
MEAGE R dispatches revea l the fact that 
the extraordinar y document published i n the Ma y CKISIS has at last been 
openly read i n the Frenc h Parliament, and 
black Deputies from Guadaloupe and 
Martinique asked explanations of this and of 
the treatment of black Frenc h soldiers by 
America n Militar y Police. The Associated 
Press dispatch continues: 
Jule s Pams, Ministe r of the Interior, replyin g to the Negr o Deputies, said that the 
Government had applied penalties and 
asked them not to insist upon a discussion 
of "the very regrettable incidents, as Franc e 
does not forget the services rendered by her 
Negr o sons." 
The Ministe r of the Interior added that 
the America n Government had not hesitated 
to express regrets i n terms that did Franc e 
the greatest honor. 
Mr . Pams asked Deput y Boisneu f fo r reasons of "hig h diplomacy " to drop the subject. The Deputy said he would not speak 
of questions that involved diplomacy, but he 
protested against the complicit y of the 
Frenc h Militar y Authoritie s i n these incidents. 
Finally , the Chambe r of " Deputie s by 
unanimous vote adopted the followin g resolution : 
The Chamber, faithfu l to the immorta l 
principle s of the rights of man, condemning 
all prejudices of religion, caste or race, solemnly affirms the absolute equality of all 
men without distinction of race or color, and 
their righ t to the benefit and protection of 
all the laws of the country. The Chambe r 
counts upon the Government to appl y these 
laws and see that the necessary penalties 
for their infringement are inflicted. 
The Buffalo Express says: 
Enemie s of Ireland have said to its 
friends: "Yo u have no more righ t to approach the Peace Congress than the 
American Negroes, another race who claim to be 
oppressed, would have to ask redress from 
the same body. What would the 
Government of the United States say to that?" 
Well , just that thin g has happened. 
Willia m Monroe Trotter, of Boston, representing the Nationa l Equa l Rights League, 
has sent to Sir Eri c Drummond , Secretary 
Genera l of the League of Nations, a petition 
askin g that certain clauses be inserted i n 
the covenant. These clauses, the petition 
says, are designed to secure for America n 
Negroes and other racia l minoritie s "ful l 
democracy. " The petition tells of the part 
taken on the battle-front by Negroes of the 
Unite d States and other countries. "It is 
notoriously indisputable, " the petition says, 
"tha t colored American s were deprived of 
or denied, either i n law or i n fact, ful l lib ­
erty and democracy. " NEGRO LABORERS : MINERS, MILLINERS, STEEL WORKERS, P 
250 PRINTERS, FACTORY HANDS, LAUNDERER S AND SEAMSTRESSES. 
251 The Horizon 
VINCEN T 
Saunders 
INDUSTR Y 
IN a competitive examinatio n fo r promotio n from lowe r grades to the first grade 
i n the Customs Divisio n of the Unite d 
States Civi l Service, Ne w Orleans, La. , 
there were nine whit e and three colored 
men who took the test. The three colored 
men headed the list, wit h mark s as follows: 
Luciu s B . Bailey , 93.65r; ; Antoin e De Lay , 
85.70%; Charle s D . Levy , 83.65%. O f the 
nine whit e men who took the test, four 
passed, the highest makin g an average of 
78.75%. 
C A Negro at Wharton, Tex., Edward 
Roberts, has sold a 840-acre farm for $84,000. 
C The Standar d Lif e Insuranc e Company, 
of Atlanta , Ga. , reported at its annua l meetin g $8,208,720 of insurance i n force, coverin g 9,218 policies. It paid $79,733 i n death 
losses durin g the year. Its tota l assets 
amount to $295,132. H . E . Perr y is president and H . H . Pace, secretary-treasurer. 
C The Great Southern Fire Insurance 
Company, with a capital stock of $100,000, has 
been chartered at Atlanta , Ga. , by Negroes. 
Amon g its backers are Charle s Thomas, 
H . A . Rucker, A . F . Herndon , Davi d T. 
Howard , Dr. H . R. Butler, Sol. Johnson, 
Bisho p J. S. Flipper, D . A . Townsly , C. A . 
Bullard , H . E . Perry , J . A . Hopkins. 
C Walte r Cunningham, a colored machin ­
ist, has perfected a device for tappin g bolts, 
at the Ho g Island Shipyard , whic h enables 
workme n to tap over 900 bolts instead of 
about 350; he has, also, made a latch device for a threadin g machine, whic h enables 
the machine to handle over 1,000 bolts per 
day i n the treading process, whereas about 
250 could be handled formerly . 
([ Colored porters on the Missouri . Pacific 
and Frisc o Railroad s have been placed on 
the basis of brakesmen, at $114.60 to $119.75 
per month. The y received from $103 to 
$483 i n back royalties. A rate of $2.66 per 
mile excess over 4,500 miles per month wil l 
also be paid. Some men average an excess 
of 750 miles per month. 
G Ove r two hundred colored women are 
employed at pork killin g and cuttin g i n the 
Cudah y and Morris packin g plants, Omaha . 
C A t Independence Heights, a Negr o town 
i n Texas, a charte r has been grante d fo r the 
operation of the American Milling 
Company. This mill will be conducted by colored people and has a capacity of fifteen 
barrels of flour and ten barrels of mea l 
daily. 
C. Chicago's labor marke t includes 500,000 
wag e earners, of whom 54,557 are Negroes. 
Accordin g to the numbe r of wage earners, 
the Negroe s ar e tenth on a list of seventeen 
nationalities. 
C The Mechanics Savings Bank of 
Savannah, Ga., reports assets of $123,928 and deposits of $58,234. It has purchased a site on 
the corner of West Broa d and Mapl e 
Streets, wher e it wil l erect a buildin g nex t 
year. Henr y Pearso n is president. 
C I n Kansa s City , Mo. , there is a Negr o 
who is one of the biggest stone contractors 
i n the Unite d States—Charle s Howell . H e 
owns a twelve acre tract, know n as Howe . 
Heights, two quarrie s and a stone cuttin g 
yard . 
G A communit y laundr y fo r colored housewive s is to be established i n Nashville , 
Tenn., as an effort of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church South. The building will cost 
$10,000. 
C The Allport , Ark. , Colon y and Industria l 
Associatio n has taken over 37,000 acres of 
land i n Lonoke , Jefferson and Arkansa s 
Counties for a Negr o colony. 
C Negr o freigh t handlers at the Municipa l 
Terminal , Memphis, Tenn., went on a strike 
for an increase of fort y cents an hour. Th e 
city met their demand withi n a few hours,— 
fifty car-loads of freigh t were waitin g disposition. The freigh t handlers now receive 
$3.20 pe r day. 
C The Wage Earners Savings Bank, a 
Negro institution in Savannah, Ga., has acquired at $1,000 per fron t foot the remain ­
in g eighty feet of the block on whic h the 
bank is located. A modern hotel, theatre, 
auditorium and department store wil l embrace the structure , whic h wil l tota l a n expenditure of $500,000. 
252 TH E HORIZO N 253 
C The Fidelit y Saving s Bank , capitalized at 
$25,000, has been opened i n Savannah , Ga. , 
makin g the fourt h Negr o bank i n this city. 
C Robert Lee Andrews, a Negro in 
Houston, Tex., has conducted a retail and wholesale grocery business fo r nineteen years. 
H e is one of the two Negr o citizens who pay 
taxes on propert y assessed above $,'10,000. 
H e is assisted i n his business by his son. 
Recently Mr . Andrews, Sr., purchased the 
Ewin g Residence, where the millionair e 
George Herman n used to live , and a 1920 
Cadilla c Eight , payin g $4,800 cash for the 
latter. 
C Th e Tidewate r Ban k and Trust Compan y 
has been opened i n Norfolk , Va . It has a 
paid-up capita l of $100,000, all owned by 
Negroes, and a $40,000 building . On the 
day tha t the bank was opened the deposits 
amounted to $70,000. The president is Mr . 
P . B . Young . 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
TWO southern numbers, called "Fro m 
the South, " writte n by the violinistcomposer Gaylor d Yost, after the Negr o 
idiom, are among late compositions published b y the Bosto n Musi c Compan y for 
the violin . 
C O f a folk-song program given by Ann e 
Thursfield i n London, the Englis h reviewe r 
says: "Perhap s the most unfamilia r and 
the most beautiful i n the whole list were 
two of the Negr o revivalist songs from 
America. " 
C A t Harrisburg , Pa. , on Jul y 1, a "Jubile e 
Sing" was given by colored people of 
Harrisburg and Steelton, under the auspices of 
the Wa r Camp Communit y Service. Part 
I wa s devoted to well-selected miscellaneous 
numbers given b y a traine d chorus under direction of Charle s F . Howard ; part II consisted of "Negr o Spirituals " directed by 
Mrs . Forenc e Ackle y Ley . 
C Th e eleventh bienna l of the Nationa l 
Federatio n of Musi c Clubs was held at the 
Ma c Dowel l Colon y at Peterborough, N . H . 
Th e principa l orchestra l numbe r given was 
Henr y F . Gilbert's "Humoresque on Negr o 
Minstre l Tunes. " Miscellaneous numbers 
included Burleigh's "Littl e Mothe r of Mine, " 
sun g by Jerome Uhl , baritone ; Joh n Alde n 
Carpenter's "Th e Law d is Smilin ' Thr o de 
Do ' " and Burleigh's "Th e Gra y Wolf, " sun g 
b y Christin e Miller, contralto. 
C. Clarenc e Camero n White , violi n virtuoso, 
is rapidl y receiving deserved recognition 
as a composer. His lately published "Ban ­
danna Sketches," pieces for violi n and piano, 
based on Negr o themes, have been played 
by the young America n violinist May o 
Wadle r whil e on tour i n Cuba . Mada m 
Mau d Powell has signified her intention of 
usin g the sketches on her programs this 
coming season, whil e the compositions have 
also won the interest of Frit z Kreisler. 
C "G o Down , Moses, " one of the finest of 
the Negro Spirituals arranged by H. T. 
Burleigh, and sung by the composer, is announced as the first of a numbe r of phonograp h records to be presented by this distinguished musician. 
([ Th e chora l numbers given at the annua l 
Norfolk , Conn., Festiva l this summe r were 
the first of the three "Hiawath a Cantatas " 
by Samue l Coleridge-Taylor. The soloists 
were Anna Case, Lambert Murphy and 
Emilio de Gorgorza. Arthur Mees was the conductor. A "Rhapsodi e Negre, " said to possess "musicianl y qualities and forceful climaxes, " was played by the America n pianist composer Joh n Powell. 
C Loni a Jones, the young Negr o violinist 
who graduated i n the 1918 Violi n Class of 
the Ne w Englan d Conservatory and was 
immediately drafted as private in the 
United States Army, returned from France in 
Jul y as Assistan t Bandmaste r of the 807th 
Infantr y Band , unde r the leadership of Mr . 
Vodery . This band wo n an enviable reputation as a musica l organization, as wel l as 
fo r the excellent conduct of the men. 
C Professor Roy W. Tibbs, head of the 
Piano Department of Howard University, received the degree of Maste r of Arts i n 
Musi c from Oberli n College, June , 1919. 
Whe n the wa r broke out he was studyin g 
i n Paris, under Philipp , the famous Frenc h 
teacher of the piano. 
C A Negr o theatrica l circuit has been 
formed, headed by E . C. Brown , the banker, 
of Philadelphi a and Norfolk , wit h Leste r A . 
Walton , Genera l Manager. The opening of 
a school of dramati c art i n Ne w Yor k fo r 
colored men and women has been decided 
upon, and a booking office to supply colored 
theatres throughout the country wit h colored acts is planned. 
G Anit a Johnson, a twelve yea r old colored 
pianist of Augusta , Ga. , has appeared i n 
recitals, with works of Rachmaninoff, 
Kautski, Gottschalk, Mendelssohn and Beethoven 
on her program. Of her appearance in 
Birmingham, Ala., for the benefit of Sixteenth 
Street Baptist Church , the Age-Herald 254 TH E CRISI S 
says: "This child plays wit h singula r repose 
and intelligent phrasing ; especially graceful 
and musicianl y was her readin g of the 
Mendelssohn number. " He r brother, 
younge r tha n she, is a violi n soloist. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
IN a recent campaig n the colored branc h 
of the Y . M . C. A . i n St. Louis, Mo. , 
added 1,000 members to its force. 
C Willia m Monro e Trotte r after being denied a passport to attend the Peace 
Conference in the interest of the Negro race qualified as a cook, and i n this means got to 
France . H e has returned to Americ a and 
says: "Ragge d and hungr y and i n need of 
funds, I made my wa y to Paris. Althoug h 
I was denied an interview wit h President 
Wilson , I succeeded i n sending a forma l 
protest to the Peace Conference and a petitio n to every member of the assembly at 
Versailles. " 
G I n order to avoid the question of the constitutionality of Oklahoma City's 
Segregation Ordinance, William Floyd, a colored 
man, has been allowed to take possession 
of his property, i n spite of the fact that 
more than 751% of the owners i n the block 
wer e white. 
G The first lega l battle i n the Nort h between the two factions of the colored Odd 
Fellows resulted i n a decision that the B . 
M . C , held i n Ne w Yor k by the Noe l faction 
was the lega l body and that the Morris body 
wa s illegal. This decision was handed down 
by the Supreme Court of Ne w York . 
C Mr . H . A . Johnson, of Brooklyn , N . Y. , 
has been granted U . S. Patent 1,310,344 for 
a new invention of airplanes. 
C Mr . A . L . Jackson, Secretary of the colored Y . M . C. A . i n Chicago, has resigned 
to become Educational Secretary of the 
National Urban League. He is a graduate of 
Harvard , '14. 
G Negroes from southern Georgi a are 
steadily movin g towar d the North . 
C Mrs. Cor a I. Parchmen t has been appointed policewoman i n Ne w Yor k City . 
C Troo p B , the only colored Bo y Scout 
troop i n Rock Island County, 111., won the 
lovin g cup offered by the county. The 
Scoutmaste r is Willia m Taylor. 
C Th e Denver Times offered prizes for an 
automobile race, open to all. Afterwar d 
they tried to ba r Willia m Hel m because he 
was colored. H e refused to be ousted, started thirt y seconds behind the other contestants, passed nineteen of them on the road , 
and finished second. It is acknowledged 
tha t wit h a fair start he woul d have beaten 
them all . 
C I n Phoenix , Ariz. , there ar e 1,700 colored 
people, who own $700,000 i n propert y an d 
have fou r churches and a weekl y paper. 
G Th e Chancer y Court i n Tennessee has 
declared that the National Baptist 
Publishing House does not belong to the National 
Convention or to the Baptist denomination, 
but is the privat e propert y of R. H . Boy d 
and his eight associate members on the 
Publishing Board. The property is worth $350,-
000. 
C In New Bern, N. C, there is a 
Commercial Association of the leading Negro business men, divided into educational, sanita ­
tio n and health and entertainment committees. These representative s attend meetings of the whit e people i n the interest of 
the Negr o citizens. 
C The State Penitentiar y i n Texa s has been 
remodeled for a State Asylum for Negro 
Insane, for which the Legislature appropriated $390,000 fo r remodeling, equippin g and 
furnishing . It has accommodations fo r 900 
patients. Dr . W . T. Johnso n has been 
chosen Superintendent of the institution . 
G A new buildin g fo r colored patients at 
Milledgeville , Ga. , has been completed and 
turned over to the trustees of the Georgi a 
State Sanitarium. The buildin g cost $90,-
000 and has accommodation fo r 400 patients. 
C Willia m L . Fitzgeral d and Warne r T. 
McGuinn , Negroe s i n Baltimore , Md. , have 
taken seats as Cit y Councilmen . 
C Jesse O. Thoma s has been appointed to 
the staff of the Nationa l Urba n Leagu e as 
Southern Fiel d Organizer. H e resigns as 
Superviso r of Negr o Economic s fo r the 
State of Ne w York . Fo r six years Mr . 
Thoma s was Fiel d Secretar y fo r Tuskege e 
Institute. 
C Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrel l has returned 
from abroad wher e she wa s the Negr o delegate to the Internationa l Congress of 
Wome n held i n Zurich . She delivered a n 
address, mostly i n German , and offered the 
followin g resolution, whic h wa s unanimousl y adopted: "W e believe no huma n bein g 
should be deprived of a n education, prevented from earnin g a living , debarred from 
any legitimat e pursuit i n whic h he wishe s 
to engage, o r be subject to any humiliatio n 
on account of race or color, W e recommend TH E HORIZON 255 
tha t members of this Congress should do 
everythin g i n their powe r to abrogate laws 
and customs whic h lead to discriminatio n 
against huma n beings o n account of race or 
color. " 
C Representative Beaty , a Negr o member 
of the Genera l Assembl y i n Ohio, has had 
passed H . J» R. 72, whic h authorizes a n in ­
vestigation into the executive management 
of Wilberforc e University . The findings 
and recommendations are to be filed wit h 
the Governo r not late r tha n December 1, 
1919. 
(I Ralp h W . Tyle r has wo n a suit against 
the Unio n News Compan y fo r discrimina ­
tion i n a railroa d dining-room i n Ohio. 
C Whit e people i n Memphis, Tenn., have 
been foiled i n their efforts to oust Negr o 
residents from Brookly n Avenue . Instead 
of fleeing from their property the Negroes 
are gatherin g funds and rebuilding. 
C Fran k A . Bryon , of Chicago, 111., who 
has been an attache of the Unite d States 
Capito l fo r eighteen years, is now Assistan t 
Cler k of the Committe e on Nava l Affairs of 
the Hous e of Representatives. H e is a 
graduat e of Howar d Universit y La w School. 
C Al f Britton , a Negr o charged wit h stealin g coal from the railroad , has been award ­
ed $100 damages against United States 
Director General of Railroads Hines, for 
"ruine d reputation and deep humiliation, " 
by the Bel l County, Ky. , Circut i Court. 
EDUCATIO N 
ROBINSO N M . HAYDEN , a Negr o 
graduat e i n pharmac y from Columbi a 
University , was sixt h on the honor roll i n 
a class of 150 students. H e received a priz e 
for his hig h standin g i n scholarship. 
C Th e Boar d of Mission s of the Methodist 
Episcopa l Churc h South has appropriated 
$10,000 each to five Negr o schools and $50,-
000 to Pain e College. These sums are onefifth of the tota l to be appropriated to these 
institutions durin g the next five years as a 
result of the Centenar y Campaign . 
C An appropriation of $123,000 for 
Howard University, which was stricken out by 
the House, was restored by the Senate and 
passed Congress. 
C The president of the Dupont Power 
Company at Wilmington, Del., has given a trust 
fund of $2,000,000 fo r modernizin g the public schools of Delaware, outside of 
Wilmington, of which $400,000 will go to the schools 
of Negr o children. 
SOL. BUTLE R 
G Sol. Butler, the Negr o contestant from 
Dubuque College, i n the inter-allied games 
at Paris, won the runnin g broad jump and 
was decorated wit h the meda l of the Fourt h 
Class of the Orde r of Danill o by the Kin g 
of Montenegro. 
C J. W . E . Bowen, Jr. , has been elected 256 TH E CRISIS 
president of Walde n University , Nashville , 
Tenn. Mr . Bowe n is a recent graduat e of 
Harvard . 
G Lan e College, Jackson, Tenn., has been 
given $7,000 by the Genera l Educatio n 
Board , on condition that the school raise 
$13,000. 
C A colored graduat e of Scoti a Seminar y 
i n Nort h Carolin a has given $10,000 to the 
Freedmen's Wor k of the Presbyteria n 
Church . 
C Si x hundred Negr o teachers from fourteen states were enrolled at the tenth annua l 
summer school at Tuskegee Institute. 
C Charle s H . Moore , State Inspector of 
Colored Schools i n Nort h Carolina , reports 
that i n thirty-eight counties of the state the 
Negroes have contributed for the buildin g 
of new schools for their children, the sum 
of $32,453.75, against $43,000 appropriated 
by school officials. 
G In a class of sixteen graduates from the 
Springfield, 111., Hig h School nine were colored—seven girls and two boys. Miss Rut h 
Walls wa s an honor pupil, havin g main ­
tained an average of 85% durin g her course. 
G Juliu s Rosenwal d contributes from $400 
to $500 for Negr o schoolhouses i n the South, 
provided the colored patrons raise from $750 
to $1,000. Unde r this arrangement 500 
model schools, representing nearl y $750,000, 
have been recently erected for colored children. O f this sum the colored people contributed $265,179, the states $213,346, southern white people $54,399 and Mr. 
Rosenwald $193,616. These schoolhouses are situated as follows: Alabama , 179; Nort h 
Carolina , 85; Tennessee, 59; Louisiana , 49; 
Virginia , 38; Mississippi , 28; Georgia , 23; 
Arkansas, 22, etc. 
C Twent y graduates of Dunba r Hig h 
School, Class '19, were awarded scholarships 
to various universitie s throughout the country. O f 123 graduates, sixty-fou r wil l continue their education i n colleges, forty-six 
i n Mino r Norma l School, three i n dentistry, 
one i n pharmacy, one i n trained nursing , 
one i n business, one i n music ; six were undecided. 
C A $60,000 school ' and administratio n 
building is being erected at Wiley 
University. 
C The Rev. W . E . Griffin has succeeded Dr . 
Jame s P . Bourne , who resigned i n May , as 
a representative of the Negr o race on the 
School Boar d in Atlanti c City , N . J . 
MEETING S 
THE eleventh annual session of the 
Empire State Federation of Women's 
Club s was held i n Ne w Yor k City , wit h 200 
delegates present, representing twenty-five 
clubs with 2,358 members. Mrs. M. C. 
Lawton is president. 
C Ninety-eigh t clubs, representin g 4,000 
Negr o women, met i n Philadelphi a at the 
sixteenth annual convention of the 
Federation of Women's Clubs. Mrs. Ruth Bennett, 
of Chester, is president. 
C The South Carolina Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs met in Spartanburg, 
under the presidency of Mrs. M. B. 
Wilkinson. They sent $1,000 to the State Board of 
Healt h fo r colored tubercula r patients. 
C Th e annua l Y . M . C. A . conference at 
King s Mountain , N . C , wa s attended by 125 
student representatives from sixt y colored 
schools. 
G Representative s of 123 missionar y boards 
and other Negr o agencies of nine Negr o 
denominations recently met i n Columbus, 
Ohio, and planned to co-operate i n missionary , educational, churc h extension and other 
activities. A Finding s Committe e wa s appointed, wit h Bisho p G. W . Clinton , president. 
C Bishops of the A . M . E. , A . M . E . Zio n 
and C. M . E . Churche s wil l hold their semiannua l convention durin g Februar y i n 
Nashville , Tenn . 
C Th e State Federatio n of Women's Club s 
i n Washingto n held its thir d annua l session 
i n Spokane, and re-elected Mrs. Joh n E . 
Mappe s president. Seventy-three clubs responded with fifty-four delegates. 
Addresses of welcome were delivered by the Mayor 
and the president of the whit e federation. 
G Th e Iowa Colored Alumni , an organiza ­
tion of thirty-five Negr o graduate s from 
the State Universit y of Iowa , has held its 
fifth annua l meeting and elected Attorne y 
S. Joe Brown , of Des Moines, president. 
G Th e annua l Colored Student Conferenc e 
of the Y. W. C. A. has been held at 
Talladega College, with representatives from thirty-seven Negr o institutions i n attendance. 
G The National Congress of Race 
Fraternities will meet October 8-10 at Memphis, 
Tenn. 
C Ther e were 3,042 representative s i n attendance at the Baptist Sunday School 
Congress, which convened in Bessemer, Ala. TH E HORIZON 257 
GHETT O 
SUPERINTENDEN T O F SCHOOL S W . 
J. DYKES , of Atlanta , Ga. , issued a 
bulleti n to school principals i n June , whic h 
said : "Al l teachers- are advised to registe r 
and to vote i n elections that concern the 
welfar e of the schools. This is not politics. 
It is pro bono publico." Th e bulletin was 
not sent to colored principals; however, the 
Atlant a Branc h of the N . A . A . C. P . has 
taken steps to promote the registratio n of 
the colored teachers. 
C I n Houston , Texas, the followin g wages 
are paid to school teachers: the whit e teachers fo r eight grades receive $50, $60, $70, 
$80, $90, $111 and $122 per month ; the 
colored teachers receive $45, $50, $55, $60, 
$65, $70, $75 and $80 pe r month, wit h large r 
classes and fewe r facilities; the whit e prin ­
cipals get $1,200 to $2,700 a year; the colored principals, from $960 to $1,200. 
CRIM E 
CITIZEN S of East St. Louis have sent a 
sarcastic message to Senator Sherma n 
and Congressmen Dyer, Johnson and Baker, 
i n regar d to the Washingto n riot. These 
me n were members of the East St. Louis 
Investigatin g Committee . 
C Fourtee n whit e men have been arrested 
i n connection wit h the Longview, Tex., riot. 
Dr . B . H . Davis, the colored ma n accused of 
precipitatin g the riot, escaped to Kansas, 
wher e he wil l fight extradition. 
C Th e followin g lynching s have taken place 
since our last record : 
Milan , Ga. , Ma y 26, Berr y Washington ; 
murde r i n defense of Negr o women. 
Minera l Wells, Miss. , Ma y 28, unknown 
Negro ; attemptin g to attack whit e women. 
Bay Minette, Ala., June 23, Frank 
Foukal (white) ; shot for murder. 
Ric h ton, Miss. , Jul y 2, unknown Negro ; 
hanged fo r discussing Hartfiel d lynching . 
Gilmer, Tex., Jul y 24, Chilto n Jennings; 
attack on whit e woman . 
Cochran, Ga., August 6, unknown 
Negro; hanged for discussing Chicago riot. 
PERSONA L 
DR. DANIE L H . WILLIAMS , a Negr o 
physicia n of Chicago, 111., wa s given a 
silver loving cup by the Pan-Missouri 
Medical Association, at its ninth annual session, 
June , 1919, at Kansa s City , Mo . 
(T Th e wil l of the late Harrie t Blanchard , 
of Philadelphia , Pa. , bequeaths $50,000 to 
St. Pau l N . an d I, School i n Virginia . 
C The Police Weekly Bulletin says of 
Cornelius Carter, a Negro police officer in 
Kansas City , Mo. , who rounded up a gan g of 
motor thieves: "Hi s entir e conduct i n the 
case savored of cool, keen, good judgment. " 
C Mrs. Mar y B . Talbert, president of the 
Nationa l Associatio n of Colored Women , is 
workin g i n Franc e under the Y . W . C. A . 
She is an accredited delegate to the 
National Council of Women. 
d Jackson Hill, a Negro farmer near 
Fayette, Mo., is dead at the age of eighty years. 
H e leaves an estate valued at over $40,000. 
C Mrs. Anni e Blackton , a colored woma n 
at Camden, N . J. , wa s wille d $25,000 and a 
home by he r late employer, Olive r P . Wood . 
C Mrs. C. C. Spaulding, wife of the 
General Manager of the North Carolina Mutual 
Lif e Insuranc e Company, Durham , N . C , is 
dead. 
C Professor J. H . Jackson, the first colored 
graduate of Berea College, is dead, at 
Cincinnati. 
TH E WA R 
R. R. WRIGHT , the Negr o educator of 
Savannah, Ga., has sailed to 
Belgium, England and France, at the assignment of Governor Dorsey, to gathe r data of 
Georgi a Negroes i n the war. 
d Lieutenant Jame s Reese Europ e Post 1 
has been granted a charte r i n the America n 
Legion . It has a membership of 100 Negr o 
veterans, with Alexander Mann, 
Commander. 
C Privat e Edwar d Merrifield , Compan y E , 
366th Colored Infantry, has been awarded 
the Distinguished Service Cross for 
"Courage and disregard for his own safety," in an 
action i n front of Frapelle , France . H e re- , 
ceived six wounds i n his left hip durin g this 
engagement. 
C A memoria l has been unveiled at the 
Nationa l Cemetery i n Ne w Albany , Ind., i n 
honor of Privat e Henr y W . Richardson , a 
Negr o who died on shipboard enroute to 
France . The monument wa s erected from 
a fund of $500 raised by his comrades. 
Whit e people vied wit h the Negroes i n doing 
honor to Privat e Richardso n i n the parade 
tha t preceded the ceremonies. 
C The appointment of Captain in the 
Infantry has been given by the War Depart- , 
ment to forme r Lieutenant Charle s H . 
Fearing, a Negro of St. Louis, Mo. 
Lieutenant Fearing was twice recommended for 
promotion to a Captainc y durin g his service TH E EMBASS Y FRO M HE R MAJESTY , ZAUDITU , QUEE N O F TH E KING S O F ETHIOPI A AN D EMPRES S O F ABYSSINIA . (See page 259.) TH E HORIZON 259 
i n Franc e wit h the 365th Colored Infantry . 
C Tw o colored men have been decorated wit h 
the Croix de Guerre,—John Baker, of the 
368th Infantry—" A soldier of admirabl e 
courage, " and Joseph James, of the same 
regiment, wh o receives his cross wit h a 
Gold Star, fo r rescuin g a wounded comrade 
under fire. 
G_ Lieutenan t R. Campbell, U . S. A. , has 
been assigned to the A . & T. College at 
Greensboro, N . C , as Professor of Militar y 
Science and Tactics. He has a 
Distinguished Service Cross and Croix de Guerre, 
wit h bronze star. 
([ Lieutenant Frierson, of the Ninth 
Cavalry, has been placed upon the retired list 
on the Unite d States Army . H e has been 
i n active service fo r more tha n thirt y years. 
C Joh n T. Gant, of Washington , D . C , a 
sergeant i n the 366th Infantry , has received 
the Medaille Militaire from the Belgiu m 
Government, fo r conspicuous braver y a t 
Gran d Rue , Vosges, September 1, 1918. 
C Captai n Charle s G. Kelly , formerl y of 
the 366th Infantry , has been appointed 
Specia l Fiel d Agen t of the Federa l Boar d 
fo r Vocationa l Education . His headquarters are at Ne w Orleans, La. , and his duties 
comprise supervision over discharged 
Negro Soldiers. 
C I n the A . E . F . there were fifty colored chaplains—13 Baptists, 13 M . E. , 9 
A. M. E., 4 A. M. E. Z., 4 
Congregationalists, 3 C. M. E., 2 P. E., 1 United Presbyterian and 1 undesignated. In the Regular 
Arm y there were 4 colored chaplains and 
three i n the Nationa l Guard . 
(L A regiment of the Pionee r Infantry , the 
807th, ha s recently returned from France , 
severa l of whose soldiers were decorated 
wit h the Croix de Guerre. The y were i n the 
Argonn e offensive and had man y casualties. 
Two of their number—Butler and 
Thompson—took first place in the athletic contests 
of the A . E . F . at Dijon , and were headed 
fo r Paris, but the regiment left before the 
games took place. 
C General Von Lettow Vorbeck, 
Commander of the German Colonial troops in East 
Africa , states tha t his army at the outbreak 
of the wa r consisted of 200 white s and 2,000 
Askaris; but the numbers increased to 3,000 
European s and 13,000 natives; at the time 
of the armistic e the forces ha d been reduced 
by losses to 250 whites and 1,200 Askaris. 
The y covered nearl y 4,000 miles i n the 
course of the fighting, 
([ Sergeant C. D . Pinkney , a Negr o of 
Pittsburgh , Pa. , captured fifteen German s 
single-handed, for which he has been award ­
ed the Croix de Guerre wit h Palm . 
([ The Crispus Attucks Post of the 
American Legion has been formed by Negro veterans i n Pittsburgh , Pa . 
FOREIG N 
A MISSIO N from Abyssini a has been 
visitin g the various countries of 
Europ e and America . The y were received 
by the President of Franc e and the Kin g 
and Queen of England , and toured the 
country. Whe n they came to the Unite d 
States, their boat flew the Abyssinia n flag, 
and they stopped at the Waldorf Astoria . 
President Wilso n received them at the 
Whit e House. Whil e i n Ne w York , they 
were refused dinner at the National 
Democratic Club and at the Republican Club, 
where the Consul-Genera l of Persi a was to 
entertain them. The gentlemen composing 
the mission were Dejazmatch Nado , a Duke , 
member of the Roya l Famil y and Chie f of 
the envoys; Kantibar Gabru, A Court 
Official; and Ato Herui, Mayor of Adis Ababa, 
the Capita l of Abyssinia . The y were, i n 
color, dark mulattoes, with predominant 
Negro blood. 
C Sir T. F . Victo r Buxton , Bart , President 
of the Anti-Slavery and Aboriginies 
Protection Society of England, is dead. 
C Mr . Morris Evans, a whit e author of 
South Africa , is proposing reforms i n na ­
tive government, includin g a Nativ e Affairs 
Council, loca l self-government i n native 
areas and limited representation in 
Parliament. 
(I The Africa n Politica l Associatio n of 
Cape Tow n has held a meeting and listened 
to an address by forme r President Dr. 
Abdurahman , on the disabilities of colored 
people i n South Africa . H e mentions the 
Pass laws, the "Jim -Crow " railwa y travel, 
unjust land acts and the tyrann y of the 
trades unions. . 
C The Paramoun t Chie f of Basutolan d has 
departed for a visit to England . 
C The eighth annua l conference of the 
South Africa n Nativ e Nationa l Congress 
has been held at Queenstown, unde r the 
presidency of S. M . Makgatho . 
C A marble and granit e monument to the 
late Mrs. Maggi e Makiwan e wa s recently 
unveiled i n South Africa . She wa s a wide ­
l y known Bant u teacher. 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Collegiate and Professional Schools 
JUNIO R COLLEG E leading to Schools of Lib ­
eral Arts, Education , Journalism, or Commerce and Financ e four year course, giving 
degree, A.B . or S.B.; A.B . or S.B. in Edu ­
cation; S.B. in Journalism ; S.B. i n Commerce. 
SCHOO L O F APPLIE D SCIENCE , four year 
course, giving degTee, S.B. in C.E. , S.B. 
in E.E. , S.B. in M.E, , S.B. in Arch. , S.B. 
in Agrl. , or S.B. in H. E 
SCHOO L O F MUSIC , four year course, giving degree of Mus.B . 
SCHOO L O F RELIGION , three year course, 
giving degree of B.D . (Also diploma and 
correspondence courses.) 
SCHOO L O F LAW . three year evening 
course, giving degree of LL.B . 
SCHOO L O F MEDICINE , including Medical , 
Denta l and Pharmaceutica l Colleges. Fou r 
year course for Medica l and Denta l students : three years for Pharmaceutical . 
Following degrees given: M.D. . D.D.S. , 
Phar.C . 
For Catalog and Information Write— 
REGISTRAR DWIGHT 0. W. HOLMES 
Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Morgan College and Branches 
JOH N 0. SPENCER , Ph.D. , President 
WILLIA M PICKENS , Litt.D. , Vice-Presiden t 
MORGA N COLLEGE , Baltimore , Md . 
LOCATION — I n great college town between 
the North and South. 
POLICY—Co-educational . 
COURSES — Fou r years, appropriate degrees. 
Preparation for professional study. Advance d 
education. Graduates certificated for elementary and high school teaching in the State. 
FACULTY — Colleg e and university trained 
men and women. 
NE W SITE — Fort y acres of most beautiful 
scenery, stream, hill and forest. 
TERMS— — Ver y reasonable. 
INFORMATION— Addres s Morga n College, 
Baltimore, Md . 
MORGA N ACADEMY , Baltimore , Md . 
LOCATION — I n the suburbs of Baltimore on 
a beautiful campus. Healthful surroundings. 
DORMITORIES — Kquippe d and supervised. 
Can care for SO students. 
TERMS — Ver y moderate. 
PRINCIPAL—Le e M . McCoy , A.M . 
PRINCES S ANN E ACADEMY , 
Princess Anne , Md . 
(Eastern Branch of Maryland State College 
of Agriculture.) 
LOCATION — Somerse t County, famous eastern 
shore of Maryland . 
COURSES — Preparatory , normal, industrial, 
domestic, music. 
DORMITORIES— Carefull y supervised; furnished. 
TERMS — Fre e tuition ; other expenses moderate. 
PRINCIPAL — Thoma s H . Kiah , A .M . 
Al l Schools Open Septembe r 29, 1919 
Dormitorie s Open Sept. 27, 1919 
1875 STATE 1919 
AGRICULTURA L AN D MECHANICA L 
COLLEG E FO R NEGROE S 
NORMAL, ALABAMA 
A COMBINATIO N HAR D T O BEA T 
A Thorough English Education Combined with a Trade 
WHA T TRAD E WOUL D YO U LIK E T O TAKE ? 
Trades for Boys, 12 Trades for Girls, 7 Trades for both Sexes, 2 
SUMMAR Y O F OU R GRADUATES—1875-191 9 
Department of Academic s 1Z17 
Department of Agricultur e ' 11 8 
Department of Household Economic s ' _ 70 4 
Department of Mechani c Arts .'.'''!!'.'* ' 227 
WHA T THE Y AR E DOIN G
 226 6 
Principals of distric t schools 163 
Teacher s in rura l schools 296 
Principals in secondary or high schools.. 24 
Teacher s in gramma r or high schools... . 90 
Doctor s 41 
Lawyer s J 
Dentists 
Pharmacists 3 
Druggists 10 
Workin g at trades 302 
Banker s 1 
U . S. Government Service 38 
Jeanes teachers 7 
Director s of hook establishments 2 
Editor s and Journalists 8 
Bookkeeper s '.'.'.'.*.*.'. 15 
U . S. Far m Demonstrators.....'.'.'.'.'.'.*.'*.* 2 
Undertaker s and Embalmers. .'.'.'.'.'. 6 
Contractor s and Builder s 8 
U . S. Burea u of Educatio n 1 
Farmer s '.'.'.'.'.*.'. 340 
Housekeeper s .*".''*'.''"' ' 498 
Dead and unaccounted for.............. . 398 
T
°t» l 2266 
Soldiers in the Grea t War . 
STAT E AN D UNITE D STATE S APPROPRIATION S 
Propert y consists of 182 acres of land, 20 building s for al l purposes, liv e stock and eenem l 
equipment valued at $202,000. Send for catalog today. * n a genera l 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
235 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 261 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal, Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING & 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. J . 
A hig h institution for the training of 
colored youth . Excellen t equipment, 
thoroug h instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academi c training for all 
students. 
Course s in carpentry, agricultur e an d 
trades for boys, including auto repairing . 
Course s in domesti c science an d do ­
mesti c art for girls. 
A new trades building , thoroughl y 
equipped. 
Ne w girls' dormitor y thoroughl y and 
modernl y equipped. 
Term s reasonable. 
Fal l ter m begins Septembe r 15, 1919. 
Fo r information address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
THE BEST SCHOOL 
in which to learn a trade and at the same time take your 
literary course. Do not waste money and time taking them 
separately. Positions await the well trained. 
BEFOR E TOTJ DECID E 
which 1B the best school for you to attend, send lor a 
catalog. 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS 
Miss Nannie H. Burroughs, President, 
Lincoln Heights, Washington. D. C. 
Learn the Auto and Tractor Business 
In from Eigh t to Twelv e Week s at the 
Prairie View State Normal 
and Industrial College 
PRAIRI E VIEW , TEXA S 
For full information, address 
W . P. TERRELL , SUPT . MECH . DEPT . 
Prairi e View , Texa s 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexes 
WINSTON-SALEM , N. 0. 
I, Offering Standard Courses 
I n Academic Subjects 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers' Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina 
and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r information communicat e wit h 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal 
SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem, N . C. 
Lincoln University 
Beginning September 22, 1919, the requirement for admission to the Theological Department will be graduation from a College of 
Liberal Arts. Youn g Me n wishing to prcpaic 
for the Ministr y in a Seminary, all whose resources will henceforth be devoted to the education of the adequately trained alone, are 
invited to write to 
President, John B. Rendall 
Lincol n Universit y P. 0., Pennsylvania . 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND, LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A . B . H . Society of New York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L . COLEMAN , President 
W e have roo m for a few mor e youn g me n i n ou r 
RESERVE OFFICERS TRAINING CORPS 
Th e Government furnishes cots, blankets, bed sacks, 
uniforms, rifles, ammunition and an officer to give 
MILITARY INSTRUCTION 
Students pay their own board and lodging amounting 
to $12 per month, but they may work out all or any 
part of this according as provision is made with the 
President. 
Al l students carry on their regular academic studies 
and trades courses in connection with their military 
training. 
Camp Opens Sept. 22nd, and Closes June 1st 
Fo r admission write 
LIEUT . W . R . SMALLS , 
A . and M . College, Normal, Ala . 
Fo r work write 
PRESIDEN T WALTE R S. BUCHANA N 
A . and M . College, Normal, Ala , 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 262 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th ST. PHILA. PA. 
(The above picture shows a few of the 1919 business class graduates and teachers of the institution. A large number of our Graduates are holding positions as clerks, stenographers and 
bookkeepers in the Government Service, banks, insurance companies and other private corporations. Students are coming to us from all over the country through our graduates and others.) 
SHORTHAN D 
Fo r Gramma r Schoo l graduates. Hig h Schoo l students an d others. 
TYPEWRITIN G 
Fo r children , blin d people , gramma r schoo l students an d others. 
BOOKKEEPIN G 
Fo r children , gramma r schoo l graduates, hig h schoo l students an d 
others. 
I n 9 lesson s ap t students ca n operat e a typewrite r accuratel y wit h 
eye s closed . 
Fal l ter m open s Wednesday , Octobe r i , 1919. 
3-month and 8-month courses. 
Enrol l fo r "Touc h System " o f Typewritin g at an y time—individua l 
attention . 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 263 
NEW OPPORTUNITY FOR YOUNG COLORED WOMEN 
TH E PROFESSION OF NURSING 
I n order to help supply the demand whic h is daily increasing- for colored nurses, Merc y Hospita l 
and School for Nurse s offers to hig h grade young colored women a most exceptional three years' 
course of training*. 
For further information address 
Superintendent of Nurses, Merc y Hospital , 50th Street and "Woodland Avenue , Philadelphia , Pa , 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Chiids" Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes 
NOTE—W e ar e enrolling Fal l Students and 
would advise al l who desire to take Specia l 
Course to send i n application A T ONC E 
as place s wil l be at a premium , 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopa l boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHAEGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTED 
Al l Bace s 
Prepare in the best school of its kin d in the State. 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training , and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Leno x Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 89 
Leno x Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City . 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fit z W . Mottley. President. 
Stenographers Wanted 
W e need three colored stenographers, 
female ; salary, $25 to $35 pe r week. Appl y 
wit h ful l details to Morale s & Company , 
Brokers, 25 Obrapia , Havana , Cuba . 
BIBLE PROFESSOR 
Teacher and Principal 
desire position. Can teach nearly all theological and seminary subjects; also Normal School instructor. Refined, 
gentle and strictly Christian. Can put life into any school 
with my novel and Inventive ideas. Write at once. 
J. L. J., care of THE CRISIS, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of Ne w Yor k 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurse s 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York City 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 an d 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y ATLANTA , GA . 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Ful l Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Boun d in Ful l 
Green Extr a Cloth, Gold Titl e on Front Cove r 
and Shelf Back. Price , net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Orde r through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St. Washington, D. C . 
BUSTS O F 
Booker T. Washington, 
Fred Douglass, Pau 
Lawrenc e Dunbar ' 
Bishop Richard Allen' 
$1.50 each. The 4 busts lor $5.00 
Agents wanted. Send at once. 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKOR Y STREE T 
PIN E BLUFF , ARK . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 264 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Reconstruction 
Wa r — an d its aftermath—ha s 
opene d the eyes o f ou r people . The y 
ar e no w seein g an d thinkin g straight. 
The y no w deman d o f individuals an d 
enterprise s seekin g their patronag e 
an d support , performanc e rathe r tha n 
glitterin g promises. The y als o de ­
man d evidence s o f stabilit y i n suc h 
enterprise s an d experienc e o n the part 
o f thos e conductin g them . 
Th e managemen t o f the Souther n 
Ai d Societ y o f Virginia , Inc. , rejoice s 
to see this day—The y hav e labored , 
i n season an d out, fo r 2 6 years to 
hel p to brin g abou t just suc h improve ­
men t i n ou r business relationships. 
Th e Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Vir ­
ginia , Inc. , ha s alway s issue d a supe ­
rio r contract—Th e only one guaranteeing payments for Sickness and Accidents each week of every year and 
an undiminished Death Claim after 
death. 
To-da y it challenge s the countr y to 
sho w a bette r record—tha n the fol ­
lowing—fo r a n institutio n confinin g 
its business to its Hom e State . 
26 years of satisfying service to policy-holders. 
$30,000.00 Capital Stock, fully paid in. 
$50,000.00 Federal, State & Cit y Bonds. 
$50,000.00 1st Lie n Mortgages—Loan s to our people tc 
secure good homes in desirable locations. 
$100,000.00 Cas h in Banks. 
$150,000.00 Rea l Estate—Fre e from all encumbrances. 
W e invite the scrutiny of the reconstruction attitude of the insur ­
ing public 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., Inc. 
Home Office: 527 N. SECOND ST., RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies Throughout the State 
A . D . PRICE , Pres. B . L . JORDAN , Sec. W . A . JORDAN , Asst . S. 
Mention TH E CRISIS, TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 265 
ORCHARDVILLE LOTS GOING FAST! 
PEOPLE FROM AL L OVER TH E COUNTRY TAKING ADVANTAG E OF OFFER AND SECURING IDEAL LOTS, 
UNDER NEW DEVELOPMENT PLAN, IN 
Beautiful ORCHARDVILLE 
FO R 
ONL Y $49 5 0 ON VER Y 
EASY TERM S 
II YOU WAN T TO SECURE AN ORCHARDVILLE 
LOT YOU MUST AC T QUICKLY. PEOPLE FROM 
AL L OVER TH E COUNTRY AR E SECURING Ti m 
LOTS, AN D TH E DEMAN D TOR THE M IS INCREASING B Y LEAP S AN D BOUNDS. 
Orehardville is located in a HIGH-GRAD E FRUIT 
GROWING REGION and is to bo developed into a 
BEAUTIFU L FRUIT CITY. 
Each lot will have a beautiful shade tree and FIV E 
HIGH-GRAD E FRUIT TREES planted on it. and will 
be cultivated and taker, .-an- of by US for FOUR YEAR S 
WITHOUT EXTR A COST TO YOU. When the fruit 
trees come into commercial bearing they should earn 
you EXCTJXEN T YEARL Y RETURN S ON YOUR INVESTMEN T WITHOI'T ANY EFFOR T ON YOUR PART. 
Thid 13 one of the main features of this offer. 
The lnts are 9ized 30 x 144 fret, and have plenty of 
room for a house, garden, chicken yard. shed. etc.. beBldea the fruit trees that we will plant on them. 
EAC H Lot IS GUARANTEE D To BE HIGH AND DRV 
UNDER A MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE, AN]) TH E 
CONTRACT YOU GET GIVES YOU TH E PROTECTION YOU WANT. 
The price of the lots, as stated above, is only $49.50 
each, ajid tiie terms are only S3.00 a month. .smaller 
terms when more than one lot is purchased. N) i 
INTEREST. 
DO NOT DELA Y THIS MATTE R BECAUS E TH E LOTS 
AR E GOING FASTI 
Our BEAUTIFU L CIRCULAR and BOOKLET contains 
all the details uf this offer, also a number of interesting views and letters from those who have been to 
Orchardvllle. Send for a copy of each RIGHT AWAY. 
Simply write your name and address on I he coupon, 
mail it. to us NOW, and we'll do the rest 
ADDRES S 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y and DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
19 SO. LA SALLE STREET CHICAGO, ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
Chicago, HI. 
Date , 1919. 
Gentlemen: — 
I am interested in your Orchardvllle offer and would be glad to receive a copy of your 
circula r and booklet without any obligation to me. 
Name • 
Address 
Town State 
C. 9-19 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 266 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Scott's Official History 
of The American Negro in the Great War 
A Proud Chapter 
in the History of 
the Negro Race 
The official and authentic 
history of the true part 
played by the Negro in the 
great World War, written 
by a man whose valuable 
experience, intimate connection with every phase of 
the direction of the great 
struggle, makes it possible 
to publish the true facts. 
A great historical volume 
that should be in every 
Negro home. Gives inside 
facts and accurate and official data and pictures 
which will appear in no 
other book. Every chapter 
is full of the very information which you have been 
anxiously waiting to know. 
This Great Book tells 
all about the Negro Everywhere in the World War 
— How He Did His Duty, 
in every capacity — from 
right up in the front line 
trenches and on the battlefields— clear bac k to 
the work of keeping the 
home fires burning; on the 
farms; in the mills and 
munition plants; on the 
railroads and steamships: 
in shipyards and factories. 
Men and women with the 
Red Cross, the Y. M. C. 
A., the Y. W. C. A., the 
War Cam p Community 
Service, the Liberty Loan 
Drives, etc. 
Scott's Official History 
was written for the Negro 
by the Negr o that the 
wonderful record of daring deeds, gallant bravery 
and undying heroism of 
our black troops might 
never perish. A great tribute to the patriotism of 
the Negro Race. 
Emmett J. Scott, 
A.M. , L.L.D . 
Agents Wanted 
Make $8.00 to $20.00 per 
day — right now — selling 
Scott's Official History — 
best book, biggest seller, 
quickest money-maker for 
live agents. Ne w from 
cover to cover. Be first in 
your territory and get the 
orders. We pay you highest commissions. 
FREE Writ 0 toda y 
for free outfit, 
including agents' sample 
book and full instructions. 
Send 25 cents to prepay 
postage. 
Copy mailed to any address 
upon receipt of $2.90 for 
cloth binding or $3.75 
for Morocco binding 
Written by 
Emmett J. Scott, A.M., 
LLD. , Special Assistant to 
Secretary of War, Newton 
D. Baker. 
Assisted by the following notable individuals: 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson, 
Director of Research, The 
Association for the Study 
of Negro Life & History, 
Inc. Ralph W. Tyler, Ac ­
credited Representative of 
the Committee on Public 
Information, who accompanied the colored troops 
10 war fronts in France. 
William Anthony Aery , 
Publication Secretary , 
Hampton Normal and Ag ­
ricultural Institute. Monroe N. Work, Director Division of Records and Research, Tuskegcc Normal 
and Industrial Institute. 
Mrs. Alice Dunbar Nelson (formerly Mrs. Paul 
Laurence Dunbar) leader 
in the mobilization of colored women of the country for war work under 
the auspices of the Wo ­
men's Committee, Council of National Defense. 
Miss Eva G. Bowles, Executive Secretary , in 
charge of the colored 
work of the Young Wo ­
men's Christian Association. Lieut. T. T. Thompson, Historian who accompanied the famous Q2 d Division, U. S. A. to France. 
Over 600 large pages 
(equal to 800 ordinary 
pages). 
Profusel y illustrated 
wit h nearly 150 official 
French and America n 
Negro Wa r Photographs, 
showing al l sides of Wa r 
Activitie s and Negro soldier Life , from the Cal l 
to the Colors on Through 
the Trainin g Camps . 
Then to th e Battl e 
Fronts and back to the 
Happ y Home Coming. 
THE NEGRO HISTORICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY 
P. O. Drawer WASHINGTON, D. C. **U" St. Station 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 267 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBERT 
Sopran o 
" She has one of the best voices that God has given her 
race. "—Los Angeles Times. 
" Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Talbert 
who beside her natural gift has already reached a high plane 
of professional accuracy."—Herman Devries in Chicago American. 
Engagements accepted for Concerts. Recitals, Oratorio. 
Mrs. Talbert will mako her first tour of the southern slates 
beginning September first at Arkansas. Write for data now. 
659 Twenty-eighth Street. Detroit Mloh. 
CLEOT A J . COLLINS 
Soprano 
She has a very lovely lyric soprano voice 
of beautiful quality and sings song* with 
style and intelligence. Her recitals are very 
interesting.— 
LIL A ROBESON 
Oj tht Metropolitan Opera Company aj New York 
103 W. 143d St., New York City 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron White and his Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
Roland W. Hayes Phonograph Records 
3 Warwick St., Boston, Mass. 
Recitals, Concerts, Oratorio, Opera 
Booking Engagements for Continental Tour 
Season 1919-1920 
Management: M . J. Minor, 2 Mills St., 
Koxbury , Mass. 
Edwin Coates 
Pianist 
Graduate of Institute 
of Musica l Art , New 
Yor k City . Featuring 
the works of Negro 
composers: ColeridgeTaylor, Charlton, Dett, 
Diton, Johnson. 
Write for terms and 
available dates. 
Management: GRETCHF N TE N EYC K 
167 W . 136th Street New York City 
WILLIA M RICHARDSO N 
Baritone 
Concerts—Recitals—Oratorio 
Joint concerts wit h 
Mau d Cuney Hare , 
Pianist 
Address: 
170 "Walnut Ave. , Roxbury, Mass. 
MUSIC was a determining factor in winning 
the WAK . The American people will give 
more time to music nuw than ever before. 
There is nothing that can make the home more 
cheerful Ihan GOOD MUSIC 
If you have a player piano let us send you 
these ROLLS from our catalog: 
WOR D ROLL S 
Title Price 
The Song the Sunny Southland Sings. . .76 
The Kaiser's Got the Blue s 80 
•Oh , Death Wher e is Th y Sting 80 
• A Good Ma n is Har d to Fin d 90 
•St. Louis Blue s 80 
•Joe Turne r Blue s 76 
•Hookin g Cow Blues 90 
•Beal e Street Blue s 90 
INSTRUMENTA L ROLL S 
Hai l to the Spirit of Freedom (March) .60 
Sympathizing Moon (Song) 60 
No Name (Waltz ) 60 
INSTRUMENTA L ROLL S (Blues) 
Preparedness Blue s 50 
Lonesome Road Blues 60 
•Ole Miss Blues 60 
•Beal e Street Blues 50 
A charge of 5c per roll for mailing insured. 
Get these songs for your phonograph or for 
your piano. 
Numbers marked (*) may be had for phonograph at $1.00 each postpaid. 
Piano copies of above listed Rolls 16c each. 
PACE & HANDY MUSIC CO., INC. 
"HOM E OF TH E BLUES " 
1547 Broadway Gaiety Theatre Bldg. New York, N.Y, 
KELLY MILLER'S 
Race Statesmanship 
Exhibited in Two Great Pamphlets 
1. "The Negro in the New Reconstruction." Considered the most 
powerful plea that has yet come from 
the author's pen. io cents. 
2. "The Disgrace of Democracy." 
Pronounced in Europe and America 
as one of the most striking literary 
documents produced by the World 
War. io cents. 
Agents wanted everywhere. Rates 
to agents 5 cents a copy. Add 10% 
to bill to cover postage. 
Address 
KELL Y MILLER 
Howard University Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 268 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
STATE ST. STYLES 
TAILORED • TO - MEASURE 
At Agent's Inside Wholesale Prices 
New Fall and Winter Sample Book Now Ready 
Bigger Samples 
Mor e Fabric s 
Additional Styles With inside Wholesale Prices to Agents 
Styles and Samples to please every taste, 
to look well on every age and build. 
Greater cash prof its to agents 
Even if you don't want to be our Agent in your spare 
time, be sure to get our new FREE offer and learn how 
we save you one-half on your own clothes. 
TAILORING AGENTS—Be sure to write and 
get our new deal with Bigger Profits, 
Better Attention and Prompt Shipments. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO. 
Dept 290, Chicago, ILL. 
SENT FREE 
AMAZING 
CASH PROFITS 
are being made in 
the delightful 
AGENCY 
TAILORING 
BUSINESS 
Why Don't YOU 
Get Into the game? 
YOU BET I WANT THAT 
New SAMPLE BOOK 
please send it to me FREE 
and PREPAID. Here is my address 
Name 
R.F.D Box Postoffice 
Street & No State 
Fill in name and address plainly—and mail AT ONCE 
If you can't be our Agent in spare time, please hand this to some ambitious fellow 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 269 
COLORE D DOLL S 
29c, 39c, 69c EACH 
These UNBREAKABL E Brown Skin Dolls 
are designed and made by Colored Girls in 
a Factory Owned and Controlled by Colored 
People. 
"Berry's Famous Brown Ski n Dolls, " are 
sold by large Department Stores: 
Littl e Bo y i n Rompers $ .29 
Littl e Girl , neatly dressed 39 
Littl e Girl , wit h hair 69 
Country Boy , overalls 69 
"Bab y Doll, " 14", hair 1.60 
"Doris, " 16", long flowing curls 3.50 
So far as we know this is the only Negro 
Dol l Factory in the World . 
CHILDREN' S DRESSE S AN D APRON S 
The "Berr y & Ross Company" is now also 
manufacturing Children's Dresses and Bungalow Aprons: 
Gingham Dresses, 2 to 6 years, each..$1.35 
Percal e Dresses, 2 to 6 years, each 1.00 
Aprons, Percale 1.35 
Ver y extr a size 1,98 
Postage, 10c. 
Berry & Ross Mfg. Co., Inc. 
Factory 36-38 W. 135th Street 
NEW YOR K CIT Y 
Agents Wanted 
100 Fine Calling Cards 50 Cents 
Fashionable styles and sizes for ladies and gentlemen. No extra charge for address or postage. Agents 
make big profits taking orders for our cards. Big 
demand everywhere. Al l orders filled promptly. 
Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Teachers Wanted 
In a secondary school with high standards the following 
teachers are needed: 
Bible and Social Service. 
English and French. 
Shorthand and Expert Bookkeeper. 
Domestic Science and Arts. 
Dressmaking, Tailoring and Millinery Matron. 
School north of Mason and Dixon Line. Only capable, 
cultured, experienced. Christian women need apply. 
Address, Secondary Sohool, care of The Crisis. 
Dolls - Dolls -
Hig h grade colored dolls that you can depend on in 
natural brown colors at reasonable prices—also beautiful Negro calendars with colored children for a 
subject. These calendars come in a great number of 
subjects. We are now making them up for the trade 
also for home use. Our agents are doing well selling 
these goods. Send for proof and get started to making 
good money. Reliable selling agents wanted. 
AH our aoods are sold on their merits. 
OTIS H. GADSDEN 
63 Park Row New York City 
TEACHERS: A state supervisor of schools 
writes us: "Will you kindly 
furnish me a large list of teachers for our schools 
for the next year? I can have them appointed at once. 
We need them for all types of schools, but primarily 
for rural schools." 
We also have immediate calls for teachers of auto 
mechanics, carpentry, painting, agriculture, Spanish 
and French. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 New Yor k Avenue Washington, D. O. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Wil l Help Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , 0 . 
Would you like to know why the Negro and Caucasian 
are mixing in spite of prejudice ? Then, read 
" As Nature Leads." by J. A. Rogers, author of " From 
Superman to Man." Undoubtedly the moat fearless analysis 
of the Negro-Caucasian situation by any author. The writer 
penetrates to the very heart of the subject and In a style 
bubbling with vigor he puts In the clearest language thoughts 
of your Innermost consciousness. Arguments supported by the 
world's greatest scientists and philosophers. Easily read. 
A book you will read and re-read and give to your friends. 
Price. $1.25: by mall, $1.39. Agents wanted. 
Dept. A, Hayes Book Store, 3640 State Street, Chics go. III. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
Fo r al l Lodg e an d Churc h Societie s 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES , Pres. 
N . E . Cor. 8th and Plum SU. , Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Telephone : Capitol 4957. 
JNO. C. NORMAN 
Registered 
Architect and Engineer 
Office: 2d Floor , Room G', K . of P . Building, 
Charleston, W . Va . 
Telephones: 
Central 266 
Mai n 220 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
202-206 Engineers Building Cleveland, Ohio 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Tel. 3487 Fort Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
I 84 School Street Boston Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F . McMechep 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 270 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MISSING Pages in AMERICA N History 
A book of ninety-two pages, bound in paper, revealing the 
services of Negroes in the early wars in the United States 
of America; 1641-1812. 
Pric e (U . S. money order) $1.00 
Address L . E. Wilkes 
1404 Frankli u St., WASHINGTON , D. C. 
** It should be widely distributed."—0. G. Villard. 
" I will put this copy in Harvard Library."—Prof. A. B. 
Hart. 
Teachers, Professional Nurses, 
Stenographers 
and persons otherwise trained in business and the 
professions will find our agency an active, important 
medium in bringing you in touch with better positions 
and higher salaries. 
SYSTE M SERVIC E AGENCY , 
Dept. "E, " 71 W . 99th St., New Yor k Cit y 
200,000 Live Agents Wanted 
DUDLEY' S FAMOU S POLIS H 
for Automobiles, Furniture and Floors. Writ e for 
term.' . 
SPECIA L OFFE R FO R 90 DAY S 
We will ship to all new agents $10.00 worth of 
DUDLEY' S FAMOU S POLISH for $5.00. 
Dudley's Leather & Chemical Works 
116 South Mai n St., Muskogee, Okla , 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
The Mecca oi Negro History aud Literature 
Distributors of 
Scott's Official History of the Negro in 
the World War. 
Cloth, $2.90; Leather, $3.75, post-paid. 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANGE . 
135 West 135th Street, New York City. 
ABC 
Employment 
Agency 
WOMEN, MEN , BOYS, GIRLS 
JOBS—GOOD JOBS 
ARE WAITING FOR YOU 
Phones: Open 
Drexel 98, 194, 1281 Evenings 
4702 S. State St. Chicago, III. IMPORTANT NOTICE 
Beginning with the November, 1919, 
issue TH E CRISIS will be increased 
in size to sixty-eight pages. At the 
same time the price will be advanced 
to One Dollar and a Half per year, 
Fifteen Cents per copy. 
SPECIAL OFFER 
Until midnight of 31 October we 
will receive subscriptions at the old 
rate of One Dollar per year for as 
many years in advance as our friends 
may care to order. This applies to 
old and new subscribers alike. 
THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
MAK E MONE Y 
Selling THE CHALLENG E 
The World's Great Negro Magazine 
It Fears Only God Write For Terms 
2305 7th Avenue, New York City 
The September issue of the 
BIRTH CONTROL REVIEW 
will be 
Negro Construction Number 
A play, "They That Sit in Darkness," by 
Mar y Burrill . 
"The Closing Door, " a short story by Angelina W . Grimke. 
A n editorial by A . Philip Randolph and a 
poem by James Weldon Johnson. 
News notes, book reviews, editorials. 
TH E BIRTH CONTROL REVIEW 
Room 2005, 104 Fift h Ave. , Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Yearly subscription $1.50, six months' trial 
50c if mailed with this advertisement, giving 
name and address. 
1000 Agents Wanted 
Latest Photo Sensation 
Bethel Art Medallions 
Just send us any picture of yourself or friend 
and receive a Beautiful Enlarged Lif e Size 
Medallion in a frame of oak or mahogany or 
ivory or flowered frame. Ou r price $1.00. 
Agents sell for $2.00. Lif e size medallion 
photos of Madame Walke r in beautiful frame. 
Ou r price $1.00. Agents sell for $2.00. W e 
can give you lowest prices on all Wa r Histories, Post Card , Pictures, Photo Jewelry, 
Photo Buttons and Photo Mirrors. A great 
Negro picture, "His Mother's Prayer," 1 for 
20c , 100 for $5.00. 
Writ e for free catalog; 
BETHE L AR T CO . 
97 South St. Jamaica, N . Y . 
M r a m in Peomiiubip- Bookkeeping, u d Saarthud 
throufh * ! m S will preplra r u l. r lia pin n w^fc 
while. (V r j( « / a r faformarfon:. 
A. D. NoDey, M. Pen., 519 Michigan Ave., Baffalo N.Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 271 
Indoor Toilet 
Convenient — Sanitary 
"*The Comfort Closet for Homes, Summer 
Cottages and Camps. Entirely odorless. 
Scientifically ventilated. Strong chemical* <i isBolve contents; kills all germs. Easily 
installed. Convenient to move. Contents disposed of easily as garbage. Prevents fly 
breeding and water contamination. Provides 
aanitary,odorle8B toilet in borne protected from 
cold and stormy weather. Only closet with porcelain container. Easily cleaned. Approved 
by U. S. Health Bureau. 30 Days' Free Trial. 
Agents make $60 to $100 weekly. Exclusive 
territory. Ask for booklet—FREE. 
COMFOR T CHEMICA L CLOSET CO . 
1670 Factories' BMg . . Toledo, Ohio 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mrs. M . WATSON RUDD, 
164 West 131st St. New York City 
has placed upon the market her new 
ROSE NINON NUFEET POWDER 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, railroad and factory employees, dancers and all persons 
who are required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—"Writs for particulars. 
Manuel's Employment Agency 
(Licensed) 
First-class situations supplied in private families to 
male and female help with jjood characters and references. Accommodations for strangers coming to 
this city. Address 
G. W. MANUEL , 
20 Eases Street, Cambridge, Mass. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 272 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FREE FASHIO N BOO K 
MAILE D 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r 
Al l our wigs are 
hand made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS, Transformations, switches, and Braids anrl 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price $10.50 
W e carry the largest selection of Hai r Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
which makes the skin velvetlike, the hair 
silklike. 
Mme. Baum's Mail Order House 
P. O . BO X 145, 
Penn. Termina l Station, New Yor k City. 
Whe n writing, mention this paper. 
No "drugging"— 
Take Turkish Baths at Home 
—enjoy vigorous health 
For every pain in the 
head, chest, back, side, etc. 
— take some drug , the 
composition, nature, an d 
effect of which are entirely unknown to you ! 
NO I Giv e Natur e a 
chanc e to be Us own 
healthful self. 
Every one know s the 
value and efficacy of the 
Turkish Ball) as a cleansing, invigorating, rejuvenating agent—but the inconvenience 
of availing oneself of the Turkish Bath has stood in the way 
of its needed frequent use. But now the real Turkish Bath 
may he conveniently ami easily taken at home any time in 
just a few minutes. 
A Turkish Bath at Home Costs OnlyO 
With This ROBINSON BATH CABINET 
Abandon drugs and use this simple, pleasant means to 
infuse your whole system with new life. If you do Dot get 
time for physical exercise, walking, etc., if kept indoors all 
day: if you do not perspire freely enough; if inclined to 
obesity — you will be delighted with the results of using this 
wonderful Cabinet, right at home, at a cost of 2c. a bath. 
FREE BOOK — Illustrated — Written 
by Men Who Have Mado a Lifetime 
Study of Bathing in Its Relation to 
Health and Beauty. 
100 pages of vital facts, real knowledge of scientific bathing for all people who want to live right ami who 
are willing to make a simple effort to 
do so. It's most truly. "The Philosophy of Health and Beauty." Just 
write a postal today. 
ROBINSO N MFG . COMPAN Y 
1009 N. 12th St.. Toledo, Ohio 
BUY IT NEXT TIME 
If your druggist or hair 
dresser does not carry it 
— order direct from us. 
Special Offer 
Send $1.23 for our wonderful 
combination Specia l of HairGrower, Hai r Gloss and Indo l 
Fac e Cream. 
A Short Road to 
Success 
Learn trie INDO L SYSTE M of 
hair culture by correspondence 
course. Diplomas granted. Best 
results. Improvements on other 
systems. Investigate. 
Six cents sent us to cover packing and postage will bring you 
our literature and liberal samples 
of our hair grower. 
INDO LABORATORIES, Corp. 
Dept. C-2 
2257 SEVENT H AVENU E 
New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 273 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOT H POWDER— 
Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E . A . Welters' Tooth Powder Co. , Inc. 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "COLD" 
in the Mouth, "-BLEACHING' the Teeth and Preventing Decay. 
Patents secured o n easy terms 
Write for particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisian a Ave.. N . ".V., Washington , D . C 
Earn $35.to $100 WEEKLY 
ALL OR SPARE TIME 
Tub 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Years 
Ton—yourself—can positively make $35 to MOO a week. I 
wan t men, hurtling, energetic. ambitiouB fellows, anxiou B to 
make money, who ore willing to work with me. Not for me, but 
with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell ana 
BDDoin t local agents for the biggest, most sensational seller i n 
5fl ^ars-th e ROBINSON FOLDIN G BAT H TUB. Demonstratlng Tu b Furnished. Here's an absolutely new invention 
—nothing like it. Makes instant appeal. Sells easily. Gives 
every home a modern, up-to-date bathroom i n any part or the 
house. No plumbing, no water-workB needed. Folds in small 
roll, handy as umbrella. Self-emptying, positively unleakoble. 
Absolutely guaranteed for,10 years. Remember, fully 70 per 
cent of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Two sales a day means S300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
§400 profit i n 30 days. Rev. Otto Schialze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont,, orders $1072 i n 17 days. Hamlmton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two dars. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a post card. Let me 
write you & long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if yon mean business. But you must be 
ambitions, you must want to make money. That sail, write 
a postcard novt I want to pay you $35 to $100 every week, 
H . S. Robinson, Pres. The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 
5044 Factories Buildind Toledo, Ohio 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cost aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine UTOB and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The water* of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams a n fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting I 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive movements Of the time? Surety! 
Then you will be Interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan. If you act at once you can secure a beautiful let for only $30.00 each'; 
$6.00 cash; Si 00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear titleGood live energetic 
Agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bidg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, IIL i 
Mention Tax CRISIS. 274 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Ful l size of book, 6Vi x 8*/2 
Price , $2.25 
B Y KELL Y MILLE R 
The following Are Some 
of the Inspiring Chapters 
It Contains 
Progress in Education. 
Histor y of Negro Education. 
Th e Earl y Teaching of the Slaves. 
Education as a Soldier. 
Church Schools Afte r the War . 
Independent Schools. 
Church Denominational Schools. 
Th e Coming Me n of the Race. 
Th e Turnin g Point. 
Earning Respect for His Race. 
Increase of Opportunities. 
In the Employ of the U . S. Government. 
Th e Colored American in the Service of God. 
Leaders of Americ a Whos e Ear s are Close 
to the Ground. 
Th e Colored American's Nationality. 
Th e World's Congress of Races. 
Ethiopia, the Great Black Empire . 
Th e Genius of Colored Americans. 
Development of the Race in the U . S. 
Th e Overground Railroad. 
Opportunity for Business Life . 
Optimism, Pessimism and Indifference. 
Th e Victor y of the Ma n Wh o Dares. 
Send $2.25 and we will mail you the hook 
and one large photo of Dean Miller . Don't 
miss getting all of Kell y Miller's books. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
W e want agents to sell this wonderful human interest story in every community. We 
offer yo u the Agency. Send 25c for Prospectus, and be FIRS T in the field. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
623 Nint h St. Washington , D . C. 
What the 
People Say 
From Utica Normal and Industrial 
Institute, Utica, Mississippi. 
Dear Sirs:—I have received "Pro ­
gress of the Colored People," and I 
am now looking it over. So far as I 
have gone, it impresses me very much. 
I feel quite sure that your labors will 
mean much, not only to the colored 
people, but all the people who wish to 
know something of what the Negro 
Race has been doing with its freedom. 
Very truly yours, 
WM . H . HOLTZCLAW , 
H . W. Principal. 
May Quit the School Room. 
Gentlemen:—"Find enclosed New 
York Exchange for $34.00 for the last 
lot of books. A m delayed a little, 
send me 40 more books at once. Letter of credit covers same. I have 
summed my sales up to 170 books, 
have no trouble in selling, have sold 
as high as 32 in one day." 
I will entertain your proposition to 
give up teaching and act as your general agent. 
Yours very truly, 
Prof. G. A. GOODMAN , 
Marshall County, Miss. 
Wants 300 Books Quick. 
Gentlemen:—I have delivered the 80 
" Progress of Colored People." Inclosed find my order for 60 more; put 
in free copies. I will need 300 of these 
books to complete my delivery, during the next thirty days. No trouble 
to sell this book. It is a self-seller. 
A . A. DUNCAN , 
Marion County, Ga. 
Prof. Kell y Miller , Author , Howar d Uni ­
versity, Washington , D . C. 
Mention T H E CRISIS. THE Brownies' Book 
Announcement is made of the 
publication beginning in 
November 
of a Monthly 
Magazine for Children 
DESIGNED FOR ALL CHILDREN, 
BUT ESPECIALL Y FOR OURS. 
It wil l be a thing of Joy and Beauty, dealing in 
Happiness, Laughte r and Emulation , and designed 
especially for Kiddie s from Six to Sixteen. 
It wil l seek to teach Universa l Lov e and Brotherhood for all little folk—black and brown and yellow 
and white. 
O f course, pictures, puzzles, stories, letters from 
little ones, clubs, games and oh—everything! 
One Dollar a year Ten Cents a copy 
W. E. B. DuBois, Editor 
A. G. Dill, Business Manager 
ADDRESS: 
The Brownies' Book, 2 W. 13th Street, New York City NILE QUEEN 
PREPARATION S 
FOR HAIR AND SKIN 
"Better Than the Best" 
FRE E "NIL E QUEEN " BEAUT Y BOOK 
Just out Write for a Copy FRE E 
For sale at all Drug Stores and first class Beauty Parlors. 
KASHMIR Chemical Co. 
Dept. K 312 So. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 