The CRISIS 
April, 1921 
FIFTEEN CENTS A <±>PY 
Library 
APR 1 1921 the Brownies' Book 
A Monthly Magazine for Children 
should have a hundred thousand subscribers and should be read by a 
million children who especially need its inspiring pictures, stories and 
news of colored youth. 
To introduce this magazine to many new readers we are launching a 
SPECIA L CIRCULATIO N CAMPAIG N and, in addition to regular liberal commissions to agents, we offer championship medals on the following terms and conditions: 
100 Championship Medals 
So GOL D MEDAL S 
T o the person in each State or 
Territory of the United States 
who sends us the largest number 
of subscription s to TH E 
BROWNIES ' BOO K mailed to 
or delivered at our office on or 
before July i, 1921 (provided the 
highest is not less than 25 annual subscriptions), we will send 
a beautiful Championship Gold 
Medal, besides paying the usua' 
agent's commission. Th e subscription price is $1.50 a year. 
Foreign subscriptions $1.7 5 a 
year. 
50 SILVE R MEDAL S 
T o the person in each State 01 
Territory of the United States 
who sells the largest numbe r of 
copies of TH E BROWNIES ' 
BOO K bought on or before July 
1, 1921 (provided the number of 
copies totals not less than 250), 
we will send a beautiful Championship Silver Medal, besides allowing the usual agent's commission. Th e sale price is 15c a 
copy. 
The contest is open to any man, woman, boy or girl. 
In case of a tie for any prize, each tieing contestant will receive 
a prize identical with that tied for. 
$50 Scholarship for Four Years 
To the person who makes the best showing in this Championship 
Contest a scholarship of Fifty Dollars a year for Four Years is offered 
by Mr. Thomas J. Calloway, a business man of the race, who is anxious 
to see TH E BROWNIES ' BOOK widely read and who desires to encourage the youth in industry and zeal. To win the scholarship it is necessary to win a gold or silver medal. The $50 a year will be paid to the 
school to which the winner goes for education. 
Write at once for agent's terms, subscription blanks, sample copies 
and current copies to sell. 
DU BOIS and DILL, Publishers 
the Brownies' Book 
2 West 13th Street New York, N. Y. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BUROHARD T DU BOI8 ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 21-No . 6 APRIL 1921 Whole No. 126 
PICTURES p. g e 
COVER. Photograph by Battey. 
"BLACK SWAN!" Hilda Rue Wilkinson 257 
MEN OF THE MONTH 265 
DELEGATES OF THE NATIONAL CONGRESS OF BRITISH WEST 
AFRICA TO LONDON 269 
ARTICLES 
INTER-RACIAL ACTIVITIES IN THE SOUTH 249 
THE BLACK SWAN. A Story. Maria Moravsky 255 
THE WOMAN'S PARTY AND THE VIOLATION OF THE 19TH 
AMENDMENT. Ella Rush Murray 259 
WHITTIER AGAIN. Charles Eaton Burch 261 
A HARBOR 262 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 245 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 251 
MEN OF THE MONTH 264 
THE LOOKING GLASS 266 
THE HORIZON 271 
THE MAY CRISIS 
The May CRISI S will have as its cover a reproduction of a rare, engraving of Le Chevalier de 
Saint-Georges, the great colored musician. There will also be an article on the same subject. 
Miss Moravsky's story will be concluded. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS ; The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as cften as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old/ and the new address must be gi'.en. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1SI0, at the post office at Ne w York, Ne w 
York, under the Ac t of March 3, 1879. 242 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a jnst pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teachtr Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Artt and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, addreu 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FO R COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N. J. 
A high institution for the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modcrnly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term opens September 15. 1921. 
For information address 
W . R. VALENTINE , Principal 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B. Kendall, D.D. , Lincoln University, 
Chester County, Penna. 
WILBERFORC E UNIVERSIT Y 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
8th Annual Session. 
Summer of 1921 June 20 to July 30 
The Summe r School is accredited 
and standardized, and teachers' certificates will be issued by the state of 
Ohio on credits received in the Summer School. 
For full particulars write Gilbert II . 
Jones, Director of the Summe r School 
Dr. John A. Gregg, 
President of the Institution 
Cheyney Training School For* 
Teachers 
Cheyney , Pa. 
Made in 1920 an accredited State Normal School, 
ottering, in addition to the regular Normal Course of 
two years, professional three vear courses in Home 
Economics and Shop Work. A diploma from anv of 
these courses makes a craduate eligible to teach in 
the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
High School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Send application now for fall term opening September 
20th, 1921. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLIE PINCKNE T HILL. Principal. 
Cheyney, Pa. 
THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR 1921 
Mention T H I CIISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 243 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South, Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta. Ga. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 14, 1921. 
For catalog1 and other information address 
PRESIDENT J. KELLY G IFF EN 
hnoxvllle, Icon . 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSIT Y 1921 
ATLANTA. GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration buikling with modern 
chapel, gymnasium and lahoramhes ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Keligi'>us atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd Tears' High School Courses, with Certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Tear High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
DiplomaCollege—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
pre-medlcal Course 
^.Ird year of nine month* opens September 21. 1921 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDR EWS KING. President 
The Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee , Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
Tbe only Institution In tne SUM hiring for Its object 
Collegiate. Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training tor colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance. Social Serrtce, Nursing and 
Normal! Sunmereiel. Music. Domestlo Science, Missionary 
trsinlns class. _ 
•nbSnJ classes, correspondence course. Deuces ofered. 
President C. H. Parri.h 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent year* 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE. N. C. 
Blddle Unlversltr, operated, ander the aajplce* of 
the Northern P—ibjtertan Church, baa four Departments—Hlg>* Scnool, Arts and Science* Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course Is the requirement for entrance to the first vear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts end Science* offers two coarse* 
uf study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific, German Is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class la 
16 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. Tbe first Is purely smguah. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In tbe High School Dept. are regain*) 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For furthsr in form si ion. ndirtu 
Pr*ildent H. L. MeCrorty, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Nor. 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science. Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
BISHO P J . S. FLIPPER , Chairma n Truste e Boe: d 
Mention T H E CBISIB. 24 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Wile y University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Har ­
vard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920 . Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
Talladega College 
Talladega , Alabam a 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negr o Leader s 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, So ­
cial Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood . 
For further information address 
F. A. SUMNER , President 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Dayton a Norma l an d Industrial Institut e for Negr o Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , • - Principal 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 36, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. For further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptiit State Woman' ! Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Student! 
from li i different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O . L. COLEMAN , President 
30-DA Y SYSTE M Positions Secured 
DERRIC K 
BUSINES S SCHOOL 
The School of Results 
The Only One of Its Kind 
SHORTHAN D TOUC H TYPEWRITIN G 
BOOK-KEEPIN G OFFICE TRAINING 
mr » W e are now in OU R OW N NE W 
BUILDING . 
Spacious class rooms equipped with 
every modern office device. 
Derrick Students learn quickly and 
earn while they are learning. 
ENROL L IMMEDIATEL Y 
to insure Class Placement 
Comfortable Dormitories for Young Women 
Write for Catalog 14—Full information of 
Winter Term. 
1514 PINE ST., PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
M . J. DERRICK, Priii. & Mgr . 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direotion of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTEB-IN-CHABGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
ST. PAUL'S HOUSE 
A TRAININ G SCHOO L FO R BOY S 
High Christian Standard 
Address the Chaplain 
TH E REV . WM . E. HENDRICK S 
234 West Penn Street 
Germantown, Philadelphia, Pa. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Hom e 
New York , N.Y . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monograph s Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 11 ATLANTA, GA. 
Mention T H E C KISII. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 21. No. 6 APRIL, 1921 Whole No. 126 
Opinion 
Ur&b- DM ftoLp 
THE DRIVE 
IE are going to conduct a 
drive for two hundred and 
fifty thousand members. 
. With an unbroken front of 
a quarter of a million, we may carry 
on our efforts to secure full human 
rights for every colored man, woman 
and child. 
The work of preparation begins 
now. The plans for conducting this 
drive are in hand. When you remember the great accomplishments of the 
Association, with a comparatively 
small membership, you will realize 
what its possibilities will be when the 
drive has made it a quarter of a million strong. 
We are, therefore, furnishing important leaflets containing valuable 
information, which can be had at the 
National Office. 
It is said that when the enemy cries 
out, you may know that your fighting 
is effective. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, more than once in 1920, 
caused the oppressors of black people to cry out. 
Remember how the Republic of 
Haiti found new hope, and how its 
wrongs were revealed to the world by 
our Association. 
Remember how the Ku Klux Klan, 
hoping to rob you of opportunity, confesses its fear of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and acknowledges that our 
organization is its strongest enemy. 
Remember how perturbed the 
Southern Senators were when our officers gave their telling testimony of 
election outrages in the South at the 
hearings before the Census Committee in Washington. 
Remember how the Association 
conducts its fight against lynchings; 
read the results already gained, and 
the promise of the victory of a Federal law against this great crime 
which disgraces America. 
Remember also the program for 
1921, and face that program with the 
realization that the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, with efficient cooperation, can 
and will accomplish these tasks. 
That cooperation is expressed in 
three simple things: 
(a) Greater numbers in our membership 
(b) More funds 
(c) Closer organization. 
We must have greater numbers. A 
quarter of a million people, standing 
behind the Association as one, with 
united purpose and united will, constitute a force that cannot be ignored. 
The vital interests of every American, colored and white, are involved 
in the things for which we fight. Our 
aim then is a modest one when we 
seek to enlist for this cause a quarter 
of a million. 
We must have more funds to carry 
on our fight. More members will 
mean more strength and more money. 
It takes money, as well as zeal, to secure what men call "rights". 
The Association is warring for that 
which is dearer than life—that we 
may have not only a larger share of 
liberty for ourselves, but full liberty 
and equal opportunity for colored 
children yet unborn. 
We must have closer organization— 
245 24G TH E CRISIS 
mass formation, the inter-lacing arteries running out from the main office 
to the most remote part of the organized body. 
We have planned a method in this 
drive which will bring this about, a 
method that can be made permanent 
for larger and more efficient work. 
This is our call to you,—a drive for 
a quarter of a million (250,000), that 
we may take up the big tasks that 
await us. 
Will you heed the call, and enter the 
drive with the will to succeed? 
Men and women of America, what 
is your answer? 
(Signed) ROBERT W. BAGNALL. 
A LETTE R 
MRS. PAUL GASTON DARROT, 
National Board, Y. W. C. A. 
My Dear Madam: f 
HAVE your letter of January 
22. I regret to say that I am 
leaving town for a few days but 
I shall be glad to have an interview with you any time after I return, 
February 6. 
Meantime I beg to say that no one 
realizes more than I do the difficulties 
before a national organization like the 
Young Women's Christian Association. I am aware that in the past 
they have done a great deal of very 
excellent work in the treatment of 
colored people and I am ready at all 
times to give such publicity as I can 
to their efforts. 
At the same time I must say frankly that I have been especially pained 
and disgusted at the official attitude 
toward Mrs. Talbert. Mrs. Talbert 
is, by reason of her presidency of the 
colored women's clubs, the foremost 
woman in America of Negro descent. 
She is a woman of unblemished character and of excellent presence. Apparently without any attempt to find 
out the truth concerning her standing 
and creditability your board took absolutely at its face value a report 
from Paris, which, to say the least, 
was neither complete nor frank, and 
made a public announcement which 
practically branded Mrs. Talbert as 
an ill-bred liar. 
When the board found that this 
first account was not true it sent out 
a second explanation which still pu 
the blame on Mrs. Talbert; and now 
in its third attempt to excuse the inexcusable it conies out with vague 
generalities and is • not yet frank 
enough to say that the Paris Y. W. C. 
A. did an unpardonable act and lied 
about it and that the Y. W. C. A. owe^ 
Mrs. Talbert an apology. 
We colored people would not be so 
resentful at this particular incident if 
we had not seen similar methods of 
procedure in dozens of cases during a 
hundred years. A colored person is 
insulted and resents the insult. Immediately, without any attempt to 
find out the exact truth, white apologists hasten to say, first, he was not 
insulted ; secondly, he was impudent; 
thirdly, his attitude represents the 
impossible demand of colored people 
who do not realize the difficulties of 
the race problem. 
As I have said, in literally hundreds of cases has this procedure been 
followed and usually no attempt is 
made to get at the original facts of 
the case. Granting freely that there 
are times when insults should be ignored or swallowed and that under 
some circumstances they must evenbe expected, surely the Y. W. C. A. 
does not mean to suggest that always 
ana everywhere we must take the 
treatment that anybody chooses to 
give. Surely sometimes protest is a 
duty and always the truth is with 
knowing. By sheer accident in this 
case there happened to be a white 
woman whose word even your board 
apparently did not dare to dispute 
and who was willing to help us bring 
out the truth. 
No Negro is minimizing in the 
slightest degree the difficulties of racial contact nor is supposing that the OPINION 247 
Y. W. C. A. has super-human knowledge or power but we do assume that 
the Y. W. C. A. does not stand for deliberate and unnecessary insult of colored women of ability and breeding, 
and we have a right to expect that 
when unfortunately such an occurrence does take place, the one responsible for it should be punished 
and the proper apology made to the 
victim. I am wondering whether 
your board has either the Christianity or womanhood to do these things 
in this case. 
I am, Madam, 
Very respectfully yours, 
(Signed) W. E. B. DuBoiS. 
THE LIBERAL SOUTH 
THE white Executive Secretary 
of the Mississippi Welfare 
League, J. C. Wilson, writes 
thus to Moorfield Storey: 
The attitude of TH E CRISIS , which claims 
to be working in the interest of the Negro 
race to bring about better relations between 
the races in the United States, is, on the 
other hand, endeavoring to help the situation by using tactics which never bring 
peace, but wa r inevitably. An d unless such 
radical papers change their attitudes and 
cease to abuse and defame the characters 
of the leading white people of the South 
who are earnestly and sincerely endeavoring 
to help the black man, the gulf will be 
widened between them. 
The attempt of DuBois to be sensational 
and vicious in his defamations is causing 
the Negr o readers of his paper to hate 
white people more and more, and is unquestionably stirring the spirit of resentment in the minds of the white people. If 
this continues, it takes no prophet to predict the ultimate end. The terrible and 
bloody riot which occurred in Chicago last 
August was but a hint of what will occur. 
W e are wondering wh y this man DuBois 
pursues this course. Is it possible that he 
hopes by such methods to increase the circulation of his paper and get for himself a 
certain kind of notoriety? Would he bring 
on wa r that would slaughter his race for 
personal gain? There are one of three 
things very evident: either DuBois does not 
know the spirit.of the white race, he is a 
fool, or is playing the game for loaves and 
fishes. 
Josiah Morse, of the University of 
South Carolina, and a moving spirit 
of the white Southern University 
Race Commission, writes to J. E. 
Spingarn: 
If DuBois is an element of moderation 
and self-control, then I need to begin all 
over again and learn the meaning of words. 
Of course everything is relative and dependent upon the viewpoint, but even then 
it is difficult to see how you can characterize him as you do. I think you should know 
that none of us here have any confidence in 
him; his influence, as we see it, is vicious 
and dangerous, and his connection with anything is sufficient to damn it forthwith. He 
sees red too much. The Negro who is going 
to be of service to his race must be able 
to look forward and backward an hundred 
years and maintain a philosophic poise and 
calm. Firebrands won't do; we'll extinguish them as often as we can. W e need 
peacemakers, not ministers of hate. 
I wonder if you know of the work which 
the Inter-racial Committee is doing throughout the South, upon which approximately 
$25,000 a month is being spent, and which 
has already accomplished many very gratifying results through the inter-racial committees that have been established in almost 
every county in every Southern State. 
Those of us who are giving the best we 
have to the cause of better race relationship feel that DuBois, more than any other 
person or influence, is counteracting our 
efforts. 
Similar statements have reached 
us from time to time from Bolton 
Smith, of Memphis, and other leading 
white Southerners. 
The answer to these gentlemen and 
all who think like them is clear: 
'Whether Negroes, like the editor of 
TH E CRISIS, are self-seeking scoundrels, or unconscious voices of a race 
ground-swell, or unselfish and farsighted patriots—in any case, the 
duty of the leaders of the white South 
is clear: 
Lead the colored people. Grant 
their legitimate demands. Show 
them that they need look neither to 
demagogues nor dreamers but to you 
for all that is vitally necessary to 
their best development. 
Get the confidence of black folk by 
deeds, not by promises or charity. 
Do not merely talk—DO! 
The demands of the mass of Negroes are not radical—they are the 
irreducible minimum below which no 
modern group can drop and live: 
The right to vote 
The abolition of "Jim-Crow" travel 
Free compulsory public school education 24 S THE CRISIS 
The abolition of lynching and mob 
law. 
These are the demands of Negroes. 
They are the demands of every peasantry, every labor group, every race 
and nation in the civilized and semicivilized worlds. 
If the liberal white South secures 
these rights for black men and 
women, they will put every colored 
demagogue out of business; they will 
close the mouth of every agitator; 
they will gain the willing, eager support of every honest Negro patriot. 
Here is your chance, Gentlemen. 
Will you take it? 
TH E SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRES S 
ACCORDING to the decision 
made by the members of the 
Permanent Committee of the 
first Pan-African Congress, 
which was held in Paris February 
19-21, 1919, a second Pan-African 
Congress is to meet in Paris during 
the first week in September, 1921. 
We are asked occasionally why the 
Congress should be held in Europe 
rather than in the United States. We 
would answer that question by calling 
the attention of our readers to the 
map below, which shows the relative 
distribution of the dark peoples of the 
world (indicated by the straight, 
black lines), and also the relative facility of means of transportation. It 
is very much easier for Africa, the 
West Indies, South America and the 
United States to get to Europe, than it 
is for all first three named to get to 
us. Also the well-known friendliness 
and cordiality of the French toward 
the Negro visitor is to be considered. 
TH E CRISIS will issue between now 
and September several bulletins on 
the Pan-African Congress. Send us 
the names of persons and organizations interested. 
TH E NEGR O WORL D AN D STEAMSHI P COMMUNICATIO N INTER-RACIAL ACTIVITIES IN THE SOUTH 
FROM the South come encouraging ac-
* counts of the good being accomplished 
by various inter-racial groups and committees, whose special object it is to engender 
a better understanding between the two 
races as a basis for constructive work in the 
future. Reports made by Inter-Racial Committees of Louisiana and Kentucky and by 
the Woman's Inter-Racial Conferences held 
recently at Memphis, Tenn., open up possibilities, JJ 
W. W. Hadnott, of New Orleans, issued 
the following call for January 12, 1921, to 
representatives of colored committees established in connection with inter-racial work 
in the parishes of that state: 
Louisiana communities have awakened to 
the importance of assisting in the development of its group of colored citizens because the development of the community 
depends on the aggressiveness and civic 
pride of the entire community. 
The Negro is part of the community, but 
on account of existing conditions he is a 
community within a community, having a 
distinct life of his own apart from that of 
all other races. This life is not only a distinct life apart from the community life, 
but it has with the community life no effective point of contact. Its standards, 
methods, practices, purposes and achievements are generally unseen by the rest of 
the community. 
Policies, therefore, are formed, based on 
ignorance, sometimes mutual ignorance. 
Such policies naturally fail to fit conditions, 
so misunderstandings, conflicts and clashes 
are inevitable. Ye t community progress depends upon the co-operation of the Negro 
with other progressive elements. If he 
does not co-operate the community suffers 
indirectly and he suffers directly. 
Recognizing these facts, inter-racial committees have been established in the parishes 
of this state so that these committees may 
handle problems peculiar to their own community. Progress has been somewhat slow 
mainly because of the failure to adopt a 
workable program. The idea, however, has 
taken a firm hold upon the people and all 
that is now necessary for the successful 
operation of the plan is the adoption of a 
definite program. This program will, of 
course, vary in accordance with the needs of 
the several communities, but there are certain fundamentals which may be used as a 
basis of operation. 
Every line of colored endeavor contributed to this conference, as a result of which 
a Findings Committee was appointed, consisting of S. S. Taylor, of Shreveport, La.; 
Dr. W. W. Ennis, of Crowley, La.; W. 0 . 
Boston, of Lake Charles, La.; Joseph 
Smith, of Jennings, La., and J. S. Williams. 
This committee submitted a report which 
was unanimously adopted. Two typical examples of their findings are subjoined: 
The Negro laborer is an essential element 
in the industrial development of the South. 
Consequently, his welfare is as important 
to his employer as to himself. Just wages, 
absolute fairness in credit transactions and 
the elimination of any degree of brutality 
will decrease his discontent and will correspondingly increase his efficiency. 
Many matters which appear separate and 
distinct evils turn out on close analysis to 
consist in the one evil of unenforced state 
laws. No court is true to the best traditions of Louisiana law if it is untrue to the 
ideals of justice involved in the application 
of that law where Negroes are concerned. 
Proper respect for the law, therefore, will 
insure to Negroes a fair trial. According 
to the law, lynching is murder, either in 
the first degree or in the second. Under 
the law, public carriers are not permitted to 
discriminate against any social group by 
forcing upon it accommodations inferior to 
those generally furnished. Under the law, 
respect for womanhood is correctly placed 
as one of the cornerstones of civilization, 
and no woman may receive injustice at the 
hands of a man whatever his race. This 
law should be impartially and rigidly enforced. 
Ill 
In Memphis the Woman's Inter-Racial 
Conference was held on October 6-7, 1920. 
The report of the Findings Committee follows in part: 
We , a company of southern white 
women, in conference assembled on the invitation of the Commission on Inter-Racial 
Co-operation, find ourselves with a deep 
sense of responsibility to the womanhood 
and childhood of the Negro race, and also 
with a great desire for a Christian settlement of the problems that overshadow the 
homes of both races. 
W e recognize and deplore the fact that 
there is friction between the races, but we 
believe that this can largely be removed by 
the exercise of justice, consideration and 
sympathetic co-operation. 
We acknowledge our responsibility for the 
protection of the Negro women and girls 
in our homes and on the streets. We , therefore, recommend: 
That domestic service be classed as an 
occupation and coordinated with other world 
service in order that a better relation may 
249 250 THE CRISIS 
be established for both employer and employee. 
We are pursuaded that the conservation of 
the life and health of Negro children is of 
the utmost importance to the community. 
That a survey of housing and sanitary 
conditions be made in the Negro sections in 
each local community, followed by an appeal to the proper authorities for improvements when needed. 
We are convinced that the establishment 
of a single standard of morals for men and 
women, both black and white, is necessary 
for the life and safety of a nation. We , 
therefore, pledge ourselves to strive to secure respect and protection for womanhood 
everywhere, regardless of race or color. 
Since provision for the education of Negro children is still inadequate, we recommend : 
That surveys be made of the educational 
situation in the local community in order 
that colored children may secure: 
(1 ) More equitable division of the school 
fund 
(2) Suitable school buildings and equipment 
(3) Longer school terms 
(4) Higher standards and increased pay 
for teachers. 
Since colored people frequently do not receive fair treatment on street cars, on railroads and in railway stations, and recognizing this as one of the chief causes of friction 
between the races we urge : 
That immediate steps be taken to provide for them adequate accommodations and 
courteous treatment at the hands of street 
car and railway officials. 
As women, we urge those who are charged 
with the administration of the law to prevent lynchings at any cost. 
W e recommend: That our women everywhere raise their voices against all acts of 
violence to property and person, wherever 
and for whatever cause occurring. 
Since the public press often gives undue 
prominence to the criminal element among 
Negroes, and neglects the worthy and constructive efforts of law abiding Negro citizens, we pledge ourseves to co-operate with 
the men's committees in endeavoring to correct this injustice and to create a fair attitude to Negroes and Negro news. 
A hopeful feature of this conference was 
the opportunity afforded four colored women 
to speak of the needs of the Negro. Mrs. 
John D. Hammond, of the Southern Publicity Committee, writes us: 
The four colored women who spoke—Mrs. 
Washing-ton, Mrs. Moton, Mrs. Haynes and 
Mrs. Brown—made the meeting. Their 
talks were really wonderful, for frankness, 
for force and for the Spirit of Christ. They 
moved the white women to the depths; and in 
doing it gave them a new sense of their own 
short-comings and responsibilities, especially 
as regards domestic service and the Negro 
child. They had always meant to do right; 
but they hadn't taken some things in. 
IV 
James Bond, State Y. M. C. A . Secretary and Colored Wor k Director of InterRacial Wor k in Kentucky, sends us a report 
of definite accomplishments wrought by 
local Inter-Racial Committees in Kentucky. 
Of these we can publish only a few but we 
find them all stimulating and inspiring. He 
cites among others this instance of the efforts of local committees to secure the Negro legal justice: 
Several months ago the entire colored 
population was driven out of Corbin, Whitley County, Ky., because of a report freely 
circulated that a Negro had severely wounded a white man with a knife (but it later 
developed that a white man had done the 
cutting). The prosecuting attorney for that 
district is Judge J. B. Snyder, of Williamsburg, Ky. He was a delegate to our first 
State Inter-Racial Conference and is chairman of the Inter-Racial Committee ffor 
Whitley County. It was agreed in the meetings of this County Inter-Racial Committee 
that a strong effort should be made to secure the conviction and punishment of the 
mob that drove the colored people out of the 
town. Judge Snyder, as chairman of the Inter-Racial Committee, pledged his co-operation. As a result one white man, the ring 
leader, was given two years and is now serving that term in the penitentiary. Twentynine other white men are under indictment 
awaiting trial. Effort has already been 
made by the friends of this white man to 
secure a pardon for him from the Governor. 
This office has taken up this question with 
the proper authorities ari~d has assurance 
that in no case will a pardon be granted. 
Successful attempts have been made to secure adequate educational facilities: 
As a result of the Welfare Conference 
held in connection with the organization of 
the Inter-Racial Committee for Graves 
County and the activity of the Inter-Racial 
Committee, a new school house with four or 
five acres of ground about it has been secured for the colored people of Mayfield. 
Assisted by the Kentucky Negro Educational Association, the State Inter-Racial 
Committee has secured an arrangement by 
which the Negro high schools of the state 
are to be accredited. In Lexington and 
Richmond, Ky., local inter-Racial Committees assisted in securing the increase of the 
salaries of colored teachers. 
V 
The conferences held by these Inter-Racial 
Committees constitute the most forward and 
promising step which the South has yet 
taken. Black and white alike win a new 
perspective, and each race becomes more 
fully aware of its duties toward the other 
and to the community. Complete understanding of all the aspects of a problem may 
not do away with it but it certainly affords 
first aid toward its solution. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
DRIVE FOR A QUARTER OF A MILLION 
MEMBERS 
A Force That Cannot Be Ignored 
OURS is a high and worthy cause. We 
struggle for a noble end—"not only 
that we may have a larger share of liberty 
and greater opportunity for ourselves, but 
that colored children yet unborn may have 
full liberty and an equal chance in life." 
Does not that thought stir your blood and 
urge you to action? We are now preparing for a drive for 250,000 members of the 
N. A. A. C. P. With such a force, united 
by one purpose, we can make a mighty effort toward carrying out our responsibility 
to the coming generations. 
Now is the period of preparation, the 
training camp. On the organization now 
being brought together, on the education 
now being given—the entire drive depends. 
He who begins to prepare when the day of 
the battle is at hand is in a sorry plight. 
The National Office has sent out minute 
instructions telling just how to organize for 
the drive. Has your branch followed them, 
choosing its Colonel, Majors, Captains and 
Lieutenants? If not, insist on its acting. 
We have sent out a full course of instructions in training the Drive Officers and 
workers. We have held 24 Regional Conferences in our main centers, reaching 186 
branches. Dr. DuBois and Mr. Pickens 
have gone to the South and Southwest in 
that work, Mrs. Hunton, Mr. White and Mr. 
Johnson to the Midwest, Miss Ovington to 
the far West, and Mr. Bagnall has covered 
the East. W e have sent out instruction as 
to files for the Drive, the details of the 
work of Committees, a speaker's hand-book, 
etc. See that your branch organizes, and 
,push it to act. 
We plan four great meetings in the 
drive: 
1. On the 31st of March, a demonstration mass-meeting for the pardon of the 
soldiers of the 24th Infantry, now imprisoned in Leavenworth. 
2. On the 23rd of April—the Initial Drive 
Rally—an Anti-lynching Meeting. 
3. On the 30th of April—an N. A. A. C. 
P. Sunday in every colored church with sermons on "Justice to the Negro—the Test 
of Christianity in America. " 
4. On the 15th of May—Closing Rally of 
the Drive. 
We plan to have our branches canvass 
every colored person and every liberal white 
in their localities. 
If any branch has failed to receive material and full instructions for the Drive, 
it should communicate at once with the 
National Office. 
A NEW SPIRIT IN THE SOUTH 
A FAVORIT E method of hoodwinking 
themselves often used by white Southerners is to secure a statement from some 
sycophantic, spineless Negro and publish 
it as representative of the sentiment of a 
majority of colored people. The colored man 
thus chosen usually has no standing whatever with his own people but the white 
press labels him as "a safe and sane leader 
of his people". This carefully picked "leader" always runs true to form in mouthing 
such time-worn and moth-eaten phrases as 
"the southern white man is the Negro's best 
friend" and "we want no northern agitators 
meddling in our relations with the good 
white people of the South". 
But occasionally the other side of the 
.story is told. Following the appearance in 
December of representatives of the N. A. 
A. C. P. before the House Committee on the 
Census, testifying regarding the methods of 
disfranchisement of the Negro in Southern 
States, the Newbern, N. C , Sun-Journal in 
its issue of January 6 stated that ten "leaders of the colored people" had declared that 
"Newbern Negroes are not in sympathy with 
251 252 THE CRISIS 
the efforts being made by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People." The Sun-Journal did not, however, 
give the names of the ten mythical leaders. 
The intelligent and self-respecting colored citizens of Newbern instantly denied 
the charge of the Sun-Journal in a document that is so manly and upright in tone 
that we are reproducing it in full. It is a 
fair and excellent statement of what the 
better element of colored Southerners are 
thinking and feeling. 
Newbern , N . C „ January 11, 1921. 
T o the Edito r o f the Newbern , N . C , Sun-Journal:— 
Unde r date o f January 6 yo u published a new s item 
in whic h it wa s stated that me n calling themselve s (o r 
called b y you ) "leaders o f the colore d people " have 
stated that Newber n Negroe s are no t in sympathy with 
efforts bein g mad e b y the Nationa l Associatio n fo r the 
Advancemen t o f Colore d People . O n the contrary, 
Newber n Negroe s believ e that the abov e mentione d 
society has don e and is doin g great goo d not onl y 
in battling against injustice, but in creating the goo d 
understanding between the races so muc h desired and 
preached in ou r time . 
It is an organization compose d o f both whit e and 
colore d peopl e wh o are makin g an unbiased study of 
condition s and telling the truth without fear o r favor. 
It is to be expecte d that in doin g so it woul d make 
enemies, but the society is on e o f the great public 
benefactors o f ou r century. S o far from lookin g 
upon the efforts o f the society as a jok e are we , that 
they are taken ver y seriously and believed to be 
handling the so-called Rac e Problem from a ver y 
necessary angl e whic h in n o wa y invalidates our local 
efforts to create and foste r the goo d will so essential 
to the well bein g o f both races. 
Th e fact that Negroe s in this section get alon g in 
comparative peac e doe s not mean that they are dehumanized and that they feel n o sympathy for their 
oppressed brethren, bon e o f their bon e and flesh o f 
their flesh, in other sections o f the South wh o are 
lynched , some time for cause, some time fo r none , 
and brutally slaughtered at the polls as was the case 
in the recent election in Orang e County , Fla. Whethe r 
lynchin g be for caus e or no cause, there can b e n o 
excus e fo r it. Th e whit e man is both Judge and 
Juror. Intelligent Negroe s will neve r be contente d 
and happy anywher e in ou r land as lon g as their 
brethren in other parts o f it are subjected to outrages 
o f injustice in the courts, lynchin g or an y other practices that are no t in keeping with, what has been 
called the "characteristic America n spirit o f fair play 
and equal opportunity and protection fo r all. " 
It is interesting to follo w the cours e o f the local 
press in its commen t o n the Negr o and the solemn and 
responsible duty o f voting. On e da y it will be that 
intelligent Negroe s d o no t want to vote. Th e article 
quote d in this pape r states that "non e o f them has 
been prevented from votin g whe n they are entitled 
to that right. " In the light o f that statement on e 
wonders just what it is that entitles on e to that right. 
Constitutional declarations are sufficiently clear, but 
it is perfectly plain that it takes a great deal mor e 
than the Constitution lays dow n to entitle on e to that 
right as the requirements are administered in some 
quarters. 
Fo r instance : Durin g the last registration in 
Newbern.^ Negroe s wer e reauired to read the whol e 
Constitution and then to write it from memory ; and 
in several instances persons wer e flatly told that they 
coul d not register at all. On e notorious instance is 
that o f a leading professiona l man wh o wa s given a 
transfer from on e ward to anothe r by on e registrar 
and wh o wa s flatly refused registration in the war d 
in whic h he then lived an d in which he had lived 
for at least a year. Th e persons mentione d abov e as 
flatly refused registration wer e in ever y wa y fitted to 
cast the ballot b y possessions, intelligenc e and goo d 
character. 
Ther e is n o doubt that if one's fac e is black he is 
undesirabl e except for bloodsheddin g in time o f wa r 
an d tax payin g in time o f peace . Th e intelligent 
Negro , as ever y othe r intelligent freeman , is keenl y 
sensible o f the dange r o f the ballot bo x bein g dominated b y an ignorant electorate ; but lie refuse s to 
admit that whiteness o f fac e give s a monopol y o f intelligenc e o r that blackness o f fac e denote s a monop ­
ol y o f ignorance. . Le t us hop e that n o ma n o f an y 
colo r in ou r communit y coul d be guilty o f claiming 
t o be so intelligent as not to desir e the ballot. Le t 
him acknowledg e his shortcomings, his inability to 
qualify unde r a fair test; but let him no t be so unappreciative o f the spirit o f democrac y or so lacking 
in the just and reasonabl e aspirations of free me n 
everywher e as to mak e so foolis h and unpatrioti c 
a declaration. 
A s fo r the Negro , h e takes Americ a at her word . 
Sh e places in his hand the Constitution and the 
Declaration o f Independence ; she teaches him that 
befor e the law his status is that o f equa l right and 
justice ; she drafts him fo r servic e in time o f war, 
though, as a rul e he volunteers, taxes him fo r gov ­
ernmen t upkeep and support o f publi c utilities. H e 
is taught the history o f the whit e man's struggl e fo r 
freedom an d remembers that Concor d is Hol y Groun d 
"wher e onc e the embattled farmers stoo d an d fired 
the shot heard aroun d the world " in defenc e o f the 
doctrin e that "Taxatio n without representation is 
unjust. " Ther e is n o magi c wan d whic h ma y be 
wave d ove r the Negr o to mak e him unconsciou s o f 
the exalted democrati c idealism whic h everywher e 
pervade s the atmospher e o f this nation ; o r obliviou s o f 
the fact that he is often most arbitrarily denie d the 
fundamenta l guarantee s o f citizenship. Th e Negr o 
takes comfort in th e fact that the prophets o f a 
better era are abroad in the lan d invokin g no t the 
spirit o f rac e hatred but that o f mutua l cooperatio n 
and fair dealing. The y are no t confined to an y on e 
section or race. Th e spectacl e o f the Negr o faithful an d true to the flag in ever y time o f national 
crisis is inclinin g eve r growin g numbers o f the whit e 
rac e to resolve that h e must receiv e unfailin g justic e 
and abiding friendship. 
Ver y muc h ou t o f harmon y with this tendenc y o f 
these just spirits wa s the needless abus e and insult 
so freely heaped upo n the Negr o in the recent political 
campaign . Equall y so is the eve r unfavorabl e and 
hate begetting paragraphi c and editorial sneering at 
this race whos e toil is the backbon e o f the industries 
and whos e spending s are the life o f trade. 
A solemn an d pressing questio n is, Ho w lon g will 
the whit e rac e g o o n in a polic y o f doubl e dealing and 
occasionalism with the Negr o ? Wh y driv e a people 
wh o are trusting and loya l into a state o f min d that 
is the fruitful soil o f radicalism, mistrust and hate? 
No t the least o f the effects o f this polic y is that upon 
the morals o f the rising generation o f white s whos e 
sens e o f justic e and fair play must b e so severely 
damage d as t o unfit them fo r their great part in worl d 
affairs. N o race fo r its ow n soul's sake can afford 
t o b e unjust t o an y peopl e with impunity. It is a 
poison to its ow n soul and some da y will sho w its 
fatal effects in matters no t involvin g the peopl e 
wronged . 
And lastly, a word as to "leaders of colored People": 
These are not self-appointed nor. are they crammed 
down our throats by others. We choose them for ourselves because we believe in them and their leading. 
We are exceedingly sensitive these days as to who they 
are and what they say. They must stand for racial 
Peace but racial peace with justice. They must be 
heralds of good-will t 0 all people including ourselves; 
and however much they may counsel patience and 
hope and trust in Almighty God and the slow but 
certain pathway of duty, they must not surrender 
the right of this race to think of itself in terms of 
full citizenship in this Republic to which the Negro 
has pledged allegiance in unrequited toil and heroes' 
blood shed in every war from the dav of its birth 
W . C. Sparro w 
F. E. Anderso n 
R. H . Herrin g 
H . P. Kenned y 
Rev . K. T . Thompson , 
W . W . Lawrance , 
S. J. Cook e 
R. J. Johnso n 
Robert R. Green 
J. J. Stanley N. A. A. C. P. 253 
Th « statements relative to the means by 
which intelligent and educated Negroes 
were debarred from voting in Newbern is 
interesting in view of the statements made 
by Representative Samuel M. Brinson 
whose home is in that city. Mr. Brinson 
represents the Third Congressional District 
of North Carolina. He voluntarily stated 
to the Census Committee: 
"Quite a number of the colored people of 
my town are well educated, there being 
among them educators, teachers, preachers 
and practicing lawyers and doctors . . . 
But I have always argued down there, and 
they have agreed with me, that for the 
safety of the South and for the safety of 
civilization in North Carolina, the ignorant 
Negro should be deprived of the right of 
voting . . W e made up our minds in North 
Carolina that they must not actively participate in politics unless they have the educational qualifications. In my state if they 
have the educational qualifications they 
vote, and quite a lot of them do vote." 
The Third Congressional District is composed of 9 counties with a population in 1910 
of 178,775. The vote in 1918 for Congressman was Brinson, Democrat, 10,205 and for 
Wheatley, Republican, 7,000, a total of 17,-
205. The potential voting strength, secured 
by taking 56 per cent, of the population, was 
approximately 101,114. There is small wonder that absurd, but effective, educational 
tests were applied in Mr. Brinson's district. 
Unless there had been, he would probably 
not be in Washington today. 
The fearless colored men of Newbern have 
rendered a genuine service to the white people of North Carolina, as well as the colored, in answering so effectively the puerile 
assertions of the Newbern Sun-Journal. 
A VICTOR Y AND A DEFEAT 
TW O important extradition cases have 
been engaged in by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People—one where a colored man was arrested 
in Indiana and the State of Georgia applied 
for his extradition, the other, a colored 
man arrested in West Virginia, accused of a 
crime in Tennessee. 
In January, Macie Giddens, a colored man, 
was arrested in East Chicago, Ind., charged 
with the murder on December 25, 1920, of 
a Deputy Sheriff in Worth County, Ga. It 
was alleged that this sheriff went to Giddens' home to arrest him on a warrant 
sworn out by the other colored men against 
Giddens for disturbing a church service and 
that Giddens, without cause, opened fire on 
the sheriff, killing him instantly. Giddens, 
however, told an entirely different story. 
He stated that he had been working as a 
laborer for a white planter who demanded 
that Giddens' wife go into the fields to work 
while ill. A quarrel ensued and Giddens 
left the employ of the planter. During the 
early hours of Christmas morning, Giddens was awakened by the noise of a crowd 
outside his house demanding entrance. 
Upon his refusing to open the door until 
the crowd stated who they were, the crowd 
started battering in the door. Giddens fired, 
killing the leader of the crowd, a deputy 
sheriff. He escaped to Chicago, later going 
to East Chicago, Ind., where he was arrested. Giddens' sister employed an attorney 
of Chicago to fight the granting of a writ 
of extradition. Information regarding 
lynching and other crimes against colored 
people in Georgia and particularly in Worth 
County were furnished to Giddens' lawyer 
and to Governor McCray of Indiana. 
Governor McCray sent a representative to 
Worth County who was assured by the white 
citizens at a mass meeting that Giddens 
would be protected from mob violence and 
given a fair trial. Thereupon Governor 
McCray granted the writ of extradition. Although Giddens was carried back for trial, 
a partial victory was won since the Georgia 
authorities were forced definitely to commit 
themselves to protect him. However, on 
his return he was quickly sentenced to 
death. The attorney for Giddens was Mr. 
Lewis E. Johnson of Chicago. 
A victory was won by the Charleston, W. 
Va., branch in the case of Ed Knox, a colored man arrested in that city, accused 
of the murder of a white man in Glenmary, 
Morgan Co., Tenn. Knox claimed that he 
had killed the man in self-defense and felt 
absolutely certain that if carried back to 
Morgan County, he would be lynched. 
The Charleston branch interested itself 
in the case through its president, the Rev. 
Mordecai W . Johnson, and the Chairman of 
its Legal Redress Committee, Honorable T. 
Gillis Nutter, member of the State Legislature of West 'Virginia. The branch requested of the National Office information 
regarding lynchings in the State of Tennessee and the possibility of the lynching of 
Knox if carried back to Morgan County. 
Through friends in Tennessee, an investigator was sent to Morgan County who made 
a full report on the state of mind in that 
part of the state. In the meantime, Mr. 254 THE CRISIS 
Nutter had been in communication with 
Governor John J. Cornwell who promised 
Mr. Nutter that ample opportunity would 
be given for the presentation of the evidence 
and that before sending Knox back to Tennessee, if that should be done, Governor Cornwell would get assurance from Governor 
Roberts of Tennessee that Knox would not 
be sent to Morgan County but to some other 
part of the State of Tennessee for trial. 
With Mr. Nutter was associated Attorney 
E. A. Graham of Charleston. The case was 
finally called on February 12. The Chief 
of Police of Charleston who was handling 
the case for the Tennessee authorities attempted to secure a continuance of the case 
on the ground that officers from Tennessee 
had wired that they were en route to 
Charleston with evidence. The case was 
thereupon continued until February 15. 
Chief of Police Charnock notified Sheriff J. 
T. Scott of Morgan County of the continuance and urged that action be taken at 
once. On Sunday, February 13, Mr. Nutter 
received a message informing him that 
Sheriff Scott had wired Chief Charnock that 
he had been unable to get the necessary evidence against Knox. Mr. Nutter at once 
called Judge W. W. Wertz of the City Court 
of Charleston, notified him of this information and demanded Knox's release. Judge 
Wertz directed Mr. Nutter to Chief Charnock who declared that he had received no 
such message. Mr. Nutter rushed to Police 
Headquarters and just as he stepped in the 
door, the day lieutenant was telephoning 
Chief Charnock, informing him of the message from Sheriff Scott. 
The release of Knox was then demanded 
of the Chief by Mr. Nutter. Thereupon 
Judge Wertz granted the release and Knox 
was freed. Mr. Nutter in reporting to the 
National Office the steps taken, stated: 
"The Tennessee authorities had intended to 
rush Knox off without a hearing, but were 
prevented by the kindly action of the Association. One colored man was lynched over 
the affair a few days after the alleged killing took place and this man was supposed 
to have been Knox. " 
In both of these cases the Association emphasized upon the Indiana and West Virginia authorities that it was not interested 
nor would it desire to prevent the lawful 
trial of any colored man accused of a crime. 
It emphasized particularly that in some 
Southern States, as is a well-known and admitted fact throughout the country, when 
a colored man is accused of a crime against 
a white man in these states, a fair trial is 
impossible. These cases are of great importance in that states which have allowed 
lynchings to go unchecked are realizing that 
other sections of the country have taken 
cognizance of the lawlessness rampant in 
those states. Refusals to grant writs of 
extradition by northern Governors will 
place southern officials on the defensive and 
will act as a further incentive to check the 
wilful disregard of law so far as colored 
men are concerned in many parts of the 
South. 
THE CITIZENS' DEFENSE FUND 
COMMISSION 
TH E National Office of the N. A. A. C P. 
has received a statement of the amounts 
raised and disbursed by the Citizens' Defense Fund Commission of Arkansas, which 
has done exceedingly effective work locally 
in defense of the Phillips County riot victims. We are glad to publish this account. 
On November 21, 1919, the N. A . A. C P. 
entered into agreement with the 'ate Colonel 
George W. Murphy to defend all of the colored defendants in the Arkansas cases, and 
paid on November 30 the first $1,000 on the 
attorneys' fees. In January following, the 
Citizens' Commission was organized and 
began to collect funds to aid in the defense 
of these cases, and with remarkable success 
as the statement below wi'l show. The 
statement, which is signed by J. G. Thornton, Chairman, and J. H. McConico, Secretary, and former president of the Little 
Rock Branch of the N. A. A. C P. follows: 
Receipts $11,303.01 
Disbursements: 
Attorneys' Fees $6,100.00 
Attorneys' Exp. Acct, 795.34 
Court Costs, Filing 
Fees, Printing 
Briefs 1,279.60 
Postage 354.00 
Clerk Hire 180.75 
Court Stenographers. 1,221.31 
Detective Service . . . 517.20 
Donations Recalled. . 89.50 
Incidentals 1.30 
$10,539.00 
Balance on Hand. . 764.01 
$11,303.01 THE BLACK SWAN 
MARIA MORAVSKY 
PEACE was declared, but in Odessa there 
no peace. The city changed hands 
constantly. Yesterday the Turkish crescent 
moon had dominated the harbor. Today it 
was the flags of the Allies. 
But Vania Polanov did not much mind all 
these changes. He was hardly interested in 
politics. He was a dreamer. 
Lazily he polished a fine writing table, 
made in the trade school where he was 
learning carpentry. He loved this writing 
table, designed and completed all by himself 
save its fancy round legs, which had been 
skillfully turned on the lathe by his friend 
Kolia. But now, in the midst of warm 
southern May, he had not the slightest desire to work. 
Acacia was in full bloom. Its sweet scent 
floated in through the open windows, mixed 
with the strong smell of the varnish. Sawdust danced in the stream of sunshine. Two 
white butterflies, strayed into the classroom 
from the garden, sat immobile on the bottle 
with the lacquer. They were intoxicated 
with its vodka-like smell. 
"Yo u bad drunkards!" said Vania, trying 
to chase them off. "Go away! I need my 
polish!" 
But the butterflies gave no heed. One of 
them crawled sleepily on his hand as he 
touched the bottle. 
"Wha t do you talk with the butterflies 
about?" laughed Kolia, entering the carpentry class. "D o they disturb your work? " 
Other boys turned their heads toward him 
and smiled. Vania looked at these smiling 
young faces and felt that they, too, were 
slightly intoxicated with the scent of acacia. 
"Wh o dares to work on such a fine day! " 
he exclaimed boldly. "La y down your tools! 
Let us declare a spring strike!" 
Kolia supported the proposal: 
"I will find the director and suggest it to 
him." 
"Otlichno! Otlichno!" shouted the boys. 
"Be our representative! Ask the other 
classes to join. " 
The young director, who did not remember 
the iron discipline of the czar's school, listened without frowning to the unusual proposition of Kolia. 
"Horosho, call the meeting," he said complacently. "The majority may decide." 
The meeting was noisy. The teachers 
faintly objected to Kolia's proposition. 
"Freedom does not mean loafing!" said the 
old, white-bearded instructor of the locksmith trade. 
"But we want to be set free for one day 
only. It is such beautiful weather! W e will 
make it up some rainy Sunday." 
The students voted that they would work 
the next Sunday, "when there is no sunshine", and the matter was settled. 
The boys surrounded Kolia shouting: 
"Well, what will we do with our free day? 
Tell us, you chairman of loafers! Yo u bargained about it,—you must plan how to 
spend it." 
"We may go to the rehearsal at the People's theatre," suggested Kolia. The idea 
met with general approval. 
But Vania did not go to the rehearsal. 
He liked solitude. He shook hands with his 
comrades and went off home. 
He lived in the outskirts of the city. He 
rented a little, sunny room in a small white 
house with the shutters painted blue and 
the sunflowers before the windows. It reminded him of his far away northern village, which he had left for the sake of 
roaming. 
The low humming of strings was heard 
from the house. Vania frowned. 
"Vaska is playing my guitar again! I 
will show him! " 
He ran swiftly to his room and saw a little barefooted boy sitting nonchalantly on 
his bed, tormenting the strings of his beloved Italian guitar. He snatched the instrument from the small sunburnt hands 
and caught the ear of the little musician. 
"Ail Ail Ne budu!" wailed Vaska. 
Vania took his treasure from the careless 
hands of the child and tuned it, sitting on 
the steps of the house. He played a little 
lullaby and it cooled his anger. 
"Wha t is new? " he asked Vaska in a 
friendly manner. 
" A foreigner came here who had lost his 
way! " grinned Vaska pleasantly. He was 
glad to be forgiven so soon. 
255 256 THE CRISIS 
"Wha t foreigner?" 
" A foreigner from A — a —• merica — 
country. He did not talk Russian. W e 
called the French boy from the bakery to 
help him. Lui understood him. He showed 
him the way. They have lived here for two 
weeks and don't know yet what train to 
take to their summer place. 
"Wh o are they? You told me only about 
a man. . . . " 
" A lady was with him, but I did not see 
her. She sat in the carriage and said nothing." 
"How do you know there was a lady, if 
you did not see her? " 
"I picked up a red ribbon that fell out 
of the carriage. Yo u don't think foreign 
men wear red ribbons? They are not communists." 
The boy drew out from his blouse a 
crumpled red bow and waved it before the 
face of Vania. 
"Yo u little rascal! Yo u did not return it 
to the owner! Don't you know that those 
Allies constantly call us robbers in their 
papers? We mustn't give them the slightest reason for it! Every button on their 
clothes must be safe! Give me the ribbon, 
I will send it to the Lost and Found Department." 
"It looks so beautiful! I thought . . . 
I thought, maybe you would like it for your 
guitar!" lied Vaska, trying to excuse himself. 
Vania looked at him with contempt. He 
carefully dusted the red bow and put it 
into his pocket. Then he went to his room 
to change his clothes. 
Today was like a holiday, so he must put 
on something light. He drew out of his 
plain white drawer a blue satin blouse, fading fast to white under the bleaching 
southern sun, and belted it with a red silken 
rope. He smoothed his light curly hair and 
rearranged the large blue bow which 
adorned the handle of his guitar. He was 
now ready for his long ride. 
He left the house and went to Porto 
Franco Street. This name was a reminder 
of that golden age when Odessa was a free 
port and the fame of its wealth attracted 
brave adventurers from all the neighboring lands. Here was the last stop of the 
horse car and the beginning of romance. 
The car passed slowly through the suburban village Romanovka, which lay in the 
channel of a river, dried up centuries ago. 
Its steep, stony banks were the natural 
walls of Romanovka. No w and then the 
dark entrance to a cave yawned among the 
yellow sponge-like stones. Glancing at 
these caves, Vania dreamed of hidden treasures. . . . 
The trolley stopped at liman1, which 
seemed to be an end of the world. Here 
the heavy waves, saturated with salt, lay 
almost immobile in the shallow bay. Its 
lonely shore was covered with white crystals, shining sharply under the fierce southern sun. The scanty grass lifted wearily 
its pale blades from the dry, reddish ground. 
The country seemed dead. 
In this salty desert stood an old park. 
It was planted ages ago by the slaves of 
Hadji Bey, a Turkish nobleman who had 
his harem here. The large oaks shadowed 
an artificial lake where the beautiful women 
used to swim in olden times. Now the 
harem was ruined and only one lonely wall 
recalled its oriental splendor. Black swans 
glided majestically on the calm waters of 
the lake. The legend ran that they were 
once upon a time the dark-eyed and blackhaired beauties of the harem. 
"Last stop! " 
Vania jumped out from the squeaky old 
car. The conductor slapped his shoulder 
and asked, squinting at him: 
"Meeting a girl, eh? " 
Vania blushed and ran away without a 
word. He was nineteen and had no sweetheart. He dreamed of a swan-girl. 
When he entered the park of Hadji Bey 
his blue eyes darkened under the deep shade 
of the old trees and deepened from the dimness of dreaming. The park was full of 
soft green light, so soothing after the monotonous brightness of the desert. Vania 
imagined himself walking on the bottom 
of a sea, whose green waves murmured 
above. . . . He was drowned in the sea 
of dreams. 
He passed slowly through the long, unswept alley, with the buttercups growing 
in the middle of it. Frightened frogs 
jumped from under his feet. He took off 
his heavy boots so as not to harm the little 
creatures. His guitar hung from his left 
shoulder, his boots from his right one. He 
now resembled a wandering singer of old, 
such as used to cross the innumerable villages of vast Russia, living on bread, milk, 
and music. 
—'Th e Beach. THE BLACK SWAN 257 
A large weeping willow near the lake 
was his tent. He sat there and looked 
around with a calm content. He felt at 
home. 
"Wher e are my swans? " he murmured, 
gazing at the water. 
They were asleep. They crouched on the 
little island in the middle of the lake. Their 
shining black wings 
wer e folded close. 
Only the vigilant leader kept wide awake, 
with his red 'egs 
placed firmly on a 
white chalkstone, and 
his long neck moving constantly. He 
watched ove r the 
peace of the flock. 
Vania too k his 
guitar, stroked the 
strings lovingly, and 
began to play a simp'e 
accompaniment, whistling softly a sad song 
of the Volga . 
The swans lifted 
their head s an d 
opened their crimson 
beaks, as if yawning. 
One by one they 
slipped into the water, 
swelled out their black 
wings and sai'ed toward Vania. 
He smiled and laid 
down his guitar. "Bel 
in good health," he1 
said using the usual 
Russian greeting, as 
if talking to his comrades. Then he drew 
from his wide pockets 
a few pieces of bread 
and began to throw 
the crumbs into the 
calm waters of the 
lake. 
In spite of his desultory education, got 
from hastily swallowing books on popular 
science, Vania believed in the myth: that 
a girl, who was turned into a swan ages 
ago, might meet him. some day on some 
moon-lit night . . . Oh, he would wait 
years for her I 
He lay in the thick, cool grass and 
dreamed of it. He changed in a dozen 
ways the old tale of the enchanted harem 
beauty. He closed his eyes and imagined 
the mysterious Black Swan shaking off its 
feathers and turning into a beautiful 
maiden. The morning star shone on her 
brow, the smile of eternal jo y was on her 
lips. 
"BLACK SWAN!" 
He dreamed for hours and hours, until he 
became very hungry. Then he went out 
to the station, bought some hard eggs and 
black bread, and returned to his green 
tent. He ate his dinner and thought of 
Ivan Czarevich, who feasted in the castle 
on the sea bottom. He dined on dreams. 258 THE CRISIS 
The young moon peeped out through the 
thin willow trees. The swans went away. 
The park was more silent than ever. But 
Vania still lay on the moon-silvered grass 
dreaming about his Black Swan. 
And she came to him. She came noiselessly, like a dream itself. She was clad in 
a black, shining, fluttering robe, resembling 
swan feathers. Red shoes encased her little 
feet.- Her face was dark like an ancient 
image. She had black hair and large black 
eyes. She was as beautiful as a southern 
night. 
II. 
She approached him with dancing steps. 
Her movements were full of vehement 
grace, as if she tried to recall and repeat 
a dance, forgotten centuries ago. 
"Dobro pojalovat! Black Swan! " said 
Vania in the ancient Russian greeting and 
bowed to the earth, as did Ivan Czarevich 
in the legend. 
The girl suddenly ceased dancing. She 
looked at Vania with curiosity and smiled 
at him. 
Her teeth were like the purest snow of 
the fields of Archangel. 
"Zdravstmdte!" she said, pronouncing very 
slowly the usual word of greeting. "Yo u 
gave me a beautiful name—Black Swan! 
I shall tell it to my impresario." 
"T o your . . . what? " Vania did not 
understand the foreign word. 
"T o my impresario, for whom I dance." 
"Yo u had danced in the harem . . . " 
"No ! Wh y do you think so? I have never 
been in a harem, although we have visited 
Constantinople. We stayed there a very 
short time; my impresario was afraid that 
the Turks might kidnap me! Such a fool! " 
Vania began to realize faintly that she 
was not a supernatural creature. But the 
haze of dreams still clouded the strange 
dancer. He had never seen anybody like 
her. 
"I came from Virginia. Old Smith has 
been dragging me with him all over the 
world! The last few months we spent in 
Siberia,—we had a good season, but, oh, I 
was so bored! Wh o are you? " 
He fully realized then that she was not 
a vision. Great jo y filled his heart. He 
might touch her and she would not melt 
with the moonlight . . . 
"I am Vania Polanov," he said, shaking 
hands with his dream, 
"I am glad I met you. You are a Russian, and you have a guitar . . . Surely, 
you can play Russkaya? That is the dance 
I tried to learn . . . But I have seen it 
only a few times and it is difficult to catch, 
because it has no rules: every woman 
dances it as she pleases." 
"Do dance it as you please! I will play 
for you. Yo u dance beautifully!" 
Easily she toned her body to the rhythm 
of Russkaya. She danced with the jo y of 
a child who has found a new toy. "Old 
Ole will be glad that I learned it," she 
said. "Russian audiences will like me better," she smiled brightly. 
"Everybody will like you, barishniaP 
You r teeth are like sugar and your smile 
is as sweet." 
"It is nice of you to pay me compliments. 
But, please don't call me barishnia, call me 
Black Swan. It sounds beautiful! I will 
keep it as my stage name. In America I 
was called Molly the Blackbird." 
America ! A t the sound of the word, 
Vania remembered suddenly the talk of 
Vaska about the foreigner and the lady 
hidden in the carriage. 
"I have found your ribbon! " he exclaimed joyously. 
"Wha t ribbon? " 
"The one you dropped when passing 
Romanovka." 
He drew out of his pocket the crumpled 
red bow and looked at it as if it were a 
miracle. 
"It was fate that I found it!" he thought. 
"It was a sign that I would meet her . . . 
It was sudba." 
"Yes, it is mine," said the girl smiling. 
"But I really don't need it. I have got another one. You may keep it,—I see that 
you, too, like ribbons." She pointed to the 
blue bow which adorned his instrument. 
Then she took from the hands of Vania her 
red ribbon and tied it side by side with his. 
The two bright bows on the handle of the 
guitar were like the two great tropical 
butterflies, resting together. 
"May I play on it? " asked the girl touching the strings. 
"A s much as you please!" exclaimed the 
boy eagerly. 
She seated herself on the grass near 
him. But she did not play. Sudden embarrassment seized her. 
"Wh y did you hide yourself in the carriage? " asked Vania with frank, childish 
curiosity. "M y brother said you rode with 
the hood raised." 
JMiss. THE WOMAN'S PARTY 269 
"People stared at me all the time. I 
felt so uneasy .. . I think it was because 
of my dark skin. There was the same 
trouble in Siberia. Don't they ever sec 
colored people?" 
"Wha t do you mean? " asked Vania. He 
had never heard the expression, "colored 
people". 
"The—the Negroes," said she after a moment of painful hesitation. "I am not 
black, I am a mulatto," she added. "My 
grandmother was a white woman, quite 
white. Yo u may see that my nose is 
(To be concluded v, 
straight and small" . . . she touched it 
with a childish pride. "And my hair curls 
only a little .. . I might pretend that I 
am a Spanish senorita,—Ole says I look 
like one—but I don't want to lie! I promised that to myself after the death of my 
father. He was a Negro and I am not 
ashamed of his race. Oh, I loved him so! 
I want to be loyal to his memory! " 
Her face darkened. The expression of 
tragic sadness deepened her great eyes. 
Some dark remembrance of the far away 
past made her look older and wiser. 
the May number) 
THE WOMAN'S PARTY AND THE VIOLATION 
OF THE 19 th AMENDMENT 
ELLA RUSH MURRAY 
r
T"'H E National Woman's Party held its 
••• final convention in the city of Washington, D. C , from February 15 to 18, with 
delegates, many hundreds in number, from 
all over the country. Every topic covering 
financial activity was presented on the program, from Denmark to the Philippines. 
The busts of the Suffrage Pioneers—Susan 
B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and 
Lucretia Mott—were unveiled with appropriate ceremonies at the Capitol. On the 
last day the convention voted to go out of 
existence as the Woman's Party, upon the 
grounds that the object of the organization 
had been achieved, the passage of the 19th 
Amendment to the Federal Constitution providing that the right of the citizens of the 
United States or any State shall not be denied or abridged on account of sex. After 
repeated statements that the Suffrage Victory had been achieved, the convention voted 
itself back into existence as the National 
Woman's Party and decided that its future 
policy should be to work for all remaining 
legal disabilities of women and for equal 
representation for women in the future 
League of Nations. 
On February 16, as a member of the National Advisory Council, I presented a 
Minority Report of the meeting of the council held on January last. The report covered a motion made by me at that meeting, duly seconded, and defeated, to the effect that the Advisory Council recommend 
to the National Woman's Party, in event of 
its reorganization, that a special committee 
of the Woman's Party be appointed to bring 
pressure to bear on Congress for a special 
Congressional Committee to investigate the 
violation of the intent and purposes of the 
l'Jth Amendment. 
In explanation of my motion I said to the 
convention that I was bringing the matter 
to their consideration on account of the 
disfranchisement of women of both races 
in the Southern States at the recent elections, by evasion and perversions of the 
State Election Laws. That the Enforcement 
Ac t enforcing the 19th" Amendment cannot 
meet the situation since it has to be worded 
like the Amendment which it enforces and 
thereby can only state that there shall be 
no disqualification on account of sex. That 
there never has been and presumably never 
will be discrimination on account of sex even 
in the most bigoted sections and that, therefore, it was futile for anyone to argue that 
the women of the South would be protected 
by either the 19th Amendment or the subsequent Ac t enforcing it. That, moreover, the 
objection that the colored men of the South 
had found no protection under the 14th 
and 15th Amendments was equally of no 
weight since, in the first place, they alone 
had been disfranchised without similar injustice being done to white men, and that, in 
the second place, there had been no powerful 
organization of white men capable of protecting them as the Woman's Party was 
able, through its national prestige and political experience, to protect women. That the 
recent disfranchisement of southern women 260 THE CRISIS 
of both races was not only a direct defiance 
of the very essence of the Susan B. An ­
thony Amendment but that it was an opening wedge for similar action wherever vested 
interests of any kind prevail, and upon any 
subject. 
That an unchallenged act of an illegal nature could become, through national disregard of law, an established situation, with 
the battle to be fought all over again. That 
the Anti-Suffragist neither slumbers nor 
sleeps. That there is even now a concerted 
attempt to prevent women from serving on 
juries in the State of Pennsylvania. That 
the Anti-Suffrage League of Women Voters, 
with headquarters in New York, is not organized purely for the sake of being listed 
in the New York City Telephone Directory. 
That in Maryland, the Anti-Suffragist is 
"walking up and down in the land, and going to and fro in it". That the past history 
of the Woman's Party will show that the 
portion of the country which most bitterly 
opposed Woman Suffrage—the Southern 
States—was now openly deriding the object 
for which we had worked so valiantly, viz., 
the 19th Amendment, and by shameless perversions and evasions of State Election 
laws, effectually frustrating our efforts. 
That aside from the fact that we ought, in 
the name of all truth and justice, to help our 
disfranchised sisters of any race, we 
certainly could not afford, with any degree 
of dignity, to reorganize along the same 
general lines without taking official cognizance of the fact that we had not attained 
our end as long as what we had striven for 
remained a dead letter in one form or another. That unless we of the Woman's 
Party went on record with a protest against 
disfranchisement, we could never consider 
that our work for the 19th Amendment had 
been finally achieved. 
On Friday morning, February IS, I spoke 
from the floor of the convention in the form 
of an objection to the Minority Report of the 
Resolutions Committee, upon the ground 
that it did not contain any allusion to the 
matter in question. On Friday afternoon, 
just before the convention closed, I succeeded in getting a motion before the convention, to the effect that the Majority Report of the Resolutions Committee should 
be amended to read as follows: 
"That the Resolutions Committee recommends that the reorganized National Wo ­
man's Party appoint a special committee to 
urge Congress to appoint a special .committee to investigate the violation of the intent and purposes of the 19th Amendment by 
evasion and perversions of State Election 
Laws." The motion was seconded by several 
delegates, and was defeated by a light majority. 
Thus the object for which I had prayed 
•and hoped and 'worked was attained. The 
Woman's Party has gone on record, and 
while it has done so in opposition to any notice of the fact that it has not succeeded in 
fully enfranchising the women of the country as far as actual voting is concerned, 
nevertheless an opening has been made, and 
the opposing vote was not a heavy one. It 
has been brought up to me that the Woman's 
Party has provided all women in the United 
States with the weapon of the ballot, and 
my reply has been, "If I wish to arm a woman whose hands are tied, which must I do 
first,—untie her hands, or just leave the 
gun around somewhere?" 
Wha t was most needed at the convention 
was an emphatic, persistent number of colored women delegates with their own leaders. This is vitally important. Leading colored women should join the State Branches 
of the Woman's Party and they should be 
present at the meetings as interested working members, and they should insist that the 
State Chairman appoint a fair share of colored delegates to the National Annual Conventions, in 'accord numerically with the 
total number of delegates allotted to each 
State Branch. The proof of the value of 
colored women appearing in a concerted demand for their rights was conclusively shown 
by the tremendous moral effect produced 
upon those members of the convention who 
were present at our National Headquarters 
when the Deputation of Sixty, representative colored club women, called upon Miss 
Alice Paul three days before the convention 
to ask her to state her position regarding 
disfranchised women. I stood on the stairs 
as the deputation came up, and listened to 
the women of my own race as they made 
such comments as: "Wha t splendid-looking 
women! " "Wha t a lot of women! " "Where 
on earth did they all come from? " "Do you 
mean to say they have come from all over 
the country just to see Miss Paul? " "Ar e 
they all college women? " "Have they got a 
lot of organized clubs? " etc., etc. 
Now the idea of deputations originated in 
the earliest gloom of time, and its advan-WHITTIER AGAIN 261 
tages as regards advertising are obvious. 
Wha t the colored women need now, in the 
opinion of the writer of this article, is to 
follow approved political methods. We of 
the Woman's Party have never broken a law, 
but we forced the United States Government 
to do so when it illegally arrested, convicted 
and imprisoned us for picketing, an act made 
legal under the Clayton Federal Act. Our 
Government thereby became "militant", and 
not the Woman's Party. 
It can be clearly seen that the fundamental idea of the Woman's Party, from 
picketing to deputizing, was to make your 
opponent put himself in the wrong and incidentally to drag him into as much uncomfortable publicity as possible. An y other 
organization is at perfect liberty to study 
our methods, from the early days when we 
were still working for State Suffrage down 
to the last hours of political pressure in 
the two great national conventions of the 
Republican and Democratic Parties. 
The National Federation of Colored Wo ­
men's Clubs, or the women of the N. A. A. 
C. P., or any other powerful association can 
persistently and unremittingly appeal for 
permission to send speakers to every meeting 
in the country, down to the smallest Ladies' 
Auxiliary of the smallest country church. 
They can work energetically for space in 
the press to report their speeches wherever 
made. They can send deputations to every 
leading woman, calling on her to use her 
influence to help her disfranchised sisters. 
Above all, they can picket early and late, 
all large conventions, the Woman's Party, 
the League of Women Voters, the Daughters 
of the Revolution (especially to the point!). 
No one except a Woman's Party woman 
can foresee the train of thought evoked by 
the sight of fine-faced colored women standing silently at the doors of the conventions 
MRS. ELLA RUSH MURRAY 
of their careless white sisters, with banners 
inscribed perhaps with some such thought 
as: "Do you know that (so many) million 
women are denied the vote?" Or "Wha t are 
you going to do about the disfranchised women of the Southern States?" Or "Help us 
to fight for the thing that is nearest our 
hearts—Democracy,—by enforcing the 19th 
Amendment in spirit as well as in letter." 
Liberty is not deserved unless fought for 
wholeheartedly and with single purpose. We 
of the Woman's Party can say to you that 
we placed one object above all others while 
we fought, and we allowed no other matter 
to divert us from our goal. 
WHITTIER AGAIN 
CHARLES EATON BURCH 
OU R age has brushed aside Whitter's 
Voices of Freedom. We are told that 
they were for the days when black men 
were in veritable bondage, when a few 
brave souls were struggling to teach a nation the doctrine of the brotherhood of man. 
Critics of literature tell us that the passing 
of stirring abolition days has sounded the 
death knell to "Stanzas of the Times", and 
that the only justification for their occasional revival is due largely to their association with a great period in our national 
history. That Whitter's anti-slavery poems 
are void of some of the elements which 
make for a great literature, cannot be 
denied. But as long as men are in partial 262 THE CRISIS 
bondage, and are not permitted to enjoy the 
fruits of the vineyard which they have 
bought with their blood and tilled by the 
sweat of their brows, they may be pardoned 
for noting such lines: 
Speed on Thy work, Lord God of Hosts! 
And when the bondman's chain is riven, 
And swells from all our guilty coasts 
The anthem of the free to heaven, 
Oh, not to those whom Thou hast led 
As with a cloud and fire before, 
But. unto Thee, in fear and dread, 
Be praise and glory evermore. 
Thus spoke the one American man of 
letters who staked his literary future to 
call a guilty nation to repentance. In season and out of season, hot flashes came 
from his tireless pen. And because of their 
very genuine sincerity, they sometimes approach the high water mark of great literature. Wha t more noble chapter in American literature than that of the humble poet 
of New England who takes the mantle of 
the World's great reformers and cries aloud: 
Shall tongues be mute when deeds are 
wrought 
Which well might shame extremest hell? 
Shall freemen lack the indignant thought? 
Shall Pity's bosom cease to swell? 
Shall honor bleed?—Shall truth succumb? 
Shall pen and press, and soul be dumb? 
And to his country that had in earlier 
days placed Freedom high upon its banners 
and marched forth to teach the great lesson 
of Democracy, he adds: 
My Country! glorious at thy birth, 
A day-star flashing brightly forth— 
The herald sign of Freedom's dawn,— 
Oh, who could dream that saw thee then, 
And watched thy rising from afar, 
That vapors from Oppression's fen 
Would cloud the upward tending star? 
But after the battle, Whitter went to his 
tent and recounted the struggles of the day. 
Occasionally he saw the cause of righteousness making small gains and tuned his lyre 
to sing of the victory. And so in his "Pastoral Letter," he reminds the champion of 
the oppressed that: 
A glorious remnant linger yet, 
Whose lips are wet at Freedom's fountains, 
The coming of whose welcome feet 
Is beautiful upon our mountains! 
Men who the gospel tidings bring 
Of liberty and love forever, 
Whose jo y is an abiding spring, 
Whose peace is as a gentle river. 
We love to tarry with the one whose 
simple faith in the Good Shepherd led him 
into the conflict. His creed was the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man. 
We , who are living in the first quarter of 
the twentieth century, can ill afford to forget his noble life. In the fight for human 
freedom, he was willing to spend and be 
spent. Hear him as he ponders over the 
Civil" War! 
We see not, know not; all our way 
Is night—with Thee alone is day, 
From out the torrent's troubled drift, 
Above the storm our prayers we lift,— 
Thy will be done. 
What a joyful psean came from his pen 
in 1865, when the amendment to the Constitution, abolishing slavery, was adopted! 
His Laus Deo is undoubtedly a great poem. 
It is done! 
Clang of bell and roar of gun 
Send the tidings up and down, 
How the bellfries rock and reel! 
How the great guns peal on peal 
Fling the jo y from town to town. 
Some day Negro children shall sing in 
mighty chorus the Laus Deo; some day the 
black toiler shall leave his cotton field to 
join in the great song of freedom. But the 
task is not done. In the contests of the 
hour, the fathers are falling, and while 
they may not be permitted to say "It is 
done", they may, in the evening of their 
day, find comfort in Whittier's Eternal 
Goodness: 
I know not where His Islands lift 
Their fronded palms in air; 
I only know I cannot drift 
Beyond His love and care. 
A HARBOR 
I N Toledo, Ohio, a band of colored men 
and women have devoted themselves to 
bringing some sunshine into the lives of 
, «S"0^ 3 
colored working girls. The plan started in 
1916 with Rev. Charles H. Bundy, who at 
that time was pastor of the Warren A . M. E. A HARBOR 
TOLEDO COLORED WORKING GIRLS' HOME 
Church. He sent out a call which was met 
by representatives from the following organizations : 
Warren A . M. E. Church, Third Baptist 
Church, Friendship Baptist Church, All 
Saints' Mission, Amazon Lodge (Masons i. 
America J. Ross Lodge (Odd Fellows), 
Golden Rule Lodge (Elks), B. & K. and 
Bruck Lodge (Knights of Pythias), Enterprise Charity Club, Mothers' Club, Julia 
Brown Circle, King's Daughters, The Girls' 
Industrial Club, The National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People, Sojourner Truth Court, Men's League of the 
All Saints' Mission, and the M. E. Mission. 
In the fall of that year a permanent 
organization was effected and a campaign was started, urging the need of 
an institution which would provide a pleasant home and its comforts to the Toledo 
colored working girl. From the first the 
idea met with marked success. The Toledo 
Girls' Industrial Club, under the supervision of Mrs. Thomas H. Randall, started 
the ball rolling with a cash subscription of 
$100. Very soon the Association was in 
possession of $500, all of which had been 
contributed by colored people. Later a 
"Ta g Day " resulted in $4,194.38. 
By March, 1918, the Association had purchased a double apartment house at 533-535 
Dorr Street, half of which was ready for occupancy by June. A growing list of applicants made it necessary to employ the 
whole building and in July, 1919, the Association held a re-oneninp-. The buildine, 
which has been tastefully and thoroughly 
furnished by friends of the movement, contains a lecture-room, assembly hall, two 
bathrooms, a model laundry, an up-to-date 
kitchen, and dormitory accommodations. 
Here girls may live for a nominal sum with 
the privilege of cooking and washing. 
In addition to affording a refuge for girls 
in need of a home, this institution has also 
served as a clearing house for girls and 
women without work. Within the first year 
of its existence more than 275 girls and 
women found employment through this 
means. 
The business end of the enterprise has 
been carried on admirably. The house cost 
originally $6,000, of which $3,600 was paid 
cash down. By January, 1920, the debt had 
been reduced to $2,700. The Wa r Chest 
helped considerably with current expenses in 
1919 and pledged $2,000 for 1920. 
Mrs. Thomas H. Randall, the president, 
writes: "The home is run exclusively by our 
own people. It has proved such a God-send 
to our homeless girls that we feel quite 
proud of the effort. W e hope that knowledge of this effort may bring a blessing to 
many girls." Men of the Month 
TH E Board of Education at Camden, N. 
J., has a Negro member in the person 
of Dr. Clement T. Branch. Dr. Branch 
served as a Commissioner from the State of 
New Jersey for the Emancipation Proclamation Celebration, and was a delegate to 
the National Progressive Convention in 
1912; he is chairnlan of the Hunton Branch 
of the Y. M. C. A. in Camden. 
Dr. Branch was born in Parmville, Va., 
January 21, 1869. He studied at Shaw, Cornell and Howard Universities. He has been 
practising medicine in New Jersey for 20 
years. 
James Francis Rickards on August 29, 
1920, was retired with a pension from the 
Detroit Post Office after 40 years' service 
as a letter-carrier. 
Mr. Rickards was born in Dover, Del., 
January 17, 1848. He attended the school 
opened by the Society of Quakers for colored children; later he took a business course 
in Detroit. In 1869 he joined the Masonic 
Fraternity; after serving as Grand Commander of Knights Templar in the State of 
Michigan for 11 years, he became in 1911 
Sovereign Grand Commander of the United 
Supreme Council of the 33rd degree of the 
Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of the Northern Jurisdiction, and has been unanimously 
re-elected to this office each year. 
Dr. William H. Brooks was born in Calvert County, Md., in 1859. He studied at 
Morgan College, Howard University, Union 
Seminary and New York University, and 
spent two summers in Europe. 
Dr. Brooks was a member of the General 
Conference from the Washington Annual 
Conference in 1896, and of the General Conference from the New York Annual Conference in 1920. The latter election was the 
first instance in the history of Methodism 
that a white conference elected a Negro 
representative. He was Fraternal Delegate 
to the General Conference of the Colored 
Methodist Eniscopal Church in 1902, and a 
delegate to the World Missionary Conference in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1910. 
Dr. Brooks has been pastor of St. Marks' 
M. E. Church, New York City, since March, 
1897. Recently a new edifice with a seating capacity of 2,000, a pariah house and a 
parsonage were contracted for in Harlem, on 
Edgecombe Avenue. The property is 34 feet 
in the rear, 67 feet front and 200 feet deep. 
During October of last year the church had 
an offering of $10,000; at a Sunday rally 
service $9,092 in cash was raised. Dr. 
Brooks is also known as the Chaplain of the 
15th Infantry. 
Dr. C. Bethany Powell is a graduate of 
the college and medical departments of Howard University. During three summer vacations while a student, he affiliated himself 
with the South Hampton Hospital, at South 
Hampton, N. Y., where he became a pathologist and an assistant in the operating-room. 
He served as president of the Chi Delta 
Mu, during 1919-20, and under his administration graduate chapters were established 
at Kansas City and St. Louis, Mo. 
Dr. Powell has recently been appointed 
an interne in the department of radiography, radio-therapy and clinical pathology at 
Bellevue Hospital, New York City; he is 
also Medical Examiner for the Municipal 
Lodging House. 
He was born in Newport News, Va., August 7, 1894. 
M. Russell Nelson was awarded the degree 
of Doctor of Medicine from the University 
of Pennsylvania, June, 1920, at the age of 
24. On July 1 he was appointed Junior 
Resident Physician of the Medical Division 
of the Columbia and Cornell Universities' 
Medical School Services at Bellevue Hospital, New Yor k City. On January 1 of this 
year Dr. Nelson was appointed Senior Resident Physician in charge of the Tuberculosis 
Division at Bellevue Hospital, succeeding 
Major R. B. Richardson. 
Dr. Nelson was born in Radnor, Pa., 
March 21, 1896. A t the Lower Merion High 
School he was chosen captain of the Varsity 
Track Team and won the Middle States Inter-scholastic Championship as a high 
jumper. He served as president of Rho 
Chapter, Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, during 1918, and was instrumental in the establishment of Psi Chapter. He was the 
founder and first president of the Daniel 
Hale Williams Surgical and Oral Society, 
the first Negro scientific society in the history of the University of Pennsylvania. 
264 DR. C. BETHANY BO WELL DR. M. RUSSELL NELSON 
B.EV. WILLIAM H. BROOKS 
SB. CLEMENT T. BRANCH MB. JAMES F. RICHARDS 
265 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
EXHORTATION 
THROUG H the pregnant universe rumbles life's terrific thunder 
And Earth's bowels quake with terror; 
strange and terrible storms break, 
Lightning-torches flame the heavens, kindling souls of men thereunder: 
Africa ! long ages sleeping, Oh my Motherland, awake! 
In the East the clouds glow crimson with 
the new dawn that is breaking, 
And its golden glory fills the western 
skies:—• 
Oh my brothers and my sisters, wake! 
arise! 
For the new birth rends the old earth and 
the very dead are waking, 
Ghosts are turned flesh, throwing off the 
grave's disguise, 
And the foolish, even children, are made 
wise; 
For the big earth groans in travail for 
the strong, new world in making— 
Oh my brothers, dreaming for dim centuries, 
Wake from sleeping; to the East turn, 
turn your eyes! 
CLAUDE MCKAY . 
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION 
T H E mantle of the late Samuel Coleridge-Taylor has fallen, successfully, it 
would seem, on the young shoulders of his 
children, Hiawatha and Gwendolen. The 
Croydon Advertiser and Surrey County Reporter, England, says: 
Of far more than transient interest was 
the concert of the String-Players' Club at 
Croydon Public Hall on Friday. Within 
this organization is enshrined special devotion to works of the late Mr. S. ColeridgeTaylor, whose laurel-adorned portrait had a 
place of honor. 
"His music lives." Of that there was 
abundant evidence, and his spirit must truly 
have hovered in the room. There was a 
stronger link with the ever-revered AngloAfrican composer-conductor than the goodly 
heritage expressed in music scores. The living link—the term may be technically 
wrong, but it is all-expressive—was there in 
the presence as conductor of the orchestra 
of Mr. Hiawatha Coleridge-Taylor, his only 
son, still in his teens and in figure and facial characteristics so like his long lamented 
sire. Having largely inherited musical 
genius, who possibly could get nearer the 
truest interpretation of the subtle beauties 
of music of so distinctive a strain? 
The chief selection was from the Hiawatha 
Ballet Suite which bears the last opus number—82—of the Coleridge-Taylor compositions. The product of intensive effort, the 
just completed and signed MSS. were lying 
on the piano at Aldwick when the composer 
passed away—his last work. The whole 
Ballet takes two hours to perform. Portions 
of the five movements were given on Friday, 
as ably orchestrated by Mr. Percy E. 
Fletcher. To the young conductor the audience were indebted for an illuminating synopsis of each movement, with stimulating 
quotations from the immortal poem. 
The joyous melody of the feast, the barbaric dance, the insinuating charm of the 
prayer in "The Departure" and the haunting beauty of "glory sunset and purple 
mist" found wonderful interpretation at the 
hands of the slim, boyish conductor in whose 
keen, highly-wrought energy and sinuous 
absorption in every note and shade of expression one detected virile powers in the 
making. The delighted hearers ignored the 
special request to be silent between each 
movement; applause punctuated the breaks 
with a spontaneity withering to strict propriety 
The pathetic interest of the occasion is 
referred to by a correspondent in a note to 
The Advertiser. 
"Remembrance of the late composer," he 
writes, "was all the more real because of 
the strong likeness in figure and manner 
of the son who has called the String-Players' 
.Club into being again—a likeness which became the more marked as, in his hands, 
the baton revealed the same characteristic 
movements of arm and fingers that were 
associated with his father. It was a bold 
thing to risk comparison between father 
and son in the conductor's chair, and it is 
high praise to say that the youthful debutante rose to the occasion and revealed possession of the temperament and musical instinct for securing a good performance." 
* * * 
The Daily Mercury, Plymouth, England, 
says of a concert given in Guildhall: 
Principal interest was centered in the 
appearance of Miss Gwendolen ColeridgeTaylor, daughter of the well-known AngloAfrican composer, who contributed some musical monologues. She is quite a talented 
elocutionist, and gave "The Clown and the 
Columbine" with rare verve and sympathy. 
Her other selection was "A'ventures, " a 
266 THE LOOKING GLASS 267 
pretty little childish story, and for an encore she gave "Fairy Rings, " another charming, though brief, monologue. In "The Clown 
and the Columbine" she had a trio accompaniment, whilst the incidental music to 
"A'ventures " was her own composition, 
which she played herself. 
Mr. Roland Hayes, the Negro tenor, was 
a popular success, and he was twice encored. 
He gave a fine rendering of Coleridge-Taylor's "Lif e and Death." 
THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON 
THE CENSUS 
T, H E colored citizen is not the only one to 
commend the action of the N. A. A. C. P. 
before the House Committee on the Census. 
H. L. Mencken writes in the Baltimore, Md. 
Evening Sun: 
From the learned Memphis CommercialAppeal of January 22 I extract the following comment upon a recent hearing before 
the House Committee on the Census: 
The public is aware that the notorious Society for the Advancement of Colored People 
appeared before the committee, and through 
its officials urged the reduction of southern 
representation in Congress on the alleged 
ground of the practical disfranchisement ot 
the Negro in the South. . . . The representatives of this organization who appeared 
before the committee were Negroes of ability 
who presented their case impressively and 
with becoming dignity. But the manner in 
which they were bullied by southern Congressmen, members of the committee, presents 
a humiliating contrast. . . . From 
this exhibition it seems quite clear that the 
South must improve the quality of its representation if it hopes to retain the respect 
of the nation. One cannot imagine Lamar, 
or George, or Isham G. Harris, or Garland 
playing the role that those men did. 
* * * 
Mr. Mencken proceeds inimitably: 
The eminent editor of the CommercialAppeal, I regret to say, does not overstate 
the facts upon which he grounds his despair. 
I have examined at length the stenographic 
report of this hearing and find it very depressing indeed. On the one side there were 
two colored men, the Hon. James Weldon 
Johnson and the Hon. Walter F. White— 
polite, intelligent, calm, well-informed, dignified, self-respecting. On the other side were 
four southern Congressmen, the Hon. M. M. 
Aswell, Lai-sen, Bee and Brinson—bullying, 
bulldozing, stupid, pettifogging, choleric, 
nonsensical. They cross-examined the witnesses exactly in the manner of eighth-rate 
lawyers in a police court—seeking to befog 
the issue, pressing idiotic points, setting up 
blathering contentions over words, makinc 
vast efforts to cover up their childishness 
with moral indignation. It was, in sober 
truth, a humiliating spectacle. One regrets 
that the whole report cannot be set before 
all the voters of the republic, that they may 
begin to understand what intolerable blockheads make their laws at Washington. 
THE MIGRATING NEGRO 
TH E Negro, who up to the time of the 
Great Wa r was almost a fixture in his 
native locality, having once learned to move, 
is still moving. This time his migration is 
not due to the lure of higher wages or of 
better treatment, but to unemployment. The 
flow is toward the great cities. Charles C. 
Cooper, of the Kingsley House, Pittsburgh, 
Pa., is quoted by the Survey: 
The number of idle colored men and 
women in any part of the great cities is 
difficult to estimate; there is no method of 
computing those who have come into the 
city after being "laid off" in surroundingterritory. During some twelve days in January, 2,100 colored men, who had come from 
surrounding districts, and none of whom had 
been working in Pittsburgh, applied at the 
little Provident Rescue Mission in Pittsburgh 
for assistance and work. In one week 1,02? 
applied to the Urban League of this city 
for work, and 8 received it. 
To care for these unfortunate but still 
cheerful people overtaxed those agencies 
which in normal times had ably assisted 
them. The colored churches threw open their 
doors to feed them. Later, with the assistance of the Association for the Improvement 
of the Poor, they were housed by the Provident Rescue Mission and the Holy Cross 
Episcopal Church (colored), and fed by the 
Grace Presbyterian Church (colored). 
With the usual lack of understanding, the 
police department began to arrest hundreds 
of these men as vagrant and suspicious persons, and many were sent to the workhouse. 
Those who had sufficient funds were unable 
to secure houses on account of the housing 
situation; the prevailing high rents were 
made prohibitive on account of the color 
line. 
The situation seems to have been made 
worse by the inhospitality of some labor 
unions. These proclaimed that they knew 
no color line; nevertheless the colored men 
feel that in their practice they have not met 
the problem fairly. Some attempt is being 
made upon their part now to organize their 
own local unions. 
* * * 
Lack of work makes the situation very 
difficult but it is not driving the Negro back 
South. The Survey says: 
In one large group, housed in the Provident Rescue Mission, the question was asked 
one night: "Now that you men are out of 
work, are you going to return to the South?" 
The answer, quaint and crude, still showed 
the hope of their race: "Like Hell we are." 268 THE CRISIS 
YOUR NEXT DOOR NEIGHBOR 
HPH E first Congress of the League of Nations, held a few weeks ago in Geneva, 
gives Robert Dell, writing in The Nation, 
a chance to compare the ability of the delegates from the various nations. America, 
he thinks, would have had much to learn. 
Never before have Europe, Asia and Latin 
America been brought into such close contact. Latin America is almost unknown to 
the great majority of Europeans, who imagine that it consists entirely of countries in 
a state of chronic revolution and less than 
half civilized. Some of the Latin-American 
delegates have shown themselves far more 
in touch with international affairs than 
many of the Europeans. Senor Pueyrreao 
is a man of marked ability and force of 
character, who at once took a prominent 
place in the Assembly, which elected him 
one of its vice-presidents. I gathered from 
American visitors that Haiti is not regarded with very great respect in the United 
States. If you have many men in your politics as well-informed, capable, and enlightened as M. Frederic Doret, I congratulate 
you. W e have not many in Europe. He is 
colored, of course, but I would rather be 
governed by him than by most of the statesmen now in power in Europe. A great many 
of the white delegates to the Assembly we 
very much his inferiors in every way. 
. . . . The Chinese and Japanese 
delegations were second to none and superior to most in culture, in knowledge, in 
ability. Mr. Wellington Koo was quite ont 
of the ablest men in the whole Assembly. 
I often wondered what these highly, cultured 
representatives of an ancient and splendid 
civilization thought of the crude, primitive, 
half-civilized Australians and New Zealanders. The Yellow Peril must be something 
like the Jewish Peril—the danger that a 
more quick-witted and instructed race will 
cut the others out. I rejoice at the election of China on the Council of the League, 
for the world has much to learn from her. 
Chinese policy in the Assembly was most 
enlightened, and her influence will be on the 
side of peace and international reconciliation. The Persian delegation had also an 
enlightened policy, and M. Zoka ed Dowleh. 
in particular, more than once intervened 
happily in the debates. The Japanese were 
reticent. They concentrated on the Council, 
from which they failed to obtain their two 
principal desires—racial equality and the 
"open door " in the mandatory territories. 
But the question of racial equality will have 
to be faced by the League 'and by the European races. Viscount Ishii announced the 
determination of Japan to raise the question next September in the Assembly. The 
ultimate choice will be between conciliation 
and war. Asia will not consent to anything 
less than equality with the rest of the 
world, especially now that she has two out 
of the eight members of the Council. 
Japan's difficulties in California bring 
this sympathetic statement from a writer 
in The Nation: 
The primary question, and in practice the 
only one of importance, is that of race antagonism. On this subject California still 
lives, as some other sections of the country 
still live, in the dense and heated atmosphere 
of 'a bygone time. It assumes without debate that the white race is superior and 
that all other races are inferior; that people 
of different races do not mix; that the presence of any appreciable number of 'aliens 
with different, and hence presumably lower, 
standards of living inevitably tends to pull 
down the standards of citizens whose plane 
of living is higher; and that racial intermarriage is unthinkable because it is certain 
to produce a low quality of children. Hence 
the war-cry, reverberating from the antiChinese days of Dennis Kearney and the San 
Francisco sand-lots to the anti-Japanese 
days of Senator Phelan, "The Japanese 
must go. " 
It is time that the American people faced 
squarely this whole question of race. In 
the years when nations made much of their 
so-calle'd sovereignty, and arrogated to 
themselves such positions in the world as 
by hook or by crook they were able successfully to assert, there was, perhaps, justification, albeit of 'a specious kind, for the 
policies of discrimination or exclusion which 
they practiced in regard to peoples of other 
races or of inferior strength. There is 
still justification for excluding from a country aliens who are physically or mentally 
defective, or who are likely for any reason 
to swell the ranks of criminals or become 
a public charge. There is still reason why 
aliens should not be imported under contract for the clear purpose of displacing 
citizen wage earners who are hieher paid. 
But as to other restrictions and discriminations the world has changed. Two of the 
•professed aims of the great wa r which has 
just been fought have been the recognition 
of the right of small nations and racial 
groups to independence and self-determination, and the union of all peoples in a world 
league in which the nations should be equal; 
and while those principles have as yet been 
honored more in the breach than in the observance, the principles themselves abide. 
JUSTICE IN DES MOINES 
A N important decision regarding the resale of property to colored people has 
been handed down in Des Moines. The Bystander, a local weekly, says: 
Real estate contracts which prohibit the 
resale of the property to colored persons 
are not binding. Such a stipulation is a 
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to 
the Constitution of the United States in the 
opinion of Judge Lawrence DeGraff, of the 
District Court, who handed down a decision 
Monday in the case of Arc h I. Madden vs. DELEGATES OF THE NATIONAL CONGRESS OF BRITISH WEST AFRICA TO LONDON (Courtesy of the African Times') 
From left to right, sitting: Dr. Bankole-Bright (.Sierra Leo-ne), The Hon. T. Hutton-Mills, Barrister-at-Law (Gold Coast), Chief Oluwa (Nigeria), The Hon. CaselyHayford, Barrister-at-Law (Gold Coast), H. Vanheim, Esq. (Gold Coast). 
From left to riglU, standing: J. Egerton Shyngle, Barrister-at-Law (Nigeria), Mr . H. M. Jones (Balhurst, Gambia), Mr . Herbert Macaulay (Chief Oluwa's Private 
Secretary), T. M. OJuwa (Son of Chief Oluwa), Mr . E. W . Dove (Sierra Leone), Mr. E. F. Small (Bathvrst, Cambria). 270 THE CRISIS 
Dorothy Quail, colored, a suit to eject the 
latter from premises she bought January 30 
from H. A. Flowers. 
* * * 
A correspondent sends a copy of the opinion handed down by Judge Lawrence De 
Graff. The decision reads in part: 
A consideration for the purchase of a 
parcel of real estate that the vendee would 
not sell the premises covered by the contract 
to colored persons or persons of African descent is void, and the 14th Amendment to 
the Constitution of the United States is 
properly invoked. In the case of Galdalfo 
vs. Hartment et al., 48 Fed., 181, a similar 
provision to that in the instant contract 
was recited, in the deed, and was intended 
to be a covenant running with the land. The 
court held that it violated the public policy 
of the United States and was contrary to 
the spirit and intent of the 14th Amendment 
to the Constitution of the United States. A 
somewhat similar question was raised in 
Buchanan vs. Warley, 245 U. S., 60, in which 
case the court was called upon to construe 
a city ordinance of the city of Louisville, Ky., 
and a like holding was made. See also Binford vs. Boyd, 178 Cal., 458. 
Fo r the reasons herein indicated the relief prayed for by Plaintiff is refused, and 
injunction is denied and case dismissed at 
Plaintiff's costs. An exception may be 
noted for Plaintiff. 
(Signed) LAWRENCE DEGRAFF, 
Judge. 
* * • 
The lawyer for the defendant, Dorothy 
Quail, was John L. Thompson, assisted by 
George H. Woodson. 
MISCELLANY 
GEORG E UNDERWOO D translates in 
the London Freethinker a striking bit 
from Voltaire, the master of satire: 
I had now only Africa to visit in order to 
enjoy all the pleasures of our continent; and 
thither I went in all reality. The ship in 
which I had embarked was taken by the 
Negro corsairs. The master of the vessel 
complained loudly, and asked why they had 
violated the laws of nations. The captain of 
the Negroes answered: "Yo u have a long 
nose and we have a short one; your hair is 
straight and oui-s curled; and therefore we 
ought, by the sacred law of Nature, to be 
always at loggerheads. You buy us in the 
public markets on the coast of Guinea like 
beasts of burden, to make us labor in I don't 
know what kind of drudgery, equally hard 
and degrading, with the whip held over our 
heads; you make us dig in mountains for a 
kind of yellow earth, which in itself is good 
for nothing, and is not so valuable as the 
Egyptian onion. In like manner, whenever 
we meet you, and are superior to you in 
strength, we make you slaves, and oblige you 
to manure our fields; or, in case of refusal, 
cut off your nose and ears." 
# * * 
A writer in the New Statesman, London, 
raises the question of first aid for discontent: 
Discontent is not a remedy, but a symptom. 
Popular unrest in itself is no more to be rejoiced in than a rash. It is also true that it 
is no more to be neglected than a rash. The 
ruling classes have throughout history done 
their best to ignore it, or, when they could 
not ignore it, to punish it. They have merely driven the disease in. The discontent of 
the poor is for the most part a protest against 
the conduct of those who have appropriated 
to themselves so large a share of the opportunities for happiness. It may be that the 
State cannot make a man happy. The State 
cannot raise the dead, nor can it endow a 
man with genius or beauty or humor. If 
he lacks these things, his quarrel is not 
political: it is with destiny. There are other 
forms of happiness, however, which the State 
can insure to him. It can insure to.him and 
his children opportunities of life, of education, of travel, of dwelling in a roomy house 
surrounded by a garden of flowers, of reading whether for wisdom or for entertainment, of eating well and speaking well, of 
seeing pictures other than the cinema, of 
hearing music other than the steam organ, 
of learning how many colors there are in a 
jay's plumage, of release from work for a 
month at a time, of swimming in the sea, of 
leading, in fine, the life of a gentleman, a 
poet and a scholar. It is folly to pretend 
that the discontent of the poor man who is 
at present shut out as by a doom from these 
delights either will or ought to come to an 
end until he has broken down the door that 
separates him from them. Contentment with 
the social order of our time would be a disgrace to rich and poor alike. Content is the 
ideal condition of society. The greatest social problem in the world—indeed, the whole 
social problem—is how to construct a State 
in which it will be possible for a decent man 
to be content both with his own lot and the 
lot of his neighbor. 
The Leader, Pittsburgh, Pa., speaks on 
the protection of the principles of liberty: 
In time it is possible we may develop a 
breed of statesmen who may be able to see 
that nothing is so big, certainly nothing is 
bigger, than the protection of the principles 
of democracy and freedom to which the nation was dedicated by its founders. It is 
possible, but if one is to be guided in his 
hopes for the future by the facts of the past 
and present, it is only remotely possible. If 
the Negro citizens ever receive protection 
from murderous mobs, North or South, it 
will be only when they take over the job of 
protecting their race. If there is any other 
solution it does not make much noise or scatter any light at present. The Horizon 
Compiled by Madeline G. Allison 
COMPILE D BY MADELIN E G . ALLISO N 
MUSIC AND ART 
THE Howard Players, of Howard Uni-
•*• versity, have appeared in "The Tents 
of the Arabs" , by Lord Dunsany, and "Simon, the Cyrenian", by Ridgeley Torrence. 
In the first play, John H. Broadnax as the 
king and Stella Skinker as the gypsy-maid, 
won much applause. Miss Skinker was 
found to be an emotional actress of splendid ability. In the second play, the title roles 
were acted by Purvis J. Chesson, Helen I. 
Webb and Ottie Graham. The players— 
who number 23 and execute their own settings and costumes—were directed and assisted by Mrs. Marie Moore Forrest and 
Cleon Throckmorton. They will present 
Eugene O'Neill's "The Emperor Jones" in 
which Charles Gilpin, the Negor actor, is 
starring in New Yor k City. Mr. Gilpin has 
promised to play his role for the performance. 
Marion Anderson, contralto, has appeared 
in a recital at Morehouse College. She was 
assisted by the Morehouse College Orchestra o f 30 pieces, the Burleigh Glee Club and 
William G. Valentine, pianist. 
J. Edga r Dowell is the tenth Negro composer to place songs with the Jack Mills 
Company in New York City. 
. A benefit concert has been given in Brooklyn, N. Y., for the Fort Valley High and Industrial School of Georgia. George Foster 
Peabody presided and among the participants were Natalie Curtis-Burlin and H. T. 
Burleigh. 
The Glee Club and Orchestra of Morehouse College has given its 10th annual concert. On the program were works of Coleridge-Taylor, Dett, Harreld, White, Dvorak, 
Liszt, de- Koven and Wieniawski. Kemper 
Harreld is the director. 
The Q. R. S. Roll Company has contracted with two Negro pianists; one of them, 
Joseph P. Johnson, will make a specialty of 
music written and composed by Negroes. 
The Okeh Phonograph Compai^y is featuring 
Mamie Smith, a singer; the Columbia 
iaphophone Company is using Marie Stafford, a vocalist; the Mel-O-Dee Roll Company is featuring Eubie Blake, pianist; and 
Clara Turner, a singer, is making records 
for several companies. 
C Negroes in Augusta, Ga., have opened a 
theatre which cost $100,000. Its capacity is 
700. 
n Philadelphia, at the John Wanamaker 
gallery there are paintings by Henry O. 
Tanner, the Negro artist. "The Wise and 
the Foolish Virgins " is a canvas 30 x 15 
feet; its place is in the centre of the gallery. 
"The Flight Into Egypt " is a 10 x 6 feet 
piece of work. Mr. Tanner's "Annunciation" 
is part of a collection at Fairmount Park. 
The Chicago Umbrian Glee Club has given 
its annual concert, with Florence Cole-Talbert, soprano, and Herbert Stewart, accompanist, assisting. The club has 35 members. 
Mr. J. E. Mitchen is president. 
Mme. Azalea Hackley has presented a 
chorus of 200 in a folk-song festival at Oakland, Cal., under the auspices of the Fanny 
J. Coppin Club. The receipts were $1,000. 
A permanent chorus was organized. The 
Oakland Tribune says: "Fo r both white and 
colored people, there was good to be carried 
away from the concert. For the former it 
was a liberal education in the loveliness— 
and the musical value—of the Afro-American songs. To the latter it was a disclosure 
of the genius for tonal beauty with which 
they are endowed." 
James A. Jackson, a Negro writer in New 
York City, has been added to the editorial 
staff of the Billboard. Among newspapers 
that have published Mr. Jackson's writings 
are the Globe, the Sun and the Herald, 
Of Mrs. H. King Reavis, the colored 
prima donna, "J. C. " says in the London, 
England, Graphic: "One—I say one advisedly—of the finest things in this Southern Syncopated Orchestra is the vocalism of Mrs. H. 
King Reavis. This lady possesses a soprano 
voice of unusual range and the number 
'Listen to the Lambs', a religious Negro melody, is exquisitely rendered." Mrs. Reavis 
271 272 THE CRISIS 
has many times sung before the nobilities of 
Europe. 
Maud Cuney Hare, author-pianist, and 
William H. Richardson, baritone, of Boston, 
Mass., have completed a tour of the Pacific 
Coast. Following their concert at Rochester, N. Y., the Rochester Democrat and 
Chronicle said: "Maud Cuney Hare offered 
to music-sated Rochester quite a new sensation in the old Creole folk-songs for which 
she herself has arranged the music and 
made the translation. .. . In her informal talks about folk music she was particularly charming, and she was at her very 
best in the interesting group of songs and 
dances of the Creoles. . . The singer, 
Mr. Richardson, is a baritone of splendid 
gifts. He sings with earnestness and dignity and is an intelligent interpreter of his 
songs. His program last evening was an 
exacting one, and one which would test any 
singer's versatility." 
EDUCATION 
MAGGI E VINCENT, a graduate of Albion Academy and Bennett College, 
has passed the examination of the State 
Board of North Carolina as Supervisor in 
Domestic Science with an average of 92%-
Miss Vincent is 22 years of age and a 
teacher of Derby School, Jackson Springs, 
N. C. 
Hampton Institute is issuing leaflets for 
school use. Among the subjects are "Games 
for Elementary Schools"; "Home Decoration", and "Beautifying Schoolhouses and 
Yards" . 
At Asheville, N. C , among city improvements last year was a $24,000 school building for Negroes. 
The House Committee on Education in a 
report recommending the passage of the 
Smith-Towner Bill for Federal Aid to Education puts the United States in the ninth 
place. The report adds: "It is thought by 
some that illiteracy is a race question, but 
it is much more than that. There are over 
1,000,000 more white illiterates in the United States than illiterate Negroes." 
The newspaper report that Professor 
George W. Cook had been retired from Howard University was an error. The statement came through an address delivered by 
President Durkee, in which reference was 
made to the retirement this year of Dr. E. 
E. Albert Cook. 
O Dr. S. Marie Kinner, of Pittsburgh, has 
passed the Pennsylvania State Board of 
Medical Examiners. Amon g 70 candidates 
for licenses, 7 were Negroes. Dr. Kinner 
studied at the University of Pittsburgh and 
was graduated with honor from Howard 
University Medical School in 1919. She 
served as resident physician at Mercy Hospital for one year and was Medical Advisor 
for the Children's Clinic of South Philadelphia. 
C Miss E. L. Fisher, of the Bruce School, 
has celebrated 50 years as a teacher in the 
District of Columbia. She was one of the 
earliest graduates of Howard University 
Normal Department. 
Eighty colored women in New Orleans, 
La., were recently granted certificates by the 
American Red Cross to practise nursing. 
Dr. J. T. Phillips, of Nashville, Tenn., 
has passed the Missouri State Medical Board 
with an average of 88%. He was the only 
Negro among 50 candidates. Dr. Phillips is 
a graduate of Fisk and Meharry. 
Margaret Deland, the well-known white 
author, is endeavoring to raise $10,000 to 
found 100 scholarships at Hampton Institute. 
The General Education Board has made 
a grant of $125,000 toward an endowment 
fund of $500,000 which is being raised by 
the United Presbyterian Church for Knoxville College. The institution is 45 years old. 
G Xi Chapter of the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity has been organized at Howard University with 15 members. There are 5 other 
fraternities at Howard. 
Through Robert L. Vann a scholarship of 
$50 has been given to Howard University 
by the Loendi Social and Literary Club of 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Graduates and former students of Talladega College have formed a "Talledega 
Club" in New York City. William E. Pickens is honorary president and Dr. Floyd 
Terry, president. 
Howard University has 1,721 students as 
follows: college, 878; law, 161; religion, 232; 
medicine, dentistry and pharmacy, 450. 
The enrollment is an increase in each department, and there are students from 10 
foreign countries. 
INDUSTRY 
THOMA S NEWMA N has retired from 
the Milwaukee road after 40 years' service, during which time he shined 600,000 
shoes. He is 80 years old. 
C A t Little Rock, Ark., the People's Ice 
and Fuel Company, colored, has let a con-THE HORIZON 273 
tract for the construction of a $100,000 factory. The president is Mr. J. G. Taylor. 
The main financial support is being furnished by David H. Raines, a Negro of 
Shreveport, La., who is reputed to be worth 
$1,500,000. Mr. Raines owns 2,000 acres 
of land on which there are 40 producing oil 
wells; he pays a clerk $100 a day to check 
up his royalties. 
. Commercial Bank and Trust Company at 
Richmond, Va., during 12 weeks of business 
passed the $100,000 mark. It has deposits 
amounting to $60,820 among 1,174 depositors; real estate, furniture and fixtures, $19,-
908; capital paid in, $33,302; resources, 
$102,292. The president is Mr. T. C. Erwin, who for a number of years was principal of the Dinwiddee Normal School. 
The Special Grocery Company, Inc., has 
been launched with a capital of $50,000 by 
Negroes of Roanoke, Va . Messrs. J. E. Jefferson is president; J. C. Eggleston, vicepresident; C. B. Stratton, secretary, and 
Mrs. Lucy Wilson, treasurer. The purpose 
of the enterprise is to conduct a wholesale 
and retail business. 
Out of a class of 29 graduates from the 
colored Derrick Business School, Philadelphia, Pa., 15 have been placed in positions 
with both races and several have returned 
South for employment. 
The Standard Life Insurance Company, 
of Atlanta, Ga., has $19,864,650 worth of 
insurance in force, an increase of $6,135,481 
over the year 1919. New business during 
1920 amounted to $13,335,500. Its admitted 
assets are $1,093,918 with a net reserve of 
$892,728. Heman C. Perry is the president. 
Harrison Collins, a Negro at St. Louis, 
Mo., has been appointed Assistant Superintendent of the Street Cleaning Department 
in charge of ash collections. 
George White, a Negro letter carrier at 
Atlanta, Ga., has been retired after 40 years 
service. A testimonial reception was given 
him. 
J. H. Bishop, a Negro manufacturer of 
hair preparations at Baltimore, Md., employs 14 people and last year did a business of $45,000. 
Richard Green, of Washington, D. C , 
has acted as Chief Messenger for 20 Treasury Department heads during 50 years service. Senator Glass and other government 
officials have tendered him a celebration and 
presented him with a gold watch. 
William F. Phillips, a Negro assistant 
warrant clerk at Philadelphia, Pa., since 
JOSEPH A. GILBER T (left) AN D JESSE MER ­
CHANT , CHEMISTS TO TH E U. S. PROHIBITIO N 
AGEN T A T CHICAGO 
1906, has been promoted to the position of 
bookkeeper in the purchasing agent's office; 
his salary has been raised from $1,200 a 
year to $1,700 a year. Mayor Moore's comment is: "This is simply a recognition of 
the services of a man who has been competent and faithful. His appointment is in 
the nature of a promotion which he had 
earned." 
The resources of the Charleston Mutual 
Savings Bank, in South Carolina, are $120,-
000 after 10 months- of business. Edward 
T. Edwards is president. 
. James E. Herndon, a Negro retail produce dealer at Baltimore, Md., does an annual business of $40,000 and employs 6 assistants. 
The Fraternal Bank and Trust Company, 
of Durham, N. C , reports resources of $138,-
105 divided as follows: Loans and securities, 
$92,664; real estate, furniture and fixtures, 
$10,598; cash on hand and net amount due 
from banks, $34,843. Mr. W. S. Pearson is 
president. 
A t Pittsburgh, Pa., George W. Walker 
has made a record in lath driving—in 4% 
hours he drove 2,250 laths. The average 
rate is 2,500-3,000 a day. In 50 seconds Mr. 
Walker drove 60 nails. 
The Fraternal Bank and Trust Company, 274 THE CRISIS 
organized in 1912 at Fort Worth, Tex., reports resources of $306,738. The president 
is Thomas Mason; vice-president, H. W. 
Hightower; cashier, William M. McDonald. 
Nine months ago the Universal Development and Loan Company, of Washington, 
D. C , purchased 65 acres of land, paying 
$20,000 cash; a first trust of $12,500 has 
since been paid, and the trust released. The 
company is chartered for $100,000 and contemplates the operation of a coal, wood and 
lumber yard, an ice plant, a general building 
material warehouse and a sub-division of 
homes to be known as "Universal Heights". 
The president of the company is Charles 
E. Lane. 
In listing 110 Negro enterprises selected 
from advertising columns of leading newspapers, Charles E. Hall finds an aggregate 
capitalization of thirty million dollars. The 
enterprises are amusement parks; bakeries; 
banking, bonding, realty, investment, publishing, steamship, coal mining, stove, furniture, fire and life insurance companies; 
broom, casket, ice and clothing factories; 
building and loan associations; chain drug 
stores; chemical laboratories; co-operative 
grocery and department stores; finance and 
hotel and housing corporations; steam laundries; theatres; and wholesale commission 
houses. 
POLITICS 
. LUL U M. SIMS, a colored woman 
in Chicago, has filed her petition as a 
candidate for alderman. 
C Of 172 candidates for deputy city marshal at St. Louis, Mo., among the 115 who 
passed the examination was a colored 
woman, Miss Sadie North. 
CRIME 
T"HE following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Port Allen, La., February 1, George Werner; shooting. 
Monroe, La., February 6, unidentified 
white man, burned; unknown. 
Wauchula, Fla., February 10, Ben Campbell, shot; attempting to attack a woman. 
Ocala, Fla., February 12, unknown Negro; 
assaulting woman. 
Odena, Ala., February 12, unknown Negro ; murder. 
Athens, Ga., February 16, John Lee Eberhardt, burned; murder. 
Talbotton, Ga., February 17, Samuel 
Williams; unknown. 
Sheriff T. A. Grant, of Ouchita Parish, 
La., "forgot " to hang Loonie Eaton, a 
Negro convicted of murder, on February 
4, and has inquired of Governor Parker 
as to what steps he shou'd take. 
G We are informed that Fred Douglass, reported as lynched, September 1, 1920, was 
convicted of murder and hanged by law in 
Dallas, Tex. 
THE CHURCH 
REEVE S MEMORIA L PRESBYTERIA N CHURCH has been organized in 
Philadelphia, in honor of the late Rev. Dr. 
John B. Reeves, who served as a pastor for 
50 years. The church has 50 charter members. 
Under the rectorship of the Rev. Junius 
L. Taylor, St. Philip's Church in Richmond, 
Va., has become self-supporting. It is the 
first Negro congregation in the Diocesan 
Missionary Society to reach this state. 
Salem Baptist Church, Fall River, Mass., 
with a membership of 59 in a rally raised 
$3,500. The pastor is the Rev. L. G. 
Nichols. 
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE 
r
T""HROUGH efforts of local Urban 
Leagues, universities in Boston, Chicago 
and Columbus, during the past year, conducted courses of lectures on "Rac e Relations" and made studies of living conditions 
among colored people. In Columbus a survey on housing was made by a graduate 
student of the Department of Sociology of 
Ohio State University. Investigations into 
the causes of delinquency and truancy were 
made under the direction of the League. 
Following a survey of living conditions 
in Louisville, Elmer A. Carter, as Executive 
Secretary of the Louisville Urban League, 
made successful application for its admission into the Community Welfare League 
which finances approved charities and social 
agencies. 
The "Neighborhood Department" of the 
St. Louis Urban League, which has for its 
object the reduction of juvenile delinquency, 
is using the public schools; L'Ouverture, 
Simmons and Dessalines Schools have secured permits to conduct classes in plain 
sewing, fancy needlework, beading and folk 
dancing for neighborhood groups. Volunteer workers carry on these activities. The 
St. Louis League employs six workers, including a dentist for school children. 
Mr. A. B. Nutt, of the Milwaukee Urban 
League, is covering a much needed field of THE HORIZON 275 
athletics for boys. He has three teams 
which are members of the Municipal League 
and are playing two to three games each 
week. Within the same group he has developed a dramatic club among the younger 
boys which has presented a health play so 
well that it has been repeated three times. 
The Kansas City Community Service 
Urban League reports the industrial situation to be very grave, with 200 men applying 
for every available job. Mid-day entertainments to keep up the morale of the unemployed have been provided through the 
help of the public schools which have furnished the talent. Colored home owners at 
the League's solicitation have assisted by 
providing odd jobs for the unemployed. 
Sixty-eight visits were made last month 
by Alverta M. Phillips, case worker for the 
New Jersey Urban League, in Newark, on 
the problems of family rehabilitation, in 
which the League co-operates with private 
and public social agencies. 
The Educational Committee of the National Urban League, in New York City, is 
receiving applications for the 1921-1922 social service fellowships, at least five of which 
are to be awarded in social service schools 
in New York, Chicago, Boston and Philadelphia. 
. The New Yor k Urban League has organized for the American Social Hygiene Association a class in Social Hygiene, numbering 
75 men and women social workers. The 
course extends over a period of six weeks. 
FRATERNITIES 
TH E 45th annual session of Free, Ancient 
and Accepted Masons, Yor k Rite, has 
been held at Houston, Tex. The Grand 
Master, Mr. B. R. Adams, of Jasper, Tex., 
noted two pioneer Grand Masters of 25 years 
standing—Drs. W. H. Jackson and A. H. 
Hughes—and Walter Scott, who has been 
Grand Treasurer for 16 years. The Lodge 
has a temple which cost $12,550. 
Most Worshipful Hiram Grand Lodge of 
Masons of Delaware has held its 71st annual 
session. John L. Hubert, of Wilmington, is 
Grand Master. 
Royal Knights of King David, of Durham, 
N. C , has a membership of 26,000 in 5 
states. The fraternity was organized in 
1888. It owns a 3-story modern building. 
PERSONAL 
HENR Y E. CUNEY , the noted colored 
politician, has died in Washington, D. 
., at the age of 64. He is the brother of 
the late Norris Wright Cuney, also of political fame. 
Mrs. M. E. Harris, wife of the late 
Bishop C. R. Harris, of the A. M. E. 
Church, is dead at Atlanta, Ga. She was 
the first matron of Livingstone College. 
Death has claimed Dr. W. T. Fuller at 
Suffolk, Va . He had been a practising physician for 20 years and served as president 
of the Phoenix Bank. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
TH E Governor of Wisconsin has appointed the Rev. Francis J. Peterson as a 
Negro representative at the Industrial and 
Commercial Exposition to be held in St. 
Louis, Mo., in 1923. 
Howard P. Carter, a Negro, has been appointed probation officer for Harris County, 
Texas. 
. A feature of the delinquent tax sales at 
Lexington, Ky., is that in the third, fifth, 
sixth and eighth magisterial districts, all 
Negro property owners paid their taxes; 
only 4 lots owned by Negroes were sold in 
the seventh district, and these because the 
owners were dead or the estate was in dispute. 
Mayor Babcock, of Pittsburgh, Pa., has 
re-appointed Attorney Robert L. Vann, a 
Negro, to the City Law Department. Mr. 
Vann will have charge of litigation affecting 
city properties and serve as counsel for the 
Department of Public Safety. His salary is 
$4,250 per year. 
The City Council of Chicago has voted to 
change the name of Forest Avenue to Giles 
Avenue, in honor of Lieutenant George 
Giles, of the 8th Illinois Regiment, who died 
in France. 
Attorney L. W. Johnson has been appointed Assistant Prosecuting Attorney of 
Wyandotte County, Kan. Mr. Johnson is a 
Negro attorney who has practised law in 
Kansas City for the last 20 years. 
(I Among public improvements at Okmulgee, Okla., during the present year is the 
erection of a Negro hospital at a cost of 
$50,000. 
Twenty-eight Negroes and one white person have been killed by a tornado at Oconee, 
Ga. Property loss is fixed at $500,000; 65 
Negro homes were totally wrecked. 
(I Four Negroes at Springfield, Mass., have 
filed suits for $400 each against John Hall, 
a Negro barber, for discriminating against 
them because of his white trade. 
The legislature has passed the bill for 276 THE CRISIS 
an appropriation of $300,000 for the construction and equipment of a Negro tuberculosis hospital in Texas. 
A complimentary dinner has been given 
in honor of Dr. Charles E. Bentley, the Negro dentist of Chicago. Since 1888 Dr. 
Bentley has had published 31 articles and 
more than 50 papers on dentistry. He is an 
honorary member of the Wisconsin State 
Dental Society, the Freeman Dental Society, 
Washington, D. C ; a member of the National Dental Association, Chicago Dental 
Society, Northern Illinois Dental Society; 
and a life member of the Illinois State Dental 
Society. 
In 1866, Negroes owned 12,000 houses, operated 20,000 farms, conducted 2,100 business enterprises, and had $20,000,000. During the following 50 years the number of 
houses had increased to 600,000, the farms 
to 981,000, the business enterprises to 45,-
000 and the wealth to $1,110,000,000, with 
the addition of 70 banks and 400 periodicals. 
A Haitian mission has arrived in the 
United States. It consists of Stenio Vincent, ex-Minister of the Interior of Haiti, 
and Pauleus Sannon, ex-Haitian Minister 
to the United States. Messrs. Vincent and 
Sannon say: "W e are sent here by the 
Patriotic Union, a national Haitian organization, with branches in every town of the 
Haitian Republic, to acquaint the American 
people with the truth about conditions in 
Haiti, to make known Haitian aspirations 
for independence and to enlist American cooperation in realizing those aspirations." 
Lucile E. Miller, a colored visiting nurse, 
has inaugurated a health exhibit at Public 
School 14, New York City. Sixteen hundred 
school-children attended within the first two 
days. 
Thomas Millard Henry, a Negro in New 
York, has been giving readings from his 
poems at the Y. M. C. A. and the Public 
Library. 
City Hospital No. 2, at St. Louis, Mo., is 
a 6-story fireproof building, which was purchased by the city for Negroes at a cost 
of $87,000. The hospital was opened in 
1919. It has a visiting staff of 24 physicians, a house staff of 8 junior and 2 senior 
internes, a resident physician, a resident 
surgeon, 14 graduate nurses, who are paid 
from $90-100 per month, and provision for 
30 pupil nurses, who are paid from $15-25 
per month. The manager of the institution 
is Dr. Robert C. Haskell. 
BRAZIL 
DO YO U WAN T 
LIBERTY AND WEALTH 
IN A LANB OF PLENTY? 
UNLIMITE D OPPORTUNIT Y AN D 
EQUALITY ? 
Then Buy 
Land in Brazil 
Kindly Send 25c in Stamps for Our 
Booklet 
BRAZILIAN AMERICAN 
COLONIZATION SYNDICATE 
American Office S5J9J4 South State Street, 
Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH I CRISIS . 
DARKWATER 
O R 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
Dr. DuBois' new book is the sensation of 
the day; selling like "wild fire." It contains 
a good picture of Dr. DuBois Price only 
$2.25. Order today. Satisfaction guaranteed 
or money refunded. AGENT S WANTED ; 
send 50 cts. for outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
BOOK AND BIBLE PUBLISHERS 
Catalog Free 
523 9th St. N. W. , Washington, D. C. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 277 
STORAG E BATTER Y REPAIRIN G 
has been added to the Course in 
AUT O MECHANIC S 
At The Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College 
which has turned out more 
ENGINE REPAIRMEN, TRACTOR OPERATORS, CHAUFFEURS, 
MECHANICS & AUTO ELECTRICIANS and VULCANIZERS 
than any other Automobile School for Negroes 
ADDRES S : Division of Mechanic Arts, Prairie View, Tex. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 1227 S. 17th Street. THE CHILDREN'S 
Philadelphia, Pa. BUSINESS CLASS 
Why not study an efficient system of shorthand that la as easy for children to learn as adults. The C. B. O. of the Stenographers' Institute Is composed of children ranjrlnff In asea from 10 to 16 years. They won three medals In a Blindfolded 
Typewriting Contest last year; Evelyn Cook and Ella Houston, accuracy and merit; Inez Holland wrote 80 words per minute. 
Thirty-two of them are now studying Primary Shorthand {monn-syllabled words). Elementary Bookkeeping and Touch Typewriting. They meet for recitation every Saturday afternoon until publio school closes. During the summer they will attend 
5 days par WEEK. 
ADULT CLASSES: There are more than 200 adult students on roll studying. 
SHORTHAND TYPEWRITING BOOKKEEPING COMMERCIAL LAW 
Spring term opens April 4th and Summer term June 1st 
Our certificated Stenographers are sought by Institutions of learning, T. M. C. A's and Colleges and Business Men In several 
states of the Union are asking for them. Address THE STENOGRAPHERS* INSTITUTE 
P. 0. Box 3859, Phila., Pa., Edward T. Duncan, President 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location. 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. 
The only school of its kind in historic Northern 
Virginia. 
State standard Four-Tear High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade 
Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepares boys and girls to 
become useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For information address 
EDWARD D. HOWE, Principal 
$2 0 t o $3 0 Pe r Wee k 
being made selling our new book "Progress 
and Achievements of the Colored People" by 
Prof. Kelly Miller, showing the wonderful 
doings and new opportunities of our race. 
Low prices, many pictures; lightning seller. 
Send 25c for agents' outfit today. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S Co., 9th St, Washington, D. C. 
WANTE D 
Agents for THE CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
WILL HELP YO N GET • BETTER PAYING POSITION. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TEEK 1 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
BO X 22 , WILBERFORCE, O . 
IMPROVE YOURSELF I 
HELP OTHERS! 
Easy, pleasant, dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 50c in 
stamps for membership, supplies, et c 
NATIONAL LITERARY ASSOCIATION 
123 0 TOD ST. N . W , WASH., D . C . 
STUDENTS ! ATTENTION ! 
W e assist in preparing material for special articles, papers, manuscripts, essays and 
orations. Proficient literary service. 
JOH N A. MARTIN , Secretary 
2220 Sixth St., N. W., Washington D. C. 
NEW YORK SCHOOL OF CHIROPRACTIC 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
A recognized institution for Chiropractic (KI-RO-PRAK-TIK) training offering a strictly 
residential course leading to degree of D. C. (Doctor of Chiropractic). 
Chiropractic, the world's foremost drugless healing science, is daily increasing in popularity because of the astounding results obtained in almost every human ailment. An unsurpassed opportunity is offered young men and women of character and ability. 
Tie school is well located and well equipped. The faculty is made up of men well known 
and recognized in the profession as capable practitioners and teachers. 
WRITE FOR PROSPECTUS 
DR. J. FREEMAN OTTO 
Registrar 
GERTRUDE MILLER-FAIDE 
Secretary 
240 W . 138th STREET, NEW YORK , N. Y . 
MENTION Thi Ciisis. 278 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The SOUTHERN AI D SOCIETY OF VA., INC., notes with a high regard the 
timely and insistent demand of our people for Facts and Figures from corporations 
and institutions appealing to them for patronage and investment. The Southern Aid 
Society of Va., Inc., has annually published full and accurate statements of its Income 
and Disbursements, as well as its Assets and Liabilities: And it has given wide distribution of this matter to its membership and the public. This was done despite the 
criticism of competitors and other uninformed persons: who said that, "since our people 
were not up on financial matters, the time and money spent in preparing and publishing 
such information was simply a waste of efforts and good money." But the Southern 
Aid management knew that the race was making rapid strides of advancement in 
education, business and finance, and would, therefore, soon be alive to such matters. 
Today's "Show Me" spirit of our people compensates us for our efforts and convinces 
the critics that the people now demand more than Names and Promises as inducements 
for their support or investment. Therefore the Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., 
takes great pleasure in spreading before the public its 27th Annual Financial Statement 
for consideration. 
RECEIPT S 
Jan. 1, 1980, Cash Balance Brought Forward $145,076.94 
Dec. 81, 1920, Annual Income 712,647.58 
Gross Receipts for 1920 $857,724.52 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec. 31, 1920, Total Paid Out (Including investments made during the year) $759,036.35 
Cash Balance, Dec. 31, 1920 $98,688.17 
ASSETS LIABILITIE S 
Cash Balance $ 98,688.17 Capital Stock $ 30,000.00 
Real Est. (Free of all Liens) 803,252.67 Deposits of Employees 16,203.89 
Real Estate Mortgages 71,599.60 Ledger Accounts 10,488.00 
Federal, State and City Bonds 62,838.00 
Furniture and Fixtures 7,000.00 SURPLU S FUN D 493,046 57 
Bills Receivable 1,358.15 
Inventories, Sundry Accts 4,001.87 
Total $548,738.46 Total $548,738.46 
CAPITA L AN D SURPLU S $ 523,046.57 
Total Amount of Claims Paid to December 31, 1920 $2,170,734.86 
The above verified record of great achievement does not satisfy us: We are therefore planning for greater growth thru better and larger service to our policyholders in 
the hours of sickness, accidents and death: In opening more avenues of employment 
to more of our people: And by supporting and co-operating with other Race Enterprises. 
The unstinted and liberal support of our policyholders has made it possible for us 
to attain this splendid position in finance: Therefore the conservation of their best 
interests' shall always receive our first consideration. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second St., Richmond, Va. 
District Offices and Agencies throughout the State of Virginia 
Write for your copy of the 2/th Annual Statement. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
27th ANNUAL STATEMENT OF SOUTHERN 
AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. (Condensed) THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 279 
Soothing, the after-smart of sh
" - — " 
Madam C J. Wkers 
Witch Hazel Jelly 
A sharp razor and good lather are not enough 
to prevent a tingling smartness after the 
morning shave. 
An application of Madam Walker's Witch 
Hazel Jelly soothes the skin, prevents chap and 
assures comfort after shaving. 
35 centi of Agents and Druggists 
Made by the Mme.C.J.Walker Mfg. Co., 
640NorthWest St., Indianapolis, Ind 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 280 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MISS MADELINE ALLISON 
SHOPPER 
Through a special concession, 
which saves you two profits, 
I am able to send you this 
skirt by prepaid delivery for 
only $4.98. 
The material is double warp all wool 
navy serge. It is a tailored model 
—with two French pockets, a wide 
all around belt of the material, and 
braid and button trimmings. It 
has a side plaquet and a deep hem. 
Waist sizes — 23 to 32 inches. 
Lengths —34 to 41 inches. 
This is an exceptional bargain. Order early! 
Room 622,70 Fifth Avenue - NEW YORK, N. Y. 
(Refers by permission to the Editor of the Crisis.) 
LIVE IN NEW YORK 
The Queens Apartment House Association is a corporation organized 
under the laws of the State of New York. The object of the corporation 
is to build homes and apartment houses in Corona, New York City. 
Corona is a beautiful suburban section of Ne w York City; beautiful 
homes, good schools and a delightful church life. It is in easy reach of 
all parts of the city and 18 minutes from the business center of the city. 
One of the best investments that can be made is in New York City Real 
Estate. Thousands of homes needed and every apartment could be 
rented at once. 
INVESTIGATE 
Queens Apartment House Association 
46 East Jackson Ave. Corona, N. Y. City. 
Mention TB I CEIIII . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 281 
YOU MUST ACT QUICKLY IF YOU WANT 
TO SECURE LOTS IN BEAUTIFUL ORCHARDVILLE, UNDER OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 
FOR ON VERY 
ONLY 56$ EASY TERMS 
No w tha t business is pickin g u p again , ther e i.> 
goin g t o b e a GREATE R DEMAN D FO R 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S tha n eve r befor e hecaus e peopl e wh o hav e delaye d buyin g wil l no w 
carr y ou t thei r plan s t o secur e Orchardvill e lots 
BEFOR E THE Y AR E AL L SOLD . Onl y a 
VER Y LIMITE D NUMBE R ar e left whic h wil l 
b e sol d unde r ou r attractiv e developmen t plan , 
an d it is importan t tha t all thos e wh o wis h t o 
secur e lots AC T QUICKLY . 
Th e lots ar e siz e 3 0 x 14 4 Fee t an d eac h on e 
wil l hav e FIV E FRUI T TREE S o n it an d on e 
BEAUTIFU L SHAD E TREE , whic h w e will tak e 
car e o f fo r FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A 
COST . 
Th e lots ar e sol d unde r a MONE Y BAC K GUA R 
ANTE E an d th e TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . It is conveye d b y Warrant y Dee d with ­
out extr a cost. Th e term s ar e onl y $6.0 0 dow n 
an d $3.0 0 a mont h pe r lot . Smalle r term s pe r 
lot whe n mor e tha n on e ar e purchased . N O 
INTEREST . 
D o no t pass this offer b y withou t first gettin g all 
th e details. W e hav e a beautifu l bookle t tha t 
contain s all th e particular s of this offe r an d a 
numbe r of excellen t scenes; als o on e tha t contain s 
severa l letter s fro m peopl e wh o hav e bee n to 
Orchardville , a s well a s othe r interestin g infor ­
mation . Thes e booklets ar e wort h reading . Ail 
yo u nee d d o in orde r t o receiv e the m is t o writ e 
you r nam e an d address on ttte coupo n attache d 
belo w an d mai l it t o u s RIGH T AWAY . Trubooklets will be sen t to yo u by retur n mail . 
DON' T DELA Y THI S BECAUS E TH E LOT S 
AR E GOIN G FAS T AN D TH E SUPPL Y I S 
GROWIN G SMALLE R EVER Y DAY . Sen d 
th e coupo n RIGH T NOW . 
ADDRES S 
Arenson Realty Development Corporation 
19 S. La Salle Street -:- -:- CHICAGO, ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSO N REAI/T Y DEVPT . C0 3 >. 1 
I Chicago , 111. | 
1
 Dat e 192 1 
Gentlemen: — 
I a m intereste d i n you r Orchardvill e offe r an d woul d lik e t o receiv e a cop y of eac h of ' 
I you r booklet s withou t an y obligatio n t o me . 
| Nam e i 
| Addres s 
] Tow n Stat e I 
CHI-4-2 1 | 
Mentio n TJ' « CRISIS . 282 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MADE TO MEASURE 
$13.50 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $13.50. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
make you a suit for $13.50, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
save 50% on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantitie s and hav e such a perfec t organization tha t w e can mak e thes e wonderful prices—and 
remembe r w e guarante e style , fit and workmanship or 
irnnr mnnoir hop!/-
You Save $8 to
 $ | | 
This suit for $13.50 clearly prove s our supremac y in the tailoring field. W e offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell || » p I A It*l 
youaboutthem . We would rathe r you did Dig OoltiPIS UUTTll lllt t 
not send us any mone y until w e send our " " 
Writ e us today and w e will mail you absolutel y FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city style s and designs, also man y larg e 
size cloth sample s to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the excep ­
tional value s w e ar e offering this year . Don't delay; w e urg e you to ac t quick; today ! 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 606, CHICAGO THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 28.1 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"Sh e combine s an excellen t voic e wit h artisti c finis h of th e mos t matur e kind . He r singin g prove d a s 
charmin g a s anythin g th e concer t program s will offci 
this season."—Detroi t Daily News. 
GEOEG E LACY , Manager , 
15 6 Hamilto n Avenu e Columbus . Ohi o 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 MoKpingtide 
17 4 W . 136t h StrM t No w York , N . Y . 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduat e o f Institut e o f Muiica l Ar t 
Organist-Directo r o f Musi c o f S t Mark s M . £ 
Church ; Concer t Accompanist ; Piano , Voice , 
Theory , Instruction , Conducting , Coaching . 
Harmon y taugh t fro m beginnin g t o com ­
pletion . Privat e o r correspondence . 
Geothiu s system . 
Studio : 25 0 W . 138t h St. , Ne w York , N . Y . 
Telephon e Mornings.d e 1708 . 
A MONE Y GETTE R because It Is A CROW D GETTE R 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
erenlng of SI da-Splitting Fun , should hare 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment In one act; full of wit 
tod good humor. Scores of churches hare cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Nigh t PRICE , BOi. 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Author 
Lincoln Height*. Washington. D . C 
AGENT S EAR N $75.0 0 A WEE K 
Selling our Enlarged Photo Me ­
dallions, Photo Cuff Button, 
Photo LockeLa, Photo Watch 
Charms, Photo Breast Pins, 
Photo Clocks and 
Life Size Por ­
trai t (16 z 20). 
We copy from 
an y Photograph 
and Saturn Your 
Original Photo. 
Agents' Enlarged 
Sample s GOc. 
Negro Books. Picture s and Post 
Cards. Prompt Shipments. 100H 
Agents and Dealers Wanted. Free Catalog. Bethel Art 
Co., 97 South St , Jamaica. N. Y. 
Genuin e Blue-Bel l $2.29 
Chambray Shirts 
toda y sure . Greates t shir t offe r eve r made . 3 fine heav y Bui e 
Chambra y shirts fo r wor k an d Bemi-dress gu<drantee d fas t colo r an d wort h $1.50 each , onl y $2.29. 
AND fHIADAUTEE If
 vo u
 ca n matc h thes e 
UU n UUAnANICC 3 wonderfu l shirts fo r 
less tha n $4.50, an d d o no t thin k yo u hav e save d 
at least $2.50, retur n at our expense . Don't pay hig h 
retail prices. Orde r today sure, befor e it ie to o late. 
W E PAY DELIVER Y OHARGE S TO YOU R DOOR, 
anothe r bi g saving. All 3 shirts $2.29 . Giv e neck size . 
BERNARD-HEWITT & COMPANY 
Des k F 91 Q W. Van Bure n St. , CHICAGO 
CROCHET BEADING TAUGHT 
BY MAIL—ALL BRANCHES $5 
Learn at Home How to do Crochet Beading f orreetly and Speedily on DRESSES, WAISTS. BAGS, 
HATS, SLIPPEBS , ETC,, Willi nil kinds i.f Beads. 
Bugles, Spangles, Fringes, Twists, Loops, Etc. 
Tho only Aotliorif ative Correspondence Courses on 
Crochet Beading ever published. Contains 21 illustrated chans with detailed explanations bv Mme. 
Bertha La Mers, International Art Needlework Authority. 
ALSO 10-day TRADE COURSE AT SCHOOL $7 50. 
WORK Gl'ARANTEED WHEN YOU FINISH 
SCHOOL COURSE. 
Classes in all branches of Art Needlework. Art Embroidery, Perforating, and Stamping, at the Studio. 
MME. B. LA MER S LA MERS STUDIO 
34S WES T 58t h ST. , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
TELEPHONE COLUMBUS 617 
TWO GREAT BOOKS for $2.50 
NO LIBRARY COMPLETE WITHOUT THEM 
(1 ) Th e Histor y o f th e Negr o Kac e an d Negr o Soldier s i n th e 
Spanish-America n War , Datin g Bac k t o Egyp t an d th e 
Pharoas—40 0 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alon e fo r 
$1.26.) Wa s adopte d a s a textboo k b y Nort h Carolin a 
Stat e Boar d o f Education . 
(2 ) Th e Pictoria l Histor y o f th e Negr o i n th e Grea t Worl d 
War , givin g a brillian t historica l sketch , a descriptio n o f 
battl e eceue s by Colone l Haywood , of th e Fightin g Fifteent h Ne w York , Capt. Marshall , Sergean t Steptoe , Ralp h 
Tyle r an d others, wit h 16 0 excellen t picture s o f officer s 
an d me n an d wa r views. (Sells alon e fo r $-2.00.) 
Joi t Think , onl y $2.5 0 fo r thes e tw o grea t books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESS i E . A . JOHNSON , 1 7 Wo t 132n d Street , Ne w York , N.Y . 
Mentio n Ta i Caian . 284 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"The Newspape r of the Hour " 
Ne w Yor k Dispatc h 
Featuring— 
Less Crime 
Less Scandal 
MORE SUBSTANTIAL NEWS—Beter Written 
Also— 
Fearless Editorials 
A Woman's Page 
Live Sporting and 
Theatrical News 
SAMPLE COPY FREE 
Subscription: $1.50 pe r Year 
NEW YORK DISPATCH 
21 W . 134th Street, Ne w York, N . Y. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE 
CROCHET BEADIN G TAUGH T $5 
Wor k guarantee d t o all learner s afte r completin g instruction . 
Lear n Direc t Fro m Big- Manufacture r 
We need 200 Learners immediately.. 
Call all week. 
PARISIAN CROCHET BEADERS 
340-34 2 Wes t 42n d Stree t Ne w York , N . Y . 
Prices 
Slashe d 
Men' s o r 
Women' s 
Sweater 
Bargain 
Thi s extr a fine 
qualit y heav y 
weigh t wo ­
men' s sweat ­
e r is no w offere d a t less 
tha n pre-wa r 
prices . 
SEN D N O 
MONE Y 
Send your n*.tne and 
address, giving size 
and color wanted, 
and w e will send 
you sweate r by mail 
postpaid. On delivery, pay mailman: 
our low bargar n 
pric e of $2.69. 
Your money back if $06 9 PAY WHEN 
not pleased, DELIVERED 
Sweate r is made 
of high grade yarn, large shawl collar, tw o knitted-in 
pockets, and broad, loose, detachable belt. Colors, 
fjra y or Blue. Sizes 32 to 46. Why pay more for 
a sweater when you can ge t this guaranteed bargain 
for only $2.69? Men's sweater ] come s without belt. 
Order one or more of these bargain sweater s now. 
Women's sweater . No. 191B530. 
Men's sweater , . No. 191B921. (29) 
THE HOWARD-LUX COMPANY 
Dept. 191 319 Lakeside Ave., Cleveland, Ohio 
BE A LAND OWNER! 
Enjo y tha t proud , self-satisfie d an d independ ­
en t feeling - tha t come s wit h th e ownershi p 
o f a fine countr y estate . Inves t you r sav ­
ing s wher e the y wil l h e saf e an d wher e 
the y ca n som e da y ear n yo u maximu m re ­
turns . Ge t awa y fro m th e turmoi l o f th e 
city , th e lay-offs, strikes , congestion , hig h 
cos t o f living-, etc . I f yo u ac t QUICKL Y yo u 
ca n secur e a Woodvill e countr y estat e con ­
sistin g o f 10, 20 o r 40 acre s i n a fine loca ­
tio n i n Michigan , o n ver y eas y terms , 
FOR ONLY $32 .50 PER ACRE 
FRE E TOW N LO T wit h eac h 10 acr e tract , 
als o a SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUN T 
t o thos e wh o ac t A T ONCE . Th e trac t i s 
wel l located , RIGH T O N A RAILROAD , wit h 
th e statio n righ t there . Th e lan d is hig h 
an d dr y an d sol d unde r a MONE Y BAC K 
GUARANTEE . Th e TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . Sen d fo r ou r BEAUTIFU L BOOK ­
LE T an d ge t al l th e detail s o f thi s offe r 
withou t an y ohligato n t o you . I t contain s 
a grea t man y goo d view s o f th e property , 
a s wel l a s interestin g information . Simply , 
as k fo r a WOODVILL E bookle t an d mentio n 
th e Crisis. Writ e you r nam e an d addres s 
plainly . SEN D FO R YOU R COP Y TODA Y 
becaus e th e tract s ar e goin g FAST . Addres s 
ARENS0N REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Sale St Chicago, III. 
A well established Corporation doing a half 
million dollar business yearly, desires the 
services of an intelligent, live-wire man or 
woman to take charge and sell a block of 
stock in a nationally known concern. 
Only those wanting to connect themselves 
with a permanent organization where good 
services are quickly recognized and repaid 
need apply. 
Address Sales Manager 
BERESFORD GALE CORPORATION 
GALE BUILDING 
413 South Broad Philadelphia, Pa. 
Send No Money 
Profit Smashing Bargain — Jus t sen d 
you r name , address, siz e an d colo r fo r 6 
pair s o f thes e handsome , durable,j?enuin e 
Duo-We b sil k socks . Pa y onl y $2.8 0 f o 
si x pair s o n arrival . GUARANTEED 
$6.0 0 VALUE. Wonderfu l quality , 
extr a heav y silk. Elasti c ribbe d top. 
Doubl e to e and. sole , high, spliced, 
heel. Choic e of brown o r black. 
Fast colors. Writ e toda y for 
thisastoundingoffer . Limite d 
Quantity . Onl y 6 pair s 
t o a customer . 
Shippe d deliver y 
charge s oaid. Pa y 
onl y S3.1 9 o n 
arrival . Mone y 
back if yo u ca n 
matc h the m fo r $6.00. 
Dept. 0444 
SMASHING 
OFFER 6 PAIRS SILK SOCKS. Guaranteed 56 value. Don't send • penny. Poy 
BERNARD-HEWITT 8 CO.. 900 W. Van BurerCcflicAGO 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 285 
DOWN GO BADGE PRICES 
LODGES TAKE NOTICE 
BIG REDUCTIONS IN PRICES ON BADGES 
Get our price list for your society and save money. 
In our new and permanent home we have ample equipment to give prompt service. Let this old reliable race 
enterprise serve you whatever your needs. Reductions 
on all regalia. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Sr.. Pres. 
641 W. 9th St., Cincinnati, Ohio 
JOS. L. JONES, JR., Manager. 
SEND NO MONEY 
SMASHIN G SHO E OFFER 
Rus h you r orde r i n this minut e fo r a pai r of 
th e famou s AMERICA N EAGL E Muneon^ last, 
sem i - dresf l an d 
work shoe . Wort h 
86.00 . Now 53.39. 
Made of tan or blafk. genuine chrome leather. Heavy extension 
soles. Special tanning 
process makes them 
Eroof against acids .and 
dlows toncrue manea 
them waterproof. 
W e guarante e t o 
refun d mone y if 
yo u ca n matc h 
the m fo r leaa 
tha n $6.00. 
Guaranteed 8 Honthi' Wear 
Don' t wait. Onl y limite d quantity. . B e rare 
t o ge t yours. Ge t i n o n thi s amazin g oner . 
Stat e siz e an d color . W e pay shippin g charges. 
BERNARD-HEWITT & COMPANY 
Dept CMUa gOO W. Van Buren, CHICAGO 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY, N. J. 
Comfort and Elegance Without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in the 
Hear t of the Most Beautiful Seashor e 
Resor t in the World , 
is replet e wit h ever y moder n improvement , superla ­
tiv e in construction , appointments, servic e an d refined patronage . Orchestr a daily , garage , bath houses; 
tennis, etc, on premises. Specia l attentio n give n to 
ladie s an d children . 
Sen d fo r booklet. Sanitariu m adde d wit h Dr . C. A. 
Lewi s o f th e Universit y of Penn . in attendance . 
FOU R OUTSTANDIN G BOOK S 
ON TH E NEGRO PROBLE M 
The Negro Faces America—Herbert J. Seligmann $1-75 
Darkwater—W. E. K. DuRois 2.25 
The Soul of John Brown—Stephen Graham 3.00 
The Shadow—Marv White Ovington 2.0 0 
Total . .' $9.00 
1 year's subscription to TH E CRISIS 1.50 
TH E CRISI S 
//' taken all in one order. 
7 0 Fifth Avenu e 
. .$9.00 ^ IO -5 o 
NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mentio n 286 THE CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OU R LATES T CATALO G WIL L B E 
MAILE D T O YO U UPO N REQUES T 
W e are positivel y the onl y Manufacturer s of HUMA N HAI R GOOD S wh o 
specializ e and cater direct t o the Colored People . 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bob s and Braids ar e strictly hand -
made—o f the finest qualities of real Huma n Hai r Good s and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME . BAUM , b y the most skillful artists in th e 
trade. 
Try Mme. Baum's Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made 
of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using 
them. 
Mme. Baum's Bob 
gives the appearance of wearing the 
hair bobbed, but 
makes cutting unnecessary. Mad e 
of strictly Supreme 
Quality huma n 
hair, with natural 
waves, sewed on 
Velve t Ribbon, 
fitted with three 
tuck Comb s to 
hold secure. In 
all shades. Price, 
$5.50. 
We carry the largest selection of Hairdressers' Tools and Accessories. 
MME. BAUM'S 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE 
Our Factor y is Locate d a t 
80 FOURT H AVE. NEW YORK , N . Y. 
When writing, mention this paper. 
SEND NO MONEY 
Writ e quic k fo r this amazin g 
underwea r bargain . Onl y 
limite d quantity . Wonderfu l 
qualit y genuin e Frenc h Bal -
brigga n unio n suit. Great ­
est valu e eve r offered . 
Eac h sui t wort h $2.00. 
3
UNION 
SUITS for 
$289 
g Mail postcard or lette r tof day Bure, this very minute , 
for 3 unio n suits, extr a 
,« full cut, shor t winge d 
V sleeves, ankl e length. 
1 neatl y trimme d throughout, 
I very silky in appearance , will 
giv e splendid wear. SEN D 
NO MONEY. Pay onl y $2.89 
on arrival. WE PAY DELIVERY CHARGES, anothe r 
| big saving. 
W E GUARANTE E T O 
REFUN D YOU R MONE Y 
I F YO U CA N MATC H 
THES E 3 WONDERFU L 
UNIO N SUIT S FO R $6.00. 
Orde r this amazin g bar ­
gai n this minut e befor e it 
is to o late . Size s 34 t o 46. 
Jus t giv e name , address, 
an d breast measure . 
BERNARD-HEWITT & CO. 
V J 0144 
900 W. Van Buren SI.,CHICAGO 
Rus h you r orde r i n toda y sure . Genuin e Swoizen e 
shir t material , extr a fine count , ver y hig h luster . 
Lates t effects, mos t beautifu l black , blu e an d 
lavende r stripes. Guarantee d fas t colors, ric h 
looking , wea r bette r tha n silk . Cu t extr a full , 
coa t fron t style , sof t Frenc h turn-bac k cuffs. 
\\T~ Z""1 « l t o refun d your mone y im -
W e laUarante e mediatel y if yo u ca n matc h 
thes e shirts tor less than S6.50. Don' t pay hig h retai l 
priceB. Orde r your s today sure, befor e it is to o late . 
Deliver y charge s paid—anothe r big Bavlng. Sen d n o 
money , all thre e shirtB S3.59 a O. D. Giv e nec k size . 
Bernard-Hewit t & Co . 
Dept. E 0444 90 0 W. Van Buren St., Chicago 
"MAK E YOU R SWEETHEAR T HAPPY " 
Sen d u s a pictur e o f you r relative , sweetheart , o r o f yoursel f an d le t u s pu t 
it on on e of ou r Phot o Pillo w Tops. GUARANTEE D LIKENESS . Thes e Phot o 
Pillo w Top s can be washe d an d irone d withou t injury . Tel l u s you r birth-month , 
l ou r phot o returne d unharmed . 
Specia l price s give n t o clubs, etc. , i n doze n lots. Sen d you r orde r today . 
Don' t wn.it. (Siz e 18 x 18. Blue , Pink , White , Golden-rod. ) Postag e paid . 
SATEEN, $2.24—SILK. $3.49 .
 B " 
29 9 WALNUT STREET TH E TALBER T PRES S BUFFALO, n. t . 
Mention Th e Crisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISE R 287 
WANTED WANTED 
Liv e Agent i A t Onc e T o Sel l 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
fo r furniture , pianos , ohuro h pews , hard ­
woo d floors an d hundred s o f othe r thing s 
tha t hav e a varnishe d surfaoe , Make s the m 
loo k lik e new . Agent s ca n mak e $60.0 0 t o 
175.0 0 pe r wee k sellin g Dudley' s Polis h t o 
furnitur e dealers , dru g stores , hardwar e 
stores , churches , housekeepers , automobil e 
stores , pain t store s an d grocer y stores . 
Specia l Offer : Fo r 9 0 day s w e wil l shi p t o 
al l ne w agent s $10.0 0 wort h o f Dudley' s 
Polis h fo r $5.00 . Tak e advantag e o f thi s 
specia l offe r a t once . 
Dudley & Porter Manufacturing Co. 
li t Sout h Mai n St. , Muskogee , Okla . 
TevTepJaettto, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTIN 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel . 6M 7 For t Hil l Cabl e Address , Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attokki t an d Counsellor-at-La w 
1 4 Schoo l Stree t Boston , Miss . 
"SOME DON'TS" TtfJS. 
nents. " A Programm e fo r Life. " Agent s Wanted . 
Pric e 10 c Tr y th e 5 c an d 10c . stores. A . R. Gillespie , 227 2 East 97t h St. , Cleveland , Ohio . 
Send No Money 
Snap this bargain up right 
now befor e it is too late. 
Onl y limite d quantity . 
Amazin g underwea r bargain. Greatest eve r made. 
UNION $060 
1
 SUITS fo r fc— 
Send postcard or lette r today — this ver y 
minute , forthes e three 
athleti c style , whit e dimit y 
chec k summe r unio n suits, 
cu t full , wel l made , wea r 
splendid . 
Sen d N o Mone y — pa y 
onl y S2.60 C.O.D . on arrival , 
n o more ; We pay delivery 
charges, another big saving. 
W E GUARANTE E 
TO REFUN D YOUR MONEY 
if yo u ca n matc h thes e 
thre e wonderfu l summe r 
unio n suits fo r $4.50. Or ­
de r this amazin g bargai n 
this minut e befor e it is to o 
late . Jus t giv e name , ad ­
dres s an d breast measure . 
BERNARD-HEWITT & CO. 
Dept. G 0444 CHICAGO 
HIGH GRADE AGENTS 
WANTED 
MEN AND WOMEN 
To sell LAN D in tracts of 10 and 20 
acres each at a low price. This is a 
very attractive proposition to purchaser 
and agents and a live-wire worker can 
make BIG money each week by handling 
it. Good commission, excellent selling 
plan, plenty of co-operation, and a reliable firm behind you. 
The conditions in the city have become 
such as to make people realize the desirability of getting out into the country, 
and the demand for tracts of land like 
the kind we offer at Woodville, Michigan, is going to be greater this year 
than ever before. 
If you have a good following and would 
like to earn big money handling this 
offer, send for full particulars A T 
ONCE. Address 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
1 9 S. L a Sall e St. Chicago , 111. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
The moit wonderfully Ideal spot where young ui d 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine Uvea and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game flah of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting I 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries 7 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency f 
Do yo-i enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, / 
progressive people of tbe day—people who do things? * 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to / 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- * 
men to of the time? Surely I / 
Then you will be Interested In, and want to . 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, / 
Michigan. If you act at once you can ~ 
cure a beautiful lot for only $35.00 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will bi 
transferred to you by an absolu** 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resorl 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldj 
So. Dearborn Si. 
Cbicaf*. ID. 
Mentio n T h e C risis. 288 THE CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
NATIONAL CAPITAL CODE OF ETIQUETTE 
Combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PAR T i 
A Book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, 
instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored Society 
leaders on the street; at the Theatre ; at Church; 
in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls. Parties, Weddings, Dinners, &c, &c. The illustrations are so 
perfect and natural that the well bred, correctly 
clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any 
and all occasions; correct dress for men and 
women ; suggestions in colors and materials for the 
ladies; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, &c, for both sexes. 
What to serve your guests at breakfast, lunch or 
dinner. 
Ho w to converse intelligently; how to know when 
to talk and when to remain silent; how to make 
friends and gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member 
of society or the most humble. 
STORIES 
PAR T 2 
A wonderful collection of Short Stories for Young and Old. Stories that 
will hold your attention from start to 
finish. By the most famous colored 
writer of Short Stories in America. 
Storie s o f Adventur e 
Storie s o f Braver y 
Storie s o f Schoo l Day s 
Storie s o f Pluc k 
Storie s o f Succes s 
Storie s o f Grea t Me n 
Stories for Father, Mother or the Children. Funny Stories; Stories that will 
bring the tears to your eyes; Stories 
once started must be finished before 
laying aside the book. Handsomely illustrated—pictures that seem to live 
throughout the story. 
A Book you will want 
Must have in your home 
A most excellent Gift 
Over fifty pages of pleasing pictures taken 
from best photographs. A BIG BOOK, 
containing over 400 pages. The people 
are much pleased with this new publication and are sending thousands of orders 
to us. Order today. We send by insured 
parcel post; return your money if not 
perfectly satisfied. Price. ONL Y $2.50 
cloth; $3 50 half morocc o like picture. 
Write today. 
Illustratin g Tabl e Manner s 
Agents Wanted 
We are looking for 1000 hustlers, men 
and women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 to $9 per day. One agent made 
$21 the first day. Such an opportunity comes but once in a lifetime. 
AGENTS ' SAMPL E showing specimen 
pages and the pictures and covers of book, 
will be mailed to you for 25 cents. Ii 
represents exactly the complete book. 
Send 25 cents for agents' outfit to-day. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
Publishers of the Life and Works of Dunbar, Douglass, Booker T. Washington, 
Kelly Miller and Du Bois. Send for Catalog. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . If I send you a Suit 
made to your measure in the 
1atest style, from choicest 
fabrics, would you be willing to 
keep and wear it, show it to your 
friends and let them see our beautiful samples and dashing new styles? 
Could You Use $10 a Day 
for a Little Spare Time? 
Perhaps I can offer you a steady job. If you will write me a 
letter or a postal at once and say: "Send me your special offer," 
I will send you samples and styles to pick from and my new 
surprising liberal offer. 
Banner Tailoring Co. Dept 927 C
FREE SAMPLE BOOK COUPON 
Banne r Tailorin g Company , Dept . 927 , Chicago , 111. 
Gentlemen: Please send me your big NEW book of Samples and Styles and your 
Special Offer. Everything free and postpaid. 
Name Postoffice 
Street and No. R. F. D Box Stale Nil e Quee n Preparation s 
"FOR HAIR and SKIN" 
Scientifically manufactured to meet your particular beauty requirements 
NILE QUEEN Hair Beautiner 
NILE QUEEN Cold Cream 
NILE QUEEN Vanishing Cream 
NILE QUEEN Liquid Cold Cream 
NILE QUEEN Face Powder 
Pink, Fiesh, White, Brunette and Cream Brown 
30c EACH POSTAGE 5c EXTRA 
The country-wide demand for NIL E QUEE N preparations has become so great that they are on sale at most drug stores and first 
class beauty shops. If your dealer or agent cannot - s _— - 1 — ^ 
supply you, send us his name with your order. mm.m*jbTj 
FREE — Beauty Book ==== = 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO. 
3423 Indiana Avenue Dept. K Chicago, Illinois 