The CRISIS 
Vol . 11—No. 1 NOVEMBER , 1915 Whole No . 61 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y ife ffi PUBLISHER'S CHAT 
THE DECEMBER NUMBER OF TH E CRISIS WILL BE 
CHRISTMA S NUMBE R 
A gem of beauty—literary and artistic—and just in keeping with the aesthetic tastes of 
our discriminating readers. C]f Do you remember our valuable and beautiful 1915 
Calendar? Then you will want to secure early a copy of our 1916 Historical 
and Statistical Calendar—a work of art and a marvel of condensation. <]f Too, 
our Christmas Card will be ready in early December and you will want copies of this 
to announce THE CRISIS as a Christmas Gift to your friends. 
H Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton; 1.5 0 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge ) 1.00 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kell y Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J.W.Cromwell ) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford ) 1.00 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B . D u Bois) 5 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N O F TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . ( Carter < i. Woodson ) 2.0 0 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.50 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booke r T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S or NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (II. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kell y Miller) 1.5 0 
Address TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, Ne w Yor k 
Mention IHE.CMS; ^ * TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE . A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted b y 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOI S 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Content! Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association lor the Advancement o( Colored People 
Contents for November, 1915 
PICTURE S 
COVER . Photograp h fro m Life . B y C . M . Battey . 
ARTICLE S 
Page 
TH E RIS K O F WOMA N SUFFRAG E B y Kell y Mille r 37 
GLIMPSE S OF BRAZI L B y R . W . Merguso n 38 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 13 
OPINION S 17 
EDITORIA L 25 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COL ­
ORE D PEOPL E 33 
LETTER S 44 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta , 
Ga . The courses of study include Hig h 
School, Norma l School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduates of Yale , Harvard , 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-si x years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fal l Term Began September. 1915 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
THE AGRICULTURAL 
TECHNICAL* COLLEGE 
of 
North Carolina 
(Formerl y the A . & M . College ) 
The 226. annual session began 
September 1, 1915. Board, lodging 
and tuition $8.00 per month. Fou r 
year courses leading to trade certificates. Fou r year college courses 
leading to degrees of Bachelor of 
Science in Agricultur e and Bachelor 
of Science in Mechanics. 
For catalog or further information 
Address 
President Dudley, A . & T. College 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinit y School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution i n the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negr o 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St. 
Mary- Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N . 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa . 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educate your children at home under our expert teachers 
Courses for Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Writ e to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard , Yal e and Columbi a 
represented on its faculty ; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negr o life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 3 
The Nationa l Religiou s Trainin g Schoo l 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
R EV . D R . C HARLE S H . P ARKHURST , New Yor k City. 
I T IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
I T IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y . M . C. A . 
and Y . \Y . C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
We . aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
Nationa l Religious Trainin g School Durham, N . C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Fo r teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of Jul y and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE , PHILADELPHIA, PA . 
Fal l Term and Seventeenth Yea r Opened 
Tuesday, October 5th. 1915 
Domestic Art, Industrial Art, Commercial, 
Musi c and English. Excellent opportunity for 
small groups and specialized classes. Age , sex 
or previous training no bar to entrance if applicant has good character. 
Helpfulness our object. Efficiency our aim. 
Evening session. Writ e now. 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , Principal 
1926 South College Avenue Philadelphia. Pa. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Directo r 
of Musi c St. Mark's M . E . Churc h 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmon y o r Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Books? See the Selected List on 
the Inside Front Cover. 
HAZE L 
Th e Story of a Little Colored Gir l 
B y 
Mary White Ovington 
Author of "Half A Man " 
This charming story, which 
has given pleasure to hundreds 
of children—and to grown-ups 
as well—is an appropriate Christmas gift. Well printed and beautifully bound in red and gold. 
Price $1.00 
Postage extra 
W e want good, live agents to handle 
this book and are offering especially 
advantageous terms for the same. 
Address 
TH E CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue Ne w Yor k 
"The White Man's Burden" 
An Unusual Novel 
Woul d you like to read an interesting story of the day when the Negr o 
race will lead civilization? Then read 
The White Man's Burden 
By T. SHIRB Y HODG E 
Published by the Gorham Press, Boston 
PRIC E $1.00. Postage 6 cents 
Can be had at the office of 
TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue 
" I have read this book with interest and recommend it to my friends. It 
has a fine lesson in its breast which is voiced in the concluding lines: 'The 
white man's burden is himself.' " W. E. B. DuBois. 
Mention T H E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
Vo l 11 -No . 1 NOVEMBER, 1915 Whole No. 61 
Along the Color Line 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
MRS. MET A VAU X WARRIC K 
FULLER , the sculptress, of 
Framingham, Mass., has designed a 
beautiful medallion donated to the Equa l 
Suffrage League, as her contribution to 
the suffrage campaign fund. The Even ­
ing Framingham News says: "It beautifully typifies the message of equal suffrage without having any of the limitations of propaganda. The medallion is 
of plaster, finished in ivory or white. 
O n it are three heads in profile—a man, 
a woman and a child—with this motto 
from an old poem: 'Eac h unto each the 
rounded complement.' It will be a thing 
of beauty and a message of truth long 
after the vote is won throughout the 
country." 
([ A n interesting drawing by L . 
Pasternak, designed to serve as an illustration to an essay on Aldridge and 
Taras Shevchenko, has been reproduced 
in the International Studio. O f the 
drawing, "The America n tragedian, 
Aldridge , and Taras Shevchenko, the 
poet of the Ukraine, " it is stated—"The 
national poet of the Ukraine , who was 
also a gifted draughtsman and etcher, 
became acquainted with the America n 
tragedian Aldridg e in 1858 at the house 
of Count Fedor Tolstoi, at that time 
Vice-President of the Academy of Arts 
i n St. Petersburg, and the acquaintance 
thus initiated developed into a warm 
friendship, in spite of the fact that they 
could understand one another only 
through the medium of an interpreter. 
Shevchenko drew a portrait, now in the 
Tretiakoff Gallery in Moscow, and the 
occasion has been reconstituted by L . 
Pasternak in the drawing now reproduced." 
C In an article on "Th e Impress of Personality" in The Musical Quarterly, Mr . 
Percy Grainger, the Australian composer, emphasizes the importance of the 
American Negro's work in music, and 
says of the Ne w Yor k Clef Club : "It is 
more than worth one's while to travel 
across the Atlantic to hear . . . The 
compositions they interpret are art 
music, and reveal the strict harmonic 
habits of the written art, but the ease 
with which those members of the club 
who cannot read musical notation learn 
and remember intricate band and choral 
parts by heart (often singing tenor and 
playing bass) and many individualistic 
and rhapsodical traits in their performances suggest the presence of instincts 
inherited from the days of communal 
improvization. The qualities are nowhere more in evidence than in their exhil
choral numbers by that strangely gifted 
American composer, Wil l Mario n Cook's 
'Rai n Song' and 'Exhortation,' in themselves works of real genius and originalitv t
tion. " 
([ The Riverside Mal e Quartet of 
Boston, Mass., assisted by Mr . W . H . 
Richardson, baritone, was heard at 
Stratham, X . H. , before the Ne w Hamp
early in September. 
([ Mr . Roland Hayes, tenor, of Boston, 
Mass., was presented at a musical held 
by the Lak e Placi d Club at Lake Placid, 
Ne w York , at the close of the summer 
season. Mme . Marcell a Sembrich, who s TH E CRISI S 
was a noted member of the audience, 
commented warmly on the singing of 
Mr . Hayes. 
([ Tw o pictures by Tanner were loaned 
to the Chicago Exposition. There were 
also pictures by young Harper, who died 
just when he attained success, and one 
by the late Miss Moss. 
([ Lyndo n H . Caldwell of Syracuse, 
New York , a concert pianist, is on tour 
in the South. 
([ Ne d Weyburn , who has staged so 
many of the large Broadway shows, is 
said to be the man who introduced ragtime to Broadway, sixteen 
H e tells how he first heard the rhythms, 
when on a vacation down in Alabama 
from an old colored man, who played the 
banjo. He caught the measure by placing a piece of paper over the old man's 
instrument. 
C A number of colored actors are rilling 
engagements in vaudeville houses in 
London, England, with great success. 
([ Mr . Melvill e Charlton has passed the 
associate examination of the America n 
Guil d of Organists, which is authorized 
by the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York . He received his certificate and is authorized to 
affix to his name A . A . G. O. One of 
the examiners was Horatio Parker, 
Doctor of Musi c of Yal e University. 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
THE social club formed by the colored 
A
 printers in the government service 
at Colon, Panama, has celebrated its first 
anniversary. 
C A Better Babies Contest held recently 
in Washington, D. C , brought out many 
fine specimens of babyhood. 
([ Prohibitionists are enlisting the help 
of colored voters in South Carolina to 
carry the state. 
([ The Leonard Street Orphans' Home , 
Atlanta , Georgia, takes care of seventy 
homeless orphans. The asylum needs 
help. Miss Chadwick, with the help of 
the older girls, manages the home. 
([ Man y colored veterans, who are left of 
the soldiers who fought in the Civi l War, 
were in the encampment and review of 
the G . A . R., held recently at Washington, D . C. 
([ Miss Ann a J. Gilmore , a great granddaughter of Tobey Gilmore , a slave and 
revolutionary soldier, suggests that the 
old homestead, built about. 1800 at Raynham, 
a home for the aged. 
([ Mrs. Lillia n H . Childress, the first 
colored graduate of the Librar y Course 
in Butle r College, Indianapolis, Ind., is 
in charge of the Colored Branc h of the 
Evansville , Indiana, Publi c Library . 
([ John Brow n of Dinwiddie , Virginia , 
saved a Bohemian family, at the risk of 
his life, during a severe storm, which destroyed their home. Mr . Brow n brought 
the family to his own home. 
([ Mr . Edwar d A . Abbott of Chattanooga 
missioners of that city that it would be 
a mistake to spend a large sum to acquire property for a park for colored 
people, which could not be kept safe for 
women and little children. The commis
chase. 
([ Rev. Henr y A . Boyd , in his financial 
report of the Negro Baptist Publishing 
House, tells of a business which has 
spent many millions of dollars and published millions of books. 
([ Emancipation Da y was celebrated in 
Spokane, Washington, with many enjoyable ceremonies. In Ne w Yor k Cit y 
there were formal exercises at one of 
the playgrounds in honor of the day. 
([ The Colored Branch of the Louisvill e 
Public Library , Louisville , Kentucky , 
celebrated its tenth anniversary recently. 
([ The Negro children of Jacksonville, 
Florida , wil l have three new graded 
schools and a new high school. This is 
the result of a fight which the colored 
citizens made for a larger share of the 
new school appropriation, 
di n response to action taken by Governor 
Boar d is forbidden to ask future applicants to state color and race and send a 
photograph. 
([ There are six vacancies on the Philad
the city are workin g to place a competent man of the race in one of them. 
C Emmett J. Scott has been in conferenc
Thomas Ince Company, concerning the 
production of a moving picture play. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
PAR T O F COLUMBUS , OHIO' S KNIGHT S O F PYTHIAS , I N PARAD E 
which wil l be the story of the Negro in 
America . This is to be an answer to 
Thomas Dixon's "Birt h of a Nation. " 
C Joshua A . Crawfor d has been elected 
chairman of the ward committee in 
War d Thirteen, Boston, Mass. He has 
also been nominated for the Legislature. 
JT Lincol n Settlement, Brooklyn , New 
York , has been successful in providing 
suitable playground facilities for the 
children of the neighborhood. Unde r 
the direction of Dr. V . Morto n Jones the 
settlement has won many friends. 
fl Since the Boys' Reformatory at Mt . 
Meigs, Alabama , became a state institution, it has been able to serve many boys. 
The chidren receive an industrial training. The colored women of Alab
started the institution. 
C The Negro Yea r Book 1914-15, gives 
a long list of colored people who during 
that time received the Carnegie Meda l 
for heroism. Amon g the number are 
several children. 
C The colored people of Washington, D . 
C , wil l be given model houses, in the 
Elle n Wilso n Memoria l Homes, soon to 
be built in that city. 
C The Colored Citizens' Unio n of 
Orange, Ne w Jersey, is asking the support of the colored voters of that city 
for their candidates. 
C The two "Fellows " named bv the 
Nationa l League on Urba n Conditions 
for this year are Forrester B. Washington and Miss Carrie L . Dukes. They 
will study at the school of Philanthropy 
and Columbi a University, Ne w Yor k 
City, and do social work under the 
supervision of the League. 
C The Woma n Suffrage Party of Ne w 
Yor k Cit y has established headquarters 
in a colored neighborhood in that city. 
C Colored and white people are attending the demonstration of farm work, 
held i n rural districts in Alabama under 
the Smith-Leve r Fund . 
C Several thousand Pythians took part 
in the parade during the eighteenth bien
colored Knights of Pythias in Columbus, 
Ohio. 
MEETING S i i 
AMONG the plans of the Kentucky 
*• Exposition to be given next year 
are a pilgrimage to Lincol n farm, and an 
extended program of Negro music. 
Tennessee. Ohio and Indiana will cooperate with Kentucky in her Emancipation Exposition, 
([ Willia m Monroe Trotter finished an 
extended speaking tour with a lecture 
to a crowded house at Unio n Baptist 
Church, Baltimore, Maryland . 
([ The Washington County Colonial 
School of Marylan d took first prize with 
their exhibit at the recent Richmond 
Exposition. 
([ The Lincol n Jubilee Exposition 
brought to notice the fact that over one 10 TH E CRISI S 
thousand patents have been granted to 
colored inventors i n this country. 
C Majo r R. R. Morto n wit h other members of the Negro Organization Society 
recently made a tour of the counties of 
Northern Virginia , giving talks on 
health, farm economics and education. 
m 
EDUCATIO N 
FOR the session ending June 1915 , 
public school superintendents of 13 3 
counties i n 1 4 states have co-operated 
with the Jeanes Fund . The supervising 
teachers are paid partly by the counties 
and partly by the Jeanes Fund . 
C A free kindergarten is to be started in 
the First Congregational Church, Savannah, Ga . 
I I A night school for colored adults wil l 
be opened in Atlanta , Ga., this fall. 
C John C. Leftwic h has started buildings 
for an industrial school for Indians and 
Negroes, i n Oklahoma . 
C Prof. J- E . K . Aggrey of Livingstone 
College, Salisbury, N . C , a native of 
Africa , did exceptional work at the summer session of Columbi a University, 
Ne w Yor k City. In a thesis which 
treated of customs in Liberia , he told of 
the knowledge of eugenics which West 
Africans have and how well and how 
long they have used it. 
C R. T. Coles, principal of Garrison 
School, Kansas City, Mo. , wil l also take 
charge of Garrison Industrial School, 
opened this fall in that city. 
C The summer normal school for colored 
teachers, held in Ne w Orleans, La. , last 
summer was most successful. It wil l be 
repeated next season. 
C Vocational training will be started in 
the Thomas Durham School in Philadelphia, in January, 1916 . If successful it 
will be introduced into fourteen other 
colored schools in that city. 
C Because the schools in Savannah were 
crowded many children were unable to 
enter this fall. 
C Prof. W . W . Colson after a year's 
study of social science at Columbi a University, Ne w York , goes to Vir
Unio n University, in Richmond. H e will 
devote part of his time to welfare workin the city. 
C W . Rutherford Banks, who has taught 
i n Georgia and Alabama , is now Presiden
M 
ECONOMIC S 
THE Eagl e Coa l Company, composed 
of colored business men of Montg
tions on their property in Fayette county. 
C The St. Pau l Farmers' Conference 
organized and encouraged by St. Pau l 
Norma l and Industrial School had an in ­
teresting session at Lawrenceville , Va . 
C The colored people of both Alabama 
and Mississippi have held state fairs, at 
which their agricultural and mechanical 
progress was shown. 
C A11 workmen on the residence of Mr . 
D . S. S. Goodloe at Jericho Park , near 
Bowie , Maryland , were colored. 
C A new bank to be known as the Sav
M 
PERSONA L 
MR. ROBER T N . WOO D of Ne w 
Yor k City is dead. H e was for 
many years closely identified wit h the 
Democratic party and its politics, 
fi It is reported that Mr . B . T. Washington 
George Hall , of Chicago, and other 
physicians and nurses are in attendance. 
C The writer, John E . Bruce , is one of a 
citizens' committee, appointed to receive 
Governor Whitma n of Ne w York , at the 
Yonkers Da y celebration, i n Yonkers. 
C Dr. Pau l Crosthewaite of Chicago, 
111., has won praise in London , England, 
for his skillful dental work. 
C Mr . Isaac Fishe r of Birmingham, 
Ala. , well known for his articles on farm 
economics, has written a movin g picture 
play, which has been produced by the 
Southern Motio n Pictur e Company. 
C Rev. J. B . F . Shaw, President of 
Meridia n Institute in Mississippi, spoke 
in German before the German Methodist 
Conference in session at St. Joseph, Mo . 
C Edmun d T. Jenkins of Charleston, S. 
C , a student at the Roya l Academy of 
Music . London , England, has done a 
creditable year's work. 
C Private Stewart from Jamaica won a 
race in which five hundred soldiers com-ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
TH E KIN G SEE S STEWAR T START . 
peted at Aldershot, England. The Queen 
of England presented the prize. 
([ Majo r Wilso n R. Ballard and wife 
have reached this country from Africa . 
Majo r Ballard has been an officer in the 
Libraria n constabulary for nearly four 
years. 
([ Thomas J. Bell, after thirteen years 
as secretary of the Y . M . C. A. , Ne w 
Yor k City, has resigned on account of ill 
health. Tames L . Jamison, Jr., will succeed Mr . Bell . 
([ Dr. Willia m H . Creditt has resigned 
as pastor of Cherry Street Baptist 
Church in Philadelphia. 
([ Forme r Senator Joseph B . Forake r is 
dangerously ill in Christ Hospital, Cicin
TH E CHURC H 
THE first bishop of Negro blood on 
the American continent was Right 
Rev. Francisco Jovier de Lun a Victoria , 
the son of a freed slave. H e became 
bishop of the See of Panama i n August, 
1751, remaining here till he was transferred to Peru, nine years later. 
([ Miss Sarah E . Conway, a missionary 
at Cape Mount, Liberia , on a recent visit 
TH E QUEE N GREET S STEWAR T A S VICTOR . 12 TH E CRISI S 
to America , told of the large amount of 
medical work she found to do among 
the natives. 
C St. Paul's Cathedral, Boston, Mass., 
was crowded at the opening session of 
the conference of Churc h Workers 
among Colored People. The other meetings were held i n St. Bartholomew's 
Churc h in Cambridge, Mass. 
FOREIG N 
LAST July, Liberi a celebrated the 
ninety-third anniversary of its 
founding. The event of the memorial 
day ceremonies was an address by Hon . 
Edwi n J. Barclay, whose subject was 
Spiritual Ideals i n the Lif e of a Nation. 
TH E GHETT O 
SENATOR BORA H of Idaho wil l 
continue to oppose a Federal Constitutional Amendment granting Woma 
Suffrage, because such a law wil l raise 
the question of Negro disfranchisement. 
([Because Negroes are rapidly acquiring 
land in Nort h Carolina, a movement is 
on foot to secure an amendment to the 
State Constitution which wil l limit their 
right to buy land. 
([ Fou r colored men who were refused 
service in a restaurant i n Huntington , 
Lon g Island, Ne w Yor k City , have 
brought suit against the owner. 
([ The Central Civi c Betterment League 
of Kansa s City, Mo. , is trying to have 
an ordinance passed which wil l prohibit 
Negro and white schools i n the same 
neighborhood. 
([ Colored men i n Miami , Fla. , may not 
drive automobiles unless they own them. 
This is one of several oppressive measures that have been passed lately i n this 
city, which has a large northern element 
in it. 
([ The Illinois conference of the Meth
resolutions to petition the General Conference for colored bishops to represent 
their people i n the South. 
CRIM E 
IT is reported that Lov e Rud d was 
hanged near Clarkeville , Mo. , for 
threatening white people. 
([ A man named Wilson , captured twice 
by a mob, was lynched near Dresden, 
Term., for a crime against a white 
woman. 
CARNE Y POST, NO. 46, VETERAN S O F FOREIG N SERVIC E O F PITTSBURGH , P A FIRS T 
PRIZ E WINNER S A T TH E NATIONA L CONVENTIO N A T DETROIT . THE Y WER E 
TH E ONL Y COLORE D POS T O N PARADE . CAPTAI N F. R. STEWAR T WA S 
I N COMMAN D i ME N of the MONT H i 
A BANDMASTE R 
WADE H . HAMMON D was born 
* * i n Alabama and graduated at 
the A . and M . College in 1895. H e was 
for some time both musician and tailor 
but finally became bandmaster in the A . 
and M . College and in Western University. In 1909 he entered the regular 
army and was sent at the expense of his 
regiment to the Roya l Militar y School 
of Musi c in London. H e also traveled 
in other countries. H e returned to resume his position as bandmaster of the 
celebrated Nint h Cavalry. 
Last fall the mayor of the city of 
Douglas, Arizona , where the Nint h Cavalry is stationed, presented him in the 
name of the citizens, with a gold medal 
set with diamonds. The medal was in -
scribed "Presented to the chief musician 
Nint h Cavalry Ban d by the citizens of 
Douglas, Arizona , September 14th, 1914. 
Keep step to the music of the Union. " 
A BUSINES S MA N 
THE late Harris Barrett was born in 
•*• Henderson, Kentucky, in 1865 and, 
entered Hampton Institute at the age o f 
seventeen years. The oldest organized 
effort to encourage loan and home-buying among local Negroes was the Peop
Hampton which Mr . Barrett founded 
soon after graduating in 1885. This 
company has loaned half a million dollars t
buying of homes. 
MR . W . H . HAMMON D MR . HARRI S BARRET T 14 TH E CRISI S 
MR . C . F . HEARTMA N 
Mr . Barrett served in the treasurer's 
office almost from the time of his entering Hampton and was cashier from 1907 
until 1913. He was a quiet, accurate 
man, happily married and widely influential. 
A BIBLIOPHIL E 
ONE of our most noted women, and 
the first of her race in Americ a to 
distinguish herself in letters, has been 
rescued from obscurity, and immortalized as it were in a kind of trilogy. W e 
refer to the three distinctive publications 
on the gifted poetess of the Revolution, 
Phillis Wheatley—a Bibliography, a 
book of Broadsides, containing facsimiles of all the various editions of her 
fugutive poems, and her Betters and 
Poems combined. W e who are somewhat backward in recognizing the literary merits of our geniuses, discovered 
and undiscovered, must now, if we have 
any gratitude in us, acknowledge our 
debt to Charles Frederick Heartman, 
late of Brunswick, Germany, a thorough 
and painstaking bibliophile and now a 
resident of New York . 
Mr . Heartman's early training in 
German journalism gave him the opportunity to devote himself to the writing 
of short stories. 
His studies of unfortunate human 
types may have been the reason that 
prompted him to republish Phillis 
Wheatley's poems, and everything extant and obtainable i n print or manuscript concerning this truly remarkable 
woman of the Negro race. Phillis has 
so long be<?n permitted to remain i n obscurity, because of her complexion in 
spite of the fact that she was the first 
woman in Americ a to attain to any distinction as a writer of poetry. 
Mr . Heartman came to the United 
States with a keen knowledge of rare 
and historical books. The Heartman 
Historica l Series, which he issues perio
Phillis Wheatley Series, number to date 
ten issues and cover the field known as 
Americana. Ever y publication in which 
he is interested is privately printed. His 
books are for the few who appreciate 
the rare, the beautiful, and the useful. 
He has brought to the notice of the 
great libraries of the country and to the 
bibliophiles a mass of information respecting this brilliant Negro girl. His 
is the work of an honest, fair minded, 
unprejudiced investigator. No t once 
has he spoken of pecuniary reward, but 
always of his desire to hand down to 
posterity this tribute to the mental and 
moral worth of Phillis Wheatlev ; to 
bring before the great libraries and collectors in all its completeness in so far 
as was humanly possible the wor k of 
this young Africa n girl who in her day 
was quoted as freely and as generously 
as are some of our modern poets. 
This publication has brought to light 
another remarkable Negro poet of 
whom few have heard in the person of 
Jupiter Hammon . N o imprint of his 
poems was known to exist. W e are in ­
debted to Mr . Heartman for a reproduction of Hammon's splendid poem to 
Miss Wheatley. 
Mr . Heartman is a man wit h a big 
heart, a noble mind, and of generous 
impulses ; we admire him for his democratic s
ARTHU R A . SCHOMBURG . ME N O F TH E MONT H IS 
MR . W . C . HAND Y MR . WILLIA M DYKE . 
HAV E YO U EVE R HEAR D TH E 
"BLUES" ? 
THE distinction of having contributed to the worl d an entirely hew 
style of music composition can be 
claimed by W . C . Hand y of Memphis, 
Tennessee. 
Mr . Hand y wrote the now worldfamous "Memphis Blues " which is the 
first America n composition to attain 
popularity written in the "Blues Style. " 
The difference between this and the old 
established rule of composition is stated 
by one authority to be that the "Blue s 
Style " has fourteen measures to the 
strain, which represents the correct construction of genuine Africa n music, 
whereas, the regular style has sixteen 
measures to the strain. Musicians who 
at first laughed Mr . Handy's compositions to scorn and ridiculed them as being musically impossible have joined the 
large number of writers who are now 
imitating his style. 
Mr . Handy's work is all the more remarkable for the reason that he never 
had a music lesson in his life. B y purely personal work and a determination to 
master music, he is able now to play 
nearly every musical instrument, and is 
a cornet soloist of rare ability. H e reads 
at sight the most difficult music and 
writes all of the orchestrations used by 
his band of forty-five men, besides doing arranging and making orchestrations 
for many musical organizations and 
music houses who have no regularly employed arranger. 
Mr . Hand y was born in Florence, 
Alabama, nearly forty years ago and 
taught music at Normal, Alabama, for 
several years. Later he travelled with 
Mahara's Minstrels in order to master 
brass band and orchestral work. About 
ten years ago, he went to Memphis, and 
organized a "Knights of Pythias " band. 
H e received scant encouragement from 
the older musicians who had a practical 
monopoly in furnishing music to the 
city. Today, he furnishes nearly all the 
music to the city both public and private, 
and employs the year round nearly fifty 
musicians. His bands are in demand 
for every occasion. Profiting by the 
mistake he made in selling the "Mem
later formed a partnership with Harr y 16 TH E CRISI S 
H . Pace, establishing the Pace & Hand y 
Musi c Company, which boasts of being 
the only colored music publishing house 
in existence today, and which has published all of the later compositions of 
Mr . Hand y and compositions of several 
other colored composers. 
m 
A HER O 
WILLIAM DYKE , principal of 
* ' Goode Publi c School, Bedford 
County, Virginia , has been awarded a 
silver medal and $1,000 by the Carnegie 
Her o Fund . 
Whe n the home of Peter Bryant, a 
white man, was burned two years ago 
his little four-year-old child was caught 
in the burning house. The roof was 
about to fall in but Dyk e rushed in and 
brought the child out alive. The building collapsed just a few seconds after 
he emerged. The money was added to 
the medal in order to pay off a mortgage 
on Mr . Dyke's house. 
Si 
A NE W COLLEG E PRESIDEN T 
THIS month Fis k University inaugurates its fourth President in the 
person of Fayette Aver y McKenzie . 
Dr. McKenzi e is a Purita n and was 
born among the Undergroun d Railwa y 
group in Pennsylvania. H e was educated 
State University. His doctor's thesis 
was on the Indian problems and as a 
teacher he has interested himself i n 
racial problems of various sorts. It is 
fortunate that Dr. McKenzi e comes to 
his wor k as a young man wit h a prospect of many years of useful endeavor. 
A N HONORE D PHYSICIA N 
DR. ULYSSE S GRAN T DAILE Y 
was born i n Louisiana , August 
3rd, 1885. H e was educated at Straight 
University and Northwestern Univer
degree at the medical school of the latter 
institution in 1906 and afterward served 
as assistant i n anatomy at the same 
place, as ambulance surgeon for the 
health department of the city of Chicago 
and as associate surgeon of the Provi
A t the last meeting of the Nationa l 
Medica l Association, which is composed 
of colored physicians, dentists, etc., Dr. 
Dailey was elected president. OPINIONS 
TH E SUPPRESSED 
NEGR O VOT E 
TH E ROTTE N BOROUG H 
Savoyard, a staff correspondent of several southern papers, is complacent 
as to the result of the Supreme Court decision on the Fifteenth 
Amendment: 
"It is folly to suppose that the decision 
of the Supreme Court upholding the Fifteenth Amendment wil l have the s
effect on the political situation in any 
State of the Union . In the boundless 
economy of time, history may record the 
name of a Negro Senator in Congress 
from Massachusetts, but there wil l be a 
Negro Senator from Massachusetts as 
soon as there is another Negro Senator 
from Mississippi. " 
H e then delivers himself of the genial 
philosophy of the Negro race: 
"It is the most docile of the races—the 
Negro. It enjoys the day. A s a peasant 
class it is altogether admirable, and if 
the day of wrath comes, and capital and 
labor shall fly at each other's throats at 
the North, the man of property at the 
South may sleep in peace, for the Negro 
loves the southern white man and wil l 
be true to him to the end." 
W e don't want to disturb anybody's 
nap but we venture to suggest that the 
before-mentioned southern white man 
would better do some of his sleeping 
with at least one eye open. W e admit 
that some fire-eaters like the editor of 
the Houston (Tex.) Chronicle use stentorian tones which sound like convictions : 
"Fanatics may howl, politicians rant, 
demagogues declaim, conventions enact 
platforms, Congress pass laws and 
courts enter decrees, but the fact remains that the blue-veined and whiteskinned man is going to run and rule 
this end of this nation. H e always has, 
he always will . H e has never divided 
his dominion with any man, and he 
never wil l and the sooner the Independent comes to know that fact, the better 
for it. " 
Nevertheless there is evidence that the 
Nort h is continuing to think. A writer 
commending an editorial in the Buffalo 
(N . Y. ) Express says : 
"Yo u should elaborate on this latter 
point and also call attention to the fact 
that having found it so easy to eliminate 
the Negro vote, the southern politicians 
have turned their attention to the white 
voter, with the result that anywhere 
from 40 to 50 per cent, or more, of that 
vote is likewise disfranchised in the 
states of the 'southern South.' Mississi
sional district in Chicago in which I am 
writing these lines. The education test 
does not apply to white voters in those 
states, so have been eliminated by making the payment of certain taxes a prerequisite for voting. Yo u could not do 
a better work than in pointing out the 
workings of these laws which have made 
of these southern states simply miserable 
oligarchies." 
If the proverbial proud southerner has 
really got it planted in his chest that this 
public is going to tolerate these ''miserable oligarchies" another twenty-five 
years then he has more faith in human 
ignorance than we have. 
TH E NE W 
LEADE R 
APOLOS I 
IN FA R FIJI 
R. S. W. , writing in the New 
Yor k Evenin g Post, gives a 
vivi d account of the rise of 
race consciousness in another 
dark people half way around the world. 
W e quote some parts: 
"Coincident with discussion in the 
Australian press of a report that after 
the wa r the Fij i group is to become a 
direct dependency of the Commonwealth 
has occurred references to Apolosi a remarkable native of the islands. A s the 
white community in Fij i does not know 
a great deal concerning him, Australi a 
knows still less. The authorities at Suva 18 TH E CRISIS 
are becoming- somewhat uneasy over him, 
for he is an orator of no mean order, and 
has a strong hold upon the native mind. 
Apolosi is the articulate voice of the 
Fijia n people—a people with whom 'Fij i 
for the Fijians' is becoming a motive. 
sf« sfc S(E i f * * 
"Apolosi is a product of a missionary 
school, and is a carpenter by trade. H e 
is a plebian, which makes the fact of his 
rise and his power the more remarkable, 
for in Fij i caste feeling and tribal prejudices and susceptibilities militate against 
the democracy from which he sprang 
and to which he seems impartially to appeal, and he has no hesitation i n pro
claiming himself as such. In appearance 
he is not prepossessing. H e is somewhat 
shorter in stature than the average Fijian; his forehead is a little lower, the 
bridge of his nose is deeper set, and in ­
stead of possessing the melodious tones 
which mark the speech of practically all 
Pacific islanders, his tongue is rather 
harsh. 
***** * 
"Abou t a twelvemonth covers Apolosi's public career thus far. Thi
reer began with rumors that he was stirring up the natives and was a menace to 
the peace of the colony. About the same 
time the white population first heard of 
the Vit i Company—Fiji being the English corruption of Vit i —a conc
was to be composed entirely of Fijians. 
Apolosi was reputed to be the originator 
of this project, and to be the collector 
of funds for it. Tha t the ultimate end 
of this movement was 'Fij i for the Fijians' there seems to be little doubt, and 
probably some of the speeches made by 
supporters of it were of the vehement 
sort generally associated with nationalist 
agitation. Back of the efforts toward 
the incorporation of the Vit i Company 
seem to have been the native resentment 
against the Indian coolies, by whom Fij i 
is being flooded, and jealousy of their 
economic status. 
"Largely as the result of Apolosi's labors the Vit i Company was launched. 
The directorate, it was decided, should be 
white, with two exceptions, and those 
naturally should be natives. Apolosi is 
credited with having a good business 
head, but the general opinion among 
those who were charged with the concern's composition was that the Fijians 
as a people had not reached a point 
which would make it safe to have Fijians 
preponderate on the board. Bu t when 
all was i n running order it was discovered that Apolosi had been tricked; 
that all the directors were Europeans, 
and these whites woul d not even accept 
the money proffered by him for stock in 
the company of which he was chiefly the 
author. 
* * * * * * 
(Apolosi thereupon addressed his people i n part as follows) : 
" ' A certain thing you people of Fij i 
have heard of,' he said : 'y° u> and the 
white business people have heard of, too. 
Tha t is the Vit i Company. In the early 
days our chiefs were foolish, but the 
white people who have come have taught 
us many things. Th e Government has 
done well, but there is no move on the 
part of the people themselves. W e remain just as we started. I saw this 
thing, and I spent many weary nights 
thinking what was to become of our race. 
Ah ! Ho w many sleepless nights have 1 
spent dreaming what to do. 
" 'Sitting i n this fine hall,' he continued, 'we do not think of the amount 
of skill and brains used i n erecting it. 
Surely, there is no reason why we should 
not try to achieve greater things. I am 
trying to lift you from the slough of despond into which yo u have fallen. I 
would teach yo u to be better citizens.' 
"Presently he made a forcible use of 
the interrogative: 'Wh y am I not allowed i n the company? Wh y was the 
man who did all the work brushed aside? 
I got 8,000 people into the company and 
now I am told to stand out. Wh y ? Ca n 
anybody in the audience say I have 
stolen your money ? Hav e I caused any 
disturbance i n these islands? Hav e I 
tried to upset the good government of 
the country ?' " Q^ J 
BUILDIN G AN D LOA N ASSOCIA ­
TION S 
A SUGGESTIO N In an address before the 
FRO M HENR Y Unite d States League of 
s. ROSENTHA L Buildin g and Loa n Associations, Hen
portant, and what may prove to be an 
epoch-making speech. H e said among 
other things: 
A SUGGESTIO N 
FRO M HENR Y 
S . ROSENTHA L OPINION S 19 
"I n an address which I made a short 
time ago before the Kentucky League of 
Buildin g and Loa n Associations, I called 
attention to the problem concerning the 
future of the Negro, in the solution of 
which I believe the building and loan 
idea could do more than any other institution. 
***** * 
"Le t us consider for a minute the remarkable strides in progress made by the 
America n Negroes, who form ten per 
cent of our population. The director of 
the Federal census, Willia m J. Harris, 
recently issued a document showing the 
details of the development of the race. 
Amon g the facts enumerated are the 
phenomenal rate of increase of their attendance at schools and churches, and a 
marked decrease in the death rate. It is 
very gratifying to note that the homemaking instinct has increased among 
them, and that they are already becoming interested in building and loan associations. A s it is there are a number of 
such organizations that are now successfully conducted by Negroes. In the year 
1900, 20 per cent of the Negro population lived in homes they owned. In 
this ratio had increased to 22.4 per cent 
In Virgini a a creditable showing is made, 
with 41.3 per cent of self-ownership of 
Negro homes. 
"It has been shown that in the cities 
the infamous housing conditions of this 
race have brought about a far greater 
death rate than the general average. 
***** * 
"Undoubtedly here is a vast field for 
building and loan associations. Its successful cultivation would mean not only 
much-needed assistance to our colored 
neighbors, but also the elimination of 
many plague spots from our cities and 
the elevation of our citizenship. 
" I realize that the proposed task of 
widening the horizon of our movement 
is a complicated one, rendered all the 
more so by the fact that the pecuniary 
incentive is lacking. In any other field 
the promoter, actuated by selfish motives, 
would cover every inch of the ground. 
A s a matter of fact, the professional promoter is not a stranger to the building 
and loan movement, as we realize when 
we recall the so-called 'Nationals' of a 
decade ago and others of more recent 
date. W e know that the activity of the 
promoter has always been harmful, if 
not disastrous, to the movement. The 
fact is that the fundamental idea of these 
institutions is incompatible with exploitation, for th
mutuality, and on that alone is their success predicated. We must create an atmosphere along those lines among the 
Negro population in the cities if we hope 
to be an important factor in their betterment and general uplift and expect them 
to aid the growth of our movement by 
becoming shareholders and depositors." 
Mr . Rosenthal, who is editor of the 
American Building and Loan News, of 
course does not realize what persistent 
efforts have been made to keep the benefits 
from colored people. Where, as in 
Philadelphia, the colored people have 
once thoroughly mastered the idea themselves their work compares with any in 
the world. 
m 
TH E AMERICA N MISSIONAR Y 
TH E N o considerations of religion, 
education, friendship or commo
age Nort h America n white 
man from setting up hateful American 
color prejudice wherever he goes. L . C. 
Warner, writing from Porto Rico to the 
American Missionary, says: 
"Whe n the Americans came to the 
island sixteen years ago, there was but 
very little color line, but now it is well 
estabished. It has probably been hastened by the presence of many officials from 
our southern states. Eve n the Y . M . C. 
A . has been compelled to recognize it, 
and the fine new building is only for 
white young men. I am not sure just 
how the native Porto Rican does count, 
but I presume if he is well dressed and 
educated, he would count for white. 
However, in San Juan, the Negro is 
much more in evidence than the Porto 
Rican. 
"The history of Porto Rico leads me 
to consider what would happen in 
Trinida d if the Americans were to take 
charge of that island and give to it the 
benefit of our boasted civilization. Instead of the four strong churches in Port 
of Spain, now attended by whites and 
blacks, and all worshipping together 
TH E 
GOSPE L 
O F HAT E 20 TH E CRISIS 
amicably, we would have one or two 
weak white churches with a membership 
of 50 or 75 each, and the colored people 
would all worship in churches of their 
own with colored preachers." 
. .Now and Then, published in Honolulu, writes editorially: 
"Honolul u ought to be free from race 
prejudice, but it isn't. So many people 
of so many different races are mingling 
here in active life that even a blind man 
would soon realize that every race produces noble men and women. I have 
never thought that I was superior to 
others because I happened to be born 
white. I can readily believe from 
knowledge and experience that there are 
many people of darker skins who are 
better than I. In this world and probably in the next it is neither race nor 
color that will count. Character is the 
only thing of enduring value. Mak e 
your character something that you can 
be proud of, and never mind your color. 
Go d made that and his stamp ought to 
guarantee it. If it suits him, no one else 
has any right to complain. 
***** * 
"The person who is not willing to 
grant the common rights of humanity to 
all, no matter what their race or color, is 
not a man himself, but a contemptible 
thing unworthy to walk on this earth and 
a long way from the road to Heaven. If 
you have any race prejudice, be a man 
and rid yourself of it. Yo u can't be a 
man and think yourself better than others 
on account of race or color, anil usually 
the persons who make the most pretentions to superiority on this account have 
little else of which they can boast." 
Notwithstanding this the Churchman, 
of Ne w Yor k City, continues optimistic. 
"Despite 'lynching in the South, which 
is an expression of community lawlessness rather than Negro antagonism, t
is reason to believe that prejudice against 
the Negro is dying out. Whe n the Negro 
Exposition was held at Richmond, Virginia, a short time ago, the new
of that city warmly supported the undertaking, urging white people to attend, 
and there were thousands of white visitors. A t the exposition in Chicago, where 
the work of 2,000,000 Negro school 
children was on exhibition, the openingday was declared a holiday by the city 
council and all municipa l and county 
offices were closed. In connection with 
the meeting of the Nationa l Negro Bus
Post publishes some figures relative to 
the commercial progress of the Negro 
during the last fifteen years." 
W e regret, however, that the Churchman 
Negro wit h a large "N. " W e have accordingly edited the above copy. 
"Grapho, " writin g in the Congregationalis
effective. H e insists "that the real 
white man under the burden of the 
world is not necessarily the man 
with the white skin, but the man 
with the white heart. There is a white 
man who blusters and boasts of his superiori
goes. There is a white man who beats 
down the weak and excuses his conquest 
and crimes on the ground that his is 'the 
paramount nation.' 'N o doubt yo u have 
found,' said President Wilso n in his 
speech to the naturalized citizens of 
Philadelphia, 'that justice in the Unite d 
States goes only with a pure heart and 
right purpose, as it does everywhere else 
in the world.' Tha t is the white nation, 
'the nation,' as he added, 'so right that it 
does not need to convince others by force 
that it is right.' The other kin d of white 
man is likely to make more burdens than 
he bears. His selfishness sends him forth 
looking for a people upon whom he can 
levy tribute, a people whom he can compel to bear his burdens. His superiority 
is a means of conquest, not of uplift. " 
m 
COMPLAIN T AN D ANSWE R 
LOGI C O F Clarence Foe, editor of 
TW O WHIT E the Progressive Farmer 
SOUTHERNER S of Nort h Carolina , who 
has been for years advoc
is growing dithyrambic in his appeal: 
"Le t me repeat, therefore, that while 
as Go d knows my heart I believe in being 
just to the Negro, I also believe—and 
here is the thought that I fear has never 
occurred to thousands of earnest, sincere, well meaning students of the problem—I also believe in being just to the 
laboring white man whose ancestors 
LOGI C O F 
TW O WHIT E 
SOUTHERNER S OPINION S 21 
through centuries of toil and aspiration 
and discipline have wrought out the civilization which we enjoy—the civilization 
to which the Negro, moreover, owes the 
very peace, safety and prosperity he enjoys. 
"An d I tell yo u tonight, my friends, 
with all the earnestness of my soul, that 
present conditions in the South are not 
just to the laboring white man—that the 
working white farmer hasn't an equal 
chance with the Negro in the struggle 
for future control of the rural South. I 
tell you that while I know that here and 
mere individual Negroes are treated with 
injustice—hideous injustice that reacts 
to our own hurt—yet considered as a 
race the really disadvantaged and handicapped man in the South today is not 
the Negro. " 
T o this the editor of the Elizabeth 
Cit y (N . C.) Independent makes answer 
which needs no elaboration : 
"It seems to me that a better way to 
increase the number of white land 
owners i n the South, would be to make it 
possible for more white persons to own 
land i n the South. It seems to me that 
this would be a better way than Dr. Poe's 
segregation scheme. If Dr. Poe gets a 
law passed i n every state prohibiting the 
sale of land i n white neighborhoods to 
Negroes, he wil l not have increased the 
number of white land owners, but he 
wil l have strengthened and fortified 
those land monopolists who are swiftly 
taking possession of the South. 
"Anythin g that tends to discourage the 
Negro land owner tends to throw that 
much more Negro wage labor into the 
open market. Whit e tenants and white 
laborers are thereby forced into keener 
competition wit h the Negro. The big 
landowner deals wit h his white tenants 
and white laborers on a basis determined 
by the availability and cheapness of 
Negro labor. The more Negro day labor 
available, the harder the terms for the 
white tenant and laborer. 
"Wha t the South needs is more small 
landowners regardless of nationality or 
color. There are millions of idle acres 
awaiting development, that wil l continue 
to wait so long as wealthy landowners 
wait upon cheap labor. There are millions of foreigners who would be only 
too glad to come in and work these lands 
if they could buy small farms on easy 
terms and not be treated as Negroes arc 
treated. Instead of framing laws to 
keep any class from owning land, we 
should make it possible for greater numbers 
m 
TH E STUD Y O F TH E NEGR O 
TH E LATES T The New Yor k Evenin g 
ATLANT A Post says: 
UNIVERSIT Y "There is but one means 
PUBLICATIO N of determining the degre
is advancing in morals and manners. 
The census, tax-lists, and schools record 
progress in economic and educational 
directions. Nothing but the observation 
ot skilled inquirers can register conditions as to home life. Professor Hart, 
in 'The Southern South,' remarks the 
rarity of such investigation. 'Ho w 
many white people in the city of Atlanta , 
for instance, have actually been inside 
the home of a prosperous, educated 
Negro? Ho w many have actually sat 
over the fire of a one-room cabin? The 
southern whites, with few exceptions, 
teach no Negroes, attend no Negro 
church services, penetrate into no Negro 
society.' Onl y in recent years has there 
been a marked increase in the number of 
social studies of the Negro. Vanderbilt 
University has published several monogr
of the University of Mississippi, has 
compiled one of great value; while the 
new Phelps-Stokes Fun d at the University 
is to give his time to study of the Negro. 
Bu t the chief work has been that of Atl
ago issued its first volume on 'black life ; 
and has undertaken a series of decennial 
studies, initiated in 1903 with a comprehensive survey of 'Morals and Manners 
among American Negroes.' The second 
with a resume of the decade's progress, 
has just been published. 
* * * * * * 
"Such a survey as this is evidence of 
the concreteness of the goals towards 
which social leaders may work in the 
South. The Negroes have the task of 
transforming their churches into a vital 
energetic agency; the whites have the 
TH E LATES T 
ATLANT A 
UNIVERSIT Y 
PUBLICATIO N 22 TH E CRISIS 
chief responsibility for the school. The 
vast variety of community conditions revealed points to the potential responsiveness of the Negro. Agai n and again the 
reader finds it stated that 'conditions 
would amaze any old resident who had 
been absent for four years,' that 'the 
improvement is so great that no comparison can be made.' " 
AESO P 
TH E IMPORTANC E The revival of the 
O F BEIN G BLAC K question of the descent of the author of 
Aesop's celebrated fables in Henr y Hol t 
& Company's recent publication, "The 
Negro, " has brought some interesting 
newspaper comment. One writer i n the 
Ne w Yor k Sun says that Aesop was "o f 
dark complexion with pendant lips. " 
Another replies that his color was "not 
black" and his features "not ugly" because he had "a radiant mind! " Shades 
of Darwi n ! A West Africa n thereupon 
replies: 
"His physical characteristics, which 
have been minutely described by men 
who had seen him, are not physical characteristics of a man of any European 
race. 'Fla t nose, pendant lips, crisp 
hair, large abdomen, a long head and 
dusky complexion' does not accurately 
describe a white man. Tha t description 
is very nearly, if not quite, that given by 
lexicographers of the Negro. 
***** * 
" I should say that the early historians 
who wrote about Aesop were better in ­
formed as to what race he belonged to 
than these modern writers, some of 
whom read history with their prejudices, and are unwilling to give credit 
where credit is due. Educated Africans 
have no doubt as to the race to which 
Aesop belonged. It is Africa n pure and 
simple. If Aesop were in the flesh today he could easily pass for a Negro in 
the United States of America . An d 
your correspondent, I fancy, would hesitate to entertain him socially." 
Mr . Arthu r A . Schomburg writes 
further: 
"It is not 'necessary to turn to legend 
and romance.' A perusal of 'Torence's 
Comedies' made English by his life with 
Laurence Echard, 9th edition, London, 
1841, says 'as for his person he was of a 
middle stature, very slender and somewhat of a tawny complexion.' Wit h 
Aesop having a dark complexion and 
Torence tawny it cannot be properly 
claimed today that these men born i n 
Afric a were white men, and the proof 
that they were must be more clearly established than that contained i n the 
present editions of emasculated books 
whose writers have painted every man 
of distinction suspected of having African blood 
"I f Prester John was white what wil l 
you do wit h the picture of Negroes 
shown in Ludolph's 'Histor y of Aethiopia' prin
and Abbas Gregorious who gave Ludolph 
are unquestionably Negroid . 
"Jose Mari a Heredia , the kin g of sonnets 
was a white man but Severiano de Heredia, 
French government, was of Negroi d descent and this is amply verified not only 
by LaRousse , encyclopaedia but by his 
family, some of whom still survive him. 
"Take , for instance, the case of Alex
appears to have been born without a 
mother, yet Gertrude Atherton, i n her 
'Conquerer,' and i n her article i n the 
North American Review for August, 
1902, upsets all precedents in romancing 
with the creation of a family connection 
and establishing beyond peradventure a 
fictitious mother for this great man 
whose real mother, as the saying goes to 
this day i n Nevis, where he was born, 
was a beautiful octoroon woman who, 
like many of her kind, remained true to 
Hamilto n and lived as in the cloisters of 
a convent, so far as the outside worl d 
was concerned—alone." 
MISCELLANEOU S 
A CORRESPONDEN T asked me 
• *• the other day if I had any doubt 
that the slow rate at which he succeeded 
in his particular wor k was because he 
was a colored man. M y answer is that 
I have very considerable doubt. I 
have known first class white men who 
for many dreary years have had to wor k 
here with little or no recognition and 
TH E IMPORTANC E 
O F BEIN G BLAC K OPINION S 23 
who won it ultimately only by the slow 
dogged perseverance and ability that the 
case demanded. I have known colored 
men in the same box. O n the other hand 
I have known and know colored men 
who are as successful in their spheres 
almost at once as men could be and that 
right here. The fact is that some men 
allow themselves to be obsessed wit h the 
idea that because they are colored there 
is bound to be prejudice against them 
and then they, of course, see a duppy at 
every dildo bush. It is all the worse 
when they have been to the States. They 
come back imbued wit h the. idea more 
than ever and if they did not find slights 
they would look for them. They vent 
the spleen gathered i n the land of the 
free on the heads of all and sundry 
here. The sensible and really able colored man who has a good disposition, as 
well as gifts, goes right along pegging 
away just like the white man and by and 
by people have forgotten whether he is 
white, black, brown or variegated. H e 
makes good and 'delivers the goods,' 
and that is all people here want. It is 
generally the inferior kind of man from 
whom one hears the perpetual bleat 
about his skin being a bar, etc. I am 
not implying, however, that my correspondent is of that class. I think that 
he has not done enough well-baked 
thinking and is a bit hyper-sensitive."— 
Jamaica (B. W . I.) Times. 
m 
I ASSERT, and challenge successful 
* refutation, that nowhere on God's 
earth today is the lot of the black man 
more irksome and less enviable than in 
the land of his ancestors and his natural home, Africa , and in South Afric a 
the aggravation of his miseries synchronized wit h the perfection of union. That 
union, which was heralded amid a blare 
ci joyfu l trumpetings and which to the 
white man meant the accession of 
strength and blessings which came in the 
wake of the amalgamation of forces, became to the black man a curse by the 
white man's determination that for the 
blacks there shall be a policy not of 
leveling up, but one of leveling down— 
i . e., the adoption of the most vicious 
and repressive measures which obtained 
i n the worst of the erstwhile states, 
rather than the more liberal ones of the 
more enlightened ones. 
"I am not unaware of the existence in 
Americ a (if a large number of wellmeaning people among yours and my 
races who propose as a panacea for the 
ills of the Afro-America n an Africa n 
exodus because, foresooth, being the 
land of his people, a cordial welcome 
here awaits him and here he would, metaphor
figtree.' Theoretically, this is beautiful, 
and the picture presents a most enchanting view fr
It is most alluring and tempting. Nearer 
approach, however, will speedily dispel 
the illusion. The unprejudiced observer 
wil l readily admit that the treatment of 
the South Africa n black man is daily becoming worse and the bogie of 'black 
peril' is set up only as an excuse for his 
repression. 
"Fo r an imaginary or no offense the 
American mob wil l rush at one poor 
helpless black man—aye, and woman, 
too, as has been oft done, and hurl him 
or her into eternity without any form of 
trial. Mais, ici nous avons change tout 
cela. One solitary white man, as in the 
case of Lewis of Buluwayo, or one frail 
white woman, armed with a revolver, is 
quite sufficient for and is the sole executor 
kindly disposed judge and a sympathetic 
and kindred jury is always at hand to 
acquit or to inflict a small fine in a case 
of unusual ferocity."—F. Z. S. Peregrino, 
Congressman Madden, published in the 
Buffalo (N . Y. ) Express. 
m 
THERE are other cases where we 
can compare the Negro and the 
Englishman more exactly than in the 
case just mentioned. Take South Africa, 
"Europeans have been there only for 
two or three generations in any large 
numbers. They have gone from the 
highly stimulating climate of Western 
Europe to the moderately stimulating 
climate of South Africa . They find 
themselves face to face with the Zulus, 
and especially the Basutos, who within 
a few generations have come from the 
unstimulating regions nearer to the 24 TH E CRISI S 
equator. Toda y we fin d a critica l situa ­
tion. Th e European s ar c not holdin g 
their own . Th e black s ar e slowl y push ­
in g the m out. Th e European s ar e not in 
dange r i n Cap e Colony , bu t farthe r 
nort h it is a n ope n questio n wha t wil l 
become o f them. Th e black s not onl y 
wor k mor e cheapl y tha n is possibl e fo r 
the whites, bu t als o mor e industriously . 
Th e result is tha t toda y abou t te n pe r 
cent o f the whit e Europea n populatio n 
is reckone d as 'poo r whites'— a shiftless 
set o f people , livin g fro m han d to mouth , 
untrustworthy , an d a dange r to th e 
whol e community . . . . 
" A mor e strikin g case tha n that o f 
Sout h Afric a is foun d i n the Bahamas. 
. . . Fro m the beginnin g the Bahama s 
hav e alway s suffere d fro m 'har d luck. ' 
Par t o f the luc k is du e to isolatio n an d 
part to natura l disasters, bu t lac k o f 
energ y o n the part o f the peopl e appears 
to be a stil l mor e importan t factor. I 
hav e talke d abou t it wit h score s o f persons, bot h islanders o f the mor e intelligent sort an d European s wh o hav e live d 
ther e fo r a ter m of years. Almos t with ­
ou t exceptio n they say, 'This climat e is 
ver y beautifu l an d healthful , an d w e 
lik e it, but someho w w e can't wor k as 
yo u peopl e do i n the States. Eve n in 
Florid a it is bette r tha n it is here . Don' t 
yo u believ e it ? Tr y livin g her e a yea r 
o r two , an d you'l l be as laz y as w e are.' " 
—Professo r Ellswort h Huntingto n i n 
Popular Science Monthly. 
THE announcemen t that a Negr o 
ha s enliste d i n the Wels h Guard s 
recalls the day s whe n man y o f ou r regiments ha d blac k bandsmen . Thes e wer e 
first attache d to the arm y i n 1783, owin g 
to one o f the Guard's band s havin g re ­
fuse d i n a bod y to pla y at a n entertain ­
men t organize d by the officers. A s non e 
o f the me n wa s attested the y coul d not 
be punishe d fo r insubordination , so the 
officers petitione d the Duk e o f York , 
then Commander-in-Chief , that bandsme n shoul d i n futur e be mad e subjec t to 
militar y law . Th e Duk e woul d no t agre e 
t o this, bu t he brough t ove r fro m Hanover fo r the Guard s a complet e Germa n 
militar y band , whic h include d Negr o 
players fo r the bass drum , cymbals, an d 
triangles. Nearl y ever y regimen t i n the 
servic e hastene d to reorganiz e its band , 
engagin g colore d performers fo r al l perc
ban d o f the Scots Guard s included a 
Negr o musician."—Londo n Chronicle. 
m 
PLANS are bein g lai d for the introduction of legis
sessio n o f Congress whic h wil l provid e 
fo r the limitin g o f the righ t of franchise . 
Th e rea l objec t o f the bil l is the simplificatio n o f the handlin g of the Negr o 
Questio n throughou t th e country . It is 
hope d to mak e this the openin g wedge 
fo r disfranchisemen t o f most Negroes, 
the uneducate d elemen t o f foreig n extr
"Ther e ar e severa l agencie s i n Wash ­
ingto n workin g o n the Negr o problem . 
Th e mor e radica l factio n hope s to perfec t a pla n whereb y al l Negroe s i n 
Americ a ma y be returne d to Africa . 
Others ar e convince d tha t suc h a pla n 
is entirel y impracticabl e an d refus e to 
giv e their support to the movemen t hav ­
in g this objective."—Pau l Woote n i n 
Ne w Orlean s Times-Picayune. 
M 
THE first day's inquir y b y th e Feder
close d interestin g details abou t the wage s 
o f Pullma n porters an d the regulation s 
o f the compan y touchin g their relatio n 
to the public . It must seem rathe r lik e 
pilin g it o n to insist tha t employe s paid 
only . $27.5 0 a mont h must loo k pleasant, 
but sinc e 'w e ca n get al l the me n w e want' 
at tha t rate perhap s the weare r of the 
unifor m shoul d perhap s conside r himsel f 
lucky . Th e warnin g against treating the 
passengers wit h haught y condecension, 
however, show s a n intimat e acquaintanc e wit h the service . No t less interestin g is the revelatio n tha t porters ar e forbidde n to quot e th e company's rules for 
refusin g certai n forbidde n services, but 
ar e instructe d to explai n more euphoniousl y tha t suc h matters ar e out of their 
'jurisdiction. ' 
"Th e manage r refuse d to say that the 
wage s wer e estimate d wit h the expectatio n tha t th e travelin g publi c woul d make 
u p the deficienc y bu t admitted that in 
practic e a fe w mor e dollars were paid to 
less experience d porters on cars where 
ther e wer e less perquisites."—Pittsburgh 
Despatch. EDITORIAL 
W E COM E O F AG E 
FIVE years ago this month 
the first number of THE 
CRISI S was issued. It 
was a very modest little 
edition consisting of one 
thousand copies with 
twenty pages each. The total cost was 
fifty dollars. This issue of TH E CRISI S 
consists of 35,000 copies of fifty-two 
pages each and wil l cost about two thousand dollars. Between these tw
history of struggle, of hope and fear, of 
apprehension and triumph. Fro m the beginning TH E C RISI S has borne all of its 
expenses of publication and paid all 
salaries except that of the editor. Last 
year, when the stringency due to the war 
put the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People in serious 
difficulties, TH E CRISI S assumed half the 
salary of the editor who had hitherto 
been paid wholly by the Association. 
Today, on our Fift h Birthday, we are 
able to announce with some pride and 
with genuine satisfaction that at the beginning of our fiscal year, January 1, 
1916, TH E CRISI S wil l become a self-supporting business institution, paying not 
only all expenses of publication but the 
full salary of the editor. This is no 
small accomplishment for the comparatively short period of time and we have 
to thank first of all not ourselves, but 
our readers in every state in this Unio n 
and in the lands oversea. 
TH E CRISIS AN D TH E N. A. A. C. P. 
MUCH misapprehension has 
existed in the public 
mind as to the relation 
between TH E CRISI S and 
the National Association 
for the Advancement of 
Colored People. This ought not to exist 
for that relation is and always has been 
quite clear. The National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is the legal owner of TH E CRISI S and 
TH E CRISI S is its official organ. The 
circumstances, however, surrounding the 
founding of this magazine make certain 
explanations periodically necessary. Most 
people assume that a rich and powerful 
association furnished the funds to publ
TH E CRISI S is a sort of subsidized organ 
which is independent of the ordinary 
commercial chances of a periodical. This 
is far from the truth. The National 
Association is not rich and has never 
expended a single cent for the publication 
fault of its own. It would have been 
glad to do so but it has had no funds for 
this purpose. It did, however, from the 
very beginning recognize that publicity 
was necessary for its propaganda ; public
people in order that its work and ideals 
might not he persistently misunderstood 
and misrepresented as was the case with 
'he Niagar a Movement; publicity also 
among the general citizenship of the -'0 TH E CRISI S 
Unite d States, in order that the cause 
for which it was fighting might be 
known. 
Fo r this purpose it appointed as one 
of its executive officers a Director of 
Publicity and Research. Whe n the Director entered his office September 1, 
1910, he was faced by a baffling difficulty. H e was receiving a salary but had 
practically no funds to expend for publicity work because the Association had 
no funds. H e sought publicity for a 
cause which was markedly unpopular 
wit h the white periodical press. H e 
faced a colored press which did not 
know or understand the objects and 
ideals of this Association and which 
could not afford to give it much publicity. Wha t should be done? Th
must have an organ. The executive 
board of the Association assented to this 
proposition provided such periodical did 
not entail any expenditure of money on 
the part of the Association. This stipulation has been carefully kept. 
m ' 
THE COST OF THE CRISIS 
When the Director of Publicity 
issued THE CRISIS 
as a small part of his 
publicity work and as a method of publicity it 
was fair to charge his 
salary to the Association and to require 
T H E C RISI S simply to pay expenses of 
publication. But as T H E C RISI S became 
a larger and larger institution until it 
occupied the whole time o f the Director 
of Publicity and left practically none of 
his time for the Association, except by 
way of advice, lectures and general committee work, it was fair that th
should be taken which will be taken 
January 1st and the whole salary o f the 
director charged to T H E C RISI S fund. 
Meantime there conie s the interesting 
question as to just what the establishment 
look at this from two points: W e may 
ask what T H E C RISI S has cost if we 
charge against it everything whic h if 
might fairly be asked to pay if it were 
considered simply as an independent 
business institution. Or, on the other 
hand, we may ask what it has cost if we 
charge against it only such expenditure 
as the Nationa l Association for the Advancem
have made if T H E C RISI S had not existed. Fo r instance: T H E C RISI S was 
for the first five months- published in the 
offices of the Nationa l Association and 
paid no rent. A s a business institution 
some portion of the rent should be 
charged against it during this period; 
but as a matter of fact the Association 
occupied no more room during this time 
on account of T H E C RISI S than it would 
have occupied otherwise. Carryin g out 
the calculation in this way we may say 
that as a business proposition T H E 
C RISI S has cost $12,000 but that on the 
other hand it has cost the Nationa l Asso ­
ciation an actual expenditure of only 
$9,000 for its establishment outside of 
what it would have expended if T H E 
C RISI S had not been founded. These 
figures have been reached by charging to 
T H E C RISI S such portion of the editor's 
salary as T H E C RISI S has successively 
taken of his time. Durin g the last two 
years the whole of his salary is charged 
against T H E C RISI S as it has taken practically all of his time. 
To this material and money cost must 
be added the intangible but vastly 
more important spiritual cost. W e must 
not forget first of all the splendid and 
unlimited sacrifice of the late Mar y Dun -
lop McLea n without whose initial aid 
T H E C RISI S woul d hardly have been possible; the disinterested friendship and 
advice of the late Robert N . Woo d who EDITORIA L 27 
did so much for the mechanical side of 
the magazine during the first three years 
of its life and whose interest in it never 
flagged. T o these must be added the 
names of volunteer workers like Mar y 
Whit e Ovington, Mau d Cuney flare, 
Martha Gruening and others. 
TH E RESUL T 
FOR this expenditure of 
love and effort and 
money we have today a 
established vehicle 
of news and thought to 
carry on the propaganda 
for equal rights in the Unite d States and, 
to a degree, to inform, guide and entertain thousands of readers. W e occupy 
today twelve hundred square feet of 
space on the fifth floor of one of the 
most convenient office buildings in New 
Yor k City. W e employ eight salaried 
workers not counting our force of seven 
hundred agents. 
It costs approximately ten dollars an 
hour for each working hour of the year 
to ru n T H E C RISIS ; or, in other words, 
about $23,000.00 a year. 
W e have above all accumulated working capital under circumstances which 
the ordinary onlooker would not appreciate. The furniture, machines and 
appliances in our office today are carried 
on our books as worth $2,000, and as a 
matter of fact could not be duplicated 
for $3,000. In most businesses of this 
size this would represent invested capital ; but T H E C RISI S had no capital in ­
vested and it must from the beginning 
get its workin g materials and machines 
out of its income beside paying expenses. 
Since many of these appliances are absolutely necessary to accurate modern 
business methods this lack of capital has 
sorely oppressed us at times and it has 
put upon the editor and manager an 
amount of financial responsibility which 
has often been a serious burden. 
Fro m the beginning the editor of T H E 
C RISI S has made himself personally responsible for every single debt which has 
been incurred, li e has used his own 
salary and borrowed money to tide it 
over difficulties and given his personal 
notes to meet emergencies. In not a single case has the Association or anybody 
connected with the Association, except 
the editor, assumed the slightest responsibility or risk or advanced a single 
cent. There is both precedent and moral 
right that legal ownership in whole or in 
part should rightly follow such financial 
risk. But not only has the editor refused to press this point in the slightest 
degree but he has even in one case 
yielded to an invasion of his rights which 
he did not and does not consider fair. 
Fie and the other officers of the Association 
beyond and above all questions of power, 
responsibility and money must be kept 
clear and high the great ideal of establishing i n the United States a dignified 
and authoritative organ of public opinion 
which should stand for the fundamental 
principles of America n democracy. This 
ideal has not been reached. It has 
scarcely been approximated but a foundation has been laid, solid and broad, 
and of the utmost promise. 
m 
TH E FUTUR E 
THE reaching of the stage 
of self-support by an institution 
like THE CRISIS 
does not mean that the 
day of difficulty or even 
danger is passed. The 
present industrial and financial conditions i n thi
difficult to foresee the business future 
and to predict how long our income can 
be made to meet our expenditures without serious curtailment. W e have, how-28 TH E CRISI S 
ever, every encouragement beyond these 
general disturbed conditions. The portion of the colored people of the Unite d 
States who are readers of T H E C RISI S is 
hut a small proportion of those who 
would read it if it were brought to their 
attention. Persistent pushing, then, of 
its circulation is going to bring great 
results. Ou r great goal of FIFT Y 
THOUSAN D subscribers and purchasers is one that we hope to see realized by Apri l 1st, 1916. This is where 
you come in, Gentle Reader! If you wil l 
make yourself this minute a Committee 
of One to secure ON E new reader for 
T H E C RISI S we wil l have a circulation 
which will immediately bring us into the 
class of large magazines. W e can then 
begin to secure a share of the national 
advertising; or to put it another way : 
The great businesses of the United 
States who are today appealing- to every 
part of the nation can be made to appeal 
to ten million colored people, to adapt 
their goods and selling methods to them, 
and to treat them with the respect that 
the purchasing public has a right to ask. 
Beyond and above this matter of selfsupport comes the question of the magazine itself as a vehicle of thought and an 
inspirer of ideals and the organ of a 
great propaganda. It goes without saying that the magazine is far below the 
ideal and plan of its founder. Its condensation and classification of news and 
its digest of opinion have been fairly 
well developed although capable of in ­
tensive improvement. Its space, however, for the two great departments of 
serious essays and literature has been 
hitherto straitly, almost dishearteningly, 
curtailed. The magazine needs at least 
sixteen more pages and it could use a 
great many in addition. Some decided 
enlargement wil l undoubtedly follow 
within a year and we shall then become 
a more rounded and complete periodical. 
In tone and method we have maintained 
and intend to maintain a certain forceful 
individuality. W e do not expect to suit 
everybody among our friends at all 
times. W e do expect to be sincere and 
to maintain our unerring way toward 
truth. 
M 
OU R PRIZ E CONTES T 
» THEORETICALLY on e 
may look in various ways 
upon prize contests and 
undoubtedly this sort of 
thin g has been done 
prett y thoroughly to 
death in most lines. Nevertheless, the 
limited concentrated effort to obtain cer
such small rewards or distinctions as 
stimulate generous rivalry without encouraging jealousy or envy,—this sort of 
effort is one of the most effective 
weapons which any organization can 
use. W e have not used it much in the 
National Association and T H E C RISI S 
has never attempted it. This fall, however, we are making a special effort and 
it would seem that every single one of 
the fifty branches and locals of the Na ­
tional Association ought to enter the contest. There is not one of them that could 
possibly fail to get at least one prize. 
Many , however, are deterred by the fear 
that as compared wit h their neighbors 
they might not make "a good showing.' ' 
W e sympathize with their modesty but 
the history of the worl d proves that the 
man who fails to try because he is afraid 
somebody else wil l do better has never 
succeeded in setting the worl d on fire at 
many places or many times. A strong, 
unselfish, adequate effort never brings 
cause for shame when compared wit h the 
efforts of others, even though the latter 
have brought greater results. W e have 
a kind of feeling that those branches who 
do not enter this contest wil l in the end EDITORIA L 29 
be conscious of much poorer showing 
than those who enter and bring small but 
definite results. 
M 
WOMA N SUFFRAG E 
THIS month 200,000 Negro 
voters wil l be calle d 
upon to vote on the 
question of giving the 
right of suffrage to 
women. T H E C RISI S 
sincerely trusts that everyone of them 
wil l vote Yes. Bu t T H E C RISI S would 
not have them go to the polls without 
having considered every side of the question. Intelligence i n voting is 
real support of democracy. Fo r this 
reason we publish with pleasure Dean 
Kell y Miller's article against woman suffrage. W e trust that our readers will 
give it careful attention and that they 
wil l compare it with that marvelous 
symposium which we had the pleasure to 
publish i n our August number. Meantime, Dean Mille r wil l pardon us fo
word i n answer to his argument. 
Briefly put, Mr . Mille r believes that 
the bearing and rearing of the young is 
a function which makes it practically impossible for women to take any large 
part in general, industrial and public affairs ; that women are weaker than men ; 
that women are adequately protected 
under man's suffrage; that no adequate 
results have appeared from woman suffrage and that office-holding by women 
is "risky. " 
Al l these arguments sound today ancient. If we turn to easily available 
statistics we find that instead of the 
women of this country or of any other 
country being confined chiefly to childbearing they are as a matter of fact engaged and engaged successfully in practic
engaged. The actual work of the world 
today depends more largely upon women 
than upon men. Consequently this manruled world faces an astonishing dile
doing the world's work successfully or 
not. If she is not doing it well why do 
we not take from her the necessity of 
working? If she is doing it well why 
not treat her as a worker with a voice 
in the direction of work ? 
The statement that woman is weaker 
than man is sheer rot: It is the same 
sort of thing that we hear about "darker 
races" and "lower classes." Difference, 
either physical or spiritual, does not 
argue weakness or inferiority. That the 
average woman is spiritually different 
from the average man is undoubtedly 
just as true as the fact that the average 
white man differs from the average 
Negro ; but this is no reason for disfranchisi
It is inconceivable that any person looking u
today in every field of endeavor, real
astonishing prejudices which they face 
and yet seeing despite this that in governmen
and literature and the industries they are 
leading and dominating forces and growin
grows,—it is inconceivable that any fairminded person could for a moment talk 
about a "weaker" sex. The sex of 
Judith, Candace, Queen Elizabeth, Soj
the merest incident of human function 
and not a mark of weakness and inferiority. 
T o say that men protect women with 
their votes is to overlook the flat testimo
there are millions of women who have no 
natural men protectors: the unmarried, 
the widowed, the deserted and those who 
have married failures. To put this 
whole army incontinently out of court 30 TH E CRISI S 
and leave them unprotected and without 
voice in political life is more than unjust, 
it is a crime. 
There was a day in the worl d when it 
was considered that by marriage a 
woman lost all her individuality as a 
human soul and simply became a machine for making men. W e have outgr
much a thinking, feeling, acting person 
after marriage as before. She has 
opinions and she has a right to have 
them and she has a right to express them. 
It is conceivable, of course, for a country to decide that its unit of repre
person in that family should express its 
will . But by what possible process of 
rational thought can it be decided that 
the person to express that wil l should 
always be the male, whether he be genius 
or drunkard, imbecile or captain of industry? The meaning of the twentieth 
century is the freeing of the individual 
soul; the soul longest in slavery and still 
in the most disgusting and indefensible 
slavery is the soul of womanhood. Go d 
give her increased freedom this November ! 
Air. Mille r is right in saying that the 
results from woman suffrage have as yet 
been small but the answer is obvious: 
the experiment has been small. A s for 
the risks of allowing women to hold 
office: Ar e they nearly as great as the 
risks of allowing working men to hold 
office loomed once in the eyes of the Intelligent Fearful ? 
m 
HAITIA N AN D OTHE R SAVAGE S 
SHORTLY after the declaration 'of hostilities between Turke y and Great 
Britain the Turkis h authorities forcibly entered 
the Italian consulate 
somewhere in Arabi a and removed the 
Britis h consul, subjecting him to many 
indignities. Italy has entered into wa r 
against the All y of Turke y but, although 
her own vital interests and the salvation 
o f her Allie s woul d seem to demand her 
participation i n the attack upon the Dardanelles, Ita
Ottoman Empire . 
Quite recently the governor of one of 
the most highly developed states of the 
Unite d States was forced to resort to 
martial law to protect his own life and 
that of his family at the hands of citizens 
who opposed one of his public acts. Failing 
the lynching states, the habitual lynchers 
of Georgia burned him in effigy and, despite 
permanent exile. 
Governor Slaton of Georgia was nearly 
imprisonment the death sentence of a 
man as to whose guilt of murder the 
governor claimed to have grave doubt, 
although this man had been convicted by 
the highest court i n this great land. 
President Guillaume, of Haiti , was killed 
because he had ordered the execution 
without trial of more than one hundred 
men whose only crime was their alleged 
opposition to his governmental policies. 
Chief among the causes of opposition 
was President Guillaume's reputedly 
favorable attitude toward America n adminis
people found little assurance of his sincerit
of the fact that, not many years before, 
citizen Vilbru n Guillaume had been tried, 
convicted, and sentenced to a term in 
prison for fraudulent transactions with 
foreign banking interests. 
In view of the fact that a man who EDITORIA L 31 
held a position of public trust in New 
Yor k has just been executed for graft 
and murder, a fact which leads to the 
reasonable conjecture that others undiscovered and untried are guilty of like 
crimes, it can hardly be said that civic 
morality and respect for law and order 
are special perquisites of the citizens of 
the United States. A s between the mob 
i n Georgia and the mob in Haiti , the 
balance of provocation is certainly in 
favor of the slayers of Guillaume, especially since the attackers of Go
Slaton are not charged with the degrading stimulus of the Vaudou x and 
Since Italy is not at war with Turkey, 
there is little ground for the fulminations 
of the America n press about the Black 
Republic's affront to the flag of France 
and the duty of the" United States to 
secure redress therefor. 
It is perhaps beyond doubt that in 
the bushes of Hait i are many people 
as primitive as their Africa n forebears, 
but to credit their superstitions to the 
people who control the destinies of 
the second America n republic is as ridiculous as to say that the Indian snake 
worshippers of the western deserts directed the actions of Harvar d Univers
There are thousands of Haitians at 
home and abroad who are not grafting 
politicians, who know nothing about the 
Vaudoux, and who would welcome any 
effort looking towards a solution of the 
difficulties which have given rise to the 
longest period of unrest that even Hait i 
has ever known, beginning practically 
seven years ago and culminating in the 
tragedy of the last week in July. But 
no intelligent Lati n American entertains 
any illusions about the purposes of the 
proponents of the Monroe Doctrine. 
Haitians are aware that the slave holding 
United States was about the last important country to acknowledge th
overthrown Negro slavery and French 
domination, gave men and arms and 
money to the destitute Bolivar and sent 
him on the expedition which ended in the 
liberation of half of South Americ a from 
the Spanish yoke, a service which is 
commemorated by the statue of Alexandre Pe
also aware that, until the interests of the 
Unit ed States seemed to dictate a change 
ol policy, this country had taken no interest w
have yet to point to a single social or 
intellectual benefit conferred upon the 
first Lati n American Republic by the 
great Anglo-Saxo n nation of the North . 
Under these circumstances it is natural 
to expect that Haitians who court out
disinterested contact with the one country 
people—enjoy the fullest measure of 
liberty and fraternity with men of similar 
France nor England desires to possess 
the Mol e St. Nicholas in order to dominat
Americ a knows that New Yor k and San 
Francisco, cities greater in wealth and 
power than most Lati n American states 
have each sent a mayor to jail for graft 
and that the largest state in the Unio n 
was barely satisfied with removing a 
governor from office for the same offe
"deserving democrats" for jobs in foreign coun
not Tim , but the one who was sent to 
represent the American people in Santo 
Domingo by a government which prides 
itself on being the most high-minded, 
pacific, non-imperialistic which this country 
American administration of Dominican 32 TH E CRISI S 
customs has not proved a cure-all for 
revolutions. The constant stream of 
America n merchants, school teachers 
and office holders returning to the 
United States from Puerto Ric o i n the 
summer has given an air of prosperity to 
that island, but has not stilled the cry of 
woe of the peasant who bears the yoke 
of the rich absentee landlord and capitalist. Neither Santo Domingo 
Puerto Rico is distinctively a blackman's country. Can the Haitians accept 
with equanimity the prospect of paying 
the salary of some "deserving democrat" 
who may have come from the Texas 
town where all the inhabitants turned 
out last month to make a holiday spectacle of the burning alive of a black man 
merely accused of murder? 
Whatever may be the solution of 
Haiti's difficulties, it is certain that the 
people wil l not give their support to a 
government which even thinks of selling 
the Haitian's birthright of liberty, licentious as it may be, for the promise of a 
mess of America n pottage. T o one who 
sees the Black Republic with eyes other 
than those of Spenser St. John and the 
incorrigibly negrophobe editors of some 
of the America n papers, foreign assistance in financial and other governmental 
problems could best be assured by the 
formation of a commission comprising 
nationals of the European powers having 
interests in Hait i and, as a matter of 
courtesy rather than necessity, delegates 
of the A . B. C. powers. If the United 
States could call into being such a commission and appoint a qualified represen
might be reached for the security of an 
orderly development of the Haitia n people. But if they must accept enforced 
subjection to some foreign power, rather 
than submit to a nation controlled by a 
press which remains callous in the presence of horrors in Texas and Georgia 
while vociferously condemning German 
atrocities and Haitia n savagery, the 
Haitians would sooner trust to the tender 
Kaise r and Kultur. J. C. 
T O TH E SECRETAR Y O F STAT E 
MAY I venture earnestly to 
raise a question over the 
action of our government in H
unfortunately attended 
wit h bloodshed? I am 
one of those who wer e never satisfied 
that the Roosevelt administration had 
any right to establish a financial protec
in Santo Domingo. I am surprised that 
a Democratic administration should follow 
and seek to confirm another precedent of 
the same seriously questionable chara
had any constitutional sanction, even of 
a previous vote by the Senate. Neither 
has there been opportunity for suitable 
discussion so as to determine the wil l of 
the people. It looks now as if the 
Unite d States were not welcome to the 
Haytia n people. W e are actually engaged 
in war wit h them compelling our 
soldiers to lose their lives i n subduing 
those who doubtless seem to themselves 
to be defending their liberties. Is not 
this course similar to German, or Russ
which Empir e has been arbitrarily ext
either party in the transaction? Yo u 
know how easily 'in the case of protectorates over uncivilized or half-civi
the conquest of Hayti ? 
"Yours wit h high respect 
"C HARLE S F . D OLE. " National Ass. for the Advancement of Colored People 
TH E JIM CRO W CA R 
SOME time ago the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People took up the question of Jim Crow 
cars with Mr . Louis Brandeis of the Interstate Commerce Commission a
advised by him that the Commission 
would not consider a general statement 
of conditions but only specific cases of 
discrimination brought in proper legal 
form. They would, however, review in 
conjunction with these cases, evidence 
gathered by a reliable investigator. 
Since then the Association has practically perfected a case which wil 
described in later, issues of T H E C RISIS , 
and is now prepared to publish the material collected by its investigator, Prof. 
Montgomery Gregory of Howar d University who generously volunteered 
services. Prof. Gregory's itinerary in ­
cluded Columbia and Sumter, S. C. ; 
Augusta, Tennille, Savannah, Waycross, 
Columbus, L a Grange and Atlanta, Ga. ; 
Birmingham, Opelika , Tuskegee, Montgomery, Selma and Uniontown, Ala. ; 
Meriden, Miss. ; Ne w Orleans, La. ; and 
Chattanooga, Tenn.; and his investigations covered the following railroads: 
The Southern, Seaboard, Atlantic Coast 
Line , August a Southern, Central of 
Georgia, Louisvill e and Nashville, 
Queen and Crescent, West Point, Alabama and Great Southern, and a number 
of smaller lines. A full report of his 
trip is now being prepared by Prof. 
Gregory and wil l be published in succeeding issues of T H E C RISIS . He has 
summarized his report as follows : 
The laws provide for equal accommodations for the passengers of both races, 
but the following conditions demonstrate 
that they are dead letters on the statute 
books: 
1. Accommodations are not equal. 
The colored coaches are antiquated 
wooden cars which are often discarded 
white coaches. 
2. Reservations for colored passen
being dangerously overcrowded. 
3. Sanitary conditions on colored 
coaches are indecent. The coaches are 
generally filthy. In some cases there is 
but one toilet for both men and women 
and that often in a foul condition. 
4. Whit e officials (conductors and 
brakemen) are often objectionable and 
insulting to colored passengers. They 
use the colored coach as dressing and 
lounging room and in some cases as a 
smoking' room. 
5. "Butchers " or venders use the Jim 
Crow coach as a storeroom for their 
cases of fruit, candy, cigars, soft drinks 
and magazines. They are frequently 
familiar and insulting in their manner to 
colored passengers. 
6. Whit e passengers have free access 
to the colored coach. They pass through 
it at will, lounge in it, and in many cases 
smoke in the presence of women and 
insult them. 
7. Accommodations for long-distance 
colored passengers are disgraceful. 
Berths in Pullman cars cannot be secured 
colored passenger must sit up all night 
in the unsanitary and uncomfortable Jim 
Crow coach. He may not even wash his 
face, for washing accommodations are 
rarely found. If he is hungry he must 
starve for he cannot enter the diner or 
eat at the counters of railway restaur
food there to take away and eat because 
there is no time to serve him as white 
folks must come first. 
These arc the conditions that the 
colored man in this country is forced to 
meet daily while he pays the same fare 
as the white man. None of the many 
injustices inflicted upon the colored man 
is as harsh and as cruel as that of the 
Jim Crow car system. Other phases of 
race prejudice and hostility he may evade 34 TH E CRISI S 
or patiently endure, but there is no escape from the humiliation and discom
and his family must travel and must in 
traveling submit to conditions that are 
galling to manhood and to decency, conditions that no decent, self-respe
'people should endure. Everywher e the 
colored people are bitter in their protest 
against the accommodations and treatment given them by the railways. 
Statutes of the states in providing for 
separate accommodations also require 
that these accommodations for both races 
shall be equal and therefore the objectionable features of the Ji m Crow car 
are illegal and can be corrected. 
It is hoped that the publication of 
Prof. Gregory's articles wil l arouse public sentiment against these 
that the Association wil l receive strong 
support in its fight to secure what the 
laws allow—equal accommodations for 
both races on the railways of the country. The Association would like to have 
aggravated cases of unfair or unjust 
treatment on Ji m Crow cars sent in the 
form of affidavits to Prof. Montgomery 
Gregory in care of the N . A . A . C. P., 
70 Fift h Avenue, Ne w York . 
In connection with Professor Gregory's report we quote below in part 
a southern white man says about the 
"Jim Crow " car. Professor W . O. 
Scroggs, of Louisiana University, in an 
address delivered before the Southern 
Sociological Congress at Atlant a in 1913 
said : 
"Railways, however, while providing 
separate accommodations, have not undertaken to make these equal for both 
races. A short time ago I made a journey which involved travel on local trains 
over six different railway lines, and on 
only one of these did I find equal conveniences for white and black. On two 
trains the whites were furnished with 
modern vestibuled coaches, while the 
Negro coaches were of the antiquated 
open-platform pattern, very dingy and 
much less comfortable than the cars for 
whites. The rear half of one of these 
inferior coaches served as a smoking 
compartment for white men, while in the 
forward half Negro men and women, 
smokers and non-smokers, were herded 
together, with a single toilet for all. An ­
other train carried its white passengers 
in a steel coach and its Negro patrons i n 
a coach of wood. Whe n I commented 
upon this to a gentleman from the West, 
he remarked: 'Well , I guess it costs the 
road more to kil l a white man than a 
nigger, and so it takes extra precautions 
for us.' 
***** * 
"This unfair treatment of the Negro 
by common carriers is inexcusable. N o 
honest Southerner would countenance a 
white merchant's selling his Negro cus
which he supplied his white patrons with 
a better article. Ye t we allow our railw
with impunity. " 
BRANCHE S AN D LOCAL S 
Columbus: 
This branch has been influential in 
securing the suspension of a police officer 
or excuse arrested Wald o and Harol d 
Tyler, sons of Mr . Ralp h W . Tyler, as 
they were returning to their home late at 
night. The boys were taken to the city 
prison and detained until two in the 
morning. Complaint was made against 
the officer by the Branc h and the boys 
were represented by Mr . Robert B . Ba
A t the exercises held in St. Paul's A . 
M . E . Church to commemorate Emancipa
gave a stirring address tracing the hist
the country from the almost universal 
pro-slavery opinion of Pierce to the 
radical anti-slavery doctrine of Lincoln . 
H e held out the hope that in time there 
would be another radical change in public 
would afford the Negro the right to 
enjoy full manhood rights and to work 
out his own salvation without let or hindrance. 
Des Moines: 
The third quarterly meeting of the 
Des Moine s Branch at the Unio n Congreg
in honor of the celebration of the fiftythird anniversary of the Emancipation 
Proclamation and of the recent decision N . A . A . C. P 35 
of the Supreme Court on the grandfather cases, and was also the occasion 
of the launching of the membership campaign for the prize contest. 
Margaret Roberts read the Proclamation 
of September 22d, 1862, and addresses 
were delivered by Hon . Caspar Schenck 
and attorneys Rus h and Woodson, each 
of whom spoke upon different phases of 
the death of the grandfather clause. One 
of the speakers in his address brought 
out the fact that the very language of 
the Court in the Oklahoma case was anticipated by Attorney Brow n in his thesis 
for his degree of Master of Arts thirteen 
years ago. Mr . Brow n is the President 
of the Branch. Musica l numbers were 
contributed by Miss Frederick and Mr . 
Griffith. Mr . Graves, the manager of 
the membership campaign, announced 
that there would be meetings of his captains every Monda y evening. 
District of Columbia: 
The District of Columbi a Branch had 
hardly been back in harness when it 
scored two triumphs. In one case a temporary skilled helper who had been employed 
emergency currency and federal reserve 
notes was dropped at the expiration of 
his appointment although several white 
men workin g in the same capacity but 
with lower averages were permanently 
appointed. Upo n making inquiry the 
man was told by the acting director of 
his department that the other men had 
probably received their appointments because of greater experience, but the experience rating given by the Civi l Service 
Commission at the time of his temporaryappointment to the man who was afterward dropped was one hundred p
Durin g his appointment the man lost no 
time, took no leave and worked generally 
on night shifts. Th e case was taken up 
by the President of the District of 
Columbi a Branch with the Director of 
the Bureau of Engravin g and Printing 
with the result that the man has been 
certified for permanent appointment. 
The other case was that of a young 
woman whose permanent appointment 
had been long delayed apparently without a satisfactory reason. A s soon as 
the matter was brought to the attention 
of the Director of the Bureau of Engraving and Printin g by Mr . Grimk e she 
received her appointment. 
Northern California: 
From a Northern Californi a member 
comes the following news : 
The name "Jewel City " was given to 
the Panama-Pacific Exposition by Virginia Step
years old. Mrs. Mar y Church Terrell 
tells us "one might travel a long distance 
before meeting a girl with brighter eyes, 
a more intelligent, pleasant countenance 
and a more prepossessing personality." 
The Oakland Enquirer said editorially: "To 
ginia Stephens, belongs the honor of 
having first suggested the title that has 
been chosen as most appropriately expr
submitted." 
MIS S VIRGINI A STEPHEN S 36 TH E CRISIS 
The San Francisco Call and Post 
says: "Th e young school girl of Oakland, Miss Virgini a Stephens, who first 
suggested 'Jewel City ' as the pet name 
for the fair has great reason to be proud 
of her faculty for striking a popular note 
and for seizing on the wor d which to the 
world becomes obviously the right one." 
W e regret to say that when it was discovered that Miss Stephens had colored 
blood there was a sudden silence on the 
part of the press and the only recognition ever given her was a season ticket 
to the grounds. 
St. Louis: 
The real estate group that is workin g 
for a segregation ordinance have found 
an effective ally i n the photo-play, "Th e 
Birt h of a Nation." In order to exhibit 
this play in St. Louis the producers had 
to secure an injunction restraining the 
order of the city authorities forbidding 
its production. Representatives of the 
real estate men stand at the doors of the 
theatre as the audience file out distributing copies of a weekly which is published 
by them under the name of "The Home 
Defender" and which purports "to disseminate truth i n defense of St. Louis 
Homes. " In contrast to this publication 
is a pamphlet by the Rev. George E . 
Stevens, pastor of the Central Baptist 
Church, called ''Negro Segregation, a 
Measure to Assassinate a Race. " which 
has the endorsement of ten thousand 
colored citizens. 
Since the segregation issue was first 
raised the N . A . A . C. P . has been actively at work. One of its field agents, 
Miss Kathry n M . Johnson, has been i n 
St. Louis for some time. Durin g September over five thousand people have 
been reached through meetings which 
Miss Johnson addressed and which were 
held in the following churches: Lane 
Tabernacle, Metropolitan A . M . E . Zion , 
St. Paul's Chapel. Central Baptist, First 
Baptist. Unio n Memorial, and McPhee -
ter's Presbyterian; also at the Sumner 
Hig h School, Booke r T. Washington 
Theatre, and the Youn g Women's 
Christian Association. The ministers of 
the city have been generous i n devoting 
part of their morning and evening services to speakers from the Branc h and 
have assisted i n the work i n many other 
ways. In this connection special mention 
should be made of the Rev . J. W . Lowe , 
Rev . George Stevens, Rev . B . F . Abbott, 
and Rev. F . F . Martin . 
Th e Women's Auxiliar y of the Fi ­
nance Committee of the Branc h has commenced a campaign for funds and i n 
co-operation wit h Miss Johnson have secured the names of over a thousand people pledged to interest themselves and to 
contribute. 
WE go to press too early to include 
more than the mention of a report just received from Mr . Wilso n describing the valuable wor k being done by 
our Boston Branc h which has recently 
published a pamphlet entitled "Fightin g 
a Viciou s Film " whic h it is distributing 
broadcast throughout the country. Th e 
pamphlet includes letters, speeches and 
evidence used in the protest the Branc h 
made against the film "'The Birt h of a 
Nation." In the next issue wil l also be 
included a description of the action of 
the Ohi o Boar d of Censors i n prohibiting this play, and the report from a Lon ­
don correspondent that it is soon to be 
shown in England . 
On October 18th Miss Nerney, Secretary of the N. A . A . C. P. , wil l 
start on a trip through the Middl e West 
which wil l include the following cities i n 
the order indicated: Columbus, Spring ­
field, Dayton and Cincinnati, Ohio , Indianapolis. Ind.. St. Louis, Mo. , Toledo 
and Cleveland, Ohio . 
TH E MEDA L PRESENTE D MR . HAMMON D 
(See page 13) TH E RISK OF WOMA N SUFFRAGE 
By KELL Y MILLER 
THE August number of T H E C RISI S 
A
 contained an interesting symposium on woman suffrage. The symposium 
was unusual, i n that it involved only one 
side of a disputed issue. The contributors represent some of the ablest and 
most thoughtful names among us. They 
presented, presumably, the best possible 
putting of the cause espoused. The public, however, should not be misled to suppose 
plausible pleas of the propagandists, I 
am wholly unable to see wherein the experiment of woman suffrage promises 
any genuine advantage to social wellbeing. 
The human race is divided horizontally by age, vertically by sex and dia
from the minor to the adult stage in 
course of a life time : the cleavage of 
race is subject to indefinite modification 
through environment and intermingling 
of blood; but sex is the one fixed and 
unalterable separatrix of mankind. The 
function of sex in human economy is 
clearly defined and well understood. The 
bearing and rearing of the young constitute the chief duty and responsibility 
of the female, and this task absorbs her 
highest energies during the most energetic period of her life. The family constitutes the fund
Woman's sphere of activity falls mainly 
within while man's field of action lies 
largely without the domestic circle. This 
represents the traditional and, presumably, the ideal relation between the sexes. 
It has the sanction of divine authority 
and the test of human experience. 
Woma n suffrage could not possibly enhance the harmoniousness of this relationship, but 
it. 
Woma n is physically weaker than man 
and is incapable of competing with him 
i n the stern and strenuous activities of 
public and practical life. In the final 
analysis, politics is a game of force, in 
which no weakling may expect to be 
assigned a conspicuous role. 
A s part of her equipment for motherh
finer feelings and a more highly emot
close to her by ties of blood or bonds of 
endearment. But by the universal law 
of compensation, she loses in extension 
what is gained in intensity. She lacks 
the sharp sense of public justice and the 
common good, if they seem to run counter 
She is far superior to man in purely personal a
Suffrage is not a natural right, like life 
and liberty. The common sense of mankind 
possession, attainment and moral character. It 
through which to secure the best result 
of government, and to make secure life, 
liberty and happiness to all. It cannot 
be maintained that woman is deprived of 
any of these objects under male suffrage. 
It is inconceivable that man would legi
are dearer to him than life itself, and 
who, he knows, must fall back upon his 
strong arm for protection, whether they 
be given the suffrage or not. 
The historical hardships and legal disab
so bitterly were incidental imperfections 
of social development. Most of these 
have already been swept away, as all of 
them are bound to be, by man's growing 
sense of justice and fair play. 
Female suffrage has been tried in 
twelve states of the Union , but so far no 
genuine public benefit has resulted therefrom, nor has the lot of woman been 
ameliorated more rapidly than i n other 
states under exclusive male suffrage. 
There may be some argument for suffrage 
widows and hopeless spinsters, but such 
status is not contemplated as a normal 
social relation. 
Wome n as voters would undoubtedly 
stand against the purely masculine vices 
such as drunkenness and the social evil, 
but they can be equally or even more TH E CRISI S 
efficacious through non-political influence. 
The logical sequence of suffrage is 
office-holding. Female suffrage wil l 
never reach its full fruition until fully 
one-half of all public offices, legislative, 
judicial and executive, local and national, 
are filled by women. Is the public mind 
ready for this risky innovation? 
It is alleged that Negro suffrage and 
woman suffrage rest on the same basis. 
Bu t on close analysis it is found that 
there is scarcely any common ground 
between them. The female sex does not 
form a class separate and distinct from 
the male sex in the sense that the Negro 
forms a class separate and distinct from 
the whites. Experience and reason both 
alike show that no race is good enough 
to govern another without that other's 
consent. O n the other hand both experience and reason demonstrate that the 
male seeks the welfare and happiness of 
the female even above his own interest. 
The Negro can not get justice or fair 
treatment without the suffrage. Woma n 
can make no such claim, for man accords 
her not only every privilege whic h he 
himself enjoys but the additional priv
The fundamental defect in the propagand
fact that instead of confining its effort to 
the improvement of woman's lot along 
the line of her obvious sphere and functio
her privilege and opportunities being 
artificially identical wit h those of man. 
It is amusing to note that women are to 
be allowed to vote at twenty-one merely 
because men are accorded the privilege 
at that age; whereas according to their 
physical and mental developments, the 
sexes have a different order of maturity. 
If the strictly physiological and psychol
twenty-one, female suffrage should be 
placed at eighteen. If man should be 
a mustache, some woman woul d doub
Mal e and female created li e them; 
what Go d has made different man strives 
in vain to make identical. 
GLIMPSES OF BRAZIL 
By R. W . MERGUSO N 
Brazil occupies about one-half the 
land area of South America . It is 
larger than the United States without 
Alask a and is the third largest country in 
the world, Russia and China alone being 
larger. Most of its land lies in the 
southern hemisphere. So vast is its territory, so dense its thousands of league
of tropical forests, and so inadequate arc 
its transportation facilities, that it remains today the one country about 
which least is known. The upper Amazon basin, in the states of Amazones and 
Matto Grosso, stales larger than empires, has hardly as yet been trod by the 
foot of civilized man. Al l the countries of 
Europe, except Russia, could be placed 
within its borders and still there would 
be sufficient territory left to accommodate a portion o f the United States. 
Fro m the Guianas on the north to the 
Republic of Urugua y on the south is a 
distance of nearly four thousand miles. 
Practically all of South Americ a lies 
east of Nort h America . Should one 
travel directly south from Chicago and 
continue his journey as far south as 
the latitude of Ri o Janeiro, the capital 
of Brazil , he would be in the Pacific 
Ocean a thousand miles from the west 
coast of South Americ a and Ri o Janeiro 
would lie two thousand five hundred 
miles east. 
Wit h its territory covering forty degre
varieties of climate. Th e general yet 
erroneous opinion is that as a whole it 
has only a tropical climate. This is not 
so. Nea r the equator and up the Amazo n 
Valley the climate is oppressive, rainfall GLIMPSE S O F BRAZI L 39 
TH E POLIC E PARADIN G BEFOR E TH E CIT Y HALL , RI O JANEIR O 
is abundant and the vegetation the most 
luxuriant to be found anywhere on the 
globe. In this humid, sultry climate in 
the Amazo n forests, is the home of the 
rubber tree. Farther to the south the 
climate becomes more agreeable and 
salubrious. In the southern states of 
Ri o Grande do Su l and Santa Catharina 
the climate is temperate, somewhat like 
our own southern states. 
Ri o Janeiro is situated just in the 
tropics. It occupies about the same relative position south of the 
Havana , Cuba, does north. The maximum temperature at Ri o never 
one hundred degrees fahrenheit. The 
nights are always cool and comfortable, 
this being due to the sea breezes which 
blow shoreward each evening. 
Brazil has the greatest river system in 
the world. The Amazo n with its thosands of tributaries drains a territory six 
times larger than France. This mighty 
pulsating artery is some four thousand 
miles long. The volume of water which 
it carries is so great, and the force so 
tremendous, that for more than a hundred miles from shore its waters have 
not mingled with the blue waters of the 
Atlantic . The most brilliant and gay 
plumaged birds in the worl d are found 
near this river. 
The oldest city in the new worl d is 
Bahia . The approach from the sea to 
this city of 350,000 inhabitants is impressive : the dark green tropical foli
and the tall majestic palms piercing the 
skies, and every where a riot of color, 
make a picture of surpassing beauty. 
B y far the larger proportion, about 
ninety-five per cent of its 350,000 people 
250,000 people is next. Bahi a has three 
times as many Negroes as Washington, 
D . C , which has something like 100,000, 
and there are more Negroes in this city 
than in any other city in the world. 
There are also many Negroes in Ri o 
Janeiro but the racial mixture there is so 
general and thorough that it is difficult 
to state with any degree of accuracy the 
exact number. 
Bahi a was the slave center of South 
America , where thousands and hundreds 
of thousands of Africa n slaves have been 
landed since the sixteenth century. The 
Bahian Negro of today is similar to the 
American Negro, but with a larger infusio
Bahi a is a city of contrasts. The upper 
town is the most beautiful of cities, with 
clean, well paved streets, houses in bright 
colors, with roofs of pink and sides in 
various shades. Its parks, plazas and 
theatres are inviting and agreeable. The 
domes and spires of its scores of 
churches stand in bold relief against the 
azure sky. N o other city of its size i n 
the worl d can boast of more churches. 
In a climate like this, where vegetation 
is so profuse, each dwelling has its own 
" miniature park wit h trees and flowers, 40 TH E CRISI S 
making a most beautiful tropical home. 
In these homes there is always present 
an atmosphere of refinement, culture 
and hospitality. The Brazilia n makes 
you welcome, he endeavors to please and 
to that end no inconvenience is too great 
if it wil l serve the traveler to have pleasant reminiscences of Brazi l and 
The lower city on the other hand 
reeks in filth and disease. There seems 
to be no thought given to sanitary measures. O n all sides is seen refuse pi
in heaps, in all stages of decomposition 
and the fumes permeate the air with 
many foul odors. Other contrasts in the 
city are everywhere apparent: some of 
the fairest and loveliest people one 
would wish to look upon, and also some 
of the most ungainly and ugly. Her e 
are the fabulously rich and the miserably poor. Intelligence and ignorance, 
refinement and vulgarity are present, for 
Brazil is a country where aristocracy 
of wealth is all powerful and predominant. 
Although the thermometer registered 
one hundred degrees in the shade the 
lower town presented a scene of great 
commercial activity.- It is the commercial center of Bahia . Hundreds of natives were busily engaged in loading and 
discharging cargoes of dozens of ships 
at their moorings. Rambling muledrawn carts full of sugar-cane formed 
a continual procession. 
Bahi a is one of the largest exporting 
cities of Brazil. Its chief exports are 
hides, sugar, tobacco, cotton and diamonds. Although the output of diamonds from the Kimberley mines in 
South Afric a is greater, the largest, most 
brilliant and valuable stones come from 
the state of Bahia. They are mined 
principally by Negroes. 
Ho w polite these people arc ! In answer to your questions it is always 
Senor or No Senor with a suavity and 
polish which seem to be inbred. Their 
thanks for your purchases are effusive 
and appreciative. This is a characteristic trait of the Brazilian ! H e is polite. 
A more courteous, quiet and well behaved people could hardly be found. 
It is in Bahi a that one first gets a 
glimpse of the great racial mixtur e 
which is i n process of evolution. Th e 
Indian element is predominant i n most 
of the South America n Republics, least 
so, however, i n the Argentine Republic. 
The Negro element is greatest i n Brazil. 
from the Atlanti c to the Pacific there is 
no color prejudice. It is well to remember 
three races, viz., Portuguese, Negr o and 
Indian. The early Portuguese settlers, 
not bringing wives wit h them, readily interm
sprang into existence a large and incre
and with them unions resulted wit h the 
Portuguese and Indians and thus another elem
the world. Th e mixtur e is so general 
and diffused that color ostracism does 
not exist. In fact, it cannot exist. 
Some of the finest people are these 
colored Brazilians. The y are fully acquainted wi
i n the Unite d States. The y know of the 
lynchings, "Ji m Crow " legislation and 
the wanton disrespect for law and order 
that are so prevalent here in the States. 
These forms of injustice a Brazilia n 
wil l readily tell you he cannot conceive 
of existing i n his country. Neve r in 
Brazil wil l America n prejudices, hatreds 
and the doctrine of inferiority of races 
become implanted ! 
First, the Brazilia n is a Brazilian . It 
chafes him to be taken for a Spaniard 
or a member of some other race. 
Whethe r he be black or white, in answ
other designation. Fro m his emphasis 
and tone you could judge that he was 
rightly proud of his country. How could 
a man be otherwise when the government under which he live
every opportunity, encouragement and 
assistance to achievement and recognizes 
him as a man possessing the same feeli
other? 
The approach to Ri o Janeiro on a 
clear day presents a panorama which GLIMPSE S O F BRAZI L 41 
for picturesque beauty cannot be duplicated the world over. The majestic 
"Suga r Loaf " is a solid bare rock jutting from the sea a thousand feet into 
the air. The beautiful villas dotting the 
shore, the surrounding mountains and 
the waving palms lend their charm and 
beauty to adorn this, the wonder city. 
The bay is set with numerous islands 
blossoming in tropical verdure, like 
rare gems set in a background of torquoise. Steaming into the bay 
passes several forts equipped with the 
latest guns and manned by Negroes. 
Wit h the aid of binoculars dozens of 
them can be seen in their bright uniforms, promenading the parapets
The founding of Ri o dates back from 
the middle of the sixteenth century. 
Today it has a population of 1,100,000 
composed principally of Portuguese, 
Negroes, Indians and their varying degrees of mixtures. It is impossible to 
single out any one predominating type, 
such is the heterogeneity of the population. Wha t a kaleidoscope of color 
her inhabitants! There is an indiscriminate intermingling of white, black, 
brown, yellow and dozens of other hues 
and variations. In Pernambuco and 
Bahi a nearly every one is black but going south toward the temperate zone 
they become fewer i n numbers and almost disappear i n the southern states. 
Blacks are not very numerous in Ri o 
but the majority of the people have at 
least a tinge of Negro blood coursing 
through their veins. Eve n in the upper 
classes this same blood is there, many of 
them appearing like mulattoes, quadroons and octoroons. The spec
argument that such racial intermixtures 
bring into existence a hybrid both mentally and physically inferior to either of 
the parent stock has no foundation here. 
There are no signs of this deterioration 
anywhere in Brazil . 
O f all the countries in South Americ a 
Brazi l is the one best disposed towards 
the United States. Although the sentiment is not pro-American it is not 
strictly anti-American. Their attitude is 
one more of indifference. In the other 
countries, and especially in Argentine, 
the sentiment is strongly anti-American. 
Th e Yankee , or gringo, as he is reBRAZILIA N SAILOR S O N TH E WHARF , RI O 
JANEIR O 
proachfully called, is not at all liked or 
welcomed. 
Fo r the ambitious and intelligent co
expansion and growth, for an atmosphere 
endless varieties and forms of race prejudi
it might be well to turn his attention in 
the direction of Brazil. Fo r the man 
without capital, the inducements are not 
alluring. Fa r from it. But if he has 
capital, or if a professional man or 
woman seeks an unrestricted and wel
inducements. Doctors, dentists, lawyers, 
teachers and professional men in any 
line do well. Livin g is high but high 
fees are paid for services. The warm 
sentiment of the people for those educate
their support of such men. The co42 TH E CRISI S 
surgery, has an unlimited field; likewise 
the dentist. 
Al l that one gets in Ri o he pays for, 
and many times he pays for things he 
does not get. O n the whole the cost of 
living wil l approximate three times that 
of the cost here in the Unite d States. 
The average workin g man earns from 
three to six milreis a day, that is a dollar 
to two dollars. Policemen, conductors 
and firemen receive about the same pay. 
Most all these men are colored. Fro m 
the lowest strata to the highest the 
colored man is represented. In all walks 
of life he is present. 
In all parts of Brazi l there is an appalling mass of illiteracy. Abou t 75 per 
cent of the people are illiterate. Schools 
are few and the training received in them 
is slight and wholly inadequate to fit the 
student for the practical affairs of every 
day life. In the school administration, 
as well as in other branches of the government, system and method are woefull
send your child to school and with these 
lax school laws it is easy to see what 
degree of interest a large proportion of 
illiterate parents, having little thought or 
interest for the future, wil l manifest for 
their children. Eac h state has its own 
school laws and primary instruction 
comes within its jurisdiction. University training, however, is under Federa
control. In the whole of Brazil there are 
not more than 10,000 public schools. 
There is as yet no university. 
The fighting force of Brazil , army and 
navy, is composed largely of men of 
color. In the Unite d States we would 
say Negroes. Brazil's navy today has 
three super-dreadnoughts: the "Ri o 
Janeiro" of 27,500 tons displacement, 
which cost about $15,000,000, the "Sao 
Paulo " and "Mina s Geraes" of 21,000 
tons. The navy consists of some thirtysix vessels composed of cruisers, torpedo 
boats, gunboats, submarines and destroyers. Almost the entire crews of 
these super-dreadnoughts, dreadnoughts 
and other fighting craft are Negroes. 
The national holiday is celebrated the 
7th of September. O n one such occasion 
I witnessed the grand review of 20,000 
Brazilia n soldiers and sailors. Their line 
extended for more than eight miles and 
it required two hours for them to pass 
the reviewing stand of the president and 
his party. These thousands of men composing 
navy were mostly Negroes. White s and 
blacks were mixe d indiscriminately together in the different divisions. There 
were, however, a few companies comp
200,000 of the Ri o population present 
and this assemblage was unstinted i n its 
praise, and cheers and shouts of acclamation. Thei
soldiers of the leading nations. They 
were not tramps and ragamuffins as some 
pictures I have seen woul d indicate. 
Their equipment was of the latest and 
most improved type. A s for their 
bravery and valor, it suffices to say that 
these virtues have been demonstrated 
many times in the different wars in 
which Brazi l has participated. 
Fro m Ri o to Santos, the greatest 
coffee port i n the world , is a voyage of 
about twenty hours on one of the coast 
line steamers. 
Fro m Santos to Sao Paulo takes two 
hours. Leavin g Santos the grade of the 
Sierr a do Ma r mountains is steep and a 
large part of the way cables are used in 
making the ascent. A t every station 
there was a brilliantly uniformed soldier, 
and he was always a man of color. The 
Italian immigration to this state has been 
heavy and today Italians form the larger 
percentage of the new-comers. There 
are at least a million of them here. They 
come poor but by their frugality and exce
able to amass much wealth in the growing 
city what rubber is to the Acr e territory, 
and tobacco is to Bahia ; it is the very 
life and revenue of the state. Man y 
Negroes are employed on these coffee 
fazendas as pickers but they are not so 
numerous as a little farther north i n the 
slate of Mina s Geraes. 
Sao Paulo is one of the most cosmopo
the meeting place of east, west, north 
and south and all upon a plane of equality. 
representatives from Africa , Turkey , 
Arabia , India, China , Japan, and i n fact 
from all quarters of the globe. Ther e is 
hardly another place in the worl d where 
so many different races may be found, 
living peacefully together, without racial 
hatreds and animosities, workin g out GLIMPSE S O F BRAZI L 43 
their common destiny. It is in truth the 
exemplification of Christian teachings. 
A s to a man's social standing in Brazil, 
color has no weight. Wealth alone determines the sphere i n which he moves. 
Her e we have a white class and a black 
class. In Brazi l is a rich class and a 
poor class, and it is almost as impossible 
for the poor illiterate to become rich 
there as it is here for black to become 
white. Most of the Negroes belong to 
the poor class. Indiscriminate commingling and intermarriage with the 
whites goes on continually in this class. 
They associate together, eat together, 
live together, attend the same schools, 
churches and places of amusement". 
Highe r in the social scale the Negro becomes fewer in number, his 
out, and finally, for all that we can tell 
from external appearances, disappears. 
America n writers have said that the line 
was drawn and the Negro, therefore, excluded because he was a Ne
I was there I saw evidences of Negro 
blood in all circles from the highest to 
the lowest. If a man, white or black, is 
absent from any class it is because he has 
not the essential requirements to belong 
to that class, and the desideratum in 
Brazi l is money and not color. 
Man y Negroes have won renown i n 
the arts and professions. In medicine, 
law, music and journalism they have 
won distinction and fame. The highest 
offices in the land today are filled by men 
o f color. In the business field, however, 
he is not so well represented. Man y enterprises are operated by men who appear colo
not be so considered. 
The condition of the country Negroes 
is one not to be envied. Their life is 
very primitive and not far removed in 
development from the native African . 
Their houses are adobe huts, poorly constructed, wit h roofs of tile. The bare 
ground serves as a floor and there are 
no windows. Eac h dwelling is surrounded by its clump of banana or 
orange trees. The Negro's pay is small 
when he does work and he is forced to 
lead a wretched existence. Often he is 
shiftless, working spasmodically, and 
wit h no thought of the future. The 
climate is bounteous in supplying him 
with his few wants and he needs have 
little thought of the morrow. He lives 
in the direst poverty, the darkest igno
cannot send his children to school for the 
federal and state governments do not 
provide adequate facilities for instru
than three per cent of the population are 
able to attend. 
Al l the large manufacturing concerns in 
Ri o Janeiro, gas, electric light and street 
railways are owned and operated by 
foreigners. The largest stores are also 
run by them. In other parts of the Repub
operated with their capital. 
Wis e leadership and direction must 
eventually come from the native Brazilian th
resplendent and crowned with glorious 
achievement. It was with the deepest 
regret that we bade farewell to this 
great continent of the south. Memories 
most cherished wil l long linger of our 
cordial welcome and pleasant sojourn i n 
Brazil where for once, at least, in our 
lives we were Men and treated as such. 
ENTRANC E T O TH E BOTANICA L GARDEN . 
RI O JANEIR O 44 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Where Your Money Goes 
Whe n you pay your life insurance premium have you ever thought about where 
it goes or what it does ? Few of us have ever had the technical knowledge to 
understand how an insurance premium is computed. No t everybody' knows that 
the net premium of EVER Y legal reserve life insurance company is based on the 
same figures. You r premium is divided into three parts : 
(1) Reserve , to take care of future liabilitie s ; 
(2) Mortality , to take care of present death claims, an d 
(3) Loading , to provid e for the expense s of conductin g the 
business suc h as agents' commissions, medica l examina ­
tion , cler k hire , printing , salaries, rent, etc. 
STANDAR D LIF E is the only legal reserve life insurance company that 
gives back to the race 100% of every dollar it pays. D o you get my point ? 
In other companies, your premium, subdivided as above, returns to you in only 
TW O ways, namely, RESERV E and .MORTALITY . In STANDAR D LIF E you 
get the same protection under a reserve system identical with every other legal reserve company; you get prompt payment of claims, and you get the LOADING , 
in that practically even' dollar we spend in conducting this business goes back 
into the pockets of the race. There are at present nearly one hundred people earning all or a part of their subsistence from their work with STANDAR D LIF E to 
whom in 1914 we paid in salaries and commissions more than Twenty-Fiv e Thou ­
sand Dollars. To nearly one hundred and fifty colored physicians we paid over 
Eight Thousand Dollars for medical examination fees. W e paid in death claims 
nearly Nine Thousand Dollars the day the claims were filed. Almost all of our 
printing is done by colored printers; we buy our office supplies from a colored 
stationer; our branch offices are rented from colored landlords; our money is 
largely deposited in six strong and well managed colored banks; in fact, we are 
seeking to build up a solid and substantial •progressive race enterprise, and while 
doing it we are trying to lift as we climb and help to build others with us. W e are 
today turning more money back into the hands of the race than any similar 
organization in existence. 
Does this program appeal to you? Do you want to help develop a strongfinancial institution that is organized, operated and conducted on scientific principles and along lines that have made Million s for white people, and that has for 
its object the financial emancipation of the race? D o you want to encourage an 
institution that, if properly supported, can within the next five years absorb into 
its active service almost every capable young man and woman of the race at 
salaries they can get nowhere else? Do you want safety first—the absolute protection of your loved ones under a contract of insurance backed by the same 
amount of bonds deposited by the biggest white companies for your protection? 
Do you want to do your duty to your family, to your children and your children's 
children? If you can answer these four questions in the affirmative, then we 
appeal to you for your support. We say to you it is your duty to show by 
your works the truth that is in you and no matter where you live to carry 
a policy of some size, from $250.00 to $5,000.00. in STANDAR D LIFE . 
Please No w don't delay, but write us while the spirit is on you, and don't stop 
particular. until the policy is in your hands. 
— STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Amoun t
 * 200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Sex 
Age Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Weight Ove r On e Millio n an d a Hal f Insuranc e i n Forc e 
Occupation Issues Policie s fro m $250.09 to $5,000.00 
Name 
Address HE M A N E . PERRY , Presiden t 
(C. Nov , 1915.) HARR Y H . PACE , Secretar y 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
18 Monograph. Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY a ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Pric e 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Te n poems by 
EFFI E T . BATTLE , A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"Yo u owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor , Southwestern Christian Advo ­
cate. 
"Verse s are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : O KOLON A INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL , 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.00 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
The Negro in American History 
by JOHN W. CROMWEL L 
Secretary American Negro Academy 
296 pp., 35 chapters, 17 full page illustrations, 
full index and bibliography 
Price, $1.25; by mail, $1.40 
Libera l commissio n to agents. Address: 
J. W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann Street Washington, D. C 
WANTED : Position as stenographer by young man 
with excellent references. Willing , painstaking; 
moderate salary. "H . F . V. " R . F . D . 6, Box 25-A, 
Taylor , Texas. 
45 
OF INTEREST T O VOCALISTS 
"Tone-Placing and Voice Development" 
With Supplementary Co-ordinating with Original Chapters 
An y one desiring a vocal course at a 
minimum cost, this book supplies a long 
felt want. Points explained, viz. : 
Breath in singing, position when practising or singing, parts of the vocal apparatus, how to practice, good rules for 
singing. Endorsed by well known professional people, musical publications 
and critics. 
PRIC E $1.0 0 
Address, Publisher, Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel Ave. , 
Chicago, III., or Claton F. Summy, 64 E. Van Buren St., 
or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash Aves., Chicago, 111. 
COLON HYGIENE 
A New Book, fully illustrated, nearly 40 0 pages, by 
Dr. J. H . KELLOGG 
Superintendent Battle Creek Sanitarium 
Describes causes and results of chronic constipation 
and new and successful methods of home treatment. 
An y reader of this magazine may, by sending $2 . 
secure the book for examination with privilege of 
return in two days for refund. Send order to— 
GOO D HEALT H PUBLISHIN G CO. , 941 1 W . Mai n St., 
Battle Creek, Michigan. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
(George Young) 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colored Authors and Books on Race Problems 
a Specialty. 
135 W. 135th Street New York City 
Something New! Startling! 
YO U AR E TH E ON E 
Who Will Receive The Largest Mail 
The Most Opportunitiea of Agencies, Positions; Be Your O
Boss; Offers Mai l Orde r Propositions, etc. 
I N YOU R TOW N 
The Buy Sell and Exchange 
Directory goes to thousands of manufacturers, 
dealers, mail order men, publishers, who will 
send you FRE E samples of magazines, papers, 
propositions, catalogues, packages, circulars, 
etc., etc. 
You Will Get u Wonderful Mail! 
5.000.00O More Names Wanted at Once! 
Send 25c. to help pay the cost of stereotyping 
your name and address, which will be inserted 
and you will receive all of above with very 
valuable information worth hundreds of dollars 
and a FRE E copy of "Buy , Sell & Exchange," 
containing your name. 
Business is Better; Get Your Share of the 
Good Things. Address. 
"BUY SELL & EXCHANGE" 
Th e Magazine Tha t Interests Everybody. 
Dept. 70-H. P. 0. Box 5240. Boston, Mass., U.S.A. 
Ad Rates 3c per word. "Thousands Read it** 
Mention TH E CRISI S 46 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEM S 
New catalogue on request. Fo r twenty years the Neale publications have been 
famous throughout the civilized world. Amon g them are books of history, biography, reminiscence, science, essays, politics, travel, fiction, poetry, religion, 
juvenile,' and pure literature. To this great library of literature important works 
frequently are being added. Ou r new catalogue wil l be sent postpaid on request. 
Th e Facts of Reconstruction. By JOH N R . LYNCH . 
Fourth Thousand. In his "Autobiography of Seventy years," the late Senator George F. Hoa r 
Massachusetts says: "Perhaps, on the whole, the ablest 
of the colored men who served with me in Congress 
was John R . Lync h of Mississippi." Lync h was made 
temporary chairman of the Republican National Con ­
vention of 1SS4, and presided over that convention 
during the whole of the first day and a part of the 
second. H e was nominated as temporary chairman 
by Henr y Cabot Lodge , and his nomination was seconded by Theodore Roosevelt and George Willia m 
Curtis. Afte r his term in Congress, Lync h served as 
Fourth Audito r of the Treasury. In this his first 
book, written with extraordinary force and with unusual clarity, he boldly justifies Reconstruction. $1.65 
by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
Boston Globe: "A n interesting contribution to the 
history of American politics." 
Racia l Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church . By JOH N H . REED . D.D. , K.C . Wit h an 
introduction by Adn a B. Leonard, D.D. , LL.D . 
$1.60 by mail. 
Christian Recorder, Philadelphia: "Th e author is 
an American Negro who has spent eight years in 
Liberi a under the missionary society of the M . E . 
Church . The book comes in at this time with more 
than ordinary interest, for during this year most of 
the lay colleges and conferences of the M . E . Church 
will discuss the subject of racial adjustment, especially that relating to Bishops for races and languages. 
Th e book is filled with splendid idealism, and presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromises for the present exigencies may not be heeded." 
M y Ogowe . By ROBER T HA M IL L NASSAU , M.D. , 
S.f.D . Fo r forty-five years a resident of Africa , 
pioneer and explorer, Dr . Nassau has contributed 
largely to both science and literature. Whil e in 
Afric a he sent large ethnological collections to the 
University of Pennsylvania and to Princeton, and 
was the first to send a carcass of a gorilla to the 
United States, and he supplied the only perfect gorilla brains to be examined by anatomists up to 1891. 
He is a member of various scientific bodies, including the Archeological Society of the University of 
Pennsylvania, the National Geographical Society, the 
Pennsylvania Society of Scientific Research. Amon g 
his published works are "Crowned in Palmland," 
"Mawedo," "Fetishism in West Africa, " "The Path 
She Trod, " "Wher e Animals Talk, " "In an Elephant 
Corral , and Othe r Tale s of West Africa n Experiences," and "M y Ogowe." On e of his more importa
Benga language of West Equatorial Africa . But by 
far his greatest achievement in literature, and the 
culmination of his varied literary activities, is this 
volume, "M y Ogowe," which the publishers hold to 
be the most important work of the sort yet published. 
It comprises more than 700 pages of text and 50 fullpage illustrations. Larg e octavo. $3.25 by mail. 
Th e Black Man's Burden . B y WILLIA M H . HOLTZ -
CLAW . Principa l of the Utic a Norma l and Industrial 
Institute for the Trainin g of Colored Youn g Me n and 
Young Women , Utica , Miss. Wit h an introduction 
by Booker T . Washington. Illustrated. Thir d Thou ­
sand. $1.60 by mail. 
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle: "In both subject and literary treatment Mr , Holtzclaw's book is a 
monument to his race." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study in Negro achievement and should be an inspiration to the young men and the young women of 
that race." 
Boston Herald: "Th e book will stir the sympathetic emotions of its readers as his story stirred 
Bostonians when he told it here several years ago. 
Th e story of this devoted young man is of intense 
interest, not only as an account of great accomplishment despite apparently overwhelming obstacles and 
repeated discouragements, but as giving a close view 
of the character of the colored people of the far 
South, their shortcomings, their inherent virtues, and 
their ambitions." 
Troy Record: "Mr . Holtzclaw is one of those 
splendid Negro leaders upon whom the hope of his 
race depends." 
Redde r Blood. By WILLIA M M . ASHBY . Th e Negro 
in Americ a has produced but little imaginative work 
other than poetry. H e has told his story by other 
mediums, which seemed to him, perhaps, better than 
fiction. Whethe r right or wrong in this view, undoubtedly the time is now ripe for Negro prose fiction, by Negroes, to be written in the English language, and not the jargon known as Negro dialect. 
Mr . Ashby , a Yal e man, is a Negro , and "Redde r 
Blood" is a novel of his race, and of the present 
time. Moreover , it is a story told for the sake of 
the story, and is not a treatise unde r disguise. Th e 
novel is one of great merit, as a novel, and there 
are situations in it that reach the acme of legitimate 
dramatic intensity. $1.00 by mail. 
Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D., author of "The United States," in ten volumes; 
formerly lecturer in Johns Hopkin s University and in the Universit y of Chicago": 
formerly Superintendent of Public Schools in the District of Columbia - "The 
Neale Publishing Company today represents high-water mark in Americ a for its 
historical works. Upo n its list are to be found the best books upon each and every 
side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered a? an entirety as to lend lustre to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor."
 r 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHING CO. , 440 Forth Avenue New York City or TH E CRISIS, 70th Fifth Avenu
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R A7 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEM S 
A prominent southern white educator in a letter to the publishers says: "You r 
policy of absolute fairness with regard to the Negro question, along with your sympathy for the South, make me wish to co-operate with you as far as possible." Says 
a prominent western colored educator to the publishers: " I am deeply impressed 
with the justice of your house. I see often, and he never tires of speaking of 
your great work in behalf of the Negro in literature." 
Negro Cultur e in West Africa . By GEORG E W . 
ELLIS , K.C. , F.R.G.S. ; recently, and for eight years, 
Secretary of the United States Legation in Liberia ; 
author of "Liberi a in the Political Psychology of 
West Africa, " "Islam A s a Factor in West Africa n 
Culture," "Dynami c Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 
by mail. 
Pittsburgh Sun: "In this thorough study of Negro 
social conditions in Afric a lies a revelation for those 
to whom the Africa n Negro has meant only the savage. Her e is revealed a social system, a religious 
tradition, a craftsmanship, and, most astonishing of 
all, a written language other than primitive. Especially interesting are the maxims and the fables 
translated from the Va i tongue, with their picturesque 
simplicity and ingenious wisdom." 
Boston Transcript: "In this study Mr . Ellis has 
given us an excellent and valuable contribution to 
the history of the Negro race." 
DR . ROBER T E . PAR K in the Chicago Tribune: "In 
an introduction which he has written to Mr . Ellis's 
volume, Prof. Starr , who is an authority on West 
Africa , describes the Va i as 'a vigorous," energetic, 
enterprising' people, and he adds that 'no people of 
the west coast of Afric a can better be taken as 
typical and showing what the Africa n can do, either 
when left to himself, or affected by outside influences.' This defines the peculiar interest of this 
volume. It tells us what a minute and isolated Negro people have done with the slight cultural resources that were at their command." 
Th e Negro Races: Vol . II. East and South 
Africans, with a Ful l Accoun t of the Slave 
Trade . By JEROM E DOWD . This is the second volume of Professor Dowd's series entitled "The Negro 
Races," and is devoted to the Negroes of both East 
and South Africa , with a full account of the slave 
trade. Th e first volume of the series, "West 
Africans, " was published several years ago. Th e 
third volume, "Th e Negroes of America, " is now in 
the course of preparation. Professor Dowd, who is 
at the head of the Department of Sociology and 
Economics, Universit y of Oklahoma, perhaps is the 
highest authority on the aspects of the Negro races 
of which he writes. O f the first volume Professor 
W . I. Thomas, of the University of Chicago, said: 
"I am greatly pleased with it. I think you have gone 
at the matter in an admirable fashion." Said Professor T . F . Jameson, Director , Carnegie Institute: 
"I can see especially the need of such systematic accounts of the sociology of the African. " Professor 
Paul S. Reinsch, of the University of Wisconsin, 
wrote: "I have read it with great interest." Th e 
nrice of each volume of the series is $2.50; by mail, 
$2.65. 
Rac e Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America . By KELL Y MILLEH , Dean of the College of 
Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, 
Howar d University. Thir d edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Dallas News: "Th e author is a cultured man, a 
forceful and most pleasing writer, interesting from 
the first sentence of the first chapter to the close of 
the book." 
Chicago News: "Th e book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable. 
New York Evening Post: "A s admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness and 
skill." 
Independent: "Ther e is no book which more fully 
and correctly represents the wishes and demands for 
equal recognition in civil and political rights than this 
volume." 
Ou t of the Hous e of Bondage . By KELL Y MILLER , 
Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Howar d 
University. $1.65 by mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. H e neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. N o 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogues." 
Detroit Times: "Kell y Mille r has the soul of an 
artist and an idealist. W e cannot but be carried 
away with a splendid fervor for our Negro brother 
after reading Prof. Miller's book. It is as big as all 
outdoors and aims at a readjustment on the highest 
principles." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "Those who are interested in the study of the Negro cannot ignore this 
volume. Wit h many of its conclusions we can by 
no means agree, but it points in favor of a revised 
judgment on certain questions connected with the 
position or achievements of his race." 
Rac e Orthodox y in the South. By THOMA S PEARC E 
BAILF.Y . For many years Professor Bailey has studied 
southern social problems, particularly with respect to 
the relations of the Caucasian and the Negro races. 
He has held professorships in the University of California, the University of Chicago, and the University 
of Mississippi, and he now holds a professorship in 
the University of the South. Although a southerner, 
now engaged in educational work in the South, he has 
lived ten years in the North, and he has studied the 
Negro and his problems of every section of the 
United States. $2.15 by mail. 
Gen. Randolph K . Evans, U . S. A. , Commanding the Department of the East, with 
headquarters at Governor's Island: " I appreciate the value of your work for 
American literature in general, and especially what you have done as a military 
missionary in publishing books, which many other publishers would have rejected, 
with a view to increasing military comprehension among our people,—an important 
part of governmental knowledge in regard to which a great majority o f our people 
sit in outer darkness and blissful ignorance." 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., 440 Forth Avenue New York City or THE CRISIS, 70th F
Mention TH E CRISI S -IX TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraterna l and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALIA CC 
Jos. L. Jones. Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Obi 
To Every Woman 
Free who writes, one copy of "Ladies 
Cyclopedia of Healt h and 
• • • M ^ ™ Beauty.*' This book contain* in 
formation indispensable to every 
woman; on every subject women are most interested 
in. Tells how to cultivate health and beauty, what 
to use and how to use it. 
131 2 Fa r na m Stree t Omaha , Neb . 
LOUI S MCCREAR Y 
TEACHER S 
1403 New Yor k Avenue Washington, D . C. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate in your own home during spare 
time. Th e parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. Yo u can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, ,printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, H i 
The new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland , Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a 
and West Virginia . 
Ou r list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
TH E NATIONAL TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Throug h us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B . F . BOWLES , MANAGER , 
2739 CONVERS E AVENU E FAS T ST . LOUIS , III . 
(EVANS Art Pianos) 
and Players at / 
I Wholesale 
30 
Direct from mv factory to you .'!'<• introduce our 
Profit-Sharing Plan, weofn ronemeach locality 
at the rock-bottom, wholesale price—putting 
$200 In Your Pocket 
Artistic designs, exclusive features scientifically built, producing wonderful tonal etlects— 
the Acme of Perfection. , , . _ . ... . 
UNLIMITE D GUARANTE E backed by Three Million Capital. FREIGH T CHARGE S ALLOWED . 
Easy payments—no interest—no extras. 
Stool and Scarf—TwoYe ors' n - pjj K™ 
Course Piano Instructions Uttfcfc 
Write Today, Be the First • 
Story & Clark Piano fo.,D&?£a£^fi: 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R . WRIGHT , JR. , and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
and arranged in an attractive volume suitable for a 
Xmas gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e :; :: :: Ne w Yor k 
SOUTHER N COLORE D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Formerly TEXA S COLORE D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1025 Boll Street, DALLAS , TEXA S 
Recommends teachers to Colleges, Universities, Schoo l Boards and Schoo l Authorities. 
Writ e for information. R . O . GOTHARD , Manager 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
H. GEO. DAVENPORT 
Days 
Free 
Trial TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
$60 A WEEK AND THIS FREE AUTOMOBILE 
I OFFE R this Big Mone y and a FRE E Automobil e to one hustling Representative in each county in the 
U . S. This is not a contest. Every agent can get a FRE E Automobil e and $60.00 a week. Yo u don't 
need experience. 1 want you to advertise, sell and appoint sub-agents for the Robinson Folding Bath 
Tub. It s a whirlwind seller. Solves the bathing problem. N o plumbing. no waterworks needed. Ful l 
length baths in any room. Folds in small roll. Won't leak. Seli-cmpiying. Ten-year Guarantee. 
Rivals $100 bath room. Never such a big seller; never such a big money-maker. Never such a liberal offer 
as this. Think ! $60.00 a Week and FREE Automobile. 
Sell 2 Tubs Daily—Make $300.00 Monthly 
Exclusive Territory. 
100°; Profit. 
Bached by 10 
Year Gold Bond 
Guarantee 
It's easy. Yo u can do it. J . H . Brown . N . J sayB : "1 4 calls, Mfalw . How' 8 
that?" ($7 0 profit). K . C . McCartney . Mich. , says: "Sol d 5 lul l in 15 hours." 
t $J 5 profit.) "Sol d 6 Irom noon to niyht,*' fays J . A . Hcmbd . S . O . ($3 0 profit* 
Ne d Bolles ot Idaho, sold tt first afternoon. ($4 0 profit) H M Velz y N D sold 
10 in 3 days. I $5 0 profit). W . A . Gloecldcr , S . D. . sold I I in 3 days. ($55 pro60 . A . K . F.ngle. Mnnt. , got I I orders in 2 1-2 days. (Addresses furnished on request). Yo u can do as well as these 
, men. Yo u can se 1 2 a day . Tha t 
means $b(J a week, clean profit, and 
a big, speedy Tourin g Ca r Free . 
Little capital needed. 1 frant credit 
to deserving men. Furnish you with 
i Demonslraling I ub, on liberal plan. 
Yo u can't lose. 70".. of the homes 
have no bath-room. The y need the 
Kobinson Tub . Just show tub; take 
order. Quic k sales and immense 
profits. This is YOU K chance. 
Don't d-lay. Ge t busy. Writ e toTu b and FREF . Automobil e offer. day for Demonstrating 
Demonstrating TH E ROBINSON CABINET MFG . CO. 
Tub Furnished H. S. Robinson, Pres.. 1595 Factories Budding. Toledo. 0. 
$100.00 PRIZE 
Given to the agent selling the largest number of 
"The A . E. C. of Color " over 1,500. This book 
is different from anything before the public. It 
is illustrated thruout with pictures of Negro 
children. No family will refuse a copy. Retail price 15c. Libera l commission to agents. 
Eighteen other cash prizes ranging from $50.00 
down to $5.00 will be given. These prizes do 
not come under the 1,500 sales as required for 
the $100.00 prize. Contest closes December 31, 
1915. In case of a tie, all contestants thus tied 
will receive the same stated prize. Address 
0. A. PIERCE & CO., 224 W. Frambes Ave.. Columbus, 0. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue, New YorkMake$35toS65aweek showingthisgreatTailor-Book . t 
Goodeeomuchfinerand prices t 
RO much lower, everyone seea" 
the difference at a glance. 
Special Offer 
To prove our unequalled quality, 
we will let you order at the 
wholesale price, a Sample Sui t or 
even a pair of pants as low a- 11.25 
—and not xtraoharceseven for the 
biggest pet; top styles. Von can 
nnw make mare quick momy and hi>7 your 
own fine tailored clothes cheaper tlnn you ever trniiKntpoBriihl©. 
We prepay the charjreB on evury onlcr ami don't keep a cant of 
anyeuatomer'arnnnry unlesa ho is Well pl< uti-d. I.- r DM I yo u 
thu nriemimplo outfit anil Hhow ymi how to take thi> must perfnet 
rauaauree for the linaet tailoring ou thumurkuU Write ua today. 
The Chicago Tailors9 Association 
Dept* 332* Va n Bure n an d Marke t Sts. , CHICAG O 
Wha t better Christmas Gift ,„ 
TH E CRISIS ? An d you may announce the same on our attractive 
CHRISTMA S CARD . 
SPECIAL OFFER * ^ 
A year's subscription to TH E CRISIS will be given to anyone sending in 
at one time five paid-up yearly subscriptions to TH E CRISIS. The offer 
holds good until midnight of December 31, 1915. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Let Me Start You in the 
Mail- Order Business 
$2 5 a Week For Your Spare Time 
$4 0 to $7 5 Weekly For Your Entire Time 
That is the money you should make in the mailorder business. I want an ambitious man in your 
community to act as my Branch Manager , and build 
up a successful, prosperous mail-order business, just 
as I have. I will help you to do it, show you how 
fortunes are made in this fascinating business, and 
supply you with everything needed to start. 
No Experience Needed. I Show You How. 
Yo u need no experience to become my Branc h 
Manager . I want honest men of determination who 
are ambitious to succeed, and I will teach such men 
all they need to know to handle the business successfully. If you are one of the thousands of slaves 
to the pay-check, grinding away the best years of your 
life for some other man's profit, let me show you how 
to embark in a business that should free you forever 
from this grinding, body-wracking wage slavery. Le t 
me show you the way to financial independence and 
happiness. A few dollars start you. The n by putting 
your profits each week back into the business you 
should grow rapidly. I show you how to make a 
start with just a few dollars and the postman should 
soon wear a path to your door laden with letters, 
orders, and moneyed mail. 
Yen Need No Office. Your Own Home Will Do. 
The beauty of it all is, you need no office, no expensive office equipment. Yo u don't even need to 
quit your regular job; just work in your own home, 
evenings, spare time, etc. Le t your wife, sister, 
mother or relatives help you. Yo u need no outside 
help. Thin k of it! A chance to build up a big, successful, mail-order business right at home in your 
spare time. Isn't that great? Isn't that wonderful? 
RISE , G O O N AN D UP ! Th e road is clear. A 
glorious future summons you to the battle of betterment. Dar e on, you whose souls are bruised with 
past defeats. Twist your frown into a smile, because 
fortune awaits you NOW . Le t me show you how to 
B E more, D O more, HAV E more in this life. Don't 
be a WISHE R and a HOPE R and a HESITATOR , 
held down by foolish doubts and empty fears. Don't 
be timid, clinging with a drowning man's grasp to 
your slender salary, just because you think moneymaking is a mystery that you can never learn. I will 
do my level best to put you on the quick road to 
independence and show you how to get a look-in at 
luxury and happiness. Don't be a boss-scared, jobhugging, wage-cowed slave; stop doing the dull drudge 
lock-step to and from work. Le t me set off the skyrocket of your ambition NOW . Pardon my plain talk, 
but plain talk, like the arnica you put on a burn, 
stings like blazes but goes straight to the spot. Plain 
talk stings good men to action; prods their pride and 
puts them on the primrose pathway to prosperity. 
Make Profit. For Yourself —Not For Others. Start Now. 
Writ e me at once and begin pulling out of the wage 
rut. No reason why you cannot have people everywhere remitting money to you while you sit in your 
home or office, gathering in BI G PROFITS . Min e is 
the ideal proposition for Aspiring Success Seekers and 
Aspiring Mone y Makers. Yo u should quickly become 
a daily bank depositor and see your profits pile up and 
bring you all those wonderful, "long-wanted, wished-for 
luxuries of life, which will give you priceless independence and enable you to bid your pay-check pals 
good-bye forever. Remember I supply everything you 
need to start, including my $1 0 Correspondence Instruction Course which I furnish you FREE . WRIT E 
me, as you value your future success, NOW ! 
Allan C. Butler, 406 Factories Bldg., Toledo, Ohio 
COLORE D AGENTS WANTE D 
Libera) commission; a postal brings particulars. 
TH E PATRICK-LEE REALT Y CO . 
Dept., O. 2743 Welton Street. Denver. Colo . 
WANTED 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue . New York. 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
T • . .. . (Centra l 104-W Telephones: j Mai n 6 1 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Buildin g Cleveland, Ohi o 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counsellor -AT - LAW 
Rooms 613-614 , Metropolitan Buildin g 
11 3 Marke t St., Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes" Block 
Nea r Thir d and Hennepi n 
Minneapolis Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
90 8 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia Pa . 
Tel . 543 7 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkins George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 527 7 Morningside 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
SURGEO N DENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Street New Yor k City 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audit a Systems 
Business information by mail. Ope n for 
engagements Jul y and August 
Bo x 25 , Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O . 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
I
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1, No . 2 an d No . 3 
Fo r Scalp , Hai r an d Ski n 
P . O . Bo x 102 , WILMINGTON . DEL . 
Mention T H E C RISI S A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. H e is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa , America , and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr. D u Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
These books may be obtained from The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
It made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J . ARTHU R THOMSON. 
Clot h bound, good paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r I"* f \ — • 
volume. Eac h complet e an d sold separatel y - - Ov/v^ « 1161 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES : 
EVOLUTION By J . A. Thomson 
TH E FRENCH REVOLUTION 
By Hilaire Belloc 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 
By Bertrand Russell 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson 
94 volumes now ready. Send for a list 
HENR Y HOL T AN D COMPAN Y 
LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
VICTORIAN LITERATUR E 
By G. K. Chesterton 
GERMAN Y OF TODA Y 
By Charles Tower 
EURIPIDES AND HIS AG E 
By Gilbert Murray 
UNEMPLOYMEN T By A. C. Pigou 
3 4 W. 33 d STREET 
NEW YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISI S Attention , Masons ! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negr o Masonr y in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Vale, formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of Ne w Have n and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr . 
Crawfor d is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A . & A . Scottish Rite: 
" 'Prince Hal l and His Followers,' written by a scholarly A fro-American, presents to the Masonic world a treatise on the legitimacy of Negro Masonry that 
should be in the hands of every Mason seeking for Truth. The information 
contained in the chapter devoted to Prince Hal l is alone worth to the young 
Mason the price of the book. Brother Crawford's easy and pleasing style 
creates in the reader a desire to complete the volume before putting the book 
out of his hands." 
From Henry A . Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"The book fills a long-felt want among intelligent Masons of our Race. 
T o know that we are right, and to substantiate that fact by intelligent research 
and logical statements, is worth more to us than what the other fellow may 
say. This is what Brother Crawford's book does; and it should be in the hands 
of every Mason of our Race." 
From Jose H . Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners: 
" A very strong brief, setting forth plainly the legitimacy of Prince Hall 
Masonry, and, as well, a stern call to all Negroes to assume full pride in the 
happy possession of a Rite which can show such clear proofs of its contentions." 
From William H . Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of " A History of Colored Freemasonry" : 
"I have read with great pleasure 'Prince Hal l and His Followers.' The book 
is well written, containing clear and convincing diction. The impartial accuracy 
with which the facts are marshalled makes the book a very valuable asset 
to Masons." 
GEORG E W . CRAWFORD , 32° 
COMMENT S 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra . 
ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
70 Fifth Avenue Ne w Yor k 