TH E 
MA Y 
CRISI S 
1917 President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D II. GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
DR. J. E. SP1NGARN , Chairman of Board 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR. W. E. B. D U BOIS, Director of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretary 
JAMES WELDG N JOHNSON, Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAMS 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSON 
Baltimore 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
DR. F. N. CARDOZO 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTORS 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIA M COOK 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTON JONES 
DR. 0 . M. WALLE R 
New Haven 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A. SINCLAIR 
New Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHOP 
MRS. FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGARN 
CHARLE S H. STUDI'N 
DR. JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
The fight for 1917 is to be against 
DISFRANCHISEMENT and JIM CRO W CARS. 
If this is your fight, join and support us. 
Date , 1917. 
Membership Blank 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
Oswald Garrison V illard , Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
Sir : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive Th e Crisis . 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street g t . a c ..... . . »v • * c» • 
$ t ;
 ;City arid State" .7 . V 
MENTION THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHL Y BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOR K CITY CONDUCTE D BY W. E . 
BURGHARD T DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917 by the Nationa Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for May, 1917 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . Posed by Miss Anita Thompson (see page 34). 
FRENC H AFRICA N TROOPS 29 
FRO M BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 30 
ARTICLES 
"THER E WA S ONE TIME. " A Story. By Jessie Fauset. Parts IV. and V. 11 
TH E MA N WH O NEVE R SOLD A N ACRE . By J. B. Woods 15 
A SONNET. By G. Douglas Johnson 17 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 7 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE 18 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 19 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 22 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 31 
TH E HORIZON 34 
TH E CRISIS for June 
Th e June CRISI S will contain a careful study of the Exodus from the South and a story 
by Mrs. Pendleton: "Aun t Caroline's Sheaves." Th e cover will be by Battey. 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 14 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
'iimiMMiimiiinmiiiwiiiniimiiminimimMiroimn^ 
The NATIONA L TRAINING SCHOO L 
"I cordially commend the school's interest, and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
Rev. D r. ChaSle s H . Parkhurst , New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVIC E AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M . C. A . and Y . W. C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDAR D COLLEG E DEPARTMEN T has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School term opens October 3, 1917. 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPAR D 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L DURHAM , N . C. 
The A. & T. Summer 
School 
Eighteenth Annual Session begins June 25, 1917, and continues 
five weeks. Two weeks' Institute also. 
Growin g older, better and 
stronger. Last summe r applications greatly exceeded capacity. 
Teachers, therefore, should send 
Registratio n Fee and secure 
lodgin g in advance. 
Fo r terms, catalog or other 
information, address 
President J. B. Dudley, 
Agricultural & Technical College, 
Greensboro, N . C. 
TH E CHEYNE Y TRAINING 
SCHOOL FO R TEACHER S 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
For reasonably mature students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$100. Fall term begins Wednesday, September 19, 1917. 
The Summer School for Teachers, from 
July 5 to August 2 inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should he made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15,00. 
For further information write to 
LESLIE PINCKNET HILL, 
Principal. 
Mention T h e Ciisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 5 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1917. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans. La . 
Situated on the main thoroughfare of the 
largest city of the South. 
Thorough training in High. School, Teachers' Course and College, with special work 
in Music and Manual Training. 
Teachers represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
country. 
For full information, address 
J . T. Cater, Registrar. 
TOUGALOO COLLEG E 
MISSISSIPPI 
"The test school for Negroes in the State"— 
Bishop Theodore D. Bratton. 
COLLEG E 
Regular Four Year A. B. Course 
Two Year Teacher Training Course 
ACADEM Y 
Choice of Seven Courses—College Preparatory, 
Agricultural, Mechanical, Home Economics, 
Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical. 
Out in the country. Expenses low. 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
Tougaloo, Hinds County, Mississippi. 
Mention the crisis 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College ) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College , Academy , Divinity - Schoo l 
A n institutio n famou s withi n recen t years 
fo r its emphasis o n al l side s o f manl y develop ­
ment—th e onl y institutio n i n th e fa r Sout h 
devote d solel y t o th e educatio n o f Negr o 
youn g men . 
Graduate s give n hig h rankin g b y greatest 
norther n universities. Debating , Y . M . C . A. , 
athletics, al l liv e features. 
Fo r informatio n address 
JOH N HOPE , Presiden t 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W . DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founde d 1866 
Thoroug h Literary , Scientific , Educational , 
Musica l an d Socia l Scienc e Courses. Pionee r 
i n Negr o music . Specia l stud y in Negr o life . 
Idea l an d sanitar y building s an d grounds. 
Well-equippe d Scienc e building . 
Christia n hom e life . 
Hig h standar d o f independen t manhoo d and 
womanhood . Fo r literature , etc., writ e 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , Presiden t 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J . I. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
40 Teachers and Workers Over 600 Students Talladega College 
Rev. F. A . SUMNER , President TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
A School for Training Leaders Positive Christian Influence 
Twenty Buildings Four Laboratories Modern Hospital 
Electric Light Library of 16000 Volumes Athletic Field 
Steam Heat Pipe Organ Good Board 
Hot and Cold Water Model Farm Expense Low 
EQUIPPE D FOR STANDAR D WOR K IN AL L DEPARTMENT S 
Departments an d Courses 
Scientific Bible Institute Domestic Science and Arts 
Classical Academy Nurse Training 
Education Conservatory of Music Manual Training 
Theological Agriculture Printing 
For Catalog and Information, address 
TH E DEAN , Room 21 , Talladega, Alabama 
TH E FLORIDA A . & M . COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P. O. DRAWER 524 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
unde r the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address : 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
609 N . 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Fou r years Academy or Hig h School. 
Fiv e years Norma l Course. 
Tw o years Pre-Medical Course. 
Fou r years College (A . B.) Course. 
$75 to $125 pays necessary expenses for a year. 
Harr y Andrews King , President. 
ROLAND W. HAYES , Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratorio Opera 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good '• 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre. 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWICK ST. . BOSTON . MASS. 
MORGA N COLLEG E AN D BRANCHES 
John O . Spencer, President. 
MORGAN COLLEGE, Baltimore, Md. 
LOCATION: Central, in great college town between North 
and South. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, music, advanced education, collegiate,—appropriate degrees. 
INSTRUCTORS: College and university trained. Seven 
colleges and universities represented in faculty. 
DORMITORIES: For a limited number, furnished. 
TERMS: Very reasonable. 
DEAN : William Pickens, Llt.D. 
PRINCESS ANNE ACADEMY, Princess Anne, Md. 
(The Eastern Branch of the Maryland State College of 
Agriculture.) 
LOCATION: The famous Eastern Shore of Maryland, 
Somerset County. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal. Industrial, domestic science, music. 
INSTRUCTORS: College and technically trained. 
DORMITORIES: Carefully supervised, furnished. 
TERMS : Free tuition; other expenses moderate. 
PRINCIPAL: Rev. Thomas H. Klah, A .M . 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS : June 25th to 
August 3rd. 
VIRGINIA COLLEGIATE AND INDUSTRIAL INSTITUTION, Lynchburg, Va. 
LOCATION: On beautiful hill, suburbs of growing city. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, domestic science gardening, music. 
INSTRUCTORS: College trained: carefully selected. 
DORMITORIES: Furnished; steam heat; accommodations 
for fifty girls; carefully supervised. 
TERMS : Within the reach of all 
PRINCIPAL: Lee M. McCoy, A .M . 
ALL SCHOOLS OPEN SEPTEMBE R 25. 1917. 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keeping 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A. B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
We typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET. PHILADELPHIA . PA. 
MME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L O F 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and Millinery 
c . Bridges System. 
special Courses in Designing. Copying, Draping 
Making, Trimmingt Finishing, Cutting and Fitting 
special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taxing two or more consecutive courses 
Individual Instruction. A Bridge* Diploma means 
something to you. means 
448 E . 35th St. chicago, Ill. 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISI S 
Vol . 14-No . 1 MAY , 1917 Whol e No . 79 
Editoria l 
A CAL L TO COUNSEL. 
THE time s deman d tha t the 
leaders of the America n 
Negr o counse l togethe r as to 
the best course of actio n 
present an d future . Th e Nationa l 
Associatio n fo r the Advancemen t of 
Colore d Peopl e hereb y calls a Na ­
tiona l Conferenc e to meet i n the Cit y 
o f Washingto n Ma y 17 to 19, 1917. 
No t onl y ou r ow n branche s through ­
out the land , bu t organization s o f al l 
kind s ar e aske d to send delegates to 
tak e counse l wit h us an d to see the 
awar d o f the Spingar n meda l fo r distinguishe d achievemen t durin g 1916. 
A NEW WORD . 
WE need a ne w wor d i n ou r 
vocabular y to express tha t 
whic h w e formerl y expressed b y the wor d "democratic. " Tha t wor d formerl y expressed "respec t fo r the rights o f the 
commo n people. " It mean t sympath y 
an d consideratio n an d justice . To ­
da y the word—bot h b y derivatio n an d 
b y actua l experience—mean s the "au ­
thorit y o f the people " an d it means 
frequentl y a n ignoran t an d unjust 
authority . T o be democrati c means 
merel y servil e conformit y to the wil l 
o f the majority , even whe n it is igno ­
ran t o r unjust, o r it mean s arrogan t 
an d intoleran t exercis e o f the politica l 
powe r o f the majority . 
W e need, therefore , a new wor d to 
express tha t ide a o f sympath y an d 
consideratio n fo r the people whic h is 
neithe r servil e no r arrogant . On e 
o f ou r grea t thinkers, discussin g this 
need, make s these observations as to 
the typ e o f ma n whic h i n forme r 
time s we woul d have called "democratic " an d the ne w wor d whic h we 
should use to describe him : 
"It seems evident that our ethical education must be carried on further than it has 
been in the past. The individual conscience 
must be strengthened and rendered more 
independent and at the same time it must 
have more imaginative sympathy so as to 
realize that public righteousness can only 
be attained by union with other wills and 
consciences that are in many ways 
diverse. . . . 
"When one comes to try to indicate a 
moral attitude which involves the union of 
a good many qualities which are not usually 
found together, one has to fall back on a 
person in whom they were actually united. 
'Lincoln-like' comes nearer expressing what 
we have in mind. It is no blind following 
of the will of the majority but it does have a 
confidence that when a just and reasonable 
course of conduct is discovered and when 
time is given for its presentation in the right 
way the majority of men will approve of 
it. . . . 
"That was Lincoln's attitude when in the 
Douglass controversy he deliberately 
shocked the majority of the moment, knowing, also, that what he was doing was 'good 
politics.' . . . 
"The word 'democratic' is liable to misconception when used for ideal ends. What 
I should like to use would be the word 
'socialistic,' if it were not preempted by 
the Socialists. The awareness on the part 
of the individual of his real relations to 
society as a whole, and his free acceptance 
of all the responsibilities involved in those 
relations would make rather a different kind 
of man." 
Th e phras e "Lincoln-like, " suggested b y this writer, expresses the 
though t I wis h to express—"inde ­
pendence, " coupled wit h "imagina ­
tiv e sympath y fo r others. " Tha t is 
the though t the wor d "democratic " 
used to express but now, unfortu ­
nately, does not. 
GEORGE G. BRADFORD. 8 TH E CRISIS 
TH E WORL D LAST MONTH . 
KP ^g i THRE E vast events stan d out : 
WES the Russia n freedom, sufIxf§H frage for Englis h women , 
k»m 8 an d War . 
I envisage the ris e o f Russi a i n one 
picture . Catherin e Breshovsk y re ­
turnin g fro m Siberia , afte r a life ­
lon g fight, afte r al l seemed lost. So 
some day a blac k woma n wil l rid e 
dow n the worl d crying , "Disfran ­
chisement is done ! 'Jim-Crow ' cars 
are gone ! Segregatio n is past! I a m 
a n American! " 
Th e Englis h suffragettes di d not 
hesitat e whe n wa r came . The y wer e 
Englis h an d althoug h bowe d beneath 
age-long insul t an d injustice , they 
fought fo r England . So wil l we blac k 
me n fight against German y fo r Amer ­
ica . Go d gran t us freedom, too, i n 
the end. 
War ! It is a n awfu l thing ! It is 
Hell . It is the end of civilization . It 
is an appea l to barbarism ; yet it 
comes. Ba d as it is, slaver y is worse ; 
Germa n dominio n is worse ; the rap e 
o f Belgiu m an d Franc e is worse . W e 
fight shoulde r to shoulde r wit h the 
worl d to gai n a worl d wher e wa r shall 
be no more . 
LOYALTY . 
NOTHIN G better illustrate s the 
attitude of the Bourbo n 
Sout h tha n the recent tales 
about Germa n propagand a 
amon g Negroes. 
Slowly , but surel y the Negr o is 
winnin g his fight. Despit e wretch ­
edly inadequat e schools, peonage, lo w 
wage s an d publi c insult, the Negr o is 
gettin g education, buyin g lan d an d 
homes an d migratin g slowl y but 
surel y to a lan d of liberty . 
Th e slave-thinkin g Sout h is beset 
b y fea r o f losin g these peons eithe r 
b y migratio n or b y their regainin g 
their lost franchise . An y tale o r 
propagand a b y whic h the Bourbo n 
Sout h ca n get the countr y to believe 
the Negr o is a menac e woul d pla y 
straigh t into the hands of the slaveholders. Martia l la w woul d be declare d i n the Sout h an d this is wha t 
the reactionarie s want : to stop mi ­
gration . 
The y ar e playin g wit h fire! Th e 
Negr o is fa r mor e loya l to this coun ­
tr y an d its ideals tha n the whit e 
Souther n American . H e neve r ha s 
been a disloya l rebel. H e neve r 
fough t fo r slaver y i n a lan d of 
Liberty . H e neve r nullifie d the basi c 
principle s o f democrac y because he 
hate d the people who m he ha d hurt ! 
Enslaved , rape d an d despised 
thoug h he has been an d is, the Negr o 
know s tha t this is his countr y because he helped foun d it, fough t fo r 
its libertie s an d eve r uphel d its 
ideals. 
N o temptatio n to trust Germa n 
race-hatre d ha s eve r been offered an d 
i f offered woul d no t fo r a momen t 
have been considered . Bac k o f the 
Germa n mas k is the grinnin g skele ­
to n o f the Souther n slave driver. 
TH E MIGRATION . 
THE migratio n o f Negr o 
laborers fro m Sout h to Nort h 
continue s as i t should . 
Souther n whit e papers ar e 
filled wit h contradictor y statements; 
to-day, wit h editorials ridiculin g the 
exodus, paintin g fearsome picture s of 
the awfu l conditio n o f the emigrants 
an d chroniclin g their wholesal e re ­
turn ; tomorro w come editorials bewailin g the loss o f labo r an d cryin g 
fo r drasti c measure s to enslave the 
blac k peons. . 
Meantim e the trut h is clear: the 
deman d fo r blac k workers i n the 
Nort h is unprecedented ; afte r the 
wa r the deman d wil l continu e because 
not fo r a generatio n wil l immigra ­
tio n fro m Europ e ris e to appreciabl e 
figures. Ther e ar e no t job s fo r 
everybody ; ther e is no deman d fo r 
the laz y an d casual, bu t trained , 
honest colored laborers ar e welcome 
i n the Nort h at good wages, just as 
they ar e lynche d i n the Sout h fo r 
impudence . Tak e you r choice ! 9 EDITORIAL 
TH E NAVA L RULER . 
WHE N the United States 
takes possession of foreign 
territory it sends to govern it a naval officer. But 
naval officers are not trained to govern. They are trained to fight! 
They have made no study of social 
organization, of human development 
of industrial organization; if they 
are not quite unsympathetic, it is no 
fault of their training or of the traditions of their caste; yet, to-day they 
are well-nigh absolute masters in 
Nicaragua, San Domingo, Hayti and 
the erstwhile Danish West Indies. It 
would be impossible to conceive a 
more dangerous or foolhardy experiment. 
A MORA L VOID. 
THER E can be no doubt but 
that the South is lacking i n 
certain moral stamina which 
must be found among successful, forward-striving people. Recently, for instance, the press of the 
country went wild over the brave 
action of Governor Stanley of Kentucky. What then ? This same Governor Stanley is apparently going to 
allow the rescued victim of that mob 
to be lynched by court under forms 
of law. There would seem to be no 
reasonable doubt but that Lube Marti n killed Guthrie Diuguid in selfdefense after Diuguid had followed 
him for a year and sworn to kil l him. 
Ye t Marti n is sentenced to death and 
the Governor dares not raise his 
voice. So too in South Carolina. A 
man is lynched because he is a selfrespecting, wealthy Negro citizen 
who refuses to let a dirty mob publicly whip him. Governor Manning 
makes brave professions and sends 
them out through the associated 
press yet to-day every single lyncher 
is free and unindicted. The Governor does nothing and wil l do nothing. How different is the tale at 
Lima , Ohio! There a mob attempted 
to lynch a Negro but was foiled by 
the brave sheriff. The ring leaders 
of the mob were arrested and the 
sheriff writes us: "We have one serving time in the Ohio Penitentiary, 
three serving time in the Mansfield 
Reformatory, one locked up in Ottawa 
Jail waiting return of Court of Ap ­
peals, one out on $1,500 bond waiting 
answer from Court of Appeals, for 
a new trial, several that we could 
not get the strongest of evidence 
against that came in and pleaded 
guilty that got suspended sentences 
by paying costs which amounted anywhere from $25 to $50, and are under our watch for one year to see that 
they don't drink and do anything bad, 
and we surely have our eyes on them 
and wil l continue so. I also have one 
locked in the county jail yet awaiting 
his trial, several to try yet, and 
about four who were indicted that we 
have not been able to locate yet. We 
have them whipped here and I hope 
and pray that our steps here in this 
matter wil l have its effect everywhere." 
A SUGGESTION . 
THE Republican party is on 
the rocks. The disfranchised 
Negro sees light but dimly. 
The disfranchised woman is 
still disfranchised in the vast 
majority of inhabited states. Suppose these three groups strike a 
simple bargain: Let them work for 
a Constitutional Amendment basing 
representation in Congress on the 
actual vote cast for president in each 
state. 
We pause for reply. 
REGISTE R AN D VOTE . 
IT is of prime necessity that the 
colored people of the South 
should begin to break down the 
"white primary. " The N . A . 
A . C. P. proposes to take the matter 
of the "white primary" into the 10 TH E CRISIS 
courts just as soon as it ca n get a 
prope r case. Bu t th e effective wa y 
to beat the "whit e primary " is 
throug h registerin g an d votin g on the 
part of the colored South . I n Col ­
umbia , S. C , recentl y some si x hun ­
dre d Negroe s registered . Immediate ­
l y the dominan t oligarch y became 
scared. "Wha t do yo u want? " the y 
asked, expectin g a deman d fo r a 
bribe . "W e want, " sai d the colored 
voters afte r carefu l consultation , " a 
ne w hig h school building. " The y got 
no t onl y a fifty thousan d dolla r hig h 
school bu t one hundre d fifty thou ­
san d dollars wort h of improvements 
i n their streets. Wha t wa s done i n 
Columbi a is possibl e al l ove r the 
South . Th e Negr o must wor k not 
onl y fo r his ow n uplift, bu t he ca n 
wor k fo r the uplift of the whol e 
South , especially whe n the whit e politician s seek to forc e upo n citie s an d 
states me n who m it woul d be shame ­
fu l to pu t i n publi c office. I n At ­
lanta , Ga. , the whit e nomine e fo r 
mayo r severa l years ago wa s a 
notoriou s drunkar d wh o wa s arreste d 
i n a bawd y house just before election. 
It wa s Negr o votes tha t pu t a decent 
mayo r i n his place despite the "whit e 
primary. " Th e colored wome n of 
Arkansa s have the chanc e of their 
lives. Th e legislatur e has give n the 
vote to wome n "i n the primar y elections. " The y expect only whit e 
wome n to vote i n the Democrati c 
primary ; but a Republica n primar y 
shoul d be organize d forthwith , an d 
colored wome n shoul d vote i n it. 
Some one shoul d appl y at the Demo ­
crati c primar y an d i f refused shoul d 
tak e the matte r to the courts. It is 
the chance o f a lifetime . Le t us not 
miss it. 
TH E WHIT E CHURCH . 
SEVERA L whit e ministers o f 
Ne w Yor k Cit y have recentl y been assailin g the Negr o 
"invasio n o f Harlem. " "Th e 
color question, " the y say, "is a grea t 
menac e to us. " I n somethin g the 
same way , w e tak e it, the Gentile s 
wer e " a menac e to th e Jews " unti l 
Jesus Christ preache d a ne w an d ver y 
unpopula r gospe l whic h the reveren d 
doctors o f tha t da y stoppe d b y a 
timel y crucifixion . Th e same spiri t 
is eviden t i n the Chicag o Standard, a 
Baptist publication . Th e Standard 
is exercise d because the edito r of 
the CRISIS tol d the students o f More ­
house College tha t lyin g abou t their 
ambition s an d aspiration s wa s no wa y 
to settle the rac e problem. H e 
says: "Some o f Dr . DuBois ' hearers 
coul d no t hel p admirin g his passio n 
fo r honest y whil e a t the same time 
wonderin g whethe r this fundamenta l 
virtu e migh t no t be so accentuate d as 
to delay indefinitel y the solutio n o f 
the grea t rac e problems confrontin g 
the nation . 
"W e believe tha t Professo r Du ­
Bois, i n his passio n fo r frankness, is 
perhap s i n dange r o f forgettin g the 
injunctio n o f Pau l to speak the trut h 
i n love. " 
W e woul d lik e to overhea r St. 
Pau l explai n to this gentlema n tha t 
trut h wit h love is no t trut h wit h 
lies. It is precisel y her e tha t the 
whit e churc h is failing . It dar e no t 
liste n to the trut h about presen t conditions. It dar e no t inveig h against 
the thie f wh o is at the bottom o f mod ­
er n industria l organization . It dar e 
not say o f the Negr o "lov e you r 
neighbo r as yourself. " Compelle d 
to be dumb on these grea t matters o f 
moralit y an d decency i t turn s to Hel l 
an d Damnatio n an d summon s Bill y 
Sunda y to preac h it. This is th e 
course tha t is spellin g mora l bank ­
ruptc y fo r whit e Christianity . 
Is ther e no t a spiri t o f mora l lead ­
ershi p i n this powerfu l aggregatio n 
of me n tha t ca n touc h wit h might y 
hands ou r rea l problems o f moder n 
lif e an d lea d us ? An d i f ther e is not, 
does the edito r o f the Standard an d 
do the whit e ministers o f Harle m believe tha t their bran d o f religio n ca n 
endur e ? Awake ! pu t on thy strengt h 
0 Zion ! "THER E 11 WA S ONE TIME" 
THER E 
WAS 
TIME 
A SroRy OF 
ASPRING 
B y 
JE S S I E 
FAUSE T 
I. to III. 
ANN A RITTER, a pretty brown 
school-teacher played truant one 
spring day and went strolling in the park. 
Her little cousin, Theophilus, had spilled 
cocoa on her school clothes, so she wore 
her best blue gown. This made her dream 
of the story of the little Shepherdess 
and the Prince which her French class 
was painfully putting into English. Then 
suddenly came the unpleasant advances of 
a white tramp, but a brown and curly 
haired stranger rescued her and they sat 
down together quite entranced and had a 
long talk, until Anna had to hurry home before either had learned the other's name. 
IV. 
Not until June did Anna encounter the 
little shepherdess again. 
She settled down the night before the 
lesson was due to read it with a great deal 
of interest. Her meeting with "the 
prince," as she always called the strange 
young man, had left on her a definite impress. She wondered if ever she would 
meet him again, and wished ardently that 
she might. Her naivete and utter lack of 
self-importance kept her from feeling 
piqued at his failure to hunt her up. She 
wondered often if life still seemed interesting to him, found herself borrowing a little 
of his high ardor. On the whole, her attitude toward "the adventure," as she loved 
to call it, was that of the little shepherdess 
and she brought back from that day only a 
mind "garlanded with pleasant memories." 
Perhaps, she thought fancifully that 
Thursday evening,—the shepherdess meets 
the prince again and he gives her a position , as court-artist. And she opened the 
little text to find out. But that lesson was 
never prepared, for Theophilus came in at 
that point with a bleeding gap in his head, 
caused by falling off a belated ice wagon. 
The sight of blood always made Mrs. Fetter sick, so Anna had the wound to clean 
and bind and Theophilus to soothe and get 
to bed. 
'UNCLE DICK. 12 TH E CRISIS 
So as it happened all she could do was 
to underline the new words and get their 
meaning from the vocabulary and trust to 
the gods that there would be no blind alleys 
in construction. 
Anyone but Anna would have foreseen 
the end of that fairy-tale. For the prince, 
with the utter disregard for rank and 
wealth and training which so much fails to 
distinguish real princes, sought out the 
little shepherdess, who had been living 
most happily and unsuspectingly with her 
little sheep and her "so pleasant souvenirs" 
(so said Miss Selena Morton in translation) , and besought her to marry him and 
live forever in his kingdom by the sea. 
" 'Oh, sky!' (thus ran Miss Morton's rendition for the French of 'Oh, heavens!'). 
'Oh, sky!' exclaimed the shepherdess, and 
she told him she would accompany him all 
willingly, and when the prince had kissed 
her on both jaws they went on their way. 
And if you can find a happier ending of this 
history it is necessary that you go and tell 
it to the Pope at Rome." Thus, and not 
otherwise, did Miss Selena Morton mutilate 
that exquisite story! 
But Miss Fetter was too amazed to care. 
Moreover, Tommy Reynolds and some of 
the other pupils had translated very well. 
Perhaps the work in grammar had been 
the best thing, after all—and perhaps she, 
too, was becoming a better teacher, she 
hoped to herself wistfully. 
"I'm very much pleased with the work 
you've done to-day," she told the class. "It 
seems to me you've improved greatly—particularly Master Reynolds." 
And Master Reynolds, who was cleaning 
the black-boards, smiled inscrutably. 
Al l the way home Anna pondered on 
something new and sweet in her heart. 
"But just think—the first part of the 
story had come true, why shouldn't the 
second? Oh, I wish, I wish " She 
rushed into the "front-room," where Theophilus sat, his small broken head bandaged 
up, picking indefatigably at his banjo, and 
hugged him tumultuously. 
He took her caress unmoved, having long 
ago decided that all women outside of aunts 
and mothers were crazy. "Look out, you'll 
break my new strings," he warned her. 
And she actually begged his pardon and 
proffered him fifteen cents towards the still 
visionary ukulele. 
One can't go far on the similarity between one incident in one's life and the 
promise of a French fairy-tale. "Still 
things do happen," she told herself, surprised at her own tenacity. "Think of how 
Mr. Allen came into Mrs. Walton's that 
night and changed my whole life." She 
went to bed in a maze of rapture and anticipation. 
Her mother was interested in a bazaar 
and dinner for the bazaar workers in the 
Methodist Church, but she had quarrelled 
with one of the sisters and she meant to go 
and arrange her booth and come back, so 
she shouldn't have to eat at the same table 
with that benighted Mrs. Vessels. 
"I'd rather eat stalled oxen by myself 
all my days," she told her daughter Saturday morning, "than share the finest victuals 
at the same table as Pauline Vessels." 
"Oh, mother," Anna had wailed, "how 
can you say such things? 'Stalled oxen' 
is the choice thing, the thing you are supposed to want to eat. You've got it upside down." 
"Well, what difference does it make?" 
her mother had retorted, vexed for once. 
"I'm sure I shouldn't like the stuff, anyway. They'd probably be tough. Don't 
you let Philly stir out of this house till I 
come back, Anna. I don't want him to 
hurt hisself again. Do you think you can 
manage everything? I swept all the rooms 
yesterday but the kitchen. There's only 
that to scrub and the dusting to do." 
Anna nodded. She was glad to be alone, 
glad to have work to do. She sent Theophilus out to clean up the side yard. She 
could hear him aimlessly pattering about. 
"Ann, " he called. She had finished 
scrubbing and all the dusting, too, except 
in the "front-room," which her mother 
would keep full of useless odds and ends— 
sheaves of wheat, silly bric-a-brac on whatnots. Ordinarily she hated it, but to-day 
—"to be alive"—her mind, not usually 
given to poetical flights, halted—"to be 
alive," no, "to be young," that was it, "to 
be young was very heaven." An d he had 
said in the queerest way, "you didn't say 
she met a prince." If she could just find 
out something about him, who he was, 
where he lived, who was his mother's 
youngest sister. Why, what had she been 
thinking about to let two months go by 
without making any inquiry? True, she "THER E WAS ONE TIME " 13 
didn't know many colored people in Marytown, she had never bothered—she had 
been so concerned with her own affairs— 
but her mother knew everybody, positively, 
and a question here or there! Oh, if he 
only knew how the story ended! She became poetical again—"Would but some 
winged angel ere too late." She had to 
smile at that herself. Yet the winged 
angel was on the way in the person of 
Theophilus. He couldn't have adopted a 
more effective disguise. 
"Ann, " he called again. "C'n I go fishin' 
now with Tommy Reynolds? I've found all 
these nice worms in the garden, they'll 
make grand bait. Aunt (he pronounced it 
like the name of the humble insect) won't 
mind. She'd let me go 'n the air '11 be good 
for my head," he wheedled. 
Anna, dusting the big Bible, hardly 
turned around. "No, " she told him vigorously, "you can't go, Philly. You must stay 
till mother comes—she'll be here pretty 
soon, and you wash your hands and study 
your lessons a bit. Your last report was 
dreadful. Tommy Reynolds is only one 
year older than you and there he is in the 
second year of the seminary and you still 
in the graded schools. He plays, but he 
gets his lessons, too." 
An d then Theo began to rustle his wings, 
but neither he nor his cousin heard them. 
"Oh, pshaw!" he retorted in disgust. 
"Tommy don't get no lessons. Someone 
around his house 's always helpin' him—he 
don't do nothin'. Why, his mother always 
does his drawin' for him." 
" I don't know about his drawing," retorted his cousin, "but I know he does his 
French. He had a beautiful lesson yesterday. Don't laugh like that, Theophilus, it 
gets on my nerves." 
For Theophilus was laughing shrilly, 
which perhaps drowned the still louder 
rustling of the wings. » 
"There you go," he jibbed, "there you go. 
He doesn't do his French at all, his uncle 
does it for him; he did it Thursday night 
when I was there. I heard him and I ain't 
tellin' any tales about it, neither," he put 
in, mistaking the look on her face, "for he 
said you'd be interested to have him do it 
for Tommy. He said he'd tell you about it 
the next time he saw you." 
"Theophilus Jackson, you're crazy. I 
never saw Tommy Reynolds' uncle in my 
life. I don't even know where they live." 
"Well, he's saw you," the child persisted 
and hesitated and looked puzzled—"though 
he did ask an awful lot of questions about 
you as if he didn't know you. Well, I don't 
know what he meant, but he did Tommy's 
French for him, I know that!" he ended in 
defiance. 
Some faint prescience must have come to 
her mind, for she spoke with unwonted 
alertness. "He asked about me?" she insisted. "Sit down here, Theo, and tell me 
all about it. Who is his uncle?" 
"Oh, I don't know, you needn't hold me 
so tight. I ain't goin' to go. Uncle Dick, 
Tommy calls him, Uncle Dick somethin'— 
oh— Winter—Mr. Richard Winter I heard 
Mrs. Reynolds call him. 'Now see here, Mr. 
Richard Winter,' she said to him—and she's 
his aunt, Anna, ain't that funny?—and he's 
bigger'n she and older, I guess, 'cause she 
looks awful young. I thought aunts were 
all old like Aunt Em. " 
She was sure now, and this miserable 
little boy had known all along. She alternately longed to shake him and hug him. 
She restrained both desires, knowing that 
the indulgence of either would dam the 
fount interminably. 
"Go on, Philly, " she begged him. "Maybe 
I can get Sid Williams to let you have the 
ukelele right away and you can pay him 
on the installment plan." 
'Well , ain't I tellin' you? Tommy and 
me, we wanted to go to the movies and 
his mother said, 'No,' he'd got to get all his 
lessons first, and Tom winked at me and 
said he had 'em all, and his mother said, 
'Not your French,' and Tommy said, 'Well, 
Uncle Dick's well again now, c'n I ask him 
to-night?' And just then his uncle walked 
in and said, 'Hullo, what's it all about?'— 
he talks so funny, Anna, and Tommy said, 
'Please do my translation!' His mother 
said, 'Not till he's reviewed the first part; 
then, he hasn't seen the part for two 
months, because he's been studying something else.' And his uncle said, 'AH right, 
hurry up, kid, because I must pack, I've 
got to go away again to-morrow.' An d 
that was when Tommy's mother said, 'Well, 
Mr. Richard Winter, do you own the railway? Why don't you stay in one place? 
You've been here and gone again four times 14 TH E CRISIS 
in the last two months!' And he said, 'Oh, 
Nora, I'm looking for something and I 
can't find it.' An d she said, 'Did you lose 
it here?'—and he answered, awful sad, 'I 
think I did.' Why doesn't he buy another 
one, whatever it is, Cousin Anna?" 
"I don't know, dear. Go on—did he say 
anything else?" 
"Uh , huh—my but your face is red! 
An d he said, 'Hit it up, Thomas-kid,' and 
Tommy opened the book and began to 
read all the silliest stuff about a lady in a 
park tending goats in a blue dress, and he 
said, his uncle did, 'What's that? What's 
that?' and he snatched the book away and 
looked at it, and he said in the funniest 
voice, 'I thought you said you were studyin' German all along. I never realized till 
this minute. Who's your teacher, Thomas?' 
And Tommy said you was. An d he said, 
'What does she look like?' Tommy said, 
'She's awful cute, I must give her that, but 
she is too darn strict about her old crazy 
French,' and I said you was my cousin, 
and I told him not to get gay when he 
talked about you and if you was strict he 
needed it. And Mr. Winter said, 'Rightoh!' and asked me a lot of questions, and 
I said, no, you weren't pretty, but you were 
awful nice looking and had pretty skin 
and little feet, and he asked me did I ever 
spill a cup of cocoa in your lap." 
She was on the floor now, her arms 
around him. "An d what else, Philly. Oh, 
Philly, what else?" 
"Lemme go, Ann, ain't I tellin' you?" 
He wriggled himself free. "Oh, yes, and 
then he said, 'Where does she live?' I 
said, 'With me, of course,' and he said, 
'Here, in Marytown?' and I said, 'Yes, 37 
Fortner street, near North,' and he said— 
oh, he swore, Ann—he said, 'My God, to 
think she's been here all this time. Here, 
boy, gimme that book,' and he sat down and 
started to read the old silly stuff to Tommy, 
and I ran out and jumped on the ice wagon 
and got my head busted. And will you get 
me the ukelele, Anna?" 
She would, she assured him, get him anything, and he could go fishing and she 
would explain to Aunt Emmeline. "An d 
here, take my apron upstairs with you. 
Why didn't you tell me before, Philly? " 
"Well, what was there to tell, Anna?" he 
asked her, bewildered. 
PAR T V. 
As soon as her mother should come in 
she'd bathe and dress and go out—but 
where? After all she was a girl, she must 
stand still, she didn't even know Mrs. Reynolds. But she could go by the house— 
yes, but he was to go away Friday, Theo 
said—why he had gone. Well, he would 
come back. 
The gate clicked. A t least, she could tell 
her mother. But she was crazy—she had 
only seen him once—well, so had the shepherdess seen the prince only once. Her 
mother would have to understand. What 
an age she was talking to one of those old 
Dorcas society sisters! She ran to the 
door and, of course, it was he on the steps, 
his hand just raised to knock. 
Together they entered the room, silent, a 
little breathless. Even he was frightened. 
As for Anna 
"Yo u knew I was coming," he told her. 
"I didn't find out until Thursday. Somehow I thought you lived in another town. 
You know you said the shepherdess had 
come such a long, long way, and I thought 
that meant you had too, and I was afraid 
to ask you. Oh, I've hunted and hunted, 
and Tommy, the rascal, told me he was 
crazy about German because he wanted 
some illustrated German books he saw in 
my trunk, and I thought he was studying 
it," he rushed on breathlessly. "An d 
Thursday night I had to go right away to 
New York to be sure about something, 
before I dared to talk to you. An d I'm 
to be a social settlement worker, and I can 
talk and talk and tell people about all 
those things," he ended lamely. 
Anna stood silent. 
"Anna, I thought, I hoped, I wondered" 
—he stammered. "Oh, do you think you 
could go with me—I want you so. An d 
don't say you don't know me, we've always 
known each other, you lovely, brown child." 
His eyes entreated her. 
But she still hung back. "You could 
talk to people about those wonderful 
things, but I, what could I do?" 
"After the war," he explained to her, 
"we could go back to Europe and I could 
build bridges and you could draw the 
plans, and after we had made enough 
money we could come back and I could 
preach my gospel—for nothing." THE MA N WH O NEVER SOLD A N ACRE . 15 
"But, till then?" 
"Til l then," he whispered, "you could 
help me live that wonderful fairy-tale. 
Dear, I love you so"—and he kissed her 
tenderly, first on one cheek and then on 
the other. 
"On both jaws," she whispered, a bit 
hysterically. 
So then he kissed her on her perfect 
mouth. 
Just then her mother, bidding Sister 
Pauline Vessels an amicable good-bye at the 
gate, came up the walk. So, hand in hand, 
they went to tell her about the happy ending. 
TH E MA N WH O NEVE R SOL D A N ACRE . 
By J. B. WOODS 
THIRTY-FIV E years ago the county of 
* Hot Springs, in the state of Arkansas, 
was for the most part under standing timber. On the rocky hills the tall pines were 
seldom disturbed, except by the occasional 
prospective home builder in search of board 
trees from which to rive floor boards and 
shingles. There were no sawmills of any 
consequence, for the railroad had come 
through but a few years before and the 
commercial possibilities of timber were as 
yet unrealized. Even in the fertile bottomlands great tracts of hardwoods were to be 
found; farmers had but begun to put the 
deep soil in shape for yearly cultivation. 
Most of those who owned cleared bottomlands were obliged to live in towns away 
from the rivers, for the malarial mosquitoes 
were so numerous that, in the words of oldtimers, it "took three frogs to live through 
a season." As a result the larger landowners were glad to rent their fields to 
others, allowing them to take the burden 
of toil, sickness, and flood loss, knowing that 
whatever the renter made would be in part 
their own at the harvest time. The same 
custom is in vogue at the present day and 
the renter's fortune is no less precarious. 
Under such conditions as these a young 
man by the name of Taylor Henson rented 
a field of ten acres about the year 1880 
and planted the whole in corn. He worked 
diligently, early and late, for the farmer's 
day was from sun-up to sun-down, and by 
the first of June his crop was in fine condition. Then came a late overflow, the 
Ouachita spread out over the bottom-lands 
and either washed away or covered deep 
with silt the crops of a score of renters 
surrounding Henson. With characteristic 
patience they all planted again, knowing 
that there would be plenty of time to mature a second crop, providing there came 
enough rain to nourish the plants. The 
corn came up promptly from the moist 
earth and the majority of farmers worked 
it once or twice and then waited for rain, but 
Henson's method was different; he kept 
at his little crop continuously, stirring the 
ground until the top soil was a fine moistureconserving mulch, although he would not 
have known what this term meant. The 
rain did not come! His neighbors finally 
gave up in disgust, moved their families 
back to town and searched for work elsewhere. By the time his corn was fairly 
tassled the man who stood by his guns 
was satisfied that his crop was a success, so 
he hired seven helpers and set about saving the fodder from the fields of those who 
had quit. There was not very much to 
save, but he secured that little, cured it and 
stored it away for future reference. When 
his own crop ripened he gathered the corn 
and harvested the fodder and before the 
winter came on he sold all that he had to 
spare to the owners and renters of the land 
about him. His income from the ten acres 
amounted to more than one hundred dollars 
per acre. 
But, of course, the money did not come in 
a lump; in fact, after settling with the 
merchant who had supplied his needs during crop time, he had just one hundred 
dollars in ready money, with a fair amount 
outstanding, when the idea of buying land 
entered his head. Learning of a forty-acre 
tract which was soon to be disposed of at 16 TH E CRISIS 
TAYLOR HENSON. 
sheriff's sale, he went to see the party in 
control and made a verbal offer for the 
whole of six hundred dollars, paying one 
hundred down, with the understanding 
that he would bid in the rest. Immediately 
he started clearing the land, which was 
covered with primeval hardwood, his idea 
being to convey the impression that he had 
arranged to buy and, thereby, kill any general interest in the forthcoming sale. The 
party in charge intimated that Henson 
had better raise his bid; but the farmer 
never gave any information as to what his 
plans were and on the day of the sale he 
succeeded in bidding in the land at his original price offer. Instead of three years, 
which had been understood, they gave him 
but seven months in which to pay for the 
land. He went to work, however, and split 
enough rails during the fall and winter to 
pay out the land and the following spring 
he was the owner of forty acres of bottomland, twelve of which were cleared and 
ready for crops. 
Thus began the landlordship of Taylor 
Henson. He was obsessed by the idea of 
buying land but at the same time he did not 
overlook the consideration of making that 
which he owned produce. He did not raise 
cotton, putting his faith in corn, until one 
spring when he embarked upon the truck 
business. Cantaloupes and watermelons 
were his specialty, and the land did its 
share for him. He got in touch with reliable commission men in St. Louis and 
Chicago and gradually built up a great 
melon business. A t first he could obtain 
nothing but box cars and lost a great deal 
of money through delayed and badly-shaken 
shipments. After a few years, though, 
the railroad came to realize the possibilities 
of this man's industry and supplied him 
with the proper cars for such crops and 
then Taylor Henson came into his own. 
His neighbors, too, began to grow melons 
to ship with his and Arkansas fruit earned 
a well-merited fame in the big markets. For 
several years he grew more than one hundred acres in melons alone, not to mention a 
goodly area of corn and potatoes, and car 
after car rolled out of the Malvern yards 
loaded with Henson's melons. The profits 
from this industry went into more land, always more land, until now, at the age of 
sixty-five, this man has the unique record 
of having bought nearly one thousand acres 
of real estate and of having sold not one! 
In the opinion of well-informed acquaintances this farmer's property is worth 
more than one hundred thousand dollars, 
which is quite a sum to most of us. 
But the crowning satisfaction came about 
ten years ago when Mr. Paul of South Bend, 
Indiana, considered the greatest truck 
grower in this country, came to Malvern 
and visited Mr. Henson for the avowed purpose of congratulating him on his achievements. In substance this gentleman declared that the Arkansas melons were the 
best that the market received and that the 
land from which they came must be the 
truck-garden of the American continent. 
He further stated that the only reason he 
did not transfer his own activities to this 
region was because he could not obtain 
land in units large enough for his methods 
of farming. This, from a man who operates two truck farms of more than three 
hundred acres each, one in Indiana and the 
other in Texas, was an endorsement more A SONNET 17 
satisfying than the returns from the finest 
car the recipient had ever shipped. 
This achievement is worthy of mention 
just as any success which is won by hard 
work and good judgment; but the outstanding feature of this story is the fact that 
Taylor Henson is a Negro, born in slavery, 
who never had a single day's schooling, except in the field and in dealings with his 
fellowmen. When spoken to he always 
hesitates a moment before replying and the 
white people maintain that he does this in 
order to decide whether or not there is any 
money in sight. When the writer suggested 
that he pose for a snapshot the old colored 
man hesitated and then replied, "Why, I 
don't believe I care to have any such work 
done." Upon being assured that he would 
not be expected to purchase a photograph he 
assented with the words: "Well, then, you 
may do as you like about it, I never had 
my picture made before." 
Several years ago he sent to Illinois for 
a few registered Poland China hogs and, 
with characteristic success, was soon the 
owner of a splendid herd of swine. After 
killing all the meat he required for the 
fall season, he carried eighty-six heads into 
the winter, with the idea of putting them on 
the market in the spring, but cholera came 
through the county and his herd was wiped 
out. He states that he might have saved 
several of the finest by killing them before 
they were taken sick but, in his own words, 
"I was not absolutely sure that they might 
not be affected and I preferred losing them 
entirely to selling diseased meat." Such 
a point of view illustrates the character of 
this man. With the loss of eighty-six 
swine averaging four hundred pounds each, 
Mr. Henson went out of the pork business 
and has not returned. 
In the South the colored man's mission is 
of vital import to the great and growing industries. Sawmills, transportation systems, plantations, and the multitude of 
lesser activities require his labor. In the 
nature of things it is inevitable that he 
shall perform lowly tasks until he progresses to the point where he can aspire to 
greater responsibilities; but on the soil 
he has the opportunity, greater than elsewhere, of becoming as near independent as 
any human being may in this great country. Therefore, when a man like Taylor 
Henson, starting with no advantages other 
than industry, brains, and will power, and 
under the handicaps which held at the close 
of the war, makes a real success of life, his 
example should be held up before the many 
thousands of colored boys, now growing up, 
that they may aspire to follow in the footsteps of progress and become credits to 
their race. 
A Sonnet: T O TH E MANTLED ! 
By G. DOUGLA S JOHNSON . 
AND they shall rise and cast their mantles by, 
Erect, and strong, and visioned, as the day 
That rings the knell of Curfew o'er the 
sway 
Of prejudice—who reels with mortal cry 
To lift no more her leprous, blinded eye. 
Reft of the fetters, far more cursed than 
they 
Which held dominion o'er the human clay, 
The spirit soars aloft, where rainbows lie. 
Like joyful exiles, swift returning home, 
The rhythmic chanson of their eager feet, 
While voices, strange to ecstacy, long dumb, 
Break forth in major cadences, full sweet. 
Into the very star-shine, !o! they come, 
Wearing the bays of victory complete! Nationa l Associatio n fo r th e A d 
vancemen t o f Colore d Peopl e 
TH E HEAR T OF TH E SOUT H 
T
H E organization of a dozen, lusty, young 
branches as a new Dixie District in 
the heart of the South marks the beginning 
of a new era in the history of the N . A . A . C. 
P. We are not unmindful of the good 
work done there by the branches at NewOrleans, E l Paso, and Key West. Nevertheless, we have heretofore been essentially 
a northern organization calling the attention of the nation to the worst of the evils 
oppressing colored folk, reporting the 
shrieks and moans that came to nur ears 
from across the Line when some particularly 
brutal barbarity cried to heaven, a voice 
trying to speak for inarticulate millions. 
With the entry of Atlanta into the fight, 
flanked by Richmond, Norfolk, Durham, 
Greensboro, Raleigh, Augusta, Athens, 
Savannah, Charleston, Columbia, Jacksonville, and Tampa, we feel that the hosts of 
the cotton kingdom have suddenly become 
articulate and the National Association a 
real first line defense facing the enemy at 
proper range. 
That the younger sons will come to grips 
with their local problems in short order we 
have no doubt, but to Atlanta belongs the 
honor of launching a fight of first importance without waiting for the ink to dry on 
their application for a charter. 
Each of these new southern branches has 
local problems facing them as important as 
the one with which Atlanta has come to 
grips. Richmond is taking steps to see that 
colored principals are placed at the head of 
the colored public schools in that city, and 
Charleston has a similar problem to attack. 
The Savannah Branch is taking steps to 
defeat for appointment to a Federal judgeship a man who had openly expressed sentiments hostile to the race, and who refused to receive a delegation of colored 
postal employees, although he was at the 
time a member of Congress from Savannah. 
Columbia has a fight on its hands against 
a residential segregation ordinance which 
passed its first reading in the City Council 
during the last days of March. R. G. 
Finlay, rector of Trinity Church, and three 
professors on the faculty of the University 
OFFICERS OF THE JACKSONVILLE, FLA., 
BRANCH. 
of South Carolina, the white members on 
the colored auxiliary to the Associated 
Charities of Columbia, have written us 
that they are preparing to oppose the ordinance; and the new branch should lose 
no time in joining forces with them. Jacksonville has taken steps to secure justice in 
the courts for a colored man who killed a 
wealthy white man whom he found in his 
home. Efforts have been made by the police 
to hold this colored man on some trumped 
up charge of robbery and of not being 
married to the woman in the case. The 
Jacksonville Branch has engaged a special 
attorney to look after his interests. Mr. 
Wilson Jefferson, President of the Augusta 
Branch, writes that "On March 5 we got out 
perhaps the largest crowd ever assembled 
for a meeting of the character of ours in 
this old town, to hear James W. Johnson. 
• . . I am not going to be satisfied until 
my people know the truth about some things 
very close to their future well-being and 
happiness." So all through the South the 
new branches are bravely taking up the 
fight. 
The roll of paid-up members as we go to 
press, made up at a later date than the 
18 THE OUTER POCKET 19 
membership statistics below, is eloquent of 
the good work accomplished by the Field 
Secretary on his first organizing effort: 
ATLANTA , G A 139 
TAMPA , FL A 107 
RICHMOND , V A 63 
SAVANNAH , GA 60 
COLUMBIA , S. C 46 
JACKSONVILLE , FL A 31 
ATHENS , G A 29 
RALEIGH , N . C 29 
CHARLESTON , S. C 29 
AUGUSTA , G A 28 
GREENSBORO , N . C 27 
NORFOLK , V A 26 
DURHAM , N . C 25 
639 
"There is no doubt that a new spirit is 
awakening in the South," Mr. Johnson says, 
"and that the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People offers the 
precise medium for the exercise of that 
spirit. When the Association has spread 
over the entire South, as it is certain to do, 
and the thinking men and women of the 
race feel and know that they are leagued 
together with thinking men and women of 
both races all over the country for one and 
the same purpose, when each group feels and 
knows that it has the co-operation and support of all the other groups, many are the 
changes that are going to be brought about. 
"I am not only gratified by the campaign 
in the South, but I have been encouraged 
and inspired by it. And I ought to add 
that I had a most enjoyable time; the six 
thousand people whom I met not only listened to what I had to say and responded 
to my efforts, but, without exception, treated 
me in full accordance with the fine old traditions of Southern hospitality." 
How ready the South is to join forces with 
and subscribe to the uncompromising demands of the N . A. A. C. P. is further testified to by a letter received from Tampa 
just as wc go to press, asking for a charter 
as a branch: 
"We are enclosing check for one hundred and nineteen dollars ($119.00) as per 
list enclosed. The report would have been 
sent several days ago but for the ambition 
of the membership to send not less than one 
hundred members. We are sending one 
hundred and seven and our motto is to increase the membership to five hundred within the net few days." 
Under date of March 31, a circular letter 
is being sent out to the entire Association 
membership with a blank enclosed urging 
each member to send in at least one new 
member from among his or her friends. It 
is not only because in numbers lies our 
strength that we make this earnest plea. 
It is not only because the N . A. A . C. P. is 
fighting for the rights of all colored people 
that it should be supported by every one, 
white or black, who has the future of democracy in America at heart. We are in the 
war, and always in times of international 
stress the support of many large contributors who support organizations dealing with internal problems is withdrawn. 
The first year of the European war was so 
lean that the Association had to curtail its 
activities all along the line for lack of funds; 
yet it is a moment when we must be particularly alert if we would take advantage 
of war-created opportunities to advance the 
status of colored people, as the disfranchised women of England and the oppressed 
masses of Russia have advanced theirs. 
Al l new memberships received from this 
appeal will of course be entered to the 
credit of the local branch of the city from 
which they come, and we count upon the 
active cooperation of all branch officers in 
shoving the Association membership well 
across the 10,000 mark within the next 
month. 
Th e Oute r Pocke t 
I
A M writing you this for special informa- that we are the people to go back there 
tion and it is this: I want to know because we are the children of Ham. If 
whether we are the people to go to Liberia, this is so let me know in the next edition of 
Africa, or not. I am told, by the Bible, the C risi s at your earliest date. If you 20 TH E CRISIS 
wish to know my color, I am a Negro woman 
and there are plenty of people around here 
who want to go home because they are not 
treated right here. My friend, who is writing for me, does housework for white people, cleaning seven rooms including the 
scrubbing and sweeping. She only gets 60 
•ents a day for all that work and, dear 
Editor, you know by that, we have to leave 
this place. We hear of people over in S. 
C , Ga., and Ala., and we want to go too. 
If you can get this information before 
my C risi s you will please send it to me. 
MRS . JOSEPHIN E CLEMMONS . 
Muskogee, Okla. 
I have just read in your Apri l C risi s a 
letter in the Outer Pocket, written by 
Donald W. Moore, Halifax, N . S., in reference to the lynching in Georgia. Yes, it 
seems most strange to any one who lives 
in the Northern States and has never had 
any experience of the life that the colored 
man in the South has to undergo. They 
are handicapped in everything, even to the 
extent of self-protection, and in most instances they are handicapped in practical 
protest more than anything else. Ninety 
per cent of the lynching that happens is over 
before the Negroes know that anything has 
ever happened, or that any crime has been 
committed. When the Negroes know it's 
over, the whites are all prepared to lynch 
others who make the least protest in any 
form and accord them the same treatment. 
If the Negroes (in certain sections) have 
meetings or form any kind of an organization to perfect a protest, they are lynched 
for plotting against the white people (just 
as was done in Early and Worth Counties 
in Georgia). So you see protest is useless 
in any form as the State's Militi a is white. 
If they are called out, it's only to protect 
the white man in his law-breaking, and not 
to do justice. I would just as soon be in 
the jungles of Africa bare-handed as to be 
in a Georgia jail with the Georgia Militi a 
on guard if I had been suspicioned of doingsomething or one of the many things that 
constitutes a crime to be lynched according 
to their inflamed minds. 
There is nothing the matter with the 
colored people in the South. They are not 
afraid of the lynchers, but they are afraid 
of the backers. That is the men who uphold them and they are the officials from 
County Justice of Peace to the Governor of 
the State. 
I think the Negro has the nerve to fight 
but like all other right thinking people, they 
know it would be a useless fight with the 
odds so strong against them and consequently they have decided on the most 
damaging and best revenge. That is to 
leave the South. It will be more far reaching than any rebellion. This migration is 
going to reach every part of the Southland. 
It's not only going to harm the proprietors 
but the entire white population from the 
cradle to the grave, from the poor devils who 
commit the crime to the rich land-owner 
who protects him. 
I have been living in the South all my 
life and all I've got is this. My whole life's 
savings that I worked for is practically 
lost as I can't sell it for any price. I sold 
it to get rid of the awful fear of being 
killed just as Crawford of S. C. was murdered. I have decided to leave everything 
just as it stands and maybe some day I 
might realize something from my property. 
But I doubt it very seriously. Just as I 
have decided to do thousands have decided 
to do the same thing. The best thing the 
Northern Negro can do is to help educate 
his Southern brother into the Northern 
ways, for he is here to stay. 
The April C risi s is excellent, as good a 
number as you have ever had. Ma„ it and 
its whole "staff" from the editor down to 
the humblest office boy thrive and flourish. 
MARIANN A G . BRUBAKER . 
Bird-in-Hand, Pa. 
In perusing the January C risis , I observed an article under the heading "Migration and Help" in which you repeat your 
argument that the Southern Negro who is 
assured of employment should continue to 
go North. Permit me to agree with you 
and assure you that although you handle 
every subject you take up in a masterly way, 
even you cannot understand the trials the 
poor Southern Negro must undergo merely 
to exist. I appreciate the fact, sir, that 
you are a very busy man, but beg that, 
even if you do not deem this narrative 
worthy of a place in your magazine, or too 
lengthy for publication, that, you will at 
least peruse it from start to finish. I wish 
to tell a story here that may serve to give TH E OUTER POCKET 21 
you a little more of the actual facts sursounding the Southern Negro. 
A young friend of mine was compelled to 
stop school after finishing the English 
Course and being transferred to the 1st, 
year Normal of a reputable local high 
school. As far as he went he finished with 
honors, having captured the class prize for 
at least four consecutive terms. Coming out 
of school he looked around for fitting employment and was employed by a grocer. Began as all around boy at $1.75 per week and 
in one month was promoted as driver on a 
small route at $3.00 per week. Being 
eager to get ahead he worked his way on 
up and after serving the grocer about 13 
months, he had filled every position from 
warehouseman, bill collector, billpayer and 
clerk to drummer for trade and salesman for 
goods that no one else could sell at the 
salary of $6.00 per week and board. He 
left this grocer and entered the service of 
a steamship company as laborer at $1.50 pen 
day. Was promoted to cooper at same pay. 
On a certain occasion the company could 
not secure the services of a white man 
capable of holding the position of storage 
clerk for the steamships. This is a very 
responsible position, the steamship freight 
manifests being made up from the report 
of the storage clerk. The agent of the 
line, having observed that my friend appeared to be intelligent, gave him the position. He made good and asked for more 
pay, receiving $2.00 per day on condition 
that when the ships were not in port he 
work on the docks at $1.50 per day as a 
laborer. A t this time he was 18 years of 
age. A new foreman employed by the company took the clerk's job away from him 
and gave it to a white man, the white man 
receiving $3.00 per day, and my friend's 
wages being reduced to $1.50 per day permanently. He left this company's service 
and went to St. Louis, Mo., being employed 
in a hotel as elevator man at a salary of 
$18 a month and board. The place being 
a family house, the tips were small and 
few. Having someone dependent on him 
and it being absolutely necessary that he 
get more money, he returned home. 
To-day he is a laborer at $1.50 a day 
with every good prospect of remaining so. 
White boys who worked side by side with 
bim as a dock laborer to-day are business 
men, pushed along by men already in business. Many of them could scarcely write 
their names and that was the limit of their 
education. The agent of the steamship line 
politely informed him that if he was a 
white man he would get him a position as 
clerk or warehouseman at a salary of $60 
or $75 a month, but as he was a Negro he 
could do nothing for him. 
This story is often repeated in our Southland. The young Negroes will not go to 
school, and if you tell them it will benefit 
them, they ask you what benefit is yours 
to you! What can we answer? Those 
who are educated, not having enough to 
travel and pay expenses until they get 
good employment, become despondent and 
take to drink, dice and other vices to forget the dreams they once cherished as ideals. 
This Northern migration offers a splendid 
opportunity for the Southern Negro of ambition. Our white neighbors here have previously arranged matters so a Negro would 
never save money enough to get away from 
his oppressors, and those Negroes who are 
fortunate enough to rise to some extent 
have joined hands with the white men in 
this pleasant occupation. Now, my friend 
is a young man of age, but discouraged and 
having responsibility on him he cannot leave 
home unless already assured of immediate 
employment. I hope some young man hearing this, in your land of opportunities, may 
be aroused to appreciation of the opportunities offered him. 
E . H . BROWN . 
New Orleans, La . 
I am very glad to renew my subscription 
to the C risis , to the Northern California 
Branch. I enclose also a small subscription to the Anti-Lynching fund, wishing 
only that it might be larger. I take every 
opportunity of speaking privately and in 
public of the sad situation which distresses 
every friend of the colored people. I feel 
that this country can do but little for the 
safeguarding of the law of nations or for 
international friendship so long as the law 
of the land is so flagrantly flouted and the 
friendship of different races is so far from 
realization here. I wish the Association and 
the C risi s great success in the constructive 
work of education, conciliation, and defence 
HAROL D E . B . SPEIGHT , 
Berkeley, Cal, Th e Lookin g Glas s 
LITERATURE. 
FRO M George Eliot: 
Dark is the Night, 
Yet is she bright, 
For in her dark she brings the mystic 
star; 
Trembling yet strong as is the voice 
of love, 
From some unknown afar. 
O radiant Dark! 0 darkly fostered ray! 
Thou hast a joy too deep for shallow Day. 
Ralph Cobleigh one of the editors of the 
Congregationalist has an excellent article 
on leaders in the new South with pictures 
of four leading colored men. 
St. Nihal Singh publishes in the Modern Review (Calcutta), an article which 
is copied in the living Age on "Fifty 
Years of Negro American Achievement." 
The message to America of Romain 
Rolland: 
This is your first task:—The diverse personalities that compose your States must 
dare to express themselves, freely, sincerely, 
entirely, in art. They must avoid the false 
quest after originality. They must be careless of form. They must be fearless of 
opinion. 
You have a second task—one more difficult and more remote. It is to establish 
from all these free-moving personalities 
within your States a tie that shall be as.a 
blood-bond. Their lives are of many moods 
and colors. Build them into a great Cathedral. Their voices are unconscious and 
spontaneous and discordant. Compose from 
them a Symphony. Think of the rich 
foundation of your country. It is made up 
of all races; it has flowed in to you from all 
continents. May this help you to understand the essential spirits of these peoples 
whose sum must be America. May it bring 
you to realize that a vast harmony exists 
between their varying intellectual forces. 
LOYALTY. 
COLONE L CHARLE S YOUNG , writing to the Cleveland Gazette, says of 
the proposed Spingarn camp for Negro 
officers. 
We Negroes must have a part—a glorious 
one—in the destiny of this country—Our 
Country. The one where our fathers 
wrought mightily in spite of handicaps the 
most stupendous. The one whose soil is red 
with their blood freely spilled for American 
liberties and freedom in every war. 
Shall we now in the face of the danger 
that seems looming largely before us play 
the baby-act and refuse to our country a 
citizen's bounden duty? Every generous 
instinct of your heart will tell you no. 
Two wrongs never make a right. Let us 
train and prepare ourselves in every way for 
the eventualities that appear to be heading 
our way. And the Almighty Hand that 
unerringly guides and directs the destinies 
of peoples and races will bring us to the 
haven where we would be, that is, where, as 
the C risi s people say to, we shall be "physically free from peonage, mentally free from 
ignorance, politically free from disfranchisement, and socially free from insult." . . . 
Let us do nothing to divide our people in 
this hour of our country's trials; neither let 
our work be negative nor reactionary but 
constructive. THI S PLA N OF DR. SPIN -
GARN' S IS CONSTRUCTIVE , AN D I 
HOP E IT WIL L MEE T WIT H TH E BES T 
OF RESULTS . When the storm is past 
we can take up the idealism of the 
cause. . . . 
May there be in this case no Achilles sulking in his tent. Such actions "cool our 
friends and heat our enemies," do no good, 
and are not in the line of strict loyalty 
to the flag. 
Every white southerner knows that if 
he were a Negro his treatment in the 
United States and particularly in the 
South would make him hate the land of 
his birth. He, therefore, rushes to assume the Negroes disloyalty in the present war. To such persons the following 
editorial from the Louisville Courier 
Journal will be almost inexplicable. The 
editor says of Roscoe Conklin Simmons, a 
colored man: 
His words, spoken the other day before 
a gathering of his own race, should spread 
a blush of shame on the Caucasian skins 
of some who are conspicuous in the eyes 
of the nation just now. When men of superior learning and vaunted super-race 
connections, intrusted with the solemn duty 
of serving and protecting their country's 
destiny, join with foreign tyrant cutthroats to heap contumely upon the nation's 
head and tie his hands stretched out to 
protect the lives and rights of Americans; 
when snivelling white pacifists join with all 
the traitor-slacker crew to invite national 
disgrace and ruin, well may this member of 
an "inferior race" boast: 
"We have a record to defend, but no 
treason, thank God, to atone or explain. 
?3 TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 28 
While in chains we fought to free white men 
—from Lexington to Carrizal—and returned 
again to our chains. No Negro ever struck 
insulted the flag. No Negro ever struck 
down a President of these United States. 
No Negro ever sold a military map or secret 
to a foreign government. No Negro ever 
ran under fire or lost an opportunity to 
serve, to fight, to bleed and to die in the 
republic's cause. Accuse us of what you 
will—justly and wrongly—no man can point 
to a single instance of our disloyalty. 
"We have but one country and one flag, 
the flag that set us free. Its language is 
our only tongue, and no hyphen bridges or 
qualifies our loyalty. To-day the nation faces 
danger from a foreign foe, treason stalks 
and skulks up and down our land, in dark 
councils intrigue is being hatched. I am a 
Republican, but a Wilson Republican. 
Woodrow Wilson is my leader. What he 
commands me to do I shall do. Where he 
commands me to go I shall go. If he calls 
me to the colors, I shall not ask whether 
my Colonel is black or white. I shall be 
there to pick out no color except the white 
of the enemy's eye. Grievances I have 
against this people, against this Government. Injustice to me there is, bad laws 
there are upon the statute books, but in this 
hour of peril I forget—and you must forget—all thoughts of self or race or creed or 
politics or color. That, boys, is loyalty." 
Even the Shreveport, La., Times, acknowledges the truth of these words albeit 
with a wry face. Whatever may be said 
of Simmons' complaint about "chains," 
"injustice" and "bad laws," of which the 
Negro is supposed to be the victim, the 
picture that he drew of the Negro's unswerving devotion to his country at all 
times cannot be gainsaid. It is characteristic of the Negro to complain and to indulge the fancy that he is being woefully 
mistreated. But Simmons' proud boast in 
behalf of his race was not altogether idle. 
Mr. Simmons words are echoed by every 
colored journal. The Washington Bee 
says that the Negro 
is willing today to take up arms and defend the American flag; he stands ready to 
uphold the arms of the President; he stands 
ready to defend the country and his President against this cruel and unjust oppression. His mother, sister, brother and children are being burned at the stake and yet 
the American flag is his emblem and which 
he stands ready to defend. In all the 
battles the Negro soldier has proved his 
loyalty and today he is the only true American at whom the finger of scorn cannot be 
pointed. 
George William Cook says in the Washington Post: 
It is an undeniable fact that the treatment of the colored man, manifesting itself 
in lynching, disfranchisement and abominable "jim crow car" accommodations, is 
inconsistent with what is due loyal citizens; 
and, while there is no question in the colored 
man's mind as to his loyalty, it is barely 
possible that the source of the question in 
some white people's minds can be attributed to a conviction that loyalty is not due 
from this class of citizens. 
The consensus of opinion, and that overwhelmingly, among colored people is that 
this is their country, notwithstanding persecution ; that this is the land of their fathers, 
and where they died; that their inheritance 
is inalienable, and that this doctrine is accepted by all colored men, and that we will 
not allow any class of people to rob us of 
our inalienable rights without our protest. 
And, while we expect to protest until things 
are righted, we propose to be loyal to our 
country and to stand by the government as 
strongly as any other class of people, and 
deny any man the right to treat us other 
than as citizens entitled to all the rights and 
immunities as such. The colored man yields 
to no man in his spirit of patriotism and 
consecration in defense of the United States. 
His vision of the future is as strong as his 
convictions of the past. That we are not 
treated better is a shame—and a howling 
shame. But we will not be robbed of our 
birthright by persecution or otherwise. In 
war Old Glory will not touch the ground because of lack of patriotism on the part of 
the colored standard-bearer, and when from 
his hands she falls her folds will cover his 
prostrate form. Al l ye doubters, remember 
Carrizal, Fort Wagner and State Street, 
Boston. 
Meantime the very dark complexioned 
Vardaman of Mississippi is as usual seeing things: 
"Universal military service means that 
millions of Negroes who will come under 
this measure will be armed. I know of no 
greater menace to the South than this," 
said Senator James K . Vardaman today 
visiting at Beauvoir. 
THE EXODUS 
BRADSTREET'S , perhaps the highest 
present authority, has this summary 
of the present situation as to the migration 
of Negro laborers: 
An immense migration of Negroes from 
the South to Northern cities and industrial 
centres is reported. Overcrowding of sections inhabited by these people and greatly 
advanced rents are reported. The large 
migration caused by higher wages offered 
is expected to have an important bearing 
on crop, especially cotton culture in the 
South. 24 TH E CRISIS 
J. Max Barber says in the Philadelphia 
Bulletin: 
Conservative estimates place the number 
of Negroes who have come North during 
the last year between 150,000 and 300,000, 
while some reports from even Southern 
papers say that the number of Negroes 
who have shaken the dust of the warm savannahs of the Southland from their feet in 
the last year, is still lower. Al l agree that 
when the Northern ice and snow melt and 
the spring winds blow again, there is going to be a mighty exodus of Negroes from 
the South. 
What sir, do you think is the cause of 
this vast migration? Negroes are not ordinarily a migrating race. A study of the 
history of Afric a shows that for ages 
certain races have clung to both their territory and traditions; and that great migrations have taken place only when the pressure of great persecutions have forced these 
migrations. 
It is in greater oppression; more flagrant 
injustice; more widely advertised lynchings 
to a hopelessly helpless condition resultant 
from wholesale disfranchisement; and to 
the pitiably low wages paid them, that are 
to be found the real reasons for the present 
movement. 
The white men of the South are assuming authority never dreamt of by the 
framers of the Constitution. Some of their 
laws which may be even technically right, 
are pernicious in principle and mischievous 
in operation where the Negro is involved. 
The air is full of a subtle, illusive intimidation; justice in the Courts is a sham and 
a delusion; the judges and legislators represent a plethora of small politicians and 
pettifogging lawyers. 
But now that the Negro is leaving, the 
South would retain him. Already, the 
effect is wholesome. The harsh attitude 
is toning down. The South needs Negro 
labor, for it never did know how to treat 
white labor. It is the greatest thing that 
has happened for the Negro since emancipation. 
That the South is awakening is shown 
by some plain statements in the Greenville, 
S. C , Piedmont: 
It must be confessed that many white men 
in the South do not want the Negro educated and their power in most Southern 
states has been great enough to cripple 
the facilities provided for the education of 
the Negro. It is hard to get at the facts in 
the case, but it is asserted, and it probably 
is true, that the public schools for Negroes 
in this state do not receive for their support as much as the Negroes of this state 
Day in taxes for educational purposes. We 
have had demagogues cry aloud against any 
use for education of Negroes of taxes paid 
for educational purposes by white people 
But, common justice and fair play ought to 
have required that those who raised or 
approved that cry should see to it that no 
taxes paid in by Negroes for educational 
purposes should be used to educate white 
children. The remarkable thing is that 
those of our citizens who are most bitterly 
opposed to education of Negroes are the 
very ones who probably would be hurt most 
if the exodus of Negro labor from the 
South should continue. As the Piedmont 
pointed out in a previous editorial, there is 
no way to force Negro laborers to stay in 
the South if they desire to go elsewhere. 
Nor will platitudes induce them to remain 
in this section. Substantial justice must 
be done them or the exodus will continue and 
even increase in volume. It would be much 
easier and pleasanter to dodge discussion of 
this subject, but that will not solve the 
problem. The thing for us to do is to 
fearlessly face -the problem and honestly 
discuss it. Does the South want to keep 
its great supply of Negro labor? If not, 
there is no need of a change in the South's 
treatment of the Negro; if it does, there 
must be a change. 
A correspondent from the same paper 
writing from the West says: 
If the South wants to keep all of its 
Negro labor and not share it liberally, it 
will have to offer equal inducements in 
wages, living conditions and opportunity and 
a fuller measure of equality in treatment. 
If, on the other hand, it wants to get rid 
of the Negro and substitute white labor, 
now is its chance. 
Carroll and Burke will not be able to 
keep the Negroes in the South by inviting 
the white ministers and other big white men 
to speak to them. They have caught on to 
that old trick. Something must be done to 
better his condition financially, educationally, politically and morally. Talk will not 
do it. Why keep him illiterate and blame 
him for being so? Why segregate him to 
the back yards, swamps and alleys, and then 
call him a dirty filthy nigger? Why keep 
him out of politics and then say he is not a 
statesman? Brown and Stewart of Muskogee, Okla., specimens of Negro humanity, 
have few equals and no superiors as attorneys in this state. They handle the business for some of the richest white men in 
this state. The Negro asks no favor. Al l 
they ask is a man's chance. To hold the 
Negro the South must offer as much to his 
manhood as the North. 
Such occasional sentiments do not mean 
that the Bourbon South has surrendered. 
The Raleigh News and Courier for instance is afraid that the Negro will return to politics: 
The Raleigh Independent can prove a 
source of strength to the Negroes of Raleigh 
the State, if it shall so elect. But we are' TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 25 
convinced that if the burden of its teachings shall be to have the Negro back in 
politics that it is mistaken friendship that 
is being shown. 
A t the Alabama Sociological Congress a 
white judge named Abernathy was very 
plain. Speaking of the Negroes he said: 
says ? 
From the top of his bone head to the 
bottom of his flat foot, there isn't a chance 
to educate a Negro. God Almighty made 
them to hew wood and draw water and I'm 
opposed to educating them. Booker Washington has done more harm in Alabama than 
tuberculosis. 
There's just as much difference in human 
nature and Negro nature as there is between 
the smell of limberger cheese and a bunch 
of roses. I believe in keeping him on the 
farm. 
A colored man writes to the Montgomery 
Advertiser: 
Thoughtful Negroes throughout the State, 
and the South, welcome the fact that men 
like Judge Abernathy of the Municipal 
Court of Jefferson county are giving their 
views on the race question at this time. We 
have known for a long time that the exalted seat of judge was filled in many places 
by men filled to overflowing with prejudice toward the Negro, and we are glad 
that Judge Abernathy now advertises this 
hidden truth to the world. If one takes the 
Judge's speech at its face value, you would 
readily conclude that it is impossible for a 
Negro to receive anything like justice in the 
Municipal Court of Jefferson county. 
We are being told by the newspapers to 
stay in the South, that the Southern white 
man is our best friend, and that he understands us better than the people of the North. 
What is friendship? If the Southern white 
man was our friend, he would not take our 
vote away, the only weapon of protest that 
any people can successfully use, and then 
force upon us all other responsibilities of 
citizenship. If the Negro of Alabama had 
the use of the ballot, Judge Abernathy would 
have hesitated a long time before giving 
vent to such views as he gave before the 
Alabama Sociological Congress. 
A CARD OF THANKS. 
THE Flushing, N . Y. , Times, under the 
heading "Heroic Lad Stops Runaway 
Horse" says: 
Arthur Stuart, colored, 14 years old, a 
pupil in Public School 20, Sanford avenue, 
saved a number of children from injury and 
possible death at noon this Tuesday when 
he grabbed a runaway horse as it was racing down Sanford avenue, and stopped it. 
The horse belonged to William Schmalkuche & Son, grocers, of 189 Franklin place. 
It ran down Bowne avenue from the store 
on the corner of Franklin place. The animal made a wild turn into Sanford avenue 
and was traveling toward Union street at a 
terrific rate of speed. A group of men 
on the corner of Sanford and Bowne avenue 
made no effort to stop the animal, but as 
soon as Stuart saw the runaway he ran into 
the road and grabbed the bridle. Stuart 
was dragged several feet before he got the 
horse under control but was uninjured. 
Stuart stopped the horse just as it was 
about to run on the sidewalk where a hundred or more children were walking back 
to school. 
In a later number of the Times appears • 
this delicious "Card of Thanks:" 
Mr. and Mrs. Joseph N . Stewart, 131 
Forest avenue wish the Times to thank Mr. 
Schmalkuche & Son who keep a grocery 
store at 189 Franklin place, for the reward 
given to their son—two bananas and a few 
sticks of candy—when the boy risked his 
life to stop the runaway horse, and to save 
the lives of other school children. 
JOSEPH N. STEWART. 
Mr. Schmalkuche ought to send around 
at least one more banana. 
"THE BIRTH OF A NATION." 
THE Dayton, O., Forum, a colored paper, 
has this bitter comment: 
It is indeed deplorable that men who 
have attained the position in life of George 
L. Knox, publisher of The Freeman, and A . 
E. Manning, publisher of the Indianapolis 
World, should so forget their duty to the 
race variety of which they are identified as 
to sell out to Tom Dixon and other enemies 
of the Negro. The reader will find elsewhere in this issue a full account of the 
contemptible deed these men committed right 
here in Dayton. 
The twelve thousand colored citizens of 
Dayton had made a strenuous fight to prevent Tom Dixon's photo-play, "The Birth 
of a Nation," from showing in Dayton. 
They had, through persistent efforts, secured the co-operation and help of the 
Greater Dayton Association (the largest 
civic body of business men in the United 
States), the Federation of the City 
Churches, the white Y . W. C. A. , hundreds 
of white citizens had written letters of protest, the City Commissioners had passed a 
resolution condemning the presentation of 
the film, and were on the verge of passing 
an ordinance which would have prevented 
it from showing here, when these black 
Judases spoke in favor of the infamous 
photo-play. 
After old man Knox cringingly stated 
that he had seen the film three times, that it 
was all right, as it showed the love of the 
Negro for his master and the love the black 
"mammies" had for the young white soldiers, the Commissioners got "cold feet," our 26 TH E CRISIS 
white friends became mortified, the committee was humiliated. The legal department 
of the city framed up an excuse. The ordinance was not drawn up. Thus again the 
race was sold out by unprincipled leaders 
for a few pieces of silver! 
Doctor Spingarn was right when he said, 
"What the colored people need most of all 
is not money, or land, or political power, 
or patronizing friends, but unpurchasable 
leaders—leaders who would not sell their 
souls for the good will of their neighbors or 
for big buildings, any more than they would 
for a dollar or a job." 
LINCOLN. 
A COLORE D writer sends this letter 
to the Columbus, Ohio, Despatch: 
I am about to relate to you what seems to 
me rather pathetic. 
On Monday, Feb. 12, the members of East 
High School celebrated Abraham Lincoln's 
birthday and a colored girl who is in attendance at East High said to her mother 
on returning from school, "We had a lovely 
program today in honor of Abraham Lin ­
coln, but, mother, it seems to me we might 
have had a colored boy or girl somewhere 
on the program as Lincoln was such a friend 
to the Negro." 
They never ask us to participate in other 
rhetoricals but it seems that we might 
have had a representative on this program 
so that we could say something in honor of 
the "great emancipator." I overheard a 
conversation not long ago between some little 
colored boys who had been attending manual 
training school. One said to the other, 
"I wonder why the teacher never lets us use 
the saw; he always lets the white boys saw." 
These one or two illustrations are only 
similar to what we hear almost every day. 
Now, the writer is a Buckeye by birth and 
never attended a Negro school, but we never 
knew any such prejudice here in Ohio a few 
years ago. 
Our people are advancing along all lines, 
yet the prejudices grow stronger. 
We are barred from picture shows, in 
fact, discriminated against in almost all 
public places; get only a half show in public schools, which are supposed to be free 
alike to Irish, Italian, Jew, heathen Chinese 
and all classes. 
THE MERRIMAC 
COLONE L L. B. CANNO N tells this 
story in the Troy, N . Y. , Record: 
"Our experiences with the Merrimac 
convinced the army and naval officers that 
she was proof against all gun fire. Even 
our two largest guns, then the largest 
afloat in the world, were ineffectual against 
her because of the peculiar formation of 
her sloping roof of armor. It was decided 
that the only way to destroy her was by 
ramming her. Some little time after the 
duel in Hampton Roads (this was between 
the Monitor and Merrimac), early in the 
month of April , four big steamships, the 
Vanderbilt, the Arago, the Ericsson and 
the Illinois—came down to Fort Monroe to 
be in the harbor in readiness to attack the 
Merrimac if she came out and destroy her 
by running her down. 
"Al l the steamships came down under 
sealed orders. Captain Gadsden of the 
Arago, a merchant ship chartered for this 
service, on reaching Fort Monroe and opening his orders found that his ship was to be 
a ram. His crew in some way got to know 
the nature of the mission their ship was on, 
and the dangerous character of the work in 
which they were to engage, and promptly 
deserted in a body. . . . 
"General Wood brought Captain Gadsden 
to me and the latter related to me the 
condition of affairs. He said Negroes 
would do for his purpose quite as well as 
white men and asked me if I would give 
him fifty Negroes. 
" 'Yes,' I answered, 'I will let you have 
all the Negroes you want under certain 
conditions.' 
" 'What are they?' asked Captain Gadsden. 
" 'They must be volunteers,' I said. 
'They must understand exactly the nature 
of the service expected of them, all its dangers and possibilities, and must undertake 
it voluntarily, or they are of no use whatever to you. I cannot tell whether or not 
they will volunteer. But I will make the 
experiment if you like. They must further 
be rated on the ship's books and their standing must be the same as that of the crew 
that deserted.' 
"Captain Gadsden agreed to these conditions. 
"A t 12 o'clock Captain Wilder had three 
hundred and fifty sturdy Negro stevedores 
drawn up in double lines. Captain Wilder 
made an address to them. 
"Not a sign of emotion was visible on 
the countenance of any of the Negroes during Captain Wilder's address. They stood THE LOOKING GLASS 27 
like so many sphinxes. There was no response to his appeal. 
"I was discouraged and disgusted, for I 
was not prepared for such a thoroughly 
disheartening exhibition of indifference. 
But I decided to make an attempt myself to 
see if they understood just their circumstances, and had any appreciation of the 
opportunity thus offered to them. I addressed them: . . . 
"We have brought down four big ships 
to destroy the Merrimac by ramming her. 
The enterprise is a hazardous one, but it is 
full of glory. From on board one ship the 
white sailors have deserted because of the 
hazard of the service. It is my privilege to 
offer to fifty of you the opportunity to volunteer to go on that ship. Every man who 
survives will be a hero and those who fall 
will be martyrs. Now those boys who will 
volunteer to go on board this fighting ship 
will move three paces to the front. 
"An d the whole line moved up in a solid 
column, as though actuated by a single impulse. It was a thrilling response, and the 
most remarkable and impressive scene I 
ever witnessed. 
"We picked out fifty of the most likely 
men and they were sent at once aboard the 
Arago. They were escorted down to the 
boats by all the Negroes around about, with 
shouting, singing and praying and every 
demonstration of exultant joy. It was a 
most exciting and inspiring sight. 
"The volunteers put aboard the Arago 
proved themselves most apt and willing 
workers and soon proved their value and 
justified our confidence in them. They were 
equipped as sailors, and when they came 
ashore the Negroes in our lines almost worshipped them. 
" A week or two after this incident Captain Fox, first assistant secretary of the 
navy, came down to Fort Monroe. I told 
him what we had done and he was greatly 
interested and saw the men and inquired 
fully as to their capabilities and value. 
Shortly afterward he issued an order that 
the fleets be recruited entirely from Negroes." 
SOCIAL GOSPEL 
A
A. M . TRAWICK , a Southern man, has 
• written a splendid article on the 
"Social Gospel and Racial Relationship" in 
the Epworth Era, one of the organs of the 
Methodist Church, South: 
Does the gospel of social living offer any 
help in the solution of race difficulties? 
Ar e differences between white men and colored men too deep to be bridged by active 
human love? Is not the problem better 
stated as a human question than as a race 
question? 
We frankly admit that a problem exists 
and that it is national in its significance. 
Some among us say that there is no problem, for the Negro has learned to "keep his 
place" in a white man's civilization. This 
easy disposition of the problem is the fallacy of "begging the question." The really 
vital question at issue is: "What is the 
Negro's place in civilization?" The answer 
cannot be reached by an appeal to things 
as they are or to things as some man might 
wish they were. Others attempt to reduce 
the problem to its lowest terms by asserting 
that the Negro cannot advance beyond a 
certain point fixed by the Creator when he 
made him a Negro. This attempt to classify races as superior and inferior is both 
unscientific and unchristian. No one has 
ever succeeded in establishing the dead line 
of Negro intelligence and morality. Still 
others argue: "The Southern white men 
know all about the Negro; leave the question to them." There is no Southern attitude on the Negro question. Men of the 
South differ among themselves both in their 
understanding of the problem and in their 
method of solving it. They have, indeed, a 
very grave responsibility in the premises 
which they may not at the price of their 
honor evade or transfer to others. But the 
Negro problem belongs to the nation, and 
it appeals to the brain and heart and character of the nation for its final answer. 
He goes on to expound the value of the 
Negro as a laborer, as a buyer, as a property owner, and as a home builder. He 
recognizes the higher achievements of the 
Negro. He continues: 
The purpose of the foregoing discussion is 
to demonstrate what to many minds is still 
a matter of doubt. The Negro is not a 
beast of burden, nor a mere imitator of the 
white man. He is rendering his own independent service to a higher society. He is 
not a drawback to civilization; he is indispensable to American life, and the destiny 
of these western lands will be imperfectly 
achieved if he does not perform his own 
racial mission. 
It is not the argument of this paper that 
all Negroes have had a part in contributing 
all the valuable things herein set forth, for 
such an argument to one who has lived all 
his days in the South would be an inexcusable act of stupidity. But it is unhesitatingly affirmed that the race of Negroes 
has been and is an indispensable benefit to 
American society, and the best things the 
few have achieved is a prophecy of still 
greater benefits the many will confer. We 
enter no plea for charity to be granted to 
a race of "hewers of wood and drawers of 28 TH E CRISIS 
water;" we plead for a spirit of co-operation to make our whole civilization what 
the will of God purposed in giving us a 
double race life on a common soil. 
He touches on the helplessness of Negro 
women: 
It is not the vicious and degraded women 
alone who are accosted by white men, and 
it distinctly is not true that a Negro woman 
is not annoyed until she gives evidence that 
she cares nothing for her honor. The more 
modest, the more refined she is, the more 
certain it is that she becomes the object of 
some white man's pursuit. The average 
white man professes to believe that no 
Negro woman possesses purity of character, 
and proceeding from that assumption, he 
persuades himself that he is a gentleman 
when he maintains a courteous bearing 
toward sheltered and protected white 
women. Toward women whose fathers, 
husbands and brothers happen to be Negroes, without the shelter and protection of 
a similar code of honor, he may act as he 
pleases and defy resentment. 
He condemns mob violence; he believes 
in Negro suffrage: 
The failure to take into consideration the 
intellectual and moral progress of the race 
in appreciation of their American citizenship is the bitter root from which have 
sprung injustice and unfairness. The Negro 
is willing to abide by any test of civic fitness 
that applies equally to all members of a 
common democracy. He wishes only to be 
assured that his political opportunities and 
limitations are accorded to him in a spirit 
of fairness and justice. 
He calls for co-operation in social uplift 
and ends with these words: 
Race co-operation conducted on such a 
fair and equitable basis as this will be a 
mighty agency in building up a nation in 
the fear of God and will furnish to all the 
world an object lesson in the eternal value 
of the gospel of social living. 
SMILES 
THE Detroit Free Press writes: 
-*- Some humorous sallies have been taken 
far too seriously by the mass of mankind 
and harm has come thereby. They have 
grown flat, stale, and unprofitable to the 
wits of the world. It is time the chestnut 
bells were tolled for them on stage and 
platform, in print and in conversation. 
Take for instance those venerable stock 
jokes about the readiness of the Hebrew to 
sell things, of the Scotchman to save money 
and goods, of the Yankee to drive hard bargains, of the Englishman to be solemn, of 
the Frenchman to be flippant, and of the 
Negro to be improvident and thoughtless. 
These are all distortions of fact, caricatures of virtues, and they give false impressions of races and individuals. Thev 
warp the judgment of hasty thinkers and 
the prejudices of those who are too busy, 
too idle or too incompetent to think. 
The Hebrew race is still giving the world 
leaders in literature, science, and philosophy 
as it has done for ages. An d it is providing 
business men of such ability that every race 
will do well to pattern after them in enterprise, probity, and wisdom. They have their 
equals, these Hebrews, in many lands and 
races, but they have few superiors. Why 
make a joke of their superiority in salesmanship? 
The Scotsman's economical turn of mind 
has been made to serve the world well in 
numerous places where Scots have risen to 
leadership, and it gives competence to many 
and keeps others from the poorhouses in all 
quarters of the world. Why make a senseless joke out of the virtue of thrift? 
If the Yankee is a good bargainer he and 
his country profit thereby and those who 
compete with him will learn to sharpen their 
wits and be the better for it. His thriftiness 
is worthy of praise, not ridicule. The Englishman's "slowness" is not stupidity, but 
rather commendable, ingrained cautiousness. 
Surely to be careful, cautious, is not to provoke laughter? The Frenchman has in the 
fight against the German disproved the 
flippancy fling; his heroism is as high, as 
holy, as noble as any heroism the world ever 
has seen. And the Negro in the United 
States is yearly becoming wiser, richer, and 
more of a contributor to world progress. 
Can't the wits invent some new, really 
funny jokes? 
The Lexington, Ky., Herald says: 
Parson Elmore T. Offutt, colored, was 
eloquently exhorting at the Pleasant Green 
Hil l Church two Sunday nights ago. 
"I want only religious people in my congregation," he proclaimed fervently reaching the climax of his sermon. 
"You are a liar, " shouted one Rowe Kendrick, rising up at the back of the church. 
"Al l yo' want is money. You don't worry 
none about religion or nothin' else." 
Yesterday morning Kendrick was arraigned before Judge Riley on a charge 
of disturbing religious worship. After a 
discussion of the case Judge Riley decided 
to let Kendrick go after he was recognized 
to keen the peace for one year. 
It was a colored woman at one of those 
little southern junction points where trains 
are never on time. She and others had 
waited and waited and gone away; then 
they hurried back to wait some more. 
"Has the train come, yet?" asked some 
one anxiously. 
The colored woman was philosophical and 
sparing of words: 
"It's jes bound for to aint come," she 
said. The 
Looking 
Glass 
Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N. Y. 
FRENC H AFRICAN TROOPS REST AFTE R VICTORY AT DOUAUMONT. 
This photograph was taken while the French African fighters were en route to the Riviera to enjoy a well earned rest following the battle of Douaumont 
in which they creditably acquitted themselves. The ranks of these intrepid fighters were considerably depleted in this battle which took place on October 
26th and ended in a complete victory for the Allies. Note the size of these fighters in comparison with the man standing in the foreground toward the left. 
29 30 TH E CRISIS 
FROM BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS. 
Above: The Square recently named after Frederick Douglass. 
Below: The new Agassiz School, Cambridge, of which Miss Mari a L . Baldwin, a colored woman is 
master. Me n o f th e Mont h 
A SERVAN T OF TH E GOVERNMENT . 
THE late Dr. Arthur S. Gray was born 
in Lawrence, Kansas, in 1869. He was 
trained in the public schools and for a 
while studied at the University of Kansas. 
Entering the civil service at Washington, 
D. C., he became private secretary eventually to O. P. Austin, Chief of the Bureau 
of Statistics. This position he held fifteen 
years, afterward being promoted to the 
position of expert in foreign languages 
and statistics and finally becoming the 
statistical correspondent for the Department. Trade bulletins and many business 
matters were entrusted entirely to his care 
and the Chief of the Bureau writes that 
"his official record has been one of unusual efficiency, fidelity, loyalty and unselfish devotion to duty." Mr. Gray married 
Miss Amanda V . Brown in 1893 and together . they conducted the well-known 
Gray and Gray pharmacy at the corner of 
Twelfth and You Streets, Washington, D. 
C. Mr. Gray was active in civic and social 
movements and widely known and liked. 
A PHOTOGRAPHER. 
MR. C. M . BATTE Y is one of the few 
colored photographers who have 
gained real artistic success. He began his 
career in an architect's office in Indianapolis. In 1888 he entered the studio of 
Ondeon in Cleveland, Ohio, and afterward 
was for six years superintendent of the 
Bradley studio on Fifth Avenue, New York, 
where he photographed men like Sir 
Thomas Lipton and Prince Henry of 
Prussia. Afterward Mr. Battey was with 
the firm of Lippincott in the Singer building and often appeared as technical expert before the courts. He made the composite picture of the "Kin g of Finance" 
which blended portraits of fifty-one national 
bank presidents and was published in 
Everybody's Magazine in November, 1910. 
Borglum, the sculptor, wrote the commentary. A t present Mr. Battey is instructor in photography at Tuskegee Institute. Many of his racial studies have 
appeared in the CRISI S magazine. 
TWO SUPERVISING ARCHITECTS . 
It is not widely known that two of the 
supervising architects under the United 
States Superintendent of Construction are 
colored men. The first to be appointed 
was Lowell W. Baker who was born in 
Ohio in 1868 and became a builder and 
contractor. For eight years he was instructor in wood-work in the State Department of Wilberforce University. He 
took up work in a correspondence school 
and passed the civil service examination for 
the position of superintendent of construction, being appointed in 1904. He has supervised buildings for six cities in Ohio, 
two in Indiana, and is now in charge of 
two post office buildings at Albion and 
Charlotte, Michigan. He is married and 
has two living children. 
Mr. William W. Cook was born at Greenville, S. C , in 1871. He graduated from 
the college department of Claflin University and taught the mechanic arts there 
and at Georgia State College. After a 
post-graduate course in the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology he passed the examination for senior art draughtsman. In 
1908 he was assigned to supervise the erection and completion of the post office at 
Lancaster, Pa., and since he has supervised 
work in four different states. A t present he is supervising the new post office 
at Ashland, Ohio, which will cost with site 
$115,000. He has spent over $650,000 
satisfactorily for the government. Mr. 
Cook is a son-in-law of Ex-Congressman 
Thomas E . Miller and has two children. 
A MINISTER. 
T
H E late Matthew W. Gilbert was born 
in South Carolina in 1862. He was 
educated at Benedict College, South Carolina, and at Colgate University, Hamilton, 
N . Y. , where he received his bachelor's degree. He afterward received the honorary 
degree of Bachelor of Divinity from Union 
Theological Seminary. Entering the active ministry of the Baptist church he held 
charges at Nashville, Tenn., and Jacksonville, Fla . He was the founder of the 
Florida Baptist College at Jacksonville. 
31 32 
TH E LAT E DR. M. W. GILBERT. MISS A. H . KNOX . L . W. BAKER . 
MR. AND MRS. C. M. BATTEY . 
TH E LAT E DR. A. S. GRAY. W. w. COOKE, DR. J. H . N. WARING. MEN OF TH E MONTH 33 
Several years' work followed as pastor, 
missionary and college teacher until finally 
Dr. Gilbert became pastor of Mt. Olivet 
Church, New York City, where he had a 
hard fight to hold together a divided 
church. He then went South again and 
at the time of his death was pastor of the 
First Baptist Church of Nashville, Tenn., 
and dean of the theological department of 
Roger Williams University. He leaves a 
widow and three children. His oldest son, 
a young man of great promise, died while 
a student at Colgate University. 
A TEACHER. 
MISS ALBERT A M . KNO X was graduated from the High School of New 
Bedford, Mass., in 1913. She was a member of the first class to graduate from the 
new half million dollar high school and was 
•elected by the faculty as salutatorian on 
:count of her ranking the class in scholarship during the four years' course. She 
also won the Bourne essay prize of fifteen 
dollars in gold. Miss Knox then attended 
the Bridgewater normal school and during 
her training taught at Brockton and 
Taunton, Mass. She was graduated in 
1916 and offered a position in all three 
cities but chose New Bedford where she is 
at present a teacher in the Parker Street 
Normal School. 
A TRAINER OF YOUTH . 
DR. JAME S H . N . WARIN G was made 
superintendent of the Howard Orphanage and Industrial School, Kings Park, 
Long Island, March 1, 1917. He was born 
in Michigan in 1861, educated in the public 
schools of Oberlin, at Howard University 
and at the Western University of Pennsylvania. He taught school in St. Louis and 
the District of Columbia, being eleven years 
supervising principal. For the next seven 
years he was principal of the colored high 
school at Baltimore, Md. Following this he 
became a practising physician in Washington until called to the Howard Orphanage. 
He was married to Miss Carrie Brown in 
1883 and they have five living children, one 
of whom is a graduate of Harvard and two 
students at Howard. Dr. Waring takes 
up the work founded by the late Dr. Gordon 
and carried on for many years by his wife. 
THE LATE F. B. SANBORN. 
A FRIEND OF JOH N BROWN . 
AMERICA N Negroes will remember the 
late Franklin Benjamin Sanborn 
chiefly because of his intimate connection 
with the* John Brown raid. He shared in 
the counsels of John Brown from the beginning of his great plan and his life of 
the great abolitionist remains the most 
authoritative work. In later days as a 
speaker and as correspondent of the 
Springfield Republican he could be counted 
on as the friend of democracy always even 
across the color line. He was born in New 
Hampshire in 1831 and died in New Jersey this year. 
The New York Evening Post says: 
"There is something a little saddening 
in the thought that with him goes the last 
circle in our literature and thought. It is 
now over a half-century since Hawthorne 
and Thoreau died; it is well over a quarter century since the deaths of Emerson 
and the two Alcotts. The surviving spectators of the group they constituted have 
passed away, one by one—Ellery Channing early the century, W. T. Harris in 
1909, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, 1911, 
J. T. Trowbridge last year. The books 
which Mr. Sanborn wrote detailing his 
recollections of Concord surpass in interest 
the recollections left by any of these 
figures." Th e Horizo n 
MUSIC AN D ART . 
THE attempt of Mrs. Emilie Hapgood, 
the promoter; Ridgeley Torrence, the 
playwright, and Robert Edmond Jones, the 
designer, to start the new Negro drama on 
Broadway, New York, is nothing less than 
epoch making. The initial performance was 
given before a distinguished audience Apri l 
5th. Three plays were presented, the "Rider 
of Dreams," "Granny Maumee" and " Simon 
the Cyrenian." The acting was good, the 
BLANCHE DEAS AS ACTE'S ATTENDANT IN 
"SIMON THE CYRENIAN." 
settings striking and the promise for the 
future excellent. 
G Our cover picture was posed by Miss 
Anit a Thompson of Los Angeles, Cal. She 
was the dancing maid in a recent production 
of Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha." Miss 
Thompson is a pupil of Ruth St. Denis, and 
although but sixteen years old, displays remarkable interpretative ability and originality. • 
G Mr. David Bispham, the distinguished 
American baritone, was heard in song recital at the Music School Settlement, Mr. 
James Rosamond Johnson director, on March 
4th, in the Settlement recital hall, New York 
City. Mr. Woodruff Rogers was the accompanist. 
G Madame Azali a Hackley directed a folksong festival in Baltimore, Md., during the 
month of March. She plans to train a large 
chorus in Washington for a similar affair 
to be given in that city in April . 
G Miss Helen Hagan, pianist, was heard 
in a successful concert at the Auditorium, 
Atlanta, Ga., on March 6th. 
C Morehouse College, Atlanta, Ga., celebrated its fiftieth anniversary on Feb. 25-27. 
For that occasion an anniversary hymn was 
written by Mr. Kemper Harreld, the words 
by Benjamin Brawley. A n anniversary 
concert by the pupils, consisting of numbers 
by the Glee Club and orchestra with soli and 
a violin selection by Mr. Kemper Harreld, 
was the feature of the closing night. 
C Mr. Roland W. Hayes, tenor, who is on 
western concert tour, was heard with much 
pleasure on March 2d at the Manual Training High School at Kansas City, Kans. Mr. 
William S. King, of Philadelphia, was the 
accompanist. 
C The Mount Vernon Choral Club, of Newnan, Ga., rendered the cantata "Esther" before a large audience of white and colored 
people. 
C Mr. R. C. Logan, the western basso, was 
chief soloist at a concert in Butte, Mont., 
where $1,500 was raised for the poor. 
G Miss Maude Roberts, of Chicago, and 
Roy W. Tibbs, of Howard University, gave 
a joint recital at the Abraham Lincoln 
Center, Chicago. The critic of the Chicago 
American says: "Of the rare charm and 
tenderness of Miss Roberts' lovely soprano 
it is impossible to write too glowing praise. 
34 THE HORIZON 35 
The young singer possesses one of the most 
appealing, caressing voices I have ever 
heard. In mezza-voce and pianissimo passages and sustained tones the quality takes 
on an ethereal hue of great beauty." Of 
Mr. Tibbs the critic said: "He exhibited a 
fluent polished technique and a very refined 
style." 
C Miss Mildred Bryant, of Louisville, Ky., 
directed the concert at the dedication of 
the new colored Central High School. The 
program was given by the girls' glee club 
and "showed fine training in the excellent 
interpretation of the music they rendered." 
C The Douglas High School of Huntington, 
W. Va., gave an annual concert at the Carnegie Auditorium before a crowded house. 
"The whole program was well arranged, 
well balanced and delightfully rendered." 
Miss Ethel B. Spriggs was in charge. 
C Mr. L. B. Deppe, the baritone singer, has 
been accompanying the film play "The 
Crisis" at the Pitt Theatre, Pittsburgh, and 
in other places. 
C The Roger Williams University singers, 
of Nashville, have been meeting with much 
success before both white and colored audiences throughout the lower South. 
C A t the Modern Gallery, 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, Mr. Sheeler, a photographer, has been exhibiting photographs of 
West African art. The photographs are 
striking. 
INDUSTRY. 
IT is widely reported that tens of thousands of Negro laborers are leaving the 
South for the North this spring. Over 400 
arrived in Newark, N . J., within less than 
a week. Sixty-seven left Greenville, S. C , 
in one day. More than 2,500 Negroes from 
the Mississippi Valley arrived in Chicago 
during three days. They come chiefly to 
work in the stock yards, where 10,000 workmen are said to be wanted. 
C Widespread effort is being made among 
colored people in the North to help the immigrants. The Monitor, a colored paper of 
Omaha, Neb., has an employment bureau 
and advertises in southern papers. 
C. Colored pastors in the South are finding 
their churches seriously depleted while the 
colored churches of the North are growing 
correspondingly. 
C Shortage of labor is being felt in various 
parts of the South, especially in Montgomery, Ala., and in West Tennessee. 
d Southern railway men, when the last 
railway strike was threatened, announced 
that they proposed to put Negroes in the 
places of the strikers. Some of the roads 
already have Negro boilermakers and mechanics as the result of a previous strike. 
(1 Negro farmers of Albany, Ga., have 
greatly increased their live stock as a result of the injury to the cotton crop by 
the boll weevil. 
(r The People's Drug Store, of Birmingham, Ala., has moved into new and larger 
quarters. 
C Two Perth Amboy, N . J., concerns are 
seeking 100 colored laborers at $3 a day. 
It is said that every one of the 9,000 colored 
men brought to Pittsburgh from the South 
in the last six months has found remunerative work. 
C Julius Rosenwald, the Chicago philanthropist, has guaranteed the bonded debt of the 
Mound Bayou Oil Mil l Corporation, Miss. 
The plant, which is owned by colored men, 
will be operated this season. 
C The Negro Business League of Kansas, 
City, Mo., under the presidency of Fortune 
J. Weaver, has started an automobile training school for colored men. More than 
fifty students have already enrolled. 
C James M . Holly, of Oakland, Cal., and 
his brother, Charles, are employed by the 
Union Iron Works Company. He started 
as foreman of seven colored workmen among 
1,500 whites and Asiatics. He has now 137 
colored men engaged in shipbuilding. He 
wants one or two hundred more young men 
to take a three months' course in riveting. 
Good riveters get from $6 to $10 a day. The 
white union is fighting Mr. Holly and his 
men and will not admit them to membership. 
C A National Farm Loan Association 
among Negroes of Davidson County, Tenn., 
has been started, with J. B. Mullins president. They expect a membership of twenty 
or more thrifty farmers. 
C The Negroes of Evansville, Ind., own 
$500,000 worth of real property. Most of it 
has been accumulated in the last fifteen 
years. 
C Colored undertakers and citizens of 
Washington, D. C , have organized and incorporated the People's Funeral Service 
Corporation. 
C Walter M . True, of Hazelwood, Ohio, 
makes a specialty of manufacturing bird 36 TH E CRISIS 
houses and shelters for all sorts of animals. 
G The miners' union admits Negro members; consequently when a large number of 
colored miners were brought from Alabama 
to Leechburg, Pa., as strikebreakers they 
refused to work when learning that a strike 
was in progress. 
G The Utah Construction Company, which 
is double tracking portions of the Union 
Pacific Railroad, is importing 3,000 southern Negro laborers into Wyoming. 
C In the Canal Zone 100 of the 800 Negroes 
employed at the Cristobal dry dock have 
struck for higher wages. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS. 
A
NE W Civil Rights bill to protect colored people against discrimination 
has been passed by the New Jersey Legislature. It was found, however, that after 
the bill was passed that all damages recovered must go to the overseer of the poor 
and not to the plaintiff. 
C The proposed Jim Crow car law in Missouri is said to have been killed. 
G A t Marlin, Tex., six colored business men 
were recently burned out by a fire. The 
loss was $20,000. 
G The Dickson Colored Orphanage at Gilmer, Tex., spent $16,404 last year. Fiftyone children were placed in homes, leaving 
149 in the institution. 
G The colored Elks have a membership of 
20,000 in 200 lodges, with $250,000 in property. They have spent $15,000 in the last 
few years to protect themselves against litigation by the white order. 
C Charles Edward Russell, the well known 
writer, spoke at Broad Street Theatre, 
Philadelphia, on race prejudices. He especially praised France because "the narrow, 
blind hatred of race is unknown there." 
C Mr. D. A . Lee, of Boynton, Okla., is 
building a large and well equipped open air 
theatre for the colored people. 
G National Negro Health Week was observed in many communities throughout the 
United States Apri l 22d to 28th. 
O The Southern California Negro Baptists 
have opened an old folks home at Abil a Station. 
C A new hospital has been opened at Winchester, Ky . The Negro department is on 
the first floor and consists of a men's ward, 
a women's ward and one private room. The 
Colored Women's Hospital Club furnished 
these rooms. 
C A tuberculosis camp for Negroes will be 
established in Richland County, S. C. 
G The Colored Civic Association of Waco, 
Tex., is distributing garden flower seeds and 
maintaining a demonstration garden at the 
colored high school. 
G Efforts to better the housing of Negroes 
are being made in Philadelphia, Harrisburg, Pa.; Detroit, Mich., and Trenton, 
N . J. 
G A playground for colored children with 
a swimming pool will be opened at the Lin ­
coln School, Joplin, Mo. 
G The formal opening of the Booker T. 
Washington social center has taken place 
in Peoria, Ill. 
G The first community conference of the 
Women's Co-operative League, Baltimore, 
Md., took place recently. Special criticism 
was made of the segregation ordinance, the 
unsatisfactory public school buildings and 
the lack of provision for the care and training of delinquent and feeble-minded colored children. The conference expressed 
appreciation for the new modern school 
building in East Baltimore and the proposals for sanitary housing. It suggested the 
establishment of a music school settlement. 
C There are sixty colored churches in Chicago with 31,870 members. The largest, Olivet Baptist Church, has 3,500 members, followed by Bethel A . M . E. , Church, with 
3,000 members. 
C There are 348 colored employees in the 
United States, state and city civil service of 
Chicago. 
G Knoxville is to have a $10,000 colored 
library as a gift from Andrew Carnegie. 
G Thirty-three colored women organized 
and incorporated at Little Rock, Ark., in 
October, 1915, have been supporting a colored probation officer, Mrs. M . M . Jefferies. 
The Phelps-Stokes Fund pays $200 toward 
her salary. 
C The colored people of Tacoma are joining with other people to raise money for a 
Lincoln statue in the Lincoln High School. 
Sixty dollars was raised at one concert. 
G Pastors of twenty-four colored churches 
in New York joined in an appeal for the 
"Bi g Brother" movement. A public meeting 
was also held in St. James Church. 
C Apri l 15th was observed as Memorial 
Day by Baptists throughout the country for THE HORIZON 37 
the purpose of making a nationwide donation to the memory of the late Joanna P. 
Moore. 
G. By the law passed at the last Congress 
Porto Ricans are now citizens of the United 
States. 
0 The Odd Fellows Temple of Wilmington, 
Del., has been remodeled and newly 
equipped. 
C The Texas Legislature has appropriated 
$200,000 for a Negro insane asylum at 
Rusk. 
C Mr. J. D. Schmidlapp, of Cincinnati, is 
head of a modern homes company, with a 
capital of $500,000. He has 220 Negro 
families in his homes and says that the investment is a safe one. Mr. Schmidlapp has 
recently been in Baltimore advising concerning a similar movement there. 
WAR . 
CONSIDERABL E currency has been 
given to alleged plots among Southern colored people by German propagandists. The rumors were promptly pronounced 
false by Negro leaders in position to know. 
C The Military Training Camp, inaugurated by Dr. J. E . Spingarn of New York, is 
now assured of success. General Wood's 
demand that at least two hundred and fifty 
enroll before he organized the camp has 
been more than met. On Apri l 5th, two 
hundred and eighty-one applications had 
been received. Of these eighty-one are under-graduates of Howard University, fortysix 6f Hampton, three of Fisk. Every 
business and profession is represented, including law, medicine, the ministry, dentistry, high-school and college teaching (including one president!), government service, banking, journalism, etc. It is a fine 
body of men, as fine as any body in the 
country regardless of race, creed or color. 
Nearly all have had college training, and 
many have military experience of some sort. 
A t least ten pastors of prosperous churches 
are among those anxious to serve their 
country. A number of physicians have enrolled in order to get the necessary military preparation to serve as surgeons in 
the army. 
As we go to press the exact details of the 
camp have not yet been settled. The sudden exigencies of war may change all the 
plans for military training camps this 
summer, but unless this happens, the camp 
is assured. The authorities at General 
Wood's headquarters are considering place, 
date, and other details. It is likely that 
the camp will be held from June 5th to 
July 2nd, at some fort or army post along 
the eastern seaboard between New York 
and Washington. Any man betwoen nineteen and forty-five who has had a highschool, normal school or college education is 
eligible for admission. The cost will be 
entirely defrayed by the government, but 
men must pay their fare to the camp and 
leave a deposit for the use of their uniform. Both fare and deposit will be returned at the end of the camp, and transportation home furnished free. Al l applications should be sent to Dr. Spingarn 
at 9 West 73rd Street, New York. 
C A meeting to pledge loyalty and support 
of the President in the war has been held 
in Chicago. 
(I Southern members of Congress are trying to have the Negro excluded from the 
Universal Service Bill . The bill was introduced by Kahn of California and provides 
that Negroes shall be called to arms in the 
same manner as white citizens but trained 
in separate units. 
C Robert R. Moton, principal of Tuskegee 
Institute, has written President Wilson, 
saying: "Notwithstanding the difficulties 
which my race faces in many parts of this 
country, some of which I called to your attention in my previous letter, I am writing 
to assure you that you and the nation can 
count absolutely on the loyalty of the mass 
of the Negroes to our country and its people, North and South; and as in previous 
wars, you will find the Negro people rallying almost to a man to our flag." 
C Negroes of Virginia, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and North Carolina are said to have 
organized a colored citizens patriotic league 
to arouse the colored citizens to national defense. 
C At a mass meeting held at Asheville, 
N . C , colored people subscribed funds sufficient to support fifty Belgium babies for 
three months. 
C The colored women of Nashville, Tenn., 
have offered their services to the governor 
to aid in knitting and sewing for wounded 
soldiers. 
C The United States Wa r Department has 
formally accepted the Fifteenth Infantry, 38 TH E CRISIS 
New York National Guard, a Negro regiment, as an integral part of the state 
troops to be sworn into federal service. 
C The first Pennsylvania colored regiment 
at Pittsburgh has offered its services to the 
United States. On account of legal technicalities the regiment has not yet been 
made a part of the National Guard. 
C The Rev. W. A . White, a colored man 
of Truro, Nova Scotia, has been commissioned chaplain of the second construction 
battalion with the rank of captain. An ­
other colored man, C. C. Ligoure, is medical officer. 
(I The First Separate Battalion, District 
of Columbia National Guard, composed of 
colored men, has been mobilized to protect 
the national capitol. 
d Francis Cain, an American Negro, has 
been recently decorated for bravery by the 
French. He has been wounded five times 
and has three colonial medals for distinguished conduct. 
EDUCATION . 
INTERCOLLEGIAT E debates have been 
held between various Southern institutions on the question of government ownership of railroads. Virgini a Union University won over Wilberforce University and 
Lincoln over Virgini a Union. 
(I A t a meeting held in New York a committee was organized to be known as "The 
Durham Commission to Study the American 
Negro." This commission grew out of the 
educational conference called by Dr. J. E . 
Shepard at the National Training School, 
Durham, N . C , last fall. The commission 
at present consists of Dr. W. E . B. DuBois, 
chairman; Dr. Shepard, Mr. William C. 
Pearson of the Durham Public School, President W. J. Hale of the Tennessee Normal 
School, President W. A . Scarborough of 
Wilberforce University, Mr. J. A . Cotton 
of Henderson (N. C. ) Institute, President 
Rendall of Lincoln University and Dr. J. 
W. E . Bowen of Gammon Seminary. 
The commission decided to undertake a 
survey of secondary schools for the education of the Negroes in the United States, 
with the idea of ascertaining the number 
and distribution of these schools, their equipment and efficiency, their attendance and 
teaching force, their income and expenditure, and the extent to which they are filling the demand for secondary education 
among colored people. 
The 300 schools which are -to be studied 
are divided into three districts of about 100 
schools each and a year is to be devoted to 
the study of each district. It is proposed 
that after this survey of education the commission turn its attention to other fields 
of investigation concerning the American 
Negro, with the idea of establishing, in connection with the National Training School 
and in co-operation with other institutions 
and organizations, a systematic series of 
surveys into the social condition of the 
American Negro. 
(I Fa r from abolishing the Western University at Quindaro, Kans., the recent 
Legislature appropriated $73,850 for its 
work. 
(I Some comment has been made on the 
work of churches of German origin among 
American Negroes. The excellent work of 
the Lutherans antedates the present war 
by many years and deserves all praise. 
The Synodical Conference, the largest 
Lutheran body, spends $60,000 a year for 
Negro education. It has two secondary 
schools, Luther College at New Orleans, 
with thirty-five students, and Emanuel College, at Greensboro, N . C , with sixty-five 
students. Besides these, thirty-one day 
schools take care of 2,500 students. The 
superintendent of the work is a colored 
man, the Rev. Dr. Christopher F . Drewes, 
of St. Louis. 
O The Freedmen's Ai d Society of the 
Methodist Church, which will soon celebrate 
its fiftieth anniversary, maintains twentyone schools, with 370 teachers and 5,279 
students. In the last fifty years it has 
trained over 200,000 students. 
C We learn with some surprise but great 
pleasure that the Sophoclean Dramatic 
Club, a student organization of Hampton 
Institute, has given a Greek play, "Oedipus 
at Colonus," for the benefit of the work of a 
Hampton graduate in South Africa . Last 
year the same organization gave "Antigone." 
C Dr. W. N . Atkins, medical director of 
schools of Atlanta , Ga., after examining 
14,561 white pupils and 4,453 colored pupils 
found 74.6 per cent of the whites physically 
defective and only 36.6 per cent of the 
Negroes defective. The Board of Education received this information "with great 
surprise." TH E HORIZON 39 
MISS WHITBY . MISS POWELL. MISS SPARKS. MISS MASON. MISS TRULEAR . 
Recent Graduates of Philadelphia High and Normal Schools. 
C Atlanta University has raised $56,000 
toward the half million dollar endowment 
fund for which it is working. 
C The General Education Board and the 
Carnegie Foundation have contributed 
$100,000 toward a total sum of $150,000 
to be used for the physical rehabilitation of 
the plant of Fisk University. It is hoping 
to raise the remainder in 30 days. 
C The colored people of Nashville, Tenn., 
put 59 of their own automobiles at the disposal of the state legislature for a visit 
to the A . & I. State Normal School for 
Negroes. 
C The city of Petersburg, Va., has appropriated $100,000 for three new school houses 
for colored children. The money was provided for in a bond issue two years ago 
but held up on account of the usual strife 
among the white people as to the location 
of the schools. 
C. Dr. S. M . Newman, president of Howard 
University, has handed in his resignation 
to take effect at the close of the school year 
June, 1918. Advancing years and failing 
health are given as the reasons. Dr. Newman has been president of Howard five 
years and the trustees now have a year to 
look for his successor. 
C The colored people of North Carolina 
have raised over $3,000 during the last 
year to supplement the rural school funds. 
C A new $22,000 colored school building 
has been finished and accepted at Sapulpa, 
Okla. 
C A t Louisville, Ky., the new Central 
Colored High School has been dedicated. It 
was formerly the white boys high school 
but has been remodeled at a cost of $75,-
i100. It will have an attendance of over 
400 and has laboratories, domestic science 
department, industrial shops and gymnasium beside the regular class rooms. 
C Mrs. Margaret M . Barber has given the 
Barber Memorial Seminary at Anniston, 
Ala., $50,000 in securities. 
G During the past year Alabama Negroes 
in twenty-three counties have contributed 
$47,451 for the improvement of their 
schools. The white people have added 
$1,368. Of the money raised $21,121 was 
put in new buildings. In addition to this 
the Negro patrons contributed hauling and 
labor. To increase salaries, $19,726 was 
raised. Home makers clubs have a total 
membership of 9,728 and canned 247,040 
quarts of fruits and vegetables. 
C In Virginia the colored people raised 
$8,109 to extend the school term and $25,-
579 for new buildings, repairs and material. 
Home makers clubs put up 86,000 quarts 
of vegetables and fruits. 
C A colored public school at Waco, Tex., 
has been destroyed by fire. 
C The origin of the Washington Education 
Fund which has been mentioned in Th e 
Crisis is thus explained by the chairman 
of the board of trustees in a letter to Mr. 
J. D. Alston: "Dr. Silas Hamilton, while 
riding through the mountains of Virginia 
a few years after 1800, en route from his 
boyhood home to his plantation in Natchez 
County, Mississippi, met a slave trader 
riding and leading by a string around his 
wrist and over the pommel of his saddle a 
young colored boy. George was then a 
boy perhaps 8 or 9 years old. He could 
keep up with the horse well enough when it 
was walking, but when it trotted or galloped, it practically dragged George along 40 TH E CRISIS 
in the dust and dirt. Dr. Hamilton was 
a man of infinitely kind heart, and taking 
pity on the slave, bought him for $100.00. 
When they made out the bill of sale, Dr. 
Hamilton asked what the name of the boy 
was, and the slave trader, not knowing, 
turned and asked him his name, and he 
stuttered out a word they took for George. 
The boy's eyes were sore, and the hard 
traveling had made him stiff and sore. Dr. 
Hamilton took him on his horse and before they reached the Doctor's plantation, 
the eyes were cured and the boy was himself again, as a result of the Doctor's attention to him. Later the boy told the 
Doctor that his name was George Washingon. The Doctor asked him why he 
selected that name, and he replied that he 
selected it because George Washington 
was a good man. 
"Dr. Silas Hamilton decided to come 
north, about ten years later. When he 
reached the first free soil, probably at 
Indiana, he gave all his slaves, 21 in number, their freedom, and went their bond. 
George Washington, however, then a young 
man, pleaded with his master that he might 
keep him and let him serve him as long as 
he lived. Dr. Hamilton consented and 
brought George with him to Otterville, 
Jersey County, Illinois, which was then the 
largest town in Jersey County. Here 
George worked for his master without compensation, until Dr. Hamilton died, leaving George in his will $3,000.00. George 
Washington died when he was about 41 
years old, and between the death of his 
master and his own death, he devoted himself to the care of his property. He 
worked about upon different farms, and 
finally bought a farm of his own. He was 
a deacon in the Methodist Church at Otterville, and was the only colored man that 
was ever a member or a deacon of that 
church. He was highly respected by the 
white people and the few blacks that lived 
in his community. His word was said to 
be as good as his bond. Many quaint 
stories are told of the predicaments and 
embarassing circumstances that he got into, 
but his common sense and loyalty always 
bore him out well. 
"When George Washington died, he left 
a non-cupative will, and his estate was 
valued, according to the records of the 
Probate Court of Jersey County, at about 
$15,000.00. The trustee of the will, however, was careless, and appropriated the 
property to his own use. My father 
taught school in Jersey County, and was 
principal of the public school at Otterville, 
and studied law at night, and was admitted 
to the bar; and he learned of this George 
Washington and the money he had left, 
and of the misappropriation of it. His 
first suit at law was to recover this money, 
and devote it to the purpose for which it 
was intended. After several years of litigation, the fund was secured and after a 
monument costing $1,500.00 was erected in 
Otterville near the old free public school, 
to George Washington's dead master, Dr. 
Silas Hamilton, there remained about 
$7,300.00 in the trust fund. That was approximately 30 years ago. When my father 
died two years ago this fund had not only 
helped in the education of approximately 
100 colored boys and girls, but had increased in value to about $23,000.00. My 
father left a request that $3,000.00 of his 
own estate should be paid to the George 
Washington Education Fund. The free 
public school above referred to is the first 
free school in Illinois admitting children 
regardless of color or previous condition of 
servitude, and was built by funds donated 
by Dr. Silas Hamilton. 
"A t present we are not sending any children to school because the George Washington Education Fund owns land in the 
Nutwood Drainage District, and the drainage assessment each year reduces the net 
income below $1,000.00. By decree of the 
Court the fund must show an income of not 
less than $1,050.00 a year before the education of young men and women is permitted. 
This condition of affairs has been true for 
about three years, although we maintained 
the boys and girls in school that we had 
previously made provision for." 
O William Mason, a colored freshman in 
the arts college Ohio State University, has 
won first prize in an oratorical contest. He 
will now meet the champion orators from 
three other universities. 
C Miss Roberta B. James, daughter of Mr. 
and Mrs. R. D. James of Cleveland, O., was 
one of the six honor graduates of the Central High School. She is seventeen years 
of age and one of the youngest members of 
the class of 79. She was the faculty's TH E HORIZON 41 
HISS R. B. JAMES. 
choice for commencement speaker together 
six class mates. 
C The Home Mission Society of the 
Northern Methodist Church has offered 
$275,000 for a school in New Orleans for 
Negroes to be controlled by the southern 
white Methodists. 
MEETINGS. 
THE Georgia State Convention of Negro 
doctors will be held this month in 
Savannah. 
C. The 36th annual session of the Southern 
Illinois Teachers' Association convened in 
Cairo. Over a thousand teachers were present. 
C Among the speakers of the colored Ala ­
bama Teachers Association were Julius 
Rosenwald, William G. Wilcox, James H . 
Dillard, Mrs. Booker T. Washington and 
Dr. George Haynes. 
(I The colored teachers of Oklahoma held 
their tenth annual session at Boley. They 
passed resolutions condemning the present 
school law. 
C The Alabama Sociological Congress, a 
white organization with colored members, 
met in Birmingham. 
0 The sixth Worth County, Ga., Negro 
fair has been held. 
(I The Iowa federation of colored women's 
clubs holds its second annual session in 
Ottumwa this month. 
C The 6th annual meeting of the Middle 
Tennessee Colored Teachers' Association 
was held in Nashville in April. 
CHURCHES . 
PAU L OBODOECIE EMECETE , a native of British Nigeria, has been admitted to the catholic priesthood at Lagos, 
West Africa. 
C The Rev. C. M . C. Mason, for thirty-five 
years rector of Al l Saints Episcopal Church, 
St. Louis, and the oldest priest in the 
diocese, is dead of pneumonia. Bishop 
Donald S. Tuttle presiding bishop of the 
Episcopal church together with his Coadjutor, Dean and twenty-four local rectors officiated at his funeral. 
(I Dr. C. A . Finley of East Cavalry Baptist Church, Philadelphia, has been tendered 
a reception on the fifteenth anniversary of 
his pastorate. He was given a purse of 
$225. 
C The colored catholics have had a celebration in New Orleans and were addressed 
by Cardinal Gibbons. 
(I Colored Baptists of Texas will raise $86,-
000 this year for educational purposes. 
C A conference of the Colored M . E. 
Church attended by eight bishops and ten 
general officers was held at Houston, Texas. 
(I The thirty-fifth anniversary of the pastorate of the Rev. J. M . Armistead of 
Zion Baptist Church, Portsmouth, Va., has 
been celebrated by a series of meetings. 
C St. James Presbyterian Church of New 
York City has become self-supporting and 
raised $1,500 at a recent rally. The Rev. 
F. M . Hyder is the pastor. 
G Charles Street A . M . E . Church, Boston, 
has celebrated its fortieth anniversary. 
POLITICS. 
FOUR bills against the interests of 
colored Americans have already been 
introduced into the 65th congress: two by 
Representative Vinson to prohibit intermarriage of races and to provide JimCrow street cars; one by Mr. Austin to 
provide a permanent colored military 
school; a fourth by Mr. Vinson to segregate colored clerks. 
G Two other bills have been introduced by 
Mr. Austin both of which are of possible 
benefit: One to construct a national home 
for aged and infirm colored people and the 
other to incorporate a Colored Association 
of Railway Employees. 
C It is said that migration will give 30,000 
new colored voters to the state of Ohio this 
year. 42 TH E CRISIS 
(I It is reported that under the new civil 
service order Negro post masters will be 
eligible to examination and appointment. 
C Dr. Sumner Furnis, a leading colored 
physician of Indianapolis, has been nominated for the common council. 
d Mayor Curley of Boston has appointed 
Lucius S. Hicks, a colored lawyer, as assistant registrar of voters. His salary will be 
$1,400 a year. 
(I The colored people of Haddonfield, N . J., 
have nominated Mrs. Edward Washington, 
a former colored teacher, for the school 
board. 
PERSONAL. 
MR. W. S. Braithwaite spoke at the 20th 
Century Club, Boston, recently on new 
tendencies in poetry. 
(I The Hon. Charles W. Anderson of New 
York City recently had the misfortune to 
break his arm. 
C Alfred Cottman for twenty years a 
policeman in Philadelphia is dead. 
(I Mary M . Wilson, a fifteen-year old 
colored maid employed in St. Louis, saved 
her white mistress from death at the hands 
of a drunken Irishman armed with a 
pistol. 
G. Mordecai Brown saved a white woman 
from drowning at the Pass-a-Grille hotel, 
Florida. 
<J Harry J. Taylor has been appointed to 
the police force at Everett, Mass. He has 
long stood high on the eligible list but was 
refused appointment on account of color. 
C Philip H . Murray, editor of the St. 
Louis Advance, is dead at the age of 
seventy-four. 
G William Duggar, a colored boy, lost his 
life by drowning at Virgini a Beach, Va., 
in trying to save a white fellow seaman. 
(I William Dean Howells lunched recently 
at a colored public school in Savannah, Ga. 
C Dr. Matthew O. Ricketts of St. Joseph, 
Mo., a graduate of the University of 
Nebraska and member of the state legislature from 1893 to 1895, died January 15th. 
G William E. Bayless, former city editor of 
the Pittsburgh Courier, has been made business manager to succeed the late William 
M . Page. 
G Mr. C. W. Cansler of the colored high 
school appeared before the Knoxville, Tennessee, Philosophical Society to give a 
mathematical demonstration. 
G Musical America says of R. Nathaniel 
Dett's "Music in the Mine," described as 
"an unaccompanied folk-song scene":— 
"The whole thing is original, splendidly 
conceived, and it should make a very attractive number for efficient choral organizations." The piece is dedicated to the Australian pianist-composer, Percy Grainger, 
who is an admirer of Afro-American folksong. 
G The Boston Transcript of a recent date 
devotes two columns to the "Rise and Progress of Harry T. Burleigh," the distinguished Afro-American baritone-composer. 
Of Mr. Burleigh's new song, "In the 
Wood of Finvara, " Musical America of 
March 17th says: "Mr. Burleigh writes today with a greater freedom, a tenser emotionalism, a broader suggestion and withal 
a subtler touch than in his songs of last 
year. * * * 'In the Wood of Finvara ' is 
a masterpiece. We are certain of that; and 
we know that it is not the exception with 
its composer. This song seems to be made 
up of a series of inspired moments, which, 
taken collectively, constitute a very important contribution to the literature of the 
contemporary art-song." 
C Inquiry is made for Jesse Mansfield McKinney who left his home, Lewisville, Ark., 
at the age of twelve years some eighteen 
years ago. His mother, father and sister 
would like to know his whereabouts. 
G Miss Nannie H . Burroughs of Washington, D. C. was one of the speakers at the 
Ruby anniversary banquet given at the 
Hotel Astor, New York City, recently. 
This celebration was under the Woman's 
American Baptist Home Mission Society to 
commemorate forty years of work. 
ATHLETICS . 
THE C risi s is reminded that Robert W. 
Marshall, a colored student of the University of Minnesota was named as the All -
America left-end in football by Walter 
Camp in 1905 and 1906. 
G The athletic carnival of the Smart 
Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn, N . Y. , was 
given recently with Howard P. Drew as the 
star. The J. B. Taylor memorial cup was 
among the trophies. TH E 43 CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Creating an Estate of One Thousand 
Dollars with Twenty-five Dollars 
Completes Your Life-Line 
Actual statistics recently compiled show that out of every hundred men considered to be in fairly comfortable circumstances only one lives to be fifty and 
leaves anything but insurance at death. It is the task of a life-time to accumulate 
a fortune. It means long years of toil and deprivation, with the ever-present 
likelihood of having all that you have earned swept away by some untoward and 
unforeseen misfortune. Instances are plentiful where men have accumulated 
enough property to keep them in comfort the rest of their days, to leave enough 
to protect their loved ones after they are gone, and then have a sudden decline in 
real-estate values or a break in the stock market sweep away all they have beyond 
any chance of recall. 
Are you willing to have your wife and children run such a risk? Do you 
know that you are that hundredth man and that you can afford to wait? If you 
know that you cannot die for twenty-five years yet, you can afford to wait. But 
if you are human, like the rest of us, your time for insuring is NOW. 
Let us suppose that you are thirty-five years of age and in good health. For 
just $24.25 you can create immediately an estate of ON E THOUSAN D DOLLARS , payable immediately upon your death. The time to do this is right now, 
today. Last year 25,000 men waited sixty days too long. Are you going to 
| \ do the same thing? Fill out the coupon in the lower corner, answering 
*. every question, and mail it today to the Home Office and assure your 
\ dependents of a chance in life after you have passed on. 
\ ^ No matter where you live we can protect you. 
3a- \ standar d LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Please send me 
particulars about 
insurance. \ 
\ Home Office 
Amount $ 
Sex ^ 200 AUBURN AVE., ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Age ^ Capital Stock, fully paid . . $ 125,000.00 
weight \ s Insurance in force . . . 4,000,000.00 
Height v 
Occupation
 N ^ OL D LIN E LEGA L RESERV E 
Name v 
\ HEMA N E . PERRY , President 
Addres s
 \ HARR Y H . PACE, Sec. Treasurer 
(C. May , 1917) ^ 
Mention The Crisis 
Standard Life 
Insurance Company 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E GHETTO . 
GOVERNO R FERGUSO N of Texas, who 
is threatened with impeachment, began his defense by calling his accuser, Senator W. A . Johnson, a "nigger." 
C W. Ashbie Hawkins of the Baltimore 
branch of the N . A . A . C. P. has filed a 
brief of the segregation cases before the 
Supreme Court of the United States. 
C A t Eufaula, Okla., George Martin, a 
white man, while drunk insulted a colored 
woman and struck one of her children. She 
called her husband, Neal Carson, who 
killed Martin. A mob is hunting for 
Carson. 
Q Edward Jackson of Danville, Va., who 
snatched a purse containing one dollar has 
been sentenced to ten years in the penitentiary. 
(I The mayor of Lakeland, Fla., has suspended the chief of police for beating a 
young colored man in order to make him 
plead guilty to a charge of gambling. 
C A fifth reprieve has been given Joe 
Campbell the colored convict of Illinois 
charged with murder. 
d Edmund J. Murch a retired capitalist of 
Bangor, Maine, who used to spend his winters in Florida has been killed by George 
Thompson of Jacksonville, a Negro restaurant proprietor. Thompson found Murch 
in Thompson's home with Mrs. Thompson. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
March 12, Maysville, Ky . — William 
Sanders for alleged theft of an overcoat 
and defending himself against the posse. 
March 19, Dyersburg, Tenn.—William 
Thomas, hanged by a mob for shooting an 
officer. He had escaped from jail and had 
been already shot by a deputy sheriff. 
March 28, Pelham, Ga.—Joe Nowling, 
killed by a mob. No reason known. 
FOREIGN . 
THE leader of the revolt against the 
Turks in the city of Mecca is E l Husein 
Ibn Ali , an Arab of Negro descent. 
(I The British transport, Mendi, was recently sunk off the Isle of Wight and 615 
native South African laborers drowned. 
C Raiswaldi Georgis a cousin of the late 
Menelik of Abyssinia has been crowned 
king of Wallou, Goudar and Bekember 
which are subsidiary states in the Abyssinian empire. 
Mrs. M . Watson Rudd 
of the 
Ideal Exclusive Parlors 
announces a Special Cours e in the 
Ar t of Beauty Culture 
during the summer months. 
This course is planned with special reference 
to teachers and students contemplating a summer in New Yor k City. A s the size of Jhe 
class is limited prospective students should 
apply early. 
Address Mrs. M . Watso n Rudd , 47 West 42d 
Street, Ne w Yor k City . 
Red Rose Face Powder 
Made in all shades to suit your complexion; heals and beautifies. Price 
50c. Sample size 20c. 
Red Rose Cold Cream 
For dry faces. Price 50c and 25c. 
Red Rose Vanishing Cream 
For oily faces. Price 50c and 25c. 
Red Rose Beauty Cream 
For use at night; a real skin food 
that cleanses, softens and preserves. 
Price 75c and 50c. 
Al l made of the best materials. 
FLORESSENC E MFG . CO., 
239 West 63d St., New Yor k City 
J. R. WIGGINS , Manager. 
KASHMIR INSTITUTE 
Train s men and women i n modern, scientific methods of hai r and skin culture . 
KASHMI R graduate s earn $20.00 to 540.00 
per week. Grea t demand for them . 
LEAR N "TH E KASHMI R WAY " 
Writ e for catalog. 
Kashmi r Institute—Dept. K . 
4709 State St. Chicago , 111. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
TH E NEGRO PLAYER S 
Acting 
Three Plays of Negro Life and Legend 
B y Directio n 
RIDGEL Y TORRENC E ROBER T EDMON D JONE S 
Dr. W . E . Burghardt DuBois calls the production 
"Epoc h making. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k TRIBUN E says it is a "Triumph. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k GLOB E calls it "Th e most important performance of the season." 
Cyri l V . Briggs, dramatic critic of the AMSTER ­
DA M NEWS , says it "Deserves the support 
of all. " 
The Art of the Colored Race 
Established on Broadway 
It Need s YOU R Support . Musi c by the Cle f Clu b 
NOW PLAYING AT 
TH E GARRIC K THEATR E 
35t h St. , East of Broadwa y NE W YOR K CIT Y 
TELEPHONE GREELEY 6224 
Mention T h e C risi s 46 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
BOOK S B Y PROMINEN T NEGROE S 
Issued by The Neale Publishing Company, New York , N . Y . 
The American Cavalryman. By Henry F. Downing 
Mr. Downing perhaps has had a more varied career 
than any other living Negro from the Civil War to 
the war between the United States and Germany. 
He was the first colored man to represent the United 
States at a city of a white government, by appointment of President Cleveland. He introduced Coleridge-Taylor to the London Public. He persuaded 
Liberia to open its doors to foreign capital. Merely 
to recount his activities in public life of the^ past 
fifty years would take a volume. But his highest 
renown has been won as a man of letters, and this 
is a romance of Liberia—a romance of a very high 
order, written by the only man who could have written it. $1.50 by mail. 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors 
By J. N. Leger 
M. Leger, formerly represented Haiti as Minister 
to the United States, and later represented Haiti 
as a member of the Peace Conference, att The 
Hague. In Europe as well as in America he is regarded as one of the ablest men of his race. Two 
editions: one in English and one in French. Illustrated. Each edition $8.20 by mail. 
The Facts of Reconstruction By John R. Lynch 
Major Lynch, an officer of the United States Army, 
lived through Reconstruction, and took a lively 
part therein. He served as a Member of Congress, 
later became Fourth Auditor of the Treasury, and 
by far the greater part of his adult life has been 
passed in public service. The late Sen. Hoar in his 
"Autobiography" referred to Major Lynch in high 
terms. Illustrated. Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail.+ 
Redder Blood By Willia m M . Ashby 
Prof. Ashby was recently graduated from Yale. This 
novel, his first book, is a valuable contribution to 
the literature of his race. $1.00 by mail. 
Ethiopia By Clayton Adams 
Mr. Adams writes of the Land of Promise in this 
powerful novel,—the adjective is used deliberately. 
The ancient Kingdom of Ethiopia has passed away, 
but its name still lives, not only as the proper 
appellation of the Negro race, but also figuratively, 
principally to designate the invisible kingdom of native Africans and their descendants. $1.00 by mail. 
Race Adjustment By Kell y Mille r 
Prof. Miller, Dean of the College of Arts and 
Sciences, Howard University, is easily in the 
first rank of Negro teachers, writers, orators, and 
leaders, and is so recognized on both sides of the 
Atlantic. This volume comprises his essays on the 
Negro in America that won for him fame as a man 
of letters when they were first published periodically. 
Third edition. $2.16 by mail. 
Out of the House of Bondage By Kell y Mille r 
This volume by Dean Miller contains the essays that 
he had written up to the time of its publication that 
were not included in his earlier volume, "Race Adjustment," and have been written since the earlier 
volume was published. Already the sale of this new 
volume has been large. $1.65 by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Afric a By George W. E llis 
Mr. Ellis was for eight years Secretary of the 
United States Legation in Liberia. _ Since his 
return to America, he has written extensively on the 
Negro and his problems, and has taken a prominent 
place among the leaders of his race. I n many respects this latest book of his is the most important 
work on the Negro yet published,—the Negro i n 
Africa. Illustrated. $2.15 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments i n the Methodist Episcopal 
Church By John H. Reed 
The Rev. Dr. Reed, D.D., K.C. , writes authoritatively on the subject matter of his book. Introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D. , LL.D . $1.60 
by mail. 
The Blac k Man's Burden 
By Willia m H . Holtzclaw 
Prof. Holtzclaw is the founder and the principal of 
the Utica Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and Young Women , 
already one of the largest educational institutions i n 
the South. Introduction by the late Booker T. 
Washington. Third thousand. $1.00 by mail. 
Negro Tales By Joseph S . Cotte r 
Prof. Cotter is the principal of one of the largest 
schools for Negroes in the South. Like Prof. 
Ashby and Mr. Adams, Prof. Cotter reveals Negro 
life in imaginative prose fiction,—a branch of literature to which Negro authors should give greater attention. $1.00 by mail. 
The Voice of Mizriam By John Walte r Paisley 
Prof. Paisley, for many years a professor of 
English Literature, has assembled in this volume 
his own poems. The book deserves a place on the 
library shelf where Dunbar's fine poems are to be 
found. $1.25 by mail. 
The New Negro By Willia m Pickens 
Dean Pickens, Dean of Morgan College, was graduated from Yale in the highest grade of his class. 
There he won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the 
Ten Eyck Oration. In this book, the full title of 
which is "The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status," he discusses with great force and 
clarity nearly all the pressing political problems that 
now confront his race. $1.60 by mail. 
The Key By James S . Stemons 
Mr. Stemons is the Field Secretary of the Joint 
Organization for Equalizing Industrial Opportunities and the League of Civic and Political Reform. He holds this work to be what its full title 
implies: "The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem." Undoubtedly the work is a powerful study of the Negro and his problems. $1.00 by 
mail. 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHING CO. , 
440 Fourt h Avenu e 
Ne w Yor k Cit y or TH E CRISIS, 
70 Fifth Avenue 
New Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH I CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 47 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph. Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY ATLANTA. GA. 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A . M. 
_ An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York* N . Y. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be nude in commissions by parties" handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address! E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
TEACHER S A live, agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
140 3 New York Avenue Washington, D . C. 
T
eachers (all subjects) 
.Ei «r» Ml mj MX i j and interpreters 
STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Established 1897 
1011 New York Avenue Washington, D.C. 
Wanted—Traveling Salesmen 
Although a Negro author, the novels of Oscar 
Micheaux have their largest circulation over 
the northwest—Minn., Iowa, North and South 
Dakota and Nebraska. We can use several 
practical young men of the highest intelligence 
in this work. Each man is sent out under 
the tutelage of an experienced salesman for 
a week before being sent out by himself. 
Salary and commission with expenses guaranteed. Address Western Book Supply Company, Publishers, Sioux City, Iowa. 
Th e Journa l o f 
Negr o Histor y 
Publishe d Quarterl y 
|100 Pages] 
Edited by CARTER G . WOODSON" -
THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY is 
the official organ of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1.00 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to THE 
JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY and 
addressed to 
CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
1216 You St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscript Criticized 
and Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
Correct Calling Cards 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEMEN . 
IO O FO R S O CENT S O R 5O FO R 3 0 CENTS . N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FO R SAMPLE S AN D TERM S 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
INDIANAPOLIS . INDIAN A 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help You Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
Mention T h e Crisis 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
EXCELLEN T OPPORTUNIT Y for Men and Women 
School of Mechanical Dentistry 
Complete in Eighth Months. Night or Day. Write for Booklet, etc. 
A . O . BRANSO N & CO. , 52 W. 135th St., New York City 
KASHMI R PREPARATION S 
FO R HAIR AN D SKIN 
IMPORTED "Better than the Best" GUARANTEED 
Learn "Th e Kashmi r Way" 
Kashmir Wonder Skin Preparation 
Kashmir Hair Beautifier 
Kashmir Cream Face Powder 
Kashmir Cold Creme 
Kashmir Vanishing Creme 
Sold in 50c sizes—Postage 8c extra 
C * Beautiful Illustrated Beauty Book FREE Write today for your copy 
A KASHMI R GIR L 
KASHMIR CHEMICA L CO. , Dept. K 
4709 State Street CHICAGO , ILL . 
Hand Made Natural Human Hair Wigs 
Transformations, 
Switches, Putts, Plaits, 
Bangs, Corone t Braids, that 
can be combe d the same as 
you r ow n hair. Huma n 
hair for sale by ounc e or 
pound . Hai r NETS . 
W E CARR Y TH E 
LARGEST STOCK IN 
ELECTRI C 
COMBS 
Mail Orders sent to any part of the U. S. or B. W. I. Send 2c for catalog. 
Mme . Baum' s Hai r Emporium , Inc. , 486 Eighth Avenue, New York City 
Between 34th and 35th Streets 
Mention T h e Crisis TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 49 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres, 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
Open July 1st Closed September 10th 
TH E OCEA N HOUS E 
SE A ISLE CITY , N . J . 
This hotel is right on the ocean front. It has 
wide porches, large conservatory dining room where 
one has a beautiful view of the sea while dining, 
and every room opens on the ocean. Special rates 
for July; room and board, $8.00 per week. Personally managed by Mrs. Lucy Lee, 5 Plain St., 
Elmhurst, L , I. Address after June 22nd, Ocean 
House, Sea Isle City, N. J. 
The Truth about the Bible—introductory price $2.00 
Why Jesus was a Man and not a Women—$1.50 
Sexology of the Bible— $1.25 
The Duality of the Bible—$1.50 
"The sex Idea of these books make them the world's 
greatest books." E. B. Ramsey, M. D. 
"Will empty our insane asylums, hospitals, and jails." 
J. H. Powell, M. D. 
"The world's most revolutionary books." 
W. A. Swann, M. D. 
You should read the sex Idea of these books. 
Address the Author 
SIDNEY C. TAPF . Ph.B., P. 0. Box 710, Kansas City, Mo. 
Summer School for Teachers 
SELMA UNIVERSITY, SELMA, ALA. 
June 11-July 20, 1917 
Alabama Certificates Extended 
Extensive Practical Courses 
Send for Bulletin 
C O L ORE D HEL P 
We shall require a large number of competent persons, women 
and men, to fill positions in private families, hotels, etc., during 
coming spring and summer. 
Wages up to $100 per month. 
Send stamp for reply. 
NEW YORK AND NEW JERSE Y 
INDUSTRIAL EXCHANG E 
Bloomfield & N. Fullerton Aves., 
Montclair, N. J. 
Langford & Lake Aves., 
Asbury Park, N. J. 
1931 Broadway Cor. 65th St., 
New York City. 
' See the Selected List on 
the Back Cover 
A "Womanly " Wa y 
T o Remove Hair 
El-Rado Sanitary 
Liquid 
Washes the hair off by dissolving it. 
Women fairly revel in the comfort and 
cleanliness of hair-free underarms. 
After using El-Rado chiffon sleeves 
can be worn without any dress shields. 
Entirely harmless. Money-back guarantee. 
At all toilet counters. 50c and $1.00 
If you prefer, we will fill your order by 
mail if you write enclosing stamps or coin. 
MM I. LELIA W. ROBINSON 110 W. 136th Street. NEW YORK 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M introducin g 
LYDA' S HAI R BEAUTIFIE R 
A Guaranteed Food Preparation for the 
Hair. Price 50 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs . E . Slaughte r Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS . MO . 
filention The Crisis 
Books? 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-class service for First-class people 
3428 South Park Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 50 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
MEASURE 
$195 Loo K express paid 
TAILORED 
• Pants To get you for a steady customer, 
this swell Dress or Business 
pants, tailored-to-measure, choice \ 
of 17 styles.Guaranteed for l 8months\L , v 
solid wear, or Money Back—Quick.wv^ 
Genuine $5 value. Only 1 to a customer. gr^ » 
Not 1c For Extras 
Al l novelty features are free—no 
charge for big Peg Tops, fancy cuffs, 
fancy belt loops and pocket flaps. 
Pick your choice from our FRE E ordering outfit containing over 1000 
cloth and style combinations. 
Thi s pin—GOLD 
Finishe d 
FREE vou 
Classy lapel pin with 
your first order only 350 
on hand, get yours quick. 
f Send 
No Cash I Money 1 Profits ing measuresof 
relatives and neighbors, young Nat. 
Spriggs made $139 in 30 days. Buy 
at lowest wholesale prices ..„.,". . , 
for yourself. Write for ,„„ CHICAGO TAILORS ASS'N . 
FRE E samples today. Depl 400 515 So. Franklin Si., Chicago 
SPECIA L OFFER 
A year's subscription to TH E CRISIS 
will be given to anyone sending in at one 
time five new paid-up yearly subscriptions 
to TH E CRISIS. The offer holds good 
until midnight of June 30, 1917. 
$6 0 A WEEK AND THIS FREE 
UT0M0BILE 
Every Agent Can 
GET Auto FREE 
NO CONTEST 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
Yon—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Fre e 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Ar e you that kind? I want you to advertise. Bell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 50 years—the ROBINSON FOLDIN G 
BAT H TUB . Demonstratin g Tu b Furnished . Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom In any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds i n small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakahle. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years, Remember, fully 10% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit In 30 days. Rev. Otto Scbulze, Mo., got S1600to date. 
Buckholder, Mont., orders $1072 in 17 days, Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that, pleasant, 
permanent, fasoinating work. Write a postcard. Le t me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit Is good If you mean business. But you must be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postoard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO. 
4291 Factories Building TOLEDO, OHIO 
Telephones: 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
Attorney-at-La w Notar y Public 
1607 Williamson Buildin g Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counsellor at law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Marke t St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N . J. 
General Practice Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R . MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counsellor at law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney-at-La w 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Te l 5437 Tort Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P . BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-La w 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARR Y M . COOPE R 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIAN S 
531 Leno x Ave. , Ne w Yor k 
Feet 
I
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS, BUNIONS, INGROWN NAILS, and AL L ' 
other AILMENTS of the FEET . 
DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
ma ^r
 CHIROPODIS T 
Registered In the States of New York and New Jersey 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 West 136th St., New York City. 
Let the 
- 4 in 1 -
Coupon Plan 
Increase 
Your Profits 
Mail Order Dealers 
Sel l valuabl e instructio n 
systems b y cu t pric e coupo n unde r Mone y Bac k 
Guarantee . Big- Margin . 
Smal l Sellin g Expense . 
Complet e Plan , Sampl e 
Coupon s an d Bargain 
Bulleti n sent o n request. 
Mai l Dealer' s Coupon System 
521 so. Dearborn Street, Chicago 
Mention T h * Crisis A Ne w Boo k b y Dr . D u Boi s 
TH E NEGR O 
B y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silve r Fleece, " "Select Bibliograph y of 
the Negr o American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. H e is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa , America , and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkabl e 
series of low-priced new books wit h whic h everybody should become acquainted. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSITY LIBRAR Y 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENR Y HOL T & COMPANY , 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per 60c. net 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - -
Postage extra 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 6o cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N By J . A . Thomson LATIN AMERIC A By W. R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIAN LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROM E By W. Warde Fowler GERMAN Y OF TODA Y 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
Th e CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue, New Yor k 
Mention T h e C risi s the CRISIS Book mart 
Yo u can orde r throug h the CRISIS an y book printe d at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected list of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIV E LIF E I N SOUT H AFRICA . (Sol. J . Plaatje) $1.50 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous). 1.20 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (B . F . Riley). 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.0 0 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.0 0 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.5 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.2 5 
PRINC E HAL L AN D His FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford).. . 1.0 0 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T . G. Steward) 1.2 5 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N O F TH E NEGR O PRIO R T O 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.5 0 
LIF E AN D LETTER S O F COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S O F NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 