The CRISIS 
Vol . 13-No . 4 FEBRUARY , 1917 Whol e No . 76 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D II. GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNES ' HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
DR. J . E . SPINGARN , Chairman of Board 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR. W. E . B. D U BOIS. Director of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretary 
JAME S VVELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimore 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O 
Spring-field, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTORS 
Washington 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONE S 
DR. O. M . WALLE R 
New Haven 
GEORG E W. CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
New York 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR. JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
proposes to make 10,000,000 Americans 
Physically free from Peonage 
Mentally free from Ignorance 
Politically free from Disfranchisement 
Socially free from Insult 
If this is your fight, join and support us. 
Date 1917-
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
O SWAL D G ARRISO N V ILLARD , Treasurer, 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
S I R : 
I desire to become a member of the Nationa l Associatio n fo r th e 
Advancemen t of Colore d Peopl e and to receive Th e Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
... . City and State 
ww w 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE . A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W. E . 
BURGHARD T D U BOIS; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINESS MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for February, 1917 
PICTURES 
l'age 
COVER. The Honorable Richard T. Greener. Photograph From Life 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT 185 
ME N OF THE MONT H 187 
ARTICLES 
THE CAL L OF TH E PATRIOT. A Story. By Fenton Johnson 169 
TH E FREDERICK DOUGLASS HOME. By Mrs. Mary B. Talbert 174 
WHY ? A Poem. By G. Douglas Johnson 184 
RHAPSODY . A Poem. By Edwin J. Morgan 188 
SHERIFF GRIFFIN. A Story. By Franklin O. Nichols 196 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 163 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 166 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 177 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 186 
TH E HORIZON 189 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be clanged as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
•MfmnnmmnnMiiiimmiiinu 
The NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV . DR . CHARLE S H . PARKHURST , New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M . C. A . and Y . W. C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT . 
A HIGH STANDAR D COLLEG E DEPARTMEN T has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School Term Opened Oct. 4, 1916 
I For catalog and detailed information, address: | 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPAR D I 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L DURHAM , N . C. 1 
r'iiiMKiiii]mimi]iBHininiiTirrniinirmnTTmiiiiiniiiiniiuniuiiitMiiuiiiiiiiiniiin niiiiiiiiuiiiniiii iniiiniiiiiiiiiiuni i uiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiMJMumiuiJilwjBlluilMiiimjmiiiumutniniiiniiiininunr mni uih™ 
TH E 
AGRICULTURAL AND 
TECHNICAL CDLLEGE 
(Formerly A. & M. Collets) 
Fell Tern began September 1, 1916. 
Board, lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. 
Maintained by the Government! of 
the United States and of North Carolina. 
short course. 
Courses leading; to the degree of 
Bachelor of Soienoe in Agriculture 
and Bachelor of scienoe in Mechanics. 
Write today for catalog. 
Address: 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N . C. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management o f the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, healthful, well appointed. 
This school offers to young colored 
men and women who have a reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to 
become teachers, courses i n academic work, domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and 
agriculture. Tuitio n is free. Board , 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. Th e entrance 
fee is $7. Fal l term opened September 16, 1916. 
Fo r full information, writ e to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 161 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Th e Best Mora l and Spiritual Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmo ­
sphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School,-
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fal l Ter m Bega n September 21,1916 
For information address 
President R. W . M c GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
609 N . 43d St W. Philadelphia. Pa. 
The Colored Teacher 
A Practical Educational Journal 
containing 
A Department of Methods and Practical Helps for 
Teachers; a Department of Rural Education; and a 
Department of Current Educational News, conducted 
by the best trained teachers; besides Editorials, etc. 
$1.00 per year, 10 cents per copy. Agents wanted. 
Address 
The Colored Teacher, Box 22, Wilberforce, Ohio. 
TEACHER S
 A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1408 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Books ? Se e th e Selecte d Lis t o n 
th e Bac k Cove r 
MOREHOUSE COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texa s and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard , Yal e and Columbi a 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
• High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE . President 
Morris Brow n Universit y 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began Sept. 88th, 1016. 
For further information address 
W . A . FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. 8. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 162 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keepin g 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A . B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
We typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET, PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
MME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L O F 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and Millinery. 
Bridges System, 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying, Draping, 
Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taking two or more consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridges Diploma means 
something to you. 
448 E. 35th St. Chicago, 111. 
LEAR N TH E S. T. TAYLO R SYSTE M 
of Garment Cutting, Fitting, Designing, Draping, Embroidery, Han d Decoration of Garments, Dressmaking and Ladies' Tailoring. 
Terms reasonable. Writ e for Catalog. 
S. T. TAYLO R SCHOO L AN D PATTER N PARLOR S 
Mrs. Maybel B. Evans, Prin. 
34 N . Garfield Avenue Columbus, O. 
Let the 
- 4 in 1 — 
Coupon Plan 
• Increase 
Your Profits 
Mall Order Dealers 
Sell valuabl e Instruction 
systems by cut pric e coupo n unde r Mone y Bac k 
Guarantee . Big- MARGIN. 
Smal l Sellin g Expense . 
Complet e Plan , Sampl e 
Coupon s an d BARGAI N 
Bulleti n sent o n request. 
Mail Dealer's Couoon system 
52 1 So . Dearborn street, Chicago 
A man of first rate address with broad experience, 
a good literary education and thorough theological 
training, with one year of post graduate work, is 
open for settlement as pastor with any Baptist church. 
Best of reference with ten years' experience in the 
pastorate. Address O. B. Y. , in care of the CRISIS , 
70 Fifth Avenue, New Yor k City. 
Correct Calling Cards 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEME N 
lO O FO R 5O CENT S O R 5 0 FO R 3 0 CENTS . N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FO R SAMPLE S AN D TERM S 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
INDIANAPOLIS . INDIAN A 
ROLAND W. HAYES , Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratorio Opera 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Haves sings freely and with good * 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS. 
PUBLISHER'S CHAT 
We are glad to say to our 
subscribers, readers and friends 
that the new year has started well 
with the CRISIS magazine. The 
amount of business which we did 
during the recent holidays in 
books, calendars and magazines 
surpassed all previous records. To 
our friends we say a cordial "Thank 
you." 
We believe that there are many 
communities as yet untouched by 
the CRISIS. Doubtless there are 
thousands of people who never 
heard of the magazine and the 
work which it is aiming to do for 
the benefit of the race, to whom 
the CRISIS would make a strong 
appeal, once an acquaintanceship 
is formed. Wil l you help us to 
reach them? We shall be glad to 
send sample copies of the magazine 
to any persons who might be thus 
reached. Drop us a line and the 
acquaintanceship is formed! 
Subscribers should remember 
that second class matter is not forwarded by the post office department. Al l changes of address, 
therefore, should be reported to us 
promptly and the old as well as 
the new address should be given. 
An d won't you allow us sufficient 
time to make such change of address:' 
And on to the 50,000! 
Mention Turn CaUSJ 
Shorthand The standard system easily mastered by our method. You write 
business letters the sixth lesson. Complete course of 20 lessons. 
Pay for each group when you are ready for them. Send $3.00 
TODA Y for enrollment and first lessons. Get started NOW. 
Particulars free. 
PITMANI C INSTITUT E 
4277 Cote Brilliante , St. Louis . Mo . TH E CRISIS 
Vol . 13-No . 4 FEBRUARY , 1917 Whol e No . 76 
Editorial 
TH E EDITOR, JANUAR Y 5TH. 
THE Y brought him down from 
the operating table at 1:30. 
It was a serious operation, 
the second he had undergone 
in two weeks. A t four I saw him 
sleeping i n the ward, ether still hiding 
from him the sick horror that awakening might mean. "He is unconscious, and we cannot tell yet," said 
the nurse, "but he seems to have stood 
the operation pretty well. " 
So I walked out of the hospital, 
thinking of all that it would mean for 
twelve million people if this champion 
of theirs were not permitted to live. 
Others would take up the gauge where 
he threw it down; others might wield 
brilliant pens; others would speak 
with something of his quiet eloquence. 
Bu t never again could these millions 
find another leader exactly like him. 
I said to myself then, and I say it 
to you now: "Wha t the colored people 
need most of all is not money, or land, 
or political power, or patronizing 
friends, but unpurchasable leaders— 
leaders who would not sell their souls 
for the good wil l of their neighbors 
or for big buildings, any more than 
they would for a dollar or a job." 
J. E . SPINGARN . 
TH E CURTAIN S OF PAIN 
ABOV E the Hil l where St. 
John's Divine Cathedral 
raises its bald and mighty 
arch, hang the Curtains of 
Pain, grey and purplish as 
they sweep the Hill , but glowing 
above with rare and tender radiance 
save where the massive shadow falls 
athwart—the shadow from the Valley of the Shadow. 
There is moaning here and writhing and now and then a cry, and yet 
less, infinitely less, than one expects. 
There is silence and deep-pulsing stillness—all that and more. But above 
all there sits a mighty Brotherhood. 
We are all initiated into the Secret 
of Lif e beneath the flowing grace of 
the Curtains of Pain. Al l little distinctions flee; there is no Race; there 
is no Age ; there is but one language. 
There is a certain softness of speech 
—we lift up gladly helping hands and 
offer every kindness of the softened 
word and touch of sympathy—while 
through the great window pours the 
winter's warm sun and the light 
music of the world comes faintly 
down in song. 
It is a very beautiful place. I am 
glad I am here. 164 TH E CRISIS 
TH E MASTE R OF HIS FAT E 
AT the seventh annual meeting 
of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People, held in New 
-York on January 2, one familia r 
with the Association since its inception noticed certain tendencies of importance not only to the organization 
but to the Negro race. 
First, all distrust of the whites by 
the colored people, a familiar phenomenon in the early days, had vanished. It was hard to believe i n the 
stormy scene, seven years and a half 
before, when Charles Edwar d Russell, 
with the genius of a master-presider, 
amid a tempest of denunciatory 
speeches, had succeeded in keeping 
parliamentary order. In 1917, there 
was no suspicion, no questioning of 
motive. The meeting was filled with 
a spirit of confidence and of good fellowship. 
Secondly, just as one saw that distrust had vanished, so one recognized 
a solidarity not only between a few 
colored and white members, but 
among the thoughtful colored people of the country. Each year that 
the Association continues with its aggressive work, each year that the 
C RISI S tells its story not only of the 
wrongs, but also of the progress of the 
colored people, the members of the 
Negro race gain in confidence and in 
the ability all together to strike a 
forceful blow. The philosophy of extreme individualism is attractive, 
many in the nation practice it, but it 
is utterly ineffective. A case here, 
taken up at random; a protest there, 
backed by half a dozen people; this 
does not leave a scratch on the bulk 
of race prejudice. But when race 
prejudice has found itself confronted 
by an association of hundreds of 
earnest people, white and black, it has 
been known to run to cover. The 
story that came from Boston of the 
discrimination practiced against a 
colored woman in a hospital in Melrose, and of the success of the branch 
of the N . A . A . C. P . i n completely reversing the policy of the institution, 
showed the strength of united effort. 
An d every battle won, whether in 
Massachusetts or i n California , in 
New Yor k or i n New Orleans, 
strengthens the next effort for fairer 
conditions for the oppressed. 
Thirdly, one felt that not only 
among the talented tenth, but among 
the mass of the race there was a 
growing confidence i n the ability, a 
growing sense of the dignity, of the 
colored people. The America n Negro 
for many generations was trained to 
think himself the inferior of his master ; such training was likely to breed 
either servility or its counterpart, impertinence. Wit h freedom there 
came a wonderful sense of dignity, 
strengthened by the reconstruction 
legislation and education. Probably 
the northern teachers who went South 
after the wa r taught nothing of such 
importance as the lesson of the equality of all men before God. How wonderful many of them were i n their 
passionate insistence on the dignity 
and the power of the colored race! 
It was their boys grown to manhood 
who, when the white South was in the 
saddle, refused to submit to the Jim 
Crow car, and walked miles to and 
from their work. The generation 
after them was too often taught to 
accept a crust with gratitude; but today new leaders are again calling for 
equality between black and white, for 
opportunity, for self-expression, for 
the best things i n life. 
An d last, the meeting showed that 
the economic progress of the Negro 
had been greatly accelerated i n the 
last two years. Out of this horrible 
European war has come economic opportunity. The black man's labor is 
needed and he is getting into factory 
and workshop. A scarcity of labor 
has given him a quick boost toward 
equality, despite the southern administration of the nation's affairs, an ad-EDITORIAL 165 
ministration that stands unequivocally for the inferiority of the Negro. 
The employer of labor is going up and 
down the South telling the black man 
that he is a good fellow and that if he 
wil l come up North and work in his 
factory he shall receive a man's wage. 
An d the Negro goes, and gains in selfrespect and i n the respect of others; 
for this country, like every other 
country, is ruled by the men who fill 
the pay envelopes, not by the men 
who are elected by the ballot. 
"I am the master of my fate, 
I am the captain of my soul." 
Henley's song is the song of our 
National Association. It calls to the 
soul of every black man and woman 
to assert its captaincy. Once the master of his fate, there is no task too 
fine for his genius. Withi n him is 
immense reserve power. Wil l he 
come into the ranks giving all his 
strength to this second great battle 
for freedom, or wil l he remain behind 
enslaved ? 
M AR Y W HIT E O VINGTON . 
TH E Y . M . C. A . 
THE CRISI S has taken such 
frequent occasion to criticize 
the white Y . M . C. A . for its 
unchristian attitude toward 
Negroes that it is glad to note anything that shows even a beginning of 
opposite tendencies. In a recent issue 
we were able to show that the International Committee of the Y . M . C. A . 
definitely repudiated "The Birt h of a 
Nation " as a Y . M . C. A . entertainment so far as its authority went. 
We are also glad to learn by personal correspondence that the West 
Side Y . M . C. A. , i n New Yor k City, 
has so far modified its previous in ­
tolerant attitude as to welcome colored people to its public lectures and 
to treat them wit h courtesy. 
We trust that these beginnings wil l 
have influence on the strongholds of 
heathenism i n other parts of this 
great movement. 
TH E GEORG E WASHINGTON FUND 
GEORG E WASHINGTON , a 
Negro freedman, died at Otterville, Jersey County, Ill., 
in 1868. He left to six trustees (who were to be appointed by 
the Circuit Court of that county) a 
fund for the education of colored 
youth resident in Illinois. Afte r the 
various white trustees had stolen 
such amounts as they could and spent 
considerable in litigation the remaining fund amounts today to $23,960 
and its average income during the 
last ten years has been $1,000. Of 
this income $400 has gone to expenses and $600 to educate students. 
The present Board seems to be 
honest, but not at all anxious to find 
colored students. Examinations are 
held from time to time in the county. 
It is necessary for colored youth in 
Illinois who wish a college education 
to see to it that these country gentlemen are prodded up and made to do 
their duty and that this fund instead 
of being dissipated in needless expenses becomes a real help to Negro 
education. Interested persons should 
write to H . L . Chapman, Jerseyville, 
Ill. 
"FRAUD " 
THE January issue of T H E 
C RISI S spoke editorially of 
the fraudulent work of one 
Thomas Hopkins. Through 
the efforts of C RISI S friends and persons who had been defrauded by him, 
Hopkins was tried and fined by the 
courts in Chatham and Danville, Vir ­
ginia. Complaints have come to us 
from various points in Virgini a and 
North Carolina concerning this man's 
fraud. We hope that interested persons in towns and cities where this 
man has carried his fraud wil l give 
him treatment similar to that which 
he received at the hands of interested 
persons in Chatham and in Danville. 
That T H E C RISI S and its friends 
should be so misused by a member of 
the Negro race is a disgrace of the 
vilest sort. A . G. D ILL . Nationa l Associatio n fo r th e A d 
vancemen t o f Colore d Peopl e 
(Lack of space prevents the publication here 
of the Seventh Annual Report in full. It 
will be mailed upon request.) 
THE annual meeting of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was held in New York City on 
January 2. The business session was held 
in the afternoon in the United Charities 
Building. Sixty members were present, including delegates from the Branches at 
Boston, Washington, Baltimore, Toledo, 
Orange, N . J., Montclair, N . J., Newark, N . 
J., Wilmington, Del., Philadelphia, Gary, 
Ind., Providence, R. I., and New York. 
Dr. J. E. Spingarn, chairman of the 
Board of Directors, in making his annual 
report, said that by far the most striking 
achievement of the N . A . A . C. P. during 
1916 has been to inject lynching into the 
public mind as a national problem. It has 
been forced upon the national consciousness 
even in the midst of the world-war, Mexico, 
and a presidential election. 
Among the investigations made have been 
that of the Cherokee fires by the secretary; 
the lynching of Jesse Washington at Waco, 
Texas; the lynching of two women and 
three men at Gainesville, Fla.; and the 
lynching of Anthony Crawford at Abbeville, 
S. C . Accounts of all these investigations 
have been published in the CRISIS. 
Sometime before the Waco lynching occurred, Mr. Phillip G. Peabody, of Boston, 
had proposed that a fund of $10,000 be devoted to an anti-lynching crusade, and he 
offered to open the subscription with $1000 
if the other $9000 could be raised within a 
period of two months. Mr. Moorfield Storey, 
President of the Association, at the same 
time subscribed the second $1000. 
To take advantage of these offers, 50,000 
copies of the "Waco Horror" were published 
and distributed as a campaign document together with an appeal for funds. The 
branches cooperated with splendid enthusiasm. A total of $11,269.71 was raised at 
a cost of $1,203.73, thus establishing a fund 
of a trifle over $10,000 net, cash in bank. 
It is particularly noteworthy that both races 
contributed in about equal measure. 
In the midst of this campaign the Gainesville lynching occurred. Although the story 
of this lynching did not receive the publicity that Waco did, two important achievements grew out of it: Ex-Governor Carter, 
of Hawaii, upon reading the story in the 
CRISIS, sent in ten dollars and announced 
that he would continue to send that amount 
for every lynching which we reported in the 
same fair manner; and the editors of the 
New Republic were moved to write the 
splendid editorial on "The Wil l to Lynch," 
which served to call national attention to 
our campaign. To round up the antilynching campaign for 1916, the national 
office, on December 27, presented a loving 
cup to Sheriff Eley, of Lima , Ohio, "for devotion to duty, in preventing the lynching 
of the colored prisoner and resisting the 
mob at the risk of his life." 
The year opened with the wave of segregation still sweeping the country, with St. 
Louis in the center of the struggle. The 
St. Louis Branch led the fight against it 
there. The city decided in favor of segregation. Our field agent who had been assisting the branch in St. Louis immediately 
left for Dallas, Texas, to organize the opposition to a similar measure; but Dallas 
followed the lead of St. Louis, Louisville, 
and Baltimore. The fight was lost so far 
as it lies within the power of cities to pass 
such legislation. We base our expectation 
of winning the fight on Constitutional 
grounds. 
For testing the validity of all these statutes, the Louisville Segregation Case was 
argued before the United States Supreme 
Court, Moorfield Storey of Boston and 
Blakey, Quin & Lewis of Louisville, representing the N . A . A . C. P. The court disagreed and have ordered a reargument before the full bench . We count it a victory 
and the fight against segregation a distinct 
achievement. 
A trained newspaper man was hired to 
watch both houses of Congress and to report 
all hostile legislation immediately to national headquarters and to the president of 
the District of Columbia Branch. This 
year's crop included five anti-intermarriage 
bills and three Jim Crow bills for the District of Columbia, as well as a bill making 
it unlawful to appoint colored men commissioned or non-commissioned officers in the 
army or navy, and a resolution calling upon 
166 N. A . A . C. P. 167 
the Attorney General to force the Supreme 
Court to pass upon the validity of the 
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. 
The Washington Branch secured a public 
hearing and no one of these measures 
passed Congress during 1916. 
The Association has long felt that our 
best hope of obtaining decent elementary 
education for the Negro in the rural South 
lies in obtaining Federal aid and in seeing 
that colored children receive their just proportion. It has been deemed wiser to organize a separate body to push this legislation in Congress, as southern support is 
absolutely necessary; and so we have aided 
in the formation of a Committee on National Ai d to Education, to be formally 
launched in New York during the month of 
January. 
This year questionnaires were again sent 
out from national headquarters to Congressional nominees endeavoring to put each 
candidate on record as to his stand on the 
Negro problem. The results were published 
in the CRISIS. A determined attempt 
was made to inject the issue of lynching 
into the Presidential campaign, by the circulation of 100,000 circulars graphically 
portraying the horror. 
The awarding of the Spingarn Medal annually calls attention to the achievements 
and talents of the colored race. In 1916, 
besides the award of the Spingarn medal to 
Major Charles Young, a $200 scholarship 
was granted through the Pittsburgh Branch 
to one of its members as a reward to the 
branch for turning in the greatest number 
of new members. 
The appointment of Mr. James Weldon 
Johnson as Field Secretary and Organizer 
meets one of the greatest needs of the Association, a field captain to rally the cohorts. 
A n especially valuable development, because it arose at the suggestion of one of 
the branches (Cleveland) out of its own 
needs, was the District Conference. The 
Great Lakes District held its first meeting 
on Decoration Day, and since that time all 
the branches of the Association have been 
- grouped into nine districts as follows: Yankee District, Chesapeake District, Great 
Lakes District, Ohio Valley District, Prairie 
District, St. Louis District, District of the 
Plains, Southern District, Pacific District. 
A third guarantee of a stronger organization hereafter is The Bulletin, devoted 
entirely to Branch news. 
During the year five groups have been 
admitted as locals, two locals have been 
given charters as branches, and a New York 
Branch has been formed. New members to 
the number of 2,253 have been taken in 
during the year; 30,063 pieces of first class 
mail, 6,094 packages, and 199,690 pieces of 
literature have been sent from national 
headquarters. 
Treasurer's Report 
of the 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPL E 
January 1 to December 31, 1916 
Cash Balance December 31, 1915— 
General Fund $ 1,430.18 
Maclean Memorial Fund 273.35 
Federal Ai d to Education 
Fund 195.63 
$ 1,899.16 
INCOME January 1 to December 31, 1916 
Contributions $ 6,291.49 
Memberships 4,817.02 
Literature sold 22.83 
Pins sold 22.87 
Subscriptions and sales of 
Branch Bulletin 3.25 
Total receipts of the General Fund $11,157.46 
Special Funds 
Maclean Memorial Fund— 
interest $ 11.02 
Anti-Segregation Fund—contributions from Branches . . 761.36 
Anti-Lynching Fund 11,539.64 
Federal Ai d to Education 
Fund 50.00 
Jim Crow Fund 2.00 
Total receipts of the Special Funds $12,364.02 
Total amount raised by N . A . 
A . C. P. from January 1 to 
December 31. 1916 $23,521.48 168 TH E 
EXPENSES January 1 to December 31, 
1916 
Salaries $ 5,053.04 
General Expense and Supplies 1,419.25 
Printing and Stationery 1,319.88 
Postage 584.30 
Traveling Expense 558.20 
Crisis subscriptions 891.05 
Advertising in TH E CRISIS 184.45 
Branches—proportion of membership fees 303.50 
Branches—prizes for the 1915 
membership contest 243.85 
Furniture and Fixtures 90.16 
Branch Bulletin—printing . . . 59.50 
Total expenditures from 
General Fund $10,707.18 
Special Funds 
Maclean Memorial Fund 13.80 
Anti-Segregation Fund 569.83 
Anti-Lynching Fund— 
Cost of raising Fund 1,203.73 
Investigations and publicity 1,204.67 
Federal Ai d to Education Fund 245.63 
Total expenditures from 
Special Funds 3,237.66 
Total expenditures of all Funds 
from January 1 to December 31, 1916 13,944.84 
Cash Balance December 31, 1916— 
General Fund 1,880.46 
Maclean Memorial Fund ... . 270.57 
Anti-Segregation Fund 191.53 
Anti-Lynching Fund 9,131.24 
Jim Crow Fund 2.00 
11,475.80 
Report of the Director of Publications and 
Research, Dr. DuBois. 
The work of this department has, as 
usual, been divided into three parts—the 
publication of TH E CRISIS, lectures, and information. 
The income of TH E CRISIS for the year 
1916 has been $28,721.36. The total number of copies sold has been 51,000. The 
average net paid circulation has been 37,-
625. In addition to this encouraging situation I have the pleasure to announce that 
the CRISIS is not only entirely self-supporting, paying every single item of its cost, 
including the salary of the editor and the 
salaries of all its employees, rent, light, 
heat, etc., but also in addition to this the 
business is entirely out of debt. 
CRISIS 
Revenue and Expense Account, 1916. 
EXPENSE S 
Publishing $12,150.80 
Salaries 7,618.40 
General Expense 2,324.75 
Postage 2,042.42 
Stationery and Supplies 937.03 
Bad Debts 1,693.59 
Deprec'n on Furniture 98.82 
$26,865.81 
NE T PROFIT 1,328.04 
$28,193.85 
REVENU E 
Sales $17,457.90 
Subscriptions 7,045.76 
Advertising 3,064.89 
Profit on Books 625.30 
$28,193.85 
Balance Sheet, December 31, 1916. 
ASSET S 
Cash $ 207.75 
Accts. Rec.—Advertisers 1,486.67 
" " Agents 2,403.19 
Books 47.34 
Books on hand 167.20 
Paper " " 577.38 
Furniture and Fixtures 1,877.63 
$ 6,767.16 
LIABILITIES 
None on books 
NE T WORT H $ 6,767.16 
$ 6,767.16 
The Nominating Committee reported the 
following names for members of the Board 
of Directors for the term expiring January, 
1920: Miss Jane Addams, Chicago; Dr. C. 
E . Bentley, Chicago; Rev. Hutchins C. 
Bishop, New York ; Dr. F . N . Cardozo, 
Baltimore; Dr. W. E . B. DuBois, New 
York ; Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York ; 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn; Mr. 
Charles Edward Russell, Washington; Dr. 
John G. Underhill, Brooklyn; Miss Irene 
Lewissohn, New York. The entire ballot 
was elected. 
The Budget Committee reported that its 
plan was to ask each branch to raise in THE CAL L OF THE PATRIOT 169 
1917 just twice as much as it had in 1916, so 
as to cover the expense of the new organizer 
and the legal administration of the Association. 
The Committee on the Annual Conference 
reported that the Governor of Ohio had 
consented to present the Spingarn Medal 
in Cleveland, the date of the Conference 
to be fixed later. 
The CRISIS Committee reported that it had 
worked in conjunction with the editor upon 
those matters that concerned the CRISIS as 
an organ of the N . A . A . C. P. 
The Legal Committee reported that it had 
concerned itself with a number of legal 
matters. Besides the segregation cases 
mentioned in the Chairman's report, the 
Committee had investigated, given advice, 
assistance, or directly aided in fighting discrimination and injustices in various forms. 
Chief among the cases of discrimination was 
that of Dr. Isabel Vandervall against the 
Syracuse Hospital for Women and Children, in which the committee secured a 
substantial offer of settlement. 
Mr. Walling gave a brief outline of the 
work the Anti-Lynching Committee intends 
to do in its campaign against lynching, as 
follows: 
1. To gather together all possible information concerning lynching. 
2. Investigation in the field and publication of results. 
3. Bringing cases before the courts whenever opportunity offers. 
4. Making an effort to obtain favorable 
legislation. 
The evening session was held in St. 
Philip's Church through the courtesy of Dr. 
Hutchins C. Bishop. Mr. Archibald H . 
Grimke presided. The session was devoted 
mainly to reports from branches. Mr. 
James W. Johnson, the new Field Secretary 
and Organizer, spoke on "Our Aim for 
1917." Among other things, Mr. Johnson 
said, "The main duty before the Negro is 
to arouse and shake off his apathy to which 
M 
S
EATE D on the bench under the little arbor in the rear of their home, Mrs. 
Simpson was reading aloud the eulogy 
Wendell Phillips paid Toussaint L'Ouverture, the Negro revolutionist. Her little son, 
perhaps fully one-half of his difficulties are 
due. As a race the Negro is very emotional. 
When that emotional power, which is now 
being frittered away, is compressed and directed through a channel, it is going to be 
one of the greatest powers possessed by the 
race for achieving its rights in this country." 
The following resolution was passed: 
I N MEMOKIA M 
"The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People has heard of 
the death of Mrs. Inez Milholland Boissevain and of that of Mr. Francis Jackson 
Garrison with a keen sense of irreparable 
loss, and it takes this occasion to express its 
profound and affectionate appreciation of 
their lives and of the value of their services 
to the cause of democracy and human 
brotherhood. They were both apostles of 
equality without distinction of race or color 
or sex and carried dauntlessly the banner of 
their lofty ideals through good report and 
evil in the midst of a hostile generation. 
They embodied in their conduct and character all that is precious and imperishable 
in the new gospel of peace on earth and 
freedom for all men. 
"From us they have passed in the flesh, 
but within us they remain in their brave 
and undying love of justice and truth and— 
God helping us—they shall remain to inspire us ever to give of ourselves as they 
gave of themselves to the holy cause of 
liberty, equality and human brotherhood in 
America and in the world." 
At the close of this session nine members 
of the Board of Directors met and the following officers were elected: Moorfield 
Storey, National President; Dr. J. E . Spingarn, Chairman of the Board of Directors; 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Treasurer; Dr, 
W. E. B. DuBois, Director of Publications 
and Research; Roy Nash, Secretary; VicePresidents : Archibald H . Grimke, Rev. John 
Haynes Holmes, John E . Milholland, Miss 
Mary White Ovington, Oswald Garrison 
Villard, Bishop John Hurst. 
m 
Garrison, a Negro child of the mulatto type, 
with eager eyes and ears was listening to 
the glowing description of the black man's 
genius as a military leader and statesman 
despite his fifty years in bondage. 
TH E CAL L O F TH E PATRIO T 
! By FENTO N JOHNSO N 1 170 THE CRISIS 
"O, mother," he cried, clapping his hands 
with glee, "Is it true? Did he put down the 
French and the Spanish and the English? 
Did he do all that the book says he did?" 
"Yes, honey," she replied. "He did that, 
and more too." 
"0 , how I would like to be another Toussaint." An d the mother kissed her child. 
From that day the boy became a hero worshipper, devoutly admiring the personality 
of Toussaint. Louisville, with her burning 
red brick and her streets dark with people 
of African descent, became to him a proper 
place to nurture one who should destroy the 
shackles of oppression. When he had read 
the oration for himself he wondered if 
Louisville and Haiti were not synonyms and 
if the dead could return and if within his 
veins flowed the admirable blood of princes 
as in the case of the Haitian patriot. Many 
a night he lay in his little white bed and 
dreamed of a massive black figure, majestic 
of poise and speech and born to command, 
and of a vision prophetic. He saw the cruel 
orgies of the enraged slaves as they swept 
before them in their wrath their helpless 
taskmasters. He saw the old man of the 
mountains with his fiery eyes and his voice, 
deep with the music of the Orient, turn them 
aside from a war of revenge to a war of 
righteousness. He saw the hero of eighty 
thousand, crowned with the laurel wreath 
and wearing the toga of government, pining 
away in a narrow prison cell overlooking 
Switzerland, crushed by the treachery of the 
Little Corporal. 
Garrison was imaginative. His mother 
before him was a woman of keen fancy and 
many said that under different circumstances she might have been a poet. His 
father, although wearing out his life in the 
monotony of the barber trade, was of military temperament and hopelessly read the 
novels of Scott and Dumas with the vain 
idea that he might appease his longing in 
the conflict of story-made heroes. "The Life 
of Toussaint L'Ouverture," by an English 
author during the days of the abolition 
movement, was a purchase he had made to 
find out the exact tactics of the Negro general and he smiled with pleasure when Garrison climbed upon a chair and took it down 
from the topmost shelf in their little bookcase to devour its contents with youthful 
ardor. 
When the minister, a scholarly man who 
first took up the work in the West Indies. 
had dinner with the family about a year 
after the reading of the oration, Garrison 
said to him: "Reverend, I've chosen my profession." 
"What is it, my little man?" he said, smiling, as he patted his head. 
"I'm going to be another Toussaint." 
The minister's smile broadened and he replied, "Yo u have chosen well; you have 
chosen well; " and he hurried forth to regale 
himself with the fried chicken and the hot 
bread that Mrs. Simpson had prepared for 
him. 
Garrison had made his declaration. To 
him in his boyish zeal it was as sacred as 
the vow of a nun. Thenceforth he studied 
every means to further his ambition, reading 
the lives of patriots, black and white. And 
through his high school days, when the 
ideals of youth first find expression, he surprised the teachers in the Colored City 
Academy by declaring his black hero the 
greatest of all ages and organizing his 
fellow students into a semi-military organization to be known as the Patriots of 
L'Ouverture. Loyal to the young dreamer 
were those dusky .followers and many higher 
aspirations doomed to be crushed in the 
tragedy of the color line were launched in 
this organization. It was the panting breath 
of the young black folk, eager to be men, 
and the shade of Toussaint was hovering 
near them. 
"Great things shall come forth from this 
boy," said the minister. "He is destined to 
be a powerful factor in the redemption of 
the race. It would be a grave mistake if he 
should not be given the opportunity of college training." 
And so Garrison gave up his chance to 
enter his father's profession and armed 
with the diploma granted him by black men, 
he went up to Chicago, where the University, 
Minerva-sprung, feeds the minds of the entire world. It was his first taste of life in 
a great metropolis where the blacks and 
the whites alike are seeking commercial salvation. He saw State Street, which had 
lately grown into a theatrical centre for 
the Negroes of the country, and the hilarity 
and tawdry pleasure sickened him. An d a 
keen disappointment entered his heart; for 
the race problem, like the germs of a deadly 
disease, was being inoculated into the pulsing life of the great city. 0, that he had 
the strength of a L'Ouverture that he might 
rid the city of this lily-white pest I THE CAL L OF THE PATRIO I 171 
The black world in Chicago was too busy 
with the struggle of living to pay any attention to the silent young man in its midst. 
Few knew or cared about his career at the 
University and very little material encouragement came his way from them. Their 
social life was brilliant, but Garrison was 
not destined for the ballroom. He called 
such an existence vapid. He held himself 
aloof, spending his . time among his books 
and executing various menial tasks to pay 
the expenses of his education. He was a 
hermit in a city of two million. 
A t the University he came and went, 
forming very few acquaintances. The instructors noted his quiet manner and his 
excellent scholarship, but were never able 
to learn his motive. The associate professor 
in French wondered why he was so eager 
to master the Gallic tongue, never dreaming 
that it was that he might read the books of 
the Abbe, who formed Toussaint's views on 
slavery. Many a night Garrison would sit 
with the Abbe's book or some French history 
of Haiti in his lap, his active mind forming 
visions of the part he would play in the 
struggle for Negro liberty and redemption. 
He became enthusiastic over the philosophy 
of Rousseau and unconsciously quoted Tolstoi and Voltaire. His vision fought shadow 
fights with all the powers of class distinction from the days of Menes. And he shuddered as he thought of the terrible revolutions that wiped out such oppression and 
wondered and feared as only a dreamer can. 
Elizabeth Selwyn, born of the Southland 
and the bone and the sinew of the aristocracy, gave more than one passing notice to 
this slender young Negro. A t first she 
felt the conflict of races, but she soon 
learned that to be in the same classroom 
with such as Garrison did not mean social 
intimacy. There was so much of the barbaric splendor of by-gone days and the 
warm passionate dreaming of the Southland in this dark soul that she felt in spite of 
herself and her five generations of prejudice 
a secret admiration for him. An d once or 
twice she felt tempted to ask him what he 
intended to do. But commencement day 
came and neither knew the other save by 
name. Elizabeth returned to her home in 
Georgia and to her natural prejudices. 
One girl watched Garrison graduate, her 
eyes dimmed with tears. She was Medora 
Leigh, the daughter of a prominent colored 
physician. Medora had learned to love Garrison and Garrison had learned to love her. 
But two nights after he had won her consent the young visionary told her of his 
ambition to emulate Toussaint and added, 
"Medora, I love you. I could not love one 
better. You are dearer to me than all I 
possess; but I feel a greater duty calls me." 
"What is it?" the poor girl asked, an uneasy fear entering her heart. 
"It is the call of the Southland. My people need me; I must work for them." 
"Then let me go with you." That was 
Medora's simple way of solving a difficult 
problem. 
"No, I cannot. You have never endured 
the hardships of the South. You, born in 
Michigan and carefully reared in Chicago, 
what do you know of separate cars, log 
cabins, tenant slavery, and the hundreds of 
other abuses in Dixie?" 
An d thus the color line broke two hearts. 
A few days after commencement, Garrison 
left for Louisville with his diploma and his 
memory of Medora. The black world received him with open arms, though several 
looked at him askance, wondering if he were 
seeking a position in the Colored City Academy or not. As the summer drew toward its 
end, the minister secured Garrison a teacher's position in the far South and ere long 
he was speeding away in the dingy little 
car, allotted colored passengers, proud of 
his chance to strive for his race. An d as 
the wheels of the car rattled and rumbled, he 
thought it was the music of the little band 
formed by the Patriots of L'Ouverture as 
his farewell ovation. 
It was a lazy land that greeted Garrison. 
Down in a swamp where the fireflies come 
in and out, adding a weird brightness to the 
night, Sinclair College sleeps with the vain 
idea that she is bettering the condition of 
the black folk. Sinclair, originally the most 
narrow of classical schools for Negroes, 
freighted with tons of Greek and Hebrew 
and a sprinkling of modern languages and 
science, forgetting entirely the study of the 
mother tongue, was now repudiating the old 
system and bestowing her little energy upon 
industrialism. The president, a preacher 
who exploited his race in the name of religion, more narrow in his conception of 
education and the general good of humanity 
than Sinclair College herself, greeted the 
teacher, but regarded him jealously, since 
he represented a great northern university. 
Garrison had not been there long before 
the president was opposing him in every 
effort he made to help the students and the 172 THE CRISIS 
TOUSSAIN T L'OUVERTURE . 
community. Many a time he would have 
given up in despair had it not been for the 
love and esteem bestowed upon him by all 
the black people for miles around. The 
whites began to hate the young teacher, who 
told his people of the doctrine of equality 
and the far sweeping effect of the French 
Revolution and advised them to build themselves up, economically and spiritually, so 
that they could be ready when the hour 
came. Their hatred and contempt inspired 
him and with trenchant boldness he launched 
The Revolutionist, a Negro sheet of protest, 
in which he both instructed and destroyed. 
"He is a dangerous niggah," the whites 
said, and they plotted among themselves 
how to overcome him. 
And Hagar brought to them the longedfor opportunity. Hagar was an industrious 
clothes-girl in the family of one Colonel 
Blackburn, who owned the entire community,—cotton, Negroes and poor whites. She 
was black, not comely, poverty and the abuse 
of ages robbing her of whatever beauty 
might have been her share; but she possessed the temper of a cowed being which 
unfortunately Edna Blackburn, the imperious daughter of the Colonel, aroused one 
Friday evening. 
"No ; I shan't pay you," said Edna. "The 
clothes aren't worth it; besides I gave you 
a gingham apron two weeks ago. What 
more do you want?" 
"A h wants some money, dat's all, " flashed 
back the enraged Hagar. "Dah's mo' dan 
me 'pendant on me fo' it; we has tuh eat 
and sleep laks de rest ob you, an' dat costs 
money. 'Sides ain't de work all right?" 
Thus they argued. Presently Hagar insisted upon taking the basket back to her 
cabin and when she was about to place her 
hands upon it Edna, as an act of intimidation, wielded a cowhide. Angr y to the boiling point, Hagar seized a broom sitting near 
the kitchen door and in her blind fury 
struck the white girl on the temples. Edna 
fell over dead, and Hagar left, little realizing the tragedy she had committed. 
On the high road she heard a howling in 
the rear as of human wolves seeking their 
prey. Intuition told her that it was a lynching party and that evidently she was the 
intended victim. Dropping the basket, she 
ran, directing her course to Sinclair where 
she could put herself under the protection 
of Professor Simpson. It was a three mile 
run and only by miraculous effort did she 
escape the bloodhounds and throw herself 
at the feet of the youthful leader who was 
walking up and down the campus, weary 
after a customary quarrel with the president. 
"Sabeme! Sabe me! 'Fessah, sabe me!" 
she gasped. 
"What is the trouble?" he asked. 
"Dey's aftah me! Dey's aftah me! De 
lynchuhs!" was all the satisfaction the terrified girl could give him. 
Realizing the serious situation, Garrison 
rang the summons bell himself and almost 
immediately the entire male portion of the 
student body filed out fully prepared for 
drill. In a short address, Garrison informed them that the whites were about to 
cause trouble and probably attack the college itself. Each student had two different 
styles of charge and according to Garrison's 
directions was ordered to use the blanks 
first and not to fire until the enemy shot or 
attempted to cross the college boundary. So 
they stood, a solid phalanx, ready to defend 
their race and their lives; and their leader 
during the few moments of grace, his heart 
kindled with the fire of a patriot, thought 
of Toussaint who some hundred years since 
had taken his stand thus against Napoleon's 
invading army. Poor Hagar, quaking with 
fear, crouched behind a bush, her heart beating tumultously and excitement only keeping her alive. THE CAL L OF THE PATRIOT 173 
Presently the whites advanced upon the 
school. 
"Heigho!" cried the leader; "Where's the 
nigguh gal, Haguh? We want huh." 
Garrison stepped within speaking distance. 
"An d what has she done?" he asked in 
a voice rigidly calm. 
With oaths, characteristic of poor whites 
who ape the aristocracy of the South, the 
leader informed him of the crime, painting 
Hagar as both an imbecile and the most 
ferocious criminal of all ages. 
"If that is so," replied Garrison, "I shall 
be pleased to turn her over to the sheriff 
and his aides with the hope that she will be 
given a fair trial. " 
"D—n it! " cried the leader. "We want 
huh now! We're itching to give huh a nice 
meal of pitch and tah and flame! She killed, 
a white woman! The d—n hussy !•" 
"Yes, we want huh. We want huh!" 
came from a hundred throats. An d with 
a blood-curdling yell they attempted to 
break in the college gate. 
The students immediately tired. The unexpected charge, though harmless, frightened the mob and they fell back. Garrison 
immediately ordered the more effective 
bullets. 
"Fire! " cried the leader to the whites. 
"An d aim foh the professuh!" 
After an hour of heavy fighting the 
president's surrey drove up, the president 
having been out for a drive. 
"Stop him! Stop him! " cried one of the 
whites. "He's the nigguh president and 
probably he knows." 
The president, frightened like a coward, 
shook and trembled and when he could manage to control his voice lapsed into dialect. 
"Yessah, yessah, massas! What's de 
trubble?" 
They explained it to him, adding: "We 
want the gul! We want to give huh huh 
just desuhts!" 
"Sho'! Tak' huh! She oughter be 
hanged! Yessah, she oughter! Kil l a white 
'oomans! De hussy! An ' 'spects us 'spectable folks tuh help huh 'scape! A h sho' is 
'stonished." 
"Then lead us through your campus and 
let us search." 
"Sho'!" his teeth gleaming like a cat's. 
So, like Judas of old, the pedagog and 
man of God led the enemy, ordering his 
students to cease firing, which they refused 
to do. 
"It's that Simpson," said the leader, 
"D—n him! " 
"Simpson?" asked the president. "Did 
you say Simpson?" 
"Yes, " replied the leader, "and if we could 
get him we'd make short work of him." 
"Ah'l l show him tuh you gem'mun de 
right time. He oughter die! He hates you 
white folks." 
Five minutes later, as Garrison was kneeling at a spring to get a drink of water for 
a wounded student, the president, inspired 
with his burning hate, pointed him out and 
one of the whites fired. The insurgent fell 
fatally wounded. The students, frightened, 
threw down their arms and ran pell mell, the 
whites following ready for slaughter. 
A young white woman who had been 
watching the terrible riot from her carriage 
alighted and made her way to where Garrison was lying in his death agony. Stooping she took his head on her lap and 
staunched the blood with her delicate lace 
handkerchief. 
"Don't you know me?" she said. "Don't 
you know me, Mr. Simpson?" 
Garrison looked into her face, but could 
not name the owner. 
"Why, we went to school together. Don't 
you remember? I'm Elizabeth Selwyn, and 
I'm Georgia-born, too. But despite my 
Georgia blood, I admire you." 
"Why do you admire me? I'm black." 
"Yes, you're black—or rather mulatto— 
but you're a hero as grand as Charlemagne 
or Napoleon or Washington. This evening 
you reminded me of a famous black soldier 
I read about the other day;—I think his 
name was L'Ouverture. Oh, that I could 
love you, that no color line divided us!" 
"Why? " 
" I have always dreamed of loving a 
super-man, a person superior to all others, 
but I never thought that such would be 
found in the race I have been taught to 
despise. When you go before the God of 
both races, entreat Him to remove this 
prejudice that is gnawing the heart of society." 
"I shall do all I can for both races." And 
then closing his eyes, he said, "Look! I see 
Toussaint. He's coming to meet me! And 
with him I see Mirabeau and Wilhelm Tell 
and Watt Tyler and Wallace! And they 
have a laurel wreath for me! Oh, I die 
happy!" 
And thus he passed away. TH E FREDERIC K DOUGLAS S HOM E 
By MRS . MAR Y B. TALBER T 
At the last biennial meeting of the Na ­
tional Association of Colored Women's 
Clubs, held in Baltimore, Md., August 6 to 
10, 1916, a committee was appointed to look 
into the advisability of assisting the trustees 
of the Frederick Douglass Historical Association which has charge of the home of the 
late Frederick Douglass at Anacostia, D. C. 
We found that under a special act of Congress this Association was created first, to 
preserve to posterity the memory of the life 
and character of the late Frederick Douglass; and second, to collect, collate and preserve a historical record of the inception, 
progress and culmination of the anti-slavery 
movement in the United States and to assemble in the homestead of the late Frederick Douglass, commonly called Cedar Hill , 
in the village of Anacostia, in the District of 
Columbia, all such suitable exhibits of records or things illustrative or commemorative 
of the anti-slavery movement and history as 
may be donated to said' Association or acquired by purchase, bequest or other lawful 
means. After careful consideration of all 
the facts we conclude that this is the psychological moment for us, as women, to 
show our true worth and prove that the 
Negro woman of to-day measures up to those 
strong and sainted women of our race, like 
Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Amanda 
Smith, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper and 
others who passed through the fire of slavery and its galling remembrances. 
We believe the attainment of the goal depends upon the enlistment of every Negro, 
man, woman, boy and girl in America. We 
MRS. M B. TALBERT. 
seriously realize that it will require us to 
mobilize all the resources of our Association 
to show that we are not afraid to put ourselves on record as being able to save the 
home by one day's co-operative effort. 
We purpose to enlist the largest possible 
number of people, especially the boys and 
girls, in this part of the work of our Association, relying upon race loyalty and pride 
as the energizing power. 
We purpose to employ such methods as 
will enable us to use every resource within 
our power for the accomplishment of this 
task. We believe that the need is concrete 
and we know that our share toward saving 
the home is comparatively small; this, howMiss I. R. CUMMINGS. MRS. V. C. HALEY. MISS R. J, DUNBAR. MISS H. Q. BROWN. 
174 TH E FREDERICK DOUGLASS HOME 175 
MISS G. A . NUGENT . 
ever, will give us courage to feel that by all 
working together it can be accomplished. 
We believe that every boy and girl should 
become a co-operating member in this program and with that in view we earnestly 
urge every woman's club to mobilize its boys 
and girls. The public schools are asked to 
observe the one hundredth anniversary of 
Douglass's birth, on Friday afternoon, February 9, by a short program, and each 
child is asked to contribute one penny on 
that day toward paying for the renovation 
of the Douglass home. In our northern and 
eastern cities where our day school pupils 
are not separated and in our Sunday schools 
all over this country, we are asking Sabbath 
school superintendents to hold a short memorial service on Sunday, February 11, and 
to ask each child to contribute one penny 
toward the saving of this home. 
The question, no doubt, will be asked by 
many, "Is it worth while?" 
I answer strongly, " YES . " For who can 
measure the far-reaching results of this 
great work and the inspiration that will be 
given to the boys and girls of our race? 
Wil l it not stir their hearts to greater race 
pride for them to know that they will have 
a hand in it and thus directly express their 
gratitude to the silent memory of the great 
Douglass? Here is our opportunity. The 
amount will differ, but the gift will be the 
same, for the gift is measured by the love 
behind it and by that alone. 
Every man, woman, boy, girl, and each 
club who takes a share in the redemption of 
this home enters into a partnership with the 
trustees in preserving to posterity the 
home of the greatest man of our race of 
his time. 
To arouse our women to greater activity 
we have decided that we will place upon 
parchment the name of every individual or 
club that contributes the sum of twenty-five 
dollars; and for the club which sends the 
greatest amount over twenty-five dollars a 
special tablet will be placed. This is done 
that our children in the years to come, when 
paying their visit to this shrine, may read 
the names of loyal race men and women who 
have proven false the accusation so long 
brought against us that we show no gratitude for benefactors if doing so costs dollars 
and cents. We need $15,000 for the saving 
and restoration of the home and grounds. 
Will you take a share in it? I have deemed 
it advisable to appoint a special treasurer to 
look after the funds. Send all monies collected to Mrs. Nettie L. Napier, 120 Fifteenth Avenue North, Nashville, Tenn. 
Make your contribution on the one hundredth anniversary of this great man's 
birth, February 12, 1917. For further information address the president of the National Association of Colored Women, Mrs. 
Mary B. Talbert, 521 Michigan Avenue, 
Buffalo, N . Y . 
MRS. I. J . JACKSON . 
The committees in charge of this movement are as follows: 176 THE CRISIS 
FREDERIC K DOUGLAS S 
COMMITTE E 
Miss Nannie H . Burroughs, Chairman; 
Mrs. Nettie L. Napier, 120 Fifteenth Avenue, North, Nashville, Tenn., Treasurer; 
Rev. Florence Randolph, Jersey City, N . J. ; 
Miss Hallie Q. Brown, Chairman of Executive Board, Wilbeforce, Ohio; Mrs. Maggie L. "Walker, Richmond, Va. ; Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass.; Mrs. 
Victoria Clay-Haley, Secretarv, St. Louis, 
Mo. 
GENERA L COMMITTE E 
Mrs. Booker T. Washington, and Mrs. 
Robert R. Moton, Tuskegee, Ala. ; Mrs. 
Lucy Thurman, Jackson, Mich.; Mrs. 
Mary Church Terrell, Mrs. Josephine E . 
Bruce, Mrs. Rozetta Lawson, Mrs. Kelly 
Miller, Washington, D. C ; Mrs. Clara B. 
Hardy, St. Paul, Minn.; Mrs. Grace B. Valentine, Bordentown, N . J. ; Mrs. Isabella W. 
Claphan, Camden, N . J. ; Miss Mary E. 
Jackson, Providence, R. I.; Mrs. Judith 
Horton, Guthrie, Okla.; Mrs. M . E . Goins, 
Jefferson City, Mo.; Mrs. S. Joe Brown, Des 
Moines, Iowa; Mrs. Mary H . Baker, Cheyenne, Wyo.; Mrs. Mar y E . Josenburger, 
Fort Smith, Ark. ; Miss Meta Pelham, Detroit, Mich.; Mrs. Waldo Bogle, Portland, 
Ore.; Mrs. George H . Warner, Los Angeles, 
Cal.; Mrs. A . H . Wall, Oakland, Cal.; Mrs. 
F . W. West, Bakersfield, Cal ; Mrs. E . J. 
Freeman, San Diego, Cal ; Miss M . R. Lyons 
and Mrs. Addie W. Hunton, Brooklyn, N . 
Y. ; Mrs. George Contee, Denver, Colo.; Mrs. 
C. R. McDowell, Hannibal, Mo.; Dr. Mary 
F. Waring, Chicago, Ill.; Mrs. Emma S. 
Keeble, Kalispell, Mont.; Mrs. W. T. B. 
Williams, Hampton, Va. ; Mrs. Charlotte 
Dette, Niagara Falls, N . Y. ; Mrs. Lizzie 
B. Fouse, Lexington, Ky. ; Miss Eartha M . 
M . White, Jacksonville, Fla.; Mrs. Charles 
Banks, Mound Bayou, Miss.; Mrs. John 
Hope, Atlanta, Ga.; Mrs. Charlotte Hawkins-Brown, Sedalia, N . C ; Mrs. G. L . Jackson, Nashville, Tenn. 
THE DOUGLASS HOME AND GROUNDS. ANACOSTIA, D. C. The Looking Glass 
BLACK S AN D WHITES IN TH E CONGO 
MR. GEORG E HARDY , writing in the 
International Socialist Review, gives 
us an unattractive picture of the Belgian 
Congo: 
One morning, through the misty atmosphere of the tropics, we find ourselves at 
the mouth of the Congo River. At the port 
of Banana we pick up the crew of natives 
who will work the cargo at the ports of 
Boma and Matadi on the Congo River. 
But here any liberty-loving person finds 
that, after all, he has not left behind him 
the barbarities of capitalism. Four-foot 
clubs are used to drive the natives who are 
paid the enormous sum of one Belgian franc 
(twenty cents) a day, for working from 4 
a. m. to 10 o'clock at night, with two or 
three short periods of rest, when they receive their allowance of rice and salt junk 
which is so rotten that it would be scorned 
by a hungry dog. 
These abuses are perpetrated under the 
charter of the Compagnie Beige Maritime 
du Congo, in which Kin g Albert, of Belgium, is said to be interested. 
A t Boma, the capital of Belgian Congo, 
about forty miles up the river, the work 
of unloading begins. Officers armed with 
clubs are stationed at each hatch on board 
ship and on shore, and they take an occasional whack at the bare backs of the natives to speed up work or punish the black 
with the smoldering or contemptuous eyes. 
Night arrives and no sleeping quarters 
are provided for the native workers, who 
sleep on hard, dirty decks of the ships, 
which bring back longings for the cosy 
grass-woven huts to which they are accustomed, as the rotten fare recalls the fresh 
fruits and nuts that make up their native 
fare. 
The dampness of the tropic nights makes 
it dangerous for any one to sleep in the 
open. The air is full of deadly fevers. The 
heat of the day causes a vapor to arise 
every night from the snake infested grasses. 
After a couple of days of savage slavery 
which is hidden hehind a franc a day 
wage, the boats leave for Matadi. A few 
hours' run against the rushing current of 
the river and we find slavery more glaring 
and more open, for Matadi is the center of 
trade, also a railway center, where ivory, 
palm oil, copra and copal, etc., are brought 
for shipment to Europe. 
The white population sleeps from 11 to 3 
o'clock, but there is no respite for the natives, who toil until their bodies look as 
though they had been dipped in oil, so covered are they with sweat. 
The writer saw an officer go down into 
the hold of the ship and beat a native without mercy because he did not work fast 
enough in this heat. Another officer stood 
on the toes of a native worker who had 
squatted to rest during the rest period, and 
beat the bare legs of the native to make him 
draw his foot from beneath the hobnailed 
boots of the noble (?) white man. Meanwhile the officer twisted the ear of the 
black man. It was easy for anybody to 
recognize the superiority of the Caucasian 
race over the Ethiopian. The attitude of 
the natives is one of manufactured smiles 
and European salutations and barely concealed curses. 
It is a pleasant little custom of the officers to throw the dregs of their glasses of 
lime juice into the faces of the Congo boys 
who serve them. I saw a native injured internally by a sling of sacks weighing nearly 
a ton. He was allowed to lie dying on the 
bare deck of a boat. The quartermaster declared he could not endure the groans of the 
unlucky man and he was removed the next 
day, a physician expressing surprise that he 
still lived. 
Very naturally it occurs to the stranger 
to inquire why the natives, who possess land 
and plenty of fruit and nuts for food, submit to such treatment. You wonder why 
they labor. One of the answers is the system of taxation which the modern capitalist 
class has seen fit to lay upon them to force 
them to work. Without this tax of twelve 
francs a year the natives would be able to 
live in ease upon their own land, in their 
own fresh huts, and live upon the plenty 
provided by a generous Nature. This tax 
makes the capitalists independent of foreign 
workers. 
And yet, strange as it may seem to you, 
my dear civilized reader, some of these natives hate work so much, or work for the 
Belgian capitalists so very much, in particular, that they refuse to earn and pay their 
twelve francs annually to the Belgian government. 
Such natives are quickly taught the 
benevolence of that government. They are 
arrested and placed in gangs with chains 
around their necks and forced to work for 
three months for the state. They carry the 
mail on their heads to the boats; also bear 
the trunks and luggage of the white parasites to and from the boats and perform 
municipal labor. You can see them lugging 
vegetables home for the Europeans, the 
white person in front and the black offender twelve paces in the rear, and an 
armed guard trudging behind the loaded 
slave. 
TH E DANIS H WES T INDIE S 
T
H E Danish people have voted by 283,000 
to 157,000 to accept the offer of $25,-
000,000 by the United States for the Danish 
West Indies. The Independent tells us: 
This settles the question since it only 
remains for Congress to appropriate the 
177 178 THE CRISIS 
money and the islanders to vote for annexation. That they are anxious for it can 
not be doubted, for they have expressed the 
desire to come under the American flag, 
both formally through the local councils 
and informally in mass meetings. The 
school children are already singing an annexation song. 
But it should be remembered that there 
are powerful interests in the islands which 
are doing everything in their power to prejudice the people against the United States. 
The Hamburg-American Line hoped to 
make St. Thomas a German commercial 
port. There are many Danish officials and 
plantation owners and holders of government 
monopolies who will be disadvantaged. Al l 
of the islanders are naturally anxious to 
know what are the intentions of the United 
States and what will be done to relieve the 
distress into which they have been plunged 
by the war. 
But there is no one to speak for the United 
States. Only her enemies are heard. Stories 
of southern lynchings and of northern race 
prejudice are assiduously circulated. The 
newspapers publish wild fabrications of 
"American atrocities" in Santo Domingo. 
It is asserted that the three Danish islands 
are to be made a mere appendage of Porto 
Rico, with which they have nothing in 
common, not even language. It is feared 
that they will be put under carpet-bag government and made the victim of a spoils 
system with "deserving Democrats" as 
rulers. It is rumored that the free port 
privileges which they have enjoyed since 
1764 are to be taken away. 
We know how much this misrepresents 
the intentions of the United States, but 
how is an ignorant and untraveled Negro 
to know it? However absurd and malicious 
the rumor, there is no one on the spot to 
deny it in the name of the United States. 
Fifty years ago when the islanders voted 
on annexation, the American government 
sent a commission, composed of an admiral 
and a clergyman, to talk to them, explain 
to them the policy of the United States, 
and answer their questions. As a result the 
people voted by 1044 to 22 in favor of 
annexation. They doubtless will vote for 
it now in spite of the agitation against it, 
but if we want them to come into the Union 
with enthusiasm and confidence we should 
do something now to show them that they 
are welcome and will be well treated. 
The CRISIS would suggest that the new 
committee be headed by Senator Vardaman, 
of Mississippi. The vote for annexation 
might not be as large as formerly but it 
would be more intelligent. 
TH E LYNCHIN G INDUSTR Y 
THE New York Evenin g Globe 
says: 
During the past twelvemonth fifty-four 
persons were made victims of lynch law 
Of this number fifty were Negroes, three of 
them women. In 1915 sixty-seven persons 
were lynched, of whom thirteen were white 
men. Of those put to death last year fortytwo, or 78 per cent of the total, were 
charged with offenses other than assault. 
Georgia again holds the unenviable distinction of recording the greatest number of 
lynchings within its borders—fourteen, or 
more than a quarter of the total. 
The lynching record for 1916 is encouraging in that it is not as black as that of 
the previous year. But it is a crying disgrace to a country that pretends to such a 
high civilization as does the United States. 
Lynching will never be stamped out until 
those inclined to resort to it are convinced 
that for their crime they will be punished. 
No one was punished for the fifty-four victims done to death last year, if memory 
serves us right. It was the same in 1915. 
Every lynching is followed by promises to 
bring the perpetrators to justice, but the 
promises are never made good. Until such 
a time comes when our so-called substantial 
citizens, who now show a readiness to join 
in mob violence, are made to have a more 
wholesome respect for the law we must 
expect these outrages against civilization. 
The Burlington, Vermont, Free Press lays 
great stress on the influence of the southern press: 
A former Turkish ambassador was not 
wholly without ground for his comparison 
between the burning of colored men and 
women at the stake in the South and the 
Armenian massacres that have so stirred 
this whole nation as well as the rest of the 
civilized world. It is not necessary for 
us to go abroad to find blots upon our modern civilization. The lynching of Negroes 
and others in different parts of the country 
is a disgrace to the nation as a whole. Whenever people of the old world raise this question, we must perforce hang our heads in 
shame. . . . 
It is the present generation of men and 
women in the South who are responsible 
for lynchings. In order to effect a cure 
of this evil the manhood and the womanhood of the South must be reached. 
Under these circumstances, it is reassuring to note the efforts of some of the great 
newspapers of the South like the Atlanta 
Constitution taking a bold stand against 
lynch law, even though the party of the 
second part be a colored person. The press 
is the only agency of education for the great 
mass of the people, outside of the fractional 
part who come under the influence of the 
pulpit. The newspapers of the South have 
a tremendous work to do in this direction 
not only for their own section but also in 
behalf of the whole nation. 
There is still much comment on the lynching of Anthony Crawford at Abbeville, S. 
C. From the Abbeville Press and Banner THE LOOKING GLASS 179 
we have the following account of our investigation : 
Some excitement was caused about town 
Monday when a number of marked copies 
of the Independent were received in which 
was a write-up of the recent lynching in 
Abbeville. The article was by Roy Nash, 
who came here from Broadway as a landbuyer just after the occurrence. 
The article is readable, if not entirely 
accurate as to facts. As is said in the 
editorials reproduced from the State in this 
issue, Mr. Nash makes the mistake of assuming that there are two classes of people in this section. There is only one class, 
though some are richer than others, some 
have had more advantages than others, and 
some look at things from a different angle 
than do others. The people of this section 
are all one people. He makes the further 
mistake in assuming that it is always the 
poorer classes, as he calls them, that take 
part in lynchings. Sometimes it is and 
sometimes it is not. Generally speaking, 
lynching parties are composed of men from 
both the rich and the poor. 
The fatal error into which Mr. Nash 
falls and the reason his article and others 
like it written about these occurrences will 
do no good, is that he undertakes to make 
the lynching of Crawford wrong, because 
as he alleges Crawford was a self-respecting and wealthy Negro, and guilty of no 
wrong. 
He thereby raises an issue which should 
not enter into the discussion of the case. 
By asserting that Crawford was a hero as 
he sees him, he allows the other party to 
justify lynching when he proves that Crawford was not a hero. As a matter of fact 
lynching never occurs either against 
Negroes or whites unless they are guilty of 
some crime or in serious disorder. And this 
was true in Crawford's case. He was a 
vicious Negro. He was a tyrant among his 
own people and he went out of the way to 
be offensive to those people who were not so 
wealthy as he was. Of course, there was 
prejudice, we will not deny that; but Crawford had not been lynched before. An d he 
would not have been lynched when he was 
if he had not been too eager to curse 
and abuse a white man and "assert his 
manhood." No man who treats his neighbors 
right and keeps the peace is ever lynched. 
But this no more excuses lynching than 
does the fact that a man lynched was a 
good citizen make it wrong. * Lynching is 
wrong because it is contrary to law. When 
we get away from the individual lynched 
and get down to the gist of the offense, we 
will learn that we can neither justify nor 
condemn lynching on the standing of the 
particular victim. An d we will make progress when we get away from the by-paths 
and get in the middle of the road. We must 
consider the broken law and not the individual involved in an alleged crime, or we 
had as well quit. 
The Charleston News and Courier speaks 
of the surprise caused by the arrest of nine 
men charged with the lynching of Anthony 
Crawford: 
The question of the guilt or innocence of 
the men who are now under charges at 
Abbeville is not, of course, a subject which 
can properly be discussed while these 
charges are pending; but the vigorous 
promptness with which this case has been 
handled by the governor, the solicitor and 
other officers of the law cannot fail to have 
a salutary effect. The main thing needed 
to put a stop to lynching is for everybody to 
know that whenever there is one, effort is 
going to be made to bring those responsible 
for it to justice. 
The News, Greenville, S. C , complacently 
tells us: 
The probability is that no one will ever be 
convicted of that lynching. But the governor is discharging his duty; the solicitor 
is discharging his; the county officials are 
discharging theirs in making an effort to 
find out the men who killed the Negro. The 
law will have been absolved from the charge 
of apathy when the court machinery is set 
to work in an effort to convict those who 
took the law into their own hands. 
A word to New Yorkers from the Holyoke, Mass., Telegram: 
A crazed man ran amuck in the streets of 
New York and before a mob got hold of 
him he had seriously wounded a pedestrian. 
When the mob got through with him the 
man was a fit subject for the dangerous 
ward of a nearby hospital with a broken 
skull and a body actually covered with 
bloody bruises. He died in a little while. 
It is not long ago we were denouncing 
Georgia, and have been denouncing other 
communities because of the conduct of mobs. 
New York is not in the South nor West. 
How about the lynchers of this week? 
TH E HEGIR A 
THE southern papers are still full of 
A comment regarding the exodus of 
Negroes from the South. The following reason is given by the Montgomery, Ala., 
Advertiser: 
The Negro from middle Alabama is going 
North because of economic conditions which 
he cannot help and which he cannot overcome. He is not being forced out by pressure from the white race. The relations between the two races in this section were 
never better; the Negro here is not subjected to oppression or to any outbreaks of 
violence which have induced the Negro to 
leave certain other sections of the South. 
The Negro is going because he is the most 
unfortunate of the victims of the combined 
disaster this year, of the flood and the boll 
weevil. There has been actual want and 180 TH E CRISIS 
hunger among some of the Negroes on the 
plantations. The heads of Negro families 
have been without present resources and 
without future prospects. The wise planter 
and farmer has said to his Negro employees and tenants: 
"Yo u never made anything this year. _ I 
never made anything this year. But we will 
do our best and I will see what resources I 
can get together to keep you until next year, 
when we can all make a fresh start." 
Another class of farmers, and we suspect 
that their number is too large, has said: 
"Yo u never made anything this year. I 
never made anything this year. I cannot 
afford to feed you and your family until the 
beginning of the next crop year. You must 
go out and shift for yourselves." 
This cold-blooded business view of the 
situation, we suspect, has been the best assistance that the labor agent has received. 
It is not difficult to know what a Negro 
farm hand will do when he and his family 
are facing hunger, when a labor agent offers 
him a railroad ticket and a promise of two 
dollars and a half a day in the industrial 
works of the North and East. That many 
of these Negro emigrants, from one section 
to the other, are destined to suffer, and to 
regret their leaving the South is certain: 
it is equally certain that a few of the more 
progressive and determined will do well 
financially as compared with their previous 
experience. 
The exodus, considered from the standpoint of the white man, will for the time being depress land values, generally speaking. 
Land will be in less demand than it has been 
since the war. There simply will not be 
enough labor to work the land heretofore 
devoted to farming purposes. Of course, 
there is to be no revolution of farming conditions; affairs will go on much the same. 
But land will be worth less and labor will be 
worth more in the future. 
In Georgia they do not feel so sure that 
nature alone is at fault. The Atlanta 
Independent says: 
Like in the life of the individual, there 
comes a time in the life of a nation, a people 
or a section when it must face the truth, and 
the time is fast approaching when the 
South must arrive at the truth and confess it with reference to the black folk who 
are a part of the life, character and thought 
of our own section. It is as our white 
neighbor says, a shame that the South has 
not been awakened by moral suasion for the 
sake of right and is now being aroused 
only because it realizes that it is about to 
lose a dollar. The Constitution remarks 
that it is unfortunate for the people of 
Georgia that an appeal to the pocketbook 
should be necessary to bring back the enthronement of the law; and the Independent 
adds that while we regret that conscience 
and the love of humanity could not bring the 
South to its senses, we are proud to observe 
the trend of public opinion, even if it is 
obtained by an appeal to the pocketbook. 
The South, in common with our own beloved state, finds itself up against this 
proposition—that it is about to swap the 
much-talked-of race problem for a labor 
problem, and it realizes that while the race 
problem might have pinched many of their 
consciences, the labor problem will affect all 
of their pocketbooks. An d the hopeful sign 
about it is that leading journals like the 
Atlanta Constitution, the Savannah Morning News, and thousands of weeklies, like 
the Ocilla Star and Tifton Gazette, are admitting the facts and confessing to the 
plain truth. 
Our esteemed contemporary, the Constitution, admits that mob law is largely responsible for the unrest among the Negroes; 
that inadequate school facilities and a lack 
of justice to the Negro in the administration of the law is largely responsible for the 
unrest and the movement North and East; 
that it is in the hands of the white man to 
stop the exodus and the remedy lies in 
ample protection of life, ample school facilities, proper encouragement and protection 
of life and liberty to the black folk in common with the white folk. There should 
be no question why the Negro would leave 
Georgia or other southern states to hunt 
for a place where he can educate his children; where he can worship God without 
having his temple burned down; where he 
can assemble in his lodge room without being accused of plotting against his neighbors and having the torch stuck to his lodge 
room; where his women will be safe from 
the noose of the mob and where he can expect justice when tried in the courts. 
Lack of colored public schools is dwelt 
upon by the Atlanta Constitution: 
Georgia, as well as other southern 
states, is undoubtedly behind in the matter 
of Negro education; unfair in the matter 
of facilities, in the quality of teachers and 
instructors, and in the pay of those expected to impart proper instruction to 
Negro children. 
We have proceeded upon the theory that 
education would, in his own mind at least, 
carry the Negro beyond his sphere; that 
it would give him higher ideas of himself 
and make of him a poorer and less satisfactory workman. That is nonsense. 
If we look over the list of the most outrageous crimes committed by Negroes, we 
find that they are generally the work of il ­
literate Negro brutes. Crimes of educated 
Negroes are fewer and of a minor nature 
compared to those committed by Negroes 
in whom the brutal instinct predominates. 
Education minimizes or removes that instinct, and, morally, the properly educated 
Negro is the better citizen, just as is the 
educated white. 
The right sort of education makes a 
better workman, no matter what his sphere. 
A trained horse, a trained dog, make better TH E LOOKING GLASS 181 
animals. A ditch digger who can read 
and write makes a better ditch digger. A n 
illiterate cook or washerwoman must fall 
short in service of one who possesses the 
fundamentals of an education. 
There are two very good reasons why it 
is not only due the Negroes, but it is an 
important safeguard to the whites themselves, to provide a thorough and efficient 
educational system for the Negroes. 
In the quotation published today from 
the Fort Valley Uplift, it is declared an 
acknowledged fact that schools for Negroes, "especially in the country districts 
where the great masses of the Negroes live, 
with very rare exception, amount to practically nothing." 
This should not be. Education will make 
a better cotton picker and a more efficient 
plowman. It would mean both a better 
type of citizen and a better farm laborer. 
It is not only a question of duty to the 
Negro race, but of duty to the whites, to 
ourselves, that there should be improvement of a material sort in the system of 
education provided for them. 
Georgia will do herself an important and 
a lasting service when she supplies it. 
From the Newark, N . J., News come 
the following stirring words: 
How futile is force in human relations is 
being shown anew by the efforts of the 
South to keep the Negroes from emigrating 
North. By force the colored people were 
brought here, and Civil War, which ravaged 
the South even as Belgium has not been 
ravaged, was the penalty. By force the 
South would keep them and the immigration movement continues, causing the 
Southerners to fear a serious shortage of 
labor in their cotton fields. Possessed of 
the most abundant supply of labor in the 
country, their methods of holding and profiting by it are likely to defeat themselves. 
A dispatch from Atlanta tells of the cooperation of Negro leaders and white economists to check the emigration. Persuasion is used in part; the Negro is told that 
no permanent gain awaits him in the North 
where he will find the colder climate a 
hardship. But, this failing, resort is made 
to force. Municipalities have passed ordinances to hamper northern recruiting 
agents. Prohibitive license fees have been 
imposed upon them. Old laws are scanned 
in the effort to keep the Negro for the services of the South. So far only trivial and 
local success has resulted. 
Cannot the South see that there are more 
than material rewards that draw the colored 
people North? Is it blind to the effect of 
its own treatment of the Negro? Does it 
not understand the desire of enfranchised 
men for the right to be free men with a 
voice in the conduct of their own affairs? 
Can it not appreciate the feeling aroused 
by the unjustifiable lynchings and other discriminations against the colored people? 
That the South has a problem to solve 
nobody can deny, but force has never yet 
helped in its solution and there is no chance 
that it ever will. What does it offer the 
Negro except a warm climate, a familiar 
habitat and an indolent life? Has it given 
him a chance to get ahead? If he gets 
ahead by his own efforts, does it offer him a 
man's place in his town or state? Or 
does it discourage him by holding constantly 
before his eyes an assertion of his hopeless inferiority? 
It is not to be denied that there are scattered manifestations of the spirit of helpfulness that display real progress. The feeling in the South against effective enfranchisement of the Negro race comes back, of 
course, to the preponderance of colored 
blood that would control the government. 
On the other hand, a race is only a menace 
in so far as it is compelled to act and think 
like a race and as a unit rather than as independent individuals. With all that has 
gone before, the possibility for the South of 
the Negro getting into such a position, or 
being permitted to get into it, is hopeful 
only through a slow evolution in which prejudices may die down. That is, if the Negro is to stay there in bulk. But if he is 
to emigrate and spread himself over the 
country he may disappear as a race problem. As a minority in different places 
neither race solidarity nor race prejudice 
might be a factor in preventing either enfranchisement or development. Of course, 
if this happened the South might have to 
look for white emigrants to make up the resulting deficiency in labor supply, but it 
is at least arguable that by its present attitude the South is both creating a race 
problem which it dreads, and trying to hold 
on to it. 
To hold the Negro the South must offer 
as much to his manhood as the North. 
Added restrictions upon his freedom will not 
do it. 
Financial America believes: 
Whether Negroes will be more likely to 
remain in the South if better educational 
facilities are provided them is a question 
apart from the undoubted wisdom of providing these facilities. President Edward 
T. Ware, of Atlanta University, who is 
seeking to raise an endowment fund of five 
hundred thousand dollars for this institution, is reported as saying that if the Negroes are to remain in the South they must 
be educated. 
It is certain that as the idea of the advantages of education grows among the 
Negroes the tendency will be to leave the 
South if educational facilities are more 
nearly adequate and more readily available 
elsewhere. But it is also to be remembered 
that as the education of the blacks progresses there will also be an increasing inclination to gain larger advantages of occupation. The South is developing rapidly in 
the magnitude and range of its industries 182 THE CRISIS 
and there will be great need of labor—a 
need as acute, if not more so, than now, 
when the Negro exodus is proving economically serious. But it is not clear whether a 
higher degree of education among the Negroes will find the latter willing to accept 
a continuance of the present sharp line 
drawn in the South between the races in all 
activities of life. Increase a man's education and, no matter what his color, he 
will be less content to be held down to a low 
social and business status and to a sharp 
definition of relationship with others of the 
human race. 
This is, of course, not an argument 
against the education of the Negro; it is 
simply calling attention to a situation which 
may possibly arise. It is our belief that 
in education lies the solution of the Negro 
problem, but the solution of the problem for 
the South will not likely come through increased contentment to the Negro because of 
better local educational advantages. It 
will come for the South rather through 
an infiltration of foreign labor into that 
region which will have the effect of making 
the South more independent of Negro labor 
and tend, together with the spirit of ambition promoted by education, to distribute 
the Negro population throughout the country. 
We end the story of the Negroes Hegira with a pleasant, if patronizing, picture 
from the Atlanta Constitution of a good 
Negro community in the South: 
"The Early County fair has accomplished 
big things for the entire section of the 
state, but perhaps the very biggest thing it 
has done was to show the Negroes what 
great opportunities are theirs right here at 
their very doors." 
This from a news article appearing elsewhere in the Constitution. 
It is a story of progress as shown in the 
industrial prosperity of the worthy, lawabiding Negroes of that section; it is a story 
of self-help and the co-operation of the white 
citizens of that county in the movement for 
the uplift of the Negro population. 
The county fair is thrown open to them; 
what they have done and are doing, educationally and industrially, is given hearty 
home recognition and more than state-wide 
advertisement; this, as their due, and for 
their encouragement in every effort to attain a higher plane of citizenship. There 
is where their white friends stand by them 
and lend the helping hand. 
These Negroes, with their own schools, on 
the most practical lines; with their local 
farmers' conferences; their women's organization to study cooking and canning problems, realize that they must live out their 
lives in that section; that their homes and 
best interests are there, and that their prosperity goes hand in hand with good citizenship. They know that these are inseparable. 
So they work for the uplift of the community and in that work they are receiving 
the cordial co-operation of their white neighbors. 
This is not only highly creditable to all 
concerned within the borders of a county, 
but it is a far-reaching lesson—a text which 
preaches its own sermon as to the settlement of the "Negro problem" in the South. 
In short, it does away with problems; 
for there can be none where such a mutually helpful state of affairs exists. 
"The white people of the county are almost as proud of the Negroes' exhibit as 
are the Negroes themselves." 
The sentiment of these Earl y County Negroes is: "We do not have to go away 
from home and ask for entrance at alien 
industrial gates: The land of Promise and 
of Plenty is here 'at home' among the people who know and understand us best, and 
here we are content to toil, doing what we 
can for our own advancement and that of 
the community whose industrial interests 
are identical with ours. We do not need 
to go away from home!" 
They try to help themselves and their 
hands are upheld; their interests protected; 
they read aright the signs on the road to 
better citizenship; the fact that they respect 
themselves commands respect. They are 
prosperous and happy! 
POLITICS 
SENATO R PENROSE' S bill to enforce 
^ the Fourteenth Amendment, the Pittsburgh Courier, a northern colored paper, 
fears is a hoax: 
United States Senator Boies Penrose introduced in the Senate the other day a bill 
which, according to his statements, is intended to put into force the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the Federal Constitution and 
to secure to the Negro his full political 
rights in. the southern states. 
The bill, if enacted into law, is a good 
thing. Bat coming as it does at this time 
when the Republican party is practically 
"down and out" sounds like a hoax. We 
have been without our rights in the South 
for many years, and we have been urging 
some relief for as many years, but no 
Penrose has come to the rescue. We are 
slow now to believe that the senior senator 
from Pennsylvania has us so much at 
heart as he has the rejuvination of the Republican party. We hope he is actuated by 
motives which have no color of suspicion, 
but our past experiences with the South 
and the United States Senate make us hesitate to believe that Mr. Penrose is championing our cause with any degree of sincerity. 
If the senator is teasing his black constituents in Pennsylvania, he need not go to 
such extremes. He knows that he owes his 
political beginning to the black voters of 
Philadelphia. Has he waited all these IH T LOOKIN G GLAS S 
years to offer them reward? Or can he 
imagine that by his belated bill he may yet 
hold them in line to accomplish his designs 
on future control of Pennsylvania? In 
either case, he must know he is mistaken. 
We know as well as does the senator that 
he may introduce any bill he pleases, but unless he can summons a majority in the 
Congress, his efforts are futile. 
Finally, if the Republican party has at 
last seen the necessity of giving back to the 
Negro his political rights, so long withheld, 
and thinks that this is the session most 
suited to the accomplishment of such a 
task, we hope the party all the success in 
the world. God knows we have been sufficiently loyal to warrant anything the party 
can do in the way of making the Federal 
amendments effective. Our fear is that 
the whole thing is a hoax. 
The Newark, N . J., Evening Star says: 
With the submission to Congress of the 
bill to insure legal voting in the South, 
President Wilson and his newspaper supporters are to be given a notable opportunity for striking proof of the sincerity 
of their vociferous declarations for the "new 
freedom" and "equal rights and equal justice for all men." There will, perhaps, be 
vigorous partisan effort to evade the issue, but it has been raised and it must be 
faced. 
No man in all the nation can shut his 
eyes to the rank injustice that has been the 
share of the colored voters of the South 
since the days of the reconstruction. Every 
one knows that the southern states have 
made Negro suffrage a mockery and an 
empty phrase. An d every one must know, 
before the present "force" bill is disposed of, 
whether the President's "new freedom" is 
to apply only where his party may secure 
votes and whether the "equal justice" for 
which his newspaper partisans have 
screamed is to be dealt out only to those 
who can spend pennies for daily editions. . . . 
It is high time that the administration 
redeem its pledges of sainted devotion to the 
cause of equal rights and equal opportunity 
for all men. And if it is to refuse so to 
redeem them, it is indeed high time that 
the mask of pretense be stripped from the 
President and the press which vouches for 
him. 
There isn't any color line in the Constitution of the United States. There was 
none in the gentle philosophy of Abraham 
Lincoln. And there can be none in the 
doctrine of the "new freedom" and equal 
rights for every man if that doctrine is 
anything but partisan buncombe and yellow journalistic chatter. 
The Times, Glens Falls, New York, tells 
us: 
You can make a campaign in Dakota or 
Nebraska or in Montana or Kansas, but 
you cannot make a campaign in the old 
South, in the Confederate states as they 
were. One of two things ought to be done. 
These southern states ought to be deprived of a large number of electoral votes. 
They have disfranchised the Negro by one 
process or another; yet the Negro is 
counted as a voter and a man in the distribution of members of congress and members 
of the electoral college. The South ought 
not to have the benefit of the Negro in 
making up their representation in congress, or else they ought not have power to 
disfranchise him. 
The entire civilized world knows of these 
conditions and knows that the American 
people have not had the courage to straighten the matter out by doing justice. 
If the South disfranchises the Negro, the 
South ought to bear the consequence of his 
loss in representation. 
Every injustice which is tolerated and not 
settled as soon as it is discovered becomes a 
danger to the republic. 
The South, however, is not disturbed and 
gives us the following account of how easy 
it would be for the Negro to enter southern 
politics. The Macon, Ga., Telegraph says: 
Every year for election of President the 
ultra Republican papers get insane over the 
electoral vote of the South, which goes into 
the electoral college with 132 votes. . . . 
Any Negro who can read the Constitution 
—not construe—but just read it, can vote. 
Any one owning forty acres of land 
whether, he can read or not, can vote; any 
one owning $500 worth of real estate can 
vote, whether he can read or not, and there 
is that omnibus clause—any one of good 
character can vote whether he can read or 
not. 
The trouble in the way is this: the Republican party dropped the Negro, and the 
Negro lacked leadership and organization. 
Negroes can have a primary of their own, 
but they have not organized. The white 
voters organized under a white primary and 
this eliminated the Negro. And that same 
white primary is now our only protection. 
So, since the decision of the United States 
Supreme Court, and the State laws, even 
constitutional, are so loose and so liberal 
that almost any Negro can vote, the threat 
to cut down southern representation on account of the Negro's indifference to politics, 
is entirely out of order. 
NEGRO ACHIEVEMEN T 
THE December Modern Review, printed 
at Calcutta, India, has an article on "Fift y Years of Negro-American 
Achievement." The writer, St. Nihal Singh, 
compares the progress of the Negro with 
the progress of the Hindoo, to the advantage 
of the former: 
The rise in the percentage of literacy 
among the Negro-Americans during the last 184 THE CRISIS 
half century is phenomenal. Before the 
Civil Wa r most of them were illiterate: perhaps not more than 5 out of 100 could read 
and write. Now fully 70 per cent, of them 
are literate. 
I wish that Indian illiteracy had been 
reduced to 30 per cent, during the last 50 
years. 
A student of comparative progress 
searches the annals of the world in vain for 
a parallel to this remarkable rise in the 
literacy of Negro-Americans. Japan may, 
at first thought, be considered to provide 
one. It is true that in the middle of the 
sixties of the last century the number of 
Japanese who were literate was small, and 
that to-day they are nearly all literate. The 
Nipponese, however, were not, less than 60 
years ago, a race of slaves, as the NegroAmericans were. Moreover, the Government of Japan took vigorous measures and 
provided liberal appropriations to wipe out 
illiteracy, while scanty and poor provision 
has been made for the education of the 
Negro-American. Be it remembered, that 
the Negro-Americans have been shut out 
of a large number of schools and colleges, 
and could, as a rule, obtain instruction only 
in institutions conducted especially for them. 
These schools have been far below the required number. Most of them have been 
inefficiently staffed, white persons, in many 
cases, not being allowed to teach in them. 
The majority of them have been kept closed 
during a large part of the year. Some of 
them have been situated in unhealthy localities. In these circumstances, the fall in 
Negro illiteracy is almost a miracle. 
SHERIF F ELE Y 
S
HERIF F ELE Y of Lima , Ohio, last Au ­
gust, at the risk of his life prevented the 
lynching of a Negro prisoner in his custody. 
Although a rope was placed around his 
neck and he was kicked and beaten into unconsciousness by an infuriated mob of his 
fellow citizens, he refused to the last to 
turn over his charge to the blood-hungry 
men. 
Night before last Governor Frank B. 
Willis presented to Sheriff Eley, on behalf 
of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a silver loving cup 
inscribed "for devotion to duty in defending 
a colored prisoner from lynching, enduring 
torture and insult that the majesty of the 
law might be upheld at Lima , August 30, 
1916." The world loves and appreciates a 
man, as Governor Willis said, who stands 
squarely with a heart unafraid and his face 
to the front at times of stress. 
Sheriff Eley didn't think what he had done 
called for any such action. He had done 
nothing more than his duty. Quite true, but 
how many men would have done it under 
similar circumstances? There may be many 
Eleys wearing sheriff's badges, but this country's black record of lynching has disclosed 
but few of them. We can, therefore, well 
afford signally to honor any official who 
shows himself willing to make any sacrifice 
rather than be false to his oath of office. 
—Evening Globe, New York. 
The Springfield Republican adds: 
It is pleasant to note that Sheriff Eley 
was retained by a big majority at the recent election. 
WHY ? 
By G. DOUGLA S JOHNSO N 
T
H E verdure sleeps in winter, O, whither are we rushing? 
Awakes with Apri l rain; An d wherefrom were we torn? 
The sun swings low—'tis night,—ascends We breathe from out the silences— 
An d it is morn again. And breathless—back are borne! 
The world spins on triumphant 
Throughout a trackless sky, 
And mortal man seeks all in vain 
The primal reason—why? 
Man through all ages past and now, 
Bows to the lone heart-cry,— 
It took a God to make us, 
And a God to answer, why! 1. NEGBO SENEGALESE, OF TH E FRENC H COLONIAL TROOPS, DELIVERING A HARANGU E 
TO A GROUP OF GERMA N PRISONEBS. 
2. U. S. LEGIONAIRES IN TH E FRENC H TEENCHE8 AROUND AEGONNE. AT TH E EXTREM E 
EIGHT IS BOB SCANLON, TH E NEGRO BOXER. 
3 AMERICAN NURSES ATTENDING WOUNDED FEENC H COLORED SOLDIERS AT TH E 
AMERICAN HOSPITAL IN FRANC E 
185 
Shadows of Light Men of the Month 
A N EDITOR. 
MR. W. E . KING , founder and editor of 
the Dallas, Texas, Express, was born 
in Macon, Noxubee County, Miss., June 7, 
1866. He was educated at Macon Academy 
and taught school at various places in Mississippi from 1882 to 1888. 
In 1888 Mr. Kin g began his career as a 
journalist at Helena, Ark., working for the 
Peoples' Friend. He established Fair Play 
at Meridian, Miss., in February, 1889, and 
in 1892 he moved to Texas and established 
the Dallas Express one year later. In race 
matters Mr. Kin g stands for all of the manhood rights of the Negro as guaranteed by 
the Federal Constitution and he has fearlessly championed this belief in the columns 
of his paper since its establishment. 
Mr. Kin g has been a delegate to every 
Republican State Convention in Texas since 
1892. He is a lodge man, being a Mason, 
Odd Fellow, Knight of Pythias, Knight of 
Tabor, and United Brother of Friendship. 
He stands high in the councils of each of 
these fraternal orders and has assisted in 
shaping their policies for the good of the 
race. He is at present State Organizer of 
the Texas Negro Business League. 
Two years ago Mr. Kin g called to his assistance a few of the Negro business and 
professional men of Dallas, Texas, and organized the Dallas Express Publishing Company, chartering the organization with a 
paid up capital of $5,000. This company 
has installed new and modern type-setting 
machines and presses and has contracted 
for further equipment. The company is 
planning to have the best equipped publishing plant owned by Negroes south of Nashville, Tenn. "Then," says Mr. King, "will 
be realized my dream of many years." 
A CATERER. 
MR. ELLSWORT H W. PRYO R was 
born in Washington, D. C , Apri l 3, 
1862, the son of Charles and Angeline Pryor. 
He was educated in the public schools of 
Washington, D. C , at Howard University 
and at Oberlin College. After leaving Oberlin he taught for a few years in the public 
schools of Alexandria, Va . In 1884 he was 
married to Miss Louise M . Braxton, of 
Washington, and shortly thereafter with his 
bride he went to Omaha, Nebraska, where 
he obtained employment as assistant steward at the Omaha Club. His ability was 
soon recognized and he was given the stewardship of this club. He held this position 
for nineteen years. In 1905 he went to the 
Commercial Club, where he has established 
an enviable reputation. 
Mr. Pryor has had the honor of serving 
banquets for six Presidents of the United 
States: Harrison, Cleveland, McKinley, 
Roosevelt, Taft and Wilson, three of whom 
have personally complimented him for his 
skill as a caterer. 
A N INVENTOR 
MR. H . C. WEB B is the inventor of the 
Webb Palmetto Grubbing Machine. He 
has a thirty-horsepower engine to pull the 
machine and plow. It grubs between five 
and ten acres a day and in the worst of 
palmettos it does in one day the work that 
it would take ten men to do in ten days. 
Mr. Webb has also invented a barrel stave 
machine and a self-force drill press, but he 
lost these inventions because he did not have 
the means to secure patents. They are, 
however, on the market, patented. 
Mr. Webb was born in Columbus County, 
North Carolina, March 25, 1864. He spent 
the first sixteen years of his life on a farm. 
Later he engaged in a blacksmith, sawmill 
and rice cleaning business for himself at 
Parish, Fla., and is now located in Bradentown, Fla . 
A MINISTER 
THE REVEREN D JAME S LUTHE R 
PIN N was recently installed minister 
of the First Baptist Church, West Washington, D. C. 
Mr. Pinn was born in Washington, D. C , 
May 12, 1877. He is a graduate of the 
Washington High School, the Washington 
Normal School and Howard University. He 
was ordained to the ministry in Washington, D. C , February 4, 1901. 
186 ME N O F TH E MONT H 
W. E. KING. 
H. C. WEBB 
MES. E . N. DETT. 
MR WEBB'S GRUBBING MACHINE 
W. J. ANDREWS. 
J. L. PINN. 
E . W. PRYOR 
187 188 TH E CRISI S 
A N EXAMPL E OF HIGH CITIZENSHIP 
WILLIA M JOSHU A ANDREW S was 
born a slave in Williamsburg County, 
South Carolina, October 15, 1841. He early 
moved to Sumter, S. C , where he still resides. 
During the Reconstruction Mr. Andrews 
was a deputy sheriff, a county commissioner, 
and a member of the State Legislature, sitting as a member of the famous Mackaye 
House in 1878. As such, he supported legislative measures in the interest of public 
education and of retrenchment in government. He has been a forceful influence in 
the church life of his community, organizing 
a' Sunday school in 1867, and serving until 
now as its superintendent. He has been 
active, also, in fraternal organizations 
among his fellows. Embarking in business 
in 1868, Mr. Andrews has been able, by 
careful investments and constant attention 
to details, to acquire valuable property in 
and about Sumter. 
A MUSICIAN 
THE marriage of Miss Helen Elise Smith 
to Mr. R. Nathaniel Dett, the director 
of Music at Hampton Institute, was solemnized at St. Philip's Church in New York 
City, December 27, 1916. 
Miss Smith was the first Negro to be 
graduated from the pianoforte department 
of the Damrosch Institute of Musical Art 
in New York City. She also did graduate 
work in the artist's course of the Institute 
and has demonstrated her ability as a concert performer on numerous occasions. 
Since her graduation she has rendered efficient and effective service as joint director 
of the Martin-Smith Music School of New 
York City. 
TH E SUBJECT OF OUR COVE R 
P
ROFESSO R RICHAR D THEODOR E 
GREENE R was born in Philadelphia, 
Pa., in 1844. He was graduated from Harvard University with the degree of Bachelor 
of Arts in 1870. In 1875 he was chosen a 
member of the General Assembly of South 
Carolina, whose duty was to revise the 
school system of the state. He was given 
the degree of LL.B . by the University of 
South Carolina in 1876. 
Mr. Greener was Dean of the Law Department of Howard University from 1880-1882; 
Civil Service examiner, New York City, 
1885-1890; Secretary of the Grant Memorial 
Association, 1885-1892; Consul to Bombay 
and Vladivostok, 1898-1906. Mr. Greener 
has also attained prominence both as a 
writer and as a speaker. 
RHAPSOD Y 
By EDWI N J. MORGA N 
Dumas or Toussaint 
I A M Black. 
Poushkin or 
L'Ouverture. 
I am Black. 
I have been the path of the Centuries 
An d Pharoes and Napoleons have 
Trod me up to glory. 
I am Black. 
Ham or Othello or Crispus Attucks— 
I have been fuel for the 
Flame of Progress. 
I have reared the everlasting Pyramids 
And have flung Nineveh and Babylon 
Up to God. 
I am Black. 
I have dredged the Nile 
That Civilization might bring 
Darkness unto me. 
I have cut marble and granite 
For Rome and Carthage. 
I have lifted the rocks from 
Culebra and Pedro Miguel 
And have watched the Seas meet. 
I am Black. 
I have been the great Burden-bearer, 
The rungs in the ladder of mine 
Enemy. 
Mine Enemy has bound mine eyes. 
I have borne him to the mountain-top 
And he has gloried in the Sunlight 
That I could not see. 
But now I shall cast -off the bandage 
From mine eyes 
And I will see the glory 
That I have made. 
I am Black The Horizon 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
COLERIDGE-TAYLOR' S "Tell, 0 Tell 
Me " is noted among the choral numbers conducted by John Hyatt Brewer at the 
first concert of the season by the Brooklyn 
Apollo Club, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
C The first performance in New York of 
Harry T. Burleigh's Negro spirituals "So 
Sad," "Father Abraham," and "Didn't My 
Lord Deliver Daniel?" set for mixed voices, 
aroused much enthusiasm when sung by 
the Choral Art Club of Brooklyn, N . Y. , at 
the first concert of the season, December 20, 
at the Academy of Music in that city. A t 
the close of the group of folk-songs, Conductor Cornell signalled Mr. Burleigh to 
rise and share the applause. Musical 
America says: "Mr. Burleigh has realized 
every possibility in his arrangements and 
contributed an important item to the literature." 
C The Nalle Jubilee Singers presented a 
program of old plantation melodies at 
Lincoln Congregational Temple during December and also before a large audience 
at the Quaker Meeting House in Washington, D. C. 
(I A t a Christmas Musicale, the choir of 
Bethesda Baptist Church, Chicago, ILL., gave 
an extended program of excerpts from "The 
Messiah," under the direction of Mrs. Martha B. Anderson. 
C Mr. Clarence Cameron White, violin virtuoso, of Boston, Mass., has completed a 
successful concert tour of twenty-two engagements. Of his recital at Quincy, ILL., 
the Quincy Daily Journal says: "Mr. 
White's positive and strong attack, and his 
smooth, caressing bowing in passages where 
that was essential, were the features of his 
performance. In tone quality he excels 
many players of more extended reputation." 
(I Miss Lucine Finch recently gave a recital of "He r Mammy's Stories" at Center 
Church House in Hartford, Conn. At Steinert Hall in Boston, Mass., Mrs. Nelda 
Hewitt Hall presented songs of the old 
southern plantations. 
C Prominent white singers are giving important place on their programs to the works 
of Dekoven Thompson, a Negro song writer 
of New York City. Mme. Schumann-Heink 
will feature "A Heart Disclosed," and Mme. 
Belle Story, the sensation of the Hippodrome last season, "Love Comes but Once," 
and "Mandy, When You Comin' Back?" 
d Miss Laura Wheeler, a colored woman, is 
one of twelve prize winners for her painting, "Heirlooms," exhibited at the New York 
Water Color Club and selected out of five 
hundred exhibits. It will be made a permanent illustration for the Water Color 
Club catalog. Miss Wheeler is teaching 
art in the Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers. 
C The Choral Club of Paul Quinn College, 
which has had the distinction of singing 
before Baylor University, Waco, Texas, and 
other similar distinctions, held a Negro 
folk-lore festival in Waco, December 14, at 
St. Paul's A . M . E . Church. 
(I The following letter has come to Mr. 
William Stanley Braithwaite from Copenhagen: "M y dear Congenial! Soldier since 
twenty months, guarding the Danish shore, 
your poems were often a great consolation 
for me in the monotony of the military life. 
I beg you to forgive me my audacity, but 
I should be very glad, if you would send 
me your 'Lyrics of life and love,'' or any 
other of your collections of poems, with a 
dedication. Perhaps I then must send you 
my own poems (Digle, 1907-1914) as a little 
promise of my reconnaissance and my admiration. With all the best salutations, 
Yours truly, Carl Kjersmeier." 
d A novelty on the program of Olga Samaroff, with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, 
was Thorwald Otterstrom's "American Negro Suite," based on Negro religious melodies. 
(L A t Copley Plaza Hotel, Boston, Mass., 
three Negro musicians, Messrs. Roland 
Hayes, tenor; William H . Richardson, baritone; William S. Lawrence, accompanist, 
were among the participants in the musicale 
for the benefit of the Animal Rescue League. 
(I The silver anniversary of the Amphion 
Glee Club, in Washington, D. C , was celebrated December 21 with a musical and literary program, reception and cotillion. Mr. 
J. Henry Lewis has been manager and 
director of the organization since its beginning. 
C The Howard High School, Wilmington, 
Del., presented as a Christmas entertain189 190 TH E CRISI S 
ment, "A n Hawaiian Idyll," an operetta in 
three acts. Mrs. Alice Dunbar-Nelson wrote 
the words, the arrangement of the musical 
numbers was made by Miss Ett a A . Roache, 
and the costumes were designed under the 
direction of Miss Agatha F . Jones, all 
teachers in the school. A n Hawaiian orchestra of native instruments was directed 
by Dr. Conwell Banton. 
G Eri c D. Brown, a Negro lad, thirteen 
years old, is a member of The High School 
Orchestra at Steubenville, Ohio, among 
twenty-five white members. He is an excellent saxaphone player. 
G Two Negro youths are members of The 
High School Orchestra of Washington, 
Pennsylvania; Miss Monzella Walters, fifteen years, who plays the violin and is an 
accomplished pianist, and Fremont Brandy, 
sixteen years old, who plays the cornet. 
G Mr. Nobel M . Johnson, a colored man, 
is appearing in various moving picture 
films, including Griffith's "Intolerance." 
G The Quality Amusement Company, a 
white organization with stock companies 
of colored players, has been operating in 
New York, Washington, and Baltimore. It 
proposes to add to this circuit a $100,000 
theatre in Philadelphia, and houses in Boston, Pittsburgh, Providence, and Norfolk. 
INDUSTR Y 
O BECAUS E of the great migration of 
southern Negroes to northern labor 
centers, the Federation of Labor has resolved to admit Negroes as members. 
G Over 300 Negroes leaving the South 
have come to Peoria, ILL. One hundred and 
fifty of them have secured employment at 
the Keystone Structural Iron Works near 
South Bartonville. 
C A . Krolik and Company, wholesale dry 
goods dealers in Detroit, Mich., have opened 
a factory with all Negro employees. A rest 
room, club rooms, and welfare departments 
have been provided for them, says Mr. Israel 
Cohen, factory superintendent. 
G Negro workers of the Canal and Panama Railroad have taken steps toward the 
forming of a permanent organization of 
workingmen to be affiliated with a similar 
organization in Colon. 
C Thirty-five colored men are employed as 
conductors and motormen on street cars in 
Toronto, Canada. 
C The Central Michigan Coal Company, Detroit, has purchased a $500,000 factory in 
Marlborough for the manufacture of fertilizers, peat and other alkali products and 
plans to employ all Negro labor. 
EDUCATIO N 
A STUD Y of Negro problems has been 
added to the course in sociology at 
Howard University. Prof. Kelly Mille r is 
to teach the first semester and Dr. R. E. 
Parks, of Chicago University, the second. 
C A n association of teachers in colored 
schools in Pennsylvania and Delaware was 
formed recently at the Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers. This association aims 
to study and take action upon peculiar educational and social problems confronting the 
Negroes in these two states. Principal 
Leslie Pinckney Hill , of the Cheyney School, 
was elected president. 
C Mr. George R. Dorsey is the first Negro 
in six years to be a member of the debating 
team of Ohio State University. 
C Mr. Emmett J. Scott, Jr., ranked second 
in the senior class of Phillips Exeter Academy, in New Hampshire, and was awarded 
the Brancroft scholarship of $140, and a 
Phillips scholarship of $150. He is one of 
nine first honor men and one of the first 
ten men to be chosen for the Beta chapter 
of Cum Laude Society. His work in 
French and advanced German received honorable mention. Mr. Scott has been awarded 
$760 in scholarships during his three years 
at this institution. 
G The $20,000 building erected for Morris 
College, in Sumter, S. C , has been named 
in honor of Mr. Henry McGowan, a colored farmer who donated $500 toward the 
fund. 
G In Baltimore, Md., the ordinance of the 
Board of Estimate for 1917 provides increases in salaries amounting to $6,650 to 
instructors in four white high schools and 
those in the white Teachers' Training 
School; but no salary increase has been 
provided for teachers in the colored high 
school and the colored Teachers' Training 
School. This discrimination, however, has 
not been shown in the elementary school 
system. 
C The Slater Public School, Birmingham, 
Ala. , has an enrollment of 1435 pupils, an 
increase of 102 over last year's enrollment. 
Mr. P. M . Davis is the principal and the 
school employs twenty-three teachers. 
G The State Agricultural and Mechanical 
College for Negroes at Orangeburg. South TH E HORIZO N 
Carolina, will erect during February, 
March, and April , three buildings costing 
$150,000. 
(I Wilberforce University is planning to 
erect a science building as a memorial in 
honor of the late William Hayes Ward, editor of the Independent and a friend to Negroes. The proposed building is to cost 
$40,000 and contributions are asked for. 
C. Simon Guggenheim and his brother 
have contributed $10,000 as a Christmas gift 
toward the construction of an auditorium 
at Hampton Instiute. 
C Mr. Charles Burroughs is one of the lecturers in a series of public lectures arranged 
by the Department of Education of the City 
of New York. A t the 135th Street Branch 
of the New York Public Library on January 
11, Mr. Burroughs gave an explanatory narrative of Shakespeare's "Macbeth," illustrating its various characters by dramatic 
impersonations. 
CDr. E . P. Roberts, a prominent Negro 
physician, has been appointed by Mayor 
Mitchell as a member of the Board of Education of New York City. 
ATHLETIC S 
MR. FRE D POLLARD , the sensational 
football player of Brown University, has 
been chosen a member of Collier's Ail -
American eleven by Walter Camp. 
C Mr. Howard P. Drew, the colored sprinter, at present studying law at Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa, is again in 
training. Some time ago he suffered a 
breakdown but is again able to enter 
athletics. 
C The Edward Waters College has won the 
championship in football for the district 
comprising the state of Florida and southern Georgia by defeating Florida Baptist 
Academy in a 12-6 score. 
C The Des Moines College football squad 
has elected Richmond, their star Negro 
fullback, to the captaincy for 1917. 
C Hampton Institute basketball team was 
victorious over the basketball team of the 
Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D. C , 29-19. 
C The Alpha basketball team of New York 
has defeated Lincoln by a 38-20 score. 
C Thanksgiving Day closed the football season for Atlanta University with a victory. 
The record was the best an Atlanta team 
has made in ten years. 
Atlanta University, 41; Clark, U. 
Atlanta University, 6; Tuskegee, 0. 
Atlanta University, 7; Talladega, 0. 
Atlanta University, 10; Morehouse, 17. 
Atlanta University, 15; Morris Brown, 0. 
ECONOMICS 
NEGR O banks increased their Christmas 
savings accounts during the past year 
as follows: In Savannah, Ga.: The Wage 
Earners Savings Bank, 1330 accounts, $14,-
000 paid out; the Savannah Savings and 
Real Estate Corporation, 900 accounts, $5,-
017 paid out; The Mechanics Savings Bank, 
133 accounts, $1,000 paid out. Richmond, 
Va. : The Mechanics Savings Bank, 7200 
accounts, $60,000 paid out (as compared 
with $23,000 the previous year) ; The St. 
Luke's Penny Savings Bank, 750 accounts, 
$9,000 paid out. The Mutual Savings Bank 
in Portsmouth, Va., paid out $11,000. It 
has installed a savings system in the schools 
to encourage thrift among young people. 
SOCIAL PROGRES S 
THE Senate has rejected Senator Reed's 
amendment to the immigration bill excluding all natives of Africa, by a vote of 
37-32. The West Indies exclusion amendment was lost, 36-28. 
C Mr. Charles Sullivan Carr has been 
made storekeeper and manager of the Erie 
Railroad's camps at Cleveland, Ohio. This 
position has heretofore been held by white 
men. 
C Mr. Matthew Harris, a Negro in Memphis, Tenn., whose home was dynamited by 
a posse because he defended a relative in 
it, has been awarded $22,500 compensation 
and $20,000 compensatory damages against 
former Sheriff John A . Reichman and his 
posse. 
C A printed warning signed by the White 
Renters' League has been distributed by 
night riders in West Texas advising landlords to dismiss their Negro tenants and 
cotton pickers. 
C At the suggestion that he meet a Negro 
boxer, Jess Willard, the champion white 
prize fighter, said: "I fought the best of 
the blacks and defeated him at Havana, and 
there and then I announced no black man 
would have a chance at the title again so 
far as I am concerned." 
C The 296th anniversary of Afro-Americans in America was celebrated at Penn 
Hall, Philadelphia, Pa., during December, 
191 I HE CRISIS 192 
under the auspices of local clubs. 
C The Longshoremen's Protective Union 
and Benevolent Association, a Negro organization of Pensacola, Fla., sent a check 
for $867 to the city treasurer as payment 
of the annual poll taxes for its 867 members. 
C The Woman's Relief Corps No. 99, in 
Stoughton, Mass., has elected its only colored member, Miss R. Adelaide Washington, 
to the presidency. 
(I Colored men in Leavenworth County, 
Kan., have organized the Sunflower Rifle 
Club, which has been admitted to the Na ­
tional Rifle Association. Mr. William Shelton is president. 
C Dr. Edna Robinson has successfully 
passed the recent dental examination in 
Boston, and is the first Negro woman to 
practice dentistry in Massachusetts. 
C Many daily papers both in the North 
and in the-South are giving more attention 
"to Negro news notes and items of interest concerning their Negro citizens. Some 
of these papers are running a regular column devoted to Negro news, while others 
are publishing interesting Negro sections. 
(I A t a recent milk test held in Des Moines, 
for the state of Iowa, Mr. Julian O. Winston, a Negro dairyman of Ottumwa, won the 
highest honor. 
C Miss Alice Hagar, because of the enactment of a law which interferes with her 
kennel of blooded Scotch terriers in Burlingame, near San Francisco, Cal., has offered her mansion at an especially low price 
to any "Chinese, Japanese or Negro." 
C The Nashville, Tenn., Globe carried a 
very interesting rotogravure section of eight 
pages in its issue of December 22, 1916. 
C By an act of the United States Congress, after July 1, 1917, any individual 
or organization not of the regular United 
States army, navy or marine, will be forbidden to wear uniforms or any distinctive 
parts of uniforms of United States soldiers. 
This action will cause a loss of nearly a 
half million dollars in clothing and equipment to the colored Knights of Pythias of 
the United States. 
C Cardinal Gibbons, in his " A Retrospect 
of Fifty Years," devotes chapters, outside 
of church matters, to such subjects as: Patriotism and Politics, Irish Immigration, The 
Lynch Law, The Funeral of General Sheridan, Will the American Republic Endure? 
(I Mme. C. J. Walker, the Negro hair culturist, has purchased a $75,000 estate at 
Irvington-on-the-Hudson, New York, on 
which she is planning to erect a $100,000 
residence. 
C Mr. Harry Robinson, a colored man of 
Louisville, Ky., has been appointed foreman of all the stock leaving the Ford Automobile Works in Detroit, Mich. He is the 
first colored man to be given this position. 
C Since the lynching of Mr. Anthony 
Crawford, at Abbeville, S. C , 270 Negroes 
have left Greenwood, and it is expected that 
many more will leave. 
(I As a result of the first colored fair of 
Guilford County, North Carolina, 200 colored people started a fund and have purchased thirty acres as a fair ground. 
C Mr. Daniels, Secretary of the Navy, upon 
the suggestion that Negroes be obtained for 
the navy, said: "Mr. Callaway, if you will 
excuse me I would prefer not to discuss that 
matter." 
C As a reason for urging compulsory registration of vital statistics, W. L . Heiser, 
of Kentucky, said: "Our grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren will be marrying persons having Negro blood in their veins." 
C Mr. Howard B. Woolsten of the City 
College of New York lists the nationalities 
in the following order with respect to good 
citizenship: Americans, first; Germans, second; English, third; Poles, Russians and 
Jews, fourth; Scandinavians, fifth; Irish, 
sixth; French-Canadians, seventh; Austrians, Slavs, eighth; Italians, ninth, and Negroes, tenth. 
(I Stephane Lauzanne, editor of the Paris 
Matin, said in a lecture in New York City: 
"Negro troops made the recapture of Donaumont possible." 
C Mr. Joe Ellis and his brother, Abe, two 
Negro farmers of the Creve Cceur Bottom, 
St. Louis County, Missouri, who did not 
believe in savings banks, but kept their 
money in an old trunk in their home, lost 
$6000, which represented their lifetime's 
work, when fire destroyed their home. 
C A site has been purchased on West 137th 
Street, New York City, for the new building 
of the Colored Young Women's Christian 
Association. 
(I John Patrick Turner writes us of the 
proposed town of Hope Isle, S. C. The 
following Negroes comprise the Board of 
Directors: Dr. C. V . Roman of Nashville, TH E HORIZO N 
Tenn.; Lester A . Walton, of New York 
City; G. Edward Dickerson, Dr. Algernon B. Jackson, and Dr. John Patrick 
Turner, of Philadelphia. Behind the movement, as consultant and advisor, is a white 
man, John T. Patrick, of North Carolina. 
Southern Pines, the noted winter resort, 
was built and owned by him. Three sites 
are being considered; one near Savannah, 
another near Beaufort, and a third near 
Charleston. Al l the money necessary for 
the purchase of the land and the erection 
of municipal buildings is in hand. A silk 
factory, a sanitarium, and an art school are 
promised. No stock will be issued until the 
town is in actual operation. 
PERSONA L 
DR. W. E. B. D U BOIS, editor of TH E 
CRISIS, was operated on twice for stone 
in the kidney and ureter at St. Luke's Hospital, in New York City, December 15 and 
January 4. Both operations were successful, and Dr. Du Bois is hoping to be at his 
desk again early in February. 
C We are informed that the announcement 
in our last issue of the marriage of Mr. W. 
A . Joiner to Miss Ada Roundtree was incorrect. 
C The name of the founder and superintendent of the National League for the Protection of Negro Girls (mentioned in our 
Richmond, Va. , number) should have read 
Mrs. Ora B. Stokes instead of Mrs. Ora B. 
Saunders. 
C Mr. and Mrs. Cassius M . Brown have 
celebrated their golden wedding anniversary 
in Harrisburg, Pa. They are both prominent and well-thought-of citizens. 
C Mrs. Mary Talbot, a native of Kentucky, and a former Negro slave, has celebrated her 120th birthday anniversary at 
Ottumwa, Ia. 
C Rt. Rev. Alexander Walters, senior bishop 
of the A . M . E . Zion Church, has been confined to St. Luke's Hospital in New York 
City. 
C Mr. Fred Douglass Pollard, the noted 
football player of Brown University, was 
tendered a banquet by the citizens of New 
York, December 20. 
C Deaths of well known Negroes during the 
month are: In Texas, Dr. R. S. Lovinggood, president of Samuel Huston College, 
and Mrs. Nancy Allen, widow of the late 
Richard Allen ; John E . Bush, Little Rock, 
Ark.; Mrs. Andrew F. Hilyer, Washington, 
D. C ; the Rev. J. M . Anderson, prominent 
in A . M . E . Church life, Waco, Tex; Charles 
W. Hollis, Wilmington, Del., Grandmaster 
of Masons, 
G Negro centenarians have died during the 
past month as follows: A t Jefferson City, 
Mo., Mrs. Grace Williams, 116 years old; 
John Davis died in November near Belzoni, 
Miss., 117 years old. He was the oldest 
resident of Mississippi; Mrs. Mary Ross, 116 
years old, at Enid, Okla. 
POLITICS 
MAN Y bills to abolish the electoral college and base the election of the President of the United States entirely upon 
popular vote have been introduced in Congress. 
C The Negro-Mulatto and Chinese suffrage 
amendment met defeat in Oregon at the 
recent election. 
C Delegates from the Every Woman Suffrage club of St. Paul, which is composed * 
entirely of Negro women, received a hearty 
welcome at the Minnesota State Suffrage 
Association's thirty-fourth annual convention, held recently in Minneapolis. 
CHURC H 
THE colored Baptists have contributed 
during the last year $68,000 to missions 
and $49,000 to education. They have 1512 
churches, 153,319 members, and four educational institutions valued at $725,000. 
d The St. Joseph's Catholic Community Society in Beaumont, Texas, has sixty-eight 
members working for the evangelization of 
colored people. The work accomplished in a 
year consists of grounds at Port Arthur, 
$1500; Beaumont, $2600, all paid. A combination of school and church costing $13,000 
is being erected. It will be followed by a 
home for the Sisters and the Father, Alexis 
A . La Plante, S. S. J. 
d The twenty-fifth anniversary of Holy 
Trinity Baptist Church in Philadelphia, Pa., 
and the fifth anniversary of its pastor, the 
Rev. W. F . Graham, were celebrated recently with over 3000 people in attendance at 
the three services. The celebration continued one week. 
MEETINGS 
A RAC E conference is to be held in Columbia, S. C , February 7-9. Dr. James 
H . Dillard of the Jeanes and Slater Funds 
is to be the speaker February 7. 
193 194 I H E CRISI S 
(1 The annual convention of newspaper men, 
of which Mr. C. J. Perry, of Philadelphia, 
Pa., is president, will be held in Nashville, 
Tenn., February 7-10. 
d The forty-ninth annual session of Negro Masons has been held in Anderson, S. C , 
with over four hundred delegates present. 
The mayor of Anderson, the Honorable J. H . 
Godfrey, delivered an address of welcome. 
C More than 700 delegates attended the 
annual session of the Grand Lodge of Ma ­
sons of North Carolina held at Washington. 
C A t the convention of former slaves held 
recently at the Cosmopolitan church (colored), Washington, D. C , the two women 
featured below were in attendance. On the 
left is Elizabeth Buckley, 125 years old, and 
Rachel Fay, 100 years old, on the right. 
FOREIGN 
AN industrial conference in Johannesburg has been discussing cotton growing 
in South Africa. It suggested that Negroes 
be imported from the southern states of 
America to carry on this industry. 
G In Liberia the inhabitants celebrated on 
December 23 the 100th anniversary of the 
founding of the American Colonization Society, which established the colony of American Negroes in Liberia. 
(I In London, England, ex-Mayor Archer, 
of Battersea, a Negro, was among the first 
people to be invited by Kin g George to 
visit with him the hospitals of the city during the holidays. Mr. Archer was accompanied by his wife. 
(I A commissioner of the West African Government has left London for Kumasi, Gold 
Coast, Africa, to install a moving picture 
plant as a method toward civilization among 
the natives. Among the pictures of "educational" value is listed first: "A rip-roaring cowboy melodrama with plenty of shooting and lynching." 
(I Sweet and Maxwell, London, England, 
have published Volume I of Gold Coast Reports, collected by Mr. Peter Awoonor Renner, a Negro. 
(I The West Indies Trading Association was 
recently incorporated in Canada with a capital stock of $40,000. Shares in the stock 
may be purchased by any Negro. 
(I Efforts are being made through the 
Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society to amend the Native Land Ac t of 
South Africa . Legislative provision is being urged for the gradual expropriation of 
lands owned by Europeans for the permanent settlement of natives in such areas, and 
local administration of native affairs by 
means of native councils. 
C G. G. Cruickshank, of Demerara, has issued two volumes: "Negro Humor," and 
"Black Talk," which give notes on dialects 
in the West Indies and traces them back to 
Africa . 
(I Canada has prohibited the landing of 
colored people from the West Indies and 
British Guiana into the dominion. 
C The American Commercial Commission, 
which has been touring France, was given 
a banquet at St. Etienne. Prominent among 
the guests was William L. Hunt, United 
States consul, who was "particularly" welcomed in the speech of the chairman as one 
who had merited the sympathy of the citizens on account of his amenable qualities. 
The Prefect of the Department of the Loire 
also said that Consul Hunt had increased 
the natural sympathy which the French 
have for the United States, and mentioned 
his courtesy and conciliatory spirit. 
GHETT O 
BECAUS E she rode in the same sleeper 
in which a colored man rode, Mrs. 
Betty Norton, of Jackson, Miss., has been 
awarded $1,000 by the courts. 
(I Four Negroes being held in the murder 
case of the Reeves family in Minden, Louisiana, are being well guarded in the county 
jail. Sheriff Phillips has announced his 
determination that "there shall be no 
lynching." 
CI The Supreme Court of Mississippi took 
the attitude that a Negro on trial for his 
life is entitled to discover through his counsel whether the jurors who are to be empanelled to try him are free from bias or 
prejudice against him for the reason that he 
is a Negro; in other words, to ascertain 
whether the feeling of race prejudice in the 
minds of the jurors would dominate their 
judgment in determining the issue between 
himself and the state, notwithstanding the 
evidence that might be presented in dealing THE HORIZON 196 
with the case of Joe Hill , a Negro, who was 
tried some time ago in Bolivar County for 
murder, convicted, and sentenced to death. 
C A decision in the courts of Los Angeles, 
Cal., obtained by Willis O. Tyler, has invalidated clauses in deeds limiting the transfer of property to white people. 
C A Chinese restaurant, in Boston, has 
been fined $100 for discriminating against 
colored people. 
C. The courts declare that the jitneys of 
Milwaukee, Wis., must not discriminate 
against colored people. 
C A colored boy of Hancock County, W. 
Va., has brought suit against the Board 
of Education for not furnishing a free 
school to which he can go. 
C Three hundred Cherokee Indians have 
begun a movement to recover the value of 
lands and money to the value of about $30,-
000,000 apportioned by the government to 
the slaves of the Cherokees under the Treaty 
of 1866. 
C. A mass meeting was held recently at 
Bristow, Okla., to protest against the segregation ordinances passed there. The colored people are considering secession to a 
separate Negro town, five miles away. Seventy per cent of the town's trade comes from 
the colored people, and the colored farmers have ginned $56,000 worth of cotton this 
fall. 
TH E YEAR' S LYNCHING S 
ACCORDIN G to The CRISIS records there 
were fifty-nine persons lynched in the 
United States during the year 1916; fiftytwo Negro men, three white men, 1 Mexican, and three Negro women. Our record 
for lynchings during 1916 is as follows: 
January 2—South Carolina—.. .Sims, insulting a white girl. 
January 12—North Carolina—John Richards, alleged murder. 
January 20—Georgia—Felix Lake, Frank 
Lake, Dewey Lake, Major Lake, Rodius 
Keith, murder. 
January 25—Texas — W. J. Mayfield 
(white), alleged murder. 
January 25—Alabama—Richard Burton, 
burglary and stabbing owner of premises. 
January 28—Florida—Richard Anderson, 
charged with rape. 
January 31—Arkansas—Will Warren, accused of chasing white boys. 
February 10—Georgia—James King , 
charged with murder. 
February 12—Georgia-Marvin Harris, 
charged with murder. 
February 25—Georgia—Jesse McCorkle, 
charged with attempted rape. 
March 4—North Carolina—David Evans 
shot to death for murder. 
March 6—Tennessee—Will Whitley, murder. 
March 20—Iowa—James Jones, "attempting to attack a white girl. " 
March 31—Mississippi—Jeff Brown. He 
was running to catch a train and accidentally brushed against a white girl. 
Apri l 3—Oklahoma—Oscar Martin, attacking a white girl. 
Apri l 5—North Carolina—Joseph Black; 
his son was accused of attacking a white 
girl. 
Apri l 5—Missouri—Lafayette Chandler, 
shot and burned for murder. 
Apri l 10—Texas—Private John Wade, 
shot by state Ranger 
Apri l 10—Oklahoma—Carl Dudley, shot 
to death for wounding a policeman. 
Apri l 16—Florida—John Dykes (white), 
charged with murder. 
May 5—Texas—Tom Dickson accused of 
attacking a white girl. 
May 15—Texas -— Jesse Washington, 
burned by mob, accused of rape and murder. 
May 20—Texas—Geronimo Lerma (Mexican) suspected of cutting a white woman 
with knife. 
May 27—Arkansas—Felix Gilmore, accused of attempting to attack a white girl. 
August 9—Arkansas—Unidentified Negro, attacking a white girl. 
August 19—Florida—Josh Baskin, 
August 19—Florida—James Dennis, 
August 19—Florida—Bert Dennis, 
August 19—Florida—Mary Dennis, 
August 19—Florida—Stella Long. 
Alleged complicity in the escape of a 
criminal. 
August 19—Texas—Ed Lang, attempted 
assault. 
August 19—Georgia—Lewis, for entering a house, is supposed to have been 
lynched. 
August 26—Louisiana—Jesse Hanmet, 
attempted assault. 
September 8—Tacoma, Washington—T. 
N . Bethel, killed by strikers for being a 
"scab." 
September 9—Georgia—Unknown Negro 
supposed to have been killed for murder of 
Crawford, a farmer. 
September 9—Louisiana Israel, shot 
for wounding a foreman. 
September 20—Georgia—Henry White, alleged attack on a white girl. 
September 21—Georgia—Pete Hudson, 
shot for murder. 
September 21—Kansas—Bert Dudley 
(white), murder. 
September 23—Tennessee—Two Negroes, 
shot for murder. 
September 27—Georgia—Moxie Shuler for "attemp196 THE CRISIS 
September 29—Oklahoma—John Foreman, murder. 
September 29—Oklahoma—F. Powell, 
murder. 
October 4—Georgia—Mary Conley; her 
son killed his employer. 
October 6—Texas—Will Spencer, wounding a policeman. 
October 7—Georgia—Charles Smith, 
shooting a sheriff. 
October 10—Arkansas—Frank Dodd, for 
"annoying a white woman." 
October 16—Kentucky—Brack Kinley, 
hanged and burned for assaulting a white 
woman. 
October 16—Kentucky—Luther Durett, 
hanged and burned for saying he "intended 
to get some white man." 
October 21—South Carolina—Anthony 
Crawford, for striking a white man. 
October ..—Mississippi—Allen Nance, 
for firing at automobile party. 
November 5—Texas—Joe Johnson, accused of murder. 
November 16—Louisiana—James Grant, 
alleged murder. 
November 29—Texas—Buck Thomas, alleged assault. 
By States. 
Georgia 15 Mississippi 2 
Texas 9 South Carolina.. 2 
Florida 7 Kentucky 2 
Arkansas 4 Alabama 1 
Oklahoma 4 Iowa 1 
Louisiana 3 Missouri 1 
Tennessee 3 Kansas 1 
North Carolina.. 3 Washington .. . 1 
By Race. 
Negro 55 White 3 
Mexican 1 
Male 
By Sex. 
56 Female 3 
By Alleged Crimes. 
Murder 23—(3 whites) 
Attacking and attempting to attack white 
females 10 
Alleged complicity in the escape of a 
criminal 5 
Assault and attempted assault 4 
Wounding white men 4 
Rape and attempted rape 3 
Unknown 2 
Threat 1 
Entering a house 1 
Striking a white man 1 
Firin g at automobile party 1 
Accidentally brushing against a white 
woman ' 1 
Chasing white boys 1 
Wounding a white woman (Mexican) . . 1 
Burglary 1 
Method of Torture. 
Hanged 49 Shot 8 
Burned 1 Shot and burned. 1 
Number of Negroes Lynched. 
1885—1916. 
1885 78 1902 86 
1886 71 1903 86 
1887 80 1904 83 
1888 95 1905 61 
1889 95 1906 64 
1890 90 1907 60 
1891 121 1908 93 
1892 155 1909 73 
1893 154 1910 65 
1894 134 1911 63 
1895 112 1912 63 
1896 80. 1913 79 
1897 122 1914 69 
1898 102 1915 80 
1899 84 1916 55 
1900 107 
1901 107 Total 2,867 
SHERIF F GRIFFI N 
By FRANKLI N O. NICHOL S 
THE main street of the little southern 
town was alive with excited voices; 
yelling urchins hurled stones at terrorstricken Negroes who slunk away to hide 
in their shanties. Stern-visaged men gathered in groups, then silently left the town. 
Some led bloodhounds, others trailed long, 
black-barreled rifles. Al l hurried to the 
creek situated in the middle of the woods, a 
half-mile distant, where the little half-witted daughter of a "poor white" had been 
found—violated and strangled to death. 
Old Jaspard Allen, the town ragman, had 
made a short cut through the woods that 
morning and had suddenly come upon the 
little girl, stretched on her back, quite naked. 
her face nearly black, tongue protruding, 
eyes bloodshot, with the awful stare of death 
in them. 
Horrified he had rushed through the trees 
to Sheriff Griffin's house on the other side 
of the woods. 
Pale and nearly exhausted, rag-bag in 
hand, Jaspard found the sheriff standing on 
his porch smoking. 
He was a tall, raw-boned man; dark 
complexioned, strong as an ox and greatly 
respected in the district. Very nearly forty 
years old, and a widower, he lived alone, 
employing an old colored woman to do his 
housework. 
The sheriff asked: SHERIF F GRIFFI N 197 
"Well, old man, what's the matter now?" 
"M y God! Sheriff, I have found a little 
girl dead in the woods. It looks like rape." 
The sheriff stiffened up, all the color gone 
from his face. 
" A little girl, you say?" 
"Yes, sir, a little girl, stark naked, on her 
back—dead." 
The sheriff gave vent to an oath: 
"By God! I'll bet it's Sally Craddock's 
crazy girl. I saw her mother hunting for 
her last night. Where did you find her?" 
Jaspard pointed out the exact spot and 
offered to conduct him there. 
But the sheriff suddenly became brusque: 
"No, I don't need you; but go to the 
coroner's office and tell him to come out 
here immediately. He'll find me waiting." 
So Jaspard hurried to town, to the coroner's office. To everyone he met he described the crime. 
He ended: 
"Nothin' but a damn nigger would 
a'don' it." 
That night five hundred white men, women and children howled and danced like five 
hundred unloosed fiends as tongues of fire 
leaped and licked and devoured three 
screaming blacks. "Suspects" tracked to 
earth by bloodhounds. 
As the fire died out little barefooted 
children prodded the human ashes, then 
they fought like demons for pieces of the 
charred bodies. 
That same night Sheriff Griffin sat in a 
heap in his arm chair before a table. He 
was sobbing with his hands clasped over 
his forehead. 
He remained crying for a long time; then 
wiped his eyes, lit a lamp, with a red shade, 
and looked at the clock. It was nearly midnight. 
Suddenly he got up, went to a closet, took 
out a bottle of white liquor and placing 
the neck in his mouth, drank with a great 
gulpReplacing the bottle, he went back to 
his table and began to write. After finishing the letter, which he addressed to the 
governor, he placed a glass weight on top 
of it. 
He thought: 
"They'll find it in the morning after it 
is all over." 
Then he pulled out a drawer in the middle of the table, and taking from it a revolver, held it in his hand under the soft 
light of the lamp. The barrel of the firearm glittered and cast reflections which resembled sparks of fire. 
He stared at it for some time with an 
uneasy glance, then slipped it in his coat 
pocket, blew out the light and went over to 
an open window. He stood there gazing 
into the blackness of the night, toward the 
mass of woods, twenty yards distant, where 
the little girl had been found, and three 
human beings burnt alive. 
In a few moments he stepped over the 
sill of the window, which was built low to 
the ground, and entered the woods. He 
went direct to the spot on the bank of the 
creek, the scene of the crimes. And he 
silently paced up and down over the soft 
moss with one hand in his pocket tightly 
grasping his revolver. 
Soon it began to rain, gradually increasing to a steady downpour. It drenched the 
sheriff to the skin; but he did not stop his 
steady pacing, the place holding him as one 
fascinated. He could not leave those 
charred tree-stumps, the gruesome reminders of the day's tragedies. Sometimes, 
when a gust of wind swept over the tree 
tops, the rain grew heavier and the almost imperceptible mutter, the ceaseless 
whisper, gentle and sad, of the rainfall, 
seemed like a low wail of the tall trees 
mourning and weeping, perhaps over the 
souls of those murdered at their feet—the 
little "poor white" and the three Negroes. 
He shuddered as a flock of crows suddenly arose and rushed through the woods 
uttering horrible and terrifying shrieks. 
"Good God!" he exclaimed, "how human 
they sound—how much like hers." 
Gradually a calm came over him, as one 
feels when resigned to a terrible fate. He 
went over to one of the blackened tree 
stumps, and, sitting down, drew out his 
revolver. He tried to look at the end of 
the barrel, at that little black hole that 
spits out death. He thought of the surprise 
of the townspeople—wondered what they 
would think of their respected sheriff when 
his body was found and everything was 
known. 
In a few moments he heard the town 
clock mournfully toll two and he suddenly 19 8 TH E 
arose, as if surprised, then opened his 
mouth with a frightful grimace, stuck the 
barrel of the revolver into it and pulled the 
trigger. Slowly he sunk to the ground, 
without a groan, where he had brutally violated the little girl, Colene Craddock, and 
afterwards strangled her to death, in a 
mad frenzy of fear, when she continued her 
horrified screams. 
Old Jaspard found the body of Sheriff 
Griffin the next morning when, through 
morbid curiosity, he stopped at the creek 
on his way to town. 
Two days later they buried the sheriff 
in the graveyard in back of the country 
church. The little "poor white" was interred 
in potter's field. 
CRISIS 
And soon no one in the district spoke 
of the tragedies except the old Negresses, 
bent with age, who hobbled to the charred 
tree stumps to which their sons had been 
lashed and burnt up. Each evening at sunset they made their sorrowful journey and 
knelt in silent prayer while great tears 
trickled down their wrinkled old faces. 
Soon they stopped, one after the other, 
for the ravenous mob had destroyed their 
only support. 
When the coroner read Sheriff Griffin's 
confession, addressed to the governor, he 
destroyed it—tore it into small pieces and 
threw them into the fire. 
He muttered: 
"He was too damn good a man to leave 
this sort of a reputation." 
The Outer Pocket 
The Negro vote has been thrown away on 
the Republican Party ever since Lincoln was 
taken out of office. I consider Grover Cleveland's administration did more justice to the 
Negro than any President's since then. 
Could not the Socialist Party put a plank 
against lynching and do justice to the Negro 
in their Platform, thereby securing the entire Negro vote and also the votes of many 
white brothers like myself? The Negro 
voters have an immense power and if it was 
rightly used they would compel the Government of the United States to protect their 
men, women and children against the possibility of lynching and other outrages. The 
greatest blot on this Government has been 
the injustice done to the Negro race. The 
candidates, both Republican and Democratic, 
promise everything before election and do 
nothing for the race afterwards. 
Speaking of the Socialists, you say the 
vote for that party " is at least temporarily 
thrown away." Has not the Negro vote 
been thrown away for the last 40 years? 
There has to be a commencement to a 
would-be successful party. It certainly 
would be a great improvement for the colored voter to follow the suggestion of Miss 
Inez Milholland. 
I have great expectation of the good that 
will be done by the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. 
GFORG E C. BARTLETT 
Tolland. Conn 
The present arrangement of the pages I 
consider the better. In the old way, the 
prejudiced white man casually looking over 
the magazine, came at once upon a list of 
the wrongs of the Negro race which was 
something his intolerant mind did not care 
to have brought to its notice. 
In this way, his attention is arrested by 
forceful writing, which whets his curiosity 
if nothing else, and he peruses the pages "to 
see what these fellows do talk about anyway"—and sometimes he develops a real 
interest. " A Fragment," in the September 
number, ought to arouse the interest of anyone whose heart is not ossified or whose 
mental liver is not "hob-nailed." 
Some day, some member of your race will 
write one of "the great American plays" for 
which they are clamoring and will have the 
business acumen to get it before the public 
sub rosa under his white manager's or secretary's manipulation. When successfully 
launched, he can emerge; they cannot, in 
sheer self-pride, refuse to accord him openly the praise and hand of fellowship which 
they have bestowed unknowingly. After 
that, it will be easy for the rest who follow. 
More through the Arts I think, than in any 
other way will the chasm be bridged. 
(MRS . ) EVELY N REYNOLDS-JONE S 
Santa Cruz, Cal. 
I am taking the opportunity to write to 
point out to you the necessity of making 
the N. A. A. C. P. decidedly universal TH E OUTER POCKET 199 
affair. Had it not been for a fellow passenger—an American traveling from Li ­
beria to America via England—I would 
not have known such a paper existed. 
J . A . VANDERPUYE . 
Edinburgh, Scotland. 
We are up against it here and trying the 
courts to see if we have any school rights 
in our County, State or Nation. The City 
School Board of Checotah, Okla., hired 
me last summer, or last spring, for this year 
promising me nine months' work as Principal of the City School for Colored Youth. 
Now we are informed that we are only to 
get three months and the whites are getting nine just the same. Call the race's 
attention to these things for we are in the 
fight. We have our white friends, but can 
these be friends? 
J. L. UMSTEAD . 
Checotah, Okla. 
I am enclosing photo of my home. No 
one of common sense would want to live in 
this section; but one of the troubles is that 
many of these people have struggled and 
worked for years and acquired splendid 
homes and property; they can't find a buyer 
and are tied here; they can't just give it to 
these people. 
We have our cash money tied up in real 
estate and I have tried hard to find a reasonable buyer. Many are like me—they 
wish with all their heart to leave here; but 
it requires a great deal to go where I wish 
to go. Sometimes I feel quite hopeless, still 
no matter the sacrifices I shall not always 
live here. . 
Edenton, N . C. 
I like your paper very much, Mr. Editor, 
because you make it my paper as well. You 
try to present to a very biased world my 
longings, my desires, my hopes and ambitions—likewise those of every other Negro. 
Don't become discouraged by adverse criticism (I know that you won't) ; just keep 
on printing the truth about me and the 
other fellow. Perhaps my blessings may 
alleviate some of his curses. Anyway, by 
following the course you have adopted you 
can't go wrong. 
JOH N H . OWENS . 
Chicago, Ill. 
Being a reader of your magazine for almost two years I have not had anything to 
say, although at times I have wanted to 
personally object to a good many things. I 
could not fully decide it would be the proper 
thing. Now that the one man has gone 
from our race, in the person of Dr. Washington, and as one who tries to agree with 
any one who is for the upbuilding of our 
race I thought I would try and say a few 
words; even now I may be wrong. If so 
you can use your own decision about publishing this and whatever way you decide 
I will not think any the less of TH E CRISIS 
magazine, for I do enjoy reading every page 
of it. 
Now as I was born in the South and lived 
in the extreme South, the same as Mr. 
Washington, I can fully side with his way 
of managing and doing things, and I have 
also come in contact with some hard propositions; some I could not digest and in doing 
so I can also understand the method of TH E 
CRISIS in doing things and in that is the 
reason I was so long coming to my conclusion. I have also seen the play the "Birth 
of a Nation" and my idea is that it shows 
more plainly the low side of the whites as 
well as the colored, and it was in a day when 
the Negro had not had time to develop his 
mind and the Negro of today should be a 
more cool-headed example of the advantages 
and opportunities of this enlightened time 
instead of encouraging the same way of 
bonding together to fight and kill. To my 
mind a more sane way would be better. Just 
here is where I must and we all as a people should give Mr. Washington credit for 
working on the Q. T. with the white people 
to get the money and at the same time train 
hundreds and thousands of Negroes to prepare themselves for the position of social 
equality; and when the time was at hand to 
come up independent and demand our rights 
he would have a nation of well-trained and 
educated Negroes to help and back him in 
his undertakings; for out of ten million 
Negroes only one-third are capable of understanding a good and sane problem, which is 
not his fault, but the white people's. But 
what we want is to get prepared for this 
thing that we are fighting for and when it 
comes we will be ready to stand up and hold 
our own, and the Negro has enough to fight 
the white man's political world. 
(MISS ) R . DEVOE . 
Trenton, N . J. 200 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Three Reasons Why You 
Should Insure in 
Standard Life 
THIRD, BECAUSE OF 
INVESTMENTDurin g the year of 1915 over One Hundre d Billion Dollars were loaned to the people of 
the United States by the life insurance companies of this country. Legal reserve companies 
are compelled to invest their reserve in real estate and bonds. If you want to know how 
much of the above mentioned amount was loaned to colored people by the life insurance companies of this country, try and see how much you can borrow from them on your own real 
estate. Naturally STANDAR D LIF E will invest its reserve in real estate owned by colored 
people. As the company increases its insurance, in force, and as its reserve increases, one can 
easily see what the growth of this company means to the economic future of the Race. Durin g 
N
the past twelve months we have loaned over Fift y Thousand Dollar s to our people, which has 
resulted in saving to the Race property of at least twice this value and in several cases many 
» times more. 
Think over these arguments and if they appeal to you see one of our agents or write 
to us for additional information. \ 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
Standard Life 
Insurance 
Company 
FIRST, BECAUSE OF 
PROTECTION 
Th e prime reason for the existence of a life insurance company is protection. STANDAR D 
LIF E can give you this because it is the only Ol d Line , Legal Reserve life insurance company 
in the world owned, operated and controlled by Negroes. Its policyholders are protected by a 
deposit of $100,000.00 with the State Treasure r of Georgia. The y are protected by the very 
nature of the company in that it is a legal reserve company—the setting aside of a large, 
definite portion of each premium paid as a legal reserve is required of all companies of this 
type. The y are protected by the fact that all officers are bonded by the Nationa l Surety Company of New York . An d lastly, the men behind the company as officers, directors, agents and 
employees are of the finest and ablest type in the Race. 
SECOND, BECAUSE O F 
EMPLOYMENT -
A t the present time STANDAR D LIF E is giving lucrative employment to over two hundred 
of our people. It is opening up wonderful new fields of employment to our young men and 
women. Some one has said that "the greatest problem of the educated Negro is to know what 
to do with his education after he has gotten it." Teaching and preaching are noble and necessary professions but all of us cannot teach and preach. STANDAR D LIF E gives entrance to 
the field of business to the young Negro who has the brains but not the capital, or who has both 
but little outlet for either. Some day you or your son or your daughter may want a dignified, 
well-paying position. A t its present rate of growth, it is only a matter of time before STANDAR D 
LIF E will have its five and ten thousand employees. 
Please . 
send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount $. 
Sex 
Age 
Weight . . . 
Height . . . 
Occupation 
Name 
Address 
(C. Feb., 1917) 
Standard Life Insurance Company 
Home Office, 200 Auburn Avenue 
Atlanta, Georgia 
CAPITAL $125,000.00 
Agencies in Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, 
Arkansas, Missouri, Texas, Mississippi and the District of Columbia, 
Nearly Three Million of Insurance in Force 
"We can write you and protect you in any 
part of the world in amounts from $250.00 
to $6,000.00. 
Hema n E . Perry , President 
Harr y H . Pace, Secretary-Treasurer TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 201 
the Authorized 
Biography of 
BOOKER T 
WASHINGTON 
Builder of a Civilization 
B y EMMET T J . SCOT T 
for 18 Years Secretary to Booker T. Washington 
and LYMA N BEECHE R STOW E 
Preface by Theodore Roosevelt 
The dramatic accurate story of one who rose from 
slave boy to be the recognized leader of his race and 
to take his place for all time among America's great 
men. 
A trenchant and graphic picture of the man himself 
as known by those nearest him ; of his contributions 
to education, his position on the rights of the Negro 
and race prejudice, etc. 
The serious matter is relieved by many of the inimitable stories for which Washington was noted. 
This book furnishes a sequel to "U p from Slavery. 
Illustrated, Net $2.00 
For sale at all book stores and at 
THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., New York 
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & CO. 
Garden City N . Y. 
1 OO O
 GIV E BOOK S
 1000 
••" W V ON E THOUSAN D DOLLAR S SAVE D V W 
SPECIAL BOOK BAB GAINS 
Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence. .$1.50 postpaid Race Relationship in the South, set, 
Life and Times of Frederick Doug- 7 vols $5.00 postpaid 
lass 2,50 N. B. Catalogue of new rare books, 
The Black Phalanx 3.00 pertaining to the colored race. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANG E :: 135 West 135th Street. New York City 
EXCELLEN T OPPORTUNIT Y FO R YOUN G ME N AN D WOME N 
SCHOO L OF MECHANICA L DENTISTR Y 
A. O. BRANSON 8c CO. 82 WEST 135TH ST. NEW YORK CITY 
Mention TH E CRISIS 202 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D., author of "Th e Unite d States," in ten volumes; 
formerly lecturer in Johns Hopkin s University and in the Universit y of Chicago'; 
formerly Superintendent of Publi c Schools in the District of Columbia : "The 
Neale Publishing Company today represents high-water mark in Americ a for its 
historical works. Upo n its list are to be found the best books upon each and every 
side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety as to lend lustre to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor." 
Mention TF B Cmsis 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEM S 
Ne w catalogue on request. Fo r twenty years the Neale publications have been 
famous throughout the civilized world . Amon g them are books of history, biography, reminiscence, science, essays, politics, travel, fiction, poetry, religion, 
juvenile' and pure literature. T o this great library of literature important works 
frequently are being added. Ou r new catalogue wil l be sent postpaid on request. 
The Facta of Reconstruction. By J OH N R, L YNCH . 
Fourth Thousand. In his "Autobiography of Seventy years," the late Senator George F. Hoar of 
Massachusetts says: "Perhaps, on the whole, the ablest 
of the colored men who served with me in Congress 
was John R. Lynch of Mississippi." Lynch was made 
temporary chairman of the Republican National Convention of 1884, and presided over that convention 
during the whole of the first day and a part of the 
second. He was nominated as temporary chairman 
by Henry Cabot Lodge, and his nomination was seconded by Theodore Roosevelt and George William 
Curtis. After his term in Congress, Lynch served as 
Fourth Auditor of the Treasury. In this his first 
book, written with extraordinary force and with unusual clarity, he boldly justifies Reconstruction. $1.65 
by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
Boston Globe: "An interesting contribution to the 
history of American politics." 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church. By J OH N H . REED, D.D. , K.C. With an 
introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D., LL.D . 
$1.60 by mail. 
Christian Recorder, Philadelphia: "The author is 
an American Negro who has spent eight years in 
Liberia under the missionary society of the M. E. 
Church. The book comes in at this time with more 
than ordinary interest, for during this year most of 
the lay colleges and conferences of the M. E. Church 
will discuss the subject of racial adjustment, especially that relating to Bishops for races and languages. 
The book is filled with splendid idealism, and presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromises for the present exigencies may not be heeded." 
My Ogowe. By ROBERT Hamill NASSAU, M.D., 
S.T.D. For forty-five years a resident of Africa, 
pioneer and explorer, Dr. Nassau has contributed 
largely to both science and literature. While in 
Africa he sent large ethnological collections to the 
University of Pennsylvania and to Princeton, and 
was the first to send a carcass of a gorilla to the 
United States, and he supplied the "only perfect gorilla brains to be examined by anatomists up to 1891. 
He is a member of various scientific' bodies, including the Archeolagical Society of the University of 
Pennsylvania, the National Geographical Society, the 
Pennsylvania Society of Scientific Research. Among 
his published* works are "Crowned in Palmland," 
"Mawedo," "Fetishism in West Africa," "The Path 
Order through 
TH E NEALE PUBLISHING CO. , 
440 Fourth Avenue 
New York City or TH E CRISIS, 
70 Fifth AVENUE 
New York City 
She Trod," "Where Animals Talk," "In an Elephant 
Corral, and Other Tales of West African Experiences," and "My Ogowe." One of his more important works is the translation of the Bible into the 
Benga language of West Equatorial Africa. But by 
far his greatest achievement in literature, and the 
culmination of his varied literary activities, is this 
volume, "My Ogowe," which the publishers hold to 
be the most important work of the sort yet published. 
It comprises more than 700 page 9 of text and 50 fullpage illustrations. Large octavo. $3.25 by mail. 
The Black Man's Burden. By WILLIA M H . HOLTZCLAW, Principal of the Utica Normal and Industrial 
Institute for the Training of Colored Young Men and 
Young Women, Utica, Miss. With an introduction 
by Booker T. Washington. Illustrated. Third Thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle: "In both subject and literary treatment Mr. Holtzclaw's book is a 
monument to his race." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study in Negro achievement and should be an inspiration to the young men and the young women of 
that race." 
Boston Herald: "The book will stir the sympathetic emotions of its readers as his story stirred 
Bostonians when be told it here several years ago. 
The story of this devoted young man is of intense 
interest, not only as an account of gTea t accomplishment despite apparently overwhelming obstacles and 
repeated discouragements, but as giving a close view 
of the character of the colored people of the far 
South, their shortcomings, their inherent virtues, and 
their ambitions." 
Troy Record: "Mr . Holtzclaw is one of those 
splendid Negro leaders upon whom the hope of his 
race depends." 
Redder Blood. By WILLIA M M. A SHBY . The Negro 
in Americ a has produced but little imaginative work 
other than poetry. He ha 9 told his story by other 
mediums, which seemed to him, perhaps, better than 
fiction. Whethe r right or wrong in this view, undoubtedly the time is now ripe for Negro prose fiction, by Negroes, to be written in the English language, and not the jargon known as Negro dialect. 
Mr . Ashby, a Yale man, is a Negro, and "Redder 
Blood" is a novel of his race, and of the present 
time. Moreover , it is a story told for the sake of 
the story, and is not a treatise under disguise. The 
novel is one of great merit, as a novel, and there 
are situations in it that reach the acme of legitimate 
dramatic intensity. $1.00 by mail. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEM S 
A prominent southern white educator in a letter to the publishers says: "'Your 
policy of absolute fairness wit h regard to the Negro question, along with your sympathy for the South, make me wish to co-operate with you as far as possible." Says 
a prominent western colored educator to the publishers: " I am deeply impressed 
with the justice of your house. I see often, and he never tires of speaking of 
your great work in behalf of the Negro in literature." 
Gen. Randolph K . Evans, U . S. A.', Commanding the Department of the East, with 
headquarters at Governor's Island: " I appreciate the value of your work for 
American literature in general, and especially what you have done as a military 
missionary in publishing books, which many other publishers would have rejected, 
wit h a view to increasing military comprehension among our people,—an important 
part of governmental knowledge in regard to which a great majority of our people 
sit in outer darkness and blissful ignorance " 
Order through 
TH E NEALE PUBLISHING CO. , 
440 Fourth Ave... 
New York City or TH E CRISIS, 
Mention the Crisis 
Negro Culture in Weit Africa. By George W. 
ELLIS , K.C. , F.R.G.S.; recently, and for eight years, 
Secretary of the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of 
West Africa," "Islam As a Factor in West African 
Culture," "Dynamic Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 
by mail. 
Pittsburgh Sun: "In this thorough study of Negro 
social conditions in Africa lies a revelation for those 
to whom the African Negro has meant only the savage. Here is revealed a social system, a religious 
tradition, a craftsmanship, and, most astonishing of 
all, a written language other than primitive. Especially interesting are the maxims and the fables 
translated from the Vai tongue, with their picturesque 
simplicity and ingenious wisdom." 
70 Fifth Avenue 
New York City 
Boston Transcript: "In this study Mr. Ellis has 
given us an excellent and valuable contribution to 
the history of the Negro race." 
DR . ROBERT E. PAR K in the Chicago Tribune: "In 
an introduction which he has written to Mr. Ellis's 
volume, Prof. Starr, who is an authority on West 
Africa, describes the Vai as 'a vigorous, energetic, 
enterprising* people, and he adds that 'no people of 
the west coast of Africa can better be taken as 
typical and showing what the African can do, either 
when left to himself, or affected by outside influences.' This defines the peculiar interest of this 
volume. It tells us what a minute and isolated Negro people have done with the slight cultural resources that were at their command." 
The Negro Races: Vol. II. East and South 
Africans, with a Full Account of the Slave 
Trade. By JEROM E DOWD . This is the second volume of Professor Dowd's series entitled "The Negro 
Races," and is devoted to the Negroes of both East 
an 1 South Africa, with a full account of the slave 
trade. The first volume of the series, "West 
Africans," was published several years ago. The 
third volume, "The Negroes of America," is now in 
the course of preparation. Professor Dowd, who is 
at the head of the Department of Sociology and 
Economics, University of Oklahoma, perhaps is the 
highest authority on the aspects of the Negro races 
of which he writes. Of the first volume Professor 
W. I. Thomas, of the University of Chicago, said: 
"I am greatly pleased with it. I think you have gone 
at the matter in an admirable fashion." Said Professor T. F. Jameson, Director, Carnegie Institute: 
"I can see especially the need of such systematic accounts of the sociology of the African." Professor 
Paul S. Reinsch, of the University of Wisconsin, 
wrote: "I have read it with great interest." The 
price of each volume of the series is $2.50 ; bv mail. 
$2.65 . 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By KELL Y MILLEB , Dean of the College of 
Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, 
Howard University. Third edition. $2.1 5 by mail. 
Dallas Mews: "The author is a cultured map, a 
forceful and most pleasing writer, interesting from 
the first sentence of the first chapter to the close of 
the book." 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable. 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness and 
skill." 
Independent: "There is no book which more fully 
and correctly represents the wishes and demands for 
equal recognition in civil and political rights than this 
volume," 
Out of the House of Bondage. By KELL Y MILLER , 
Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Howard 
University. $1.6 5 by mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. He neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogues." 
Detroit Times: "Kelly Miller has the soul of an 
artist and an idealist. We cannot but be carried 
away with a splendid fervor for our Negro brother 
after reading Prof. Miller's book. It is as big as all 
outdoors and aims at a readjustment on the highest 
principles." 
New Orleans Times Picayune: "Those who are interested in the study of the Negro cannot ignore this 
volume. With many of its conclusions we can by 
no means agree, but it points in favor of a revised 
judgment on certain questions connected with the 
position or achievements of his race." 
Race Orthodoxy in the South. By THOMA S PEARC E 
BAILEY . For many years Professor Bailey has studied 
southern social problems, particularly with respect to 
the relations of the Caucasian and the Negro races. 
He has held professorships in the University of California, the University of Chicago, and the University 
of Mississippi, and he now holds a professorship in 
the University of the South. Although a southerner, 
now engaged in educational work in the South, he has 
lived ten years in the North, and he has studied the 
Negro and his problems of every section of the 
United States. $2.1 5 by mail. 204 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY it ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N . Y. 
BLAC K FOL K IN AR T 
By FREEMAN H. M. MURRAY 
The first book of the series, bearing the title 
EMANCIPATION AND THE FREED IN 
AMERICAN SCULPTURE 
will be ready about January 25, 1917. Introduction by Prof. John W. Cromwell, author 
of "The Negro in American History." Over 
300 pages. 48 full-page half-tone plates, made 
for this work; no portraits of persons—all 
are pictures of works of sculpture. $1.75 per 
copy; postage, 10 cents extra. Descriptive 
circular on request. 
Address the author at— 
1733 Seventh Street. N. W.( 
Washington, D. C. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties^ handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
The Truth about the Bible—introductory price $2.00 
Why Jesus was a Man and not a Women-$1.50 
Sexology of the Bible—$1.25 
The Duality of the Bible—$1.50 
"The sex Idea of these books make them the world's 
greatest books. " E . B . Ramsey, M . D . 
"Wil l empty our insane asylums, hospitals, and jails. " 
.T. H . Powell, M . D . 
"Th e world's most revolutionary books." 
W. A . Swarm, M . D . 
Yo u should read the sex Idea of these hooks. 
Address the Author 
SIDNE Y C. TAPP , Ph.B. , P. 0. Box 710, Kansas City. Mo. 
Th e Journa l of 
Negr o Histor y 
Publishe d Quarterl y 
100 Page s 
l Edited by CARTE R G . WOODSON 
THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY is 
the official organ of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $l.00 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to THE 
JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY and 
addressed to 
CARTER G. WOODSON 
1216 You St., N . W . Washington, D . C. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscript Criticized 
and Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
TH E GRAMMA R O F ENGLISH . 
On the Theory That This is the First. 
The most abused language on earth is the Eng ­
lish. It has been perverted i n spelling, so confounded i n grammar, that few even of college 
graduates know the correct form of words. Ye t 
English has a grammar easier than any other 
language. The fault is i n the books and the 
manner of teaching. This book is what the title 
indicates. 284 pages 75c. 
G. S. HUGHS 
915 E. 55th St. Chicago, Ill. 
A. Selected List of the Best Books on the Race Problem 
may be found on the back cover of this issue 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 205 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodg e Regali a for every 
Fraterna l Society. Gas h or Installment 
Plan . Cheapest Badge Hous e i n the Country. Catalogue for you r Society FREE -
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pre*, 
N. E. Cor. 8th &. Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
This Free 
Express 
and 
postage 
paid. 
We want YO U to eetone these auits 
absolutely FRE E so you can show 
it to your friends. No doubt about 
it, you will 
Be The Best Dressed 
Man In Your Town 
It will be a big advertisement 
for us. Just to prove the 
wonderful quality, style ^ 
and value of our tailoring, 
we make this astounding * 
offer- Never before have we bee: 
able to make such a wonderful 
offer; beat clothes — nobbiest 
fabrics—classiest styles—and 
lowest prices. 
$2500 A Year and 
TWO Suits tor Yourself Here is the greatest opportunity 
you ever heard of for you to mak 
a BIG SALARY , a lot of money o 
the side, while doing other work 
If yon would like to make S25O0 
a year and get YOUR OWN 
CLOTHES FREE , write for our aflT J 
wonderful offer—it's a dandy— ~ \ 
style book, confidential price list, and 64 
beautiful samples to choose from—FREE, 
Write 
NOW— 
LTODAY 
Ths Progrw Tailoring Co., Dept. 706, Chicago 
AGENTS $60 WEEKLY 
0 EobinsonIrb]dingBathTab . Bigeeller. Costa 
little , n o plumbing , littl e water. Weigh t 
BOIIH50II CABINET MFfi. CO 42-SJi Factories flldo.. Toledo. Obio 
CLOTH FREE SAMPLES 
Big selection of cloth samples— 
Guaranteed all-wool Sergea.new fancy^J/ * 
Worsteds, stylish Cassimeres, all latest ^*a% 
shades and patterns — everything good 
dressers wea r — Free. Posta l wil l bring it. 
Wo make Uno clothes tor man to 
individua l measure, absolutely guaranteed 
to fit and please at prices that wil l astonish 
you. Don' t buy suit or overcoat anywher e 
at any price—until you have sot our selection of 
cloth samples, faahfon models, tape line, everything; Fr«». Stop paying- high prices for clothes. 
Write oulek for our imaiine suit offer. 
THE CAPITOL TAILORS.Pcpt. 121. Chieaoo.lll. 
THIS 
SUIT FRE E 
To Introduce Our Nobby 
Clothes in Your Town 
It's the ver y finest suit 
you ever saw. $50 couldn't 
buy a better one, but yoo 
can get it free, It'e made 
to your measure from the 
most beautiful cloth. Don't 
fai l to get one of these 
auits. Yo u can earn it while 
you wear i t and make 
$50 a Week 
b y takin g orders. Drop 
us a postal for latest sample outfit, select the style 
you want and the cloth. 
Le t us prove our amazing 
offer. We send everything 
free the same day your ren, jest 13 received. Address 
Paragon Tailoring Co . Dep i 251 Chicar o 
WANTED 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
P
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS. BUNIONS. INGROWN NAILS, and AL L
 1 
other AILMENTS of the FEET . 
Eiamlna tion and AdTice Free. 
DR . WILLIA M J . CARTE R 
CHIROPODIS T 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 West 136th St., New York city. 
Comfort Moor Closet 
Odorless, Sanitary , Germ-proof . Ca n be 
place d anywher e i n home . A guarante e o f 
healthy , sanitar y conditions. 
ABOLISH OUTDOOR CLOSET 
Hav e cit y conveniences. Germ-lif e kille d instantl y by 
chemicals. Emptie d onc e a month . Need s n o othe r 
attention. Board s of Healt h endorse . Writ e for literature . 
Agents wanted— exclusive territory 
1662 Factories Bids. COMFOR T TOLEDO. OHIO CHEMICAL CLOSET CO 
LADIES WANTE D T O TAK E TH E QUINO COURSE In Scalp Treatment. No 
money required. Just a 
little time. Be our agent. Sell our goods and make money. Quino Hair Grower, 50c, Temple Oil, 
75c. Try a box. Write QUINO, 636 Fogg Street, NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Mention TH E GAISI S 206 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
8en d postal today fo r foi l Informatio n ho w to get you r new 
suit , mad e t o measure , witbon t a 
penny's coat. $30 to $J0woul d no t 
bu y a bette r one . Simpl y wea r ft, 1 
tel l you r friends wher e yon go t it -
tak e their orders—and mak e 
$10 to $15 a Day 
i n your F par e time . It Is dead 
easy—yo u never sa w a nobbier 
Eui t o r amoreEt u iimne r pattern , 
vutinver y lateetstyle . Yourchoic o 
o f 60 fabric s and3 2 styles. Dro p aa 
6 posta l car d forbeav y patter n book . 
Inside informatio n about styles, eel frneasuriwr blanks, etc . DON' T WAIT . W e prenav TVliver y Char . 
Sea. Mal l Posta l NOW1 
American Woolen Mills Co. 
Pe^t. 2S1 Chicago 
Mrs . Minni e C . Warwic k 
NOVELTY SHOP 
Novelties, Dry Goods, Gents' Furnishings, Small 
Wares, Toilet Articles. Lingerie of all kinds in stock 
and made to order. Wedding outfits at reasonable 
rates. Agency for Mme. C. J. Walker's preparations. 
178 Northampton St., Boston, Mass. 
The SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M introducing 
LYDA' S HAI R BEAUTIF1E R 
Ouoranleed to Grow Hair In SIX TREATMENTS 
or Money Refunded. Price 30 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted . Syste m Taugh t b y Mal l or at College . 
Mrs . E . Slaughte r Gambl e 
^OOl LAVVTON AVENU E ST. LOUIS. MO . 
H ESPECIAL OFFER 
A year's subscription to TH E CRISIS 
will be given to anyone sending in at one 
time five new paid-up yearly subscriptions 
to TH E CRISIS. The offer holds good 
until midnight of March 31, 1917. 
95 
PANTS ' 
MadetdVburi 
Otdec 
Cnoria l Offe r
 t 0
 Prove our nnequalspeciai uner ity. TheBe flne j?anta 
for Dress or Business, choice of many handsome styles, guaranteed for 18 months solid 
wea r and satisfaction or MONE Y BACK , 
absolute $5.00 value—while they last, one 
pair to a customer, Express Prepaid fo r only $i.9S. 
NO EXTR A CHARGE S 
N o charge for Bit? Extreme Pe g Tops, o r 
Cuff-Bottoms, nothing extr a for fancy Belt 
Loops or Pocket Flaps.no charge for Open 
WeltSeam a or Lartre Sizea—all novelty feature s 
FREE—n o extr a charge s o f any kind . 
Cash Profits £j?°o'or»ffi«.,,,SS 
neighbors. Youn e Nat . Spriecrs ma.le J139.00 
i n 30 daya . Writ e lo r Fro o »ftmplen today . 
CHICAGO TAILORS' ASSOCIATION 
Peat, 212. 5180a. Franklin strait, ChloBga. 
Money ! 
Telephone 5277 Mormngsiae 
DR..GERTRUD E E. CURTI S 
SURGEON DENTIST 
133 W. 135th Street New York City 
Tehees : {^V^ — ~ 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St, Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Te l SCTTort Hill" Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY ANP COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORHEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARR Y M . COOPE R 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write jor Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY FOR A DENTIST 
desiring to locate in Philadelphia, Pa. For 
particulars address Frank Dawson, 1020 Chestnut Street. 
55 Valuable 
Illusions 
Formulas, Tricks, 
nd Household hints. 
in our interesting magazine for 
two issues. SENT COMPLET E FOR 10c 
CRAWFORD'S SPECIALTY HOUSE 
127 West 134th St.. 
NEW YORK CITY 
Dept. C 
AGENT S WANTED ! 
For our new book, Progress and Achievements of the Colored People. Showing the 
wonderful doings and new opportunities of 
our race, low price, many pictures, lightning 
seller, $10.00 per day. Ask for terms. Write 
quick. AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 
7th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS A Ne w Boo k b y Dr . D u Boi s 
THE NEGRO 
B y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silve r Fleece, " "Select Bibliograph y of 
the Negr o American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. H e is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa , America , and wherever 
else it has appeared. T o look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkabl e 
series of low-priced new books wit h whic h everybody should become acquainted. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENR Y HOL T & COMPANY , 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A . L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTE R 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per • 
volume. Each complete and sold separately 60c. net 
Postage extra 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 60 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOM E SELECTE D EARLIE R VOLUMES : 
EVOLUTIO N By J . A . Thomson LATIN AMERIC A By W. R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIAN LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROM E By W. Warde Fowler GERMAN Y OF TODA Y 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AN D HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
Th e CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue, New Yor k 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS The CRISIS Book mart 
Yo u can orde r throug h the CRISI S an y boo k printe d at 
the regular publisher's price . 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
n Selected list of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIV E LIF E I N SOUT H AFRICA . (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.5 0 
HAZEL . (Mar y White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous). 1.20 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Anios Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford).. . 1.00 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
MASTERPIECE S OF NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyma n Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 