THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Vol. 5, No. 1 NOVEMBER , 1912 Whole No. 25 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for Negro 
Youth which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Army 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y 
NORMA L 
COMMERCIA L 
CLASSICA L 
SCIENTIFI C 
TECHNICA L 
THEOLOGICA L 
MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Banking taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Ten 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term began September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM. A. JOINER, Superintendent, C. N f.\ 
Department 
Address all communications to 
BOX 36 WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga. 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, wit h manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1912. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy, wit h manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORGE RICE HOVEY , President 
Fis k Universit y 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
The largest colored college in the South. 
A new department of sociology and social 
service. A notable equipment in land 
and buildings Endorsed by the General 
Education Board: For information address 
GEORGE A. GATES , President TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
, PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPLE. A T 26 VESEY STREET, NE W YOR K CITY 
Edited by W. E . BURGHARD T Du BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard, 
W. S. Braithwaite, M. W. Ovington, Charles Edward Russell and others. 
Contents for November, 1912 
ARTICLES 
PAGE 
TH E PROGRESSIV E PART Y AN D TH E NEGRO . By Jane Addams... . 30 
TH E COLORE D MAGAZIN E I N AMERIC A 33 
TH E RELIGIO N O F SLAVERY . By Charles Edward Stowe 36 
SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . By Alfred Noyes (Reprinted) 40 
HISTORI C DAY S I N NOVEMBER . By L . M . Hershaw 26 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 15 
OPINIO N 18 
EDITORIA L 27 
WHA T T O READ . By Jessie Fauset 38 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 39 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTRA . 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. If the blank is BLU E your subscription expires NEX T month. If the 
blank is YELLO W your subscription expires THI S month. If the blank is RE D your subscription 
has already expired and no further copies of the magazine will be sent until you renew. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Avery College Training Schools 
NORT H SIDE, PITTSBURGH , PA . 
A superior training school for young colored women, thoroughly instructing 
its students as a means of self-support in dressmaking, cutting and drafting, domestic 
science, music, nurse training, millinery, and an intermediate Englis h course. This 
institution is under the influence of no religious denomination, is the oldest endowed 
chartered Negr o institution in America . Th e accommodations in its dormitory, 
which is in charge of a competent matron, are excelled by no colored institution 
in this country. 
Th e hospital department offers the same course as the large hospitals of the 
State of Pennsylvania, fully equipped with its' operating rooms, diet kitchen and 
ambulance service. Th e course requires three years' lectures on general nursing, 
anatomy, ethics, surgery, obstetrics, asepsis, antiseptics, gynecology, pediatrics, eye, 
nose, throat, materia medica, therapeutics and dietetics under a staff of white and 
colored physicians. Catalogues now ready. 
Address all communications to 
JOSEPH D. MAHONEY , Secretary 
Box 154 North Side, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Daytona Educational and Industrial 
School for Negro Girls 
DAYTONA , FLORID A 
It reaches, by reason of its location, a large 
territory of Negro children deprived of educational privileges. 
Its comfortable home life and Christian influences insure a certain individual attention 
and superior training impossible in larger institutions of its kind. 
Mrs. Frances R. Keyser, formerly in charge 
of the White Rose Home for Working Girls, 
in New York City, has been elected Principal 
of the Academic Department. Write for catalog 
and detailed information. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUN E 
Founder and Principal 
Binghamton Normal, Industrial and 
Agricultural Institute 
BINGHAMTON , N. Y. 
Courses offered: Academic, Trades, Agriculture, Music and Band Instruction for 
boys. A course in Dining Room work 
and the Art of Serving is offered to men 
and women in addition to other studies. 
Arrangements can be made for anxious 
students to wor k out part expenses. 
Attached department for boys and girls 
between the ages of ten to fifteen years. 
Fo r terms and information address 
FRE D C. HAZEL , President 
(Graduate Hampton Institute) 
Campus and Farm contains 105 acres overlooking 
the Chenango and Susquehanna Rivers. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
Agricultura l an d 
Mechanica l College 
Open all the year round. For 
males only. Strong, practical and 
theoretical courses leading to 
degree of Bachelor of Science in 
Agriculture, and Bachelor of 
Science in Mechanics. Board, 
lodging and tuition, $7.00 per 
month. Writ e to-day for catalog 
or for further information. 
JAS. B. DUDLEY , President 
GREENSBORO. N. C. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Northwestern Normal, Agricultural and 
Industrial Institute, Lorain, Ohio. 
A partly free industrial school, the only institution in the Northwest that offers a thorough industrial and literary, moral and religious training to 
Negro youths. Beautifully located in sight of Lake 
Erie. Healthful location. Fall term opened October 
1, 1912. For information address 
Rev. S. Douglass McDuffie, Principal. 
Lorain, Ohio. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F . Morton, Jr., A. M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and. up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York, N. Y. 
A Remarkable Book by Wm . George Jordan 
the MAJEST Y of CALMNES S 
CONTENTS: 
The Majesty of Calmness. 
Hurry, the Scourge of America. 
The Power of Personal Influence. 
The Dignity of Self Reliance. 
Failure as a Success. 
Doing Our Best at All Times. 
The Royal Road to Happiness. 
Ornamental Covers. Price, 25c. Postpaid. 
Order from FRANCE S L . DUSENBERR Y 
(Book Shop) 
27 E . Randolph St. Chicago, Ill. 
F 
0 
R 
B 
I 
R 
t 
H 
d 
A 
y 
s 
F 
0 
R 
C 
h 
R 
I 
S 
t 
M 
a 
S 
A NARRATIV E of 
TH E NEGR O 
By Mrs. Leila Amos Pendleton 
A comprehensive history of the 
Negr o race from the earliest period 
to the present time ; told in pleasin g narrative style; may be read 
and understood by children. Boun d 
i n cloth and illustrated. 
Address: Price $1.50 
MRS . L . A. PENDLETO N 
1824 11th Street, N. W. , 
Washington, D. C. 
A Race Between Tw o Straits 
A New Book on Labor Unions and Bad 
Politicians by Rev. W . B. Reed, 
N ewport, R. I. 
REV. W. B. REED, Author and Lecturer 
Th e book shows that labor unions are the 
greatest menace to-day to America n manhood and freedom. Read the book and 
know the truth. Pric e 25c. Sol d by The 
Crisis. Agents wanted everywhere. Writ e 
Rev. W . B. REED , Newport, R . I. 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practical method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises, 
forming" a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course in 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, Ill., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your 
very useful and succinctly written book on 'TonePlacing and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a simple system. 
' 'Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, 0. S. P., 
"Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
Price $1. Address the publisher: 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL. 
or Clayton F. Summy, 64-66 B. Van Buren St. 
(Steinway Hall Bldg.), and Lyon & Healy, Adams 
and Wabash Sts., Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
TONE-PLACIN G 
AN D VOICE — 
DEVELOPMEN T 6 TH E CRISIS 
G O TO COLLEG E 
The World To-day Is Calling for 
College-trained Me n and Women. 
It has been found that out of every one hundred 
pupils in the graded schools only seven reach the 
high school and less than two per cent, go to 
college. Lac k of means is found to be the primary 
cause. Bu t a way has been opened by the World's 
Cyclopedia Company to overcome the handicap of 
money. A little energy on your part and the goal 
is won! 
We want high-class student canvassers, and a 
little work on their part will insure a college career 
at Harvard, Yale, Brown, Dartmouth, Smith, Wellesley, Radcliffe, etc. 
The tuition fee at any of the colleges named 
averages $150.00, and to any high school student 
who secures one hundred and fifty bona fide subscriptions to Murray's Historica l and Biographical 
Encyclopedia of the Colored Race Throughout the 
World, the World's Cyclopedia Company wil l pay one 
hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) as a bonus in 
addition to a regular commission of 10 per cent. 
Eve n if you fail to reach the mark you wil l have 
your 10 per cent. 
If you are now in college you are also eligible 
to enter this contest. Note that it is not limited 
to the first student, but open to every student. 
If you are ambitious, and wish to take advantage 
of this splendid offer, write the Scholarship Department of the WORLD'S CYCLOPEDIA COMPANY at 
Washington, D. C.—P. O. Bos 2379—for full information and literary outfit. 
This Beautiful Watch 
7.98 
Gold-fille d Case. 
Guaranteed 20 Years. 
Elgin or Waltham 
Movement. 
We were fortunate 
in being able to secure this handsome 
watch from one of 
the largest dealers in 
New Yor k City. 
Seldom has such a 
low price been duplicated on such a highgrade watch. Ladies' 
or gentlemen's size. 
Suitable as a Xmas 
or birthday gift. 
Sent prepaid on receipt of price. 
The Dunbar Company 
26 Vesey Street New Yor k City 
WM.H . HACKNE Y 
TENO R 
Oratorio, Concert, Recital, Pupils. 
Large repertoire. Engagements 
accepted. Special inducements to 
Colleg e Athletic Associations 
Studio—514 East 33d Street, Chicago, Ill. 
Biggers' Business and 
Industrial College 
(An Institution of Modern Methods) 
Prepares Teachers, Stenographers, Book ­
keepers and Clerks; grants certificates and 
diplomas and secures positions for all persons completin g courses throug h mail or in 
our Hom e College . Writ e for particulars. 
Address: 
C. A . BIGGERS , A. M. , President 
1202 Frederick St. Houston Texas. 
Buy Direct From the Producer 
Save Importer's, 
Wholesaler's 
and 
Retailer's 
Profits. 
This magnificent 
French Cur l 
Ostrich Plume 
inches in 
length. 
of the 
highest 
grade 
hard 
flue 
f
selected 
from the 
male bird. 
Has a very 
glossy fiber 
and is extra wide, with heavy drooping 
head. Le t as send you this Plume on 
approval. Send us 15c to pay express 
charges, and we will send you this beautiful Plume in black, white or colors, to your 
express office C O. D. with privilege of examination. If satisfactory pay the express agent 
$1.95 and the Plume is yours. If, however, you 
" do not think this the most marvelous value you ever 
saw. if you can duplicate of your dealer for less than 
$5.00. tell the express agent to return the Plume to us and we 
will refund your 15c, Or , If you prefer to send the full amount, 
$1.95, we will send the Plume by return mail, postage prepaid, 
and if not satisfactory, we will promptly refund your money. 
W e take all the risk. For complete line of Ostrich Feathers, 
including bargains in Willow Plumes, write for free catalog 
SPECIAL "^Wo CT c»ffia,BS« 2.2 8 
South African Importing Co.. Dept Cr 1841 Wabash Ave., Chicago. 
"Your old feathers made into beautiful 
Willow Plumes. Send them to us and we 
will quote you a price. 
FOR THIS 
FRENCH CURL 
0STRICH PLUM E 
whit e 
colors 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 5, No. 1 NOVEMBER , 1912 Whole No. 25 
ALON G 
TH E COLOR LIN E 
POLITICAL. 
C
OLORE D women wil l vote i n the next 
presidential election as follows: 
Californi a 6,936 
Colorado 3,861 
Idaho 187 
Uta h 313 
Washingto n 1,697 
Wyomin g 494 
Tota l (six States) 13,488 
I n Kentuck y women are being allowed to 
vote i n school elections. A report comes 
from Hopkinsvill e showing that more interest is being taken i n registration by the colored women than by the white women, 190 
of the forme r registering as against 85 
whites. 
«I Laurens County, Ga. , had i n 1900, 14,565 
white persons and 11,338 colored persons. 
To-day it probably has at least 30,000 in ­
habitants, and perhaps 6,000 males of voting 
age. There were registered i n October 3,781 
qualified voters, of whom only fifty-four were 
Negroes. A report in the Savannah News 
says: "It is probable that there wil l not 
be a single Negr o vote cast here." 
<I It is probable that woman's suffrage wil l 
be inaugurated i n Hawai i withi n a short time 
and that no color line wil l be drawn. 
ECONOMICS. 
D
EA L JACKSON , a Negro, brought to 
market i n South Georgia , on September 
3, the first bale of cotton made this season 
i n the entire South. H e has both white and 
colored tenants on his farm. 
<I A . H . Holmes, a prominent Negro farmer, 
has grown two acres of rice at McRae , Ga. , 
i n a region where it was not thought hitherto 
that rice could be raised. 
*I Afte r a long fight fo r excluding Negroes 
the Holders' International Unio n of Americ a 
is again considering the question of admitting 
them. One speaker said i n their last convention : 
"The Negro has demonstrated that he is 
a capable mechanic, and is quite able to fill 
the place of the white laborer. The Southern 
foundry managers are makin g capital out of 
the race prejudice between the white and the 
colored molders, and i f we do not raise the 
colored worke r to our standard he wil l drag 
us down to his. 
"W e can hardly find language strong 
enough to express our opinion of the feudal 
lords, when we consider the days when the 
laborer was bought and sold with the land. 
Ou r evolution from a condition of slavery 
to the freedom that we now enjoy was slow, 
but we now withhold our aid from the Negro, 
who is tryin g to gain the same freedom. 
"Ho w can yo u get the Negro organized 
unless yo u are willin g to meet with him? 
His interests are identical wit h yours. 
Everyone knows that this condition wil l have 
to be met, yet some of us want to postpone 
the day and let others take the responsibility. 
Do not let your race prejudice war p your 
judgment. " 8 TH E CRISIS 
^ I n the waiters' strike i n Bosto n eighty 
colored waiters from New Yor k were brought 
i n as strikebreakers. 
^ Two thousand five hundred colored cotton 
pickers are at work on the 8,000 acres of 
cotton which the Taft ranch, of Sa n Patrici o 
County of Texas, has planted. 
<J I n Columbus, O., there are 121 colored 
people i n business and twenty-five i n the 
professions. Amon g the businesses represented are six coal dealers, four confectioners, three contractors, three feed merchants, 
four hotels, eight restaurants and five shoemakers. 
^ I n Houston, Tex., the colored people have 
thirty barber shops, one bank, one dr y goods 
store, three undertaking establishments, two 
bakeries, six printin g offices, forty groceries, 
five newspapers, twelve contractors, one 
brickyard, nine lawyers, four dentists, sixteen doctors, three drug stores, ten real-estate 
agents, six notary publics, five peace officers, 
two carriage and wagon manufactories, 
twenty-one blacksmith shops, thirty restaurants, four hotels, two insurance associations, 
one badge factory, two beauty parlors, three 
jewelers, four ice-cream factories, one business college, two night schools, two architects, sixteen hucksters, fourteen trained 
nurses, twelve music teachers, fifty dressmakers, one kindergarten, six manicurists, 
two chiropodists, one veterinary surgeon, 
three cemeteries, eighteen painters, six cabinetmakers, three plasterers, one sign painter, 
one second-hand store, six cement contractors, two stone cutters, fourteen brick masons, 
three tailor shops, four hack lines, two steam 
laundries and two photographers. 
<I I n Bryan , Tex., the wages of colored 
laborers have been gradually increasing until 
they get from $1.50 to $2.50 a clay. Amon g 
them wil l be found bricklayers, carpenters, 
grocers, real-estate agents, insurance agents, 
barbers and one physician. Al l of these 
are meeting wit h success. A colored undertakin g establishment, recently begun wit h a 
capita l of $2,000, is receiving support. 
Negroes are rapidl y buyin g property and 
buildin g better homes, thus causing the 
whites who have colored renters to put u p 
more comfortable houses. I n and near Brya n 
are Negroes owning from 500 to 1,000 acres 
of some of the best land i n this State. 
*I M . Delcasse, Frenc h Ministe r of Marine , 
has appointed Captai n Moltenot to the ful l 
command of a wa r vessel. M . Molteno t is a 
full-blooded Negro . 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
T
H E nationa l committee of management 
of the Mosai c Templars o f Americ a 
have had their annua l meeting i n Littl e Rock , 
Ark . They are about to invest $70,000 i n 
securities and real estate, an d have $51,000 
i n their endowment fund . 
*I Augusta , Ga. , has a colored civi c an d 
improvement league, supported by membership fees. They have supported durin g the 
summer two playgrounds fo r children, done 
neighborhood wor k and pla n to employ a 
colored district nurse. 
*I The seventh annua l report of the colored 
branch librar y of Louisville , Ky. , shows that 
the circulation has grown fro m 17,831 the 
first year to 73,462. The books were loaned 
from the central branch an d three stations 
and through forty-eight classroom collections. 
Thirt y per cent, of the circulation was fiction ; the attendance at the story hour was 
1,873; 1,582 reference questions were looked 
up and 244 meetings held. 
*l A colored community named Norwood , 
near Indianapolis, is to have a publi c librar y 
wit h about 1,000 books. Miss Ad a B . Harris, 
principa l of the local school, has been chief 
promoter of the project, and the citizens 
themselves have cleaned and remodeled the 
building, while loca l firms have given much 
of the furniture . 
^ Colorado College has a colored athlete by 
the name of Holmes. H e has done 100 yards 
i n ten seconds. The Denve r Post says: 
"Holme s wil l be the target of every playe r 
i n the State. On account of his color there 
wil l be a general demand to see him leavin g 
the field on a stretcher, but anyone that 
knows the wa y Holme s can pla y football 
wil l be safe enough i n venturing to say that 
he wil l be able to take care of himself. " 
<I A package of currency containing $55,000 
was mysteriously extracted from a shipment 
by the First Nationa l Ban k of Pensacola, 
Fla . It was recently found i n the rear of 
the bank by the Negro janito r an d turned 
over to the authorities. 
<I A group of colored people at Nyack , 
N . Y. , recently gave an entertainment and 
raised $130 for the benefit of the Nyac k 
Hospital . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
•H Chattanooga, Tenn., has established a colored par k and playgroun d fo r the colored 
people by purchasing nine and one-half acres 
on Orchar d Knob . 
*J New Orleans is .going to attempt a Negro 
dail y newspaper called The Daily Spokesman. The pape r is to have its own printin g 
plant. 
The women's convention, auxiliar y to the 
Nationa l Baptist Convention, reported for 
the fiscal year $26,968 raised. O f this $18,992 
was spent on the Nationa l Trainin g School. 
Loca l organizations raised $8,000 i n addition 
to this. 
EDUCATION. 
TH E fight against colored schools still 
goes on i n certain parts of the South. 
Louisiana , which has by fa r the largest 
percentage of colored illiteracy of any State 
i n the Unite d States, is especially active i n 
spoilin g the Negro schools. Ne w Orleans 
stops the education of colored children wit h 
the sixth grade and has recently appointed 
to the colored schools twenty-four white 
teachers, who wil l go to the colored schools to 
get experience, and after a month or two 
wil l be appointed to white schools and other 
raw recruits appointed to take their places. 
The board has also refused to establish a 
night school fo r colored people. The excuse 
given fo r not appointin g colored teachers 
was that only five passed the examination; 
but the charge is made that the board di d not 
intend that colored teachers should pass the 
examination under any circumstances. 
*I A colored man sends the followin g letter 
to a Ne w Orleans paper: 
September 15, 1912. 
Edito r The Item, 
City . 
D EA R S IR : 
It is not clear to us why the school board 
at its last meeting assigned twenty-four white 
norma l girls to teach i n the colored publi c 
schools. Ca n it be that colored schools are 
the best places fo r the norma l girls to secure 
experience i n order to teach white children? 
Or is it true that, contrary to the long-cherished traditions of the South, these girls prefer to serve colored children to the children 
of their own race? Perhaps these positions 
were given to control votes; maybe to save 
the rin g from defeat. However, i n justice to 
the colored children of this city, these schools 
ought to be taught by colored teachers, as 
there ought to be no semblance of social 
equality i n our schools. These norma l girls 
are placin g themselves i n a position where 
they are not wanted, and, i n justice to themselves and their friends, they ought to immediately resign. 
Ver y respectfully yours, 
J OH N F . G UILLAUME . 
*I The legislature of Louisian a has ordered 
the Southern University, a colored State 
school, to sell all its property i n New Orleans 
and find a location i n the country. 
^ President G . E . Gates, of Fis k University, 
has resigned his position on account of il l 
health. President Gates was i n a railroad 
accident last spring, and i n consequence suffered a breakdown. H e is said to be i n a 
serious condition now. 
<I Alle n LeRo y Locke , formerly a Rhodes 
scholar and a graduate of Harvard , has accepted the position of assistant professor of 
Englis h i n the Teachers' College, Howar d 
University. 
<I Dr. Charles H . Marshall has been appointed a member of the board of education of the 
Distric t of Columbia . H e is a graduate of 
the Unio n University, Richmond, and of the 
Howar d Universit y Medica l School. 
^ School No . 91, i n Baltimore , has been 
turned over to the colored pupils. It was 
formerly a white school. There was much 
opposition to the transfer. 
q Miss Clar a M . Standish of Talladega College, Ala. , writes to the New Bedfor d 
Standard: 
"One-half of the Negroes get no schooling 
whatever. The average child i n the South, 
white as well as black, who attends school at 
all, stops wit h the thir d grade. I n schoolhouses costing an average of $275 each, under teachers receiving an average salary of 
$25 a month, the children i n actual attendance received five cents' worth of education 
a day for forty-seven days only i n the 
year." 
<1 New Negro schools are being built at 
Tampa , Fla. , and Fernwood, Miss., by State 
authorities. Negroes themselves are starting 
institutions in Helena , Ark. , and Pin e Bluff, 
Ark . 
<I Mr . W . T. S. Jackson, a teacher i n the 
M Street Hig h School, Washington , and a 
graduate of Amherst College, has been made 10 TH E CRISIS 
principa l of the colored business high school, 
Washington , D . C. 
^ Fo r the first time i n fifteen years the 
Baltimor e Count y school board has decided 
to increase the salaries of colored teachers. 
The increase wil l be 14 pe r cent. 
<I Bisho p Thirkiel d says of the publi c schools 
of Atlanta , Ga. : 
"No t only are the white children unprovided for, but thousands of colored children 
cannot be accommodated i n either session of 
the publi c schools. This means that they are 
permitted to ru n wil d on the streets i n contact wit h the lower lif e of the city. I f 
crimina l instincts are developed and these 
colored children thrown i n the way of vice 
the authorities of this city are responsible. 
" I have studied this situation for some 
years and am utterly amazed at the lack of 
foresight i n buildin g schoolhouses merely for 
the sake of saving on an investment which 
promises the largest returns i n the mora l and 
industria l lif e of the city. " 
^ Tuskegee Institute has opened wit h the 
largest enrollment i n its history. The plant 
consists now of 2,345 acres of land and 108 
buildings valued at $1,339,248. The endowment fund is $1,401,S26, not includin g 19,910 
acres of unsold government lan d valued at 
$300,000. There are 9,000 graduates and 
former students. 
<I A colored woman teaching i n Lownde s 
County, Ala. , says i n an appeal for funds: 
"Wher e I am now workin g there are 
27,000 colored people and about 1,500 whites. 
I n my school district there are nearly 400 
children. I can y on this work eight months 
i n the year and receive for it $290, out of 
whic h I pa y three teachers and two extra 
teachers. The State provides for three 
months' schooling, but practically I am workin g without any salary. The only way I can 
ru n the school eight months is to solicit funds 
from persons interested i n the wor k of Negro 
education. 
" I have been tryin g desperately to put up 
an adequate school buildin g for the hundreds 
of children clamoring to get an education. 
To complete it and furnish it with seats I 
need about $800." 
<i Abou t twenty-five years ago Miss Katherine Drexel, of the wealthy Drexe l famil y of 
Philadelphia , took the veil of a nun and announced her intention of founding a Catholic 
order fo r the education of the India n an d 
colored race. Colore d schools have been 
opened at Roc k Castle, Va. , Nashville , Tenn., 
two i n Philadelphia , one i n Ne w York , one 
i n Chicago and one i n Columbus, O. These 
Catholi c schools are non-sectarian i n the 
sense that they receive children of all denominations; they are taught, however, b y 
Catholi c sisters. 
<I J . Pierpon t Morga n has agreed to give 
$10,000 toward a $60,000 fun d fo r the St. 
Paul's Episcopa l School fo r Negroes at Law -
renceville, Va . 
^ The America n Churc h Institute fo r Ne ­
groes i n its sixth annua l report shows that 
$89,582 has been raised fo r the support of 
its six schools durin g the year. The report 
contains a careful study of the needs of 
Negro education. 
TH E CHURCH . 
r TH E twentieth annua l meeting of the colored convocation of the diocese of 
Southern Virgini a was held recently. Thirt y 
churches and missions reported 1,700 communicants and $6,000 raised b y the colored 
people. 
$ Over 1,000 colored people fro m fou r 
States met i n Ne w Orleans to greet Bisho p 
Thirkield , of the M . E . Church , who came 
to take special charge of colored work . 
<I The total membership of the Negr o Baptist 
Churc h i n Americ a is now reported to be 
2,444,055. There are 18,987 churches wort h 
$25,000,000. 
<J Rev. J. S. Quarles of Columbia , S. C , has 
been appointed archdeacon o f that diocese. 
*I Fo r thirty-three years the colored Baptists 
have been engaged i n missionary wor k i n 
Africa . They have sent i n all sixty-two missionaries and fifteen native workers; they 
have established eighty churches, 300 outstations and own about $30,000 wort h of 
propert y on the West Coast. The Rev. L . G . 
Jorda n is at present the secretary i n charge 
of the work. 
<5 Pop e Le o XIII . established two apostolic 
vicariates i n equatorial Africa ; that of 
Norther n Nyanz a and that of the Uppe r 
Nile . I n the first there are 98,000 Catholic s 
and fifty-eight schools an d eleven hospitals. 
I n the vicariate of the Uppe r Nil e there are 
19,000 Catholics and thirteen schools wit h 
fourteen medical institutions. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
MEETINGS. 
' THE thirty-second annual meeting of the 
True Reformers has taken place i n 
Richmon d wit h delegates from all States of 
the Unite d States. Mr . Floy d Ross was 
placed at the head of the order. 
*I Colored people i n New Jersey and Penn ­
sylvani a are proceeding with their arrangements fo r celebrating the jubilee of emancipation at Philadelphi a next year. 
^ The celebration of the fiftieth anniversary 
of the issuance of the preliminar y Emancipa ­
tion Proclamation took place i n Washington , 
D . C. President Taft was one of. the 
speakers. 
<3 The Society of America n Indians held 
its second annua l conference at Ohio State 
University , October 2 to 7. 
*I Man y Negro fairs are being held i n the 
South. The fifth annual exhibition of the 
Tennessee Colored Fai r Association was held 
i n Nashvill e and was unusually successful. 
The annua l colored fair was held i n Memphis. 
*I The fifth annua l session of the Arkansa s 
Federation of Colored Women's Clubs convened i n Pin e Bluff. The organization is 
chiefly concerned i n raising funds for a 
Negro reformatory. 
PERSONAL. 
L. R. HENDERSON , a colored man of 
Greensboro, N . C , has joined the 
Unite d States army. H e is 21 years 
old, stands six feet three inches i n his bare 
feet and weighs 171 pounds. 
<I Spurre d by recent attacks upon the civil 
service i n Philadelphia , Assistant Director 
Reed has appointed Fred . W . Matheas as 
foreman of repairs at $850 a year i n the 
city street repair corps. 
" I was very glad, " Mr . Reed said, "to give 
this man the job. H e is a graduate of the 
Universit y of Main e i n civil engineering and 
came to this city several months ago asking 
for employment i n municipa l work. I asked 
him i f he was willin g to begin as a laborer 
and he promptl y said he was and hoped by 
good wor k to fit himself fo r preferment. H e 
started as a laborer and then took a civilservice examination for a better position, 
wit h the result that he came out second on 
the list and has been appointed to his present 
place. " Matheas is colored. 
*! Ric e Barnett, one of the best-known colored men i n Zanesville, O., is dead. 
*I A memorial meeting to honor the late 
George F . T. Cook, formerly superintendent 
of colored schools of the Distric t of Columbia, is planned. 
<] Dr. A . C. McClennan , the founder of a 
colored hospital i n Charleston, S. C , is dead. 
In sixteen years he has raised $60,000 for the 
hospital, beside the annual cost of maintenance, $3,500. One of his white co-workers 
said : 
"Knowin g Dr. McClenna n well, it is no 
exaggeration to say that this community can 
il l afford to lose a man of his stamp. H e 
belonged to that class of refined colored men 
who, while standing true to his own race, 
never ceased to show respect to those of a 
different race. His friends were numbered 
among white and colored. They lament his 
takin g off. I shall drop a tear upon his 
newly made grave." 
<I The celebrated Millie-Christin e twins died 
i n Wilmington , N . C., October 9, at the home 
of the pair. Milli e died first, and the other 
withi n a few hours. 
The twins, who were colored, had two heads 
and two sets of lower extremities, but had 
the same body. They had been exhibited all 
over this country and i n Europe , and could, 
speak several languages fluently. They were 
born i n slavery and were sold for $40,000 fo r 
exhibition purposes. 
<I The Rev. Feli x A . Curtright came to 
Joliet, Ill., two years ago wit h nothing. 
Since then he has bought and pai d for a 
church, costing $12,000 and established a 
social center. The buildin g is open all the 
time ; there are regular lectures, an employment bureau, night school, restaurant and 
baths. 
Mr . W . H . Ellis of New York , a man of 
international fame, is pushing a claim of 
$105,000,000 against the Mexica n government. Mr . Ellis, who is a broker and promoter, is remembered as the energetic American who, after the death of Fran k D . Loomis, 
the Assistant Secretary of State, took the 
treaty papers to Abyssinia . 
<I I n the recent wreck of the New York , New 
Have n and Hartfor d Railway , P . B . Cleveland, a porter on one of the Pullma n cars, 
had his left arm broken; he, nevertheless, 
kept on his wor k of rescue, takin g some of 
the last persons from the burnin g car. 12 TH E CRISIS 
FOREIGN. 
A
MEMORIA L meeting on the death of the 
late Dr . E . W . Blyde n has been held 
i n Lagos, West Africa , and the Blyde n 
memorial committee was formed. The Hon . 
C. A . Sapar a Williams, of the legislative 
council, presided. The Righ t Rev. Bisho p 
Johnson was the principa l speaker. The 
meeting decided upon a life-sized portrait 
and a scholarship or technical school. 
SI The free Negroes of the Gul f Coast of 
Afric a and of the Germa n colony of Kame -
ru n are raising and exporting over 40,000 
tons of cocoa each year. This whole development is said to be the result of mission 
schools. 
SI The first blue book on native affairs published by the Unio n government of South 
Afric a forms a volume of 400 pages. The 
report shows that while $1,500,000 is raised 
from native taxation, only $55,000 is spent 
on native education. 
TH E GHETTO. 
A TLANTA , GA. , is tryin g to register and 
tax its colored washerwomen. Colored people are protesting. 
SI Difficulties are continually arising on the 
"Ji m Crow " street cars i n the South. Recent 
fights are reported i n Houston, Tex., Louisville, Ky. , and Mobile , Ala . 
SI A white woman ran away from the hospita l i n Cincinnati, O., because a colored 
woman was on a cot next to her. 
SI I n Kansa s City , Mo. , a Negro clerk i n the 
city treasurer's office was discharged because 
he was black. The civil-service commission 
decided that the colored man had been unjustly removed, but had no power to reinstate 
him. 
SI The appointment of a colored teacher i n 
the Sexton School, Chicago, has led to a 
strike on the part of some of the white 
pupils. 
SI A local paper reports: "Hatre d of 
the Negro and those who employ 
Negroes has been carried to an outrageous 
extreme i n Briartown , Okla . Three farmers 
have been shot there because they employed Negro cotton pickers i n violation 
of local sentiment. It is thought that two 
of the farmers wil l die. Heretofore, Negroes 
never have been allowed to stay i n the Briartown section. Whe n it became known that 
the three farmers had importe d Negr o help 
armed mobs formed an d marched to the 
farms. The farmers were shot when defendin g themselves, their families, the Negr o an d 
the far m propert y against the mobs. Certainly, i f the officials of Oklahoma have any 
respect fo r themselves and their State, they 
wil l ferret out and punis h the assailants of 
the three men and their employees." 
SI Whit e Southerners i n Newburgh , N . Y. , 
tried to start a row because colored people 
were eating i n the same Chinese chop suey 
restaurant. 
SI Whe n Negro propert y owners of Harle m 
met to discuss the colored "invasion, " Mr . 
Joh n E . Nail , a colored real-estate agent, 
addressed the meeting and declared that 
property depreciation followin g the coming 
into the neighborhood of a Negr o famil y was 
due to pani c on the part of the white owners. 
"I f a Negro famil y gets i n a house on you r 
block, " said he, "don't ru n away. I f you r 
tenants move out don't rent to Negroes at a 
lower rate. Just get together and stick and the 
chances are yo u wil l find you r houses wil l fill 
up wit h white families who wil l learn that the 
Negro famil y is mindin g its own affairs and 
is above the average i n intelligence. I f yo u 
get scared and throw you r propert y on the 
market or put i n Negr o tenants yo u lose 
money, because Negro tenants do not pa y as 
much as white ones." 
SI I n Summit Township, Kansas, there is 
trouble over the local school. There are a 
larger number of Negro families i n the district than white families, but there are more 
white children to attend the school than colored children. The Negroes own the most 
land and pa y a greater amount of the taxes 
and they, standing on their constitutional 
rights, elect Negroes as members of the school 
board. To this the white patrons object, but 
it does little or no good. The school board 
employed Mrs. Ros a Johnson, a colored 
teacher of Alma , Kan. , to teach the school, 
but county superintendent W . E . Connell y 
refused to indorse her teacher's certificate 
and she is therefore debarred from takin g 
charge of the school officially. She appeared 
there one morning, but the white people 
were at the schoolhouse and Mrs. Johnson di d 
not call school to order. 
Two or three white teachers have been sent 
to the district to get the job, but the board 
di d not employ them, saying they had already ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 13 
employed a teacher. Just when the school 
wil l begin cannot be told at this time, and 
what the outcome of the trouble i n No . 67 
wil l be is also a mystery. 
*I A Bosto n woman livin g i n Washington 
has discovered that her husband has colored 
blood. 
*I Kansa s Cit y firemen recently refused to 
rescue workmen who were entombed beneath 
a burnin g building . "Wh y risk our lives? 
W e know of only two there; they are dead, 
undoubtedly—and Negroes." 
<I The city of Macon , Ga. , has removed its 
''red-light " district to the vicinit y of a Negro 
church. The church has protested and is 
preparin g to move. 
^ A mob i n Dawsonville , Ga. , has burned a 
Negro church and ru n a Negro tenant away 
from his home. 
1 A Buckingham County, Va. , jur y brought 
i n such a curious verdict to deprive colored 
people of 342 acres of land that appeal has 
been made to the Supreme Court of Appeals 
i n the case. 
^ I n Guthrie , Okla., two colored women with 
their little girls drew water wit h their own 
cups from a public fountain. Fo r this they 
were told that "Niggers " were not allowed 
there, and one of them was knocked down 
by a policeman. 
CRIME. 
THE followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last report: 
^ A t Bakersfleld, Cal. , an unknown Negro 
accused of attacking a child. A t Callings, 
Ga. , "Bob. " Edwards, suspected of complicity 
i n attacking a girl . H e was shot, dragged 
through the streets and mutilated. A t Ameri -
cus, Ga., a Negro, Yarborough , accused of 
attacking a girl . In Rawlins, Wyo. , a colored man, Wigfall , was lynched by the convicts. H e was charged with the assault of an 
old woman. A t Shreveport, La. , fifty men 
killed a half-witted Negro, "Sam. " Johnson. 
H e was accused of killin g a white lawyer. 
*J The governor o f Georgi a declared martia l 
law and sent 167 soldiers and officers to protect six Negroes who were being tried for 
crimina l assault i n Forsythe County. Two 
of the Negroes were sentenced to Be hanged. 
^ A n unusual number of colored men have 
been murdered this month : 
One at Swaynesboro, Ga. , supposed to have 
been killed by unknown white men. A t 
Bristol, Va. , a steward of a hotel killed a 
Negro bellboy. A t Huntsville , Ala. , a white 
man killed a colored laborer. A t New Orleans 
an old colored man was kille d by a white 
man. I n Mario n County, Ala. , Willis 
Perkins was kille d by a party of white men 
for no apparent cause. I n Homer, La. , a 
prominent farme r shot and killed a Negro,. 
Joh n Woods. A t Fitzgerald , Ga., a prominent dentist accused a Negro of stealing an d 
shot him dead when the Negro tried to ru n 
away. Forest Bolan d of Lucedale, Miss. , 
was recently kille d because he had testified 
against white liquor sellers. 
<I A white man i n York , Pa. , shoved a colored man roughly off the sidewalk. H e was 
slabbed three times with a knife. 
^ Governor Donaghey has given absolute 
pardon to Robert Armstrong , a Negro convicted and sentenced to be hanged for attackin g a whil e woman. The governor says: 
"M y reason for granting this pardon is 
that I have become thoroughly convinced of 
Armstrong's innocence. Feelin g this way 
about it, there can be no middle ground 
so fa r as my action is concerned. H e is 
either guilty or innocent, and believing him 
innocent, I have pardoned him. 
" I have given the case careful thought and 
study, have read the transcript of the evidence and have considered it i n an unbiased 
and unprejudiced manner. The evidence as 
disclosed by the transcript does not show the 
identification of Armstron g by the prosecutin g witness to be of such a nature as to convince me of its absolute certainty. The 
opportunity for her to identify her assailant 
was limited to the flare of a match as he 
stood by the bureau i n the dark room and to 
a dim light from a possible street lamp that 
might have shown through a crack i n the 
window curtain. There is some evidence that 
she had stated the party might have been a 
dark-skinned Greek or a mulatto Negro. 
" I have every confidence i n her honesty 
and sincerity i n this matter, but under all 
conditions connected with the case I feel that 
she is bound to be mistaken i n her identification. 
"Armstrong's defense was an alibi. True , 
it was Negro testimony, but to prove where 
a Negro is at night, after workin g hours, one 
would ordinaril y have to resort to Negro tes-14 TH E CRISIS 
timony, as it is Negroes wit h whom he associates. His alib i was apparently made out 
as well as a Negro alib i could have been 
proven. " 
^ The special grand jur y investigating the 
lynchin g of Robert Johnson at Pineville , 
W . Va. , refused to indict the lynchers, although there seems to be no reasonable doubt 
that the murdered man was not guilty. 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR , the 
distinguished composer who died after a 
four days' illness of pneumonia i n London , 
Eng. , on September 1, was buried at Croyde n 
on September 5. The service was held i n 
St. Michael's Church. 
W . J . Read, violinist, played the slow 
movement from Mr . Coleridge-Taylor's vio ­
li n sonata, and Julie n Henr y sung "Whe n I 
A m Dead, M y Dearest," selection from the 
"Si x Sorrow Songs," dedicated to the dead 
composer's wife. 
Whil e the body was being removed from 
the church the funeral march of "Minne ­
haha," from "Hiawatha, " was played by 
H . L . Balfour, organist of the Roya l Chora l 
Society. 
Wreaths and flowers from all the principa l 
musical organizations of London , as well as 
from many professional musicians and 
friends, were received, and two open broughams filled wit h wreaths headed the cortege. 
*J Mr . Willia m Speights, tenor, an intelligent 
singer of skill i n the use of his voice and 
i n clear diction, gave an exacting program 
before a large and enthusiastic audience at 
Steinert Hall , Boston, Mass., on September 
18. H e was assisted by Mr . J . Shelton 
Pollen , pianist, and Mr . Clarence Cameron 
White , violinist. Mrs. Clarence C. Whit e 
was the efficient accompanist. 
Mr . Speights, who graduated from the New 
Englan d Conservatory of Musi c last June , 
has opened a studio for pupils i n vocal 
training. 
1 A recital was given on September 5 by 
Mr . J . Elme r Spyglass, baritone, of Toledo, 
0., at the Trinit y Congregational Church, at 
Pittsburgh, Pa . 
<I Miss Haze l Harrison , the talented young 
pianist of L a Porte, Ind., has been studying 
under Hug o Va n Dalen , i n Berlin , Germany, 
for the past year. She has lately met wit h 
the good fortune of havin g been accepted as 
a pupi l by the distinguished pianist and 
teacher, Ferruci o Busoni. 
Miss Harriso n wil l be heard i n concert 
wor k durin g her stay i n Berlin . 
<I Miss Hele n E . Hagan , pianist, of Ne w 
Haven , Conn., wil l begin her student lif e i n 
Franc e under particularl y sad circumstances. 
She sailed on August 31 fo r Paris, where 
she is to study composition and to continue 
her work i n pianoforte. A few days after 
her departure her mother died at Ne w 
Haven . Miss Haga n is remembered as the 
recipient of the Sanfor d Fellowshi p at the 
Yal e Conservatory of Musi c at the last 
commencement. 
<I "Christophe, " an Haitia n tragedy, writte n 
by Mr . Willia m Edga r Easto n of Lo s 
Angeles, Cal. , was presented this summer at 
the Gamut Auditoriu m at Lo s Angeles. The 
pla y is lai d i n the early nineteenth century, 
durin g the brie f reign of Christophe . Specia l 
music was arranged fo r the pla y and given 
by Wheaton's Orchestra. 
^ Mrs. E . Azali a Hackley , soprano, gave an 
illustrated lecture and demonstration i n voice 
culture on September 20, at St. John's 
Churc h at Springfield, Mass. The Spring ­
field Republican notes that "Mrs. Hackle y 
sought, to instruct and elevate her audience 
i n the simplest and most unconscious way . 
"He r voice is very ric h and ful l an d her 
high notes ra n to tremendous power, havin g 
a noteworthy force and clearness." 
Mrs. Hackle y gave a retirin g lecture-recital 
i n Jorda n Hall , Boston, Mass., on the night 
of September 30, and was greeted b y an 
appreciative audience. 
Mrs. Hackle y is now i n the fulness of her 
powers,, and it is to be regretted that her 
splendidly trained voice of remarkable range 
and clearness is not to be heard again i n 
concert wor k i n Boston. 
Mrs. Hackle y played her own accompaniments. 
«J On October 8, at the Churc h of the Hol y 
Spirit , Mattapan , Mass., Mr . Wm . H . Rich ­
ardson, baritone, of Boston, assisted by Mrs. 
Mau d Cuney Hare , accompanist, appeared i n 
an afternoon of song before the Woman's 
Club , of which Mrs. Francis Peabody, Jr. , is 
president. ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
L. R. LATTIMER 
TH E LAT E FREDERICK LAMA R McGHEE 
A GREA T ADVOCATE. 
WHE N the twenty-nine colored men met 
at Niagar a Falls i n 1905 and 
stemmed the tide of abject surrender to oppression among Negroes, Frederic k L . 
McGhe e of St. Pau l was a central figure; 
and he is the first of that faithful group to 
die. H e was born i n Mississipp i on the eve 
of the Civi l War , educated i n Tennessee and 
studied law with the well-known E . H . Morris 
of Chicago. I n 1889 he began to practice i n 
St. Paul , and he became, as the years went 
by, one of the great crimina l lawyers of the 
Northwest. 
Bu t McGhe e was not simpl y a lawyer. H e 
was a staunch advocate of democracy, and 
because he knew by bitter experience how his 
own dark face had served as excuse for discouraging him and discriminating unfairl y 
against him, he became especially an advocate of the rights of colored men. H e stood 
like a wal l against the encroachment of color 
caste i n the Northwest and his influence and 
his purse were ever ready to help. A s a 
prominent member of the Catholi c church 
and a friend of Archbishop Ireland and 
others, he was i n position to render unusual 
service. 
H e died at 51, leaving a widow and 
one daughter. _ His pallbearers were among 
the most prominent men, white and colored, 
TH E LAT E JOSEPHINE SILONE-YATES 16 TH E CRISIS 
J. MA X BARBER, D. D. S. 
of St. Paul , and a solemn public memorial 
service was held afterward. 
Those who knew McGhe e personally cannot reconcile themselves to his loss. H e was 
to them more than a great and good man— 
he was a friend. 
JOSEPHINE SILONE-YATES. 
MRS . JOSEPHIN E YATES , youngest 
daughter of Alexande r and Partheni a 
Reeve-Silone, was born i n Mattituck, Suffolk 
County, N. Y. , November 17, 1859, where her 
parents, grandparents and great-grandparents were long and favorably known as individuals of sterling worth. On the maternal 
side she is a niece of Rev. J. B . Reeve, D . D. . 
of Philadelphia . 
She was educated at the Institute for Colored Youth . Philadelphia , and at the public 
schools of Newport, R. I., where she took 
high rank, and graduated from the Rhode 
Island Norma l School i n 1879. That fall she 
began her wor k as teacher and taught until 
her marriage to W . W . Yates of Kansa s 
City , Mo. , i n 1S89. Durin g her married life 
she kept i n touch wit h current events, wrote 
for the papers and became a leader i n club 
life . She was elected thir d president o f the 
Nationa l Associatio n of Colored Women . 
I n 1902 she resumed teaching and taught 
until her death, September. 3, 1912. Mrs . 
Yate s was a master o f arts of the Universit y 
of Iowa . She leaves a husband, who is prin ­
cipa l of the Lincol n School, Kansa s City ; a 
daughter, Josephine, who is a teacher, an d a 
son, Blyden , who is i n his junio r college 
year i n the Universit y of Kansas. She was 
a woman of rare personal charm, simpl e dig ­
nity and keen insight. 
A PLUCK Y MAN . 
THIRTY-TW O years ago a brown boy 
was born i n Carolina . H e had not only 
ability but pluck. H e was trained i n the 
local schools, and eventually went to Virgini a 
Unio n University , where he di d his academic 
work ; and also was a leader i n student 
activities. On graduating he became editor 
of the Voice of the Negro, and immediately 
the name of J . Ma x Barbe r became know n 
throughout the colored race. 
Then came the severest temptation a youn g 
man can meet. A little dishonesty to his own 
ideals, a little trucklin g diplomacy, and success and a fine income awaited him. This he 
refused to give. Perhaps there was some 
arrogance of youth i n the decision to hew to 
the line of his thought and ideal, but it was 
fine arrogance, and when defeat came an d 
the Voice stopped publication, he simpl y set 
his teeth and started lif e again. Onl y menia l 
employment was open to him, but he took 
it. faced poverty, and began to study dentistry. Fo r four long years he studied, until 
last spring, when he graduated from a 
Philadelphi a dental college, among the best 
i n the class. 
Fo r the first two years of its existence 
TH E CRISI S was glad to carr y Mr . Barber's 
name on its title page among its contributing 
editors as some slight token of appreciation 
for a pluck y man. 
HENR Y L. PHILLIPS. 
THE raising of the rector of the Churc h 
of the Crucifixio n i n Philadelphi a to 
the archdeaeonate marks an era i n the history 
of colored men i n America . Henr y L . 
Phillip s was born i n Jamaic a i n 1817. I n 
his own words: 
"Fathe r was a plante r of sugar cane an d 
ginger. A t the usual age I went to a board-GARRISO N A T BENNINGTO N 17 
in g school, the Moravia n Trainin g School at 
Fairfield . I n 1868, at the age of 21, I left 
to teach i n St. Croix , Danis h West Indies. 
I n 1870 I came to Philadelphia . 
"Afte r two years of private study, I entered the Philadelphi a Divinit y School and 
was graduated and ordained i n 1875." 
Mr . Phillip s is thus the oldest colored 
America n priest i n point of service i n the 
Episcopa l Church . His great work has been 
the upbuildin g of the Church of the Crucifixion i n Philadelphia , which, as he' says, 
"was institutiona l when that kin d of work 
was little known. " Youn g peoples' clubs, 
singing societies, lecture courses, kindergartens and other activities have been carried 
on i n the parish house fo r twenty-five years. 
Bu t Mr . Phillips' energies have not been 
confined to his church. H e is trustee of the 
Starr Center fo r Settlement Work , member of 
the La w and Orde r Society, and recently appointed by Mayo r Blankenber g a member of 
the vice commission; he is president of the 
Home fo r the Homeless, and of the organization fo r the protection of colored women, 
and trustee of several schools. 
Out of his wor k at the Crucifixion have 
sprung three other churches. It was fitting 
that i n June , 1912, this indefatigable worke r 
should have been made archdeacon fo r colored wor k i n the diocese of Pennsylvania . 
His own good words wil l best close this 
sketch: " I have always worked on the prin ­
ciple that man is greater than any church 
or organization. I f anyone needs me, and 
I can be of service to him, I am not to stop 
and ask about his religious affiliations before 
I decide to do anything. " TH E VENERABL E HENR Y L. PHILLIPS 
Archdeacon in Pennsylvania 
GARRISO N A T BENNINGTO N 
By WENDELL PHILLIPS STAFFORD 
{Written for TH E CRISIS.) 
Here , where the meadow grasses fringed the 
street 
An d shadows fell from the green mountain 
height, 
H e crooned above his types, hearing the 
sweet 
Voice s of future fame by day and night. 
An d here to him the footworn Quaker came 
Bearin g the burden of a race's wrong, 
His lonely eyes alight wit h freedom's flame, 
His stammering lip s raptured wit h freedom's song. 
Fort h from this place the summoned warrio r 
went 
Snow white i n armor and the sword i n 
hand 
That from its aim was never to be bent 
Til l slavery fell upon the blood-soaked 
land. 
Fi t spot—most fit—for that high trumpet 
call 
That comes, one day, welcomed or spurned, 
to all. OPINIO N 
TH E NEGRO 
IN POLITICS. 
There is still some discussion 
i n both the colored and white 
press concerning the colored 
vote more particularl y wit h regard to Mr . 
Roosevelt. Harper's Weekly says that Mr . 
Roosevelt has dropped the subject because 
the Southerners di d not "nibble at the bait," 
and continues: 
"Tha t indicates the other reason wh y 
Roosevelt himself has not been discussing his 
new pla n wit h the colored brother. I f it 
has not helped him i n the South, it has 
positively and substantially weakened him i n 
the North—an d he knows it. Unhappily , 
there are conscientious and honorable people 
i n his motley following, and not a few of 
them are of the anti-slavery strain. Such 
people have not approved, or pretended to 
approve, his sudden desertion of the. Southern Negro after all his loud declaration of 
friendship for them. Neithe r could they perceive the slightest basis i n reason or morals 
fo r his distinction between Southern Negroes 
and Northern Negroes. There is none. The 
only basis fo r that distinction was and is 
political. 
"The maneuver has failed—failed completely an d ignominiously. It is the worst 
kin d of failure, fo r his act is not bitterly 
denounced, it is not raged at, it is laughed 
at. A demagogue can thrive on denunciation 
and hatred, but ridicul e and indifference are 
fatal. " 
The Southern papers have been spurred to 
new arguments because of Roosevelt's 
Southern trip . The Birmingham Age-Herald 
cannot forget the past: 
"The South, and particularl y Alabama , 
cannot forget his attitude toward the Repub ­
lican party of the State right after Alabama 
adopted her present constitution, at which 
time he was President. H e declared that it 
was his purpose to support the buildin g u p 
of a white man's party i n Alabama , and 
takin g him at his wor d the Republicans met 
in convention—the most enthusiastic convention i n the history of the part y i n this State 
—and it was addressed by a special envoy 
from the President i n the person of Judg e 
Pritchar d of Nort h Carolina . The Negroes 
were not allowed to even look on. A very 
short whil e after the President proceeded to 
cut off heads of every officeholder that participated i n the 'lily-white ' movement, an d 
the federal patronage again fell into the 
hands of the regulars and Booke r T. 
Washington. 
"Th e colonel, therefore, should not feel 
peevish i f the people of Alabam a are a little 
bit inclined to be from Missouri regardin g his 
sudden conversion to a white man's part y i n 
the South. " 
The Atlant a Journal, i n an editoria l entitled "G o Home , Colonel, " says, among other 
things: 
"I f yo u fancy that the pharisai c pose yo u 
have recently assumed on the Negr o question 
wil l wi n yo u this section's support, yo u are 
pitiabl y deceived. Yo u have' straddled this 
issue i n both the Nort h and the South, fra ­
ternizing wit h the Negr o there and execrating 
him here. 
"D o yo u think we are so stupi d as not to 
see through this two-faced an d impudent 
game ? 
"Di d yo u not bi d might and mai n fo r the 
support of the Negro delegates at Chicago ? 
"Woul d yo u ever have pretended this sudden change of heart had yo u succeeded i n 
capturing the machinery of that part y as yo u 
violently strove to do? 
"Wh y was it, colonel, that yo u never awoke 
to the corruptin g influence of the colored 
delegates from the South until yo u foun d 
that they woul d no longer serve but woul d 
embarrass you r politica l schemes? 
"The whole country knows that no Repub ­
lica n ever went further or stooped lowe r 
than yo u for these same Negr o delegates 
when yo u needed them to ru n you r particula r 
machine." 
The colored ministers of Cincinnat i have OPINIO N 19 
been asking ex-Senator Forake r about the situation, and Forake r says that the "Bul l 
Moos e is flirting wit h the Lil y Whites. " 
President Taft i n a recent interview says: 
"Ha d the colored delegates from the South 
to the Republica n national convention yielded 
to the influences the newspapers said were 
dangled before their eyes, the Progressive 
part y leaders might have viewed differently 
their fitness fo r participation i n the Progressive party's convention. 
"It occurs to me that instead of the Southern colored Republicans being declared as 
disqualified to participate i n the activities 
of the new party, the very fact of their 
loyalty to a cause they had been elected to 
represent i n our national convention should 
have commended them to the Progressive 
party's leaders. 
" A race which i n fifty years has reduced 
its illiteracy from 95 to about 30 per cent, is 
certainly deserving of more respectful consideration than it received from the Pro ­
gressive part y leaders." 
It must have taken some urgin g to 
force Assistant Attorney-Genera l Lewis into 
the rin g against his first love, but he certainly struck heavily i n his Ohio and New 
Jersey speeches: 
"The disfranchisement of eight millions of 
citizens i n the South, from part y representation i n the new party, was the worst blow 
that the race has received i n the last fifty 
years, because ours is a part y government; 
because it is the only means through which 
the citizen can make his ideas of government 
prevail ; and when he is denied his representation there he is denied a fundamental right, 
a right most essential to his liberty and his 
happiness. 
" I sat i n the gallery of the coliseum at 
the birth of the new party. I saw men and 
women wor k themselves into a frenzy of 
enthusiasm. I heard the magnificent keynote 
of Senator Beveridge, when he said : 'W e 
stand for a nobler America . W e stand for 
an undivided nation. W e stand for a broader 
liberty and a fulle r justice. * * * W e 
stand fo r mutua l helpfulness instead of 
mutua l hate. W e stand for equal rights as a 
fact of lif e instead of a catchword of politics. battle fo r the actual 
rights of man.' 
"Fo r an hour and a half the great orator 
developed his theme. I listened to the strains 
o f music of 'Joh n Brown's Body ' and the 
'Battl e Hym n of the Republic ' M y heart 
sank withi n me when I thought that there 
were men outside clamoring for admission 
who were denied on account of their race and 
color. Since all men di d not include Southern Negroes, I could not feel that Joh n 
Brown's soul was marching there. Whe n 
that vast audience sang the 'Battl e Hym n of 
the Republic,' 'as Christ died to make men 
holy let us die to make men free,' I felt that 
human cant and hypocrisy could go no 
further; it had reached its fitting climax. " 
The death of ColeridgeCOLERIDGE-TAYLOR. 
Taylo r has brought 
much comment on his work. Almost without 
exception the praise has been universal. O f 
course, Philli p Hale , the dyspeptic and somewhat erratic critic of Boston, had to have his 
usual fling at the Negro. 
Musical America says of Taylor: 
"I n the musical circles of Great Britai n he 
was a force and a power, a name which wit h 
that of Elga r represented the nation's most 
individua l output i n the domain of choral 
music, at any rate. His 'Hiawatha, ' which 
has made his name better known than anything else he has written, is a work that wil l 
last for many years to come. So, too, his 
'Atonement,' perhaps the finest passion service of modern times. * * * Though surrounded by the influences that are at work 
i n Europ e to-day, he retained his individu ­
ality to the end, developing his style, 
however, and evincing new ideas i n each 
succeeding work. * 9 * His untimely 
death at the age of 37, a short life— 
like those of Schubert, Mendelssohn, Chopi n 
and Hug o Wolf—ha s robbed the worl d of one 
of its noblest singers, one of those few men 
of modern times who found expression i n the 
language of musical song, a lyricist of power 
and worth, and, what is perhaps most significant, the ablest musician the Negro race 
has yet produced. " 
Arthu r M . Abell , the well-known reviewer 
of Berlin , Germany, says of the composer i n 
the Musical Courier: 
"A s the first and only Negro composer of 
real importance, his death constitutes a great 
loss to his race, but it is also more than that; 
it is a loss to the musical worl d at large. 
Fo r Coleridge-Taylor was a composer of 
noteworthy achievement and still greater 
promise. Eve n Berli n wil l feel his loss, fo r 20 TH E CRISIS 
it was the composer's intention to come here 
early i n the season and personally conduct 
the first Europea n performance of his new 
violi n concerto i n G minor. * * * H e 
was a man of sterling character, he was a 
good husband and father and a staunch and 
loya l friend. " 
The Londo n Daily Telegraph says: 
"The work of Coleridge-Taylor must be 
regarded as adding lustre to the history of 
musical composition i n England . That his 
career, already so fruitful, should have been 
cut off while he was at the height of his 
artistic power, is a tragedy whose pathos wil l 
be universally recognized." 
The Philadelphi a Public Ledger says that 
he exemplifies the genius of the Africa n race 
i n music, and continues: "Coleridge-Taylor 
was to modern music what our America n 
Negro poet, Pau l Laurence Dunbar, was to 
literature. His genius was not of the very 
highest order, but it was of elevated rank. 
H e never set his pen to an ignoble or unworthy score. The worl d of melody is im ­
poverished by the premature termination of 
the labors of one who represented by fa r 
the best achievement of his race i n his chosen 
field of endeavor." 
A write r i n the New Yor k Tribune speaks 
of Mr . Taylor's visit to the Litchfield County 
Chora l Unio n i n 1910, and says: "Coleridge -
Taylor, who endeared himself to all by his 
charming personality, repeatedly by wor d 
of mouth and i n letters assured me and 
others that the whole-hearted welcome accorded him by his host and hostess at Norfolk and the cordiality wit h which he was 
received by those he met there had filled him 
with new energy, enthusiasm and love for' 
work. " 
The Syracuse Post-Standard, remembering 
the artist's descent, says that Providence di d 
not visit upon the offspring of this union 
the penalty which racia l amalgamation is 
commonly supposed to incur. "H e was," it 
continues, "one of the greatest artists i n 
England. " 
Miss Natali e Curtis calls attention to the 
talent of the colored people for music—a 
talent which i n Coleridge-Taylor's case received i n Englan d encouragement and honor, 
whereas i n our own country the barrie r of 
race has kept colored musicians, wit h one or 
two exceptions, i n the music hall, and has 
made them ashamed of their best heritage— 
the folk music of the old plantation. 
TH E NEGR O AN D 
TH E UNIONS . 
There are several indica ­
tions that the white and 
black workingme n are beginnin g to get together. No w and then one 
hears the old attitude of the Negr o echoed 
as i n the Western Outlook, a colored paper, 
which says: 
"W e have always contended that unions 
are no benefit to the Negr o and wil l not 
tolerate him i n them only when they are to 
be benefited. Take the barbers' union—they 
are glad to have Negroes as members. Why ? 
Because they control most of the good trade 
among the whites, and it helps white barbers 
to keep u p prices. I n this case they are a 
benefit to the union. Bu t how is it i n other 
branches of trade? It was only last week 
Messrs. Siebe & Sons, proprietors of Shell 
Moun d Park , came to us and told us that 
union musicians want them to sig n a contract on Januar y 1, 1913, not to rent the 
par k to any one, club or society, that does 
not employ unio n music. H e said he had 
refused to sign, as he could see at a glance 
it would only affect colored organizations 
who gave picnic s out there." 
On the other hand, down i n Louisian a 
white men have begun to get a taste of the 
way i n which colored laborers are treated. 
The white timber workers tried to organize 
the workingmen into a union. Their committee of defense i n an appea l says: 
"Whe n the forest slaves of Louisian a and 
Texas revolted against peonage, and began, 
about two years ago, the organization of the 
Brotherhood of Timbe r Workers, an industria l union, takin g i n all the workers i n the 
sawmills and camps, the lumbe r kings at 
once recognized the powe r inherent i n such 
a movement and immediately began a campaign of lyin g and violence against the unio n 
and all persons connected wit h it or suspected 
of sympathizin g wit h us. 
"First among the cries they raised against 
us was, of course, the old bunco cries of 
'white supremacy' and 'social equality,' 
coupled wit h that other cry, 'they are organizin g the Negroes against the whites,' which 
the capitalists and landlords of the South 
and their politica l buzzard and social carrion 
crows always raise i n order to justif y the 
slugging and assassination of white and colored workingme n who seek to organize and 
better the condition of their class. Pro m the 
day you, the Negr o workers, were 'freed,' 
down to the present hour, these cries have 
been used to cloak the vilest crimes against OPINIO N 21 
the workers, white and colored, and to hide 
the wholesale rape of the commonwealth of 
the South by as soulless and cold-blooded a 
set of industria l scalawag's and carpetbaggers as ever drew the breath of life . 
"Fo r a generation, under the influence of 
these specious cries, they have kept us fightin g each other—us to secure the 'white 
supremacy" of a tramp and yo u the 'social 
equality' of a vagrant. Ou r fathers 'fell for 
it,' but we, their children, have come to 
the conclusion that porterhouse steaks and 
champagne wil l look as well on our tables 
as on those of the industria l scalawags and 
carpetbaggers; that the 'white supremacy' 
that means starvation wages and child slavery 
for us and the 'social equality' that means 
the same for you, though they may mean the 
'high life ' and 'Christia n civilization' to the 
lumber kings and landlords, wil l have to go. 
A s fa r as we, the workers of the South, are 
concerned, the only 'supremacy' and 'equality ' they have ever granted us is the supremacy of misery and the equality of rags. 
This supremacy and this equality we, the 
Brotherhood of Timbe r Workers, mean to 
stand no longer than we have an organization bi g and strong enough to enforce our 
demands, chief among whic h is ' A man's lif e 
fo r all the workers i n the mills and forests 
of the South.' Because the Negro workers 
comprise one-half or more of the labor employed i n the Southern lumber industry, this 
battle cr y of ours, ' A man's lif e for all the 
workers,' has been considered a menace, and 
therefore a crime i n the eyes of the Southern 
oligarchy, fo r they, as well as we, are full y 
alive to the fact that we can never raise our 
standard of livin g and better our conditions 
so lon g as they can keep us split, whether 
on race, craft, religious or national lines, and 
they have tried and are tryin g all these 
methods of division i n addition to their campaign of terror, wherein deeds have been 
and are being committed that woul d make 
Dia z blush wit h shame; they are so atrocious 
i n their white-livered cruelty. Fo r this reason, that they sought to organize all the 
workers, A . L . Emerson, president of the 
brotherhood, and sixty-three other union men 
are now i n priso n at Lak e Charles, La. , under 
indictment, as a result of the massacre of 
Grabow, where three union men and one 
association gunman were killed , charged with 
murde r i n the first degree, indicted fo r killin g 
their own brothers, and they wil l be sent to 
the gallows or, worse, to the frightful penal 
farms and levees of Louisiana , unless a united 
workin g class comes to their rescue with the 
funds necessary to defend them and the 
action that wil l brin g them all free of the 
grave and the levees. 
"Furthe r words are idle. It is a useless 
waste of paper to tell you, the Negro workers, 
of the merciless injustice of the Southern 
Lumbe r Operators' Association, for your race 
has learned through tears and blood the 
hyenaism we are lighting. Enough . Emerson and his associates are i n prison because 
they fought for the unity of all the workers. 
"Wil l yo u remain silent, turn no hand to 
help them i n this, their hour of great danger? 
"Ou r fight is your fight, and we appeal 
to yo u to do your duty by these men, the 
bravest of the brave! Hel p us free them 
all. Joi n the brotherhood and help us blaze 
freedom's pathway through the jungles of 
the South. " 
The fiftieth anniversary of the 
THE JUBILEE. issuing of President Lincoln's 
preliminar y Emancipatio n Procla ­
mation has brought much comment together 
wit h one frightfu l cartoon i n the Ne w Yor k 
Sun. On the whole, the comments are 
encouraging. 
The Philadelphi a Ledger says: 
"The problem is still a far cry from the' 
final solution. Bu t i f i n half a century such 
gratifyin g progress—'up from slavery'—has 
been made, who shall venture to impose a 
limit to the Negro's developing possibilities 
of usefulness to himself and to his white 
neighbor? " 
The Boston Post, reviewing some of the 
main facts concerning the Negro's rights, 
adds: 
"Suc h is the development of half a century 
of acknowledged equal manhood. It marks 
an anniversary that may well be celebrated 
wit h pride and wit h confidence i n the future." 
The Indianapolis Star calls attention to 
the double meaning of emancipation: 
"Emancipatio n of the slaves brought freedom to the black race, but its blessings were 
hardly less to the whites. It lifted a cloud 
that had always darkened the nation's fame 
and whose shame was felt by a multitude of 
citizens; it opened the way for a prosperity 
and an advance of civilization never before 
equaled i n one-half century i n the history 
of the world . Eve n yet the effect upon the 
nation of a genuine and universal sense of 
liberty has not been full y realized. The debt 22 TH E CRISIS 
to Abraham Lincol n is not yet wholl y understood by either race that he benefited." 
The New Yor k Nation expresses the view 
of those who are still strivin g to emancipate 
black men and adds to it a curious and 
certainly unworthy touch of pessimism: 
"A s fo r the colored people themselves, 
despite all the injustice under which they 
still stagger, they have every reason both to 
venerate the name of Lincol n and to take 
heart as they look back fifty years. Fro m 
a chattel to a human being—that is the 
measure "of the effect of Lincoln's pen. To 
own one's body and one's soul; to know no 
"longer the anguish of seeing wif e and child 
sold to meet a creditor's demand or an executor's order—surely the burdens of to-day are 
but slight compared wit h those of half a 
century ago. An d the future is still theirs. 
Ho w can they falter or fail to have fait h 
and hope when they think not only of the 
change since 1862, but of the story of the 
fifty years which preceded the proclamation? 
Their weakness to-day is chiefly their in ­
ability to organize to defend their rights. 
Unite d they would stand fa r better; divided 
they fal l before oppression. Ca n anything 
else be expected when one reflects on the 
conditions of their servitude? Or is there 
an innate race weakness such as the Jews 
have never known i n the darkest days of 
their age-long battle against prejudice and 
injustice? Time alone wil l show." 
The South has little to say, but the Okla ­
homa City Times is glad that slavery is 
gone: 
"Well , it is all past. Perhaps not a single 
soul now livin g woul d care to defend the 
morality of the institution, and we of the 
younger generation, even although born and 
reared among forme r slaveholders, are rejoiced that the institution did not come down 
to us, and that Lincol n was persuaded to 
sign that proclamation fifty years ago. 
"Perhaps it may be argued wit h force that 
the material condition of the Negroes has not 
improved, but certainly the mora l condition 
of the white race, the former slave owners, is 
lifted, and the Negro's mora l and intellectual 
lif e has been greatly advanced." 
TH E SOUT H 
AN D EDUCATIO N 
The division i n the white 
South concerning the advisability of givin g the 
Negroes an effective education is plainl y 
evident i n this month's comment. The president of the board of education i n Savanna h 
acknowledges how badly the Negroes have 
been treated i n school facilities, whil e a 
correspondent i n one of the dail y papers 
asks wh y they should be educated at all . 
The Petersburg Index-Appeal, a prominent white paper, says: 
"The Negroes of Petersburg need better 
school facilities. Conditions are so bad that 
they hardl y should be discussed i n print, 
unless, indeed, there should develop evidence 
that the city school board fails to appreciate 
the terrible lack of necessities whic h exists. 
It is certain that a portio n o f the board does 
recognize the needs of these schools, just as 
there is evidence that some members fai l to 
do so. 
"There may be more than one opinio n as 
to the wisdom of educating the Negro , as 
many of them now are being educated, but 
there should be but one as to the absolute 
necessity of keeping hi m i n good health. A 
tuberculous Negr o is as much a menace to 
the whites as is a tuberculous white. It is 
impossible to have a city wit h a low death 
rate among whites i f conditions whic h cause 
a high mortality rate among the colored are 
allowed to exist. An d it is impossible to 
have a low death rate i n Petersburg as lon g 
as conditions whic h exist i n the Negr o schools 
are permitted to continue." 
The New Era, a colored pape r of Ne w 
Orleans, commenting on the forcin g of 
twenty-four white girls into the colored 
publi c schools, charges that the reasons fo r 
this "are not fa r to seek," and it goes on 
to explain the failur e of the colored teachers 
to pass the examination : 
"Last year certain colored schools were i n 
charge of white substitute teachers. Most of 
them were persons who had been foun d unfit 
to teach i n the white schools. Their wor k 
was so unsatisfactory that the mothers of the 
children were lou d i n their criticisms an d 
di d not conceal the fact that they wanted 
colored teachers fo r their children. This is 
one cause. 
"Last session the city norma l school 
turned out nearly 200 graduates, a much 
larger suppl y than is required by the white 
schools here. Althoug h educated i n the long -
cherished traditions of the South, these youn g 
ladies have manifested an inconsistent an d 
peculia r preference fo r salaries earned i n 
bringin g u p Negro children i n the schools, 
although every one of them woul d balk at OPINIO N 23 
doing the same thin g i n their homes. A s 
years go by more teachers wil l be turned out 
an d more colored schools wil l be required for 
these norma l girls and a correspondingly 
less number of colored teachers wil l be 
needed. This is evidently the chief cause of 
the recent humiliation of the graduates of 
our schools. 
"Th e examination questions were apparently framed wit h the purpose of eliminating 
as man y of the colored teachers as possible. 
Mr . Bauer's wholesale accusation of the colored teachers of the intention of stealing i n 
the examinations appeared to be a part of 
the program to unnerve the applicants, to 
put them i n a state of min d where they 
would be unfit to do their best work. It was 
untimely and uncalled for, and as the results 
o f examinations have indicated that his 
charges were wholl y unfounded, Mr . Baue r 
wil l undoubtedly have quite a hard time convincin g man y of the applicants that they 
were not intentionally deprived of their 
certificates. 
"Consequently, the whole situation is bad, 
and does little credit to our public-school 
system here. The attempt to discredit the 
work of the colored universities here i n order 
to furnish an excuse to fill the colored publi c 
schools wit h white teachers is much to be 
deplored. The colored people do not want 
white teachers i n the colored publi c schools, 
and the sooner the white teachers are removed from the colored publi c schools the 
better wil l it be fo r the advancement of 
Negro education here." 
TH E ULTIMATE 
PROBLEM. 
Frankli n H . Giddings, the 
sensational "sociologist " of 
Columbi a University, has 
again expressed his reactionary opinions on 
the race problems i n the publi c press. H e 
is forced to "admit that the Negro has made 
some progress, that he has become a property 
owner, a small farmer, and has come to enjoy 
some of the privileges of the white man. Bu t 
I cannot see that the Negro has made any 
politica l progress, and I cannot see that he 
is likel y to make any i n the near future. I 
am not discussing whether this is right or 
wrong. I merely wish to make clear the 
point, irrespective of its ethical considerations, that there is no likelihood that the 
Negro wil l be permitted to vote i n considerable numbers where he may control results 
fo r a long time to come, or that he wil l 
enjoy the same privileges as the white man. 
The South does not intend to allow such a 
condition to come about. An d of one thing 
we may rest assured—the Nort h wil l never 
make another attempt to force the South to 
yield the Negro greater privileges. " 
H e is, of course, sure that a great mistake 
was made in ever enfranchising Negroes, but 
apparently does not know whether he wants 
educated Negroes to vote or not. H e concludes that: 
"There is a considerable likelihood that 
for a long time to come the prejudice shown 
against the Negro i n the skilled trades wil l 
continue. I n many places i n the Nort h he 
has been effectively driven out. I n the South 
he is not i n such great danger because he has 
many opportunities there to work for his 
own people. 
" I have mentioned these considerations as 
a general impression. I have not made a 
special study of this special aspect of a great 
problem. I feel certain, however, that the 
race problem is fa r from solution. I am 
also certain that the problem of the future 
wil l be even greater than that of the present. 
The white man considers the black man so 
inferior to himself that he does not oppose 
him or give him much consideration as a 
rival. Bu t wit h the improved opportunities 
of the Negro, wit h a better education and 
extended privileges, he must inevitably claim 
a place alongside of the white man as his 
equal. I f he should be able to back up his 
claim on the strength of educational and 
economic equality, then we may prepare to 
witness a race conflict compared to which the 
present situation is a love feast." 
The comments on this outburst are rather 
to the point. 
The Pittsburgh Despatch says: 
"The Negroes, or the fractional Negroes, 
are here to stay i n one form and i n one 
condition or another. They have increased 
since the emancipation by Abraham Lincoln , 
the semi-centennial of which is celebrated, 
from about 4,000,000 to more than 10,000,-
000. They have established great schools and 
acquired hundreds of millions of property. 
They are i n every calling and every profession and the proportion of those who are 
makin g good is equal to the proportion of 
the whites who are makin g good. They have 
been disfranchised i n the South, i n flagrant 
violation of constitutional enactments. They 
go on i n their beleaguered way to tr y for the 
best. 
"I f we are to have a race wa r it wil l not 24 TH E CRISIS 
be the fractiona l Negroes' fault, but the fault 
of the persecutors of the Negro and of 
sociologists like Dr . Giddings. " 
The Ne w Have n Register rebukes the "im ­
patient sociologist" and says that he "shows 
an impatience—not to call it pessimism— 
which is hardly creditable to a thoughtful 
student of sociology. Professor Giddings can 
find not many miles from the seat of Columbi a a race of white men who do not observably make any politica l progress, and show 
no signs of doing so. The subjects of Tammany Hal l seem, superficially, to be about 
where they were i n Tweed's time, and their 
condition under Murph y is not materially 
better. Shall we conclude then that things 
wil l never be any different i n politicall y 
darkest New York? " 
The Boston Globe is quite cheerful about 
the matter: 
"Bu t the Negro race wil l not stand still, 
nor wil l it be exterminated. Wit h more and 
better education, wit h greater industria l and 
business privileges, especially i n the South 
where the Negro has larger opportunity to 
work among and for his own people, his 
progress wil l be inevitable. Neither wil l the 
white race stand still, and when the Negro 
is able to enforce his claim of equality the 
white man wil l surely be sufficiently enlightened to avert the race conflict which 
Prof. Giddings predicts." 
The Southern papers get considerable 
satisfaction, and yet they do not agree wit h 
the professor. 
The Savannah News, for instance, says: 
"Prof. Giddings' expressed fear that a 
great race wa r wil l come when the Negro 
reaches a plane where he can back up his 
demand for politica l equality shows that the 
professor still has something to learn. The 
opposition to the ignorant Negro's ballot was 
more because of the character than the color 
of the voter. * * * There is no sentiment 
here against the Negro i n the professions 
provided he qualifies himself, and when he 
fits himself for the ballot there wil l be little 
i f any obstacle to his having it. " 
• So there yo u are! An d then the Bourbo n 
Charleston News and Courier steps i n wit h 
its ancient pseudo-science: 
"Ar e we face to face wit h another irre ­
pressible conflict ? W e doubt it and we doubt 
it because we are sure that the Negro never 
wil l be able to show educational and economic 
equality. Dr. Smith, of Tulane University , 
i n his splendid study, 'The Color Line, ' 
shows conclusively that physiologicall y the 
Negro is precluded from intellectual progress 
comparable to that achieved by the whit e 
man. I n the Norther n schools it is often 
noted that black students are very precocious 
i n the lower grades. Suddenl y their growt h 
i n a mental wa y stops. The y generally fal l 
behind. The reason seems, to be that the 
sutures of the black's skull become absolutely 
fixed at about the age of 16, whil e the growth 
of the white's skul l continues until the ma n 
is 25 years old or more. " 
Wha t is one going to do wit h rationa l 
people that talk lik e this ? Wher e is all this 
race conflict coming from, an d where does 
the rea l point of contact occur ? I f we tur n 
to the Negro papers, we ma y mor e easily 
see. A little Texas colored paper, fo r 
instance, says: 
"Tha t this is a 'white man's country' is 
forcibly illustrated b y the wa y Negroes are 
dealt wit h on the street cars an d i n all publi c 
places where masses of people congregate. 
Regardless of the restrictions limitin g the 
races to certain confines, white people are 
prone to violate the law. The y do it wit h 
impunit y and wherever an d whenever they 
please. Whe n the cars are crowded white 
people stand and sit right alon g i n the colored division, even i f complaint is made. A s 
a rule, the conductors don't kick , nor do they 
attempt to enforce the rules. O n the other 
hand, when colored people act similarly , they 
are snatched up, arrested and fined fo r vio ­
lating the law. I n the Negro's case the conductors make it a point to see everything, 
enforcing the law wit h vengeance, humiliatin g 'Cuffy,' treating him wit h contempt an d 
worse than a dog i n most cases. I n face 
of all this, too man y of our people persist 
i n butting i n where they are not wanted, 
makin g it harder for us as a class, causing 
us to suffer indignitie s of every kin d an d 
degree, as though we were not members of the 
human race." 
A colored woma n soliciting fo r a Southern 
school said to the representative of a Wor ­
cester paper: 
"Because the colored race is colored, and 
because we have been slaves, there wil l always 
be more or less prejudice, I suppose. W e 
should be treated fairly . Hav e yo u ever been 
i n a depot i n the South? Yo u wil l find the 
part of the depot that is reserved for white 
folks is clean and comfortable, but the part 
that is for the colored folks is generally 
dirty and uncomfortable. One day I got a OPINIO N 25 
registered letter that had been i n the postoffice, I believe, for nearly ten days, but 
each day I called fo r it I could not secure 
it. I brought the matter to the attention of 
the authorities at Washington , and one day 
the postmaster told me the letter was there." 
Bu t fo r real insight to the innermost meanin g of the race conflict commend us to 
Laurence Taylor. W e do not know Laurence, 
neither does ''Who's Who, " but i n a letter to 
the Boston Herald he states the case with 
startling perspicuity. "Negroes and whites," 
he says, "are different races and should have 
kept apart. Le t the traveled, educated 
Negroes educate their own and live among 
them, and whites do the same. They cannot 
be mixed, as the wisest whites and Booke r 
Washingto n have found out. It is not a 
matter of refinement, or learning, or that one 
feels superior; all such compromises lead to 
unfortunate results, unfair to both sides. 
There are many white men who are objectionable, even dissipated, clubmen; also many 
colored who might conduct themselves better 
than they—that has nothing to do wit h the 
ease. It is instinct and race that are called 
into question, and only this. " 
This is getting down to the real pit h of 
the matter, and it takes the Chicago Examiner 
to give the final word. Speakin g of the 
deaths of children, it says: 
"Science is already workin g out its racesuicide problem i n splendid form. Reports 
show that the largest percentage of deaths of 
babies under one yea r is i n families of the 
Negro and of the uneducated foreigner. The 
smallest percentage is i n native white 
families. " 
W e hesitate to suggest to the Examiner 
the use of strychnine as an aid to malnutrition. 
There comes, however, one large and reassuring wor d from Mrs. Anni e Besant, the 
great lecturer of England . Fro m a speech 
at Letchworth Garden Cit y Summe r School 
we clip the followin g significant extracts: 
"Le t us take the colored races one by one 
and tr y to understand them. Britai n has a 
great future before it in that work i f the 
whole of our social system is going to be 
remodeled and reorganized on a new basis 
of human happiness instead of on the basis 
of struggle. 
"Chin a and Japa n are both great and 
growin g powers in the Pacific. Ca n we think 
it likel y that, i f their people are not treated 
with more courtesy and justice, they wil l 
always submit to a nation of 5,000,000 people"? W e should not do it i f i n their place. 
Is it possible fo r Englis h people to discriminate constantly among colored races, 
and yet expect them always to remain quiet 
and submissive, takin g an inferior place, 
which very often is not theirs? 
"I n Australi a we have an enormous territory, with about 5,000|000 of white men, 
and an immense coast line. Bu t even i n 
Australi a (here are some parts that exclude 
the colored man. One condition is that a 
man must be able to write and translate i n a 
foreign tongue. A n India n going there is 
given a passage i n modern Greek to read and 
translate, and i f he cannot do it he is turned 
back. N o Indian prince can go into 
Australia . Arrangements are carefully made 
beforehand i n order to prevent his landing 
when he reaches those shores. 
"There is a terrible outcry when an outrage 
is done to a white woman, but nothing is said 
or done when tens of thousands of Kaffir 
women are outraged by white men. This is 
a most serious question, for no white woman 
was ever touched roughly by a Kaffir until his 
own women had been outraged by the white 
man. The advance of womanhood i n South 
Afric a has been destroyed by the white man, 
and not by the colored races. It is the white 
man who has broken down the barrier that 
surrounded her and left her no longer safe 
among the colored people. It is there that 
lies one of our greatest sins; the utter disregard of all morality where colored women 
are concerned; the shameful disregard of 
womanhood i n every country where Britai n 
has entered and where Britai n rules. W e 
send our missionaries over to them, but Eng ­
lish people themselves should first be taught. 
I cannot forget the shame I felt one day 
when a great Indian orator, speaking of the 
Englis h i n India , turned to me and said : 
'I f yo u take away your religion, police and 
your brothels, we can manage the rest of the 
difficulties for ourselves.' It is no good sendin g missionaries while such a retort lies on 
on the lips of the Indian. " 
HOUSIN G TH E 
NEGRO IN CHICAGO. 
The Chicago Post says 
that the difficulty on the 
part of the Negro i n gettin g decent housing facilities in Chicago is 
well brought out by Miss Sophonisba Breckin ­
ridge, who, wit h Miss Edit h Abbott, has 
edited the series of housing reports of which 
this is a part. Miss Breckinridge , though a 26 TH E CRISIS 
Southern woman, displays a fa r greater 
breadth of view and a fa r more democratic 
attitude i n her comments than many a North ­
ern woman, we fear, would be able to show: 
"The majority of people stand fo r fair 
play, and we believe that the persecutions 
of race prejudice which the Negro endures 
express the feeling only of a small minorit y 
of his fellow citizens of the white race, and 
that the great majority are completely ig ­
norant of the heavy burden of injustice which 
he carries. Ignorance is always the bulwark 
of prejudice, and race prejudice is singularly 
dependent upon an ignorance which is, to be 
sure, sometimes wilful , but which is for the 
most part unintentional and accidental. It 
has come about, however, that the small 
minorit y who cherish their prejudices and 
persecute the black man because he is black 
have had the power to make lif e increasingly 
hard fo r him. An d to-day they not only 
refuse to sit i n the same part of the theatre 
wit h him and to let him enter a hotel which 
they patronize, but they also refuse to allow 
him to live on the same street wit h them, or 
even i n the same neighborhood. Eve n where 
the city administration does not recognize a 
black 'ghetto' or 'pale,' the real-estate agents 
who register an d commercialize what they 
suppose to be a universa l race prejudic e are 
able to enforce one i n practice. It is out of 
this minorit y persecution that the specia l 
Negr o housing problem has developed.?' 
I n Chicago this active prejudic e has resulted i n the gradua l establishment of fou r 
colored districts. B y forcin g the colored 
people into those districts the real-estate in ­
terests have enabled the landlords there to 
obtain extortionate rents. One of the most 
glarin g exhibits i n this report is that revealin g the rents exacted o f the colored family . 
There is, fo r example, a table comparin g 
what the colored famil y has to pa y fo r a 
four-room apartment an d wha t the immigrant families i n various districts have to 
pay : 
DISTRICT MEDIA N 
Jewish $10.00 to $10.50 
Bohemia n 8.00 to 8.50 
Polis h 8.00 to 8.50 
Stockyards 8.00 to 8.50 
South Chicago 9.00 to 9.50 
Colored (south side) 12.00 to 12.50 
Colored (west side) 10.00 to 10.50 
HISTORI C DAY S I N NOVEMBE R 
1. Revised constitution of Mississipp i 
promulgated, 1890. 
2. Disfranchisement defeated i n Mary ­
lan d the second time, 1909. 
3. Rio t at Danville , Va. , growing out of 
the exercise of the elective franchise by 
Negroes, 1883. 
4. Massachusetts made declaration 
against man stealing, 1646. 
6. Convention of Negroes at Indianapolis 
asked for suffrage, 1866. 
7. Rev. Elija h P . Lovejoy, while defendin g his presses against the assault, of a 
pro-slavery mob, was killed at Alton , Ill., 
1837. 
8. Rev. Elija h P . Lovejo y born, 1802. 
9. Benjami n Banneke r born, 1731. 
11. Nat. Turne r executed, 1831. 
12. Twenty slaves petitioned New Hamp ­
shire legislature to abolish slavery, 1779. 
13. Libert y part y named J . G . Birne y 
fo r President, 1839. 
15. Joh n M . Langston died, 1897. 
16. First attempt by Englan d to establish systematic slave trade, 1618. 
17. Stephen S. Foster, abolitionist, born, 
1809. 
19. Organization of the 29th Connecticut 
Volunteers authorized, 1863. 
20. Lemue l Haynes, first Negr o i n Nort h 
Americ a licensed to preach the gospel, 1780. 
25. Andre w Carnegie born, 1837. 
28. The Frenc h evacuated Haiti , 1803. 
29. San Doming o annexation treaty negotiated, 1869. 
Wendell Phillip s born, 1811. 
L . M . HERSHAW . EDITORIA L 
TH E SECOND BIRTHDAY. 
IT is natura l tha t ther e 
shoul d be man y misap ­
prehension s concernin g 
the origi n o f TH E CRISI S 
as wel l as its object. 
Ever y ma n wit h a cause 
long s to voic e his belief. Most men , 
however, lik e the edito r o f this maga ­
zine , ar e hel d bac k b y a ver y genuin e 
doub t as to whethe r the publi c wil l 
recogniz e an y wort h i n the propose d 
message. The y know—o r the y thin k 
the y know—tha t whe n th e message is 
voiced , an d the worl d realize s its ful l 
import , it wil l welcome an d hel p 
activel y i n its spread . 
Th e proble m is the n ho w to begin , 
ho w first to sprea d the message. Capi ­
ta l must be ha d fo r the launchin g o f 
suc h a n enterprise , bu t ho w ma y one 
rais e i t an d whence ? It seeme d to the 
edito r o f TH E CRISI S i n earlie r years 
tha t the benevolen t ric h migh t be approache d wit h suc h a proposition . H e 
forgo t tha t the benevolen t ar e besiege d 
wit h scheme s o f al l sorts an d hav e littl e 
time o r abilit y to judg e a matte r the 
justificatio n o f whic h lie s i n the fa r 
future . The y ar e use d to helpin g th e 
thin g tha t ha s alread y prove n its worth . 
A secon d metho d woul d be to furnis h 
the necessar y capita l oneself an d 
thu s bridg e th e starvin g period . No w 
the capita l tha t a n America n colore d 
man , workin g a t "colored " wages, ca n 
affor d to pu t int o a periodica l o f pur ­
pose is small . TH E CRISI S is a smal l 
magazin e ru n o n extremel y economica l 
line s wit h a small—muc h too small — 
workin g force ; bu t TH E CRISI S costs 
ove r $1,000 a mont h to publis h an d 
distribute . Person s proposin g to start 
smal l magazine s shoul d remembe r this. 
Ye t a n earnest agen t wh o is abou t to 
bu y twenty-fiv e copie s a mont h write s 
us: " I wil l handl e you r magazin e i f 
yo u wil l promis e to enlarg e i t soon!' ' 
Th e pus h o f th e unspoke n though t 
tha t demand s utteranc e is strong . So , 
despit e cost an d trouble , the edito r attempte d seve n years ago a smal l maga ­
zinelik e weekly , publishe d at Memphis, 
Term. , an d calle d The Moon. Th e 
edito r gav e al l his savings, some twelv e 
hundre d littl e dollars, int o the hand s o f 
a n ambitiou s youn g printer , turne d th e 
whol e business responsibilit y ove r to 
hi m an d furnishe d his service s as edito r free. Th e resul t wa s a flash o f 
popularity , a yea r o f unsystemati c 
struggle , an d the n the clea r realizatio n 
tha t eithe r the edito r must giv e his 
whol e time an d hel p i n the business 
managemen t o r giv e up . No w as the 
edito r wa s earnin g his dail y brea d as 
wel l as capita l fo r The Moon b y his 
wor k as teacher, givin g this u p seemed 
impossibl e an d the Moon set. 
Immediatel y friend s came forwar d 
an d said : ' ' Bu t we must have suc h a 
periodica l as yo u sough t to giv e us. 
Suppos e we hel p yo u bea r the expense? " Th e resul t wa s a miniatur e 
magazin e calle d The Horizon, publishe d 
fo r nearl y thre e years i n "Washington , 
D . C , b y me n wh o themselve s pai d the 
deficit ou t o f their shallo w pockets. 
Her e we face d a ne w problem . 
Scarcel y 500 copie s o f the magazin e 
wer e sol d monthly , and , as the youn g 
manage r flatl y pu t it, i t seeme d as i f 
"th e peopl e don' t wan t it. " 28 TH E CRISIS 
The problem was serious. If it was 
true that 10,000,000 serfs did not want 
a single untrammeled champion of 
their larger rights and ambitions, then 
the problem of those rights and ambitions was even graver than the editor 
had dreamed. But the editor doubted. 
Was it proven that the colored folk 
did not want such a magazine? Had 
they been given a fair chance to decide ? 
While these questions were being 
pondered the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People 
was formed and the editor was asked 
to become director of publicity and 
research. 
Articles in this number show how 
difficult it is to try to get publicity 
on the Negro problem in the regular 
periodical press unless the black man is 
vilified and traduced. The editor therefore said to his board of directors: "If 
we are to have publicity, it must be 
through an organ of our own." The 
board hesitated. They knew far better 
than the editor that magazines cost 
money, and despite legends to the contrary, they had almost no money. 
Nevertheless, the necessity of some 
organ was great, and with many misgivings the board authorized an expenditure of $50 a month for a small 
monthly. 
The editor will not soon forget that 
first number of TH E CRISIS . William 
English Walling suggested the name; 
Mary Dunlop Maclean saw to the 
'' makeup ;'' Robert N. Wood took the 
printing contract. But it was the editor alone, looking out on the forest of 
roofs of lower Broadway, who asked and 
asked again the momentous question: 
"Dare I order 500 copies—or 1,000?" 
And when in a fit of wild adventure 
he ordered 1,000 copies printed he felt 
like Wellington before Waterloo. 
Month before last TH E CRISI S in a fit 
of parsimony ordered but 20,000 copies 
printed. The result was that orders 
for over 1,000 copies could not be 
filled, so that last month we returned 
to our regular 22,000 edition. When 
we tell facts like these, people imagine 
large capital and dividends in connection with our magazine. Not so. Not 
a cent of capital has been invested in 
the magazine, except that the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People has furnished the services of the editor free of charge. This 
means that TH E CRISI S is not quite paying expenses, for it could not to-day, 
with its present income and expense, 
afford to pay an editor. 
Can, now, a magazine like TH E CRISI S 
ever become entirely self-supporting? 
Many of our friends doubt this. They 
point to the graveyard of ambitious and 
worthy ventures—the Colored American and the Voice of the Negro 
to name the latest—and say the American Negro has not yet reached the place 
where he appreciates a magazine enough 
to pay for its support. We doubt this 
assertion. We actually sell each month 
over 21,500 magazines. We are sure 
that if we could get TH E CRISI S to persons who want it we could to-day sell 
50,000. The problem of distribution 
is, however, extremely difficult. We 
cannot use the ordinary channels of 
distribution, but must have our own 
agents, and these agents must be largely 
missionaries in a crusade, because it 
hardly pays them to give their time 
to one magazine. 
When once TH E CRISI S can reach a 
circulation of 50,000 its permanence 
and independence are assured. Until it 
can there must always be the element 
of doubt as to whether such a magazine 
can command the requisite support. We 
believe it can. The experience of the 
first two years is more than encouraging. TH E CRISI S has to-day the largest 
net circulation of any periodical devoted to the Negro race in America. 
If the growth in the next two years 
parallels the past, then one at least of 
our problems will be solved—the problem of publicity. EDITORIA L 29 
TH E LAS T WORD IN POLITICS. 
BEFOR E anothe r numbe r 
o f TH E CRISI S appears 
the nex t Presiden t o f the 
Unite d State s wil l hav e 
bee n elected. "We have , 
therefore , bu t this last 
wor d to colore d voters an d their 
friends. 
Thos e wh o hav e scanne d ou r ad ­
vertisin g page s this mont h an d last 
hav e note d a n unusua l phenomenon : 
the thre e grea t politica l partie s hav e 
i n this wa y been appealin g to the 
colore d vot e fo r support . The y hav e 
don e this out o f n o lov e to this 
magazine , bu t becaus e the y neede d 
th e publicit y whic h this magazin e 
alon e coul d giv e an d becaus e the y kne w 
tha t ou r news column s an d editoria l 
page s wer e no t fo r sale. "We commen d 
these advertisements to ou r readers' 
notice . The y ar e the last wor d o f 
politica l appea l an d the y ar e undoubtedl y sincere . 
Takin g the m no w an d comparin g an d 
weighin g them, an d wha t is the ne t result ? Th e Republica n part y emphasize s 
its past relation s wit h the Negro , the 
recen t appointments to office, an d warn s 
against the disfranchisemen t an d caste 
system o f the Democrati c South . Th e 
wea k poin t i n this argumen t is tha t 
withou t the consen t o f Republica n 
Presidents, Republica n Congresse s an d 
a Republica n Suprem e Court , Souther n 
disfranchisemen t coul d no t surviv e a 
singl e day . 
Th e Progressiv e part y stresses its 
platfor m o f socia l reform , so admirabl e 
i n man y respects, an d points to the 
recognitio n give n i n its part y councils 
to the Norther n Negr o voter. Th e wea k 
poin t her e is the silenc e ove r the fac t 
tha t Theodor e Roosevelt , the perpetra ­
to r o f the Brownsvill e outrage , ha s 
adde d to tha t blunde r the Chicag o disfranchisemen t an d is appealin g to the 
Sout h fo r whit e vote s o n this platform . 
Th e Democrati c part y appeals fo r 
colore d votes o n the groun d tha t othe r 
partie s have done an d ar e doin g pre ­
cisel y the thing s tha t the Democrati c 
part y is accuse d o f doin g against the 
Negro , an d this i n spit e o f the fac t 
tha t these partie s receive the bul k o f 
the Negr o vote. If, therefore , the 
Negr o expects Democrati c hel p an d 
support , wh y does he no t giv e the 
Democrats his vot e 1 Th e wea k poin t 
her e is tha t the invitatio n is at best 
negative ; the Negr o is aske d to tak e a 
lea p i n the dar k withou t specifi c prom ­
ises as to wha t protectio n he ma y expec t afte r the Democrats ar e i n power. 
I n non e o f these cases, therefore , is 
the invitatio n satisfactory . Neverthe ­
less, becaus e the Socialists, wit h their 
manl y stan d fo r huma n rights irre ­
spectiv e o f color, ar e at presen t ou t o f the 
calculation , the Negr o vote r must choose 
betwee n these thre e parties. H e is 
aske d virtuall y to vote . 
1. Fo r a part y whic h ha s promise d 
an d failed . 
2. Fo r a part y whic h ha s faile d an d 
promised . 
3. Fo r a part y whic h merel y 
promises. 
W e sympathiz e wit h those faithfu l 
ol d blac k voters wh o wil l alway s vot e 
the Republica n ticket. W e respec t their 
fidelit y bu t not their brains. W e ca n 
understan d those who , despit e the un ­
speakabl e Roosevelt , accep t his platfor m 
whic h is broa d o n al l subjects excep t 
the greatest—huma n rights. This we 
ca n understand , bu t we canno t follow . 
W e sincerel y believ e tha t eve n i n the 
face o f promise s disconcertingl y vague , 
an d i n the face o f the soli d caste-ridde n 
South , it is bette r to elect Woodro w 
Wilso n Presiden t o f the Unite d State s 
an d prov e onc e fo r al l i f the Democrati c 
part y dare s to be Democrati c whe n i t 
come s to blac k men . It ha s prove n tha t 
it ca n be i n man y Norther n State s an d 
cities. Ca n i t be i n the nation ? W e 
hope so an d we ar e willin g to ris k a 
trial . The PROGRESSIV E PART Y AN D TH E NEGR O 
By JANE ADDAM S 
AT the Progressive convention 
held i n Chicago last August 
disquieting rumors arose 
concerning the Negro delegates. It was stated that 
although two groups from 
Florida , one of colored men 
and one of white, had been excluded because 
of a doubt as to which had been authorized 
to elect delegates, that the colored men only 
from Mississipp i had been excluded; and 
that this was done i n spite of the fact that 
the wor d "white " had been inserted i n the 
call for the State convention which elected 
the accredited delegates. It di d not seem 
sufficient to many of us that the credentials 
committee i n seating the Mississipp i delegation had merely protested against the use of 
the wor d "white, " and some of us at once 
took alarm on behalf of the colored men. 
Wit h several others, who were also members of the Nationa l Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People, I appeared 
before the resolutions committee to point out 
the inconsistency of pledging relief to the 
overburdened workingma n while leaving the 
colored man to struggle unaided wit h his 
difficult situation, if, indeed, the action of the 
credentials committee had not given him a 
setback. 
I n reply we were told that colored men were 
sitting as delegates i n the convention, not 
only from such Norther n States as Rhode 
Island, but that the Progressives of West 
Virginia , Maryland , Tennessee and Kentuck y 
had also elected colored delegates, setting a 
standard which it was hoped the States south 
of them would attain when the matter was 
left to those men of the South who are im ­
patient i n the thraldom of wa r issues and 
old party alignments. It was pointed out 
that such are the limitations of local selfgovernment that free politica l expression can 
only be secured to the colored man through 
the co-operative action of the patrioti c and 
far-seeing citizens of the States i n which he 
lives; that only when white men and colored 
men together engage upon common politica l 
problems wil l the colored man cease to be 
regarded as himself a problem. W e were 
reminded that under so-called Republica n 
protection the colored man has practically 
lost his vote i n certain States, not only 
through the. grandfather clause, but through 
sheer intimidatio n i n those counties where 
the line of part y cleavage follows the line o f 
race antagonism, all the whites being Demo ­
crats who vote, all the blacks Republican s 
who do not. W e were furthe r told that i f 
there was airy disposition to continue old 
shams, that it woul d be a very simpl e matter 
to insert i n the Progressive platform the 
glittering phrases which had done valiant 
service fo r so long a time, not only to blin d 
'the colored man himself, but to enable the 
manager of a Republica n convention to determine the result through the colored vote. 
B y the simple device of appointin g to federal offices colored men i n the sections where 
there is no Republica n party, these men elect 
themselves delegates to the nationa l conventions an d naturall y repa y their part y by 
voting as their officeholding interests require. 
Certainl y self-government is not being pro ­
moted by such politica l recognition on the 
part of the Republicans of the Nort h any 
more than it is by the disenfranchising action 
on the part of the Democrats of the South. 
The Progressive convention took neither 
point of view and challenged at one and at 
the same time the traditiona l shibboleths o f 
both parties. 
Whe n I asked myself most searchingly 
whether my Abolitionist father woul d have 
remained i n any politica l convention i n which 
colored men had been treated slightingly, I 
recalled an incident of my girlhood whic h 
was illuminatin g and somewhat comforting. 
I had given my father an explanation of a 
stupid decision whereby I had succeeded i n 
bungling the plans of a large famil y party, 
and I ended my apology wit h the honest 
statement that I had tried to act upo n what 
I thought his judgment woul d have been. 
Hi s expression of amused bewilderment 
changed to one of understanding as he replied : "Tha t probably accounts fo r you r 
confusion of mind . Yo u fell into the easy 
mistake of substituting loyalt y and dependence upo n another's judgment fo r the very 
best use of your own faculties. I should be 
sorry to think that yo u were always goin g 
to complicate mora l situations, already sufficiently difficult, by tryin g to wor k out TH E PROGRESSIV E PART Y AN D TH E NEGR O 31 
another's point of view. Yo u wil l do much 
better i f yo u look the situation fairl y i n the 
face wit h the best light yo u have." 
Certainl y the Abolitionists followed the 
best light they had, although it differed from 
that possessed by the framers of the Con ­
stitution, whose light had also come from the 
eighteenth century doctrines of natura l rights 
and of abstract principles, when ideas were 
pressed u p to their remotest logical issues, 
without much reference to the conditions to 
which they were applied. Shall we be less 
fearless than they to follow our own mora l 
ideals formed under the influence of new 
knowledge, even, although the notion of evolution has entered into social history and 
politics, and although "abstract" i n the 
tongue of Willia m James, has come to impl y 
the factitious, the academic, and even the 
futile ? 
W e all believe that a wide extension of 
politica l powe r is the only sound basis of 
self-government and that no man is good 
enough to vote fo r another, but we surely 
do not become mere opportunists when we 
tr y to know something of the process by 
whic h the opinio n of the voter has been in ­
fluenced and his vote secured. I f it is done 
through bribery, we easily admit that the 
whole system of representative government 
has broken down, and we are not accounted 
to have lost our patriotism when we estimate 
how much of a given vote is due to the liquor 
interests or to manufactured opinion ; only 
on the politica l status of the colored man is 
it still considered unpatrioti c to judge, save 
as one who lon g ago made up his mind . 
Eve n i n that remarkable convention where, 
fo r the moment, individua l isolation was dissolved into a larger consciousness and where 
we caught a hint of the action of "the collective mind, " so often spoken of and so 
seldom apprehended, I was assailed by the 
old familia r discomfort concerning the 
status of the colored man. Ha d I felt any 
better about it, I speculated, when I had tried 
i n vai n for three consecutive years to have 
the question discussed by a great national 
association to whose purposes such a discussion was certainly germain? Wa s I more 
dissatisfied with this action than I had often 
been with no action at all ? I was forced to 
acknowledge to myself that certainly wa r on 
behalf of the politica l status of the colored 
man was clearly impossible, but that there 
might emerge from such federal action as 
the interference wit h peonage, perhaps, a 
system of federal arbitration i n interracia l 
difficulties, somewhat analagous to the function of the Hagu e tribuna l i n international 
affairs. I n fact, it has already been discovered at the Hagu e that many difficulties 
formerly called international were i n reality 
interracial. Through such federal arbitra ­
tion it may i n time be demonstrated that to 
secure fair pla y between races livin g i n the 
same nation is as legitimate as it is when 
irrationa l race hatred breaks out on those 
fringes of empire which the Hagu e calls 
"spheres of influence." The action of the 
Progressive part y had at least taken the 
color question away from sectionalism and 
put it i n a national setting which might clear 
the way fo r a larger perspective. Possibly 
this is all we can do at the present moment. 
Viewin g the third-party movement as a 
consistent, practica l effort toward the "barn 
raising of a new party i n the nation, " which 
i n its organization and program should not 
be along the old Civi l Wa r cleavages, we can 
predict but one outcome. The issues were 
those of politica l democracy and industria l 
justice—a merging of the politica l insurgency 
i n the West and country districts wit h the 
social insurgency of the cities. Imbedded 
i n this new movement is a strong ethical 
motive, and once the movement is crystallized, 
once as a body of people it gets a national 
foothold, once as a propaganda the rank and 
file are transfused with the full scope and 
meaning of social justice, it is bound to lift 
this question of the races, as all other questions, out of the grip of the past and into 
a new era of solution. MAR Y DUNLOP MACLEA N 
Late Managing Editor of TH E CRISIS The COLORE D MAGAZIN E I N AMERIC A 
THE first colored magazine i n 
Americ a seems to have been 
The African Methodist 
Episcopal Church Magazine, edited by Dr. Hogarth , 
general book steward, and 
published in Brooklyn , i n 
October, 1841. This magazine was i n a 
sense the ancestor of TH E CRISIS . Its editor 
seems to have been a native of Haiti , 
although little is known of his lif e and work. 
The prospectus of the magazine says: "I n 
embarking upon this laudable enterprise it 
becomes our duty, i n the onset, to inform our 
friends that such a wor k cannot be concluded 
wit h dignity and honor to our people unless 
it meets wit h ample suppl y of pecuniary and 
intellectual means. A fear of failure i n obtaining these important contingencies had, 
i n a great measure, prevented our brethren 
i n their deliberations from coming to any 
conclusions on this important subject. But, 
judgin g from the present aspect of things, 
that the times have greatly changed i n our 
favor as a people, light has burst forth upon 
us, intelligence i n a great measure is takin g 
the place of ignorance, especially among the 
younger portions of our people, opening the 
avenues to prope r Christia n feeling and 
benevolence—our brethren, from those important considerations, came to the conclusion, at our last Ne w Yor k annual conference, held i n June , i n the city of Brooklyn , 
to order such a wor k and lay it before the 
publi c for their patronage." This magazine 
lasted two or three years. Its publication 
was then stopped. 
Afte r an interva l of forty years Bisho p 
B . T. Tanne r began the publication of the 
A. M. E. Church Review Quarterly. This 
has been published as a quarterly magazine 
from 1885 down to to-day and is now receiving new lif e from its recently elected 
editor, Dr . R . C . Ransom. The first number 
of the Review says editorially : "M y church, 
the Africa n Methodist Episcopal , at its recent quadrennial session i n Baltimore , concluded to have not only a weekly paper, but 
a Review, for the present quarterly, but 
intended to be bi-monthly, wit h the management of which it honored me. I have, therefore, gentlemen, to ask at your hands the 
same friendly consideration you so generously accorded me when editor of the Christian Recorder. Grant an exchange. Speak 
a word—when merited. Wha t we present is 
unique i n the worl d of letters. I f you think 
so, advise the thoughtful of your readers 
to subscribe for it. " 
A quarterly magazine, however, did not 
quite fill the bill, and in the years from 1845 
to the present there have been a number of 
other adventures. There was, for instance, 
The Repository of Religion and Literature, 
published i n Indianapolis and afterward i n 
Baltimor e for several years. I n later days 
the Colored American Magazine, started by 
a colored man who put the savings of his 
lif e from days' labor into it, was first issued 
i n Boston i n 1900, and rapidl y attained a 
wide circulation. A t its zenith it distributed 
15,000 copies. Then, however, its troubles 
began. It was at one time sold for debt, 
but Colonel Willia m H . Dupre e rescued it, 
and it seemed about to take on new lif e 
when further difficulties occurred. It was 
suggested to the editor, who was then Miss 
Pauline Hopkins, that her attitude was not 
conciliatory enough. A s a white friend said : 
"I f you are going to take up the wrongs 
of your race then yo u must depend for support absolutely upon your race. Fo r the 
colored man to-day to attempt to stand up 
to fight would be like a canary bir d facing a 
bulldog, and an angry one at that." The 
final result was that the magazine was bought 
by friends favorable to the conciliatory attitude, and transferred to New York , where 
it became so conciliatory, innocuous and uninteresting that it died a peaceful death 
almost unnoticed by the public. 
Meantime, a firm of subscription-book 
printers, then known as the J. L . Nichols 
Company, conceived an idea suggested to it 
by one of its agents of publishing a colored 
magazine in the South. The Voice of the 
Negro appeared i n January , 1904, and a 
young man then just out of college, Mr . J. 
Ma x Barber, was made its editor. The Voice 
of the Negro proved the greatest magazine 
which the colored people had had. It reached 
a circulation of 15,000, and at one time 34 TH E CRISIS 
TH E CRISIS "SANCTU M SANCTORUM" 
printed 17,000 copies. It was a magazine 
of fifty-five pages of reading matter, was 
illustrated and well edited. The whole story 
of its final failure has not been written, and 
perhaps ought not to be for some years to 
come. Suffice it to say that the fault did not 
lie wit h Mr . Barber. The editorial wor k 
was well done. The business side, on the 
other hand, under a succession of men, was 
not as well attended to; nevertheless, it was 
not a failure, and the magazine might still 
be alive had it not been for sinister influences 
within and without the race that wished either 
to control or kil l it ; and finally, had it not 
been for the Atlant a riot. Mr . Barbe r 
found himself continually hampered by in ­
terests which were determined to edit bis 
magazine for him. Whe n he asserted his 
independence these interests appealed to the 
firm which was backing him and finally so 
impressed them that they determined to unload the proposition on a new corporation. 
Stock i n the corporation sold slowly, but it 
was beginning to sell when the instigators 
of the Atlant a riot drove Mr . Barbe r from 
the city. Removin g to Chicago, Mr . Barbe r 
found himself facin g the task of re-establishin g his magazine wit h practicall y no capital. H e made a brave effort, but finally ha d 
to give up and The Voice of the Negro 
ceased publication. Its successor is TH E 
CRISIS , and it looks as though this latest 
candidate for popula r favo r was goin g to 
be permanently successful. 
Since then TH E CRISI S represents so in ­
teresting a series of magazines, perhaps a 
wor d should be said for its force and dwellin g place. A s one rides down Broadway , 
New York , past the tallest buildin g i n the 
world, one comes to the old postoffice on Cit y 
Hal l Par k and Par k Row , the center of 
newspaperdom. Vesey Street is the westwar d extension of Par k Ro w across Broad -
way. There, opposite the moss-grown graves 
of St. Paul's churchyard, rises a brownstone 
buildin g of the older office design. Yo u 
come up a lon g flight of stairs and enter 
our rooms. 
The bi g librar y and workroom greets yo u 
first. Fro m this yo u pass by the agents 
and subscription clerks to the two editoria l 
offices or to the offices of the secretary of TH E COLORE D MAGAZIN E IN AMERIC A 35 
TH E CRISIS BUSINESS FORCE—Messrs. Turner and Holsey; Misses Allison, Jarvis and Sousa 
the Nationa l Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored Peopl e and her assistant. 
Turnin g the other 
wa y yo u find the 
cashier i n his den 
and the advertising 
man, and finally the 
store and mailin g 
room with their periodicals and machine. 
The present force of 
TH E CRISI S consists 
of an editor, three 
clerks, a bookkeeper 
and advertising man, 
four unpai d editorial 
assistants and 489 
agents i n the field. 
Man y persons do 
not understand the 
relation of TH E 
CRISI S to the Na ­
tiona l Association for 
the Advancement of 
Colored People. The 
association owns and 
publishes TH E CRISI S 
and uses the magazine as its especial organ 
of publicity. A t the same time it aims to 
make TH E CRISI S 
more than a mere 
bulletin of its work, 
and to conduct it as 
a magazine of general information i n 
its sphere. The two 
institutions make , 
therefore, parts of 
one great whole. 
To no part of its 
force does TH E CRISI S 
owe more than to its 
little army of agents 
scattered over the 
world. They sell 
every month from six 
to 1,400 copies each. 
Finally , we cannot 
forget, and would not 
have our readers forget, our first paid-up 
subscriber: Geo. W . 
Blount, of Hampto n 
Institute, Virginia . 
GEORGE WESLE Y BLOUNT, of Hampton, Va. 
The First Subscriber to TH E CRISIS The RELIGIO N O F SLAVER Y 
By CHARLES EDWAR D STOW E 
RASMU S was once asked, by 
a mystified statesman, why 
the theses of that obscure 
monk, Marti n Luther, had 
made such an ominous commotion i n the world . 
"Because he touched the 
monks on their bellies and the Pop e on his 
crown, " was the aphoristic repl y of the 
caustic oracle. 
Something of the same nature may be said 
o f the unusual excitement caused b y the publication of "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " sixty-one 
years ago. The significance given to what 
would have been otherwise a comparatively 
obscure effort was that it touched the 
haughty Slave Powe r at the same time on 
its belly and on its crown. 
Slaves were property, and property protected by the Constitution of the Unite d 
States and the laws of the country. A n 
attack on any form of property is an assault 
on the whole basis of civilized society, and 
therefore revolutionary and dangerous i n the 
highest degree. This was the view not only 
of the slaveholder of the South, but of some 
of the best people i n conservative New Eng ­
lan d and the Northern States i n general. 
Tha t slavery was morall y wrong, and a 
nationa l sin that made the whole America n 
people subject to the divine wrath, was 
therefore a most discomforting and disquieting suggestion to conservative, orthodox, 
church-going people both Nort h and South. 
They felt wit h regard to it as the old lady 
di d when she first heard the simian origin 
of the human race hinted at i n a sermon. 
"Perfectl y shocking! Why , even i f it were 
true, we ought to tr y to hush it up somehow! " 
So good people tried to hush up the mora l 
wron g of slavery by shifting the responsibilit y on to Go d and the Bible . This Mrs. 
Stowe attacked wit h pitiless satire, and 
added insult to injur y by putting her attack 
i n the mouth of the slaveholding Southerner 
St. Clare . 
"Suppose, " says the garrulous and irre ­
sponsible individual, "that something should 
brin g down the pric e of cotton once and 
forever, and make the whole slave propert y 
a dru g i n the market, don't yo u thin k that 
we should soon have another version of the 
scripture doctrine? Wha t a flood of light 
would pou r into the Churc h at once, and how 
immediately it woul d discover that everythin g i n the Bibl e and i n reason went the 
other way. " 
It was certainly very shocking i n Mrs. 
Stowe to hint at any possible connection 
between religion, whic h we are all bound to 
believe sky born, and economics, which 
orthodox people are prone to confess wit h a 
groan to be hopelessly "earthly, sensual, 
devilish! " The ruthless Mrs. Stowe not 
only attacked the propert y of pious Southerners, but the very religion i n whic h they 
found a divine sanction fo r holdin g that 
sort of property. This exascerbation of 
her crime was sure to brin g down on her 
head the pious wrat h of good, respectable, 
orthodox folk both Nort h and South, and 
it did. 
A most interesting confirmation of this 
is to be found i n the files of the Ne w Yor k 
Observer under the date of September 23, 
1S52. The editor of that Gibralta r of 
orthodoxy writes i n sad sincerity : "W e have 
read the book and regard it as anti-Christian. W e have marke d numerous passages 
i n whic h religion is spoken of i n terms of 
contempt, and i n no case is religion spoken 
of as makin g a master more humane, whil e 
Mrs. Stowe is careful to present the indulgent and amiable masters as men without 
religion. This taint pervades the wor k as 
it does all the school of modern philanthropy . 
It is essentially a non-religious i f not a 
non-evangelical school. Mrs. Stowe labors 
through all her book to render ministers 
odious and contemptible by attributin g to 
them sentiments unworthy of men or 
Christians. " 
The write r of these words was a 
sincere man, earnest, exigent and conscientious i n what he wrote. W e can imagine the 
satisfaction wit h whic h the article was read 
by men like the Rev . Docto r Nehemiah 
Adams of Bosto n and Ne w Orleans—a Ne w 
Englan d man and author of that lubricious TH E RELIGIO N O F SLAVER Y 37 
antebellum treatise "Th e South-side View, " 
which gained him the title of "South-side 
Adams " among the scoffing and gainsaying 
Abolitionists. Tha t marked copy of "Uncl e 
Tom's Cabin " wit h the passages carefully 
pointed out i n which Mrs. Stowe spoke of 
religion "i n terms of contempt" would certainl y be exhilarating reading i n the light of 
to-day; but we can ourselves easily imagine 
what and where they were. It is not hard 
to find them. 
Pious old ladies at the South read this 
editorial, and when, after careful inquiry , 
they discovered that Mrs. Stowe was received 
into reputable society at the Nort h felt 
that they had mournfu l confirmation of 
their gloomy suspicions as to the condition 
o f morals and religion i n the Fre e States. 
Fo r the Southern slaveholder was very 
orthodox and pious i n the strict theological 
sense of the word . H e believed i n the Bibl e 
from cover to cover as a book of divine 
oracles, and found therein abundant confirmation of his doctrine that slavery was a 
divine institution, and a blessing to both 
races. It was unavoidable therefore that 
Mrs. Stowe from his point of view should 
appear to be a very wicked woman, guilty 
of attempted robbery and actual blasphemy. 
An d such is the subtle relation between 
religion and economics. 
"The modern school o f philanthropy " with 
which the editor of the Observer 
somewhat vaguely classified Mrs. Stowe is 
also an interesting subject fo r analysis. W e 
can imagine it to ourselves pictured to the 
eye i n the manner of Kaulbach's celebrated 
cartoon of the Reformation. I n the background we would arrange the Broo k Farmers, 
and Transcendentalists, and contributors to 
the Dial. There are Emerson, Ripley , Mar ­
garet Fulle r and Theodore Parker—Emerso n 
whose "Divinit y School Address " had 
recently scared the enlightened Unitarian s 
and even the youn g James Russell Lowel l 
half out of their wits; Theodore Parker, 
who denied the miracles and the divinit y of 
Christ ; Margare t Fuller, who had announced 
i n the Dial that Christianit y was a prison. 
Then there woul d be represented as standin g about i n various attitudes Charles Sumner, Wendel l Phillips, Garriso n with his 
Liberator, Horac e Greeley with his Tribune 
and Henr y War d Beecher wit h a copy of the 
Independent. I n the foreground, where 
Vo n Kaulbac h has pictured Marti n Luther, 
is Harrie t Beecher Stowe with "Uncl e 
Tom's Cabin. " 
"See the mighty host advancing, 
Satan leading on! " 
N o wonder the editor of the Observer was 
alarmed. H e doubtless sought and found 
consolation i n the doctrines of election and 
total depravity. 
Mr . James Russell Lowel l has somewhere 
reminded us that "Time makes ancient good 
uncouth." It is easy for us in the light of 
this modern world i n which we live to 
smile at the ancient wisdom of the Southern 
slaveholders and their Northern sympa ­
thizers; but we must not forget that they 
were good men and true and had on their 
side all the' conservative and conserving 
influences of human society, as well as the 
Constitution and laws of the Unite d States. 
The anti-slavery movement must be 
reckoned with those onward-reaching forces 
that respect neither conservative traditions, 
constitutions, laws, churches nor thrones, but 
tear them all down ruthlessly i n the holy 
name of humanity and of progress. Mrs. 
Stowe wit h her "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " 
belonged, like all the rest of the Beechers, 
to the destructive rather than the constructive forces of the universe. That she should 
have been recognized as such i n her day and 
generation we can but acknowledge as 
inevitable. 
Slavery, social inequality and wa r all 
have had an important part and place in 
the evolution of man on this planet. 
Slavery has gone, and we are asking to-day 
i f wa r and social inequality are to follow. 
The lesson of the anti-slavery movement 
is i n brie f this: Socia l traditions, constitutions and laws are often on the side of 
wron g and injustice. Whe n they are, sooner 
or later they have to go, even though protected by the sanction of religion. I f it is 
true that might makes right it is truer still 
that in time right wil l make might. I f 
economics for a time dominate religion, the 
day wil l surely come when religion wil l rise 
and dominate economics. It was so yesterday and it wil l be so to-morrow. 
W e hear much to-day about the "leopard's 
spots." They are harmless compared to the 
"tiger's claws! " The "tiger's claws " seem 
to be thirsting for the poor leopard's blood, 
if the leopard forgets that he is an "inferior 
being" and can never therefore aspire to 38 TH E CRISIS 
politica l equality wit h the tiger. I n a speech 
at Poplarville , Miss. , i n April , 1907, Governor Vardama n said "Ho w is the white man 
going to control the government? The wa y 
we do it is to pass laws to fit the white man, 
and make the other people come to them. 
* * * I f necessary, every Negro i n the 
State wil l be lynched, and it wil l be done to 
maintain white supremacy. * * * The 
Fifteent h Amendment ought to be wipe d 
out! " Her e are the tiger's claws! Her e is 
something worse than economics, race hatred 
and prejudice that utters itself i n bestial 
threats of blood and slaughter subversive o f 
the very foundations o f civilize d society. 
It wil l go down, however, as slavery went 
down. The very stars i n their courses wil l 
fight against it. 
"Eigh t forever on the scaffold, wron g 
forever on the throne ; 
Ye t that scaffold rules the future, and 
behind the dim unknown 
Standeth Go d withi n the shadow keepin g watch above Hi s own. " 
WHA T T O REA D 
The Autobiography of an ex-Colored Man , 
Boston. Sherman, French & Company, 
1912. 
"This vivi d and startling new picture of 
conditions brought about by the race question 
i n the Unite d States makes no special appeal 
for the Negro, but shows i n a dispassionate, 
though sympathetic, manner conditions as 
they actually exist between the whites and 
blacks to-day. Specia l pleas have already 
been made fo r and against the Negro i n hundreds of books, but i n these books either his 
virtues or his vices have been exaggerated. 
This is because writers, i n nearly every in ­
stance, have treated the colored America n as 
a whole ; each has taken some one group of 
the race to prove his case. No t before has a 
composite and proportionate presentation of 
the entire race, embracing all of its various 
groups and elements, showing their relations 
wit h each other and to the whites, been 
made." 
The preceding paragraph quoted from the 
opening lines of the preface to this very interesting book gives i n a way a resume of it. It 
is indeed an epitome of the race situation i n 
the Unite d States told i n the form of an 
autobiography. The varied incidents, the 
numerous localities brought in , the setting 
forth i n all its ramifications of our great and 
perplexin g race problem, suggests a work of 
fiction founded on hard fact. The hero, a 
natura l son of a Southerner of high station, 
begins his real lif e i n a New Englan d town 
to which his mother had migrated, runs the 
whole gamut of color-line experiences, and 
ends by going over on the other side. 
The wor k gives a view of the race situation i n Ne w England , i n Ne w Yor k City , i n 
the fa r South, i n city and country, i n hig h 
and low society, wit h glimpses, too, of Eng ­
land, Franc e and Germany. Practicall y every 
phase and complexity of the race question 
is presented at one time or another. The 
wor k is, as might be expected, anonymous. 
The South and the Negro. Negroes in the 
Urban Movement. The Negro in New 
York. Outlook, June 29, 1912. 
The Negroes i n the South are, according 
to one of these articles, flocking to the cities. 
An d the reason for this is due, not to the 
call of city life , but largely to the "avidit y 
wit h whic h Negroes are seizing educational 
opportunities. They insist on being i n the 
towns where good schooling is possible. " 
Als o a commission of Southern university 
professors has decided to deal wit h the Negr o 
from an educational point of view. Eleve n 
State universities are to furnis h one professor each. The article goes on to remark : 
"The formation of this commission is a manifestation not only of the vita l wor k whic h 
Southern men are doing i n social economics, 
but of their real leadership i n matters of 
education, for the primar y function of education is to enable men to learn how to live 
i n right relations wit h one another, whatever 
their race and whatever their country. " 
Al l this sounds very well and encouraging. 
Bu t it is to be hoped very earnestly and i n 
no spirit of carpin g that the wor k of these 
leaders "i n matters of education" wil l be 
carried on i n a manne r fa r more scientific 
than that employed recently by one Mr . 
Charles Stelzle. NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORED PEOPLE 
MEMBERSHIP. 
SIXTEE N new members have been added 
to the association, and this month we 
also welcome a new branch—St. Louis—t o 
membership. W e now have ten branches. 
The constitutions of two more are under 
consideration and we are i n dail y receipt of 
applications from all parts of the country. 
Ma y we not especially urge on persons i n 
sympathy with our work the necessity of 
personally joinin g this association? W e 
need you r names, you r influence and your 
money. A s one frien d writes, "The clock is 
not going fast enough! " Le t us make time, 
and fast time, between now and Januar y 1. 
MEETINGS. 
MIS S MARTH A GRUENING , the assistant secretary, on September 15 
addressed a meeting at the Harle m Zio n 
Churc h on the wor k of the association. 
October 7 Miss Gruenin g spoke before an 
enthusiastic meeting of the Washingto n 
branch at the Shilo h Baptist Church. 
The Boston branch held the first of a 
series of meetings Wednesday, October 9, 
with the Hon . Albert E . Pillsbur y and Dr . 
Francis H . Rowle y as speakers. 
FUNDS. 
IN the campaign fo r funds the association 
is now makin g we need the active cooperation of every member. Althoug h the 
wor k of the year has been most encouraging , we must have larger resources at our 
disposal i f we are to cope successfully with 
the almost daily demands made upon us to 
fight the increasing violence and discrimina ­
tion which are spreading to such an alarmin g degree i n this country. Eve n the aged, 
insane women and morally defective children 
are not exempt, as was evidenced recently by 
the fate of Ann e Bostwick i n Georgia, Vir ­
gini a Christian i n Hampton , Va. , and the 
lynchin g i n West Virgini a of a probably 
innocent colored man. The association 
makes a special appeal to each member 
to help i n this wor k by securing two $5 
members or the equivalent, $10, i n memberships i n some form. Literatur e for free 
distribution and membership blanks wil l be 
furnished upon request. Checks should be 
drawn to Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, treasurer, 
60 Wal l Street, New Yor k City . 
LEGA L REDRESS. 
THE association's investigation of one of 
the most horrible lynchings of 1911 
has been completed. A n account of this wil l 
appear i n one of the leading popula r magazines, of which an exact notice wil l be given 
later i n TH E CRISIS . 
I n response to an anonymous appea l from 
a correspondent i n Bluefield, W . Va. , the 
association secured the services of Mr . James 
Oppenheim, the well-known journalist and 
novelist. Mr . Oppenheim made a careful 
investigation of the situation, the results of 
which appeared i n The Independent of 
October 10. 
MEMORIA L FUND . 
A T the last meeting of the board of directors it was voted that the Mar y Dun -
lop Maclea n memorial fund, or so much of 
it as may be necessary, be devoted to the 
publication of literature i n the interest of 
the association, each publication to bear the 
name of the fund. The memorial notice 
which appeared i n the August CRISI S has 
been reprinted. The memorial committee 
consists of the following : Miss Mar y Whit e 
Ovington, secretary; Dr. W . E . B . D u Bois, 
Miss Mar y Moseley, Mrs. Prances R. Key -
ser, Prof. E . R. A . Seligman, Willoughb y 
Walling , Marth a Gruenin g and Margare t 
Wycherl y Veiller. SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLO R 
(Died September 1, 1912, aged 37) 
Written for the London Daily Standard by ALFRE D NOYE S 
I. 
Farewell! The soft mists of the sunset sky 
Slowl y enfold his fadin g birc h canoe! 
Farewell! His dark, his desolate forests cry 
Move d to their vast, their sorrowful, depths 
anew. 
II. 
Fading ! Nay , lifted through a heaven of 
light, 
His prou d sails, brightening through that 
crimson flame, 
Leavin g us lonely on the shores of night, 
Home to Ponemah take his deathless fame. 
III. 
Generous as a child, so wholly free 
Fro m all base pride, that fools forgot his 
crown, 
H e adored Beauty i n pure ecstasy, 
An d waived the mere rewards of his 
renown. 
IV . 
The spark that falls from Heaven not oft on 
earth 
To human hearts this vita l splendor gives; 
His was the simple, true( immorta l birth ! 
Scholars compose; but this man's music 
lives! 
V . 
Greater than England , or than Eart h 
discerned, 
H e never paltered wit h his art fo r gain ; 
Whe n many a vaunted crown to dust is 
turned, 
This uncrowned kin g shall take his throne 
and reign. 
VI . 
Nations unborn shall hear his forests moan ; 
Age s unscanned shall hear his wind's 
lament, 
Hea r the strange grie f that deepened through 
his own, 
The vast cry of a buried continent. 
VII . 
Through him, his race a moment lifte d u p 
Forests of hands to Beaut y as i n prayer, 
Touched through his lip s the sacramental 
cup, 
An d then sank back, benumbed i n our 
bleak air. 
VIII . 
Through him, through him, a lost worl d 
hailed the light! 
The tragedy of that triump h none can tell, 
So great, so brief, so quickl y snatched from 
sight; 
An d yet—0 hail, great comrade, not 
farewell! 
<J The Negro lawyers of Oklahoma have 
formed a bar association, wit h forty 
members. 
<J Dr. A . B . Terrell, a colored man, has been 
made assistant physician to the board of 
health of For t Worth , Tex. H e is a 
graduate of the Universit y of Chicago and 
of the Harvar d Medica l School, and has 
taken an active part i n combating the epidemic of meningitis i n Texas. 
IJ I n Hutchinson, Kan. , a jur y composed 
entirely of colored men has been tryin g a 
case. Charles Fulton , deputy probate 
judge, remarked that he never saw a finer 
set of men on a jur y than those six colored 
men, one of them a doctor, another a min ­
ister- and a third a law student, and all of 
them men who have good education and 
character. It attracted a lot of attention, 
being a very unusua l occurrence i n Kansa s 
legal circles. 
<J A company of contractors who are build ­
in g automobile engines i n Ne w Yor k are 
developing a new ignitio n system whic h is 
the invention of a colored man . 
<J In Perry , Ind., Higb y Morgan , a colored 
boy, has taken the W . C. T. U . medal fo r the 
best composition. 
<J A man named Kelly , who is doing a tur n 
called "Th e Virgini a Judge " on the stage, so 
angered the colored people of Montrea l by 
his use of the wor d "Nigger " that he had to 
have police escort home. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Publishers Page 
The Christmas Number 
A n exquisite cover by Richar d Brown ; a novelette, the strongest 
piece of fiction we have published, by Jessie Fauset. 
Read y Novembe r 22—orde r early. 
Als o a dainty Christmas card with baby faces. 
THE DUNBAR COMPANY 
To keep abreast with the remarkable growth of TH E CRISIS, we have 
combined our mail-order and service departments into one big department, which 
will be known as TH E DUNBA R COMPANY . 
It is fitting that we inaugurate this feature in this, our Anniversary Number, 
as it marks the realization of carefully laid plans and novel ideas for the convenience, pleasure and comfort of our thousands of reader friends. 
Aside from books, pamphlets, patterns, etc., we will add pictures and postcards of Negro subjects, music by Negro composers, jewelry, toilet articles, 
wearing apparel, etc. 
Our splendid location in the busy section of the nation's largest city enables 
us to go directly to manufacturers and producers of these articles for our purchases and sell them to you at such prices as will eliminate the wholesalers' and 
jobbers' profits. 
Each article sold by us will have our guarantee that it measures up to TH E 
CRISIS standard of excellence. Quality will always be our first consideration, 
and while price will be consistent thereto, it will always remain at the lowest 
possible point. 
We believe that such prices and quality will appeal to those in "Jim Crow" 
localities, where direct shopping is robbed of its pleasures by discourteous salespeople and shopkeepers. TH E DUNBA R COMPAN Y will always maintain a 
scale of prices within reach of our patrons, and by concentrating the efforts of 
a part of our force to this work, we can assure our friends prompt dispatch of 
orders and careful attention to each detail. 
In the Christmas Number we will offer you some splendid holiday gift 
suggestions, and during the succeeding months other new and novel features to 
this department will be added. 
After Christmas there will be a large illustrated catalogue, brimful of articles, 
many and varied, to meet the every-day requirements of each member of the 
family, not forgetting the low prices to save you money. 
41 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Why the Negro Should Be a Progressive 
Suffrage i n this country, so far as the Negro is concerned, has been a national 
travesty. It has been the one standing blot upon the Unite d States, that has won for 
her the merited contempt and just criticism of the intelligent and justice-loving 
world. Suffrage was bestowed upon the Negro by the Republican party and was stolen 
from him by the Democratic party. "Tho u shalt not steal " has had about as much 
place i n the political decalogue of the Southern Democrats as it had i n the politica l 
decalogue of the stand-pat Chicago Republicans of June, 1912. 
Under the disfranchising laws of the several Southern States, Negro suffrage has 
become so restricted and worthless as a politica l factor that the Republican party has 
tacitly decided that Negro suffrage was a failure, and not the slightest effort was put 
forth to prevent the nullification of those amendments to the Constitution which gave 
the Negro freedom, citizenship and suffrage. An d it remained for the Taft administration to set the seal of official approval upon the unconstitutional legislation of 
the South, by the wholesale removal of the Negro from federal office throughout the 
South, and declaring that no more would be appointed where it was objectionable to 
Southern whites. 
Upon this Taft propaganda, "lil y whitism " took on new lif e and blossomed and 
bloomed in the South as never before. The Negro was politically down and out. H e 
had been bound by his politica l enemies, the Democrats, and basely deserted and 
betrayed by his political friends, the Republicans. H e stood without a politica l friend, 
and not a voice throughout the length and breadth of the land was lifted i n sympathy 
or i n defense. It was the Negroes' political extremity; and smarting under the grievous 
injustice that had been done them, and spurred on by desire for politica l revenge, 
thousands reviled the name of Taft, and thousands pocketing their pride, hat i n hand, 
started toward the camp of their ancient enemies, the Democrats, intent only on makin g 
friends and getting even wit h Taft, the "lil y whites, " and the Republican party, a 
combination of political hypocrites, ingrates and highwaymen. 
"Go d maketh the wrath of men to praise him; " and i f there ever has been a 
demonstration of these words, plain and positive, it was demonstrated at Chicago i n 
June. The men who manipulated the Chicago convention forced the nomination of 
Taft i n haughty disregard of decency and honesty, littl e dreamed of what they were 
doing. The Negro delegates, who aided in forcing Taft upon the Republican party, 
despite the thousand-voiced protests of Maryland , Ne w Jersey, Pennsylvania , Massachusetts, West Virginia , Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and the West, had not the slightest 
idea that they were stabbing the Republican party to death; and thus the politica l 
selfishness and hate of a few white men and the politica l blindness of a few Negroes 
accomplished in a day what might have otherwise taken a score of years to encompass; namely, the death of the Republican party. Brought into existence i n 1856 to 
protect four millions of enslaved Negroes, it was killed, unintentionally, however, i n 1912 
by less than threescore Negroes, the slaves of politica l bosses and the hirelings of the 
"Almight y Dollar. " 
The Republican party is dying of old age—political senility. It has outlived its 
usefulness. It has served its missions. It has run its race, its days are numbered and 
on November 5 the Republican party wil l go to its long home and the mourners wil l 
go about the streets. 
The . disintegration, death and annihilation of the Republican party wil l mean a 
second emancipation of the Negro. There wil l remain no more politica l debts to be 
paid and the Negro wil l be absolutely free to vote for whatever party his conscience 
may direct him to support. 
The disfranchisement and "Ji m Crowism " of the South have come about because 
the Republican party was too cowardly to prevent the same, although i t had a 
Republican President, a Republican Congress and a Republican Supreme Court to 
legislate, interpret and enforce the plain mandates of the Constitution. 
Prom 1856 down to 1908 the Republican party had never failed to mention the 
Negro in the platform. It remained for the platform of 1912, for the first time i n 
the history of the party, to be absolutely silent and forgetful of the Negro i n strict 
and consistent accord wit h the Taft Southern policy. An d yet the Negroes renominated 
him! An d in return, his platform forgot them! TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 43 
Deserted by the Republican party, undesirable, and not wanted in the national 
Democratic party, which way shall the Negro turn his face, and whither direct his 
steps? Over yonder on the hil l of progress is the sun-glinted camp of the Progressives. 
Waving proudly above the camp is a banner upon which is inscribed: "W e invite into 
our ranks men and women entirely without regard to their former political affiliations to 
their creed, their birthplace or the color of their skin.' ' Wil l the Negro go in and 
enroll? Wil l the Negro still hanker after the flesh pots of dead Republicanism? Wil l 
the Nego use sense—common sense—instead of sentiment? Is he so blind that he 
cannot see i n the Progressive party a Godsent opportunity for political and civi c 
betterment, such as he has not had since the days of reconstruction? Is he so deaf 
that he cannot hear the voice of self-interest and self-protection calling and urging 
him to join the Progressive party? 
Wha t has he to gain by casting his lot with this new party? Everything ! Wha t 
has he to lose? Nothing! Fo r down at the very bottom of the civic and political 
lif e of this country, any kin d of political upheaval, political disturbance, politica l 
earthquake, which destroys old conditions, old parties and old systems, and old ideas, 
must redound to the benefit of the Negro, whether it is so intended or not. 
President Taft, under politica l fright and pressure, has uttered more words of 
politica l comfort and performed more acts of political benefit to the Negro since 
Theodore Roosevelt announced himself a candidate for the Presidency than at any 
other time during the three years of his term of office. Governor Wilson has not 
failed to declare himself a political "Christia n gentleman, " recognizing the politica l 
brotherhood of all men under the Constitution, as he welcomed Negro support, and 
thus far has kept from the stump in the North ' ' Jim Crowers' ' and disfranchisers of the 
South, lest the Negro voter should become frightened and take to his heels at the sight of 
his real leaders, supporters and controllers of his party. 
Is the Negro to be fooled by the deathbed utterances of Taft and the hypocritical 
utterances of Wilson? The sensible, thoughtful Negro wil l support the Progressive 
party because it emancipates him from party slavery, wipes out the aged party debt 
to the Republican party, and permits him to vote according to the dictates of his 
own conscience; because he can enter the Progressive party as a charter member, and 
be in the party, of the party, and an actual part of the party; because it offers to 
him the line of the least resistance; because he wil l not be dealt wit h as racial mass, 
but as a man, recognized by worth and merit; because the success of the Progressive 
party wil l do away wit h the Africanizin g of three or four politica l appointments i n 
Washington as a return for the support of race; because in following the leadership 
of Theodore Roosevelt, he wil l be following not Theodore Roosevelt the man, but 
Theodore Roosevelt the incarnate representation of a new party whose platform 
recognizes no creed, no race, no color; politica l equality of sex; physical conservation 
of men, women and children, and the conservation of natural resources; a minimum 
wage; control of the trust; protection to the laborer, and the enforcement of the 
Constitution and every amendment. 
In choosing the least of three political evils, the Negro wil l certainly choose the 
Progressive party. 
In choosing the best of three political leaders, the unbiased Negro wil l surely 
choose Theodore Roosevelt—the man of courage and convictions, fearless and incorruptible—the man who does things, and who wil l do more to help the Negro than any 
other Presidential candidate now before the people. 
SHOULDN'T TH E NEGRO THE N BE A PROGRESSIVE 
AND VOT E FOR ROOSEVELT AND JOHNSON ? 
JAMES H. HAYES, Richmond, Va. 
(Adv.) 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
QU O VADIS? 
Fo r forty-two years the Republican party has ridden up to the gates of heaven on 
the back of the Negro and then tied him on the outside. With the patience of the 
pack mule the black man has submitted. The grand old party of Abraham Lincoln 
would surely come out to the. outer gate where he stood tethered and lead him into 
the promised land! Such implicit confidence, such blind, dogged faith, the world has 
seen but once before—the time ' nearly 300 years ago, when the white men in their 
square-rigged sloops sailed down the Eastern Atlanti c from Europe to Africa, and 
wit h words of honey, trinkets and dross enticed into slavery the forbears of the 
present trustful, gullible black American. Brought hither i n droves he has allowed 
himself to be herded ever since, until to-day he stands before the world as the 
greatest psychological phenomenon in all history; actually demonstrating that it is a 
possibility for millions of people of a given racia l persuasion to think alike for nearly 
fifty years, no matter how varyin g and differing the propositions submitted to his 
consideration. Is this a sign of mental activit y or mental stagnation or, to be fair, 
does it mean that in American politics, when white men are naturally differing and 
disagreeing over great live questions of civi c and economic policies, black men must 
forever herd themselves around the standards of a dead issue? Does it mean that 
while the white man advances from the discussion of Greenbackism, Bimetalism and 
Tariff Schedules to Government Ownership of Publi c Utilities, the Direc t Electio n of 
Unite d States Senators, the Initiative and Referendum; the polemics of the black 
man must ever be predicated upon Abraham Lincol n and the Civi l War ? 
This is a grave question i n any kin d of a civilize d government. I n a democratic 
republic it is a question which connotes a condition of positive danger. For in our 
government each citizen is a sovereign and the very health and lif e of the nation 
depends upon the intelligent deliberation and wisdom wit h which each sovereign meets 
the questions submitted to him. A n ignorant electorate is a voidable danger; an 
electorate not ignorant, but stubbornly, blindly and traditionally, prejudiced and 
vindictive , is a menace which must be overthrown or it wil l i n time subvert all 
government of the people, by the people and for the people. The enlightened publicists 
of the nation, irrespective of party, have observed this dire phenomenon, and Nort h and 
South, East and West, white men of all shades of politica l beliefs have grown callous 
to the black man's pleadings for political and civi c liberty under the Constitution. 
Of the servants of the Lor d the Negro received only the one talent, and as it came 
to pass in the parable of holy writ he comes forth to-day crying : "An d I was afraid, 
and went and hid thy talent in the earth. * * * " And the talent which was his 
was taken from him and given to him who had the ten talents. Nearl y half a century 
ago the talent of American citizenship was given to the Negro. Wherein to-day, after 
voting like wooden blocks all these years, can he show an increase of his powers 
as a citizen? Almost pari passu with the onward progress of the Republican party the 
Negro has descended lower and lower i n the scale of American citizenship. H e cannot 
accuse the Democratic party as being the responsible and sole agent of his retrogression; 
for the power, the nearly absolute power, has been i n the hands of the. Republican 
party throughout all but eight of these dreary years of hopes born to die again. 
Whether i n that clause apportioning direct taxes and representatives among the people 
of the several States, or i n that which makes the House of Representatives the sole 
judge of the qualifications of its own members, or i n the clause which guarantees to 
each State a Republican form of government there is ample law i n the Constitution. 
It isn't legislation which is needed, but the honest desire to enforce the law already 
written. This the Republican party has failed to do. There are two kinds of sins 
the sin of commission and the sin of omission, and the not doing of those things 
which we ought to do is just as culpable as the doing of those things which we ought 
not to do. This in a general way sums up the relation of the black man to the government in which he lives. There are some facts of recent occurrence which show to what 
low estate the Negro has fallen in the house of his friends. 
A t Chicago, last June, sixty-six black men held the balance of power in the 
Republican convention. They could have nominated Roosevelt. They nominated Taftnot that they loved Roosevelt less, but because, as black Republicans, they obeyed the 
behests of the regular party machinery. For their loyalty they asked for a radica l 
platform plank for the race they represented. They received the weakest expression 
for justice to Negroes which has appeared i n a Republican platform since 1872. 
When Roosevelt announced the date for his Bul l Moose convention for last August 
there were hundreds of thousands of black men whose bosoms heaved wit h the TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 45 
enthusiastic hope that at last the hour had struck when the dashing Chevalier of the 
"Squar e Deal, " "Th e Door of Hope, " "Al l Me n U p and No Me n Down, " would 
make solemn asseveration of those Presidential utterances which i n a former day had 
wrung from their throats lusty and exultant hosannas. ' ' On to the Roosevelt convention " was the cry. "Th e Crusader of the Common People is the Moses who wil l 
lead us out of the wilderness. " Ever y Southern State elected its full quota of colored 
delegates. Lik e burning excelsior their enthusiasm was a "fast but fading fire;" for 
there came out of the cloudless heavens a thunderbolt which staggered the nation and 
dashed to the ground, wit h a cruelty unparalleled, the high hopes of the mighty black 
phalanx of delegates who stood ready to rush to the standards of their idol. It was 
the Julia n Harris letter, i n which Roosevelt, i n the insane delusion that he might 
capture some Southern States, proclaimed his opposition to the sitting of Southern 
colored men i n his convention. Disaster followed disaster. Hoping still that the 
convention, whose symbolic hymn was "Onward , Christian Soldiers, " would listen to 
their humble pleadings, these colored delegates, through the kindly and noble offices 
of Prof. Spingarn of Columbia University, himself a delegate, offered the following 
plank for incorporation in the platform of the Bul l Moose party! 
"The Progressive party recognizes that distinctions of race or class in political life 
have no place in a democracy. Especially does the party realize that a group of 
10,000,000 people who have in a generation changed from a slave to a free labor system, 
re-established family life, accumulated $1,000,000,000 of real property, including 
20,000,000 acres of land, and reduced their illiteracy from 90 to 30 per cent., deserve 
and must have justice, opportunity and a voice in their own government. The party, 
therefore, demands for the American of Negro descent the repeal of unfair discriminatory laws and the right to vote on the same terms in which other citizens vote." 
The reading of this plank instantly struck a popular chord and everything bade 
fair for its passage, when a man arose and made objection. He was given profound 
attention, for he was a man whose renown extended over two continents. He had been 
a member of the Cabinet of Theodore Roosevelt and later Ministe r to Turkey. In 
private life he was a merchant prince and philanthropist. This man himself was a 
member of a despised race of people whose struggles for civi c and religious liberty 
have been the marvel of centuries. He encouched his objections to this plank of 
justice to another oppressed people i n earnest but brief speech. He carried the day 
and the plank was voted down. This man was Oscar Straus, the Bull Moose nominee 
for Governor of New York. Thus was the Negro betrayed i n the house of his friends. 
But where can he go? 
The Democratic party, standing on the Jeffersonian principle of ' ' equal rights to 
all, special privileges to none,' ' is opposed to the practice of placing in its party 
platforms declarations making of any class or race its special pledges; it believes that 
planks of this kin d are not only inserted for decoy purposes, but that they are of a 
piece wit h class legislation. A t its national convention i n Baltimore, last June, Senator 
Newlands of Nevada, a member of the resolutions committee, made a stubborn attempt 
to have his plank declaring for the national disfranchisement of colored persons made 
a part of the Democratic platform. He made a direct and impassioned appeal to the 
Southern members of the committee, among whom were Senators Tillman and Vardaman. 
When the vote was taken it stood 39 to 1. Not only did this Democratic committee 
on resolutions refuse to deliver this wanton attack upon colored men, i n spite of the 
fact that colored men had always voted against the Democratic party; but i n the 
convention itself marked courtesies were extended to the members of the Nationa l 
Colored Democratic League, and to the ladies who accompanied many of them. 
A n earlier instance of this disposition of the Democratic party to extend the olive 
branch to the black man was afforded shortly' after the Congressional campaign of 
1910, when colored voters in unprecedented numbers assisted i n the election of the first 
Democratic Congress since 1894. Speaker Champ Clark addressed a delegation of 
colored men i n the Speaker's Room at the Capitol, and in a speech remarkable for 
its profound sincerity assured the colored people that inasmuch as colored men were 
finally beginning to identify themselves wit h the Democratic party, the Democratic 
members of the House would see to it that no legislation inimica l to Negroes should 
be given serious consideration as long as be was Speaker. An d this promise was 
religiously observed to the closing day of the Sixty-second Congress. 
It does not require a philosopher or a statesman to see a light i n a sky long 
shrouded i n darkness. Al l that is needed is clear vision and a mind free from the 
cobwebs of ancient history and traditional prejudice. Governor Wilson is the highest 
type of a Christian gentleman and scholar. His antecedents, training and public life are 
absolute guarantees of an aversion to everything which savors of "Man' s inhumanity 
to man. " Bu t seldom i n their political career have colored men had the opportunity 
to vote for a man who possessed his sympathy with the struggles and aspirations of 
humanity. The opportunity lies open to them and there are thousands who wil l accept 
it. The others we exhort as did Rienz i the Romans: "Awake , arise, or be forever 
fallen. " (Adv.) 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which YO U 
have been looking may possibly be here on this page. 
A large corporation advertised i n TH E CRISI S for a general manager with 
capital. The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those 
with capital and experience. They write: 
' ' We believe that one of the parties is really interested i n 
our proposition and will close with him i n a few days.' ' 
They ' ' closed' ' with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
SUNLIGHT A T NIGHT 
Th e Sun-Ra y Mantl e Incandescent Kerosene Burne r 
burns common kerosene or coa l oil. 100 candle -
power light. Burn s 95% ai r an d only 5% oil 
Burner s fit al l screw colla r lamps. New improved 
1912 model. Odorless, noiseless, absolutely safe. 
Every lam p guaranteed. Price s defy competitionWrit e for our agency proposition. 
SIMPLE X GASLIGH T CO. 
Dept. C. New York City, N. Y . 
We Wil l Star t You in a 
Paying Business for $10.00 
W e are importers and manufacturers of 
natural human hair and all kinds of human 
hair goods. 
O n an investment of $10.00 we wil l ship 
yo u enough goods to clear from $20.00 
to $30.00, and show yo u how to conduct 
a profitable business. 
Hairdressin g taught by capable instructors. Terms from $5.00 to $50.00. Positions guaranteed our graduates. Address 
C. S. STARK , Manufacturer 
54 Oakwood Avenue Orange, N. J. 
Don't Slave for Wages 
Be your own boss. We show you how. 
Particulars free. 
JACKSO N SPECIALT Y CO . 
Box 22A East Lynn, Mass. 
AGENTS—Represent reliable house, 400 per 
cent, profit. Selling GORDON'S Photo Pillow 
Tops. High grade work. Easy sales. Biff money. 
Samples and catalogue free. 
Luther Gordon Co. 206 N. Fifth Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
AGENTS —Bi g money. Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted Negr o pictures. Portraits. Pillo w Tops. Catalo g 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U , Chicago, Ill. 
WANTED —Reliabl e men wit h references 
to handle the best Stock Investment on 
the market. An y good solicitor can earn 
from $50 to $100 per month. 
Ou r reference: Th e Ban k of Moun d 
Bayou . 
TH E S. I. & E . CORPORATIO N 
Moun d Bayou, Miss. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our propertie s in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country wher e there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES 
WANTE D A T ONCE.— Partne r i n real 
estate and insurance business. Bi g opportunity for right man. Must be a live wire . 
Business established. Idea l location. 
Address: 
H . DAVI D MURRAY , Bank Floor, 
S. E . Cor. State and 31st Sts., Chicago,Ill. 
ESTABLISHE D BUSINES S FO R SALE . 
—Owne r of milliner y and hair-dressing 
business wil l sell milliner y department. 
Establishe d 20 years. Reason, il l health. 
Address: Mrs. J. Wallace, 3247 State St., 
Chicago, Ill. 
MUTUA L TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommend s teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington. D. C. 
The Power of Womanhood 
A Speech by Joseph Wellington 
PRIC E 20 CENT S 
Sol d by 
TH E STANDAR D NEW S COMPAN Y 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
TYPEWRITERS 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
Jewetts , $11.50 each; 
Franklins, Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. All guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Park Row, New York 
NOVELTIES 
Phone: West 3497 Insurance 
W . IRVIN G THOMA S 
Pen Novelties and Fancy Card Writing 
Send 15 cents for one dozen sample cards 
wit h you r name and address. Xmas cards 
—all styles. Orde r early. 
2720 West Lake Street Chicago, Ill. 
WORTHINGTON'S PHOTO-ETTS 
Somethin g New—35 cents 
O n receipt of thirty-five (35) cents I wil l send to any 
par t of the Unite d States or Canada , six of our little 
PHOTO-ETTS . copied fro m any photo or tintype. Postage 
prepaid by us. 
Wra p well the photo you send. Specia l care will be taken 
with al l photos sent to us. W e guarantee thei r prompt 
retur n wit h your orde r as sent. Al l money should be sent 
In stamps, or by postoffice money orde r payabl e to 
WORTHINGTO N AR T STUDIO 
4711 State Street Chicago , Ill. 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
PATENTS 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AND ELECTRICA L ENGINEER 
and 
SOLICITOR OF PATENTS 
66 John Street New York 
• Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machines Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone Room 604 343 John 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNEY DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 West 63d Street New York, N. Y. 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
P. and A. Phone, 4771 F. 
JOH N B . DAVI S 
Funeral Director 
Shipping to All Parts a Specialty 
Carriages for Receptions 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free 
2154 Wylie Avenue Pittsburgh, Pa. 
A PLAC E T O STOP 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class Peopl e 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, Ill. 
MOVING 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKING AND SHIPPING 
ANDREW J. BRANIC 
Formerly Manager Virginia Transfer Company 
469 SEVENT H AVENU E New York City 
Orders by mail or phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNKS STORED 25c. PER MONTH 
Official Expressman for the C. V. B. A. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningside 
DR. D. W. ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W. Cor. 133d St. and Lenox Ave., New York 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays by Appointment 
Mention- TH E CRISIS . 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY S 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Intr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
328 Lenox Avenue 
Telephone Harlem 1896 
126th Street, NEW YORK. 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
A HOUSEHOL D WONDE R 
PROTECT S TH E HAN D 
SAVE S TIM E AN D LABO R 
Thousands of users say it's the best polisher on earth for silverware, signs, guns, 
harness, pianos, furniture, automobile bodies, 
lamps, etc., etc. 
Made—like cut—of special tanned lamb's 
wool on the hide, and has a protected tip. 
Sam e mitt 
adopted by the 
Pullman Company, for porters' use on the 
best trains. 
A few large users: Al l Nixon & Zimmerman theatres; the Gladstone, Walton, 
Blenheim Hotels, Philadelphia; Traymore, 
Shelburne, Atlantic City; Knickerbocker, 
New York, and other hotels, garages and 
many ocean liners, yachts and a thousand 
households. 
Price 25 cents each postpaid. 
Special prices to large users. 
A splendid proposition for agents. It 
sells on sight. Write to-day for particulars. 
J . E. REDDICK 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
Telephone 3253 Harlem 
CARPE T GLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
For Particular People 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the warld, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOING CARPETS AND 
SPECIALTY 
RUGS OUR 
Folding BATHTU B 
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water. 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lasts for 
years. Write for special agents offer and description. ROBINSON 
MPG.CO.,11 1 Vanc e St.. Toledo, O. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
The HARRIE T TUBMA N 
Neighborhoo d Clu b 
Fo r the Benefit of the Detention 
Home for Colored Girls 
Wil l present for the first time a dramati c 
pantomime of scenes from "Macbeth, " 
"Merchan t of Venice, " "Othello, " and a 
groupin g of pictures showin g some of the 
struggles of the great heroine, Harrie t Tub ­
man, at Young's Casino, East 134th Street 
and Par k Avenue , on Novembe r 15, 1912. 
General admission, 50 cents; boxes, seating eight 
and ten persons, $4 and $6. 
Mr . Charles Burroughs is director of the pantomime ; Mrs. Dor a Cole Norman, instructor of dance; 
Mrs. Daisy Tapley, i n charge of chorus; Marie Jackson Stuart, president and manager. 
Musi c by New Amsterdam Orchestra—Prof. Pastor 
Penalver, leader. 
REA L ESTAT E 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Large tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. We have 
for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses an ' barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
City property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Large 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. For any investment in Texas property, write T. B. Madison Real 
Estate Company, 2415 Elm Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE—We have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Can sell you a 
house for $50, $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. For investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Farm land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. An y of these are in good locations. 
Write for further information. 
THIS IS A COLORED ENTERPRISE. 
EDWAR D A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estate 
Mt. Vernon Ave. Columbus, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapte r I. Ho w the colored people won their civil and politica l rights. 
Chapters II. and III. Th e Negr o tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living , wit h a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapte r VI . Th e colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapte r VII . A vivi d description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapte r VIII . Th e Negr o in politics in New York . 
Chapte r IX . Th e author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Department of The Crisis, 26 Vesey St., N . Y . 
PRINTIN G IS AR T 
It is not expensive machinery and high-grade paper stock alone, 
but it is those things plus correct type formations and artistic blending 
of colors with textures combined with superior workmanship. 
Progressive business men appreciate the business-building qualities 
of stationery, catalogues and printed things produced in our shop. 
Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue, Dr. W . E . B . D u Bois, of TH E 
CRISIS, and Prof. J. E . Spingarn are among our satisfied patrons. 
Write for samples and quotations. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
If you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
FRANKLI N W. WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Real Estate Conveyancer 
206 Parrish Street Durham, N. C. 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New York City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
Telephone 5574 Beekman Booms 905 to 907 
WILFOR D H . SMIT H 
Lawyer 
150 Nassau Street New York City 
Uptown Office—136 West 136th Street 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Office: Room 502, Eberly Block, Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Port Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOOL STREET Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore. Md. 
PAMPHLET S 
Published and sold by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. African Civilization: By M . D. Maclean. Pric e 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
B y Burt G. Wilder. Pric e 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: By Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Pric e 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: By Brigadier-Genera l Burt, U . S. A . Pric e 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Pric e 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Pric e 2 cents. 
7. Disfranchisement: B y Joh n Haynes 
Holmes. Pric e 5 cents. 
8. Disfranchisement: B y W . E . B . 
D u Bois. Pric e 10 cents. 
Address 
TH E DUNBAR COMPAN Y 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Writ e 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES: 26 Vese y Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911 
OFFICERS 
National President—Mr. Moorneld Storey, Boston, Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mass. Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Vice-Presidents— Treasurer—Mr. Walter E. Sachs, New York. 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. Director of Publicity and Research— 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York. Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. Secretary—Miss May Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller, Baltimore, Md. Assistant Secretary—Miss Martha Gruening, New 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn, N. Y. York. 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civi rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
OUR MEMBERSHI P 
CLOCK 
Octobe r 15,191 2 
JOIN US 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name -
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 
per year. 
Class 4. Contributing Members, paying $10, 
$5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 per 
year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annual 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECKS PAYABL E TO NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
OF COLORED PEOPLE, 26 VESE Y STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. BES T BOOK S 
For students of the Negro Problem and general readers. Your library will 
be incomplete without a selection from this up-to-date list. 
These are books produced by the best writers and most able authorities on 
the problems affecting the races. By mail at following prices: 
ESSAYS 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. 
Kelly Miller $2.15 
SOULS of BLAC K FOLK . 
W. E. B. Du Bois 1.35 
CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. 
Jas. F. Morton, Jr 27 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY STUDIES 
The Atlant a University Studies are an 
annual study of decennially recurring subjects, covering every phase of Negro-American life. 
No. 7—TH E NEGRO ARTISAN $ .75 
No. 8—TH E NEGRO CHURCH 1.50 
No. 9—NOTES ON NEGRO CRIME. . .50 
No. 10—BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TH E 
NEGRO-AMERICAN 25 
No. 11—HEALT H AND PHYSIQUE 
OF TH E NEGRO-AMERICAN 1.50 
No. 12—ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION 
AMONG NEGRO-AMERICANS 1.00 
No. 13—THE NEGRO - AMERICAN 
FAMIL Y 75 
No. 14—EFFORTS FOR SOCIAL 
BETTERMEN T AMONG NEGROAMERICANS 75 
No. 15—THE COLLEGE-BRE D NEGROAMERICA N 75 
No. 16—THE NEGRO COMMON 
SCHOOL 75 
FICTION 
QUEST OF TH E SILVER FLEECE . 
W. E. B. Du Bois $1.50 
FLOWE R O' TH E PEACH . 
Percival Gibbon 1.45 
MARROW OF TRADITION. 
Chas. W. Chesnutt 1.65 
HOUSE BEHIND TH E CEDARS. 
Chas. W. Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E WIFE OF HIS YOUTH . 
Chas. W. Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E CONJURE WOMAN. 
Chas. W. Chesnutt 1.40 
SPORT OF TH E GODS. 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.65 
TH E TESTING FIRE. 
Alexander Corkey 1.35 
WISDOM'S CALL. 
Sutton E. Griggs 60 
POEMS 
LYRICS OF LOWL Y LIFE . 
Paul Laurence Dunbar $1.40 
LYRICS OF TH E HEARTH-SIDE. 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.40 
LYRICS OF LOV E AND LAUGHTER . 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.40 
LYRICS OF SUNSHINE AND SHADOW. 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.40 
POEMS OF PHILLI S WHEATLE Y 1.10 
HISTORICAL AN D SCIENTIFIC 
NEGRO IN TH E SOUTH. 
Washington and Du Bois $1.10 
NEGRO IN TH E NEW WORLD. 
Sir Harry Johnston 6.30 
MIND OF PRIMITIVE MAN . 
Franz Boaz 1.65 
INTER-RACIAL PROBLEMS . 
Official Record. Univ. R. C.. . . 2.55 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO RACE. 
E. A. Johnson 1.40 
NEGRO EXPLORE R AT TH E NORTH 
POLE. 
Matthew A. Henson 1.10 
SUPPRESSION OF TH E SLAV E 
TRADE. 
W. E. B. Du Bois 1.65 
BIOGRAPHIES, ETC . 
JOHN BROWN. 
W. E. B. Du Bois §1.40 
FREDERIC K DOUGLASS. 
Booker T. Washington 1.40 
LIF E OF HARRIET BEECHE R STOWE. 
By her son and grandson 1.65 
UP FROM SLAVERY . 
. 1.65 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX -
COLORED MAN . 
1.40 
SOCIAL STUDIES 
HALF-A-MAN . 
$1.12 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . 
W. A. Sinclair 1.65 
SOUTHER N SOUTH. 
Albert B. Hart 1.65 
RAC E PREJUDICE. 
J. Finot ... . 3.25 
NEGRO AND TH E NATION. 
G. C. Merriam 1.92 
FRE E 
Shoul d yo u at any 
time require special in ­
formation concerning 
books, authors or publishers, WRIT E US . 
Ou r location gives us 
the opportunity to 
render this service to 
our many patrons. 
This service is FREE . 
SPECIAL OFFER Add 75 cents to the 
regular price quoted 
for any of these books and we will send you TH E 
CRISIS for one yea r and one CRISIS cove r design, 
printed on plain paper, for framing. Size 8% x 11. 
Address all orders to 
THE DUNBAR COMPANY 
26 Vesey Street Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention T H E CRISIS 