The New Year 
Crisis 
January 1916 fa fa PUBLISHER'S CHAT fa fa 
The CRISIS Calendar for 19! 6 is a small encyclopedia of the Negro race, with 
all the facts you want and can never find. Twenty-five cents. Order now for 
the edition is limited. 
Is it a New Year's Gift to a friend ? Why not make it a year's subscription to 
The CRISIS ? The subscription is One Dollar per year. Our pretty holiday card 
announcing the gift will be sent for the asking. 
The February CRISIS will be New Orleans Number and it will be unusually well worth reading. 
H Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton; 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK. (W . E. B . D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Ilodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G . Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E . B . Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HAL L AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W . E . B. D U Bois) 50 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G . Woodsor.) 2.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T. Washington) 3.00 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.50 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.00 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
OU T OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
Address THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention THE CRISIS Edition 36,00 0 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE. NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted. 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for January, 1916 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. "To the Highest Bidder." After the celebrated painting by Harry 
Roseland. Copyrighted by the artist. 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 119 
IRA ALDRIDGE 121 
TW O MAJORS 130 
OUR CHRISTMAS GREETINGS T O HAITI 134 
LYNCHING A T TEMPLE, TEXA S 145 
ARTICLES 
"AUN T BET " By D. A. M. 136 
SEBASTIAN GOMEZ By Arthur A. Schomburg 136 
TH E "JIM-CROW" CAR . An N. A. A. C. P. Investigation. Part II. 
By T. Montgomery Gregory 137 
GO. A Poem : By Lucian B. Watkins 143 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLOR LINE 111 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 118 
OPINIONS 122 
EDITORIAL 132 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 139 
TH E BURDEN 144 
TH E LETTE R BOX 146 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 108 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-six years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, OA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offen full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expense! Tery reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1915 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
THE AGRICULTURAL 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of 
North Carolina 
(Formerly the A. & M. College) 
The 22d annual session began 
September 1, 1915. Board, lodging 
and tuition $8.00 per month. Four 
year courses leading to trade certificates. Four year college courses 
leading to degrees of Bachelor of 
Science in Agriculture and Bachelor 
of Science in Mechanics. 
For catalog or further information 
Address 
President Dudley, A. & T. College 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W . DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and groundi. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
BEREA N MANUA L TRAININ G 
AN D INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Fall Term and Seventeenth Year Opened 
Tuesday, October 5th, 1915 
Domestic Art, Industrial Art, Commercial, 
Music and English. Excellent opportunity for 
small groups and specialized classes. Age, sex 
or previous training no bar to entrance if applicant has good character. 
Helpfulness our object. Efficiency our aim. 
Evening session. Write now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
192 6 SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE PHILADELPHIA. PA. 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 109 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H. PAKKHUKST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this yearT 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. For teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNE Y HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CHISIS 110 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
ROLAN D W . HAYES , TENO R 
Recitals Concerts Oratorio Opera 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWICK ST., BOSTON. MASS. 
Evans Art 
Pianos AN D Players 
Factory to You 
AND UP CAN BE SAVED BY MY PLAN OI 
SELLING DIRECT FROM MY FACTORY TO YOU. I CAN 
SAVE VOU FROM S125 TO §250 ON AN Evans Artist 
Model Piano or flayer. 
FREIGHT Paid
 fn e E&SIEST KIND OF TERMS,WEEKLY, MONTHLY, QUARTERLY OR YEARLY 
PAYMENTS TO SUIT YOUR CONVENIENCE. ALL MIDDLEMEN, JOBBERS, DEALERS AND AGENTS PROFITS CUT 
OUT. THESE ARE SOME I>F THE REASONS WHY 1 CAN SELL 
THE EVANS ARTIST MODEL PIANOS FOR SUCH LITTLE 
MONEY. LET ME SEND YUU THE OTHER REASONS. 
3 0 DAY S FRE E TRIA L 
WE ALLOW ALL FREIGHT CHARGES, LET YOU USE THE 
BEAUTIFUL EVANS ARTIST MODEL PIANO FOR THIRTY 
DAYS FREE. IF YOU ARE NOT ENTIRELY SATISFIED, WE WILL 
TAKE IT BACK WITHOUT ANY COST TO YOU—YOU ARE THE 
SOLE JUD^CE TO DECIDE. IF YOU WANT TO KEEP IT, YOU 
MAY DO SO ON OUR LOW FACTORY WHOLESALE PRICE ON 
MOST CONVENIENT TERMS. 
Musi c Lessons Withou t Cost 
TO EVERY CUSTOMER WE WILL GIVE A TWO YEARS 
COURSE OF PIANO INSTRUCTION FREE. ASK ABOUT OUR 
INSURANCE PLAN. WRITE TODAY. 
STOR Y & CLAR K P I A WO CO . 
F. O. EVANS, GEN. MGR., DEPT. B 35 CHICAGO 
E . ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. £. Church 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Clas$ Work 
Studio: 30 W . 132d STREET, NE W YORK CITY 
OF INTEREST T O VOCALISTS 
Tone-Placing and Voice Development, With Supplement Co-ordinating with Original Chapters 
Highly recommended and endorsed 
by well known Choral and Musical 
Societies, Directors, Vocal Teachers 
and Musical Publications, as evidenced by the following extracts 
selected at random from those who 
know: 
Pedro T. Tinsley of Chicago is 
the first of the vocal teachers to 
realize the possibilities of TonePlacing and Vowel Values (Study) 
as applied to music, and will soon 
be reaping his reward in the knowledge that he is helping thousands 
to a thorough musical education where he previously 
helped but hundreds. 
THE MUSIC TRADES. 
I highly endorse your Book Tone-Placing and 
Voice-Development as being in a class by itself. This 
is my fourth order and will be able to use quite a 
number of additional copies very soon. 
G. W. WILLIAMS, B.M.A., 
1214 Pease Ave., Houston, Texas. 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly 
this 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, 111., or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, 111. 
LINCOLN , MD „ ° EA R W «
0D : D
-
C , on the finest 
and best constructed electric railroad in the world." 
Special: A large lot, 50 by 150, a house to be built 
•n it according to plans specified in the contract, 3 
pear trees, 3 apple trees, 3 peach trees, 15 chickens, 
1 pig, firewood for two years, free grazing for cow 
•r horse, all for a total of $750; payable $5 down and 
$5 per month, without interest. Sample house now 
•ccupied by C. B. Fulton. 
TH E LINCOL N LAN D AN D 
IMPROVEMEN T COMPAN Y 
140 3 New York Ave . Washington, D. C. 
Norma and Peggie of Lincoln 
Th e number 
of children in 
Lincoln was increased by ten 
new arrivals in 
October , 1915 . 
WATC H 
LINCOLN 
GRO W 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 11 -No . 3 JANUARY, 1916 Whole No. 63 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
THE symphony '"Antar," by the Rus-
• sian composer Rimsky-Korsakoff, 
the music of which is largely based on 
Oriental folk-themes, was played on 
November 12th by the Boston Symphony 
Orchestra, at Boston, Massachusetts. 
The composer took the subject from 
the Arab story. "x<\ntar" was a mulatto, the son of an African slave and 
a chieftain. Acknowledged and freed by 
his father, he became famous as a poet 
and a valiant warrior. 
ftSamuel Coleridge-Taylor's "Deep 
River" and "From the Green Heart of 
the Water" were among the numbers 
given at a concert of sea pictures, at the 
Chicago Musical College late in October. 
C'He r Eyes Twin Pools," by Harry T. 
Burleigh, the words by James Johnson, 
was one of the novelties offered by 
Arthur Herschmann in his song recital 
on November 6th at Aeolian Hall, New 
York. 
I I At a joint recital with Bauer, the eminent pianist, Paul Althouse sang Burleigh songs in an American group of 
representative compositions before the 
Woman's Club in Evanston, Illinois, on 
October 26th. 
ftThe Appomattox Club of Chicago 
lately gave a Coleridge-Taylor concert in 
remembrance of the composer's birthday. 
An address was delivered by Dr. 
Charles E. Bentley. The musical program was arranged by Mr. Pedro Tinsley. The artists were Mrs. Willa M. 
Sloan, soprano; Mr. W . H. Hackley, Dr. 
W. Carver Williams, Mr. Harrison 
Emanuel, violinist and Mr. T. Theodore 
Taylor, pianist. 
ft Mr. Clarence Cameron White closed 
his fall concert tour with a very successful recital given by the Euterpians at the 
Howard Theatre on November 6th, at 
Washington, D. C. 
ft Mr. James Johnson's poem "The 
White Witch" is included in William 
Stanley Braithwaite's "Anthology of 
Magazine Verse for 1915," as one of the 
best poems of the year. It originally appeared in TH E CRISIS for March, 1915. 
The Boston Transcript of November 
30th says of Mr. Braithwaite: "He has 
helped poetry to readers as well as to 
poets. One is guilty of no extravagance 
in saying that the poets we have—and 
they may take their place with their 
peers in any country—and the gathering 
deference we pay them, are created 
largely out of the stubborn, self-effacing 
enthusiasm of this one man. In a sense 
their distinction is his own. In a sense 
he has himself written their poetry. 
Very much by his toil they may write, 
and be read. Not one of them will ever 
write a finer poem than Braithwaite himself has lived already." 
ftThe African exhibit at the American 
Museum of Natural History in New 
York City has grown so large that it has 
been placed in a hall to itself. The recent Lang-Chapin expedition brought 
valuable additions from the Congo. The 
Africans excel in iron and wood work, 
in weaving artistic pile cloth and in making various types of musical instruments. 
Specimens of all these are in this collection. 
ftThe first American composer represented at the annual Christmas festival 
of the Madison, Wisconsin, Choral 
Along the Color Line 112 TH E CRISIS 
Union, is a Negro, R. Nathaniel Dett. 
His carol "Listen to the Lambs" was 
sung at the University of Wisconsin 
Armory, December 11th. The Director 
says: 
"Side by side with magnificent musical 
climaxes is the syncopated time, which 
is so popular with rag-time lovers. Almost instantly it changes from grand and 
majestic harmonies to some of those 
good old 'barber shop' minor chords, 
which a bunch of fellows likes to hold on 
to. Often when one voice is carrying a 
catchy Negro air, the rest of the voices 
are weaving a background of harmony 
around it which carries the production 
out of the realm of ragtime into the 
realm of the classical." 
C'Th e Fruit of his Folly," a drama in 
five acts, was given at Wilber force University, Ohio, under the direction of 
Miss Hallie Q. Brown. 
CDavid Mannes, the violinist, will give 
two hours' instruction each week to the 
three best students of the violin in the 
Music Settlement for Colored People in 
New York City. 
CWilli e H. Butler of Yonkers, New 
York, is one of the pupils who will study 
under Mr. Mannes. 
C A new musical organization known as 
"The Haywood Symphony Club" has 
been perfected in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 
C[The French Government has purchased some paintings from Henry O. 
Tanner, for its collection of modern art 
in the Luxembourg Gallery. 
CMme . Lillian Hawkins Jones, a contralto of the Colorado Conservatory of 
Music, is giving concerts in Kentucky 
and the South. 
m 
ATHLETIC S 
TJAMPTO N INSTITUT E captured 
the Inter-Collegiate football title 
of the South Atlantic States by defeating all of its opponents in this vicinity. 
Union University of Richmond, fell a 
victim by a score of 13 to 0, and Howard 
University felt the crush of a perfect 
machine on Thanksgiving Day when 
Hampton rolled up 18 points via the 
touchdown route and Howard scored 
nothing. 
Other important games were between 
Union and Petersburg which closed a 9 
to 7 victory for Union, and Howard defeated Union by a 18 to 0 score. 
Even with a knowledge o f conditions 
existing, we venture to assert that until 
the seasonal games begin earlier, and 
fuller schedules are the rule, although 
smaller institutions are included, football 
will never be the sport it should be 
among colleges in this section. For some 
reason Lincoln University was not a 
factor and played none of the I. C. A. A. 
teams. 
The advent of two new coaches entering the field made for renewed interest 
in many circles. Walker Bacon a graduate of M Street High School of Washington, D. C.j and Syracuse University, 
took charge of the Petersburg team as 
faculty director of athletics and coach 
and all but defeated the school's big 
rival, Union. Merton P. Robinson, a 
well known football mentor, landed a 
Deanship at Union University in the 
Teachers' College and became faculty 
coach of athletics with a result that 
Union was able to throw a scare of considerable dimensions into the football 
camps of Howard and Hampton, a fact 
that will make Union be taken more seriously in coming seasons of sport if the 
system now employed obtains longer. 
The thrilling battle of the season was 
the Thanksgiving struggle at Hampton. 
Howard's line was incapable o f preventing the charging forwards of Hampton 
from smearing formations before they 
were born, and the Hampton backfield 
with the ever present Cayle for much of 
the game romped over the Howard 
trenches for big gains. 
CTh e four most prominent institutions 
in football in the South would be ranked 
this year as follows: Fisk first, Morehouse second, Talladega third, and Tuskegee fourth. The following are the 
scores: 
Fisk 0 Morehouse .. . 0 
Fisk 47 Tuskegee 0 
Fisk 9 Talladega 3 
Fisk 0 Wilberforce .. . 0 
Morehouse .. . 6 Tuskegee 6 
Morehouse-Talladega, declared "No 
Game." 
Talladega 6 Tuskegee 6 
The Morehouse-Talladega game was ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 113 
not played to a conclusion as darkness 
left fifteen minutes to play. Each school 
had really kicked one field goal which 
would have made the score 3—3, but the 
game was officially called "No Game" by 
the umpire. Atlanta University has 
shown improvement in football, but was 
beaten by both Talladega and Tuskegee 
and lost to Morris Brown in her critical 
game on Thanksgiving Day 13 to 7. 
CI n Washington on February 25th will 
be held one of the largest athletic carnivals held in the East at Convention Hall 
under the auspices of Howard University and the Public Schools Athletic 
League. 
CJ- E. Tregg, a colored man, is a member of the Varsity crew at Syracuse 
University, and also a member of the 
football team. 
CJames Wiley, fourteen years old, 
proved the best all around athlete at a 
field meet of the Pathfinders' on the 
State Fair grounds in Minnesota. James 
belongs to the Congo Club, which is the 
one colored club in the Pathfinders' 
camp. 
C M Street High School won the football championship of the secondary 
school teams of the South Atlantic Section. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
WIT H simple ceremonies and the 
singing of Negro folk songs 
Booker T. Washington was buried at 
Tuskegee Institute. Many distinguished 
persons, white and black, were present. 
Memorial meetings for Mr. Washington 
have been held throughout the United 
States and in Canada. 
CMrs. Mary Church Terrell spoke at 
the Fifth Avenue Marble Collegiate 
Church, New York City, under the 
auspices of the Women's Board of 
Domestic Missions of the Reformed 
Church of America. 
CEugene K. Jones, Associate Director 
of the National League on Urban Conditions among Negroes, is making a tour 
o f cities in the Middle West urging the 
value of the work of the League. 
CTh e Virginia Legislature has given an 
appropriation of $6,000 to the Industrial 
Home School for Colored Girls, in 
Peake, Hanover County, an institution 
founded and maintained so far by the 
Virginia State Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs. 
CI Union Hall, the building which the 
colored Masons and Odd Fellows put up 
jointly in St. Paul, Minnesota, will be 
used by nineteen Negro fraternal societies. 
C A farewell reception and luncheon 
were tendered the men of the Twentyfourth Infantry by both the colored and 
white residents of Manila, on their departure from the Philippines. 
CI n Spain it is one of the Three Wise 
Men, the black king Balthaser, who 
visits each home and leaves presents for 
the children at Christmas. 
CTh e simple people of both Poland and 
Spain worship with love and reverence 
a Virgin Mary called the Black Madonna. 
CTh e Oklahoma State Federation of 
Negro Women's Clubs, along with other 
earnest workers, has been successful in 
persuading the Oklahoma Legislature to 
establish a school for incorrigible Negro 
boys. 
CTh e colored women's clubs of Guthrie. 
Boley and McAlester, Oklahoma, support libraries in each of these towns. 
CTh e Woman's Study Club of Clarksburg, West Virginia, distributes magazines to shut-ins and schools. Last 
spring it conducted a yard improvement 
contest, which thirty children entered. 
CA n Ogden auditorium will be erected 
at Hampton Institute, Virginia, in memory of the late Robert Ogden. Over 
two-thirds of $100,000 needed has been 
subscribed. 
CI n Spokane, Washington, Sam Glasgow, City Amusement Censor, allowed 
the play "Birth of a Nation" to be produced. The colored people organized 
and defeated him for re-election by fifty 
votes. This is effective censorship. 
CJames C. Jones of Philadelphia has 
invented a new mail receiver for railway 
mail. 
CEarnest colored people of Charleston, 
South Carolina, are making an effort to 
establish an Industrial Training Home 
for their young women. It will be named 
in honor of the late Dr. Mattie V. Lee. 
C Numbers of colored men registered 
for the recent municipal election in 114 TH E CRISIS 
GIRLS OF DES MOINES, IOWA, IN THE "RAINBOW KIMONA" 
Charleston, South Carolina, for the 
first time in years. 
ftMargaret Burton, in her new book 
"Comrades in Service," devotes a chapter to Fannie Jackson Coppin. This 
book will be used in the mission study 
course of the Y. W. C. A. this year, 
ft Dr. Ira Landrith, a white Texan, is 
the first secretary to be appointed for 
the extension work lately undertaken by 
the Christian Endeavor Society. His 
work will be among the young colored 
people of the South. 
ftThe National Independent Equal 
Rights League held its eighth annual 
meeting December 15-16 in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. This convention took 
place in "Freedom Centennial Week," as 
December 18th is the exact date of the 
enactment of the Thirteenth Amendment. 
ftA Woman Suffrage meeting was held 
in the First Presbyterian Church of 
Newark, New Jersey, under the auspices 
of the Women's Political Union. 
ftThe Richmond Negro Welfare Association of Richmond, Virginia, held a tag 
day to get funds for the Colored Hospital and Training School for Nurses, 
which it plans to establish in that city. 
ft"The Awakening of Hezekiah," a 
story of Negro political life, written by 
John E. Bruce, will be published shortly 
by The Saturday News of Hopkinsville, 
Kentucky. 
ftA fountain has been erected by the 
colored people of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, at the entrance to the Twelfth 
Street Playground, to the memory of 
one of their race, Dr. William H. Jones. 
ftThomas W. Fleming, a colored lawyer 
of Cleveland, Ohio, was elected a member of the City Council from the Eleventh 
Ward. 
ftBurrell Memorial Hospital, a new institution at Roanoke, Virginia, has received its charter from the State. It is 
well equipped and modern, and has a 
competent staff o f colored physicians. 
ftThe colored branches of the Young 
Men's Christian Association in Atlanta, 
Georgia, Brooklyn, New York, and St. 
Louis, Missouri, are each working hard 
for new buildings. 
ftThe Hartford (Conn.) Courant, in a 
recent Sunday number, had pictures of 
fifteen distinguished colored residents of 
Hartford. 
ftOn December 19th the fiftieth anniversary of Lewis Hayden, the colored 
abolitionist, was celebrated in Faneuil 
Hall, Boston. 
ftThe Georgia Baptist, edited for a number of years by the late Reverend W. J. 
White at Augusta, Georgia, is to be published again with Dr. C. T. Walker as 
editor. 
ftThe alumni of Howard University, 
Washington, D. C , residing in Panama 
and Central America, have formed an 
association among themselves for mutual help. 
ft Miss Eva G. Burleigh has been elected 
superintendent and Mrs. Lola Johnson 
Guerst matron of the Sojourner Truth 
House, a home for unfortunate girls in 
New York City. 
ftThe Rhode Island Union of Colored 
Women's Clubs held their twelfth annual 
conference at Newport and heard among 
others the report of the Prison Committee. 
ft Nine colored girls, assisted by a number of other citizens, gave an entertainment for the N. A. A. C. P. in Des 
Moines, Iowa. It was called "The Rainbow Kimona," and attracted much attention. ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 115 
CFunds are being solicited by the 
colored people of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, for the Lincoln Memorial, which 
will consist of a modern hospital and 
training school for nurses in the city, 
and a rural home for convalescents. 
These institutions will serve all the 
colored people of Pennsylvania. 
CTh e first annual convention of the 
Pullman Porters' Benefit Association 
was held in the Pullman Building, Chicago, Illinois. 
CTh e Employed and Volunteer Workers Among Colored Women in City 
Young Women's Christian Associations 
held a conference in Brooklyn, New 
York. 
C"Jupiter Hammon," by Oscar Wegelin, is the first account of the life of an 
American Negro poet, who wrote ten 
years before Phyllis Wheatley, together 
with his writings. It is published by 
Heartman, New York City, and is uniform with his Phyllis Wheatley. 
EDUCATIO N 
A TEACHERS ' Institute was held in 
Prince George County, Maryland. 
Dr. Lucy Moten, Principal of the Normal School, Washington, D. C , made 
an instructive address. 
CDr. John Lovejoy Elliott of the Ethical Culture Society was the principal 
speaker at one of a series of educational 
meetings at St. Mark's Lyceum, New 
York City. 
C A special session of the Domestic 
Science School conducted by The Sentinel, a white newspaper of WinstonSalem, North Carolina, was held for the 
benefit of the colored school children. 
CTh e colored teachers of Galveston, 
Texas, have held their first institute of 
the year. "Reading" was the subject for 
discussion. 
CMiss Margaret Newlin of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has made bequests 
in her will to Hampton, Tuskegee, and 
to the William G. Edwards School at 
Snow Hill, Alabama. 
CA t the annual farmers' conference and 
exhibit held recently at Hampton Institute, visiting farmers and their wives 
told how they had triumphed over economic and social obstacles. 
CTwelve pupils from the Mayer Industrial School at Knoxville, Tennessee, 
gave a demonstration, at a recent meeting of the Synod of Tennessee, in the 
Fourth Presbyterian Church o f that city. 
The members o f the church wish to 
spread information of the goo d work 
which the school is doing among colored 
people of Knoxville. 
CMohammed Yohari, an African youth, 
whom Colonel Theodore Roosevelt met 
in Africa on his hunting trip, came to 
him in New York recently and asked to 
be sent to school. Mr. Roosevelt sent 
him to Tuskegee. 
CB y a recent decision of the State Department of Education of Texas, graduates of the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute, who are citizens of Texas, 
may receive permanent teachers' certificates in that State. 
C Horace Talbert, for many years secretary of Wilberforce University, Ohio, 
has resigned. 
CWilliam Haines, a colored boy from 
Nashville, has been elected to the debating team of the University of Chicago. 
CWilliam Pickens has been installed as 
Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore, 
Maryland. 
CTh e colored people of Greensboro, 
North Carolina, are making every effort 
to meet the-requirements which will enable them to have a Carnegie Library. 
M 
ECONOMICS 
'" p HOMA S J. PILLO W is employed 
as demonstrator by the Western 
Motor Car Company of Los Angeles, 
California. 
C Frank L. Gillespie has been placed in 
charge of a department for colored people which the Royal Life Insurance 
Company of Chicago, Illinois, has lately 
established. 
CTh e Frederick Douglass Film Company has been organized in Jersey City, 
New Jersey, by a number of colored 
men. 
CTh e Carnegie Library, just completed, 
at Camden, South Carolina, was erected 
by R. D. Belton & Son, colored contractors and builders. 
CTwenty-three white men who worked 
in the block testing department of the 116 TH E CRISIS 
Continental Motor Works of Detroit, 
Michigan, went out on strike. They 
were discharged and colored men were 
put in their places. 
CFifty-five colored Americans replaced 
aliens who were employed in building the 
State highway near San Juan, California. The aliens were discharged because of protests from the labor unions. 
CMrs. Maude G. Hall of the Pictorial 
Review staff, New York City, has secured work from the embroidery department of the magazine for several expert 
colored embroiderers and filet lace 
makers. 
(ITh e Ashley and Bailey Silk Company 
of Paterson, New Jersey, employs over 
four hundred colored boys and girls in 
its mill in Fayetteville, North Carolin?. 
CTh e Colored Wage Earners' Bank of 
Savannah, Georgia, erected a $40,000 
building last year and will make $7,000 
worth of improvements this year. It has 
a paid-up capital of $49,000 and totai 
resources of $315,808. 
CPresident Wilson and his fiancee recently dined at Hill Top House near 
Harper's Ferry, West Virginia. This 
house is owned and conducted by 
Thomas F. Lovett, a colored man. 
CSheperdsville, near Selma, Alabama, 
is owned by a colored fraternal organization. They hold 3,100 acres of land, 
have three mills, fifty-three tenants and 
received last year $1,907 in rents. 
PERSONAL 
TAME S MILTO N TURNER, former 
United States Minister to Liberia, 
died in Ardmore, Oklahoma, where he 
had gone on business. 
([Chaplain Carter, of the Tenth Cavalry, 
has been transferred to the Ninth Cavalry, and will accompany that regiment 
to the Philippine Islands. Chaplain G. 
W. Prioleau, of the Ninth, has been 
transferred to the Tenth Cavalry. 
([Mary M. Randolph, a fifteen year old 
colored girl of Los Angeles, California, 
devoted one hour a week of her last 
summer's vacation to telling stories to 
thirty-one little children near her home. 
CMrs. Ida A. Walker, President of the 
Missouri Federation of Colored Women's Clubs was one of the speakers at 
the State Conference for Social Welfare 
held in Marshall, Missouri. 
([Funeral services for Jack Dickerson, 
janitor for twenty years of Trinity College, Durham, North Carolina, were held 
in the college chapel. Two instructors 
and four students of this white school 
acted as pall bearers. 
([Dr. Mattie V. S. Lee of Washington, 
D. C , who died lately in Asheville, North 
Carolina, had quite an extensive practice 
in the capital city. 
([Judge Robert H. Terrell of Washington, D. C , is making a lecture tour 
through Texas under the auspices of the 
Colored Women's Progressive Club. 
([Governor Willis of Ohio has appointed Thomas A. Goode of Columbus 
to the position of assistant Fire Marshall 
in that state. 
([Miss Anna Thankful Ballantine, long 
matron of the girls at Fisk University, 
is dead. 
([Wilbur E . King has been appointed 
supervisor of the "loan shark" bureau of 
the state banking department of Ohio. 
The salary is $2,500. 
FOREIGN 
T N South Africa the colored vote was 
cast almost unanimously for the 
Unionists Party which elected forty 
members as against twenty-seven Nationalists and fifty-four followers of 
General Botha. This greatly encourages 
the colored people as the Nationalists 
are the Negro haters. 
([Th e "Herald," a newspaper in the interests of the colored people of the 
Island, has been started in Christiansted, 
St. Croix, Danish West Indies. D. 
Hamilton Jackson is the editor. 
CTh e new Haitian treaty, which extends United States control not only 
over financial but also over civil affairs 
and which contains no guarantee of the 
territorial or political integrity of the 
Island, is now ready to be laid before 
the United States Senate. 
m 
GHETT O 
T7URTHE R report concerning the 
Louisiana Republican Convention 
says that after assuring the colored delegates that the Republican party would ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 117 
Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N. Y. 
ADMIRAL CAPERTON 
SUDRE D'ARTIGUENAVE 
The southern white usurper in Haiti and the helpless colored President. 
put no candidate in the field, the white 
men went to a hotel to which Negroes 
are not admitted, and organized a committee to serve for four years. 
CTh e law of Arizona separates its 
colored and white school children. The 
colored schools are inferior in every respect. 
CMinisters and other responsible citizens of Atlanta, Georgia, held a meeting 
to discuss ways and means to stop further encroachment of Negroes into white 
neighborhoods. They decided the boundaries beyond which colored people may 
not go, and voted to hold a conference 
with prominent colored men about the 
situation. 
CTh e superintendent of the white high 
school of Carlisle, Pennsylvania, refused 
to admit the son of Henry Young, because he was a colored child. 
CTh e City Council of Miami, Florida, 
has passed a law making a certain street 
the dividing line between white and 
colored neighborhoods. A high wall or 
hedge will mark this line. The colored 
section will be enclosed on three sides. 
The Colored Board of Trade endorsed 
this measure. 
CColored people of New York are protesting against the discrimination practised toward physicians of their race by 
the hospitals of the city. 
CI- S. Cousins sued the Clinchfield 
Lodge of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers of Erwin, Tennessee, for 
libel, because they charged he had Negro 
blood in his veins and persuaded the 
railroad officials on this account to give 
him a poor run. He won his suit. 
CSometime ago we noted the refusal of 
a white girls' club in Portsmouth, New 
Hampshire, to confirm the election of a 
colored girl, Mary E. Patillo, as a member. The battle against the colored girl 
was led by two Jewish girls and despite 
the opposition of the Board of Advisors 
Miss Patillo was excluded. The Board 
of Advisors thereupon threatened to resign and last month Miss Patillo was 
"enthusiastically elected a member." 
CTh e colored people of Galena, Kansas, have gone into court in order to resist the imposition of a "Jim-Crow" 
school. 
M 
CRIME 
OFFICERS shot and jailed A. Scott 
of Texas City, Texas, who they 
claim was carrying a revolver. Scott 
later died in a hospital. 
CTroops had to be called out to stop an 
election fight at Charleston, South Carolina, in which ballots were thrown out, 
and one man killed. All concerned were 
white. 
CLov e Rudd, charged with robbery, was 
drowned by a mob at Clarksville, Missouri. 
CJohn Taylor, said to have fired at a 
sheriff, was hanged by a mob at Aberdeen, Mississippi. 
CJerome Wilson, a Michigan colored 
man, committed suicide because he 
feared mob violence and an unfair judge. 
CEllis Buckner was lynched at Henderson, Kentucky. He was accused of attacking a white woman. MEN of the MONTH! 
A PIANIST Monsieur Justin Elie was 
born at Port-au-Prince, Haiti, 
September 1st, 1883. At the age of five 
years he showed a passion for music. 
His parents took him to France and put 
him in the celebrated institution at 
Sainte Croix. He was prepared for the 
Conservatory of Paris by the great 
pianist, Marmontel, and passed a brilliant entrance examination in 1903. He 
studied under De Beriot, Phillips, De 
Wormser and De Pessard. He was 
graduated in 1905 and has since been in 
concert work in Paris and in the West 
Indies. He has written several compositions, notable among them is "Aphrodite." Monsieur Elie is expected in the 
United States soon. 
m 
A CLERGY- Pierre Emry Jones was born 
MAN in Haiti in 1848 and was 
educated in the United 
States. He was made a Deacon in the 
Episcopal church in 1872 and returned 
to Haiti as a missionary under Bishop 
Holly. 
Since the death of Bishop Holly Mr. 
Jones has been President of the Episcopal convocation. Last year the Divinity 
School of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church in Philadelphia conferred upon 
him the honorary degree of Doctor 
of Sacred Theology. 
In Prussia he received a gold medal of 
the first class for art and science, previously awarded only to Humboldt, 
Spontini and Lizst. The Emperor of 
Austria gave him the Grand Cross of the 
Order of Leopold. In Russia he was 
equally honored. Indeed from 1852 
until his death Aldridge was recognized 
in Europe as the first of living tragedians, equalled only by the wonderful 
Rachael. 
He married a Swedish lady and had 
two daughters both of whom have 
achieved prominence in England in 
music. Aldrich died in Poland in 1866. 
TWO James P. Johnson entered 
SERVANTS the dining car service of the 
OF THE old Wagner Palace Car ComPUBLIC pany in 1889. When this 
company was taken over by 
the New York Central Railroad Mr. 
Johnson still remained at his work and 
is now one of the most celebrated of the 
traveling chefs. There are thirty-seven 
dining cars East of Buffalo which come 
under the supervision of Mr. Johnson 
and his assistant Mr. Edward Williams. 
With them is associated Mr. John 
Jones, dining car steward on the Twentieth Century Limited. Mr. Jones has 
been with the Company twenty-four 
years. 
A GREAT Ira Aldridge was born in MaryACTOR land in 1810. He was educated 
at Schenectady College and at 
Glasgow University in Scotland. Although he was intended for the ministry 
he turned to the stage and made his 
debut at Royalty Theatre in London in 
1833. His success was immediate. 
Edward Kean played Iago to his Othello 
and other actors and actresses vied in 
honoring him. 
In 1852 he started for the continent. 
TWO Miss Bessie Glenn is the first 
TEACHERS colored woman to be appointed a teacher in the State 
institutions of Ohio. Miss Glenn holds 
a position at the Girls' Industrial School 
at Delaware, Ohio. 
Miss Wilhelmina B. Patterson is 
Musical Director of the Prairie View 
State Normal and Industrial School. 
This year Miss Patterson conducted a 
concert in the Legislative Hall at Austin, 
Texas, which was unusually successful, ME N OF TH E MONT H 119 
JAME S P. JOHNSO N MIS S BESSI E GLEN N RO Y W. TIBB S 
MIS S WILHELMIN A B. PATTERSO N 
WILLIA M B . SCOT T JOH N JONE S THOMA S B. M C KEE L 120 TH E CRISIS 
and did much toward securing an appropriation of $259,000 for the school. 
AN William Edward Scott has just 
ARTIST finished a fine set of mural decorations at the new Burdsall 
section of the City Hospital in Indianapolis. 
There are about twenty-two panels in 
this ward and they range in size from 
five to forty feet wide and 300 figures 
are used. About ten colored models 
were used. 
In the lobby the artist has used the beginning, Adam and Eve being driven out 
of the Garden of Eden. Across from this 
is represented Mary being told of the 
coming of the Christ Child. On three 
narrow panels in the same room are represented Moses, John and Paul. In the 
main room are large panels representing 
the boyhood of Christ, the Three Wise 
Men (one of them black), and the Star 
in the East, the nativity, Christ in the 
arms of Simon, Christ in the carpenter 
shop, flight into Egypt and the largest 
and probably the best, Christ in the temple asking questions of the doctors. This 
panel, notwithstanding the silvery gray 
tone, is rich in color and the thirty or 
M. JUSTIN ELIE 
more doctors show wonderful character 
studies of Jewish types. A spot of sunlight falls upon the Christ figure and 
gives it an unusual effect of feeling. 
Probably the next best panel in this 
room is Christ being blessed by Simon. 
In this picture Christ is shown in the 
arms of the old patriarch, and Mary and 
Joseph standing near with a cage of 
turtle doves which they have brought as 
an offering. The Christ figure was posed 
by Weir Stewart, son of Dr. William 
Weir Stewart, a colored man. Mary, 
the mother, was posed by Miss Martin, 
supervising nurse at the hospital. 
In the corridors begins the preaching 
of Christ. First come two large panels 
representing "Suffer little children to 
come unto me," and "He that is without 
sin, let him cast the first stone." These 
two panels are each about thirty feet 
long and contain about forty figures. In 
this room overlooking the sun porch, are 
panels representing Zaccheus in the tree, 
Sermon on the Mount, Christ before 
Pilate, Christ as He appeared to Mary 
after the crucifixion and Christ riding 
into Jerusalem on the ass. These are all 
large panels and carried out in the same 
color scheme as the others. 
DR. P. E. JONES AND HIS SONS ME N OF TH E MONT H 121 
Up about fifteen feet from the floor in 
the main room are two forty-foot panels 
representing the women of the Old and 
the New testament. 
Scott has worked on this ward about 
five months and considers it the best bit 
of mural painting he has ever done. 
Mr. Scott was born in Indianapolis in 
1884 and trained in the public schools 
and Chicago Art Institute. By the winning of prizes and saving he was enabled 
to study in Paris with Mr. Henry O. 
Tanner and others. He succeeded in 
having a picture "hung on the line" in 
the great Paris spring Salon. This was 
purchased by the Argentine Republic. 
He has since sold a number of pictures 
and taken prizes. He hopes to do for 
the Negro in painting what Dunbar has 
done in verse. 
We may note in passing the rise of 
W . M. Farrow'j another young colored 
artist who announces two excellent reproductions for sale. 
A GOOD Thomas B. McKeel was born 
CITIZEN in New York City in 1839 and 
died in 1915. He went into 
business in 1862 and in 1865 became a 
clerk in the Freedmen Hospital, Savannah, Georgia. Later he entered the fire 
insurance business in New York City 
and acted as agent for about forty years. 
He was especially well-known at St. 
Philip's P. E. Church. 
A TEACHER Mr. Roy W. Tibbs, ProOF MUSIC fessor of Pianoforte at 
Howard University, is an 
example of successful achievement, 
through hard work. He was born in 
Ohio, educated in Kentucky and at Fisk 
University and Oberlin College. 
Mr. Tibbs trained and directed the 
chorus of two hundred voices which was 
so notable a feature of the Pageant recently given in Washington, D. C. 
An interesting 
picture of Ira Aldridge, recently reproduced in the International Studio. 
He is represented 
with his friend 
Shevchenko the 
"Poet of the Ukraine." Opinions 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTO N 
THE NORTHERN PRESS 
Dr. WASHINGTO N has often 
been called the leader and the 
representative of the Negro race in 
the Republic. He was a leader in a 
qualified sense, since he devoted his 
life to directing the Negroes in what 
he believed to be the path of progress. But he was far from being 
their acknowledged leader. On the contrary, very many of them, and these 
among the more intellectual, did not 
share his ideas or accept his policy. Besides these, there was a multitude of the 
more ignorant who were quite unable to 
understand either his motives or his 
methods, who thought him timid, and 
even treacherous, to the race, as to some 
of whose wrongs he was, of set purpose 
and deliberately silent. It is obvious that 
this feeling among his fellow-Negroes 
was always a serious and painful element in the work that Washington had 
set himself to do. It was all the more 
so because he was himself, necessarily, 
the victim in a thousand ways of the 
rooted prejudice of race, and had to bear 
daily 'the spurns that patient merit of 
the unworthy takes.'"—Times, New 
York City. 
"Booker T. Washington was a great 
man by every account and along many 
lines—the leader of the Negro race 
throughout the world ; a citizen of America, who had promoted his country's 
greatness by raising toward fitness for 
full citizenship and economic independence a people just emerged from slavery ; a man whose influence was inspiring and helpful to the whole country. 
That a man born a slave, turned out 
upon the world when a child as an outcast, forced to gain his early education, 
a book in his hand at night while working as a boy in a coal mine, should accomplish what Washington did and 
reach the eminence he attained, is in itself a proof of the man's personal greatness. But the more cogent proof is 
found in the sum of achievement and the 
impulse for future progress which he 
has left behind. Tuskegee and its 
methods and ideals have affected the 
whole scheme and method of industrial 
education in this country. Created out 
of a wilderness by Washington's own effort, solidly succeeding against every obstacle, conquering the approbation and 
support of a people who at first regarded 
the work with deep suspicion, and building a strong foundation of hopefulness 
and confidence for the structure of a 
whole people's future. . . . 
"Booker Washington came, to some 
extent, into conflict with certain of the 
abler men of his own race, who thought 
that he showed too much humility—that 
he submitted too willingly to the suppression of the Negro vote in the southern states, and, by emphasizing the industrial side of the education that he 
supplied, consented to the relegation of 
his race to an inferior position forever. 
There are some colored people today 
who believe that Washington helped to 
condemn their race to a new slavery. 
The answer to this charge is that the 
race which rises from slavery can rise 
only by means of economic improvement 
or by revolution. It must march upon 
the good ground of the well-ploughed 
field—either upon that or upon the field 
of battle, where its own blood is shed for 
victory over oppression. The upward 
path of the blood-stained field of revolution is forever debarred to the American 
Negro. There is no way for him except the field of hard w
r
ork, wise work, 
patient work, with constant improvement at every step, and the great purpose of redemption in the breast of every 
black man and woman. Booker Washington knew that well, and proved his 
greatness by a life of consistent devotion to the ideal."—Evening Transcript, 
Boston, Mass. 
"In Booker Washington the country OPINIONS 123 
loses not only a leader, but one who was 
in his person a real triumph of democracy 
"He was not the standard-bearer of 
a united race. It is a rare educational 
leader who does not compromise on 
some questions, and in his peculiarly 
trying position, where a single false 
step might mean the ruining of his work 
—even the burning of his school—Dr. 
Washington did not speak out on the 
things which the intellectual men of the 
race deemed of far greater moment than 
bricks and mortar, industrial education, 
or business leagues—the matter of their 
social and political liberties. He was silent by choice in the face of many a crying wrong and bitter injustice, and more 
and more colored men came to resent it. 
They would not have objected had he, 
like other heads of schools, kept out of 
politics and assumed no leadership beyond that of the field of industrial training. But when they saw him, under 
Taft and Roosevelt, a powerful political 
factor in the White House; when they 
saw him in the attitude of a race leader 
forever dwelling upon the bright side of 
the picture and having no words of fiery 
indignation for injustices that cry out to 
high Heaven for redress, the unhappiness grew until men openly accused him 
of selling their birthright for a mess of 
pottage."—Evening Post, Xew York 
City. 
"Booker T. Washington, who died 
yesterday, will pass into history as the 
ablest Negro leader of his generation. 
Here in the United States the Negro 
race has produced greater men than he— 
men of larger mould and more extraordinary native genius. Frederick Douglass was one. Born and brought up a 
slave, the latter overcame even greater 
obstacles than Mr. Washington had to 
overcome in arising to leadership. Douglass excelled as an orator. His appeal 
was to the emotions, to the sense of 
justice of a ruling race which had put 
shackles on the black man and had denied him the ordinary rights of a human 
being. He pleaded for emancipation, believing that the Negro's future here 
would be assured once he had the chance 
to be his own master, to acquire education and property and to sell his labor 
in an open market. 
"Mr. Washington's task was difficult, 
because conditions made it difficult."— 
Tribune, New York City. 
"Dr. Booker T. Washington's work 
among the members of his race was 
based on the belief that the Negro 
would win social and political advancement only after he had achieved economic independence and stability. He 
held that time was better spent in 
demonstrating the capacity of the black 
man in those callings that are now open 
to him than in seeking opportunities in 
fields where every factor was opposed 
to him. 
"This policy brought Dr. Washington 
into conflict with many other leaders of 
the Negroes, but he maintained it from 
the beginning of his work in Tuskegee. 
He was not less concerned with the 
progress of the blacks in the United 
States than were those with whom he 
could not agree as to methods; their dispute was over the means to be used, not 
the end to be sought. His belief was 
supported by the intelligent judgment of 
thousands of citizens who saw in Tuskegee a possible instrument for the solution of a pressing problem."—Sun, New 
York City. 
"The future is brighter because 
Booker Washington lived. It is brighter 
because he was able to penetrate the encircling blackness with a vision that 
brought him confidence and the will to 
conquer. His never failing optimism 
through forty years of contact with the 
least promising condition in America 
could not die with him. That personal 
conviction of final success for his race, 
in harmony even with the 'white man's 
civilization,' the more easily dominates 
other minds because he had held it so 
tenaciously. Despair knew him not in 
life, and in death his message will ever 
ring with the joy of struggle and the 
dauntless spirit of service."—Republican, Springfield, Mass. 
"He was a leader, great and inspired. 
White and black alike will, in the day 
of calm and fair judgment, count him 
among the prophets of his time. His 
greatness was that of a great purpose." 
—Register, New Haven, Conn. 
"Any one who has studied the history 
of the colored people for the past fifty 
years will realize that the race has in 124 TH E CRISIS 
store for it a development that cannot 
be retarded by the death of one leader, 
no matter how great his influence. 
"No students of history, certainly no 
ethnologists, longer assert that the colored race is incapable of achievement. 
The recent discoveries of the free cities 
it established in early times in Africa, 
the achievements of its forerunners, the 
Egyptians, its remarkable evolution in 
eastern Asia and middle Africa in mediaeval times, have been studied in recent years to the justification of modern 
efforts by the race. 
"Everything about the black man's 
past goes to show that, until the blight 
of slavery was put upon him by peoples 
who had a better running start toward 
power, his history was honorable, 
though, because of climatic conditions, it 
did not follow the lines of the northern 
races. The colored man in America, with 
the help of such institutions as Tuskegee, 
has shown himself capable of advancement, and the advancement has largely 
been accomplished through efforts of 
men like Washington, DuBois and others 
of the race."—Press, New York, and 
Washington (D. C.) Times. 
"Dr. Washington was a wiser leader 
than those impetuous souls who demanded for the Negro at once every political right and cultural opportunity. 
The Negro is on the soil. He is in the 
South. His surest, shortest road to an 
assured road is efficiency. Dr. Washington was far-seeing in his desire to work 
in harmony with white men of his section. It is to the credit of the whites 
that they were so ready to work with 
him."—World, New York City. 
"The death of Booker T. Washington 
should recall every square-toed American citizen to the fact that, sooner or 
later, in the North, in New England and 
in Massachusetts, we must face manfully, and in justice to both races and to 
the cause of humanity, a problem which 
we have been cruelly and cowardly dodging. 
"Fair words about the 'great American 
melting pot,' as wc welcome to our ports 
all sorts and conditions of men, are all 
very fine, but what are we going to do 
about the boys and girls, the men and 
women, who, born here, reared here, 
educated here, are turned loose to find 
the doors of opportunity closed to them 
as if by constitutional mandate?"— 
Traveler and Evening Herald, Boston, 
Mass. 
"Near the beginning of his career in 
the White House President Roosevelt invited Booker Washington to dine with 
him. The South broke into fury. Its 
Republican congressmen, few and far 
between, were put to it to account for 
the episode. Linny, of North Carolina, 
explained to his confiding constituents 
that when the noon hour came Roosevelt 
looked up to say: 'Aren't you hungry, 
Booker? Of course you are. Here, 
Mandy, go and get Booker something to 
eat; give it to him out there with you; 
there now, Booker, you'll feel better.' 
"Democratic congressmen took the opposite tack. They exaggerated the episode. Alabama elected Heflin to Congress after declaring that he wished the 
same man who had assassinated Mc -
Kinley had been there to throw a bomb 
under the table. . . . 
"The South won, in the controversy, 
to this extent: Roosevelt never invited 
Booker Washington to dine with him 
again, nor did Taft or President Wilson 
ever proffer similar hospitalities. It is 
doubtful if in the near future any President risks the favor of the South by 
doing so. As a nation, we enforce the 
most serious race proscription in the 
world."—Herald, Boston, Mass. 
"To wage a militant campaign for the 
rights of the Negro, as Mr. DuBois is 
doing, appeals to the sympathies. But 
we believe that the verdict of time will 
give to Dr. Washington the palm for the 
greater accomplishment in seeking conciliation rather than the deepening of 
hatreds, in bearing wrongs with infinite 
patience instead of breaking out in revolt 
against them, and in making his people 
intrinsically worthy of the things denied 
them."—Evening Post, Chicago, 111. 
"He held that the present duty of all 
Negroes is to improve their economic 
position by thrift and industry and build 
up a reputation as law-abiding citizens, 
leaving political problems to be settled 
later. For this he was bitterly attacked 
by the more impatient leaders of his own OPINIONS 125 
race; but the chances are heavy that the 
cool judgment of Washington will be 
found a better guide than the impassioned eloquence of DuBois."—Evening 
Journal, Chicago, 111. 
"Estimated in gross, it may be that the 
influence o f this son of a slave woman 
and an unknown father has been the 
greatest of all American forces for progress in our generation. The computation 
is beyond finite minds. Only the Supreme Judge can know the answer to the 
question. But at least we mortals can 
bid farewell to the departed man with 
deep respect and an acknowledgement of 
his to us unmeasurable value to our 
time."—Free Press, Detroit, Mich. 
"Since the ending of slavery, two 
really strong men of Negro blood stand 
out. Not that the race has produced but 
two men of marked ability, but those 
who have places fixed in history are 
Frederick Douglass and Booker T. 
Washington. The former performed a 
great service for his people in settling 
their political and civil status in the formative period following emancipation. 
"Fully as commanding a figure is 
Booker Washington, though he addressed himself to a different problem—the 
economic and social uplift of his race."— 
Bee, Omaha, Neb. 
THE COPPER HEAD PRESS 
ttTTI S success in keeping clear of political pitfalls was remarkable. 
Only once did he make a misstep in that 
direction. On that occasion he accepted 
an invitation to lunch at the White 
House, extended to him by President 
Roosevelt. Because that incident aroused 
feeling against him in the South, it was 
a mistake to give the invitation and a 
mistake to accept it. No intelligent 
American could have failed to enjoy a 
talk with Booker T. Washington, but invitations to 'break bread' in the White 
House carry with them what is called 
social recognition. It was unfortunate 
to have that question raised in the case 
of a man of such intellectual distinction 
as Mr. Washington and carrying such 
important responsibilities as he had assumed."—Post, Hartford, Conn. 
"The temptation to those interested in 
benefiting the Negro was to scold the 
whites for their refusal to recognize him. 
Race pride protested against Jim Crow 
cars, segregation in theatres, restrictions 
in residence. 
"This is precisely the kind of work Dr. 
Washington did not do. He seldom 
scolded the whites, and took his rebuffs 
with philosophy. Instead of calling upon 
the colored men to assert their rights, he 
set out to eradicate those Negro characteristics which made it impossible for 
Negroes to achieve rights."—Tribune, 
Chicago, 111. 
"Booker Washington was a black, 
thick-lipped, ungainly specimen, born in 
slavery without a knowledge of his 
father or his birth date. That is the picture of a real Negro. . . . 
"He plodded along, pulling his race 
with him, looking after the needs of the 
most lowly in a moral and intellectual 
way, demonstrating to the Negro that he 
could never be anything else but a Negro, 
that there was really no place worthy his 
effort in the political life of this nation 
to which he could reasonably aspire as a 
race for generations to come."—Record, 
Long Branch, N. J. 
THE SOUTH 
THE death of Booker T. Washington is a national misfortune, 
for his life was a national benefaction. 
He stood head and shoulders above any 
man of his race, and his towering figure 
for more than a generation was as a 
pillar of fire to light his people out of 
the darkness of ignorance, indolence and 
error. He was the Negro's wisest, bravest teacher and leader. He saw, as none 
more clearly, the black man's shortcomings and possibilities, his need and his 
hope. He devoted his life—every day of 
it, every energy of it—to bringing the 
descendants of the slaves to see these 
things as he saw them, to setting their 
feet upon the one path that opens their 
way to real freedom, material independence, respected and self-respecting citizenship. His work, great in its purpose, 
great in its results, was monumental. 
Now that he has laid it down may there 
be others as able, as devoted, to take it 
up. But where are they?"—Louisville 
(Ky.) Courier Journal. 126 TH E CRISIS 
"At Tuskegee he merely taught the 
Xegro to help himself, to be more valuable as an artisan, a servant, a laborer. 
To fit him for this he readily obtained 
funds from southern white men. That 
he told the less sincere sources of income 
in the Xortli that he was making doctors 
and lawyers and great intellects in Tuskegee was thoroughly understood in the 
South and not criticized. Washington 
was practical; he knew diat to reach the 
pocketbooks of people who were not intimately acquainted with the Xegro and 
his problems and his tremendous needs 
he must appeal to their imaginations. 
So he did. This was misunderstood in 
the South for only a little while. Investigation of what was going on at Tuskegee ironed out all misapprehension."— 
Macon (Ga.) Telegraph. 
"But there is a second kind of limitation from which the three groups of the 
disadvantaged suffer, the limitations of 
an inner kind, resulting from a spirit 
that is less than free. To the breaking 
of the bonds diat lay about the spirits of 
his people rather than those that tied 
their feet. Booker T. Washington gave 
his life. Themselves, he would have 
break the bonds of sloth, of fear, of 
ignorance, of appetite. 
"If he seemed to underemphasize the 
difficulties growing out of external political and social restriction, it was rather 
due to his unceasing cry that the kingdom of power and wealth and dignity 
can rest finally only on spiritual achievement, self-control, foresight, thrift, the 
practice of the common virtues. X o 
breaking of the outer bond can alone 
free the spiritual slave."—A Kentucky 
White Woman in The Survey. 
"The North has been misrepresented 
by a small class of fanatical and impracticable doctrinaires. Its supposed historic attitude toward the Xegro race is 
a lie—not a conscious lie reduced to the 
terms of an equation, but a lie nevertheless. This Booker Washington had the 
wit to percieve and he turned it handsomely to the account of his people in 
the South. Wealthy northerners saw. 
or thought they saw, the expediency of 
localizing the X'egro problem. Washington was a handy and a willing instrument to carry out their plans. We are 
not saying that either they or he was 
wrong, that only the future can tell, but 
the course taken was the natural one, the 
line of least resistance. It may be best 
for all concerned that the process go 
on."—Columbia (^S. C.) State. 
"He was a great man. Xo t great in 
a comparative sense or in that narrow 
judgment which merely records him as 
one who achieved well considering the 
circumstances that he was a Xegro, but 
regardless of all limitations. His career 
must stand as an ample answer to the 
theory that the X'egro is not capable of 
high intellectual and spiritual development, because he blazed his own way to 
usefulness and fame. . . . 
"The southern white people are ultimately to have as their neighbors many 
millions of black people ignorant, immoral, criminal, inefficient, filthy, diseased and hopeless or they are going to 
have as their neighbors a Xegro race 
that is intelligent, virtuous, efficient, 
honest, patriotic, friendly. Intelligent 
men and women know diat the South 
needs the latter. Washington strove for 
the better choice and he has blazed the 
way diat the leaders of his race will 
surely follow with patience, earnestness 
and determination."—Houston (Tex.) 
Post. 
"He worked out a set of ideals for his 
people, and to a remarkable extent made 
them follow those ideals. 
"He gave them what they needed. He 
told them the truth about themselves, 
even while he recognized dieir higher 
aspirations. He kept them from the specious lure of the 'white man's culture' 
and the petty and irritating demand for 
'social equality.' He bade them develop 
their own capabilities. His theorv was 
that the Xegro should make himself the 
best and finest possible X'egro. instead of 
trying to make himself an imitation 
white man. And in that doctrine, and 
its successful preaching, lay another triumph of democracy."—Tulsa (Okla.) 
Democrat. 
"During the period of his leadership 
in his efforts to create a place in the 
world for his people, the race has made 
wonderful strides. The South, no less 
than any other part of the nation, recognizes and appreciates this. The thou-OPINIONS 127 
sands of people of the South who accepted him as their premier will be better 
for Washington's great ability."—Jacksonville (Fla.) Metropolis. 
"The writer recalls hearing a distinguished North Carolina leader, Mr. 
Waddell, of Wilmington, express to 
Washington in The Advertiser office at 
Montgomery, the sense of obligation of 
the white people of his city because he 
had cancelled an engagement to lecture 
there on a date immediately following 
the unfortunate race riot there about 
1900. That decision was real statesmanship on the part of Washington, and it 
was just such sympathy and sagacity, 
constantly exercized in matters large and 
small, that gave him the unstinted confidence of leading southern men."—Birmingham (AJa.) News. 
"Some Negroes and some northern 
white men thought him too subservient 
to the opinion of the white South ; some 
white men in the South thought he had 
too lofty ambitions for his race; some 
regarded him as a chameleon—proclaiming one race law South of the Potomac 
and another to the North. Sometimes, 
as in the famous Roosevelt episode, 
Washington gave ground for criticism; 
at other times and in most things, he 
went his way cautiously, conscious of his 
responsibilities and aware of the influence of his example. 
"It is not probable that history will 
pass a unanimous verdict on him. 
Opinion will probably remain divided. 
But the romance of his rise from slavery, 
the success of his efforts and his indisputable ability will give him a place 
among the most remarkable men his race 
has produced."—Richmond (Va.) News 
Leader. 
"Booker Washington's account is 
closed. Many things have been said for 
and against him. Some people in this 
country had faith in him that was almost 
fanatical, and lavished on him admiration and praise rather distasteful to those 
with whom the color line is an instinct 
and to whom the observance of it is 
almost a religion. Others regarded him 
as a bad and dangerous man. Some of 
his own color thought he was on the 
wrong line and was failing to give service for the large amounts of money he 
obtained. We will have the evidence 
presently and will be able to arrive at 
just judgment and accurate conclusions. 
We confess to having fell always a little 
doubt, hardly strong enough to be described as distrust, of the practical results of the Tuskegee School."—Richmond (Va.) Journal. 
"If Washington ever had any ideas of 
race equality, he never showed it or 
uttered it. lie wanted his people to take 
help from their white neighbors and to 
live well the parts of humble citizens. 
But he wanted them to live unto themselves and he had no mistaken ideas 
about amalgamation of the two races, 
the superior and the inferior. Only one 
act in all his life, so far as ever became 
generally known, contradicted this idea 
—that was when he ate dinner as a guest 
of Col. Roosevelt. And in all the controversy and criticism that followed that 
incident, Washington, so far as ever 
reached the general public, never had 
one word to say in defense of the incident or of criticism of the critics."—• 
Denton (Tex.) Record Chronicle. 
" 'He was a good Negro.' Thus will 
Alabama and Tuskegee, the little capital 
of Macon county, sum up their opinion 
of the Negro educator who died Sunday. 
"Washington did much for the uplift 
of his race and, by so doing, much for 
the benefit of the white people in his 
section of the South. Those who knew 
him best know that he was an unobtrusive personality. Working in a community traditionally ultra-southern, he 
kept his place as a Negro. Tuskegee 
Institute, just beyond the corporate 
limits of the tiny town from which it 
took its name, is as large as the town 
itself, and its population about on a 
numerical par; but if Washington vaingloried in his achievements he kept the 
emotion locked in his heart. On the 
streets of Tuskegee, whether walking or 
driving behind his team of two beautiful 
bays, he represented to Tuskegee people 
'a good Negro'—nothing less, nothing 
more."—Oklahoma City (Okla.) Oklahoma. 
The official statement of the governor 
of Alabama says: 
"In the death of Booker T. Washington the colored race has lost its greatest 128 TH E CRISIS 
leader. He was a man of unusual force 
and executive ability, and in many respects rose above the environment oi 
race. In my opinion, his efforts toward 
the development of his people have been 
of great benefit to them and to the entire 
South. Born a slave, living a life of 
earnest endeavor, and at his death the 
chief executive of an institution of nation-wide reputation created by his own 
brain and energy, demonstrates to the 
world the unbounded possibilities open 
to those whose purpose is to accomplish 
something, and marks him as one of the 
able men of his time." 
M 
MISCELLANEOUS 
WE trust that the members of the 
* * African M. E. Church are going 
to read with deep thought .the leading 
editorial of Editor R. C. Ransom, in the 
October number of the A. M. E. Church 
Review. W e quote a single paragraph: 
"Petty chiefs, struggling for the 
ascendency in Mexico and Haiti have 
brought anarchy and bankruptcy, with 
their attendant ills, to these two unhappy 
republics. Are we to round out a century of denominational life by Mexicanizing or Haitianizing the A. M. E. 
Church? Certainly the stage is well prepared for the enactment of such a tragedy. The principals are preparing their 
roles, and many actors are ready to step 
from behind the scenes even before the 
curtain rises on the next General Conference. Shall the A. M. E. Church go 
the way of the Black Republic of Haiti, 
and thus give added evidence to the wide 
belief that the Negro is incapable of selfgovernment in church as well as in 
state ? Office, honor, authority, power; 
to attain these things strong men both in 
Mexico and Haiti have sacrificed their 
country upon the altar of their personal 
ambitions. At bottom it is just this sort 
of thing that is transpiring in the A. M. 
E. Church. There is no question of division among us on doctrine, on the best 
methods of propagating the work of 
education, or missions, or over the 
grave moral, social and political questions of the times. There is nothing 
about great constructive movements for 
the social, moral and spiritual advancement of the people. No ; it is principally about who among us shall be chief. 
By some of the bishops we hear the cry 
of 'sectionalism' and 'politics' raised. 
But if the cry of sectionalism has been 
raised, and political methods pursued to 
place men in the Bishopric, we should 
not be surprised to find them resorting 
to the unworthy methods by which they 
attained their high position." 
Persons who wonder at the "conversion" of the northern press to southern 
ideals, should read and reflect upon this 
extract from the Tampa, Fla. Times. 
"Hurrah for the Dixie highway!" 
"Under this caption the Chicago Herald, published by James Keeley, presents 
a leading editorial in which a beautiful, 
truth-giving tribute is paid the South 
and southern people. 
"The Herald editorial contrasts so 
greatly with the venemous attacks on the 
South and southerners by the Chicago 
Tribune in its rabid discussion of the 
lynching of Leo Frank that the Times 
reprints it in full and urges all Floridians to read it and then thank the editor 
for his display of fairmindedness. Mr. 
Keeley, who was an editor of the Memphis Commercial Appeal before he began his career in Chicago, knows the 
South and southern people, and therefore respects their traditions." 
The Lagos Standard, published in 
Sierre Leone, West Africa, quotes and 
strongly commends the "Immediate Program for American Negroes," delivered 
before the last annual meeting of the 
N. A. A. C. P. 
"The program as we have before said 
is not only for the American Negro but 
for the African Negro as well. It will 
serve the purposes, aims and aspirations 
of the race in this part of the world to 
such a marked degree producing at the 
same time such appreciative results, as 
will bring the race to inter-racial recognition on all lines." 
What is the cause of the unrest in 
India? S. R. Wagel thus explains it in 
the New York Times: 
"It is unfortunate that throughout the 
world the nature of the British connection with India has been misrepresented; 
and well-meaning neutrals have been 
made to believe that Indians are guilty 
of unpardonable ingratitude in even 
thinking ill of Great Britain, which has OPINIONS 129 
done 'so much' for India. It is this 
false idea that obscures the whole situation ; and appearances have been also 
in favor of the belief that the people of 
India are grateful to British rule. 
"At the same time there is no denying 
even on the authority of British witnesses, that there is serious unrest in 
the country. The causes of the unrest 
are more fundamental than Mr. Dulles 
believes they are, and are more economic 
and political than social. It is no use 
forgetting the fact that the British are 
in India, and are going to remain there 
as long as they are strong enough to 
maintain dteir authority. It is also plain 
that the British hold the country primarily for their own benefit and prestige, and it is but natural that such 
should be the case. Knowing full well 
the nature of international morals Indians are not so devoid of sense as to 
whine and complain when they are 
aware of the fact that only strength on 
their part, or want of strength on the 
part of the British, alone could give 
them the kind of freedom necessary for 
their getting on in the world. 
"But the British are pursuing a very 
immoral course when they assume, or 
pretend to have, a moral sanction to 
their position in India, and blackguard 
the people of India to justify their rule 
and its continuance. It is very often 
stated that the people of India are not 
fitted for self-government and will not 
be fit for hundreds of years to come. 
History teaches that no nation was ever 
fitted for self-government before it obtained it. A nation fits itself for selfgovernment by various and arduous 
steps, under the kindly guidance of the 
men in authority. Education is made 
free and all steps are taken to make the 
common people as enlightened as possible." 
The December, 1914, Monthly Bulletin of the Ohio State Board of Health 
says: 
"It is very evident, therefore, that in 
addition to providing better housing conditions for our Negro population, it is 
necessary to revolutionize in a way the 
social and economic standards of this 
race. The best general remedy to apply 
is education. W e have no sympathy 
with the prevailing opinion of the South, 
namely, that the Negro when educated 
loses his usefulness. With few exceptions, the educated Negro is the one 
whose standards of living have been materially improved and are comparatively 
high, the one who knows how to live in 
the most hygienic manner, and the one 
who is not a breaker of the laws and a 
resident of our jails and penitentiaries, 
but in most instances is a good citizen. 
"It is important, therefore, that health 
departments and health officials as well 
as the social workers in this state, meet 
the problem of increasing sickness and 
death among the members of this race 
and deal with it in a manner which is in 
every sense in accord with the well recognized principles of sanitary and social 
science." 
William H. Chenery, who conducts a 
column in the Chicago Herald, has this 
story: 
" A football player from one of the 
local high schools, a southern boy, as 
it happens, told the story. 
" T had a funny experience last 
Saturday,' he said. T was running down 
the field on the kick-off when I saw a 
colored fellow. He plays half back on 
the High School and he's good. It 
was my business to put him out. I hit 
him squarely with my shoulder and 
bowled him over. 
" 'The ball was downed a few feet 
away and I stood there, near the fellow. 
I laughed and said to him, I got you 
that time. He didn't say anything, but 
when he got up he held his hands over 
his head. He thought I was going to hit 
him.' 
" 'Gee, it must be tough to be always 
expecting somebody to have it in for 
you!' 
"In that small incident is a miniature 
of the routine meaning of race prejudice. The white player had no intention 
of 'being dirty,' but the colored boy had 
no assurance that he was safe. Even in 
a game he thought at least that he had to 
be on guard, that everybody might 'have 
it in for him.' For his own part, he was 
square—his white opponents testify to 
that. But always he must pay a penalty 
to blind dislike. In that slow process is 
the tragedy, vastly more wearing, than 
are the violent outbreaks of racial feelings." MAJOR CHARLES YOUNG , U. S. A. 
Born in Kentucky 1868. Educated in the public schools of 
Ohio. Graduated from West Point 1889. Has served in the 
7th, 9th and 10th Cavalry and 25th Infantry of the United States 
Army. Was a Major in the Spanish War, Superintendent of the 
Sequoia and Grant National Parks of California, and has seen 
military service in Haiti, the Philippines and Liberia. 
He has been suddenly recalled from Liberia and may take 
command of the new Constabulary in Haiti. MAJOR ROBERT RUSSA MOTE N 
Born in Virginia in 1867. Graduated from Hampton Institute in 1890. Has served for twenty-five years as Commandant 
of Cadets at Hampton Institute and has spoken for Hampton 
and led its singers all over the United States. 
He is Secretary of the Jeanes Fund, President of the Negro 
Organization Society of Virginia, and has written the story of 
his life for the World's Work. 
Mr. Moten will probably succeed Booker T. Washington as 
Principal of Tuskegee. TH E NE W YEA R 
NE W Year, Comrades! 
Come, let us sit here 
high in the Hills of 
Life and take counsel 
one with another. How 
goes the battle there 
below, down where dark waters foam, 
and dun dust fills the nostrils and the 
hurry and sweat of human kind is everywhere ? Evil, evil, ves, I know. Yonder 
is murder: so thick is the air with blood 
and groans that our pulses no longer 
quicken, our eyes and ears are dull. 
Here, to home-wards, is breathless gain 
and gambling and the steady, unchecked, 
almost unnoticed growth of human hate. 
What then, Comrades? Shall we give 
up ? Shall we hold our hands and voices, 
shall we cease complaint? Shall we 
forego striving, shall we bury hope ? 
Never! Such is the way of weaklings 
and cowards. Up ! Look ! See the 
faint flamings to northwards, hear the 
faint voices in the East, and the song 
that sings in the West, swelling softly 
above the sigh. Courage then and grim 
content. What more can true men ask 
than God's alembic, Time? Behold this 
greatest of Christmas gifts—A New 
Year: A clean, white sheet of Life, the 
rugged swell of endless earth, the great, 
swift curve of sky; and all within the 
unshaken Will to be, the unfaltering 
Dream to do—what more shall we ask, 
Comrades, what more was ever asked bv 
men ? 
LAZ Y LABO R 
'O R bull-headed inability 
I t o reason, commend us 
| t o Mr. John A . Todd, 
B.L., who has recently 
i published "The World's 
Cotton Crops." He says: 
"But even if the boll weevil were extinct tomorrow, the increase of the American cotton 
area would still be hindered by another difficulty; namely, the lack of sufficient labor. 
Cotton has always been regarded as a cheaplabor crop, that is to say, a crop that can only 
be profitably cultivated where there is an 
ample supply of cheap labor. Such a supply 
of labor was obtained in the United States 
by the introduction of the slaves, who, though 
neither very industrious nor efficient, could be 
trained to the necessary processes of cultivation and picking. Indeed, it is admitted that 
a good Negro is the best cotton cultivator, 
if he can be persuaded to do his best. But 
since the liberation of the slaves, good Negroes have become almost the exception; the 
average 'nigger' has an incurable aversion to 
steady and especially prolonged labor. Two 
or three days' labor will earn a wage sufficient to keep him for a week, and that is all 
he wants. Nothing will persuade him to work 
six days a week, let alone seven, even in the 
busiest part of the picking season, when, 
owing to the uncertainty of the weather, a 
day's delay may mean irreparable damage to 
his crop. No matter what happens, he must 
have his Saturday off to go to town and buy 
'rations' and spend his week's wage. Even 
when the land and crop are his own, be seems 
to have no desire to make more money than 
is sufficient to keep him, and is quite content 
to remain a day-laborer all his life, when a 
few years of steady hard work and careful 
saving would put him in a position of independence, from which he might easily rise to 
comparative affluence. The scarcity of labor 
Editorial EDITORIA L 133 
has only resulted in raising the general level 
of wages, and enabling the Negro to adopt a 
higher standard of living, and copy the luxuries of the white man. A horse and saddle to 
ride to town with on Saturdays, expensive 
clothes, and the best brown boots that money 
can buy, gold-filled teeth, and gramophones, 
are his idea of life. The contrast between all 
this and the position of the Egyptian fellah, 
with his unlimited capacity for patient plodding work from morning to night, for almost 
seven days a week, and from one year's end 
to another, on a wage of less than a quarter 
of that of the American Negro, which yet 
enables him to maintain a standard of living 
that makes him the healthiest and the strongest agricultural laborer in the world,.is painful in the extreme." 
It occurs to us to make two comments: 
First, if this kind of "laziness" has succeeded in raising the rate of wages and 
the standard of living of black men we 
strongly recommend more laziness of the 
same kind. Secondly, we wish to call to 
Mr. Todd's mind the fact that not only 
has this lazy laborer bought "brown 
boots" and "gramophones" but also, according to the census of 1910, 218,972 
of these families representing over a 
million people have also bought land. 
This land has increased from 6,000,000 
acres in 1880 to 8,000,000 in 1890; 12,-
000,000 in 1900, and 20,000,000 in 1910, 
or a realm as large as Ireland. We have, 
we assure Mr. Todd, deep sympathy 
with the patient plodding Egyptian 
fellah but we hope to high Heaven that 
he will soon get "lazy" enough to raise 
his wage to some dim resemblance of 
decency. 
TH E LATEST CRAZE 
KLAHOM A seems to be 
a natural hunting ground 
for those persons, white 
and black, who wish to 
mislead the colored people. Yesterday it was 
Chief Sam and his West African Migration. Today it is the "Chief Counsel for 
the Civil War Cotton Revenue Tax 
Claimants of Sixty-Eight Million Dollars." The Secretary of the Treasury 
said last month: "There is no fund of 
$68,000,000, or any other sum in the 
treasury of the United Slates for former 
slaves or their heirs, or for any other 
persons who worked in the cotton fields 
of the South." 
This, however, does not worry that 
"Attorney of Record" who lightly says 
that even if the money is not there his 
organization proposes to claim it. Of 
course, he can claim it and anybody else 
can claim it and they may also claim the 
moon but the chance of getting the one 
is about as great as that of getting the 
other. W e trust that few colored people 
are going to be beguiled into throwing 
away their money in such a quest. 
SSl 
Editorial from Le Nouvelliste, Port-AuPrince, Haiti. 
H E American eagle is 
spreading its wings 
more and more upon 
our territory. The 
events of yesterday 
were a living expression of the clearly outlined and executed 
purpose of the Star-Spangled Republic 
in disembarking its troops. 
"While putting into effect the plan 
long delayed, the northern republic 
seems to say to the world that she is 
re-establishing order and peace and, to 
us Haitians especially, that we have no 
reason at all for anxiety. But how can 
we lend an ear to such declarations when 
the American occupation, in the more 
than suggestive form adopted yesterday, 
is not only an annexation, not even a 
protectorate, but rather a frank attempt 
at colonization, if we call things by their 
names, without ambiguity and without 
euphemisms. 134 TH E CRISIS 
Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N. Y. 
OUR CHRISTMAS GREETING TO HAITI: "PEACE ON EARTH, GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN" 
"By the will of Rear Admiral Caperton there are in the capital of Haiti, a 
military controller and an officer in 
charge of the civil departments. By 
what means can we reconcile all this 
with the essential attributes of an independent nation ? 
"The United States of America have 
for some time been introducing astonishing and strange innovations in international law. Certain it is that our great 
northern neighbor has international lawyers of ability, and it is to their authority 
that we refer in order to determine in 
their own light the acts which are now 
being put into effect by the American 
officers in our country. 
"And these things are seen while 
nearly the whole world is enflamed for 
the maintenance of the principles safeguarding the weak peoples : respect for 
Belgian territory and the non-enslaving 
of the Serbian people. Nobody wants to 
take the responsibility for such aggression^—neither those who needed war nor 
those who profit by it. 
"What is happening now in this 
hemisphere and in our own country? 
With the rapidity of action which characterizes the Germanic peoples, the German Legation sent an energetic protest 
in answer to the circular of the American Legation giving notice of the political measures taken upon our territory. 
"The German Legation invokes the 
law of nations against this procedure 
unknown to international custom and 
employed by the guardian of law and 
justice in America." 
OU R POLICY 
J^n^Jg PERSONS who send us 
clippin g contributions 
and pictures often assume or seem to assume 
that the acceptance or 
rejection of articles is 
purely a personal matter between them 
and the editor. They forget the Third 
Person, the Reader. Now, the editor 
may to a vast extent educate the Reader, 
he may inform and lead him; he may EDITORIA L 135 
even to some extent debauch, force and 
cajole him, but in the long run the 
Reader is the ruler. He is the one who 
decides what the magazine will print and 
what it must reject. Before him the 
Editor stands more often as servant than 
as master. He may in time gain influence and ascendency but he must always serve to a large extent his readers' 
tastes.. 
Now comes a manuscript. Four questions may be asked: 
1. Does the writer deserve credit for 
producing it? 
2. Does the editor like it? 
3. Will the readers like it ? 
4. Ought the readers to like it? 
Number one must be ruled out immediately. The editor if he has time 
and secretaries enough may commend 
the writer for his efforts and promise, 
but these are not reasons for publishing 
the manuscript. 
If the editor likes the manuscript this 
is not sufficient reason for publishing it. 
He must ask : Will the readers like it? If 
the answer is "yes"—the manuscript is 
accepted; if it is "no"—then there comes 
the greater and more difficult question: 
How far is this something which the 
readers ought to read despite their likes? 
How far is it something that they should 
be educated up to or become intelligent 
about or aroused over? How far will 
publication now and in this form induce 
them to read what they are not willing 
to read? 
All these are serious questions. The 
editor who insists continually on publishing what he likes and what his readers 
•do not like will eventually ruin his magazine. The editor who merely caters to 
his readers present tastes will miss his 
greatest possible service if he does not 
sink to positive dissemination of evil. 
To preserve that balance of judgment 
and foresight on the one hand which will 
make the magazine popular, and on the 
other hand make it a real force for education and uplift—this is no easy task 
and calls for unusual ability and clairvoyance if it is well done. 
When, therefore, TH E CRISIS stoops 
for popularity by blazing pictures and 
covers and "light" stories remember that 
the Ladies Llomc Journal and McClurcs 
and similar publications got their circulation in just that way, and TH E CRISIS 
must have circulation. If on the other 
hand TH E CRISIS preaches and complains ad nauseam, remember that this is 
not a mere magazine—it is a magazine 
with a purpose. 
A SUGGESTION 
SIMPL E and feasible 
memorial to Booker T. 
Washingto n may be 
contributed by the colored people alone. 
As we said in our last 
number the mortgage on the Frederick 
Douglass Home, near Washington, D. 
C , must be raised. Mr. Washington 
was interested in this project and helped 
raise a part of the mortgage. Could not 
his colored friends and admirers raise 
the rest and present it to the Douglass 
Home as a Booker Washington Memorial Fund? 
([Mr. Bell, a colored teacher in one of 
the city schools in New Orleans, recently received the following note: 
"Say, Mr. Nigger, you must move at 
once or we will burn you out. 
"Tired having Niggers acting like 
white people, living in fine houses and 
singing and playing the piano. Last 
warning. Give you one month to move 
out. Move across the street in those 
small houses suited for Niggers. 
"Com. of White Men." 
Afterward Mr. Bell's house "caught" 
fire. "AUNT BET 
T T was just about the end of the Civil 
*• War when she came to us. Grandfather seemed to have a knack of picking up the most efficient help in the most 
unexpected ways. I believe he was on 
his way to the bank, when his attention 
was attracted by a beady-eyed, agile 
little woman hurrying across the avenue 
with a bandanna bundle poised easily 
upon her head. 
The chef had just asked for another 
assistant as the old one was getting too 
slow. Perhaps—well, just how the bargain was struck I do not now recall, but 
from that day until her death, a few 
months ago, she was a member of our 
family. How old she was we could only 
guess, as she persisted in being "half-ahundred'' until the day of her death, and 
her appearance afforded no clue to the 
mystery. To me she seemed never to 
have been any more or any less and I 
never had the temerity to question her 
too closely upon the subject. In fact, I 
never wholly recovered from my earliest 
recollections of this little ebony autocrat 
of the kitchen. 
I remember so well the picture she 
made in the old whitewashed summerkitchen of our country home, where she 
held sway during the slack season at the 
hotel. Irresistibly drawn byr the seductive odor of browning corn bread, one 
little face after the other, wistful, piquant, or bold, according to the disposition of the owner, would peer in through 
the open door, each with its eyes fastened on the ostentatiously busy little 
body at the oven door. W e knew just 
how she would do it. First, the hand 
under the apron—and such an apron— 
like the apparel of Robin Hood's palmer, 
"patched both beneath and above," but 
never, oh ! never, other than spotlessly 
clean; then the bobbing of the bandanna 
head, the deft opening of the oven door; 
a triumphant flourish, and with "a final 
satisfactory, "Dah, now! " the coveted 
prize was turned out upon the shining 
table. 
W e knew we should each get a generous slice ; but, oh ! the delicious thrills of 
half-fear that accompanied its final capture. Sometimes she accompanied her 
"Get out a-heah, you pesterin' little rapscallions !" with a wild flourish of her 
glittering carving knife! Ah, was ever 
corn bread so delicious! 
Then, too, there was her garden. 
Everyone knew who'd have the first peas 
in the neighborhood. Not that Aunt Bet 
ever went out to see. It was her boast 
to the day o f her death that she "never 
had nothin' to do with no nigger" (she 
was just sunburned), and as she '"spized 
white folks," it is not hard to believe that 
she never ventured outside the front gate 
except on the rarest occasions, when 
there was absolutely nobody else to go 
to the corner for groceries. 
Her "people," her chickens (she always had a "Thomas Jefferson" and 
"Mirandy" on the roosts), her two 
ancient revolvers, relics of her war experiences, each one glorying in a mighty 
name—and last but not least, "Old Tom" 
—but if I should tell you of these, I 
should write a book. 
SEBASTIAN GOMEZ 
By AUTHU R A. SCHOMBURG 
A MON G the great painters who have 
achieved honor and recognition by 
their talents the least has been said of 
Sebastian Gomez of the city of Sevilla 
in Spain. M. L. Alcantara mentions the 
famous school of Alonso Cano of the 
XVI I century, the father of Granada's 
school of painting, in his "History of 
Granada" (1846). Sebastian Gomez 
was a pupil here with Alonzo Mena, 
Geronimo Cieza, S. H. Barnuevo, Pedro 
A. Bocanegra, Jose Risueno, Ambrosio 
Martinez and Juan Nino de Guevara, 
who contributed notable canvases to TH E "JIM-CROW" CAR 137 
adorn the church edifices and private 
residences of Granada. 
It is to be regretted that the early life 
of Sebastian Gomez is shrouded in mystery because of the odious curse of slavery, that repressive institution which has 
killed the noblest aspirations of so many. 
Some further information may, however, 
be found in the Historical Dictionary of 
the most illustrious professors of BellesArts in Spain, written by Juan Cean 
Bermudez and published by the Royal 
Academy of San Fernando, Madrid, 
1800, in six volumes: 
"Sebastian Gomez, called the Mulatto 
of Murillo, was a Spanish painter." He 
was a "slave of that gTeat artist, and by 
his application was able to imitate his 
master in the moments of his servitude. 
In this manner he became a famous 
painter, with good taste, a heavy brush 
on his canvases and an exactness in his 
drawing. The 'Virgin and Child,' located in the portico of the Church of the 
Mercenary Barefooted Fathers of Sevilla, painted by his hand, is very charming. The canvas, 'Christ attached to a 
pillar and St. Peter kneeling at His feet,' 
is in the vestry of the Capuchins Convent of that city, and a 'St. Joseph' and a 
'St. Ann' in the choir below the Convent 
are noted for their harmony of color, 
masterly handling of light and shade and 
their remarkable fidelity of life. It is believed that he outlived his master and 
died in the city of Sevilla." 
The city of Sevilla is remarkable for 
having as early as 1360 a Chapel for 
Negroes, which was founded by Archbishop Gonzalo dc Mena, who died in 
the year 1401. The Chapel was known 
as "Our Lady of the Angels," with a 
brotherhood. When their benefactor 
died the Negroes in a body, as a mark 
of respect, followed the funeral cortege 
to the Monastry of Cartuja in the majestic Sierra Nevada Mountains. (Anales Eclesiasticos y Seculares etc., Ortiz 
de Zuniga, Madrid, 1677.) 
Gomez' master, Bartolome Esteban 
Murillo, was one of Sevilla's most cherished and best loved sons, and is known 
the world over for his religious compositions, portraying wonderful expressions of tenderness and motherly solicitude. 
Sebastian Gomez died during the year 
1680 and was buried in the city of Sevilla. We are thankful to historian Alcantara that he has given him a place in 
the niche of fame where he properly belongs with those others, who, during that 
early century, helped to perpetuate the 
glory of Spain. We recall also the Ne-" 
gro, Juan Latino, whose name adorns 
Alcantara's history among the "poetas 
granadinos," who flourished with Luis 
Marmol, Diego Hurtado de Mendoza 
and Pedro Soto de Rojas. 
THE "JIM-CROW" CAR 
A N N. A . A . C. P . INVESTIGATION, PART II. 
By T. MONTGOMERY GREGORY 
/" \ NE of the greatest injustices of the 
"Jim Crow" car system is the unequal accommodations provided for Negroes for equal fares. Numerous instances, varying from the sickening conditions on the local lines to the more 
favorable ones on some of the main 
lines, present a situation that is intolerable. Dilapidated wooden coaches, 
cramped space, dirty and unsanitary interiors, and indecent toilet facilities, are 
some of the conditions that violate the 
requirements of equal accommodations 
as well as the sense of decency and 
justice. 
But these physical aspects of the "Jim 
Crow" car system are not the only ones 
that make travel for the Negro unbearable. In fact, I feel that the service and 
general treatment accorded colored passengers by the officials of the road is the 
worst evil of them all. I have already 
cited instances where the officers of the 
road—conductors and baggage-men— 
smoked in the colored coach. This abuse 
is not an uncommon one on the local 
lines. Furthermore, white men have no 
hesitation in freely invading the colored 
coaches, where they lounge and smoke 
at will. Appeals to the conductor, as in 138 TH E CRISIS 
the case noted before, receive only ridicule and contempt. In practically every 
"Jim Crow" coach in which I travelled 
the conductor used the coach as a storage 
room for his large train boxes and often 
for his clothes. In my ride from Washington to Columbia on the Seaboard, the 
conductor moved a colored passenger in 
order to make use of two seats for his 
boxes and record books. The conductor 
together with all the other train hands 
used the coach as a lounging and gossiping center all night long. These officers 
of the road seem to take delight in annoying the occupants of the "Crow' ' 
coach. 
The worst nuisance of all is, however, 
the "butcher," or vendor. This objectionable man—in the South he is always 
a man, never a boy—does all in his 
power to add to the unpleasantness of 
your travel. In the first place he stores 
all of his wares, over-ripe fruit, candy, 
tobacco, soft drinks, and books in at 
least two seats of the car. On the Seaboard train already spoken of the 
"butcher" ordered a Negro passenger 
out of the two end seats that he might 
jilace his goods upon them. The conductor had already moved another passenger that he might use two other seats 
for his truck. Thus most of the limited 
accommodations were seized by these 
subalterns of the road. 
This storage of his goods by the 
"butcher" in the "Jim Crow" coach not 
only monopolizes needed space, but the 
over-ripe fruit and the candy attract flies 
and vermin and thus make the coach unsanitary and unhealthy. 
Finally, these "butchers" are insulting 
to colored passengers, especially to 
women and girls. In offering their 
wares they will fawn over them, pluck 
them by the arm, and often insult them. 
I have in hand several specific instances 
of such behavior, but one will serve: 
In the coach going from Columbia to 
Sumter. South Carolina, two modest 
girls in their teens, sisters, were continually approached in a familiar manner by 
the "butcher," to their evident annoyance and embarrassment. The climax 
came when he stuck insinuatingly under 
their noses several indecent books; 
among them were these two: "How to 
Kiss," "Married Life." Must unprotected women and innocent girls be subjected to the insults and annoyances of 
these panderers? 
Frankness compels us to complain of 
another employee of the railroads. He 
is the colored porter who is given charge 
of the Negro coach, but who is frequently a sort of pseudo-valet or personal attendant on the conductor. These 
porters are permitted or seemingly encouraged to make no attempt to keep the 
colored coach clean and fit for habitation. The coaches are uniformly filthy 
and many persons carry brushes with 
them to clean the seats before using 
them. The writer has seen time and 
again these porters devoting their time 
to cleaning the boots and clothes of the 
conductor, when they should have been 
giving attention to the coach. 
Still another failure to provide proper 
service for colored passengers and one 
that is seldom mentioned, is in the neglect to provide an extra step or rest for 
alighting from the car, a convenience 
that is always provided for the whites. 
The distance is usually very great, and 
it is difficult for a man to step it with 
comfort; yet ladies and children are 
compelled to alight from the cars as best 
they can. always to their discomfort, 
often to their danger. 
These then are the conditions of travel 
for the Xegro on the southern lines. 
They are conditions supported bv irrefutable evidence. They are conditions 
that the great majority of the race are 
forced to endure daily. X o self-respecting man can submit to them without 
shame and humiliation, and yet he must 
see his wife and daughters suffer under 
them. Is it any wonder then, that the 
writer found the Negroes of the South 
earnest and pathetically urgent in their 
protests against these detestable conditions, and in their hopes that they would 
he remedied soon ? I shall not forget 
soon the eager faces and the loud acclamations of sincere approval when my 
mission in the South was made known 
to a Baptist congregation in Sumter. 
South Carolina. Everywhere was I 
made to feel that this attempt at righting 
these conditions by the N. A. A. C. P. 
was earnestly welcomed by the colored 
people in every hamlet and city of the 
South. GOV. CAPPER OF KANSAS, 
PRES. TOPEKA N. A. A. C P. 
National 
Association 
for the 
Advancement 
of 
Colored People 
GOV. F. B. WILLIS 
OF OHIO 
GOVERNOR S OF TW O STATES 
AGAINST PHOT O PLA Y LIBEL 
OROTEST S against the production of 
• "The Birth of a Nation," from correspondents of the Association in Kansas 
were referred by the National Office to 
Governor Capper, whom the Association 
is honored in having as President of its 
Topeka Branch. Governor Capper writes 
as follows: 
"Answering your letter of November 
23rd, will say that the 'Birth of a Nation' 
will not show in Kansas. I informed 
those interested in it that I would not 
stand for it in this State and the company has announced that they will not 
come here. I do not believe in promoting any picture show or play that will 
stir up race prejudice, and as long as I 
am governor I will do all in my power 
to stop them." 
In Ohio the producers of the play 
made a skillful attempt to outwit the 
State authorities, who have taken a vigorous and uncompromising stand against 
it by offering it as a complimentary feature of the "Buckeye Corn Special 
Tour," which is an annual excursion, 
"promoted in the interest of education 
and patriotism." In response to a protest from National Headquarters to Governor Willis the following was received: 
"I am in receipt of your letter concerning the attendance on the photo-play, 
'The Birth of a Nation,' by the members of the Corn Boys' Special on its 
Eastern trip. I am glad to inform you 
that I believe this situation has been satisfactorily arranged. On the 23rd day 
of November I learned for the first time 
that it was proposed that the photo-play 
in question was a part of the official 
entertainment provided for the Corn 
Boys' trip. Upon receipt of this information I immediately called Mr. T. P. 
Riddle, of Lima, Ohio, manager of the 
Corn Boys' tour, by 'phone and informed him that in my judgment it was 
entirely improper that a play which had 
been barred by the Ohio State Board of 
Film Censors, as being an improper play 
to be exhibited in Ohio, should be made 
a part of the official entertainment on 
this excursion outside of Ohio. I called 
his attention to the fact that such action on his part would be highly offensive to a large body of our citizens who 
do not approve of this photo-play, and 
furthermore it would place the State of 
Ohio in a most ridiculous position. It 
would be absurd for the State to say 
that the photo-play in question could not 
be exhibited inside of the State, but that 
it would aid in paying the expense of 
its citizens to go outside of the State to 
see the same play. Furthermore, I wrote 
Mr. Riddle promptly and vigorously on 
this subject. I have before me his letter 
in which he says that he will arrange to 
provide a substitute entertainment for 
the members of the Buckeye Corn Special party. I may add that in my talk 
with him by 'phone, I informed him also 
that unless some other official entertain-140 TH E CRISIS 
ment were provided in lieu of the photoplay in question that I should feel constrained to cancel my connection with 
the trip." 
The excursion generally includes from 
one thousand to two thousand people, 
many of whom are young boys. Mr. T. 
P. Riddle, who has charge of the tour, 
writing in the same circular, which announced the "Birth of a Nation" as a 
part of the official program, tells the 
anecdote of Lincoln's historic trip down 
the Mississippi and his visit to the slave 
market, concluding with these words: 
"When was the seed of emancipation 
planted ? The impressions made by the 
things which that country boy saw and 
heard on that trip down the Mississippi 
in 1831 proved the seed from which developed the liberation of millions and 
the restoration of the Union. 
"Many homes and many communities 
in years to come will reap benefits from 
the impressions made by the things seen 
and heard upon these Buckeye Corn 
Special Tours." 
The benefits our Republic will be 
likely to reap in future generations from 
the degrading spectacle known as "The 
Birth of a Nation" can perhaps be inferred from the remark of a young boy, 
who, after seeing the play in New York, 
said to a friend: "I'd like to kill every 
nigger I know." The Association appreciates the prompt and vigorous co-operation of its Ohio branches in this matter, 
news of which first came from the 
Cleveland Branch through Mr. Harry E. 
Davis, its attorney. 
M 
ST. LOUIS 
THE campaign against the proposed 
A
 Segregation Ordinance, which the 
St. Louis Branch has been organizing 
for several months, was formally 
launched at a mass meeting November 
8th, held in Central Baptist Church at 
which the Pastor, the Rev. George E. 
Stevens, author of "Negro Segregation," 
presided. The speakers included Congressman L. C. Dyer, Miss Nerney and 
the following clergymen: Rev. B. G. 
Shaw, Otho Brandt and S. W. Parr. 
The referendum is the "Legislative 
and Democratic Reform," by which it is 
proposed to decide if a "Black Ghetto" 
shall be established in St. Louis when 
on February 29th the Segregation Ordinance will be submitted to the thirty 
thousand white and fifteen thousand colored voters. The real estate group, who 
are responsible for the ordinance, are securing wide publicity for their views 
through the distribution of a leaflet 
called "The Home Defender," and 
dirough their invaluable ally, "The 
Birth of a Nation." As the great audiences file out of the theatre, after having 
witnessed the chase of the white girl 
by the Negro, "Gus," they are given 
copies of the "Home Defender," urging 
them to defend their homes by voting for 
the Segregation Ordinance. 
The ordinance itself is a sublimated 
form of the St. Louis "and Baltimore ordinances. The former has been appealed 
to the Supreme Court by the National 
Association, and the latter, which has 
been fought in various forms by the 
Baltimore Branch, is now awaiting decision in the highest court in Maryland. 
The framers of die St. Louis ordinance 
point with pride to its absolute justice 
to both races, which perhaps is best illustrated by its Servant Clause, which provides not only that colored servants of 
white persons shall be exempt from the 
provisions of the ordinance, but also 
WHIT E SERVANT S O F COLORE D 
PERSONS . 
Enrolled against die Ordinance are 
the St. Louis Branch, a majority of the 
colored clergy, the white press, with a 
single exception, and many representative white people. The Branch has organized for the campaign through several strong committees; the Segregation 
and Finance Committees, with Mr. Pitman and Dr. T. A. Curtis as Chairmen, 
and the Legal and Publicity Committees, 
with Attorneys Phillips and Vaughn as 
Chairmen, are indefatigable in their efforts to reach the people. Meetings are 
being held everywhere, letters have been 
sent to the white press and to the white 
clergy, leaflets have been printed for 
house to house distribution in a campaign of education among both white 
and" black; the city has been districted, 
funds collected and headquarters opened. 
Through Mr. A. W. Lloyd, Grand Chan-N. A. A. C. P. 141 
cellor of the Knights of Pythias, the 
Pythians of Missouri have given the use 
of several rooms in their beautiful temple as headquarters. In order to assist 
the able Secretary of the Branch, Mrs. 
H. A. Smith, Miss Helen Spears has 
been appointed stenographer and clerk in 
charge o f headquarters. Mr. Paul W. 
Mosley has been appointed solicitor. A 
certified public accountant has approved 
the business methods of the Branch, 
opened its books and audits all accounts. 
There has been some question as to the 
advisability of enjoining the election 
commissioners from holding the proposed election. A concensus of the best 
legal opinion in Missouri, and Mr. 
Storey, counsel for the National Association, strongly advise against this 
course. In spite of this some of the 
colored people of St. Louis have announced their intention of taking such 
action, and of raising six hundred dollars to retain a lawyer. 
The N. A. A. C. P. welcomes the cooperation of other organizations and individuals not included in its membership 
who are willing to fight this ordinance, 
and is glad to give them full credit, but 
it cannot but deplore disagreement and 
friction at such a crisis. The Bourbons 
of St. Louis will have reason to congratulate themselves if the colored people split on this issue while the enemy 
as usual stands as one. 
TH E SECRETARY'S TRIP 
ON the trip recently taken in the interest of the Association through 
the Middle West the Secretary visited 
eight branches, reaching at least five 
thousand people through public meetings, and everywhere finding evidences 
of the vitality of the work of the N. A. 
A. C. P. The large southern population, both colored and white, throughout 
this section of the country is responsible 
for much of the increase in discrimination. 
A number of valuable suggestions 
made by our branches and several important legal cases referred by them to 
National Headquarters are now under 
advisement. It is hoped as a result that 
a more practical plan for cooperation 
may be worked out. The results that 
have been accomplished by these branches 
in the face of most discouraging difficulties are promising. Ohio is still vigilant in its campaign against "The Birth 
of a Nation" and St. Louis' splendid 
work against the segregation ordinance 
is of importance to colored people everywhere. St. Louis had the best meetings 
of any of the branches. The women 
particularly showed great interest and 
the resolutions that they sent to the Association are much appreciated. Lack of 
space only prevents our publishing them 
in full. jus. 
TH E ANNUA L MEETING 
THE Annual Meeting of the National 
Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People will be held in New 
York City at the Assembly Room of the 
Society for Ethical Culture, Central 
Park West and 64th Street on Monday 
afternoon, January 3rd, 1916, at half 
past two. The session will be open only 
to members who have paid their dues. 
There will be reports from officers and 
branches, and the following nominations 
for Directors for terms expiring in 1919 
will be voted upon: 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New 
Haven. 
Bishop John Hurst, Baltimore. 
Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York. 
Mr. Joseph P. Loud, Boston. 
Dr. William A. Sinclair, Philadelphia. 
Mr. Arthur B. Spingarn, New York. 
Mr. Charles H. Studin, New York. 
Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York. 
Rev. G. R. Waller, Springfield, Mass. 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Boston. 
On February 11th and 12th there will 
be a Conference in New York City ending in a mass meeting in Carnegie Hall 
when the Spingarn Medal will be awarded and the prize scholarship, for which 
branches recently competed, announced. 
Speakers of national reputation will be 
heard at this conference which will take 
the place of the conference generally 
held in the spring. Every member of 
the Association should attend these 
meetings. Q^J 
BRANCHES 
r
T
y
 HE branch elections held early in 
A
 November seem to have given general satisfaction. Lack of space pre-142 TH E CRISIS 
vents our publishing the names of the 
new officers and committees. W e are sure 
that the results of their work, which will 
appear throughout the year in T H E 
CRISIS, will justify the confidence of the 
branches in their choice of representatives. 
Price Contest — Returns from the 
Prize Contest are so late in reaching us 
that it has been decided to postpone publishing the results until next month. 
Albuquerque, with the aid of the Civic 
League, has prevented "The Birth of a 
Nation" from being shown. The Branch 
has also been successful in having abbreviations used to indicate race omitted 
from the city directory. 
Baltimore—The case of Maryland vs. 
Jackson, involving the segregation ordinance, which the Branch has fought in 
various forms since its introduction several years ago, has been argued and is 
now awaiting decision in the Maryland 
Court of Appeals. 
At a public meeting held at Sparrows 
Point on November 23rd a number of 
new members were enrolled. 
Cleveland has been successful in compelling a restaurant keeper to take down 
discriminatory signs. 
Columbus—As the result of a prosecution conducted by the Branch a patrolman has lost his position. This man, 
Thomas E. Dunn, was found guilty of 
beating an old colored man whom he was 
attempting to arrest. Another patrolman, 
named Tiller, who, it was alleged, assisted in the arrest, was suspended with 
Dunn pending investigation. Testimony 
brought out that Dunn was the aggressor, Tiller having merely tried to dissuade him. The discharged officer is 
the same man who was suspended for 
trying to arrest the Tyler boys without 
a warrant, another case handled by the 
Branch, an account of which is given in 
T H E CRISIS for November. 
Des Moines—Nearly seven hundred 
persons were present at the entertainment given by Mr. E. R. Hall in the 
name of the Association, the proceeds 
of which have been devoted to increasing the circulation of T H E CRISIS among 
white people of prominence. The entertainment consisted of a two-act comedy, 
"The Rainbow Kimona," under the direction of Miss Feme Allen; a one-act 
sketch, entitled, "When the Worm 
Turns," and musical selections. All the 
voung people played their parts exceptionally well. 
January 1st will be observed by the 
Branch as Emancipation Day, with Attorney-General Cosson as the chief 
speaker. 
District of Columbia—The following 
abstracts from letters to the President of 
this Branch speak for themselves: 
"I am sure you will be glad to know 
that I have received my appointment in 
the Bureau. I shall always remember and be grateful for your kind 
interest in my appointment." 
"Some time ago I took the civil service examination for skilled laborer. I 
made an average of 93.82 and the number of persons whose names were ahead 
of me on the register established from 
this examination was eleven. In June, 
before going away for the summer, I inquired of the Civil Service Commission 
and was told that fifty persons had been 
appointed from this register. The appointment clerk told me that nothing 
could be done, as I had not been selected 
from the names certified. 
"I was discouraged and gave up in 
despair. I mentioned the matter to my 
pastor, who asked me to let him take my 
papers, saying he would see the President of the District of Columbia Branch. 
I gladly consented. That was the first 
week in November. On November 11th 
my pastor called with a note from you 
and accompanied me to the 
Rureau, where I saw the Director. He 
read the note, summoned his secretary 
and directed him to take me to the appointment clerk. On November 19th I 
was called to work and am now at work. 
"I now realize I am under great obligations to the N. A. A. C. P., and to 
you personally. I thank you heartily, and 
expect to join the Association, which is 
helping so wonderfully to aid those who 
have no influence. I never knew the 
value of such an organization until now. 
I shall be glad to be of whatever service 
I may be to the Association." 
Kansas City, Kansas, is co-operating 
with the Spring Valley Colored Im-GO ! 143 
provement Association in opposing the 
eftorts of the Linwood Improvement Association (white) to force a number of 
colored families to move from the district which lies immediately next to the 
section occupied by the Linwood Association. 
Peoria includes among its officers and 
executive committee some of the best 
known people in the city. Although very 
recently chartered, it has held a series 
of public meetings which have been well 
attended and is now endeavoring to pass 
an ordinance which will prohibit photoplays likely to cause race friction. 
Pittsburgh — Two meetings w h i c h 
aroused wide interest in the work of the 
N. A. A. C. P. were held by the Branch 
in the Metropolitan Baptist Church, the 
largest church of that denomination on 
the North Side, the Rev. IV. K. Brown, 
pastor, and in the Trinity A. M. E. 
Church, the Rev. G. A. Henderson, pastor. 
Providence-—Undismayed by their 
failure to keep "The Birth of a Nation" 
from showing in their city, the Providence Branch is taking fresh hold of their 
work with redoubled energy. In fighting 
the photo-play they had a more difficult 
situation to meet than any other Branch, 
not only foes without, but an enemy 
within. They handled the situation with 
an uncompromising vigor which promises well for the success of their work in 
the future. 
The A. M. E. Zion Church where the 
Branch held a Brotherhood meeting on 
November 28th, was crowded to the 
doors. Mr. Rolfe Cobleigh, Assistant 
Editor of the C ongregationalist, and 
Prof. William Pickens, Dean of Morgan 
College, were the chief speakers. 
Quincy heard the well-known colored 
violinist, Prof. Joseph H. Douglass, at 
their mass meeting on Sunday, November 28th. 
Topeka—The six weeks' fight which 
this Branch waged against "The Birth 
of a Nation," and in which they had the 
co-operation of the white Ministerial 
Union and the Governor of the State, 
was successful as is indicated by a letter 
from Governor Capper. 
Trenton is securing encouraging results from a publicity campaign they are 
carrying on through letters addressed to 
the press and to owners of hotels, restaurants and theaters, protesting against 
discrimination. 
GO! 
By LUCIAN B. WATKINS 
Suggested by tlie victory of Howard P. Drew. 
He heard the starting signal-word and Each there to give his measure as a 
ran; man! 
The lightning of his will through He won! Go ! Let us each take heed 
muscles fleet 
Became the pinions of his flying feet! 
As speeds the flash of thought, with him 
began 
Strong racers fired with the faith, "I 
and run, 
Run with our gifts eternal and make 
known 
The hope we feel, caught from the 
beacon sun; 
The faith we find in many a midnight 
moan. 
Great hearts high-steamed to reach Drew 
the judgment-seat, 
The final goal and palm of victory 
sweet, own 
ran his race—outstripped the 
world—and won. 
Now we resolve, O God, to win our MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON' S 
ly A
 story
 ! 'The White Brute," which 
appeared in the Masses, has been reprinted for distribution by the N. A. A. 
C. P. It is an awful story and tells how 
a dark bride was taken from her black 
husband and outraged by white men. 
The poor, ignorant husband strives to 
comfort the stricken thing: 
"And what good would it have done? 
It wouldn't have made no diffuence. 
You'd have had to suffer jes' de same. 
Listen, honey, I couldn't help you, it'd 
been jes' de same, only you'd have been 
le f all alone. 
"But you ain't alone now, Melindy, 
honey-lamb, you's got me, and I'll toil 
for you while I lives. I'll help you to 
furgit. I'll love you and I'll work for 
you from morn till night. I'll tend you 
if you're sick lak's if you was my baby 
chil'. There ain't nothin' I kin do fur 
you as I'll leave undid. Oh, Melindy, 
I'm here alive, don't you want me? I'm 
alive. You wouldn't rather have a dead 
man than a live one, would you? " 
li e stopped, panting, and listened for 
her answer. 
At length it came in whispered gasps : 
"I don't know, Sam, I'm afraid. Every 
minute I'm afraid." 
"Don't be afraid," he cried impetuously, throwing his arm about her. "I'm 
hyar." 
And then he stopped. She had not 
turned to him, but snuggled close to the 
wall as if seeking protection there. 
Outside were the soft night sounds, 
the vines rustling against the window, 
the insects' drowsy chirps. Far off, by 
some distant cabin, came the howl of a 
dog. 
"A dead man or a live cur," he said 
to himself; and turned upon his face 
with a sob. 
"A number of residents of Mulberry 
Street and Georgia Avenue, in the vicinity of New Street, were considerably 
aroused over an incident which took 
place yesterday morning, in which three 
men and a bull dog in an automobile and 
a Negro boy on a motorcycle figured, 
and it is probable that the matter will not 
only be brought before the recorder but 
called to the attention of the civil service 
commission as well. 
"The automobile was going up Mulberry Street, closely followed by the 
motorcycle. Near New Street, it is said, 
the bull dog jumped from the car, directly in front of the motorcycle and was 
run over by the latter, the Negro rider 
being thrown a distance of ten feet and 
painfully injured. 
"According to Will Starr and H. A. 
Wiggers, both of whom reside near 
where the accident took place and to 
several - others who witnessed it, the 
owner of the bull dog, said to have been 
a man named Howard, got out of the 
car, walked over to where the Negro 
was lying on the paving, kicked him 
several times and, picking him up, struck 
him a blow which knocked him down 
again. Several persons interfered and 
about this time a policeman appeared. 
"According to witnesses, the policeman told the Negro" boy that if he did 
not make himself scarce he would make 
a case against him and the boy, hardly 
able to drag himself along, managed to 
get back on his motorcycle and hurried 
away. 
" A request was made of the policeman 
to make a case against Howard, but the 
policeman's reply was that the Negro boy 
was gone and he did not know where to 
find him. Several persons volunteered 
to act as prosecutors in the case, but no 
summons were given. 
"Mr. Starr, one of the witnesses to 
the accident, wrote a letter of complaint 
to the civil service commission yesterThe Burden TH E BURDEN X45 
THE MOB AT TEMPLE, TEXAS 
day, asking that the policeman be called 
on to explain why no case was made 
after several persons had so requested." 
—Macon, Ga., Telegraph. 
" A mob of 10,000 took Will Stanley, 
a Fort Worth Negro, from the officers 
soon after midnight this morning and 
marching him to the public square 
through the principal business streets, 
proceeded to cremate him in full view 
of the populace, which included many 
women, some of the latter standing on 
men's shoulders to witness the grewsome sight. 
"All along the route the Negro fought 
savagely and was kicked and beaten by 
the mob. Arriving on the square a pyre 
was constructed of dry goods boxes, 
barrels and other inflammable stuff secured from the rear of business houses in 
nearby alleys. Trace chains were used 
to shackle the Negro."—Fort Worth, 
Tex., Record, July 31, 1915. 
"These pictures were selling for ten 
cents each on the streets of Waco. " 
(From a letter, Aug. 5, 1915.) 
"Absolutely nothing has been done. 
The Governor claims that he has not 
been 'officially' notified of the burning. 
The Negro was accused of murdering 
some white people. He implicated a 
white man but the mob burned him without permitting him to tell all." (From 
a letter Sept. 7, 1915.) 
THE CRUCIFIXION, AT TEMPLE, TEXAS 
Reproduced from a post card sold on the streets THE LETTER BOX 
T HAV E been completely captured by 
the last number of TH E CRISIS dedicated to the babies and children. I do 
not see how anyone can resist the appeal 
of these little people. This is just meant 
as a word of appreciation and thanks. 
JOHN LOVEJOY ELLIOTT, 
New York City. 
CRISIS. As I have been very frank in 
criticism when I thought criticism deserved, I want to be equally frank in 
expressing my increasing interest in and 
approval of the magazine. Keep up the 
good work. 
GEORGE G . BRADFORD, 
Boston, Mass. 
"The Drop Sinister" is the finest and 
truest "thrust" at the wickedness of 
American race prejudice that I have ever 
seen in TH E CRISIS. That's saying a 
"heap!" 
WILLIA M PICKENS, 
Baltimore, Md. 
I have read every copy of your publication, TH E CRISIS, (from the first copy 
up to the present issue) and I wish to 
inform you of a little discussion occurring a few days since among a few of the 
young Negro men and women of this 
vicinity. The subject was "TH E CRISIS. " 
All agree that the publication serves a 
great need of the Negro as it is brilliantly edited, well printed, nicely illustrated 
and correctly worded, but those of us 
who have followed its pages for years 
feel that it (always) presents a horribly 
blue outlook. There seems to be a continued "howling" and "whining" because 
the white man does not give the Negro 
employment, allow the Negro the accommodation of his hotels, churches, places 
of amusement and other social and semisocial institutions. Since race prejudice 
actually exists why not deal with it from 
a constructive viewpoint ? 
M . ROY, 
Braddock, Pa. 
God bless you for the November editorial. 
WILLIA M RICHARD BROWN, 
St. Louis, Mo. 
A word of congratulation on the increasing success and value of TH E 
If I was amazed at your bitterness 
against the Belgians I was amused at the 
indignation expressed by many of my 
white brethren at the sending of colored 
troops to the help of the Allies. I saw 
many thousands of diese black soldiers 
on their march through Paris—splendid 
fellows and true Frenchmen. The population greeted them like brothers. I assure you the words "Color Line" would 
not have been understood. I must confess that the presence in France of these 
colored troops helped to lift some of the 
weight which lay on my heart—I had 
but one fear for them, and that was that 
they might become demoralized by the 
example set by some of our highly civilized friends. . . . 
My interest in your cause is very sincere even though I do not think of it as 
separate from the cause of the oppressed 
white people. 
MARI E R . PERRIN, 
Paris, France. 
Enclosed please find one dollar for my. 
subscription to TH E CRISIS. I appreciate 
very much the general make-up of your 
magazine. Especially am I pleased at 
the absence of bitterness against those 
of our race who differ with you or who 
advocate principles not in line with your 
own. 1 regret that certain other periodicals do not measure up to this tone of 
general liberality. 
Wishing that your lists may reach the 
100,000 mark or that point which will 
give you full scope for your noble work, 
J. R . REYNOLDS, 
Baldwin, La. TH E LETTE R BOX 147 
Yo u may always count on my renewal 
so long as TH E CRISIS maintains its present policy. It is refreshing and encouraging in a world governed by force 
and moved by the spirit of materialism 
to see a journal battling for human 
rights, the social and spiritual redemption of the race. 
W . S. TURNER, 
Raleigh, N . C. 
Wi 
Please find enclosed Money Order for 
one dollar for which you will send TH E 
CRISIS to my address for one year. A 
copy was handed me by my sister and 
after reading it through I concluded that 
you were filling a long felt want. 
J. E . RECTOR, 
Little Rock, Ark. 
M 
Please find enclosed Money Order for 
two dollars to pay for two subscriptions 
for TH E CRISIS: my own, renewed, 
and one new one. 
I trust that the good work may continue and the same excellent policy 
which is in vogue may continue to 
dominate in the future as in the past. 
W . H. COWAN , 
Washington, D . C. 
I would not miss a single number of 
this superb and manly defensive racial 
implement. .. . I would that every 
southern white man and woman could 
read TH E CRISIS. In proportion as they 
learn of us they will form opinions in 
variance to the common one obtaining of 
our race. Men of any color or creed 
respect men wherever found in proportion as they present themselves manly. 
The day of cringing and crawling, grinning and head-scratching belongs to the 
servile days of slavery. These are traits 
of slaves, not men. An unmanly compromise on any ground is a stench in the 
nostril of civilization. 
I pray you live long to present our 
cause to the world in the only true style, 
manly and intelligently. 
WILLI S E . STEKRS, M. D., 
Decatur, Ala. 
I regard TH E CRISIS as the ablest and 
most scholarly publication issued in behalf of the colored people of the United 
States. And may I add that I regard 
your editorial upon the darker races in 
the European war as the most searching 
and potent editorial utterance which I 
have noted in any publication since the 
outbreak of hostilities. Indeed, this profound pronouncement of yours is interracial as well as international in its importance and significance. Its splendid 
English and diction, its deep analysis, 
and its moving and convincing spirit of 
justice and humanity, instruct the intellect and arouse the soul for the highest 
and best there is in society and civilization. May this work and that other 
work among the Congressmen for complete citizenship and freedom continue 
unabated forever. 
GEORGE W. ELLIS, 
Chicago, 111. 
m 
Your November number was so intensely edifying I must drop you a line 
to say so. I especially and emphatically 
agree with your stand against segregation. It is repugnant to Christian principles, to American principles, to true 
manhood and breeds war. 
I was delighted to see the honest, 
manly faces of the three sergeants of the 
10th Cavalry of which I was an officer 
for thirty years. 
R. H. PRATT, 
Brigadier-General, Retired. 
Washington, D. C. 
m 
The editorial in TH E CRISIS, entitled 
"Votes for Women, " is entirely worthy 
of a statesman. It is the ablest literary 
contribution to the cause of universal 
suffrage of my day. Indeed, I have 
found nothing comparable to it in the 
history of democratic republics. 
I thank you heartily, and I know the 
young colored men of promise will sustain you and help you and render your 
work both beneficient and immortal. 
H . J. PINKETT. 
Omaha, Neb. 148 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Are You Insured? 
No. insurance cheaper; but 
Why not? d°
 vo u eve r ex Pec t t o
 die? 
It costs money. Certainly. 
So do all things. Do you ex- Do you ever expect to propect to be insured? tect your family against 
, 7 death? 
Yes. 
When?
 Yes " 
0 Then do it now while you Sometime. , „ v» 
are young and well. Do 
Do you buy when things are no t post pon e it until you 
cheap or dear? ar e ol d an d s i ck > NOW 
When they are cheap. you can. THEN you canInsuranc e will never be
 not -
cheaper for you than it is Insurance is costly, 
today. Why not buy to- go is death. 
^
a
^ ' Insurance can be postponed. 
1 haven't any mone y to 
J
 Death cannot. 
spare. 
Tj- AVT V „,„„ QTI o Where shall I insure? Have you ANY money? 
Yeg Where your money is safe. 
rr\t i u 4. Is it safe with the STANThen you have enough to DAR D LIFE INSUR -
spare a part for death. ANCE CO ? 
I am not sic . ^ e Treasurer of the 
Good! That will make State of Georgia. 
Pleast ~ 
send me 
particulars 
& ~ STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Amount $ 200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
s « 
Ag c Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Weight OVE R TW O MILLION INSURANC E IN FORCE 
Occupation Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
Name 
Addr( . M HEMA N E. PERRY, President 
(C Jan., 1916) HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Mention Th e Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 149 
TEN YEARS 
AN INTERNATIONAL 
RECORD HOLDER 
Thi s stamp s th e 
UNDERWOO D 
a s 
Supreme in the Typewriter Field 
I n 191 5 th e Underwoo d repeate d a succes s 
It ha d achieve d for nin e year s b y winnin g 
In Open Competition 
th e 
One Thousand Dollar Trophy Cup 
awarde d for 
SPEED ACCURACY STABILITY 
UNDERWOO D 
"The Machine You Will Eventually Buy" 
III 
Books? 
See the Selected List on 
the Inside Front Cover. 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM introducing 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guaranteed to Grow Hair In SIX TREATMENTS 
or Money Refunded. Price 5 0 cents per box . 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E . Slaughte r Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTON AVENUE ST. LOUIS. MO . 
Mention THE CRISIS 
The Stenographers' Institute 
1227 S. 17th Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
In a few lessons our students write business letters, word for word, as dictated, and transcribe them 
rapidly and accurately on a Letterless Keyboard Typewriter by our Rythm Touch Method. 
Stenography, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Commercial Spelling, Commercial Correspondence, Piano 
Music and Dressmaking, a specialty. 
500 situations have been secured for 6tudents and 
domestic servants during the last three years. 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , Pres. 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
THE NEGRO AND HIS PROBLEMS 
New catalogue on request. For twenty years the Neale publications have been 
famous throughout the civilized world. Among them are books of history, _ biography, reminiscence, science, essays, politics, travel, fiction, poetry, religion, 
juvenile' and pure literature. To this great library of literature important works 
frequently are being added. Our new catalogue will be sent postpaid on request. 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By JOHN R, LYNCH. 
Fourth Thousand. In his "Autobiography of Seventy years," the late Senator George F. Hoar of 
Massachusetts says: "Perhaps, on the whole, the ablest 
of the colored men who served with me in Congress 
was John R. Lynch of Mississippi.'' Lynch was made 
temporary chairman of the Republican National Convention of 1S84, and presided over that convention 
during the whole of the first day and a part of the 
second. He was nominated as temporary chairman 
by Henry Cabot Lodge, and his nomination was seconded by Theodore Roosevelt and George William 
Curtis. After his term in Congress, Lynch served as 
Fourth Auditor of the Treasury. In this his first 
book, written with extraordinary force and with unusual clarity, he boldly justifies Reconstruction. $1.65 
by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
Boston Globe: "An interesting contribution to the 
history of American politics." 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church. By JOHN H. REED, D.D., K.C. With an 
introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D., LL.D. 
$1.60 by mail. 
Christian Recorder, Philadelphia: "The author is 
an American Negro who has spent eight years in 
Liberia under the missionary society of the M. E. 
Church. The book comes in at this time with more 
than ordinary interest, for during this year most of 
the lay colleges and conferences of the M. E. Church 
will discuss the subject of racial adjustment, especially that relating to Bishops for races and languages. 
The book is filled with splendid idealism, and presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromises for the present exigencies may not be heeded." 
My Ogowe. By ROBERT HAMILL NASSAU, M.D., 
S.T.D. For forty-five years a resident of Africa, 
pioneer and explorer, Dr. Nassau has contributed 
largely to both science and literature. While in 
Africa he sent large ethnological collections to the 
University of Pennsylvania and to Princeton, and 
was the first to send a carcass of a gorilla to the 
United States, and he supplied the only perfect gorilla brains to be examined by anatomists up to 1891. 
He is a member of various scientific bodies, including the Archeological Society of the University of 
Pennsylvania, the National Geographical Society, the 
Pennsylvania Society of Scientific Research. Among 
his published works are "Crowned in Palmland," 
"Mawedo," "Fetishism in West Africa," "The Path 
She Trod," "Where Animals Talk," "In an Elephant 
Corral, and Other Tales of West African Experiences," and "My Ogowe." One of his more important works is the translation of the Bible into the 
Benga language of West Equatorial Africa. But by 
far his greatest achievement in literature, and the 
culmination of his varied literary activities, is thia 
volume, "My Ogowe," which the publishers hold to 
be the most important work of the sort yet published. 
It comprises more than 70 0 pages of text and 50 fullpage illustrations. Large octavo. $3.25 by mail. 
The Black Man's Burden. By WILLIAM H . HOLTZCLAW, Principal of the Utica Normal and Industrial 
Institute for the Training of Colored Young Men and 
Young Women, Utica, Miss. With an introduction 
by Booker T. Washington. Illustrated. Third Thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle: "In both subject and literary treatment Mr. Holtzclaw's book is a 
monument to his race." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study in Negro achievement and should be an inspiration to the young men and the young women of 
that race." 
Boston Herald: "The book will stir the sympathetic emotions of its readers as his story stirred 
Bostonians when he told it here several years ago. 
The story of this devoted young man is of intense 
interest, not only as an account of great accomplishment despite apparently overwhelming obstacles and 
repeated discouragements, but as giving a close view 
of the character of the colored people of the far 
South, their shortcomings, their inherent virtues, and 
their ambitions." 
Troy Record: "Mr. Holtzclaw is one of those 
splendid Negro leaders upon whom the hope of his 
race depends." 
Redder Blood. By WILLIAM M. ASHBY. The Negro 
in America has produced but little imaginative work 
other than poetry. He has told his story by other 
mediums, which seemed to him, perhaps, better than 
fiction. Whether right or wrong in this view, undoubtedly the time is now ripe for Negro prose fiction, by Negroes, to be written in the English language, and not the jargon known as Negro dialect. 
Mr. Ashby, a Yale man, is a Negro, and "Redder 
Blood" is a novel of his race, and of the present 
time. Moreover, it is a story told for the sake of 
the story, and is not a treatise under disguise. The 
novel is one of great merit, as a novel, and there 
are situations in it that reach the acme of legitimate 
dramatic intensity. $1.00 by mail. 
Wm . E. Chancellor, Ph. D., author of "The United States," in ten volumes; 
formerly lecturer in Johns Hopkins University and in the University of Chicago' 
formerly Superintendent of Public Schools in the District of Columbia' "The 
Neale Publishing Company today represents high-water mark in America for its 
historical works. Upon its list are to be found the best books upon each and every 
side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety as to lend lustre to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor. o r r 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., 
Order through 
440 Fourth Avenue 
New York City' • or THE CRISIS, MrY~ 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 151 
THE NEGRO AND HIS PROBLEMS 
A prominent southern white educator in a letter to the publishers says: "Your 
policy of absolute fairness with regard to the Negro question, along with your sympathy for the South, make me wish to co-operate with you as far as possible." Says 
a prominent western colored educator to the publishers: "I am deeply impressed 
with the justice of your house. I see often, and he never tires of speaking of 
your great work in behalf of the Negro in literature." 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By GEORGE W . 
ELLIS, K.C., F.R.G.S.; recently, and for eight years. 
Secretary of the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of 
West Africa," "Islam As a Factor in West African 
Culture," "Dynamic Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other works. Profusely illustrated. $2.1 5 
by mail. 
Pittsburgh Sun: "In this thorough study of Negro 
social conditions in Africa lies a revelation for those 
to whom the African Negro ha9 meant only the savage. Here is revealed a social system, a religious 
tradition, a craftsmanship, and, most astonishing of 
all, a written language other than primitive. Especially interesting are the maxims and the fables 
translated from the Vai tongue, with their picturesque 
simplicity and ingenious wisdom." 
Boston Transcript: "In this study Mr. Ellis has 
given us an excellent and valuable contribution to 
the history of the Negro race." 
DR. ROBERT E. PARK in the Chicago Tribune: "In 
an introduction which he has written to Mr. Ellis's 
volume, Prof. Starr, who is an authority on West 
Africa, describes the Vai as 'a vigorous, energetic, 
enterprising' people, and he adds that 'no people of 
the west coast of Africa can better be taken as 
typical and showing what the African can do, either 
when left to himself, or affected by outside influences.' This defines the peculiar interest of this 
volume. It tells us what a minute and isolated Negro people have done with the slight cultural resources that were at their command." 
The Negro Races: Vol. II. East and South 
Africans, with a Full Account of the Slave 
Trade. By JEROME Down. This is the second volume of Professor Dowd's series entitled "The Negro 
Races," and is devoted to the Negroes of both East 
an 1 South Africa, with a full account of the slave 
trade. The first volume of the series, "West 
Africans," was published several years ago. The 
third volume, "The Negroes of America," is now in 
the course of preparation. Professor Dowd, who is 
at the head of the Department of Sociology and 
Economics, University of Oklahoma, perhaps is the 
highest authority on the aspects of the Negro races 
of which he writes. Of the first volume Professor 
W. I. Thomas, of the University of Chicago, said: 
"I am greatly pleased with it. I think you have gone 
at the matter in an admirable fashion." Said Professor T. F. Jameson, Director, Carnegie Institute: 
"I can see especially the need of snch systematic accounts of the sociology of the African." Professor 
Paul S. Reinsch, of the University of Wisconsin, 
wrote: "I have read it with great interest." The 
price of each volume of the series is $2.50 ; by mail, 
$2.65. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By KELLY MILLER, Dean of the College of 
Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, 
Howard University. Third edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Dallas News: "The author is a cultured man, a 
forceful and most pleasing writer, interesting from 
the first sentence of the first chapter to the close of 
the book." 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable. 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness and 
skill." 
Independent: "There is no book which more fully 
and correctly represents the wishes and demands for 
equal recognition in civil and political rights than this 
volume." 
Out of the House of Bondage. By KELLY MILLER, 
Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Howard 
University. $1.65 by mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. He neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogue!." 
Detroit Times: "Kelly Miller has the soul of an 
artist and an idealist. We cannot but be carried 
away with a solendid fervor for our Negro brother 
after reading Prof. Miller's book. It is as big as all 
outdoors and aims at a readjustment on the highest 
principles." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "Those who are interested in the study of the Negro cannot ignore this 
volume. With many of its conclusions we can by 
no means agree, but it points in favor of a revised 
judgment on certain questions connected with the 
position or achievements of his race." 
Race Orthodoxy in the South. By THOMAS PEARCE 
BAILEV. For many years Professor Bailey has studied 
southern social problems, particularly with respect to 
the relations of the Caucasian and the Negro races. 
He has held professorships in the University of California, the University of Chicago, and the University 
of Mississippi, and he now holds a professorship in 
the University of the South. Although a southerner, 
now engaged in educational work in the South, he has 
lived ten years in the North, and he has studied the 
Negro and his problems of every section of the 
United States. $2.15 by mail. 
Gen. Randolph K. Evans, U. S. A. , Commanding the Department of the East, with 
headquarters at Governor's Island: "I appreciate the value of your work for 
American literature in general, and especially what you have done as a military 
missionary in publishing books, which many other publishers would have rejected, 
with a view to increasing military comprehension among our people,—fin important 
part of governmental knowledge in regard to which a great majority of our people 
sit in outer darkness and blissful ignorance" 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., or THE CRISIS, EftJTS 
Mention THE CRISIS -152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Oil Paintings 
now beautify the best Negro homes. W e are offerin'; at popular 
prices, genuine hand painted reproductions in oil colors of "Still 
Life" (See illustration) and a "Moment of Rest," which, in a 
collection of over 200 paintings and drawings exhibited at the 
Chicago Lincoln Exposition, were awarded the highest honors 
in still life and figure painting, and were favorably mentioned in 
the leading Chicago papers. 
Attractively arranged on 10 x 13-inch mat, they are suitable 
for framing, for the home, schools, clubs, etc. Prices in oil colors, S2.00. Sepia Ph
By mail, 6c. additional. Special te
Landscapes, portraits and artistic designs supplied at reasonable prices. 
Address: W . M. FARROW , 6117 South Racine Ave., Chicago, 111. 
$30 0 in 3 0 Days! 
Made by one Robinson salesman. You—yourself— 
can positively make $60 and expenses every week. I 
want men like you, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, anxious to make money, who are willing to work 
with me. Not for me, but with me. I want you to 
advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, 
most sensational seller in 50 vears—the ROBINSON 
FOLDING BATH TUB. Here's an absolutely new 
invention that has taken the entire country by storm. 
Nothing else like it. Gives every home a modern upto-date bathroom to any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy 
as an umbrella. Self-emptying and positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 10 years. Hustlers, 
east, north, west, south,—coining money. Orders, 
orders, everywhere. Badly wanted, eagerly bought, 
for remember, fully 70% of homes have no bathrooms. 
Immense profits for you. Two sales a day means 
$300 a month. Here's proof—real proof. Rev. Otto 
Schulze, Mo., got $1,600. Burkholder, Mont., orders 
$1,072 in seventeen days. Hamlinton, of Wyoming, 
made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, permanent, fascinating work. 
This is not idle talk. Make me prove it. Write a 
postcard. Let me write you a long letter. Then decide. No experience needed, no capital. Your credit 
is good if you mean business. But you must be ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. 
Write a postcard now. I want to pay you sixty dollars 
every week. 
H. S. Robinson. Prest., The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 
138 5 Factories Buildind. Toledo . Ohio 
a
$YO U 
Splendid 
Outfit 
FREE 
In 
Your1 
Spare 
Time 
Hundreds of 
Our Ar.ents are 
_ $10 A DAY in 
their spare time. Many are 
b°aling even that. Such a thing 
__s failure is utterly impossible 
with our new and complete outfit which we will s^nd 
you free—all charges prepaid. 
Progress clothes wear belter and are 
more stylish than any other made-to-measure clothes. Our prices are the lowest. 
MADE TO MEASURE 
PANTS cut in EXPRESS 
thelateststyle PREPAID 
marie to your 
individual measure, fit and workmanship guaranteed. No extra charge 
fur peg tops —no matter how extreme 
you order them. 
Agent s Wanted-£tfsTLER^ 
every town to take orders for our celebrated made-ti)-mi':iinjre clMh.-s Samples of all the latest materials FREE. 
W e Pa y Bi g Mone y 
evei vwhere. Turn \"urs|'are time into caah bv taking orders for our stylish clothes. Write tit once for greatest offer ever made. 
PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept 771 . Chicago 
WANTED 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work . 
7 0 Fifth Avenue , New York . 
JUST OFF THE PRESS MEMORIAL EDITION 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON 
The Master Mind of a Child of Slav
An appealing life story of a man who was a most remarkable product of 
modern civilization in all its phases. 
Our Memorial Edition of the Life of Booker T. Washington includes a full 
description of the Tuskegee Institute, the GREAT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION that stands as a monument to the energy, ,earnestness, intelligence and honesty of this great man, and won for him the respect of all 
men in all walks of life and from every station. 
Every man, woman and child should read this book, irrespective of race 
or creed. 
The book is a large octavo volume of 350 pages, including superb, strikingly 
impressive engravings. Size, %y2 x 6]/4 inches. PRICE, ONLY $1.00 POSTPAID. Send all orders to 
HOWARD , CHANDLE R & COMPANY , (Publishers) 
643 4 Vincennes Avenue Agents Wanted. CHICAGO, ILL. 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 153 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
18 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY n ATLANTA. GA. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
_ An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 2S cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Ten poems by 
EFFIE T. BATTLE, A.M. 
"Mrs, Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W. Cable. 
PRICE 25 CENTS. 
ADDRESS: OKOLONA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.00 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
40 0 pages, 5 0 illustrations. Price $1.2 5 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
(George Young) 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colored Authors and Books on Race Problems 
a Specialty. 
135 W. I35tta Street New York City 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOB. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Ohio 
TEACHERS 
Big Entertainer jffi&jJa 
Games, 31 0 Jokes and Itiddl«H, 7 3 
Toat>tB, IS Card Trick*. 4 Oomio 
ReoitationB.3 Monologues,Cheekertj, Chews, Dim i noes, fox and 
Geese, i) Men Aiorns. All 10 CENTS POST PAID. 
J. C. D0RN, 709 So. Dearborn Street, Dept. 75. Chicago, III. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you ? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAIL DEALERS WHOLESALE HOUSE 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago. 111. 
The new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Through us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B. F. BOWLES, MANAGE*, 
2739 CONVERSE AVENUE EAST ST. LOTJIS, III. 
FOOTWEAR FIT TO WEAR —By Mail 
Fred Douglass Shoe for Men 
Phillis Wheatley Shoe for Women 
Write for Culahm Mail Order Department 
FRE D DOUGLAS S SHO E CO. , Newport, R.I . 
SOUTHERN COLORED TEACHERS' AGENC Y 
Formerly TEXAS COLORED TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1025 Boll Street, DALLAS, TEXAS 
Recommends teachers to Colleges, Universities, School Boards and School Authorities. 
Write for information. R. O. GOTHARD , Manager 
Mention THE CRISIS 154 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
PICTURES 
Latest and best picture of Dr. Booker T. Washington, heavily mounted; size, 11 x 14, 50c.; framed 
in elegant Circassian walnut or gold, $1.40. Similar 
pictures of Douglas, Dunbar, Phillis Wheatley, etc.; 
same quality, size and price. Also 30 Negro art pictures, including our famous nudes in brownskin, 
"The Girl and the Parrot" and "A Study in Brown." 
Adents Wanted Everywhere 
Dougla s Specialtie s Compan y 
354 8 Vernon Avenue. Dept. K. CHICAGO, ILL 
WANTED 
Agent s fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
7 0 Filt h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
A NEW WAY 
To GetYour Clothes Free A NEW PLAN TO MAKE BIG MONEY DURING YOUR SPARE TIME 
.Something- different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offer ever made. Lower prices— 
better clothes—bigger cash profits—Express paid on everything. 
Double Pay FREE clothes and cash profits besides. We don't ask you to use 
your cas h profits fo r you r 
> own clothes. Ours is a new and 
better plan. 
An Extra Present with every order. 
Not a prize scheme. Choose what 
you want, work for it and get it besides your Cash Profits. Agent's 
Complete Outfit FREE, fifty-six 
stylish, real cloth samples—fifty 
Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. Everything FREE. Get into 
the bip; money-making class. Just 
put your namfi on a post card and 
mail it to us today. 
SPENCER MEAD CO.,Dept. 172.Chicago 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
T-l Telephones -iA™,—. /Central 104-W : j Main 61 HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohie 
Office L. D. Telephone-3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSILLOK-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable AddreM, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Bolton, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKINS & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratog PERSONA a Street Baltimore L CARD S , Md. 
Telephone 5277 Morningside DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. 135th Street New York City 
J. E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTANT 
Audit! Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforco UniYersitr 
Wilberforce, O. 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
I
W. T. McKissick & Co's. FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1, No . 2 an d No . 3 
For Scalp , Hai r an d Ski n 
p . O . Box 102, WILMINGTON, DEL. 
Mention THE CRISIS A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
A t the low price of 5 0 cents net—By mail 5 6 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 2S 6 pages per CT/^^- » _. i 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - - Uv/L , lic l 
Postage extra 
" A growing wonder of enterprise, and sound judgment. 
Each volurae, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 3Xpert; is brief enough and plain enough to be__readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of SO cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By G. K. Chesterton 
GERMANY OF TODAY 
By Charles Tower 
EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
By Gilbert Murray 
UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION 
By Hilaire Belloc 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 
By Bertrand Russell 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson 
Order through the publishers or through 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention THE CRISIS PRINCE HAL L 
Preacher, Race Champion, Abolitionist, 
Father of Negro Masonry 
One of the Great Figures in Negro History 
"The abolition of slavery; participation in the government upon 
terms and under conditions applicable alike to every other class of 
citizens; equality before the law; resistance to every form of 
encroachment upon the rights of black men; the education of 
Negro children; the right to be let alone; the iniquity of public 
insult: such was the platform of this Negro prophet who was born 
a whole century before Appomattox." 
Th e character and wor k of this great man have been admirabl y set fort h 
in a new book of vital interest to Masons and laymen. 
Th e book is 
"Prince Hall and His Followers" 
Th e author is 
George W. Crawford, 33°" 
"Grand Master of Connecticut 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
""ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York 
Mention THE CRISIS 