The CRISIS 
Tenth Education Number 
JULY , 1921 FIFTEE N CENT S A COP Y Ad d this ne w boo k o f inspiratio n t o you r library . 
UNSUNG HEROES 
by 
ELIZABET H ROS S HAYNE S 
Th e lives of seventeen men and wome n of the Negr o race told i n a 
way to inspire the children of our time. 
Frederick Douglass 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 
Booke r T . Washingto n 
Harrie t Tubma n 
Alexande r Pushki n 
Blanche K . Bruc e 
Coleridge-Taylor 
Benjamin Banneke r 
Phillis Wheatle y 
Toussaint L'Overtur e 
Josiah Henso n 
Sojourner Trut h 
Crispus Attuck s 
Alexande r Duma s 
Pau l Cuffe 
Alexande r Crummel l 
John M . Langsto n 
Dedicated to Fis k University—Illustrated—Pric e $2.50 
Address the Author, 
ELIZABET H ROS S HAYNES , 1761 T St., N.W . Washington,D.C. 
or 
D U BOI S and DILL , Publishers, 2 West 13th St., New York, N . Y. 
STUDENT S 
W e would like to secure the 
services of students during 
the summe r vacation to act 
as agents - taking subscriptions and selling single copies 
of 
The CRISIS 
and 
The Brownies' Book 
Libera l commission is offered 
Address: 
A . G . DIL L 
70 FIFT H WE. , NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Parents 
Teachers 
Preachers 
Socia l Workers 
Are you looking for 
a suitable 
Present for a Child 
or a suitable 
Prize in a Children's Contest? 
Then make it 
a year's subscription to 
The Brownies' Book 
A monthly magazine for children 
which attempts to bring to them: 
1. The best in pictures and stories of Negro 
life. 
2. The life and deeds of famous men and 
women of the Negro race. 
The current events of the world told in 
beautiful language which children can understand. 
15 Cents per copy $1.50 per year 
Agents Wanted Subscribers Wanted 
Sample copies sent on request. 
DuBoi s an d Dill , Publishers 
2 West 13th Street, New York, N. Y . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOI8 ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 22-No. 3 JULY, 1921 Whole No. 129 
PICTURE S Page 
COVER . Sadie Tanner Mossell, Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania 
PICTURES OF SIXTY-EIGHT COLLEG E GRADUATES . 
TH E DEVASTATE D ARE A A T TULS A 
CHARLES S. GILPIN, Seventh Spingarn Medalist 
NEGROES A T "BIRTH OF A NATION" HEARING 
E. GOURDIN IN TH E 100 YAR D DAS H 
ARTICLE S 
TH E HIGHER TRAINING OF NEGROES. Illustrated 
TH E SECOND PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS. Illustrated 
A N OLD EX-SLAVE . A Poem. Charles Bertram Johnson 
A COURSE IN COMMO N SENSE. Professor Edwin L. Clarke 
AUN T SUE'S STORY . A Poem. Langston Hughes 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINION 101 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 113 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 122 
TH E HORIZON 129 
TH E AUGUS T CRISI S 
Th e August CRISI S will be our annual Vacation Issue. A n early number of The CRISI S will 
carry an article on Gandhi, by Max Yergan. 
115 
123 
129 
129 
105 
119 
120 
121 
121 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS ; Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the port office at Ne w York , Ne w 
York , unde r the Ac t of Marc h 8, 1879. 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though It ii young in history, the Institution fecit a juit pride in the work thai 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship, 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teachtr Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arta and Sciencea The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, addreaa 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution for ths training ot colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academi c training for all 
students. 
Courses In carpentry, agricultur e and trades for boys, 
including auto repairing . 
Courses in domestic science and domestio ar t for 
girls. 
A new trades building , thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modornly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fal l term opens September 15, 1921. 
Fo r information address 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
Jefferson City, Missouri 
Offers the following courses: 
High School Business 
Normal Manua l Arts 
College Musi c 
Agriculture Pre-Medical 
Home Economics 
For detailed information address 
CLEMEN T RICHARDSON , President 
Fall Term begins Sept. 12, 1921 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B . Kendall , D.D. , Lincol n University , 
Cheste r County, Fenna . 
Mentio n 
Cheyney Training School For 
Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
Made in 1920 an accredited State Norma l School, 
offering, in addition to the regular Normal Course of 
two years, professional three year courses in Home 
Economics and Shop Work . A diploma from any of 
these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach in 
tiie public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
Hig h School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Send application now for fall term opening September 
20tk, 1921. 
Fo r further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal , 
Cheyney, Pa . 
THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR 1921 
TH E CIISIS . S CRISIS ADVERTISE R 99 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta, 
Ga . Th e courses of study include Hig h School, 
Norma l School and College. Spscial emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts o'. the South. Graduates 
have a fine record iov successful work. 
Fo r furtner information address 
President Edward T . Ware 
Atlanta , Ca . 
ginu i DUIII uniiLi iLuiLLllllllJ i <LL>] 11 iiini i ninnii i IUI i si 1111; i n i jiiiiviiiiLu: min i u i ILU in llrii u i LIIIII in i n 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E 
Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua Environment, 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following1
 departments: College , Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science. 
Nurs e Trainin g and Industrial. 
Good water , steam h«at, electri c lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable. 
Fal l Ter m Begins Septembe r 14, 1921. 
Fo r catalo g and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y tilFFE N 
Knoxviue , Te n a . 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1921 
ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administratio n buildin g with modern 
chapel, gymnasiu m an d laboratorie s ready for use i n 
September. Strong faculty— Religious aimosphere— Ath ­
letics—Co-educational. Adm ' >sion only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junio r :flgh School—7th an d 8th Grade s an d li t an d 
2nd Years' Hig h Schoo l Courses, with Certilcate . 
Junio r College—3r d an d 4th Yea r Hig h Schoo l with 
Freshma n an d Sophomor e years of College work, with 
Diploma . 
College—Fou r years above Hig h School, or two years 
above Junio r Colle* * Course, with degree or A.B . 
Domesti c Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medica l Cours e 
53rd year o f nine months opens September 21. 1921. 
$150.00 pe r year pays tuition, board, room an d laundry7. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
Zf)t Jfloriba Agricultural 
anb ifflrcfjantcal College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, LouisviUe, Ky. 
Founde d 1879. 
Th e onlv Institution In the Stat e having for Its object 
OoUacUU . SlntotaSS . M«uc.l , an d Lega l tralnln , tor Col -
»&**S& E"SS^», Socia l Sar-lc, . Nunln , an d 
Normal ? CoSmarelal . Music . Domaatto Bctanc . Mlaalonar , 
gj^ggj ^uiei. conesKmdme . eosm . Danat s oBared. 
t'resldant C . H . Parrla h 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent yean 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Blddl e CniTerslty, operated ande r the suplce i »f 
tho Norther n Pr-ibyteria n Church , has four Depar t -
menu—Hlg r Scnool, Arts an d Sciences Theologica l 
an d Industrial. Th e completion of a Gramma r School 
eourse la the requirement for entrance U the flrit YO U 
of toe Hig h School. 
Th e Schoo l of Arts an d Sciences offer* two souse s 
of study, the Classica l an d the Scientific, i n the 
scientific. Germa n is substituted for Greek or Latin . 
Th e entrance requirement for the Freshma n Class la 
16 units of Hig h Schooi work. 
Th e Theologica l Department offers two eoursee, each 
consisting of three years. Th e first la purely smgllan. 
Greek an d Hebrew are taught In the others. 
Al l students In the Hig h Schoo l Dept. are reqalrod 
to take trades In the Industria l Dept. 
Fa r furthe r information, as*draw 
President H . L . MsCrtrty , 
Charlotte , N . C . 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Nor . 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
Fo r further information addTee* 
JOH N H . LEWIS, President 
BISHO P J . S. FLIPPER , Chairma n Trusta e Boar d 
MeatJos T n Cun t 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919 1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
Talladega College 
Talladega , Alabam a 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthfu l Location . 
Literary , Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical. 
Business Administration. Journalism, 
Nurs e Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood . 
Fo r further information address 
F. A. SUMNER , President 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar , High , Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specia lty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
DARKWATE R 
O R 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
DARKWATER 
W.E.B.D U BOI S 
The Twentieth Century Completion 
of "Uncle Tons Cabin" 
Dr . DuBois' ne w boo k is the sensatio n of 
the day ; sellin g lik e "wil d fire. " It contain s 
a good pictur e o f Dr . DuBois . Pric e onl y 
$2.00, Orde r today. Satisfactio n guarantee d 
or mone y refunded . AGENT S WANTED ; 
send 50 cts. for outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
BOO K AN D BIBL E PUBLISHER S 
Catalog Fre e 
523 9th St. N. W., Washington, D. C. 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND, LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A . B , H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
from six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopa l boarding sckool for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Fa . 
ST . PAUL' S HOUS E 
A TRAININ G SCHOO L FO R BOY S 
Hig h Christian Standard 
Address the Chaplai n 
TH E REV . WM . E . HENDRICK S 
234 West Pen n Stree t 
Germantown , Philadelphia , Pa . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction i n nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
Mention TH I CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 22. No. 3 JULY, 1921 Whole No. 129 
Opinion 
of W.E.B. Du Bois 
AMIT Y 
A CONVENTIO N of colored 
and white people took place 
in Washington, D. C , in May, 
which deserves thought. The 
programs carried these words: 
"Hal f a century ago i n Americ a slavery 
was abolished. 
"No w there has arisen need fo r another 
great effort. 
"Correctio n of the present wron g requires 
no army , for the field of action is the hearts 
of our citizens. The instrument to be used 
is kindness; the ammunition , understanding 
of all by all. Th e actor i n this engagement 
for righ t is every inhabitant of these Unite d 
States. 
"Th e great work we have to do and for 
which this convention is called is the establishment of amit y between the white and 
colored people of our land. 
"Whe n we have put our own house in 
order, then we may be trusted to carr y the 
message of universa l peace to all mankind. " 
There were white and colored people present and their speeches were 
not all "problem" but carried poetry 
and music. 
Some folks seem to think that because TH E CRISI S and the N . A . A . C . 
P. preach continually the gospel of 
fighting for your rights and standing 
up against oppression we mean by 
this that the Negro is to gain his 
place in the world by blood and conquest. God forbid! If the rights of 
the darker races can only be bought 
by brute force, then we face the saddest future that ever the world looked 
upon. But what we and what all 
thinking men mean by self-assertion 
and fighting is that when human beings insistently and even obtrusively 
succeed in putting their case before 
the world, they gain so great a multitude of allies that their cause is bound 
to succeed. The only difficulty is that 
such persons are so easily persuaded 
not to cry out, not to complain, not 
to disturb the world. Complaint, agitation, insistence day in and day out 
upon the wrong of evil, is a civilized 
and justifiable program; but after all 
its greatest effect must be upon the 
hearts and thoughts of men, and if 
in meetings of amity and friendship 
white and colored people in this land 
can sit together and talk frankly, the 
Negro problem is solved. 
MR . HARDING 
MR. HARDING' S program as 
to the Negro is not progressing. Nothing ha s 
been dime as to the Race 
Commission; the progress on the 
anti-lynching bill is slow; and the apparent consideration of Mr. Taft's 
name for the Supreme Court is almost disastrous. Mr. Taft is not an 
enemy of the Negro race, he is worse 
than that; he is a luke-warm friend 
whom enemies of the race have used 
and will use to its hurt. 
Worse than this, for some inexplicable reason Mr. Harding was persuaded to nominate Frank A . Lin -
ney as District Attorney for the western district of North Carolina. Mr. 
Linney is a "Lil y White". In 1916 
as a candidate for Governor, Mr. Lin ­
ney publicly announced that he favored rural segregation of Negro 
land ownership. During the last 
101 102 TH E CRISIS 
campaign, in a letter to North Carolina Democrats which was made public, Mr. Linney not only declared himself in favor of disfranchising the Negro and eliminating him absolutely 
from politics, but offered to form a 
coalition with the Democratic Party 
for that purpose. In his letter he 
said : "If the Democratic organization 
will meet us half way, we are in a fair 
position, by agreement between us, to 
eliminate any possibility of the Negro 
question in this or any subsequent 
campaign." He further said: "I 
pledge to the women of North Carolina that if we carry the state in this 
election, you will have a strictly white 
government." 
We are astonished to find Mr. 
Harding sending this nomination to 
the Senate. Immediate protest was 
made from the colored people of 
North Carolina and from the N . A . A . 
C. P. throughout the United States. 
A t present it looks as though Mr. Lin ­
ney would not be appointed. 
Mr. Harding so far has practically 
made no appointments of Negroes to 
office of any consequence except that 
of Lieutenant Flipper, which was, we 
understand, the personal appointment 
of Senator Fall. The appointment 
given Mr. Perry Howard was one 
that we wish Mr. Howard had been 
able to refuse, as it is too unimportant 
and inadequate to be at all representative. 
TH E LIBELOUS FIL M 
LAS T month "The Birt h of a 
Nation" with its cruel and indefensible libel of the Negro 
and glorification of the mob 
in the K u Klu x Kla n was revived in 
several eastern cities. In Boston it 
was suppressed; in New Yor k the N . 
A . A . C. P. planned a public protest. 
We secured former service men and 
women Y . M . C. A . secretaries who 
had served abroad, to march before 
the Capitol Theatre and distribute 
bills and carry placards. They were 
arrested. The first judge was vociferous and wanted to charge them 
with inciting riot. The second judge 
was calmer and offered to let them go 
if they would promise not to do it 
again. This they refused to do and 
were released on suspended sentence. 
They appealed the case. The names 
of these public servants are: Mrs. 
Helen Curtis, Mrs. Laur a Jean Rollock, Miss Katharine Johnson, Ed ­
ward F . Frazie r and Llewelyn Rollock. 
TH E NEGR O AND RADICA L THOUGH T 
MR. CLAUD E McKAY , one 
of the editors of The Liberator and a Negro poet of 
distinction, writes us as 
follows 
"I am surprised and sorr y tha t i n your 
editorial, 'The Drive' , published i n T H E 
CRISIS for May , you should leap out of your 
sphere to sneer at the Russia n Revolution, 
the greatest event i n the history of humanity ; much greater than the Frenc h Revolution, whic h is held up as a wonderful 
achievement to Negr o children and students 
i n whit e and black schools. Fo r America n 
Negroes the indisputabl e and outstanding 
fact of the Russia n Revolutio n is that a 
mere handful of Jews, much less i n ratio 
to the number of Negroes i n the America n 
population, have attained, throug h the Revolution, all the politica l and social rights 
that were denied to them under the regime 
of the Czar. 
"Althoug h no thinkin g Negr o can deny 
the great wor k that the N . A . A . C. P . is 
doing, it must yet be admitted tha t from 
its platform and personnel the Associatio n 
cannot function as a revolutionar y workin g 
class organization. An d the overwhelmin g 
majorit y of Americ a Negroe s belong by 
birth , condition and repression to the work ­
in g class. You r aim is to get for the American Negr o the politica l and social rights 
that are his by virtu e of the Constitution, 
the rights whic h are denied him by the 
Southern oligarch y wit h the active cooperation of the state governments and the 
tacit support of norther n business interests. 
An d you r 'aim is a noble one, whic h deserves 
the support of al l progressive Negroes. 
"Bu t the Negr o i n politics and social life 
is ostracized onl y technically by the distinction of color; in- realit y the Negr o is discriminated against because he is of the lowest type of worker. . . . 
"Obviously, this economic difference between the white and black workers manifests itself i n various forms, i n color prejudice, race hatred, politica l 'and social boycotting and lynchin g if Negroes. An d all OPINION 103 
the entrenched institutions of whit e America,—law courts, churches, schools, the fightin g forces an d the Press,—condone these 
iniquitie s perpetrated upon black men ; in ­
iquities tha t are dismissed indifferently as 
the inevitabl e result of the social system. 
Still , wheneve r it suits the business interests controllin g these institutions to mitigate the persecutions against Negroes, they 
do so wit h impunity . Whe n organized white 
workers quit their jobs, Negroes, who are 
discouraged by the whites to organize, are 
sought to take their places. An d these 
strike-breakin g Negroe s wor k unde r the 
protection of the militar y and the police. 
Bu t as ordinar y citizens and workers, Ne ­
groes are not protected by the militar y and 
the police from the mob. The rulin g classes 
wil l not gran t Negroes those rights which, 
on a lesser scale and more plausibly, are 
withheld from the whit e proletariat. Th e 
concession of these rights would immediatel y cause a Revolutio n i n the economic life of 
this country. " 
We are aware that some of our 
friends have been disappointed with 
TH E CRISI S during and since the war. 
Some have assumed that we aimed 
chiefly at mounting the band wagon 
with our cause during the madness of 
war; others thought that we were 
playing safe so as to avoid the Department of Justice; and still a third 
class found us curiously stupid in our 
attitude toward the broader matters 
of human reform. Such critics, and 
Mr . McKa y is among them, must give 
us credit for standing to our guns in 
the past at no little cost in many influential quarters, and they must also 
remember that we have one chief 
cause,—the emancipation of the Negro, and to this all else must be subordinated—not because other questions are not important but because 
to our mind the most important social 
question today is recognition of the 
darker races. 
Turnin g now to that marvelous set 
of phenomena known as the Russian 
Revolution, Mr . McKa y is wrong in 
thinking that we have ever intentionally sneered at it. On the contrary, 
time may prove, as he believes, that 
the Russian Revolution is the greatest 
event of the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries, and its leaders the most unselfish prophets. A t the same time 
TH E CRISI S does not know this to be 
true. Russia is incredibly vast, and 
the happenings there in the last five 
years have been intricate to a degree 
that must make any student pause. 
We sit, therefore, with waiting hands 
and listening ears, seeing some splendid results from Russia, like the cartoons for public education recently 
exhibited in America, and hearing of 
other things which frighten us. 
We are moved neither by the superficial omniscience of Wells nor the reports in the New Yor k Times; but 
this alone we do know: that the immediate work for the American Negro lies in America and not in Russia, and this, too, in spite of the fact 
that the Third Internationale has 
made a pronouncement which cannot but have our entire sympathy: 
"Th e Communist Internationale once forever breaks with the traditions of the Second Internationale which in reality only 
recognized the white race. The Communist 
Internationale makes it its task to emancipate the workers of the entire world . The 
ranks of the Communist Internationale fra ­
ternally unite men of all colors: white, yellow and black—the toilers of the entire 
world. " 
Despite this there come to us black 
men two insistent questions: What is 
today the right program of socialism? 
The editor of TH E CRISIS considers 
himself a Socialist but he does not 
believe that German State Socialism 
or the dictatorship of the proletariat 
are perfect panaceas. He believes 
with most thinking men that the 
present method of creating, controlling and distributing wealth is desperately wrong; that there must come 
and is coming a social control of 
wealth; but he does not know just 
what form that control is going to 
take, and he is not prepared to dogmatize with Mar x or Lenin. Further 
than that, and more fundamental to 
the duty and outlook of TH E CRISIS, is 
this question: How far can the colored people of the world, and particularly the Negroes of the United 
States, trust the working classes? 104 TH E CRISIS 
Many honest thinking Negroes assume, and Mr . McKa y seems to be 
one of these, that we have only to 
embrace the working class program 
to have the working class embrace 
ours; that we have only to join trade 
Unionism and Socialism or even Communism, as they are today expounded, to have Union Labor and Socialists and Communists believe and act 
on the equality of mankind and the 
abolition of the color line. TH E 
CRISI S wishes that this were true, but 
it is forced to the conclusion that it is 
not. 
The American Federation of La ­
bor, as representing the trade unions 
in America, has been grossly unfair 
and discriminatory toward Negroes 
and still is. American Socialism has 
discriminated against black folk and 
before the war was prepared to go 
further with this discrimination. 
European Socialism has openly discriminated against Asiatics. No r is 
this surprising. Why should we assume on the part of unlettered and 
suppressed masses of white workers, 
a clearness of thought, a sense of human brotherhood, that is sadly lacking in the most educated classes? 
Our task, therefore, as it seems to 
TH E CRISIS, is clear: We have to convince the working classes of the 
world that black men, brown men, 
and yellow men are human beings and 
suffer the same discrimination that 
white workers suffer. We have in addition to this to espouse the cause of 
the white workers, only being careful 
that we do not in this way allow them 
to jeopardize our cause. We must, 
for instance, have bread. If our 
white fellow workers drive us out of 
decent jobs, we are compelled to accept indecent wages even at the price 
of "scabbing". It is a hard choice, 
but whose is the blame? Finally despite public prejudice and clamour, 
we should examine with open mind in 
literature, debate and in real life the 
great programs of social reform that 
are day by day being put forward. 
This was the true thought and 
meaning back of our Ma y editorial. 
We have an immediate program for 
Negro emancipation laid down and 
thought out by the N . A . A . C. P. It 
is foolish for us to give up this practical program for mirage in Afric a or 
by seeking to join a revolution which 
we do not at present understand. On 
the other hand, as Mr. McKa y says, it 
would be just as foolish for us to 
sneer or even seem to sneer at the 
blood-entwined writhing of hundreds 
of millions of our whiter human 
brothers. 
NEGR O AR T 
WAN T to say "Amen " to your 
editorial on "Negro Art" . 
There is, indeed, "a vast wealth 
of human material " that lies at 
the hands of the Negro artist. The 
material is enormous, but no Negro 
dares use it. The colored man to-day 
is self-conscious, afraid even of the 
clean humor of the old-time musical 
comedy of Williams and Walker, Cole 
and Johnson, Ernest Hogan. Instead 
he stands back and lets Roy Cohen depict second-rate buffoons. Imagine 
Dickens going about England so fearful of offending his public that he 
never dared draw Pecksniff or 
Squeers, Wegg or Sarey Gamp or Mi -
cawber! What would his novels have 
been like if the characters had been 
restricted to the perfectly proper 
Nicholas Nicklebys and Agnes Wickfields ! An d yet that is what the colored public asks of the writer who depicts Negro life to-day. 
Wherever in this country there is a 
large group of Negroes there is a 
wealth of character, of pathos, humor, roguery, affection, heroism, that 
is as great as Dickens found in Lon ­
don. It is there, for the genius to depict it. Ma y he come soon, and when 
he does come may he be guided only 
by his love of truth. An d that wil l 
mean that he will have a sense of humor and will show life as it really is. 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON . TH E HIGHER TRAINING OF NEGROES 
ffiffi » m i ^ 
THE followin g table 
gives an estimate of 
the number of America n 
Negroes who have been 
graduated from college: 
1820—1829 3 
1830—1849 7 
1850—1859 12 
1860—1869 44 
1870—1879 313 
1880 1889 738 
1890— 1899 1,120 
1900—1909 1.613 
1910—1919 2,861 
Durin g the years in 
which TH E CRISIS has 
kept special record there 
have been the followin g 
graduates: 
1914 250 
1915 281 
1916 338 
1917 455 
1918 384 
1919 373 
1920 364 
A nearly complete list 
of graduates shows fo r 
1921, 85 colored Bache ­
lors of Arts and Sciences 
in northern white institutions, 11 Masters of 
Arts and 3 Doctors in 
Philosophy. Fro m Ne ­
gro institutions there 
were graduated 376 bachelors, makin g in all 4(> 1 
bachelors and 14 recipients of highe r degrees. EV A B 
WHITE NORTHERN INSTITUTIONS 
Norther n institutions have graduated colored students this yea r as follows: 
Harvard University.—Edwin B. Jourdain , 
Jr., Massachusetts, A . B . "Wit h distinction 
i n history. " Edwar d O. Gourdin , A . B . 
"Note d athlete." Willia m L . Hansberr y 
"received the degree of B . S. at the mid ­
yea r fo r honorable service in the field." 
Awarde d a fellowship in anthropology for 
next year. Benjami n T . Johnson, M . B . A . 
(Maste r of Business Administration). Norris B . Herndon , M . B . A . 
DYKES , PH.D. , RADCLIFE E COLLEG E 
Radcliffe College.—Miss Louise H . Cook, 
A . B. Miss Ev a B . Dykes, Ph . D. 
Columbia University.—Joseph Coleman, 
A . M . Miss Anni e Lauri e McCary , A . M . 
Miss Ma y Edwar d Chinn , B. S. 
Smith College, Massachusetts.—Miss Eu ­
nice R. Hunton , New York , A . B. and A . M . 
"She has been an excellent student throughout her course." 
University of Illinois.—Vergil A . Gant, 
Illinois, A . B. Gordon B. Fletcher, Indiana, 
A . B. Wendell P. Nelson, Illinois, B. S. 
Herbert S. Davis, Illinois, A . B. (end of summer session). 
105 106 TH E CRISI S 
Clark University, Massachusetts.—Miss 
Isador Williams, A . M . 
University of Wisconsin.—David Thorn ­
ton, A . B. 
Northwestern University, Illinois.— 
George W . Lipscomb, A . B . V . D . Johnston, 
A . M . 
University of Kansas.—Miss Ida E . L . 
Anderson, A . B. Miss Eppinett a V . Terrell, 
A . B. Matthew E . Carroll , A . B. Shirle y 
G. Hamilton , A . B. Verno n A . Wilkerson , 
A . B. Percy Young , A . B. Miss Lea h E . 
Crump , teacher's certificate in Publi c School 
Music . 
University of Pennsylvania.—Miss Sadie 
Tanne r Mossell, Ph . D . Arthu r H . Fauset, 
A . B . Miss Pauline A . Young , B . S. 
Ohio State University.—Miss Catherine 
E . Thompson, B. S. 
Indiana University.—Homer L . Wales, B . 
S. W . Owen Allen , B. S. I. W . St. Clair, 
A . M . 
University of Chicago.—Miss Georgiana 
Simpson, Ph . D. , cum laudc. T. R. Davis, 
A . M . James V . Allen , B. S. James A . 
Berry , B. S. Miss C. Vivia n Carter, Ph . B. 
Miss Rut h Harris, Ph . B. Clifto n S. Hardy , 
Ph . B . Miss Marth a L . Lewis, Ph . B. Miss 
Mar y E . Link , Ph . B. Miss Lucil e B. Robinson, Ph . B. Gordon H . Simpson, Ph . B . 
Henr y 0 . Slaughter, Ph . B. Davi d Little , 
Ph . B . Harpe r C. Trenholm, Ph . B. Miss 
Mami e B. West, Ph . B. 
Amherst College, Massachusetts. — R. 
Percy Barnes, A . B. He was elected to the 
Ph i Bet a Kapp a i n his junio r year. 
Williams College, Massachusetts.—Henry 
A . Brown , Distric t of Columbia , A . B. 
Dartmouth College, Ne w Hampshire.—M . 
Gran t Lucas, Jr., Distric t of Columbia , A . B . 
Theodore M . Seldon, Virginia , A . B. He 
"stands exceptionally high i n his class and 
is doing unusually good work i n chemistry. " 
John H . Shelburne, Massachusetts, A . B. He 
"is rated as one of the most able athletes 
of the college." 
Oberlin College, Ohio.—Miss Mavis W . 
Mitchell, A . B. (at end of summe r session). 
Miss Helen A . Scroggins, A . B. Miss Dorothy Mari e Tuck, A . B. Miss Tuc k has done 
some additional work beyond the requirements for graduation. Miss Mitchel l wil l 
receive a diploma from the Teachers' Train ­
ing Course i n Physica l Education . 
Colby College, Maine.—Edwar d C. Niles, 
Massachusetts, A . B. He "has been quite 
prominent in athletics durin g his college 
course and is a member of the football team 
and track team; he is a two-letter man. " 
Brown University, Rhode Island.—Russell A . Lane , A . B . Ja y M . William s A . B. 
Maynar d J . Wartman , A . B . A . Theophilus 
Peters, A . B . 
Bates College. Maine.—Hubert Allenby , 
A . B. Roscoe McKinney , B . S. Lewis 
Moore, B. S. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.— 
Emmet t J. Scott, Jr., Distric t of Columbia , 
B. S., i n Civi l Engineering . "Fairl y gooJ 
record throughout his course." Lee J. Purnell, California , B . S., i n Electrica l Engi ­
neering. "Wit h a good record. " 
Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburg.—Miss Esthe r Monroe , B . S. 
New York University.—Clarence B . Curley, Ne w York , M . B. A . 
Syracuse University.—J. Schille r Nich ­
olas, A . B . 
Hunter College, Ne w York.—Miss Leathe 
Colvert, A . B . Miss Lillia n Dobson, A . B . 
Miss Louis e Jackson, A . B . (September, 
1921). 
College of the City of New York.—Thomas 
A . Garratt-Phayme , A . B . Nevill e C. White -
man, B . S. Edwar d M . Swift, B . S. Mr . 
Swift won the Roeme'r Priz e fo r declamation 
i n 1918 and i n 1921 he won the Boar d of 
Trustees priz e for the best origina l oration. 
His subject was "Th e Solution of the Negro 
Problem" and he advocated the retur n of 
his race to Africa . "Hi s gestures were 
somewhat awkwar d but his evident command 
of his subject won him first prize. " 
University of Washington.—Miss Mabl e 
Byrd , A . B. Joh n K . Crump , B. Ed . George 
Hines, M . B. A . 
Ohio Wesleyan University.—Bertram W . 
Doyle, Texas, A . B . "Mr . Doyl e has an exceedingly brillian t record as a student and 
in recognition of his attainments he was 
elected to membership i n Ph i Bet a Kapp a at 
the sprin g election this season. H e is expecting to secure a fellowship for furthe r 
study. " Theodore H . Dotson, Texas, A . B . 
"O f average genera l scholarship. " 
Pennsylvania State College.—George D . 
Brooks, A . B . Germa n P. Nater, Mechanica l 
Engineering . Louis A . Potter, Chemica l 
Agriculture . 
Ohio University.—Mrs. Cor a M . Wad e 
graduates from a two-yea r course i n Ele ­
mentary Education . 
Tufts College, Massachusetts.—Benjami n Russell A . Lane , 
A.B. , Brown University 
McGlenar d Williamson , 
B.S., Michigan Agricultural 
Emme r Lancaster , 
A . B. , University of Akro n 
Pauline A . Young \ 
B. S., Universit y of Penn. 
Ida M . Rhodes, 
A.B. , U . of Cincinnati 
Le e J . Pumell . 
B.S. , Mass. Inst, of Tech. 
Esthe r Monroe , 
B.S. , Carnegie Institute 
Gordon B. Fletcher , 
A.B. , University of Illinois 
Dorothy M . Tuck , 
A.B. , Oberlin College 
R. Perc y Barnes. 
A . B. , Amherst College 
Sarah B . Harris, 
B. S., U . of Cincinnati 
Henr y A . Brown , 
A.B. , Williams College 
Nevill e C. 'Whiteman, 
U.S., C. C. of New Y d 
Roscoe L . McKinney , 
B.S., Bates College 
Lewis T . Moore , 
U.S.. Bates College 
Helen M . Scrog-glns, 
A.B. , Oberlin College 
107 108 TH E CRISI S 
Snyder, Massachusetts, B . S. i n Chemistry . 
University of Cincinnati.—Miss Sara h 
Harris, B. S. Miss France s Leslie , A . B. 
Miss Mau d B . Ragan , B. S. Miss Ida M . 
Rhodes, A . B. 
Kansas State Agricultural College—Miss 
Rut h Ridley, Kansas, B. S. 
Boston University.—Albert A. Kildare , 
B. S. 
Tabor College, Iowa.—Miss Croly n Keal -
ing, A . B. Fo r the past two years her work 
has been "A " quality, which weans above 
90 per cent. He r father graduated from 
Tabo r i n 1881. 
Union College, Nebraska . — Rothacke r 
Smith, A . B. 
Agricultural College of Utah.—Miss Mig -
non Barker, Utah , graduate i n Home Econ ­
omics. 
Municipal University, Akron , Ohio.—Emmer Lancaster, A . B. "Honors i n debating. 
He has represented the college very creditably several times i n intercollegiate debates." 
Monrovian College, Pennsylvania.—Head -
ley T. Wilson , A . B . 
Michigan Agricultural College.—McGlenar d Williamson , B . S. Class reporter for 
the senior year. 
Kalamazoo College, Michigan.—Wilbu r J. 
Bolden, A . B . 
Rhode Island State College.—Miss Rose A . 
Butler, B. Ed . 
Wittenberg College, Ohio—F . Dougla s 
Speaks, A . B . 
These institutions also graduated 10 doctors of medicine, 3 dentists, 6 pharmacists, 6 
lawyers, 2 ministers and 3 veterinary surgeons. 
THE LEADING COLORED INSTITUTIONS 
There are i n the Unite d States, according 
to the best available lists, 226 Negr o institutions of learning ; 
Alabama 24 
Arkansas 13 
District of Columbia 2 
Florida 8 
Georgia 26 
Kentucky 8 
Louisiana 9 
Mississippi 14 
New Jersey 1 
North Carolina 34 
Ohio 1 
Oklahoma 4 
Pennsylvania 2 
South Carolina 24 
Tennessee 13 
Texas 14 
Virgini a 26 
West Virginia 3 
226 
These schools are divided as follows: 
Havin g Name Universities 18 
Colleges 68 
Institutes 64 
" " Academies 21 
*' Seminaries 5 
Schools 50 
226 
They are carrie d on b y the followin g 
church and other organizations: 
Methodist Episcopal 16 
Methodist Episcopal, South 1 
Africa n Methodist Episcopal . 16 
Africa n Methodist Episcopal Zion 7 
Colored Methodist Episcopal 4 
Presbyterian 30 
South Presbyterian 1 
United Presbyterian 4 
Baptist 56 
Congregational 23 
Episcopal 6 
Friends 5 
Universalist 1 
Lutheran 1 
Christian 4 
Adventist 1 
State 21 
Independent
 2 6 
Medical 1 
Catholic 1 
United States 1 
226 
These institutions have graduated 376 
Bachelors of Arts, 80 Doctors of Medicine , 
73 dentists, 27 pharmacists, 25 lawyers and 
45 ministers. The reports i n detail follow: 
Howard University: Bachelors of Arts, 
72; Doctors of Medicine , 39; Doctors of 
Dentistry, 8; Pharmacists, 7; Bachelors of 
Law , 25; Bachelors of Divinity , 3. 
Durin g the yea r Howar d Universit y received from the government, $210,000 for a 
buildin g to house the dinin g halls and the 
School for Home Economics. 
Fisk University (Tennessee) : 40 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 4 graduates i n home economics and 1 i n music. Th e institutio n has 
been promised $500,000 from the Genera l 
Educatio n Boar d on condition that it raise 
$500,000 more. Miss O. R. Shields, C. W . 
Ransom and C. W . White , graduat e magna 
cum laude; 4 others graduat e cum laude. 
Lincoln University, (Pennsylvania ) : 23 
Bachelors of Arts. A n endowment fund of 
$25,000 is being raised but business depression makes the progress slow. The alumn i 
association has erected a memoria l arch to 
Lincol n soldiers i n the Worl d War . It was 
dedicated at Commencement. 
Biddle University: 23 Bachelors of Arts 
and Sciences, 25 hig h school graduates, 6 
graduates i n theology. 
Wilberforce University: 22 Bachelors of 
Arts, 35 hig h school graduates, 7 theological graduates. I n the college Jame s E . 
Coleman graduates magna cum laude and I. W . St. Clair , 
A.M. , Indiana University 
George D . Brooks, 
A.B. , Pennsylvania State 
George D . Lipscomb , 
A.B. , Northwestern 
Leath e Colvert, 
A.B. , Hunte r College 
Louis e H . Jackson, 
A.B. , Hunte r College 
Alber t A . Kildare , 
A.B. , Boston University 
Germai n P . Nater , 
M.E. , Pennsylvania State 
T . A . G. Phayme , 
A.B. , C. C. of New York 
109 
Edwar d M . Swift, 
B.S. , C. C, of New Yor k 
T, R . Davis, 
A . M. , U . of Chicago 
Maude Ragan , 
B. S., U . of Cincinnati 
Louis e H . Cook. 
A.B. , Radcliffe College 
Arthu r H . Fauset, 
A.B. , University of Penn. 
A . Theophilus Peters, 
A.B. , Brown University 
Joseph T. B. Coleman, 
A.M. , Columbia University 
Clifton S. Hardy , 
Ph.B. , U . of Chicago 110 TH E CRISI S 
Russell W . Smith , cum laude. 
Talladega College (Alabama ) : 15 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 20 hig h school graduates. 
Morehouse College (Georgia): 18 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 26 hig h school graduates and 
15 divinit y graduates. 
Virginia Union University: 13 Bachelors 
of Arts, 10 graduates i n theology, 27 hig h 
school graduates. The college has received 
$10,000 from the Genera l Educatio n Boar d 
this year. 
Atlanta University (Georgia ) : 12 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 22 norma l graduates, 40 hig h 
school graduates. The institution by means 
of a legacy has paid nearly all of its debt. 
Knoxville College (Tennessee) : 11 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 10 hig h school graduates, 12 
norma l graduates, 1 graduate i n music and 
1 graduate i n dressmaking. The Genera l 
Educatio n Boar d has promised the college 
$125,000 on condition that $500,000 be 
raised. 
Meharry Medical College (Tennessee) : 
41 Doctors of Medicine , 35 dentists, 20 
pharmacists, 6 nurses. The institution is 
appealing for subscriptions and bequests to 
increase the endowment. 
Shaw University (Nort h Carolina ) : 13 
Bachelors of Arts, 66 hig h school graduates, 
3 theology graduates. The school received 
$10,000 from the Genera l Educatio n Boar d 
on condition that the colored people raise 
$5,000. This they did. The same board also 
gave $11,000 for repairs. A missionary 
trainin g school has been established. 
Philander Smith College (Arkansas) : 9 
Bachelors of Arts, 23 hig h school graduates, 
5 norma l graduates. 
Shorter College (Arkansas) : 6 Bachelors 
of Arts, 20 graduates of the School of Edu ­
cation, 8 high school graduates, 2 industria l graduates. 
The college has received $16,600 in gifts 
this year, of which $5,000 Was from the 
Genera l Educatio n Board , $600 from the 
Slater Fun d and $5,000 from the white citizens of Littl e Rock. The institution has purchased 480 acres of lan d and is establishing 
an Agricultura l and Mechanica l College as a 
branch of the main school. The school expects to receive an endowment from the 
drive of the A . M . E . Church . 
Benedict College (South Carolina ) : 7 
Bachelors of Arts, 35 high school graduates. 
Florida A. and M. College: 6 Bachelors 
Eunic e R . Hunton , Ann a Cooper, 
A.B. , A.M. , Smith A.B. , Cum laude, Howard 
of Science, 19 hig h school graduates, 12 
norma l graduates. 
Morgan College (Baltimore ) : 6 Bach ­
elors of Arts, 13 hig h school graduates, 13 
norma l and industria l graduates. 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute: one 
Bachelor of Arts, 29 hig h school graduates, 
79 norma l graduates (two years' wor k 
above the hig h school). Th e Legislatur e 
has appropriated for the school durin g the 
next two years $455,282.46. Th e new college department is being organized for thorough work i n libera l education wit h stress 
upon work i n teacher training , business and 
pre-medical courses. 
Prairie View (Texas) : 5 Bachelors of 
Science. 
Samuel Houston College (Texas) : 5 
Bachelors of Arts. 
The Negro A. and T. College (Nort h Carolina) : 5 Bachelors of Arts, 14 graduates 
from the Trad e School. The Legislatur e appropriated $115,000 fo r permanent improvements and $30,000 fo r the annua l main ­
tenance of the school. 
Spellman Seminary (Georgia): 2 Bachelors of Arts, 39 hig h school graduates, 13 
teachers' professional graduates, 6 nurses, 4 
graduates i n home economics. Th e graduates from the teachers, professiona l and 
home economics departments have had at 
least two years' wor k above the hig h school. 
Paine College (Georgia ) : 4 Bachelors of 
Arts, 27 hig h school graduates, 1 theologica l graduate. 
Friendship College (Rock Hill , S. C.) : 
6 Bachelors of Arts, 60 junio r hig h school 
graduates. A buildin g is being constructed 
which wil l cost $150,000. It wil l contain a 
chapel, gymnasium, offices and class rooms. 
Morris College (South Carolina ) : 4 
Bachelors of Arts, 11 hig h school graduates, 
27 norma l graduates, 12 industria l gradu ­
ates. A $30,000 chapel has been erected. Ezell e H . Hancox , 
A.B. , Texas College 
Ear l Dyer , 
A.B. , B.D. , Paine 
C . W . Ransom , 
A.B. , Fis k University 
Magna Cum Laude 
Iradelle L . Bond, 
A.B. , Morgan College 
Pete r Shy, 
A.B. , Paine 
Thoma s Jefferson, 
A.B. , Paine 
Charle s W . White , 
A.B. , Fisk University 
Magna Cum Laude 
J . A , Gabriel, 
B.S., Paine 
Otelia Shields, 
A.B. , Fisk University 
Magna Cum Laude 
Graduates of Straight 
111 112 TH E CRISI S 
The white Women's Convention of South 
Carolin a gives $500 a year to the domestic 
science department. 
State A. and M. College (Orangeburg, 
S. C.) : 3 Bachelors of Arts, 36 hig h school 
graduates, 4 commercial graduates, 3 in ­
dustria l graduates. The school has received $40,000 for its maintenance durin g 
the year. 
National Training School (Nort h Caro ­
lina ) one Bachelor of Arts, 14 hig h school 
graduates, 1 theology graduate, 12 commercial, 2 industria l graduates. A n accredited 
teachers' trainin g course has been started. 
Tillotson College (Texas) : 2 Bachelors 
of Arts, 17 high school graduates, 9 commercia l graduates and 2 graduates i n music. 
Hartshorn Memorial College (Virginia ) : 
one Bachelor of Arts, 14 high school graduates. The General Educatio n Boar d has 
given the school $5,000. 
Texas College: one Bachelor of Arts, 1 
high school graduate, 14 norma l graduates. 
Fift y thousand dollars has been given the 
institution by the Methodist Churc h South. 
Lane College (Tennessee) : 3 Bachelors 
of Arts, 14 high school graduates, 19 graduates of the teachers' course. Durin g the 
year Lane College has built Cleaves In ­
dustria l Hal l at a cost of $70,000. 
Paul Quinn College (Texas) : 1 Bach ­
elor of Arts, 1 Bachelor of Science, 3 hig h 
school graduates, 8 commercial graduates 
and 2 graduates i n sewing. The school is 
erecting a girls' dormitory to cost $150,000 
and to be opened in September. 
New Orleans College: 1 Bachelor of Arts, 
43 high school graduates. 
Virginia T. S. and College, (Lynchburg ) : 
3 Bachelors of Arts, 25 high school and norma l graduates, 1 theological graduate. The 
college is erecting a $13,000 administration 
building. 
Claflin College (South Carolina ) : 1 Bach ­
elor of Arts, 17 preparatory graduates, 20 
norma l graduates, 7 commercial graduates, 
7 manua l trainin g graduates. 
Bishop College (Texas) : 12 Bachelors of 
Arts and Science, 3 Bachelors of Theology. 
Wiley University (Texas) : 12 Bachelors 
of Arts and Science, 146 preparatory graduates, 116 norma l graduates. The 25th anniversary of the presidency of M . W . Dogan 
was celebrated at commencement and $1,000 
was given him to defray expenses to the 
Ecumenica l Conference at London, England . 
Straight College (Alabama ) : 3 Bachelors 
of Arts and Science, 25 hig h school gradu ­
ates, 8 graduates i n music, 1 graduat e from 
the Teachers' Trainin g course. A commodious home for teachers has been added to the 
campus. A dormitory for college men has 
been rented. Student government has been 
introduced wit h excellent results. 
These institutions have nearl y all been 
hard pressed for funds and the teachers 
especially have suffered from low salaries. 
Some schools, lik e the Alabam a N . and I., 
at Huntsville , have been reorganized. 
Hampto n appears for the first time wit h a 
college department givin g courses i n Agri ­
culture, without degree. 
HIGH SCHOOLS 
Colored institutions mentioned above reported 825 hig h school and norma l graduates. I n most cases the norma l graduates 
do one or two years' wor k i n addition to 
the regula r hig h school course. A few 
schools di d not report the numbe r of their 
hig h school graduates. 
A partia l survey of whit e northern high 
schools shows 244 colored graduates. Colored public hig h schools i n the southern and 
border cities report 1,107 graduates, of whom 
255 are reported as going to college and 
others undoubtedly wil l go. These schools 
have 474 of their graduates i n college. 
The largest colored hig h schools are the 
Dunbar, D . C , (175 graduates), Hampto n 
Institute wit h 83 graduates. 
Man y of these hig h schools report improvements. The school authorities are 
erecting new buildings a t Columbus, Ga. , 
and Paducah , Ky . (at a cost of $90,000 wit h 
a playgroun d and athletic field), at Mayfield, 
Ky . (at a cost of $21,000). Ne w buildings 
have already been erected at Petersburg, 
Va. , where $140,000 has been put into new 
school buildings, an d at Newport News, 
Va . A t Lynchburg , Va. , a new four years' 
course has been planned an d a new buildin g 
wil l be erected. Annapolis, Md. , and 
Petersburg, Va. , wil l have new four year 
courses. Ne w buildings have been erected 
by privat e schools at the Virgini a N . and I. 
Institute, the Henderson forma l Institute, 
the Laurinbur g N . and I. Institute, N . C , 
and the St. Pau l N . and I. School, Va . 
Details of hig h schools an d picture s of 
hig h school graduates wil l appea r i n the 
Jul y Brownies' Book. GRADUATIN G CLAS S O F TALLADEG A COLLEGE , ALABAM A National • Association • for • the • • -
Advancement of Colored.-People. 
OKLAHOM A RIO T VICTIMS ' RELIE F 
AN D DEFENS E FUN D 
THE Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People has established a relie f fund to be applied to aiding 
the colored victims of the terrible race riot 
i n Tulsa , Okla . Press reports state that a 
large part of the colored residence district 
is wiped out by fire, and thousands of men, 
women and children are homeless and i n the 
greatest destitution. 
Alread y refugees have come to this office 
i n Ne w Yor k City , possessing littl e or nothin g except the clothes they were wearing, 
and it was necessary for their immediate relief to ask for contributions from the Association's office staff. 
Ever y cent collected for this fund wil l be 
applied directly to relief, and possible legal 
defense, and the necessary administrative 
work wil l be undertaken without cost by the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. A public accounting wil l 
be rendered of all funds received and expended. 
Some of our splendid branches had already initiated movements to this end before our telegrams reached them, as is seen 
by the following telegram and letter: 
James Weldon Johnson, Secretary, 
Nationa l Associatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, 
70 Fift h Ave. , Ne w Yor k City . 
Kansa s City , Mo. , Branc h awaits instruc ­
tions to cooperate i n whatever plans you 
propose for relie f of Tuls a Riots Victims. 
Citizens are offering to help. 
MYRTL E F . COOK, Secretary. 
BOSTON , Mass. 
M y Dea r Miss Ovington : 
Mayo r Peters has just called me on the 
telephone to know if it is desirable to form 
a Citizens' Committee fo r the relie f of the 
situation in Oklahoma . If anythin g of this 
kin d is being done, wil l you telegraph me 
as soon as you receive this letter, or call me 
by telephone? Mayo r Peters desires to 
know by 11 o'clock tomorrow. 
Ver y trul y yours, 
BUTLE R R. WILSON , Secretary. 
We urge our branches to reach their 
churches and fraterna l organizations, requesting them to make donations to this 
fund. W e urge them, whereve r it is feasible, to send strong committees to their mayors, urgin g them to follow the exampl e of 
Boston i n organizin g a citizens' committee 
for the relie f of the riot victims. 
TH E TULS A RIOTS 
WITHI N six hours of the time, on June 
1, when the Ne w Yor k Evening Post 
called up the Nationa l Office on the telephone to ask whether anythin g ha d been 
heard of race trouble in Tulsa , Okla. , a representative was on the wa y to the battlescarred city to investigate for the Associa ­
tion. Meanwhil e reports continued to come 
i n which showed that one of the most serious 
race riots i n the country's histor y was i n 
progress, lastin g until Jun e 2. Th e newspapers reported that practicall y the entire 
colored residence section of Tuls a wa s i n 
flames, that shooting was goin g on and tha t 
motor cars and airplanes were being used 
by white people i n the battle. 
One of the first steps whic h the secretary 
took was to send a telegram to Governor 
Robertson of Oklahoma , urgin g him to use 
the ful l power of his office to put a n end to 
the reign of violence and terror. Statements 
were also issued to the Ne w Yor k newspapers warnin g their readers tha t a race 
riot is never caused b y one isolated case of 
assault, and that probably conditions of 
peonage i n the country surroundin g Tuls a 
had brought about a situation of dangerous 
il l feeling. 
These statements received startlin g confirmation when, on Jun e 2, fou r refugees 
from the riot zone appeared at the Nationa l 
Office. The names of the refugees were 
Lizzi e Johnson, Stell a Harris, Josi e Gatli n 
and Claude Harris, al l from Okmulgee . 
The y had formed part of a group of eight 
which had left Oklahoma before the riots 
began. The y told terribl e stories of the 
oppression visited upon colored people, said 
114 FORTY-FOU R BLOCK S OF NEGR O PROPERTY . DESTROYE D B Y TH E MO B A T TULSA , OKLAHOM A TH E CRISIS 
that the practice of .peonage was common, 
and that colored farmers were kept always 
in debt, the planters taking their crops and 
giving them only a bare subsistence in return. The refugees said warnings had 
been distributed weeks and months before 
the riot, telling colored people they would 
have to leave Oklahoma before June 1, or 
suffer the consequences. Cards had been 
posted outside the doors of colored people's 
homes warning them to get out of the state, 
and a white newspaper of Okmulgee had 
published a similar warning. 
The refugees had left Oklahoma and arrived in New York City possessing practically nothing except the clothes on their 
backs. Being members of that body they 
had gone, they said, to the offices of the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association, 
Marcus Garvey's organization, where they 
were told they could not be taken care of, 
and where, according to their accounts, efforts were made to communicate with 
Okmulgee to prevent other colored people 
from coming to New York. 
Refused assistance by the Garvey organization, they were brought to the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People by Mr. Edward Givens, of 
39 West 133d Street, New York City. His 
role was indeed that of the good Samaritan, 
for he had taken these homeless people 
under his wing, had given them food, 
shelter and clothing and had tried to get 
them work. 
A collection was at once taken up for 
them in the National Office, and in the offices of TH E CRISIS, and the sum of $51.50 
was presented to them to tide them over 
their immediate difficulties. A t a meeting 
of the New York Branch on the same evening an additional contribution was raised 
for these people. Thereupon the secretary 
announced in the newspapers that a relief 
fund was to be established by the Association, and that every cent contributed to it 
would be applied to relief of the riot victims. 
Meanwhile, the stories told by the refugees from the riot zone were sent out to the 
press and were prominently featured in the 
most important newspapers, appearing on 
the first page of the New York World, and 
being published in the New York Times, the 
Tribune, the Herald, the Evening Post, the 
Globe and the Evening World. 
The national secretary then took further 
action. He sent the following telegram to 
President Warren G. Harding in Washington: 
The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People feels that an 
utterance from you at this time on the violence and reign of terror at Tulsa, Okla., 
would have an inestimable effect not only 
upon that situation but upon the whole 
country. 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . 
President Harding replied through his 
secretary on June 7 as follows: 
Following the receipt of your telegram 
of June 2, the President, as you will have noticed, made a public expression of his regret 
and horror at the recent Tulsa tragedy, 
which reflected his sentiments. 
Meanwhile telegrams had been sent to 
Oklahoma branches telling them that a 
representative of the National Office was 
on the way. The fearless temper of the 
men in the midst of the disturbance is well 
illustrated by the following telegram which 
the Boley, Okla., branch sent to the National Office in reply to its telegram. This telegram was received at the National Office on 
June 3: 
Telegram received. Representative will 
have all moral and financial support demanded. Oklahoma branches and friends 
loyal and fearless. 
C. F . SIMMONS . 
At the time of writing, the refugees from 
Oklahoma are being cared for, and the Association is ready to publish the reports of 
its investigator as soon as they arrive. 
OD D FELLOW S CONTRIBUT E T O 
N . A . A . C . P . 
A FE W days ago the following letter 
J
- *• containing a check of $100 was received at the National Office: 
Mr. James Weldon Johnson, Secretary, 
70 Fifth Ave., 
New York, N . Y . 
My Dear Sir: 
I am sending herewith my check for one 
hundred dollars, being a donation by the 
Sub-committee of Management, G. U . 0. O. 
F. America to the general fund of the N . 
A. A . C. P. 
Very truly yours, 
JAME S F. NEEDHAM , 
Enclosure. Grand Secretary. 
This generous contribution of the Odd 
Fellows sets an example for our many 
splendid fraternal organizations. It is an 
outward and visible evidence of appreciation of the work of the Association. Our N . A . A . C . P. 117 
fraternal organizations are showing with 
increasing frequency their readiness to 
back with mass-effect the great fight for 
freedom and opportunity. 
TH E DRIV E 
THE National Office had hoped to report 
in this issue the results of the drive. 
The extension of time to May 31 makes this 
impossible. Our branches are working hard 
and few of them are stopping to make full 
reports. Of the few who have made full 
reports at the time of this writing, most of 
them have "gone over the top." The first 
branches to reach their quota were Akron, 
Ohio; Newport, R. I.; Rockford, Ill.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Fairfax County, Va . 
Over 200 of the branches entered the 
drive. The National Office has sought to 
get the remaining branches to conduct a 
supplementary drive, beginning June 1 and 
ending at the time of the Conference. During the drive there were ordered and distributed 121,919 pieces of literature. The 
National Office is much pleased at the 
awakening of the branches to the importance of literature for propaganda purposes. 
We urge its use at all mass-meetings and 
in letters during the whole year. 
The Drive has been seriously affected by 
the industrial depression with its resultant 
unemployment. One of our strong branches 
in the Middle West reports that less than 
thirteen per cent, of its colored factory 
population is employed, and many are in 
desperate need. In spite, however, of this 
depression the branches are conducting a 
vigorous campaign and the National Office 
is confident of large increases in membership. 
From all sources come reports stating 
that there is today a general appreciation of 
the worth of the Association and keen enthusiasm for its work. The National Office 
urges all our branches to proceed, if already they have not done so, to select their 
permanent colonel, and with this assistance 
their permanent majors, captains and lieutenants, sending their names and addresses 
to the National Office. 
The National Office will then issue commissions and emblems of office. We intend 
to publish in July a list of the branches 
that reached their quota and of persons 
who individually brought in more than 100 
members. At the conference, Victory Pennants will be awarded all branches that 
have gone over the top and have reported 
to the National Office. 
NE W GOL D AN D BLU E CERTIFICAT E 
BUTTON S 
TWO very beautiful buttons have been 
devised for Gold and Blue Certificate 
holders. These buttons are not for sale and 
are sent out from the National Office with 
the Gold and Blue Certificates. 
The buttons are gold and enamel. The 
Gold Certificate button has a central circular field of blue enamel on which appears 
the balances in gold and the open book of 
white enamel with N . A . A . C. P. in gold 
letters across its pages. The wide border 
is of white enamel. Around the border in 
letters of gold are the words "Gold Certificate Member, 1921 to 1922." 
The Blue Certificate button has a circular field of white enamel, the open book of 
blue enamel, the balances and the lettering 
just the same as the Gold Certificate button. The border is in blue with the gold 
lettering "Blue Certificate Member, 1921 to 
1922." 
These buttons will be given hereafter to 
all Certificate Members. Those who became Gold or Blue Certificate Members before the Drive, will receive the new button 
of their membership on remitting fifty cents 
to the National Office. 
These buttons are visible evidences of 
interest in the Cause, and should be worn 
by a largely increased number of our members. 
A STATEMEN T O F TH E CAS E O F 
DR . HILL S 
WHE N representatives of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People appeared in December before the Census Committee of the House of 
Representatives, they presented facts concerning the disfranchisement of colored 
voters in the South, and particularly in 
Florida. They stated that hundreds of 
reputable colored citizens had been denied 
the right to vote and mentioned specifically 
the name of Dr. J. Seth Hills, of Jacksonville, among 941 citizens. Immediately the 
Florida representative of that district wired 
the Mayor. The Mayor called up Dr. Hills 
and asked him if he had been denied the 
right to vote. Dr. Hills stated that he him-118 TH E CRISIS 
self had voted but that he knew of hundreds 
of others who had not voted. The Mayor 
asked Dr. Hills if he would make affidavit 
stating that he had voted. Dr. Hills made 
this affidavit. Immediately a telegram was 
sent to Washington, without Dr. Hills' 
knowledge, of which the following is a 
certified copy: 
JACKSONVILLE , Fla., 
January 4, 1921. 
Hon. Frank Clark, M . C , Florida, 
Washington, D. C : 
I voted in the last general election in this 
City. 
(sgd) J . SET H HILLS . 
Charge J . W. Martin, Mayor. 
Phone 1274. 
Certified a true copy. 
L. J. Maxwell, 
D. CS . 
Dr. Hills, after a number of attempts, got 
hold of a copy of the telegram sent and 
found it marked "charge to the Mayor". 
Thereupon, Dr. Hills sent the following telegram to Congressman Clark: 
I noticed in the Times-Union of this 
morning, January 6, a statement to this effect: "Mr. Clark also read to the committee a telegram from a Negro doctor of 
Jacksonville, J. Seth Hills, stating that he 
had voted on election day." While it is true 
that I was asked by a representative of 
Mayor Martin's office if I had voted and 
gave an affidavit to this effect, this was all 
to it. I told the truth, which any honorable 
citizen would do, but the statement that 
I sent a telegram to Mr. Clark or anyone 
else is absolutely incorrect. When I made 
the affidavit I told the representative that 
while I had voted I knew of hundreds who 
had not done so. 
J. SET H HILLS . 
It is significant that Congressman Clark 
made no further attempt to explain the 
cases of 94 1 disfranchised colored men and 
women of Jacksonville whose names, addresses and registration numbers were presented to the committee. 
TH E CONFERENC E 
YOU cannot, Reader, afford to miss the 
Detroit Conference. From Montreal 
to New Orleans, from Los Angeles to Atlantic City, delegates all over the country, 
are preparing to come. 
In Detroit, which is widely known as a 
convention town, the cool breezes from Lake 
Erie and Lake St. Clair will temper the 
heat; and the beautiful Detroit River and 
picturesque Belle Isle, the most noted Island 
Park in America, will offer attractions for 
the spare hours. 
If you have time to remain for a visit 
after the Convention, you may take the 
wonderful trip through St. Clair flats, the 
Venice of America, and the pleasant ride 
across Lake Erie to Put-In-Bay. Detroit 
leads all American cities in growth, and 
now numbers 1,000,000 with a colored population of 50,000. 
At the Conference, some of the best speakers of the country will make addresses on 
the vital questions which most intimately 
concern the colored people, the nation and 
the world. 
Conferences on methods of organization 
work will enable you to return home and 
teach your Branch how to do its work in 
the most effective way. You will get the 
vision of the great work of the Association 
as you see men and women from all over, 
the country, from Haiti and from Liberia, 
come together to plan and work for a fuller 
realization of Democracy in America and 
the world. Make up your mind now. Remember when you buy your ticket to ask 
your ticket agent for a certificate—not a receipt. This, when signed by Walter F. 
White, Assistant Secretary of the N . A . A. 
C. P., will entitle you to half fare on your 
return trip home. 
Mignon Barker. 
B.S.. Utah Agricul 
tural College 
Jay M . Williams, 
A.B. , Brown University 
May E. Chinn, 
B.S.. Columbia University 
Forest D. Speaks, 
A.B. , Wittenberg 
College 
Bertram W . Doyle, 
A.B. , Cum laude, Ohio 
Wesleyan University TH E SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS 
THE first Pan-African Congress, as our 
readers doubtless remember, met in 
1919, February 19, 20, 21, at the Grand Hotel, Paris. A t this Congress a permanent 
committee was appointed which ordered a 
second Pan-African Congress to meet in 
1921. 
This second Congress, the plans for which 
are well under way, will hold three sessions: 
Preliminary Council—London, England; 
Sunday and Monday, August 28 and 29. 
Main Sessions — Brussels, Belgium; 
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, August 
31, September 1 and 2. 
Fina l Session—Paris, France; Sunday 
and Monday, September 4 and 5. 
Special Committee to visit the Assembly 
of the League of Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, after September 6. 
The idea of meeting in Brussels is especially laudable, as Brussels is and has been 
for some time the centre of most of the international activities of the world. It has 
built to house these organizations the beautiful Palais Mondial, where the Brussels session of the Pan-African Congress will meet. 
The Palais, pictured above, is in a 
large park at the beginning of an avenue 
which stretches off southeast through the 
Soignes Woods to the town of Tervueren. 
The palace spreads over more than two 
acres and contains a hundred rooms. These 
rooms include administrative offices for international associations, a large auditorium 
and reception room for congresses like the 
Pan-African, an international library, an international museum, and the classrooms of 
the International University. This last has 
as its object "the uniting in a movement 
of universal higher learning and culture 
the universities and associations oif the 
world". It will hold a conference in September, 1921, at which Dr. DuBois has already been asked to speak. 
The Pan-African Congress is expecting 
representatives from the Colonial Offices of 
Great Britain, France, Belgium and Portugal. Thus Africa will be represented both 
officially and unofficially, for we have assurance of the presence of many natives from 
Various African countries. The United 
States is sending Bishops and other delegates from Negro churches, besides delegates from Greek Letter Fraternities and 
other fraternal orders. In addition we are 
already assured of the presence of the following distinguished personages: Jane 
Addams, H . 0. Tanner, Blaise Diagne, Gratien Candace, Roland Hayes, W. H . Jernigan, W. S. Scarborough, Senator La Fontaine, Senator Vinck, Professor Paul Otlet, 
Henri Barbusse. 
119 120 TH E CRISIS 
A congress of this kind must necessarily 
present some practical program. We submit herewith such a program under five 
divisions: 
(a) We are conscious at present of the 
need of a greater knowledge concerning 
Africa, for in spite of the vast literature 
extant, few people are well informed on the 
present social status of Africans, both black 
and white. Especially if we hope to establish 
a better entente between black Americans 
and black Africans do we need to know mure 
about Africa's physical, climatic and commercial conditions, as well as the attitude 
of the natives and the European governments. Undoubtedly this congress will do 
much to satisfy this need. 
(b) This knowledge once gained should 
be carefully threshed, put into the form of 
a statement, presenting the main social 
problems which face the Negroes of the 
world. Such a statement of facts would be 
of vast importance to Sociology, but it is 
obvious that it can be made only by persons 
who have acquainted themselves at first 
hand with aspects of the problem in all the 
parts of the Negro World. 
(c) The leaders of the different Negro 
groups the world over mast become acquainted. Lack of acquaintance breeds intolerance which in turn creates often an 
impasse in cooperative effectiveness. Now 
social reform and uplift is not mechanical, 
it is a matter of human knowledge and sympathy and the Negro world can only act in 
cooperation as its different parts get direct 
knowledge of the different personalities that 
are coming to the front who can be counted 
upon in future work. 
(d) The greatest single difficulty in the 
solution of the Negro Problem is the amount 
of ignorance on the part of white people 
concerning the fundamental characteristics, 
needs and deserts of the black man all over 
the globe. Yet there are in the world today 
numbers of persons, groups, nations and 
organizations of various races who either do 
sympathize with the peoples of Africa and 
their descendants or who would sympathize 
if they knew the facts. It is of great importance that we should know these forces 
and get into touch with them. 
(e) Finally some form of permanent organization must be evolved. It must at first 
be loose and with more or less indefinite objects but as time goes on it ought to gain 
in strength and definiteness until it welds 
into one, the Negro people and their friends 
for the emancipation of the race. 
Aside from the social importance of the 
Pan-African Congress, there is a cultural 
importance which should not be overlooked. 
A trip to Europe at this time would be most 
valuable. The world has been transformed 
by the War. Just exactly the meaning of 
that transformation few of us yet grasp, 
but the center of the great change developing during the century, is Europe. It 
would be most interesting to see the great 
cities of the modern civilization, London, 
and Paris; to know the country where the 
World Wa r began, Belgium; to see the cities 
where international effort is concentrated at 
Brussels and Geneva; to look upon the torn 
battlefields of northern France and see 
something of the beauty of Switzerland. 
The cost of this trip will not be excessive. 
If one wishes to attend simply the main 
session at Brussels, going and returning 
direct without side trips, the cost could be 
kept below $400. The trip which would include all three of the sessions and a chance 
to see something of London, Paris and Brussels can be made for $500. For $750 one 
can visit the sessions of the congress, see the 
battlefields and go to Geneva. 
Every day is working toward the realization of the Congress. We are now issuing 
our second bulletin which gives all details 
of time, place, and expense. Transportation is in charge of the Woman's Travel 
Club of America. All persons desirous of 
receiving this second bulletin, or of acquiring fuller information, should write immediately to W. E . B. DuBois, the secretary 
of the Congress. 
AN OLD EX-SLAVE 
CHARLE S BERTRA M JOHNSO N 
ALL day upon his porch he sits, He dwells apart in that far clime: 
And lives in dreams his life again, The border-land of human lives, 
The cabin frolics, banjo songs, Where men live only in their dreams, 
Like shadows pass before his ken. And faith in God alone survives. A COURSE IN COMMON-SENSE 
PROFESSOR EDWI N L. CLARK E 
T N the first Ohio Student Interracial Con-
*• ference a new means of promoting 
friendly race relations has been proved 
practical. On Miay 14, Dr. Edwin L. Clarke's 
class in Race Problems at the Ohio State 
University visited Prof. W. F. David's sociology class at Wilberforce University. 
The morning was spent by the two groups 
in getting acquainted with each other, in 
exploring the campus and in visiting classes 
under the escort of the Wilberforce students. 
There were several spontaneous social gatherings, at the home of Prof. David and in 
the reception hialls of the dormitories, where 
the Wilberforce students sang and played 
for their guests. 
After lunching together at noon the students spent the afternoon in discussion. 
Each class had submitted to the other a 
set of questions. Ohio State asked such 
questions as: "What is the greatest handicap, aside from white prejudice, which colored people suffer?" "How can white folks 
help remove it?" and "What program 
should be adopted to eliminate lynching?" 
Wilberforce asked, among other questions: 
"What do you find in the Negro that appeals to you most? Is this based upon your 
own experience, or have you adopted the 
general opinion of your race? What do you 
find in the Negro the most objectionable?" 
and "What program would you offer to 
the church, the press and other institutions 
to eliminate prejudice?" 
The questions were answered by a speaker from each class and general discussion 
followed. For three and a half hours the 
assembly considered frankly and courteously important problems of race contact. 
Of special interest were the concluding addresses on the subject, "What College Students Can Do to Promote Friendly Race 
Relations". 
While much benefit was derived from the 
formal conference, there is no doubt that 
even greater good resulted from the informal association during the day. From 
the moment the first visitor stepped from 
the train till the last friendly handclasp 
was given on departure, a spirit of delightful cordiality prevailed, proving that race 
relations on a high plan are thoroughly 
possible and desirable. 
It is to be hoped that this conference will 
become an annual affair, and that students 
from other colleges will be able to participate. 
AUN T SUE' S STORIE S 
LANGSTO N HUGHE S 
A UN T SU E has a head full of stories, 
Aunt Sue has a whole heart full of 
stories. 
Summer nights on the front porch 
Aunt Sue cuddles a brown-faced child to 
her bosom 
And tells him stories. 
Black slaves 
Working in the hot sun, 
And black slaves 
Walking in the dewy night, 
And black slaves 
Singing sorrow songs on the banks of a 
mighty river 
Mingle themselves softly 
In the flow of old Aunt Sue's voice; 
Mingle themselves softly 
In the dark shadows that cross and recross 
Aunt Sue's stories. 
And the dark-faced child, listening, 
Knows that Aunt Sue's stories are real 
stories. 
He knows that Aunt Sue 
Never got her stories out of any book at 
all, 
But that they came 
Right out of her own life. 
And the dark-faced child is quiet 
Of a summer night 
Listening to Aunt Sue's stories. 
121 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
O, BLOOD of the people! changeless 
tide, through century, creed and race! 
Still one as the sweet salt sea is one, though 
tempered by sun and place; 
The same in the ocean currents, and the 
same in the sheltered seas; 
Forever the fountain of common hopes and 
kindly sympathies; 
Indian and Negro, Saxon and Celt, Teuton 
and Latin and Gaul— 
Mere surface shadow and sunshine; while 
the sounding unifies all! 
One love, one hope, one duty theirs! No 
matter the time or ken, 
There never was separate heart-beat in all 
the races of men! 
***** * 
And honor to Crispus Attucks, who was 
leader and voice that day; 
The first to defy, and the first to die, with 
Maverick. Carr, and Gray. 
Call it riot or revolution, his hand first 
clenched at the crown; 
His feet were the first in perilous place to 
pull the king's flag down; 
His breast was the first one rent apart that 
liberty's stream might flow; 
For our freedom now and forever, his 
head was the first laid low! 
JOH N BOYL E O'REILLY . 
* * * 
The second issue of The Negro Musician, 
edited by Henry Lee Grant, at Washington, 
D. C , deserves special attention. It contains 
notes from the local branches of the N . A . 
N . M. , and several well-conducted departments. Its print and appearance are very 
attractive, and it bears as cover a fine likeness of Roland Hayes. 
* * * 
We have received a copy of The Kappa 
Alpha Psi Journal, which is published in Indianapolis, Ind'ana. 
* * * 
Maud Cuney Hare writes instructively on 
African Dances in The Musical Observer. 
* * * 
The Comhill Company, Boston, issues The 
Stairway, by Alice A. Chown. 
Miss Chown writes the vivid, breezy account which might be expected from a 
woman who has dedicated her life to the 
quest of freedom. She tells by the breaking 
through of what "inherited inhibitions", 
through the avoidance of what "travelled 
roads of custom", she finally reached her 
goal. 
She becomes an object lesson to the person of any race who is fretting against 
barriers to the expression of self. In the 
midst of her flying, kaleidoscopic pages the 
author stops long enough to hit at the rarely noticed, because so insidious, effect of 
racial injustice on the oppressor. "I should 
like to work at the colored problem from the 
side of the evil re-actions of our indifference on us," she says. 
The student of psycho-analysis will be interested in Miss Chown's interpretation of 
Freud, and in her own reactions to the matter of sex. 
EDUCATION IN ALABAMA 
THE race between two Congressional 
candidates, McDonald and Jeffers, of 
Dallas County, Alabama, throws a merciless 
light on discrimination in the education of 
blacks and whites in that state. The fight 
centers upon the passage and interpretation 
of the Smith-Towner bill. The Selma, Ala., 
Times-Journal says: 
Evidently the signers of the circular letter which you enclosed are under a serious 
misapprehension in regard to the provisions 
of the Smith-Towner bill. The bill provides 
for the establishment of a department of 
education with a secretary in the President's 
cabinet, and authorizes an annual appropriation of $100,000,00 0 to encourage and assist the states in the promotion and support 
of public education, with the express provision that the management of the schools 
shall remain exclusively under state and 
local control. This provision of the bill 
is in the following language: "Provided, 
that courses of study, plans and methods 
for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this act within a State shall be determined by the State and local educational 
authorities of said State, and this act shall 
not be construed to require uniformity of 
courses of study, plans and methods in the 
several States in order to secure the benefits herein provided; and provided further. 
That all the educational facilities encouraged by the provisions of this act and accepted by a State shall be organized, supervised and administered exclusively by the 
leg-ally constituted State and local educational authorities of said State, etc." 
* * * 
Mr. McDonald opposes this bill; Mr. Jeffers advocates it. The bill requires that 
each State match dollar for dollar, every 
cent of Federal money and enjoins that 
122 TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 123 
CHARLE S S. GILPIN , 
Seventh Spingarn Medalist 
each dollar be spent for equal school advantages for white and Negro children. 
But in Dallas County outside of the city 
schools (i.e., those of Selma), there are 
1,512 white children of school age, and 13,-
057 colored children! There lies the rub! 
"Last year," says the Dallas County 
Board of Education ingenuously, 
"For the white children we appropriated 
substantially $53,663.47, and for the Negro 
children $15,000.00. . . . Under the 
Smith-Towner Bill, as we construe it, onehalf is divided according to teachers, and 124 TH E CRISIS 
the other half is divided according to school 
population. This would substantially result 
in colored schools receiving $99,936.00 and 
white children receiving $37,390.94 for 
school purposes. It would mean a loss to 
the white children outside of Selma of about 
$16,273, and a gain to colored children outside of Selma amounting to about $84,936." 
* * * 
The Times-Journal quotes a Dr. Palmer 
of the Jeffers Committee as saying: 
"We should see to it that every child, 
white and black, is properly trained for 
rendering the best service to the State; or, 
in other words, that he might have a chance 
to fit himself for useful service." 
* * * 
"True," shrieks the McDonald Committee, 
"—but not at the sacrifice of the white 
children and white teachers of Dallas County." 
And McDonald comes to the fore: 
"Men and women of Dallas County, tomorrow you, by your vote, will say whether 
or not you are in favor of this Federal Educational Bill—whether or not we are willing to jeopardize the educational opportunities of our White Children for generations yet to come. In its final analysis 
it means that we increase the white man's 
tax burdens and decrease the white child's 
school opportunities in order to give the 
Negro child better school opportunities." 
* * * 
This is an amazing construction to be put 
on the bill which is now pending in Congress. 
Of course, what will really happen if the 
bill is passed and if a man like McDonald 
represents the thought of the community, is 
a method of discrimination which in the last 
analysis will give the southern white child 
the advantage over all children all over the 
country. For as a correspondent of ours 
astutely points out: 
If the State educational authorities in the 
South are permitted to discriminate against 
the Negro, to the advantage of the white 
child, it will not only mean prostitution of 
the import and purpose of the bill, and unfairness to the Negroes of the South, but 
unfairness to the white child of the North, 
in that the southern white child will get 
what the northern white child gets plus 
what shall be shorn from the Negro child. 
AN ATHLETE 
THE Harvard Alumni News does honor 
to its famous colored athlete, Gourdin, 
who saved honors for the crimson in the 
recent Harvard-Princeton meet. 
Harvard defeated Princeton, 59 points to 
58, in the track and field meet which the 
teams representing those colleges had in the 
Stadium last Saturdav afternoon. A closer 
contest has never taken place in the home 
grounds. The result was in doubt until the 
final event of the meet, the 220-yard dash, 
was run. A t that time the score stood B5 
to 53 in favor of Princeton, and Harvard 
had to take two of the three places in the 
22 0 in order to win the meet; fortunately, 
Gourdin finished well in the lead in that 
dash, and although Stevenson, of Princeton, 
was second, Chapin took third place. 
The six points made by Harvard in the 
22 0 were just enough to win the meet by 
a single point, but the points which the 
Harvard athletes scored in other events 
earlier in the meet were quite as important 
and had as much to do with the victory. 
Gourdin was by all odds the most conspicuous performer on the field. He won not 
only the 220, but also the 100-yard dash 
and the broad jump, and in the event last 
mentioned he jumped 24 feet, 6 inches, thus 
excelling the intercollegiate record of 24 
feet, 4l/2 inches, made in 1899 by A . E . 
Kraenzlein, of the University of Pennsylvania. It is said that at the Pennsylvania 
Relay Carnival in 1900, Myer Prinstein, of 
Syracuse University, jumped 24 feet, 7% 
inches; with that exception, which seems to 
be borne out by the records although Prinstein never again jumped nearly so far, 
Gourdin's jump last Saturday was the longest ever made in any collegiate meet in 
this country. Gourdin contributed fifteen 
points to Harvard's total. 
* * * 
This is the record of Gourdin's points: 
100-yard dash—Won by E. O. Gourdin, 
Harvard; second, D. B. Lourie, Princeton; 
third, Vinton Chapin, Harvard. Time: 10s. 
220-yard dash—Won by E . O. Gourdin, Harvard; second, W. E. Stevenson, 
Princeton; third, Vinton Chapin, Harvard. 
Time: 22 2-5s. 
Running broad jump—Won by E . O. 
Gourdin, Harvard, 24 ft. 6 in. (new intercollegiate record) ; second, D. B. Lourie, 
Princeton, 22 ft. 11 1/2 in.; third, W. F. 
Goodell, Harvard, 22 ft. 9 1/2 in. 
INDIA'S SAINT 
THE greatest man in India today," says 
John Haynes Holmes, "is Gandhi." 
It is he who has initiated the non-cooperation movement in India which means the 
total boycott of all British functions on the 
territory of the Hindus. J. T. Sunderlin 
writes in Unity: 
What does India propose to do? Probably she could not if she would (disarmed as 
she is) throw off her foreign yoke by force. 
But she prefers not to use force. She abhors bloodshed. Has she no other resource? 
She believes she has. She has always been 
preeminently a peace-loving nation. She 
believes that peaceful agencies in the end 
are stronger than those of war. She believes that in the end right is might. She THE LOOKING GLASS 125 
has determined, therefore, upon a bloodless 
revolution. She will win her rights; she 
will compel England to grant them. How? 
Not by violence; not by indulging in even 
a single act of violence; but by "non-cooperation" with her foreign rulers, and by 
suffering. The government cannot go on a 
week without the aid of the Indian people; 
the English cannot do business of any kind, 
or even live in India, without the aid of the 
Indian people. The Indian people propose 
peacefully but resolutely to strike against 
their foreign masters—refusing to cooperate 
with them in anything, or to aid them in 
anything until their rights are granted; and 
they propose to suffer, without retaliation 
or revenge, the penalties visited upon them, 
however heavy they may be. Of course, they 
know that the government which has not 
scrupled in all the past to hold them in subjection by force, and to meet every sign of 
insubordination with arrest, imprisonment, 
hanging and shooting, will not hesitate now 
to resort to the extremest measures to break 
their resolve to be free. They know that 
not only the strongest possible police forces, 
but also the army with all its enginery of 
machine guns and bombs and martial law, 
will be employed to thwart their purpose and 
compel them to submit to their masters. 
* * * 
Gandhi, however, has already won remarkable results in South Africa by his 
methods of non-violence. The Hindu scholar 
Basanta Koomar Roy tells in the New York 
American, how the Mahatma (saint) cast in 
his lot with the "coolies". 
He lived with them and inspired them to 
offer passive resistance against unjust laws 
and obnoxious regulations. He has been 
arrested with them, tried with them, and 
also sent to prison with them, times without number. 
In prison he always refused to accept 
preferential treatment. Many a time he and 
his compatriots have been "led in prison 
garb to grace General Smuts' triumph under Kaffir guards armed with rhinoceroshide whips". 
More than once angry mobs have threatened him with death. Undaunted, he always obeyed the dictates of his own conscience, fearless alike of prison, punishment, 
or even death itself. 
Gandhi's noble fight in South Africa attracted the attention of Tolstoy, who' thus 
wrote to his Indian counterpart in part: 
"Your activity in the Transvaal, as it seems 
to us at the end of the world, is the most essential work, the most important of all the 
work now being done in the world, and in 
which not only the nations of Christian, but 
of all the world, will undoubtedly take 
part." 
» * * 
His life is that of the ascetic, continues 
Mr. Roy. 
Gandhi is a man of unimpeachable character, and his fellow-countrymen rightly call 
him Mahatma (saint). He lives the life of 
an ascetic. He eats only vegetables, rice and 
nuts. By voluntary fasting he has reduced 
himself to a mere skeleton. He weighs about 
one hundred pounds. 
He sits on a mat spread on the floor and 
sleeps on hard planks. He dresses like a 
poor workingman, and he walks barefoot. 
He invariably travels by the third class. He 
has reduced his personal needs to the minimum. 
He is always genial and gentle, and is 
courteous even to his enemies. His toleration is superhuman. Deeply engrossed in 
his own idealism he is above insult and injury, above anger and hatred. 
* * * 
It is this blameless life of his which has 
accomplished the incredible—that of bringing together the numerous sects of India. 
This one phenomenon ought to convey a 
warning to Great Britain. 
THE HAITIAN MEMORIAL 
A COMMISSION from Haiti, consisting of 
Messrs. H . Pauleus Sannon, Stenio Vin ­
cent and Perceval Thobey, presented on May 
9 to the Department of State and to the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee a "memoir" on conditions existing in the Republic 
of Haiti under the American occupation. 
These gentlemen are the official delegates 
to the United States of the Union Patriotique d'Haiti. The San Francisco, CaL, Call 
and Post remarks of the memorial which the 
Nation carries in full: 
Men and women who love America and 
wish their country always to stand for justice to other peoples should read the charges 
and complaints of the Union Patriotique 
d'Haiti against the treatment of Haitians 
by the representatives of the United States. 
The union is an organization of the leading 
and educated citizens of Haiti and the report 
is written by three men who have been 
Haitian charge d'affaires at Washington, 
minister to the United States at Washington, and secretary of the interior and of 
justice at Haiti. And the purpose of this 
organization is "to crystallize the national 
aspirations of the Haitians for the return 
to their independence, maintained until the 
American invasion for one hundred and 
eleven years". 
Strange words for American ears, and a 
strange situation when the people of a sovereign country should come to look upon the 
United States' administration as oppression 
not less cruel than the oppression that resulted from the invasion of Belgium by Germany. But this report, sworn to and declared to be true by citizens of Haiti, is a 
horrible story of official stupidity, military 
cruelty, and stubborn refusal to do the right 12 6 THE CRISIS 
thing for a patient and suffering people. 
The report declares that since the American military occupation of Haiti on July 
28, 1915, representatives of the people have 
been bullied and insulted by American officers, property and public funds have been 
stolen, and men and women have been illegally killed by American soldiers. "In the 
prisons of Cap Haitien, during the years 
1918, 1919 and 1920, more than 4,000 prisoners died. At Chabert, an American camp, 
5,475 prisoners died during these three years. 
At Cap Haitien, out of 500 prisoners, the 
average mortality is four a day, that is, 24 
per cent per month. The ghastly mortality 
together with confirmation by survivors reveals a record of atrocities, of brutality, and 
cruelty which defies description." 
* * * 
The report reminds America that the Haitian Republic maintained its independence 
for 111 years with its own history, culture, 
institutions, literature, religion and social 
and political organization. This was the 
case according to the Call: 
Until one day when, "under the merest 
pretext, without any possible explanation or 
justification on the ground of violation of 
any American right or interest, American 
forces landed on our national territory and 
actually abolished the sovereignty and independence of the Haitian Republic." Since 
then, during the last five years, the Haitian 
people have passed through "such sacrifices, 
tortures, destructions, humiliations, and misery as have never before been known in the 
course of its unhappy history". 
And now this poor people turns in desperation from the actions of American 
agents in Haiti, under a former administration, to appeal to the sense of justice 
of the American people. They charge that 
the investigations of the Naval Board of 
Inquiry have been perfunctory whitewashing affairs. Isn't it about time that a clear 
white light of truth should be turned on this 
black and seemingly shameful business in 
Haiti? The government of Haiti was not 
the most stable in the world in the years before the American occupation. It was 
bloody and shaky and it needed the help of 
the United States. But the people of Haiti 
did not and do not deserve the treatment 
they charge in this cry to the American 
people. They ask for action and ought to 
have it. 
ETHIOPIA 
THE Bulletin of the Museum of Fine 
Arts at Boston gives some interesting 
data on that mysterious country "Ethiopia," 
the classical name of the region in northeastern Africa which borders the Red Sea 
and lies between Egypt on the north and 
Abyssinia on the south. Whatever the derivation of the name, to the Greeks it described "sun-burned faces." According to 
the Bulletin: 
In the writings of the Greeks and the 
Romans, Ethiopia was a region of the gods, 
of marvelous peoples, and of incredible customs. Long accounts of this mysterious 
country were gathered from various sources 
and recorded by Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and Pliny. Most of these tales 
related to the second, the Meroitic Kingdom 
of Ethiopia, and being current in Rome in 
the first century A . U., moved the Emperor 
Nero to send an exploring party of Roman 
soldiers to Meroe, the capital, and to the 
lands southward of Meroe. But even before the time of Herodotus, Ethiopia had 
its place in the imagination of the ancients. 
It is mentioned in the Iliad as a land of the 
gods, and its people are included among 
the descendants of Ham in the list of races 
given in Genesis (Chap. 10). 
A hundred years ago the Englishmen, 
Hanbury and Waddington, and the Frenchman, Cailliaud, following in the wake of the 
army of Mohammed Ali , Viceroy of Egypt, 
journeyed into the Sudan to seek the longlost Island of Meroe. Cailliaud alone was 
successful. To his delight, he found not 
only Meroe, but the older capital, Napata, 
and many other sites with pyramids, temples, and the ruins of cities. However fantastic the tales which the classical writers 
had handed down, Ethiopia was a land in 
which a great kingdom and a peculiar civilization had once flourished. Since that time 
the decipherment of the hieroglyphic and 
the cuneiform inscriptions of Egypt and Assyria and the scientific excavation of a number of the ancient sites of Ethiopia have 
given us a more intimate knowledge of the 
people and the history of this remote country. But previous to 1916 there were still 
two periods lost in obscurity. The earlier 
of these still remains blank,—that is, the 
time between Herihor, the last known 
Egyptian viceroy of Ethiopia (1090 B. C) , 
and Piankhy the Great, the king of Ethiopia 
who conquered Egypt in 721 B. C. The history of the second period, however, has now 
been recovered in its main outlines by the 
excavation of the pyramids at Nuri. This 
second, hitherto obscure, period extends 
from the expulsion of Tanutaman, the 
nephew of Piankhy from Egypt by the Assyrians in 661 B. C. to the reign of Ergamenes. Kin g of Ethiopia and friend of Ptolemy II, or about 250 B. C. 
* * * 
The Egyptian occupation of the Sudan 
in 2,000 B. C. led to a thorough Egyptianizing of Ethiopia. The Bulletin tells us: 
Egyptian officials and soldiers were scattered about the land; temples to Egyptian 
gods were built in all large towns; and 
Egyptian learning, as well as the practice 
of Egyptian handicrafts, was widespread. 
During the Twentieth Dynasty our list is 
less secure, and finally ends with the name 
of Herihor. The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G ALLISO N 
EDUCATIO N 
CLYD E W . PHELPS , a Negr o member 
of the '22 class at Harvar d University , 
is winne r of the Boylsto n priz e for elocution. His subject was Wendell Phillips' 
"Toussain t L'Ouverture" . 
G The Plaz a Parent-Teache r Association 
at Fort Scott, Kan. , durin g the past two 
years has given 32 prizes for scholarship 
and deportment and $30 toward the purchase of a set of Ne w Worl d Encyclopedias; 
it has placed TH E CRISI S and TH E 
BROWNIES ' BOO K i n the school and the city 
libraries. Mrs. Katherin e D . Tillma n is 
president of the organization . 
C Th e colored Bartlet t Hig h School at 
St. Joseph, Mo. , has been placed on the list 
of approved first-class hig h schools. The 
principa l is Mr . C. W . Blac k and there are 
11 teachers. 
C Lambd a Chapte r of the Ph i Bet a Sigma 
Fraternit y has been organized at Virgini a 
Unio n University . It has 16 members and 
gives Virgini a Unio n he r thir d Greek letter fraternity . 
( I A t Montgomery , Ala. , of white children, 7 to 13 years of age, 76.4 per cent, 
were attending school i n 1910 and 87.5 per 
cent, i n 1920. Fo r colored children of the 
same age the percentage in the same interva l increased from 53.4 to 69.2. 
C A t the second annua l inter-collegiate 
track meet, Howar d Universit y scored 89 
points; Lincoln , wit h a score of 40 points, 
won second place. Dunba r Hig h School 
made 29 points, wit h Bordentown Manua l 
Trainin g School takin g second place wit h 
16 points. 
Q Th e hig h school graduatin g class at 
Miartin's Ferry , Ohio, wil l have as its valedictorian, Kennet h H . Randall , la Negro , 
who made better grades than any of his 
61 classmates. Harol d Lee, colored, is valedictorian of a class of 30 i n the Cadiz , 
Ohio , high school. 
C Twenty-five white and 23 Negr o physicians and surgeons participated i n the postgraduate course i n medicine and surgery 
held in the John A . Andrew Memoria l Hospita l at Tuskegee Institute. Sixty-five surgica l operations were performed and 1,136 
cases treated; there was one death. 
C The 1921 class of the New Yor k School of 
Social Wor k included Negro, Japanese and 
Filipin o students. 
C The colored Walker's Nationa l Business 
College of Jacksonville , Fla. , graduates 72 
students. The school was started 6 years 
ago, with 3 students; today it owns and occupies a large buildin g and has an enrollment of over 300. Mor e than 100 graduates 
are employed in banks, and insurance companies throughout the country. 
C The Nationa l America n Red Cross has 
awarded a scholarship to Mrs. K . B . ParkerTaylor, a colored public health nurse of Orlando, Fla . Mrs. Taylo r was a representative at the Nationa l Tuberculosis Conference 
held i n Ne w Yor k at the Waldorf-Astoria . 
(I Colored women students at the Universit y 
of Cincinnati have organized Omicron Chapter of the Alph a Kapp a Alph a Sorority. 
The chapter wil l offer two scholarships; one 
for a deserving but needy student, and one 
for the high school student makin g the highest average for the four years of high school 
work. Hatti e V . Fege r is president of the 
sorority. 
( I The graduatin g class of Lincol n Hospita l 
in Ne w Yor k Cit y numbers 24 nurses. 
C Reginald W . Overton, a junio r in Electrical Engineerin g at the Cooper Unio n Institute of Technology, Ne w Yor k City , has been 
awarded a scholarship for the yea r 1921-22. 
C Ma y E . Haden, a colored student at Herrick's Institute, Ne w Bedford, Mass., has 
won a gold medal awar d from the Remington 
Typewrite r Company. He r speed was 60 
words a minut e for 10 consecutive minutes. 
d Students of the Chemistr y Department of 
Howar d Universit y have organized a Chemi127 128 TH E CRISIS 
cal Research Society, Ch i Rho Sigma . It is 
the first organization of its kin d to be 
formed i n a Negr o college. 
MUSIC AND AR T 
WILSO N LAMB , a Negr o baritone, in 
his recita l at Aeolia n Hall , New 
Yor k City , rendered works by Russian, 
French , German , Italian and Negro composers. The Tribune says: "Th e clarity of 
his enunciation in the songs given i n Eng ­
lish was a creditable feature of his performance. " 
C A musicale benefit for the Paris h Home 
for Age d Wome n has been given at St. 
Philip s Church , Ne w Yor k City . The artists were Helen Hagan , pianist; Dais y 
Tapley, contralto; Harr y Burleigh , baritone, and Eugene Mars Martin , violinist, 
wit h Haze l D. Thoma s and Arthu r W . Ross 
as accompanists. 
C Clarence E . Mus e and Alb a Iona Le -
Sesne, Negroes, are being used for Harris 
Dickson's film comedy, "Th e Custard Nine. " 
C The Reol Corporation has made a moving-picture film of Pau l Lawrenc e Dunbar's 
"Th e Sport of the Gods. " 
G A t the graduation exercises of Geneva 
College, School of Publi c Speaking, an in ­
terpretative recita l "Pau l Laurenc e Dun ­
bar" , was presented by Pau l D. White , a 
white student. 
C In Chicago, Elnor a Manson , a colored 
student of the Cosmopolitan School of Mu ­
sic and Dramati c Art , presented 3 numbers in a recita l of origina l compositions. 
He r lyric s were Dunbar's "Compensation" 
and "Love's Seasons" and Fenton Johnson's 
"Ma y Song. " 
(I Accordin g to J. A . Jackson, of the Billboard, Negroes support 328 vaudeville and 
fill motion picture theatres in 21 States. 
The smallest theatre seats 200 and the 
largest, 1,800. Since September, 1920, 25 
new acts, 14 companies and 12 theatres 
have entered the field. 
(1 The second monthly release of Blac k 
Swan Records has been made by the colored 
Pace Phonograph Company i n Ne w Yor k 
City . Amon g the numbers are "Fo r Al l 
Eternity, " "B y the Waters of Minnetonka, " 
and "Nobody Knows de Trouble I've Seen," 
by Carrol l Clark ; "A t Dawning " and 
"Than k God for a Garden, " by Revell a 
Hughes. 
C Cleota Collins-Lac y has completed a series 
of concerts in Cleveland, Dayton , Hamilton . 
Mt . Verno n and Toledo, Ohio, Middlesboro, 
Ky. , and a joint concert wit h Helen Hagan 
in Erie , Pa. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
Dr. T. STEWAR D LANGSTON , a Ne -
gro of Johnstown, Pa. , has been appointed by the Unite d States Treasur y De ­
partment as dental examine r a t the Burea u 
of Wa r Ris k Insurance i n Cambri a County. 
Dr. Langsto n is a graduate of the Phila ­
delphia Denta l College, '19. 
C B y a vote of 69-0, the Senate of Arkan ­
sas has passed a bill providin g $15,000 for 
the establishment of a Negr o reform school. 
The bil l was presented by Representative 
Ebel, of Garlan d County, and the appropriation wil l be made available i n 1923. 
C Walte r S. Buchanan , retirin g president 
of Norma l Institute, Ala. , has been added 
to the staff of The Competitor, a Negr o 
monthly magazine published by Robert L . 
Vann , of Pittsburgh , Pa . Mr . Buchana n 
wil l serve as managin g editor. 
C Thoma s Myles, a 14-year-old Negr o student of Lincol n Hig h School, Sa n Francisco , 
Cal. , won the 220-yard dash in 22:3 seconds, 
breaking the city record by 1/5 of a second. 
d Merce r L . Lewis, a Negr o attorney at 
Philadelphia , Pa. , has been appointed As ­
sistant Cit y Solicitor. Mr . Lewis has studied at Fis k Universit y and the Harvar d 
and Yal e la"w schools. 
C In Judge Monaghan's court, Philadelphia , a verdict has been rendered against 
the Quake r Cit y Cab Compan y for $29,000 
to Russell Crosby, an 11-year-old Negro , 
and $6,000 to his mother. The boy was hit 
by a taxicab owned by this company and 
permanently disabled. The verdict is said 
to be the largest damage awar d ever made 
i n the Philadelphi a courts. 
C Fou r Negroes i n Ne w Yor k City—Mrs. 
Ev a W . Deaver, the Misse s Catharin e D . 
Lealta d and Vasht i Maxwell , land Howar d 
D . Gregg—have been awarded $100 each 
against Grace's Garrett Coffee Hous e for 
discrimination. 
C Willia m L . Houston, a Negr o of Washington, D . C , has been appointed a member 
of the Board of Education, succeeding 
Fountain Peyton. Mr . Houston is a graduate of Howard University and has prac-NE W YOR K NEGROE S THRON G COUR T HOUS E A T "BIRT H O F A NATION " HEARIN G 
STAR T O F TH E 100 YAR D DASH . E . GOURDIN . HARVARD' S COLORE D RUNNE R AN D WINNE R 
O F TH E RAC E O N TH E EXTREM E LEFT . 
129 130 TH E CRISIS 
ticed in the Distric t Courts for 25 years. 
C The Lexington , Ky. , Herald has added a 
column of "Colored News Notes " to its edition. 
C In Ne w Yor k City , 22 colored women 
have volunteered to work at the Harlem 
Red Cross room, where sewing for the poor 
children of Europ e is being done. 
G Th e Committee on Internationa l Rela ­
tions—the highest committee of women in 
personnel of representatives in the League 
of Nations—ha s chosen Mrs. Mar y B. Tal -
bert as a member. Mrs. Talbert was the 
first accredited Negro delegate to sit in the 
Internationa l Council of Women and one 
of five America n women to speak for the 
Nationa l Council of Women of the Unite d 
States of Americ a i n the House of Parlia ­
ment at Norway . 
G The Alph a Bet a Fraternit y has been 
formed 'among colored students at Ne w 
Bedford, Mass., for the purpose of elevatin g their standards of scholarship. 
C Adolp h P. Hamblin , a Negro who graduated from Kno x College, Ill., i n 1920, has 
been acting as assistant i n biology durin g 
the present school year and has made an 
excellent record in his work. H e is also 
distinguished as an all around athlete and 
has given valuable assistance to the college as assistant coach. 
C The Alph a Gamma Chapte r of the Al ­
pha Ph i Alph a Fraternit y has been established by Negro students of Brow n Uni ­
versity. Because college authorities declared there was no room i n Brow n for a 
colored fraternity, the seat of the organiza ­
tion is i n Providence, R. I. Louis Redding 
is president. 
C Henr y Arthu r Callis has received a letter from the Civi l Service Commission offering him an appointment as interne i n 
the Psychopathic Department of the Cook 
County Hospital. Mr . Callis writes: "This 
is a new opportunity i n the medical profession i n Chicago for Negroes and I regret that I am unable to accept the appointment at this time. I have agreed already to begin service i n the St. Louis, Mo. , 
Cit y Hospita l on Jul y 1. A t present I am 
employed by the State of Illinois as bacteriologist in the laboratory of the Chicago 
Department of Health. " 
C The colored 8th Regiment, Chicago, Ill., 
is to become a part of the Federalized Na ­
tional Guar d i n July . Otis B. Duncan , the 
Negro Colonel, wil l continue in command. 
C In an issue of the Morning News Journal, Lancaster, Pa. , there appears a photograph of Leli a Miller, a colored girl who is 
given recognition as a poet. 
G Mrs. Rose Snowden at Elmira , N . Y. , has 
been awarded $100 i n a theatre discrimina ­
tion case. 
C Relatives who contested the wil l of the 
late Maggi e Ross, of Winston-Salem, N . C , 
have lost their case; the estate of $100,000 
wil l be divided among Mitti e Bel l Houston, 
Robert B. Ross and Florenc e T. Houston, 
Negro servants. 
C Mrs. Adelaide Casely-Hayfor d and Miss 
Kathlee n Easmon , natives of West Africa , 
have addressed the Societe des Beaux Arts 
at the Waldorf-Astori a i n Ne w Yor k City . 
They have also spoken at the Civi c Club , 
the Churc h Club House of St. Thomas, the 
Women's Auxiliar y at Hol y Trinit y Churc h 
(Brooklyn), and at St. James Episcopa l 
Churc h in Uppe r Montclair, N . J. 
C The sum of $1,206,216.46 has been appropriated by the West Virgini a Legisla ­
ture for the creation and support durin g 
the next two fiscal years, beginning Jun e 1 
next, of Negro agencies and institutions— 
educational, eleemosynary and corrective. 
Of this amount, West Virgini a Collegiat e 
Institute receives for salaries, building s 
and current and other expenses, $455,-
272.46; Bluefield Colored Institute, $133,-
644; Storer College, a privat e school, $6,-
000; the hospita l for insane, $150,000 for 
buildings and land and $30,000 for current 
general expenses; industria l school for 
boys, $150,000 for buildings and land , and 
a simila r home for girls, $50,000; including insurance derived from the burnin g of 
the Colored Orphan's Home , that institution is to receive for rebuilding, $126,000; 
the tuberculosis sanitarium, $52,500; the 
deaf and blind school, $30,000. Othe r appropriations are : Burea u of Negr o Welfare and Statistics, 12,000; Supervisor 
of Negr o Schools, $5,400; Advisor y Coun ­
cil to the State Boar d of Education , $5,200. 
This gives West Virgini a 8 institutions for 
and under the management of Negroes. 
C Willia m H . Parker, at St. Louis, Mo. , 
has been appointed chief clerk i n the Unite d 
States Senate Document Room, being the 
first Negr o appointee. 
C The Louisville , Ky., Y . M . C. A. , has 
opened Camp Willia m Hunto n for colored TH E HORIZON 131 
boys. Th e site consists of 12 acres. Mr . 
C. L . Harris is the director. 
C I n the Louisian a Legislature , the race 
purit y bill , sponsored by the Louisian a 
League of Wome n Voters, has been defeated by a 68-58 vote. 
C Th e 15th Ne w Yor k colored Infantr y 
has paraded and received colors from Genera l Nelso n A . Miles. 
MEETINGS 
THE seventh annua l meeting of the New 
Jersey Organizatio n of Teachers of 
Colored Childre n has been held in Atlanti c 
City . Mr . W . R. Valentine , of Bordentown, 
N . J. , is president. 
(I The Kentuck y Negr o Educationa l Association enrolled 1,005 teachers i n its session 
held at Louisville . This represents 80% of 
the active teachers of the state. There 
were 950 teachers In actua l attendance, 
makin g this perhaps the largest gathering 
of Negr o teachers. 
C A n Epwort h League and Sunday School 
Institute wil l be conducted by the Washing ­
ton and Delawar e Conferences at Morga n 
College, August 22 to 28. 
(I The Alabam a Teachers' Associatio n has 
held a 3-day meeting at Montgomery , celebratin g its 40th annua l session. Amon g 
those to deliver addresses were Mayo r W . 
A . Gunter, Jr. Mr . C. J. Callowa y of Tuskegee Institut e is president. 
C The Nationa l Medica l Associatio n wil l 
meet in Louisville , Ky. , August 23 to 26, 
in its 23rd annua l session. 
C The America n Technica l Association is 
enrollin g Negr o architects, chemists, civil , 
electrical, mechanica l and minin g engineers 
and other technica l specialists. The first 
convention wil l be held August 16 and 17, 
at the Carlto n Avenu e Branc h of the Y . M . 
C. A. , i n Brooklyn , N . Y . Mr . Darnle y 
Howar d is secretary. 
C Hampto n Institut e wil l hold a 6-weeks 
summe r school fo r teachers, beginning June 
20. Ther e wil l be 37 instructors who wil l 
give 52 courses. 
C Th e America n Woodmen wil l convene in 
its fifth quadrennia l session, August 8-13, 
at Denver, Colo. Ther e wil l be a delegation of several thousand. The order has a 
membership of over 80,000 in 23 States. 
INDUSTRY 
A T Kansa s City , Kan. , Home r Roberts 
has opened an automobile salesroom. 
Fo r a number of years Mr . Roberts has 
sold from 50 to 200 automobiles a year to 
Negroes in Kansas. Durin g the wa r he 
served as a first lieutenant i n the Negro 
Signa l Battalion . 
G A branch of the Nationa l Thrift Associa ­
tion, known as the Dixwel l Avenue Chapter, 
has been organized among Negroes at New 
Haven , Conn., for the purpose of improvin g 
their financial status. Mr . J. V . Keese is 
president. 
C The Huskerson Construction Company 
is a Negro enterprise at Washingto n D . C. 
Mr . Huskerson, a graduate of the Engineerin g School of Howar d University , has spent 
four years in the Cana l Zone and the Republic of Panama . Mr . S. Z. C. Westerfield, 
a graduate of the Universit y of Nebraska , 
has had charge of the installation of large 
power plants in various plarts of the Unite d 
States. 
C Durin g the yea r 1920, the Nort h Carolin a Mutua l Lif e Insurance Company collected $1,605,087 and paid $534,764 in 
claims; it increased its insurance in force 
by $10,000,000, makin g a total of $36,-
102,873; it loaned $250,000 to Negroes on 
mortgages. The company operates i n ten 
states and is erecting a seven-story fireproof office buildin g at Durham. 
Q In Chicago, Ill., the Progressive Company is conducting a drive for $250,000— 
wit h a millio n dollars as the ultimat e end— 
for the establishment of a Negro department store. Messrs. C. H . Turne r and W . 
E . Bryan t are president land treasurer, 
respectively. 
O A t Asheville , N . C , Mr . E . W . Pearson 
has a rea l estate business capitalized at 
$50,000; its assets are $45,000. Mr . F . S. 
Campbell owns a grocery business valued 
at $40,000; he employs three clerks, a cashier land two delivery boys. 
G Professiona l and business men of Wea -
vervill e and Asheville , N . C , are planning 
to organize the People's Exchange Bank , 
wit h a capita l of $50,000. This wil l be the 
first Negr o bank i n this vicinity . 
CRIME 
LOONI E EATON—th e Negro whom the 
" sheriff of Ouachit a Parish , La. , "forgot " to hang—has been given a life sentence 132 TH E CRISIS 
in the penitentiary. His crime was murder. 
C Forme r Governor Catts, of Florida , has 
been indicted for peonage. Afte r obtaining 
pardons for two Negr o convicts, he forced 
them to work on one of his farms. 
G The followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: Huntsville , Tenn., 
Ma y 7, Berr y Boilin g (white), murder; 
Stark, Fla. , Ma y 8, Sam Ballinger; murder. 
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGU E 
IN Kansa s City , Mo. , F . T. Lane , Execu ­
tive Secretary, has made an industria l 
and housing survey for the Missouri Negr o 
Industria l and Educationa l Commission ; he 
is now investigating State eleemosynary 
institutions to be reported on at the Missouri State Conference of Socia l Wor k i n 
November. 
(I The Milwauke e Urba n League, i n connection with a child welfare clinic , conducted a Bab y Contest i n which more than 100 
colored children were entered. A Healt h 
Department expert presided at the daily examinations of the contestants. 
(I In conjunction wit h its Annua l Healt h 
Campaign , the Ne w Yor k Urba n League 
introduced a prize health essay competition 
among the school children of the Harlem 
district. Mor e than 2,000 essays were submitted and six prizes awarded. 
C Less than a yea r ago the Ne w Yor k 
League placed 10 colored workers wit h 
Rosenwasser Brothers, shoe manufacturers, 
in Lon g Island City . In May , 83 colored 
workers were employed there, many receiving $45 per week. 
(I In Boston, durin g the recent Cit y Cleanup Campaign , at the request of the Municipal Committee, Matthew W . Bullock, the 
Executive Secretary of the League, served 
as one of the Distric t Chairme n for the city. 
The feature of the work i n his distric t was 
the fine co-operation he received from the 
ministers and all social welfare organiza ­
tions. 
(I The St. John's Institutiona l Activitie s of 
Springfield, Mass., Dr. Willia m N . DeBerry, Director, is specializing this summer i n 
scientific poultry culture and campin g for 
boys and girls on its recently acquired farm. 
G One of the objectives of the Philadelphi a 
Armstron g Association, affiliated wit h the 
League, was attained through the recent appointment of Miss A . L . Richardso n as Visitin g Teacher and Attendanc e Officer i n the 
public schools of Philadelphia . 
O The Atlant a Urba n League reports the 
formation of a Bankin g Scout Organizatio n 
composed of students i n the public schools. 
The program requires a cashier from a local 
colored bank to visit the schools one day 
each week to receive deposits on accounts 
carried by these children. A bank-book is 
the requisite for membership. Upward s of 
500 boys and girls are already members of 
this organization. 
C The Urba n League of Newark , N . J. , has 
been instrumenta l in opening a factory employin g women in the needle trades in which 
all the workers are colored. 
C George W . Buckner, Executiv e Secretary 
of the St. Louis Urba n League , is Chairma n 
of the Committee on Negr o Problems of the 
Missouri State Conference on Socia l Wor k 
which met in Kansa s Cit y on Ma y 12 and 
adopted for the State Conference i n November the most comprehensive program the 
conference has yet presented on the problems of the Negro. The office of the 
League was used as headquarters for the 
St. Louis Healt h Campaig n durin g which 
40,000 people were reached and 50,000 
pieces of literatur e distributed. 
C The Neighborhood Department of the 
St. Louis Urba n League has successfully promoted four neighborhood centers this year. 
Over 1,000 finished articles were made. Si x 
hundred attended the closing exercises i n 
one of the centers. 
C In order that justice may be done unemployed Negr o workingme n of Louisville , 
Ky. , who are often arrested through error 
as vagrants, arrangements have been made 
wit h the Chie f of Police by Elme r A . Carter, 
Executiv e Secretary of the League i n Louisville , to refer all such cases where doubt 
exists to the League for investigation and 
report. 
G Throug h the wil l of Mrs. Sara h E . Kro -
lik, the Urba n League of Detroit was left 
$1,000 to be used i n prosecuting its work. 
G Mrs. Edwi n F . Horn e as a representative 
of the Bi g Sisters of the Brookly n Urba n 
League has been elected a member of the 
Boar d of Directors of the Bi g Brothe r and 
Bi g Sister Internationa l Federation . She is 
the only colored member on this Board . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 133 
ON TO WASHINGTON, D. C. 
The Superintendent of insurance of the District of Columbia, 
after a satisfactory investigation of 
our contracts and business, has 
granted the Society license to do an 
Industrial Sick Benefit Insurance 
Business in the District of Columbia. 
We therefore announce the opening of our Washington (D. C.) District Office on Monday, June 6, 
1921. 
The Washington District Office 
will occupy the Specially Designed 
Office Suite No. 300, 3rd floor front, 
in the Society's own Modern Four 
Story and Basement Building, N. W . 
Corner of 7th and T Sts., Washington, D. C. 
We invite our members, friends and the general public to call on us 
when visiting the Capitol City of the Nation. 
The Acorn of 1893 is now the Spreading Oak of Protection of 1921. 
SOUTHER N AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N . Second Street RICHMOND , VA . 
OFFICER S AN D BOAR D 
Jas. T. Carter, President and General 
Counsel. 
Edw . Stewart, Vice-President. 
B. A . Cephas. Vice-President. 
A. Washington. Vice-President. 
W. E. Baker, Treasurer. 
B. L Jordan, Secretary. 
W. A . Jordan, Assistant Secretary. 
C. N . Jackson. 
W. E. Randolph. 
A . D. Price, Jr. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. ON E LES S SLINKIN G COWARDL Y SUBMARINE . A CENTE R SHO T B Y COLORE D GUNNER S O N BOAR D A N AMERICA N DESTROYER . 
The Negro in the WorldjWar 
By KELL Y MILLE R 
This new and complete history is now ready, it tells of 375 .00 0 Colored Soldiers who bravely served in the Army and Navy and helped to 
carry "OL D GLORY " to a new victory. 
It shows—in story and picture—how the men 
and women of the Negro Race have proven 
themselves well worthy of the important positions thev now occupv in AMERICA N 
CITIZENSHI P and furthermore proves that 
there was not an ounce of patriotism lacking 
when the CAL L T O TH E COLOR S was 
sounded for them to join in defending their 
country in TH E GREATES T WORL D 
BATTL E FO R FREEDO M AN D DEMOC ­
RACY . 
The Greatest Tribute to the Loyalty and Patriotism of the GREA T NEGRO RACE. The first and 
only Historical Volume specially prepared and published strictly in the interests of the NEGRO— 
FOR TH E NEGRO—BY TH E NEGRO. Every 
chapter teems with the very matter that THE 
COLORED FOLK HAV E BEE N ANXIOUSLY 
AWAITING TO KNOW. 
Thi s Grea t Boo k Tell s Al l Abou t The Negr o Every ­
where in the Worl d War-Ho w H e Di d Hi s Dut y 
In Ever y Capacity—From Right Up in the Front Line Trenches 
and on the Battlefields—Clear Back to the Work of Keeping the 
Home Fires Burning: On the Farms: In the Mills and Munition 
Plants; On the Railroads and Steamships; In the Ship Yards and 
Factories. Men and Women with the RE D CROSS , the Y . M . 
C. A., the Y. W. C. A., the War Camp Community Service, the 
Liberty Loan Drives, etc., etc. 
AGENTS WANTE D 
YOU can make $4 to $26 per day 
just now selling Kelly Miller's Authentic History. Be first In your territory and pet the orders. You 
can make money because it is easy to sell. ANY BOOK BY KELL Y 
MILLER will sell. This book gives the most reliable information. 
Sell the book that gives satisfaction. 
700 PAGES—price only $2.60. We pay yon highest commission. 
Thousands of these books are being sold, students, ministers, teachers everywhere are getting busy. Agents prospectus to canvas with 
will be mailed to you for only 30 cents (stamps) ; it is a fine outfit, you will be pleased; order today. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO. 
'BOO K AN D BIBL E PUBLISHERS ) 
Send for Catalog of 160 Books No. 521 9th Street, Washington. D. C. 
The 
Crisis 
Advertiser TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 135 
AUSTI N N . JENKINS . GEN'L MANAGER 
OSCA R KELLER . SECRETAR Y 
EDWAR D S. GREEN 
IF FUTURE REFERENCE TO THIS SUBJECT IS NECESSARY. WRITING YOUR REPLY 
OH THE BACK OF THIS LETTER WILL ENABLE US TO GIVE 
IT ESPECIALLY PROMPT ATTENTION 
AUSTI N JENKIN S COMPAN Y 
SUBSCRIPTIO N BOO K PUBLISHER S 
ESTABLIS H 
IN 18?1 
POPULA R AN D FAST-SELLIN G BOOK S 
OU R SPECIALT Y 
OVE R $50,000.0 0 CAPITA L INVESTE D IN 
TH E MANUFACTURIN G O F 
BOOKS 
WARDE R BUILDIN G 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 
IIB1 E STORIE S AM D 
BIBL E HISTORIi , 
PROMP T 
N O PROPE R ATTEM I 
Dear Friend; -
Are you energeti c and enterprising,intereste d i n the 
development of the Colored people,thei r progress i n business 
and education, are you intereste d i n seeing members of the raoe 
buy and read good books and become self-educate d and enterpris ­
ing citizens ? 
Are you,yoursel f possessed wit h al l the means you 
desire,o r are you a person who can very wel l use at leas t £51.00 
more per day? 
Have you give n the "Raoe Problem" any thought? Are 
you "a thinker" ? This lette r to you i s fo r the purpose o f MAKING 
YOU THINK. Al l over thi s great country of ours,here and there on 
every corner,Colored people are establishin g themselves i n 
business. In many towns and counties we have perminent representatives ; -men and women who have i n many cases begun i n a smal l 
way by sellin g a few books at odd times, and graduall y increased 
thei r business . They have hire d additiona l assistan t agents from 
time to time unti l they have buil t up a business givin g them an 
income o f severa l thousand dollar s per year. 
Perhaps you have never give n the book business any 
particula r thought or attentio n and have not been aware of the 
fac t tha t i t offer s YOU an opportunity to do some constructiv e 
educationa l work. We want as our representatives,th e best,the 
most loya l energetic persons. 
Our principa l publication s are speoia l books fo r 
Colored people. Agents als o sel l a ful l lin e o f bible s and religiou s 
books. In your county there are a great many people who have been 
waitin g fo r a lat e and up-to-date histor y of THE WORLD WAR. 
Wil l you not send fo r the outfi t and our catalo g and begin work at 
onoe? 
Awaiting wit h interes t your earl y repl y we are, 
Yours very truly , 
ANJ/k AUSTIN JENKINS CO . 
Twenty years ago Colored people bought books from white agents at 
fabulous prices ; today i t i s different." A word to the wise i s sufficent. " 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 136 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Hampto n Institute 
Agricultura l Schoo l 
HAMPTON , VIRGINI A 
Opportunit y Knock s at th e Doo r 
of th e Ma n Wh o Know s 
an d Ca n D o 
If you wish to prepare yourself to fill a 
responsible position of wide 
usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teache r of vocationa l agricultur e 
Rural-schoo l principa l 
Hampton now offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEGIAT E COURS E 
Based on Four-Year Secondary Course 
With Work in Well-Equipped Classrooms, 
Shops, and Laboratories; With Summer 
Field Practice; With All-Round Training 
Under High-Grade Instructors. 
James E . Gregg, Principal, 
Warren K. Blodgett, Director 
Morga n College s an d Branche s 
John O. Spencer, Ph.D. , President 
Le e M . McCoy , Litt.D. , Dea n 
Morga n College , Baltimore , Md . 
Location:— In great college town between north and 
south. 
Policy:— Co-educational. 
Courses:— Fou r years, appropriate degrees. Prepa ­
ration for professional study. Advance d 
education. Graduate s certified for elementary an d high school teaching. Col ­
lege extension courses in city. 
SUMME R SCHOO L FO R TEACHER S 
July 5th—August 12th 
Faculty:— College an d university trained men an d 
women. 
Kite:— Eighty-five acres of most beautiful 
scenery, stream, hil l and forest. Athletic fields. Fraternit y house. 
Terms : — Ver y reasonable. 
Information.—Address the Registrar. Morga n College . 
Baltimore . Md . 
Morga n Academy , Baltimore , Md . 
Location:— In the suburbs of Baltimor e on a beautiful campus. Healthfu l surroundings. 
Dormitories:—Equippe d and supervised. Ca n care for 
100 boarders and 100 day students. 
Athleti c an d physical education. 
Terms: — Ver y moderate. 
Principal — John W . Haywood . A.M. . R .T .B . 
Princes s Ann e Academy , Princes s Anne , Md . 
(Eastern Branc h University of Maryland ) 
Location:— Somerset County, famous Eastern Shore 
of Maryland . 
Courses:— Preparatory, normal , agricultural. Industrial, domestic, music . 
Terms: — Fre e tuition : other expenses moderate. 
Principal: — Thoma s H . Kiah . Ped.D . 
Information:—Address the Principal . 
Al l Schools Open September 26, 1921. 
Dormitories Open Sept. 24th. 
Educate Your Gir l at 
The National Training 
School for 
Women and Girls 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, D. C. 
Among the best schools for women and 
girls in the United States. 
The School that develops CHARACTER and PERSONALITY. We fill 
our students with a burning desire to 
go out into the world and make not 
only a LIVING but a LIFE. 
COURSE S 
6th, 7th and 8th Grades, Normal Preparatory 
and Normal, Music, Business, Domestic 
Science and Arts 
Social Service 
Beauty Culture Physloal Culture 
Ideal Location High Grade Teachers 
Thorough Training 
SEND FOR CATALOG 
Nanni e H . Burroughs , President 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a 6rst-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25 ; enrollment, 350 ; 
boarders, 220 . Cottage and buildings, 34. 
School farm, 1,129 1/2 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
33 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T.S.. INBORDEN , Principal, BRICKS , N. C. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, O. 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated i n publi c an d secondar y schoo l 
libraries as a n introduction to the study o f America n 
History from the America n Negro viewpoint. 284 pares . 
32 chapters. 17 ful l pag e illustrations. Index sn d 
bibliography other features. Tric e $2.00 ; sent o n receip t 
of net price. Orde r through any bookseller : C . O . D . o r 
postage remittance. Fo r furthe r information addres s th e 
author. 
JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swan n St . Washington . D . C . 
Mention TH E Caisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 137 
STORAGE BATTERY REPAIRING 
has been added to the Course in 
AUTO MECHANICS 
At The Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College 
which has turned out more 
ENGINE REPAIRMEN, TRACTOR OPERATORS, CHAUFFEURS, 
MECHANICS & AUTO ELECTRICIANS and VULCANIZERS 
than any other Automobile School for Negroes 
ADDRES S : Division of Mechani c Arts , Prairi e View, Tex . 
JUNE 27th SUMMER SESSION ENROLL NOW! 
DERRICK BUSINESS SCHOOL 
Derrick Bldg. - 1514 PINE STREET 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
SHORTHAND, TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
Dormitories - $2.50 per week 
SAVE TIME AND MONEY BOYD'S 30-DAY SYSTEM 
ML J . Derrick, Principal and Manager 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(RICHMOND , VA.) 
offers young men an excellent opportunity to secure a 
good College or Theological education at moderate 
cost. 
Special Pre-Medieal courses are offered for those 
who plan to enter a medical college. 
Information cheerfully furnished. Write to the 
President. 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
Richmond, Va. 
A superior school for the separate education 
of young women. 
College, Academic . Junio r and Musi c 
Departments. 
Send for catalog to the President. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
OPPORTUNITY 
Helpfulness Our Object Efficiency Our Aim 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING AND 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
1926-30 S. COLLEGE AVE., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Principall y a Trade School 
Fal l Ter m Opening Tuesday, October 4, 1921 
Day and Nigh t Classes 
Introduction Day Commercia l Course 
VISITORS WELCOM E WRITE NOW 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , 
Principa l and Founde r 
COSMOPOLITAN SCHOOL of CHIROPRACTIC 
Formerly NEW YORK SCHOOL OF CHIROPRACTIC 
NE W YORK , N . Y . 
A recognized Institution for Chiropractic 'KI-RO-PRAZ-TIK) training offering a strictly 
residential course leading to degree of D. C. (Doctor of Chiropractic). 
Chiropractic, the world's foremost drugless healing science, is daily increasing in popularity because of the astounding result, obtained In almost every human ailment. An unsurpassed opportunity is offered young men and women ofcharacter and ability. 
The school is well located and well equipped. The faculty is made up of men well knows 
and recognized in the profession at capable practitioner* and teachers. 
WHITE FOR PROSPECTUS 
DR. J . FREEMA N OTT O GERTRUD E MILLER-FAID E 
Registrar Secretary 
240 W . 138th STREET , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention the Crisis 138 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS , VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. 
The only school of its kind In historic Northern 
Virginia. 
State standard Four-Year High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade 
Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepares boys and girls to 
become useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
EDWARD D. HOWE, Principal 
THE STENOGRAPHERS INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th St. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Our Business Course includes a thorough training 
in the craftsmanship and practicality of Ben Pitman 
Shorthand, Building and Loa n and Real Estate. 
Two months' Theory Course in Business (for teachers) 
starts July 5 and ends August 31 
Edwar d T. Duncan, President 
STUDENTS! PUBLIC SPEAKERS! 
Literary Criticism and Revision for Writers and Speakers. 
We also assist in the writing of material for Special Articles, 
Manuscripts, Theses, Sermons, Essays, Orations and One Act 
Plays. These are expertly prepared (typewritten) papers. 
Proficient, scholarly service. 
Address: John A. Martin, Secretary, 
2220 Sixth St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
SOCIETY PRINTING 
Best qualities and most fashionable styles. Our 
line includes Calling Cards, Business Cards, 
Mourning Cards, Wedding and Party Invitations, Sympathy Acknowledgment Cards, Monocrammed Stationery, etc. Agents wanted. Good 
pay. Bi g demand everywhere. Al l orders filled 
promptly and sent prepaid. Write for samples 
and terms. 
Th e Hous e o f Chownlng , Indianapolis , Ind . 
HOW TO LIVE TODAY 
In order to keep healthy, and how to avoid 
the healing swindlers of all sorts—that is 
what you learn through RATIONA L LIVING , 
the radical independent health magazine, 61 
Hamilto n Place , New York . Edito r B . Liber . 
M.D. , D.P.H. , 40 cents a copy, Tria l subscription 3 copies, $1.10. No free sample 
copies. Sold in important book stores in 
U . S. and Canada. 
Dr . Liber's book on the bringing up of 
children, "TH E CHIL D AN D TH E HOME, " 
$2.50. Advanc e subscription, $2.00. The book 
together with yearly subscription to Rationa l 
Living , $5.00, instead of $6.50, 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY, N. J. 
Comfort and Elegance Without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in the 
Heart of the Most Beautiful Seashore 
Resort in the World, 
is replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, garage, bath houses, 
tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. Sanitarium added with Dr . C A . 
Lewis of the University of Penn. in attendance. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y " ATLANTA , GA . 
BOOKS-BOOK S -BOOK S 
The Emperor Jones with Charles 
Gilpin $2.oo 
The play that stormed Broadway 
and shook the theatrical world. 
Book just published, by mail 2.10 
Poems and Letters of Phillis Wheatley first Pub. 1773 introduction by 
A. A. Schomberg 3.00 
The Haitian Revolution — T. G. 
Steward 1.50 
Native Life in South Africa—Plaatje 2.50 
The Aftermath of Slavery—Sinclair 2x0 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
135 West 135th St. , Ne w York . N . Y . 
Books by Colored Authors a specialty 
BERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATIO N 
FINANCIER S 
"Investments of the Better Kind" 
INVESTMENTS SECURITIES 
Branches in Principal Cities 
Hom e Office 413 Sout h Broa d St. Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 139 
STARTLING NEW OFFER 
O F 
ORCHARDVILLE LOTS 
AT $29.50 EAC H 
PAYABLE AT $3.00 DOWN AND $1.50 A MONTH 
THES E LOT S AR E EXACTL Y TH E SAM E KIN D 
AN D IN TH E SAM E LOCALIT Y A S THOS E W E 
SOL D UNDE R TH E DEVELOPMEN T PLA N A T 
$56.00 EACH , TH E OFFE R O F WHIC H HA S 
ME T WIT H GREA T SUCCESS . 
The lots are size 30 x 144 feet, and have plenty of room for a garden, chicken yard, 
shed, etc., besides a few fruit trees which can be planted later on. Each lot is sold 
under a MONE Y BAC K GUARANTE E to prove to you that everything is as 
described in our advertising matter. TITL E to the property is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEA R and is conveyed by Warranty deed. 
This offer must be taken advantage of QUICKL Y because only a LIMITE D NUM ­
BER of these lots will be sold at this price, and the demand is sure to be VER Y 
GREAT ! Many of those who purchased Orchardville bits under our development 
agreement will want some of these lots also, and with a large list of lot owners 
all ready to start with, you can see how important it is to act WITHOU T DELAY . 
Space here is too limited to give you all the details of this offer, but if you want 
to know all about it, simply write your name and address on the coupon below and 
mail it to us RIGH T AWAY . We will then send you a circular containing all 
the particulars regarding the proposition, location, etc.. without any obligation on 
your part. 
DON'T WAIT BUT SEND FOR IT TODAY-RIGHT NOW! 
Address : 
ARENS0N REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
19 S. La Sall e Street CHICAGO , ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSO N REALT Y DE V P T CORP . 
CHICAGO , ILL . 
Date 192 
Gentlemen: — 
I would like to receive all the details regarding your new lot offer, without any obligation on my part. 
Nam e 
Address Town and State 
CRI—New Offer—7-21 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 140 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
Are Made by 
The Only Phonograph Company in the World 
Owned and Operated by Colored People 
REVELL A E. HUGHES 
The most beautiful Lyric Soprano of the race 
C. CARROL L CLAR K 
Premier Baritone Soloist of the race 
Exclusive Black Swan Artists 
ALBERT A HUNTE R ETHE L WATER S CREAME R & LAYTO N 
KATI E CRIPPEN EDDIE GRA Y JUA N HARRISON 
The only records made using exclusively Colored 
Singers and Musicians 
Buy from Your Dealer or Order Direct from 
Pace Phonograph Corp., 257 W. 138th St., NewYork, N.Y. 
Agents Who Will Work Wanted in Every Community. Liberal Commissions. 
ft 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 141 
BRAZIL 
D O YO U WAN T 
LIBERTY AND WEALTH 
IN A LAND OF PLENTY? 
UNLIMITE D OPPORTUNIT Y AN D 
EQUALITY ? 
Then Buy 
Land in Brazil 
South America 
Kindl y Send 25c in Stamps for Ou r 
Booklet 
BRAZILIA N AMERICA N 
COLONIZATIO N SYNDICAT E 
American Office 3539 1/2 South State Street, 
Chicago, Ill. 
MISS 
MADELINE 
ALLISON 
Shopper 
Fro m Fireco, W . Va . 
I
RECEIVE D the iron O.K . and like it fine. 
Wil l add furthe r tha t you made an unusual selection in picking an automati c iron— 
one that when it gets too hot disconnects. 
The very thing for m y wife , and you can 
imagine what happened the very first time 
she used it. 
Wil l let you hea r fro m me when i n need 
of anything . 
B. W . Wilson . 
Fro m Willowvale , South Africa . 
Wil l you kindl y send me at once a pai r of 
brown boots (size 8) which will not cost 
more than 30/ (thirt y shillings) sterling? 
Dube H . Bulube . 
Address : Room 622 
70 FIFTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
(Refers by permission to the Editor of the "Crisis.") 
BE A LAND OWNER! 
Enjo y that proud, self-satisfied and independent feeling that comes with the ownership 
of a fine country estate. Invest your savings where they will be safe and where 
they can some day earn you maximu m returns. Ge t away from the turmoil of the 
city, the lay-offs, strikes, congestion, high 
cost of living, etc. If you act QUICKL Y you 
can secure a Woodvill e country estate consisting of 10, 20 or 40 acres in a fine location in Michigan , on very easy terms, 
FOR ONLY $32.50 PER ACRE 
FRE E TOW N LO T with each 10 acre tract, 
also a SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUN T 
to those who act A T ONCE . Th e trac t is 
well located, RIGH T O N A RAILROAD , with 
the station right there. Th e land is high 
and dry and sold under a MONE Y BAC K 
GUARANTEE . The TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . Send for our BEAUTIFU L BOOK ­
LE T and get all the details of this offer 
without any obligaton to you. It contains 
a great many good views of the property, 
as well as interesting information. Simply, 
ask for a WOODVILL E booklet and mention 
the Crisis. Writ e your name and address 
plainly. SEN D FO R YOU R COP Y TODA Y 
because the tracts are going FAST . Address 
ARENS0N REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Salle St Chicago, III. 
HOMES 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L . S REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA, N. Y. CITY 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 142 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. He r singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORG E LACY , Manager , 
156 Hamilto n Avenue Columbus, Ohio 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduat e of Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Organist Director of Musi c of St. Marks M . E . 
Church ; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice , 
Theory Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system, 
Studio: 25 0 W . 138th St., New York , N. Y . 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
Important to YOU 
An investment NOW in the young, growing 
colored moving picture business is the wisest 
financial step you can take. 
Writ e to 
FLORENTIN E FIL M MFG . CO. , INC. , 
"Producer s of Superior Rac e Pictures" 
903 Yo u St., N . W. . Washington, D. C. 
SHARPS $10.00, CASH OR TERMS. 
TH E BUREAU OF IMF0RMAT10N FOR 
COLORED GRADUATE NURSES 
Wil l help you get a better position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: 
Bureau of Information for Colored Graduat e 
Nurses 
317 W . 138th STREET . NE W YORK . N . Y . 
Mrs. T. S. Bell . Secretary 
IMPROVE YOURSELF ! 
HELP OTHERS ! 
Easy, pleasant dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusua l 
opportunity. Send 50c in 
stamps for membership, supplies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Too St. N . W.. Wash., D. C 
For the most valuable books 
dealing with the Negro Problem 
see the inside back cover. 
A MONE Y GETTE R because it is a CROW D GETTER 
Churchi and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment In one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE . 50. 
MISS NANNI E H. BURROUGHS , Author 
Lincoln Heights, Washington. D. C 
AGENT S EAR N $75.0 0 A WEE K 
Selling our Enlarged Photo Medallions. Photo Cuff Button, 
Photo Lockets, photo Watch 
Photo Breast Pins. 
PHOTO CLOCKS AND 
Life Size Por 
traits (16 x 20) 
We copy from 
any Photograph 
and Return Your 
Original Photo. 
Agents' Enlarged 
sampl e 50c. 
Negro Books. Pictures and Post 
Cards. Prompt Shipments. 1000 
Agents and Dealers Wanted. Free Catalog. Bethel Art 
Co.. 97 South St.. Jamaica. N. Y. 
A Beautiful Complexion 
Just a few minutes a day and you 
can have a beautiful complexion. 
Yvonne Lemon Massage Cream 
will work wonders with your skin, 
A wonderful bleaching cream for CJJ ^Hfc T 
sunburns. Keep- the skin smooth. » 
firm and youthful looking. Clears 
up muddy and sallow skins. Removes lines and wrinkles. Guaranteed harmless. It's 100% pure. 
Begi n toda y an d us e 
Lemon Massage Cream 
Note the wonderful improvement. You can have 
a complexion you'll be proud of. Price 50c a 
jar by mai l postpaid. Orde r today. 
Yvonne Charmante Face Powder 75c 
Yvonne Vanishing Cream 35c 
Yvonne Cleansing Cream 50c 
YVONN E LABORATORIES 
3011 Cottag e Grov e Ave. . Dept. B , Chicago , III. 
PU T OF F YOU R SUMME R VACATIO N AN D ATTEN D TH E 
TRAD E EXHIBI T AN D CONVOCATIO N OF CHIEF S 
MONROVIA, LIBERIA, DEC. 21st TO 31st, 1921 
Special excursion rates via 10.000 ton palatia l passenger line r makin g 
the tour to West Afric a rapid, reasonable, safe and convenient, 
including the following ports of call: 
TH E CANAR Y ISLANDS . DAKAR , FRENC H SENEGAL , 
TH E BERMUD A ISLANDS , FREETOWN , SIERR A LEONE . 
An d two weeks in 
MONROVIA, GRAND BASSA AND CAPE PALMAS, LIBERIA 
TH E MOS T NOVE L TRI P O F TH E AG E 
Returning January 17th, 1922 
701 S . 19th STRE : 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Sailing from Baltimore, December 3d, 1921 
AMERICAN-AFRICAN TOURIST CO., INC., 
MAJ . WILLIA M H . YORK . Bus. Mg r 
Mention TH E Crisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 143 
MADE to MEASUR E 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $12.45. 
WERE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
make you a suit for $12.45, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
save 50% on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save
 s
g to$|| 
This suit for $12.45 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let s tell 
you about them. We would rather you did 
not send us any money until we send our 
Big Sample Outfit FREE 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FREE our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dent. 612: CHICAGO 
Mention TH E CRISIS 144 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
OUR LATEST CATALOG WILL B E 
MAILED TO YOU UPON REQUEST 
We are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAIR GOODS who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME. BAUM, by the most skillful artists in the 
trade. 
Try Mme. Baum's Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made 
of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using 
them. 
We carry the largest selection of Hairdressers' Tools and Accessories. 
Mme. Baum's Bob 
gives the appearance of wearing the 
hair bobbed, but 
makes cutting unnecessary- Mad e 
of strictly Supreme 
Quality huma n 
hair, with natural 
wave*, sewed on 
Velve t Ribbon, 
fitted with three 
tuek Comb s to 
hold secure. l a 
all shades. Price, 
5.50. 
MME. BAUM'S 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE 
Our Factory is Located at 
80 FOURTH AVE. . NEW YORK, N. Y . 
When writing, mention this paper. 
WRITE FOR CATALOG 
Write 
For 
Catalog 
Agent s Wante d 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAS T INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG . CO. 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY , OKLAHOM A 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES , Pres. 
641 W. 3th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
WANTED WANTED 
Liv e Agents A t Once To Sell 
DUDLEY' S FAMOU S AUT O POLISH 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hardwood floors 
and hundreds of other things that have a varnished 
surface. Makes them look like new. Agents can 
make $50.00 to $75.00 per week selling Dudley's 
Polish to furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile stores, paint 
stores and grocery stores. Special Offer: For 90 days 
we will ship to all new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's Palish for $5.00. Take advantage of this 
special offer at once. 
DUDLEY MANUFACTURING CO. 
Formerl y 
DUDLE Y & PORTE R MFG . CO . 
and 
DUDLE Y LEATHE R & CHEMICA L WORKS , 
Bo x 642 
MUSKOGEE , OKLAHOM A 
TOUR S 
First annual series of delightful summer tours for 
colored people during July and August, from 
Washington, Baltimore , Philadelphi a 
to 
Buffalo, Niagar a Falls, Toronto, Windsor , Detroit 
and return. 
Travelers' Specialized Information Service, 
903 Yo u St,, N . W . Washington , D . C . 
Tel . 6417 For t Hil l Cable Address. Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTOINI T AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
14 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
that stirred the peoples of both continents. A Programme for Life. " Agents Wanted. 
Price 10c. Tr y the 6c. and 10c. stores. A . R. Gillesp.e, 2272 East 97th St., Cleveland. Ohio. 
"SOME DON'TS" i: I: i' i' 111 i r!: 111 i i" i: i. i n • i 11, i. i! 1111 • i, i: 11111 • i • i. i, i! 111. i • i, i. 111, L T. 11 ^ 111. i. i, I . I 1111:111 L 11 i 11. i • i. i L • 111 ' 111 ! 11 M i s 111 HI [: I E : I I i i I I I L : I L : I I ! I . I I I I I i • I I I • I . r m! I i I : I n1
1 J\ Selected Cist of Books 1 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
| HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.00 j 
| TH E HEART OF A WOMAN AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas g 
1 Johnson) 1.25 § 
| NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 | 
| TH E SOUL OF JOHN BROWN. (Stephen Graham) 3.00 | 
| A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 | 
§ SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 | 
1 A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 j 
1 TH E CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 | 
| HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Biawley) 2.00 E 
g TH E NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein) .. . .50 = 
| GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 2.25 _ 
| HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 | 
| AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 | 
§ M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 g 
I UNSUNG HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 | 
| TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 g 
1 JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 | 
1 NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 g 
j PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) .. 1.00 g 
| TH E VOICE OF THE NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 | 
| NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 3.00 | 
| TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 90 § 
B TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. | 
| Woodson) 2.00 | 
1 TH E NEGRO FACES AMERICA. (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 | 
| DARKWATER. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.25 | 
1 POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.50 | 
| AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.00 [ 
| BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.00 | 
| Address: TH E CRISIS, : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. | 
£=f111111, i - [. [ 11: i: L i. I, ri ^ : [' l' r 111.11T1111:11. • u' i: 11:1111111111:11 ];!! ] i;' i: I: J: t: I i t' t: r [ ~ i 11: ]: I: ]: I: i: I! 11 [ 111 [ 111111; t i I i 1111 (1111111 [ 11: i i i: i llllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllBeautiful 
white teeth 
A 
MADAM C. J . WALKER' S 
^ANTISEPTIC DENTAL CREAM ^> 
IS THE SECRET 
A delicious, 
effective germicide 
and mouth wash for 
Cleansing, Polishing and 
Preserving the teeth. 
of Agents and at Drug Stores. 
Mouth acids and a slimy film are the great contributions to decay. Your Dentist will tell you that 
it is not enough to merely clean the teeth 
and ordinary dentrifices will not preserve 
them from decay. Madam C. J.Wallcer's 
Antiseptic Dental Cream keeps the 
saliva alkaline, which counteracts acid-mouth, prevents 
slimy film, the formation of tarter and 
purifies the 
breath. 
MME. C. J. WALKER MFG. CO. 64 0 NORT H WES T STREE T 
INDIANAPOLIS.IND., U.S.A. 
Makers of Mme. C J. Walker's Wonderful Hair Grower. 