RACE S CONGRES S NUMBE R 
TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Tw o SEPTEMBER , 1911 Number Five 
CONCORDIA 
INTER.GENTES 
AC.POPULOS 
Design by 
Walter Crane 
TH E SEA L ΟF TH E RACES CONGRESS 
ONE DOLLAR A YEAR TE N CENTS A COPY TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored .races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of T H E 
CRISIS ; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $!, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss Mary W . Ovington, 
New York, 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Barnum , New York . 
Miss France s Blnscoer , New York . 
•Rev. \V . H . Brooks, New York . 
Prof. Joh n Dewey, New York . 
'Dr . Joh n Lovejoy Elliott, New York . 
"Mr . Thos. Ewing , Jr. , New York . 
"Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Hamilto n Holt. New York . 
Miss Mau d It. Ingersoll, New York . 
•Mrs . Florenc e Kelley , New York . 
•Mr . Pau l Kennaday , New York . 
•Mrs . F . R . Keyser . New York . 
Dr . Chas. Len/ , New York . 
Mr . Jaco b W . Mack . New York . 
•Mrs. M . D . Maclean , New York . 
•Mr . Joh n E . Milholland . New York . 
Rev. Horac e G . Miller , New York . 
Mrs. Ma x Morgenthau , Jr. . New York . 
Mr . Jame s F . Morton . Jr. . New York . 
Mr . Henr y Moskowitz , New York . 
Miss Leonor a O'Reilly , New York . 
• Rev. A . < lay ton Powell . New York . 
•Mr . Charle s Edwar d Russell, New York . 
Mr . Jacob H . Sehlff, New York . 
Prof. E . R. A . Seligman , New York . 
"Dr . Joseph Silverman . New York . 
Mrs. Ann a Garli n Spencer . New York . 
•Prof. J . E . Spingarn , New York . 
Mrs. Henr y Villard . New York . 
•Miss Lillia n D . Wald , New Yor k 
•Mr . Wm . Englis h Walling , New York . 
"Bishop Alexande r Walters. New York . 
Dr . Stephen S. Wise , New York . 
Miss M . It. Lyons, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
•Dr . 0 M . Waller , Brooklyn . N . Y . . 
Mr . D . Maco n Webster , Brooklyn , N Y . 
Mr . Geo. E . Wibecan . Jr. . Brooklyn . N . Y . 
Mrs. W . H . Talbert, Buffalo . N . Y . 
Hon . Thos. M . Osborne , Auburn , N . Y . 
•Mr . W . L . Bulkley . Ridgefleld Park , N . J . 
Mr . George W . Crawford , New Haven . Conn -
Miss Mari a Baldwin , Boston. Mass. 
Mr . Francis J . Garrison , Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke , Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat. Boston. Mass. 
"Mr . Alber t E . Pillsbury , Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Wm . Munro e Trotter , Boston, Mase . 
Dr . Horac e Rumstead , Brookline , Mass. 
Miss Flizabet h C . Carter , New Bedford , Mass. 
Rev. Harve y Johnston. Baltimore , Md , 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter , Baltimore , Md . 
Prest. Chas. T . Thwlng , Cleveland , O. 
Mr . Chas. VV. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O 
Hon . Harr y C . Smith . Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H . C . Kins . Oberlin . 0 . 
Prest. W . S. Scarborough, Wilberforce , O. 
•Miss Jane Addams. Chicago , 111. 
•Mrs . Ida B . Wells Barnett, Chicago . 111. 
•Dr . C . U. Bentley. Chicago . IU. 
Miss Sophroiusha Breckenridge , Chicago . 111. 
Mr . Cl a rence Darrow. Chicago , 111. 
Mr . Juliu s Rosen wald, Chicago , 111. 
Mrs. Celi a Parke r Woolley , Chicago , 111. 
Mr . F . L . McGhee . St. Paul . Minn . 
Miss France s Bartholomew, Philadelphia , Pa . 
•Dr . N . F . Mossell, Philadelphia , Pa . 
•Dr . Wm . A . Sinclair , Philadelphia . Pa . 
Miss Susa n Wharton , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . R . R. Wright. Jr. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . W . Justin Carter , Harrisburg , Pa . 
Rev. Harve y Johnson. D.D. , Baltimore , M d 
Hon . Wm . S. Bonnet, Washington , D C 
Mrs. Carri e W . Clifford . Washington , D . C . 
Mr . L . M . Hershaw, Washington , D . C . 
Prof. Kell y Miller , Washington , D . C . 
Prof. L . B. Moore , Washington , D . C . 
Justic e W . P . Stafford. Washington , D C 
"Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell , Washington , D . C 
•Rev . J . Milto n Waklron . Washington , D . C . 
Prest. Joh n Hope , Atlanta . Ga . 
Mr . Lesli e P . Hill . Manassas, Va . 
Mr . Willia m Pickens, Talladega , Ala . 
•Executiv e Committee . 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311. 20 Vesey Street, New York. TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , Editor [ OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
™?™t C ^™r t>D ' ,
 Ed "0 M . %SS^ \ CHA A RX LE B
S
A
lDW R AR D RUSSEL L FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Mmile r hditora ) W S BRAITHWAIT E 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advert..,,,, Manager ( KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FO R SEPTEMBER , 1911 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 183 
OPINION : 
The Coatesville Lynching 188 
Vardaman : 188 
A Symposium. 189 
Ruling the "Lesser Breeds" 190 
Iridescent Hues of the Rainbow 191 
The "Sacred" Calf 192 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE : 
Articles of Incorporation and By-laws 193 
Letters 194 
EDITORIA L 19S 
DELEGATE S T O TH E RACE S CONGRESS : Photograph 198 
TH E RACE S CONGRESS : 
What Was the Races Congress? 200 
The Object of the Congress 200 
The Program of the Congress 201 
The Men Who Were There 202 
Some of the Papers 202 
The Race Problems 207 
The Social Side 208 
Results of the Congress 209 
WOMEN' S CLUBS : State Conventions 210 
JOH N BROWN : Poem by Eugene F. Ware 212 
WHA T T O REA D 213 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter In the post office at New York City. 180 THE CRISIS 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENTS 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
part by the S.tate of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term begins September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH, President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N, 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36, WILBERFORCE , OHIO . 
Mention T 
ADVERTISER 
Wilberforce University 
WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Opens first Tuesday in September 
Located in Greene County, 3J4 miles from Xenia , 
Ohio. Healthful surroundings. Refined community. Faculty of 32 members. Expenses low. 
Classical and Scientific, Theological, Preparatory, 
Music , Military , Norma l and Business Departments. Te n industries taught. Great opportunities for Hig h School graduates entering College^ or 
Professional Courses. Tw o new buildings for girls 
to be erected this year—one now in process of 
erection, and the other to be begun in the spring. 
Catalogue and Special Information Furnished. 
Address 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , Prejident. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Sixty-five College Freshmen . 
A Ne w Department of Sociology . 
A Notabl e Equipmen t in Lan d and 
Buildings. 
Successful Graduates in Nearl y Ever y 
State. 
Endorse d by the Genera l Educatio n 
Board . 
Fo r information address 
GEORG E A. GATES , President. 
Uirginia Union University 
RICHMOND; VA. 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training , giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepar e a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness, 
GEORG E RIC E HOVE Y President 
E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 181 
Shaw University 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industrial departments tor both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal tn d 
preparatory departments. Ther e are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine, Pharmacy and Theology. 
Th e facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that will 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year in advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who apply. 
The present enrollment is over 500. 
The academic year begins on the Thursday 
nearest the first day of October and continue! for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. Th e chargea are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDEN T 
Shaw University, Raleigh, N . C 
Lincoln Institute 
JEFFERSON CITY, MISSOURI 
Founded by the Soldiers of the 62d and 66th 
Regiments of the IT. S. Colored Infantry. 
Supported by the State of Missouri. Ha a 
Normal, Collegiate, Agricultural , Mechanical and 
Industrial Courses. Building s and equipment 
unsurpassed. Thirt y teachers representing the 
best schools of the country. Students from all 
sections of the country. Fo r catalogue and further information address 
BENJAMI N FRANKLI N ALLEN , 
President. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Wor k 
Offers full courses i n the following departments: College, Normal, Hig h School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fal l Term Opens Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Atlanta lanttai (Mlwje 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Established 1867 
A School for Boys and Men 
' DEPARTMENTS : 
GRADE S FIN E EQUIPMEN T 
ACADEM Y STRON G FACULT Y 
COLLEG E DIVINIT Y SCHOO L 
Societies, Debatin g Clubs and Athletics. 
For further information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
Mention 
The National Training School 
Offers special training to young 
men and women as Settlement 
Workers, Association Secretaries, 
Missionaries, Literary and Other 
Branches. 
The following departments are now 
in successful operation: 
Commercial, Literary, Music, Theological 
Religious Training and Industrial 
FAL L TER M OPEN S OCTOBE R 12 
SUMMER SCHOOL. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua opened Jul y 5, 1911, and closes 
August 14. 
The attractions and advantages 
offered i n the Summer School are 
unsurpassed i n the country for colored young men and women. 
Applications should be sent i n at 
an early date. 
Loa n Scholarships have been established for deserving young men. 
and women. 
Fo r further information address 
The President, National Religious 
Training School, Durham, N. C. 
Morgan Colleve and Branches 
JOH N OAKLE Y SPENCER , Pb.D. , President 
COLLEG E AN D PREPARATOR Y SCHOO L 
Baltimore, Md . 
CHARLE S EDMUN D YOUNG , D.D. , Dean 
LOCATION—On e of the great educaUona l centers of the 
nation. 
COURSES—Collegiate , Classical, Latin , Scientific, Scien ­
tific leading to appropriate degrees. 
NORMAL—Fou r years, fltUng for teaching. 
PREPARATORY — Jj'ou r years, fltUng for college or pro ­
fessional schools. 
Musical , vocal or instrumental, includin g orchestral 
instruments If desired. Musica l courses special, or i n 
connection with scientific an d Uterary courses. 
FACULTY—Colleg e an d university-trained men and 
women exclusively. Seven colleges an d universities 
represented i n the faculty. 
TERMS—Ver y reasonable. Address the Dean . 
PRINCES S ANN E ACADEM Y 
(The Eastern Branc h of the Marylan d Agricultura l College) 
Princess Anne , Md . 
THOMA S H . KIAH , A.B. , Principa l 
COURSES—Normal , four years, specially fitting for 
country schools. Preparatory , four years, fltUng for 
college an d professional schools. Industrial, agricultural, 
theoreUcal and practical, horticulture , truck gardening, 
dairying an d stock breeding, blacksmithlng , wagon mak ­
ing, carpentry, cabine t mairing, printing , for young men. 
Domesti c science, housekeeping, sewing, dressmaking, 
ndlUner y an d home gardening, for young women. 
FACULTY—Speciall y selected men an d women direc t 
the departments. 
TERMS—N o tuition charges. Othe r fees reasonable. 
Address the Principal . 
TH E VIRGINI A COLLEGIAT E AN D 
INDUSTRIA L INSTITUT E 
Lynchburg , Va . 
FRAN K TRIGG , M.A. , Principa l 
COURSES—Normal , four years, specially fitting for 
teaching i n Virginia . Preparatory , fltUng. for advanced 
secondary work. Industrial, gardening, agriculture , cooking, sewing, both plai n an d fancy, basketry, dressmaking. 
TERMS—Moderate . Address the Principal . 
THES E SCHOOL S OPE N TUESDAY . SEPTEMBE R 
20th, 1811. 
TH E CRISIS . 182 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist MM E A . C. KELSEY , Oen' l Instr. 
TH E KELSE Y SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City. Branch: 75 W . 135th Street 
Persona l instruction given in the Ar t of Manicuring , Shampooing , Hai r Dressing , 
Beauty Culture , Chiropody , and the manufacturing of Huma n Hai r Goods. Send 
for booklet-directory of the recently graduated students. Courses from $10 to $65. 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L . A. de TOSCAN O CO . 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
Knights of Pythias, Knights Templars and Patriarchs; Equipments. Paraphernali a 
and Supplies for Al l Societies and Churches. Estimates Given. Badges, Jewels, 
Regalia , Banners, Flag s and College Emblems. 
146 WES T 31st STREE T 
Between Sixt h and Seventh Avenue s Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephone 3263 Harle m CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U ! 
12 WES T 135TH STREE T 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture, we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R SPECIALT Y 
Thi s Is 
TH E CRISIS 
Fe w peopl e se e yo u 
Many people see your letters 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Use Good Stationery 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Not the cheapest; but the 
best for the money charged 
= SPECIALT Y 
Wedding Invitations printed 
or engraved — correct style 
As k Edito r 
W . E . B. Du Bois 
by permissio n WRIT E O R 'PHON E T O 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printe r 
202 East 99th Street New York City 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CBISIS . Along the Color Line 
POLITICS . 
Disfranchised colored men in Anna ­
polis, Maryland , are again threatening to 
bring suits for irregularities in keeping 
them from voting at the last election. 
Q Montgomer y County, Alabama , has 
53,000 Negroes; less than 100 of these 
have been enfranchised under the new 
suffrage law. 
<I Cincinnatus LeCont e has been elected 
president of Hait i to succeed the deposed Simon. LeCont e is the eighteenth 
president since Toussaint L'Ouverture . 
fl Muc h merriment has been excited in 
the colored as well as in the white press 
by the suggestion of Representative 
Slade, of Georgia , that colored men 
should be allowed to vote on condition 
that two chaste women swear they woul d 
trust them in the dark. Mr . Slade means 
two chaste white women, but there is 
some difficulty in getting that into the 
bill in a direct manner. Man y questions 
arise, such as how dark it must be, who 
is to judge of the chastity of the ladies, 
whether the rule ought not to be applied 
to settle the woma n suffrage question 
also, substituting two chaste men as arbiters. Mr . Slade has been rather an 7 
noyed at the mirt h he has occasioned, 
but says his bill wil l pass. 
• ECONOMICS . 
A pottery company, wit h a capital of 
$10,000, to employ colored people, is to 
be started in Zanesville, Ohio . 
Q A movement lookin g toward migra ­
tion to Liberi a has been started amon g 
dissatisfied colored people in Oklahoma . 
<I Dr. Eugene E . Noble,, president of 
Gouches College , thinks the colored 
population of Baltimor e very badly 
housed. H e is reported as approving 
the West segregation ordinance, but he 
finds that it "does not meet the situation 
as completely as it might. " H e describes 
a tour of inspection through the alleys: 
"The filth that I found everywhere was 
appalling. Garbage and dead cats were 
visible, wit h nobody sufficiently interested to see that they were properly 
disposed of. But probably the worst 
part of what I saw was the smallness 
of the houses. Peopl e cannot live in 
such places without suffering unduly. 
This is due in a large part to houses in 
the front and rear of those I observed, 
causing a dearth of illumination and ventilation. Such conditions cannot be 
healthful, and a city ordinance should 
be passed to prohibit them and afford 
everyone a proper return for rent paid. 
Th e majority of persons livin g on these 
alleys are Negroes. Outbreaks of disease among them wil l naturally spread 
to their white neighbors. I wished I 
had a camera with me that I might have 
been able to preserve the sights I 
witnessed. 
"Th e segregation ordinance should be 
made to include the remova l of all 
Negroe s to restricted streets, not necessarily in one section of the city, but so 
that they wil l be assured of better housing and thus protect themselves and 
their neighbors from the spreau of disease. I realize full well that such a 
measure wil l meet wit h much opposition 
on the part of property owners, but it 
should be passed in some reasonable 
form. " 
<J Th e colored population of the followin g cities for 1910 has been published by 
the Census Bureau: Baltimore , 84,749; 
Richmond , 47,222; Chattanooga, 17,924; 
Memphis, 52,451; Nashville , 36,523. 
<1 Th e chief health officer of Richmond , 
Va. , is being widely quoted as the author 
of certain ridiculous predictions as to the 
dyin g out of the Negr o race. 
Q The Knights of Pythias of Tennessee 
report $40,000 worth of property on hand. 
<I Th e report from the Unite d States 
Census shows that in the nine cotton 
States 18.9 per cent, of the white people 
and 17.1 per cent, of the colored people 
lived in cities and towns in 1910. Th e 
colored people are increasing fast in 
cities and towns, but very slowly in the 
country districts. 
EDUCATION . 
Heretofore the practice has been in the 
Distric t of Columbi a to follow the general custom in Southern States in so jugglin g the accounts of school appropriations as to make it impossible to tell 
which were for white and which for colored schools. Th e serious cutting off of 
appropriations for colored schools has 
so aroused the Negroe s that they are 
promised their just proportion in the 
future. 184 THE CRISIS 
<J Th e fourth annual meeting of the Na ­
tional Associatio n of Colore d Teachers 
has been held in St. Louis, Mo . W . T. B. 
Williams, of Hampton , Va. , was elected 
president. Th e next session is to be at 
Chattanooga, Tenn . 
<I Th e Universit y of Pennsylvani a has 
conferred the degree of Docto r of Philosophy on R. R. Wright , Jr., editor of the 
Christian Recorder. Mr . Wrigh t is the 
second colored man to receive this degree from this institution. 
<I Mrs. E . A . Hackle y has been holdin g 
a summer voca l institute in Ne w Yor k 
with picked students from various parts 
of the Unite d States. Mrs. Hackle y is 
now on a tour to Canada, and wil l later 
open a series of free voca l classes for 
children in Chicago. 
<I Th e West Virgini a Seminary and Col ­
lege, a Baptist institution, is threatened 
with extinction on account of the with ­
drawa l of State and county aid. 
<J A new hospital has been given Tuske -
gee Institute. 
<I Th e second convention of the Na ­
tiona l Negr o Educationa l Associatio n has 
been held at Denver, Col . 
«J Miss D . C. Guin , of Ne w Bedford, 
has wo n a $200 scholarship at Radcliffe 
College. She was salutatorian of her 
class at the Ne w Bedford Hig h School, 
1909. 
•I Th e America n Interchurch College, 
with white teachers, has been established 
at Nashville , Tenn . It has a colored department for training religious and social 
workers. 
<I The Illinois Supreme Court is again 
considering the question of the rights 
of colored children in so-called white 
schools. Formerl y the court decided in 
favor of colored litigants, but the lower 
court repeatedly refused to obey the 
mandate. 
*J Th e fifteenth Hampto n Negr o Con ­
ference was held at Hampto n Institute 
Jul y 19 and 20. Resolutions dealing with 
the followin g topics were unanimously 
agreed upon: Influence of the Negr o 
church upon moral, educational and ma ­
terial welfare of rural communities; betterment of school grounds and buildings; 
ministers' institutes; co-operation of all 
organizations for race advancement; crusade against consumption; better preparations of Negr o school teachers, and 
the need of stimulating public interest in 
colored schools. 
TH E CHURCH . 
Th e Woma n Missionar y Boar d of the 
A . M . E . Churc h is holdin g its quadrennial meeting in Knoxville , Tenn . 
<J A n educational and missionary convention of the five colored conferences 
of the Methodist Episcopa l Churc h has 
met in St. Louis. Man y promiment 
speakers were present, includin g Dr. M . 
C. B. Maso n and Bisho p I. B. Scott. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
A committee of representatives from 
a number of leading colored and white 
organizations for social service has been 
systematically investigating conditions in 
St. Louis for more than a year. Th e report shows that ' colored people enjoy 
practically the same advantages in 
schools, libraries, parks and recreation 
enterprises as white persons, although of 
course there are separate schools. In 
several hospitals colored people are not 
received, it is reported, or if received, 
are not accorded the same treatment 
white people receive. Th e report continues: "Th e housing and sanitary conditions amon g colored people are very 
bad in some parts of the city, but probably no worse than amon g neighboring 
white people. It is interesting to note 
that the city has practically no problem 
of destitute or neglected colored children. . Ther e are none in the Industria l 
School, few in the Juvenile Court. " Th e 
problems of relief, too, "seem to be comparatively fewer and proportionately less 
than among white people." Th e report 
is encouraging, especially the spirit of 
co-operation in whic h it has been made. 
It points out, however, that "both educational and recreation activities and advantages for the colored people need 
greatly to be improved, particularly in 
the field of commercia l recreation, dance 
halls, theaters, etc." 
<I It has been proposed to the Boar d 
of Administrators of Charit y Hospital, 
Ne w Orleans, that an annex for colored 
patients be built. Th e matter is in charge 
of the house committee. Dr. J. A . Danna , 
house surgeon, reports that the buildin g 
to be adequate for the requirements 
woul d cost more than $35,000. H e reports, also, that leaders amon g the colored people have started a fund to aid 
in buildin g the annex. 
•I In the post office at Atlanta , Ga., it is 
said that three-fourths of the clerks and 
carriers are colored, and there are nearly 
100 colored clerks in the railway mail 
service wit h headquarters in Atlanta . 
<I Colore d people of Tennessee are offering to help the State support a colored 
reformatory, if one is established. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 
<J Th e Mayo r of Chattanooga has written 
the followin g letter to the Mayo r of 
Charlotte : 
"Dea r Sir: 1 am endeavoring to inaugurate a movem«nt lookin g to the pretection of the ignorant and innocent 
among the Negroe s arrested for trivia l 
offenses and often without cause. 
"I am also endeavoring to brin g about 
a movement lookin g to the better feeling among the races of this community. 
"Hav e either of these two propositions 
made any headway in your city? 
"An y information that yo u can give me 
in regard to this wil l be appreciated. 
"Yours very truly, 
"T . C. THOMPSON. " 
Q The Nationa l Negr o Business League 
met in Littl e Rock , Ark. , August 16 to 
20. Wit h the League met the Nationa l 
Negro Press Association , the Nationa l 
Bankers' Associatio n and the Nationa l 
Ba r Association. A n address of welcome 
was delivered by Governo r George W . 
Donaghey. 
<J Th e colored Od d Fellows of Georgi a 
are planning to erect a $100,000 building 
<J Mr . Harr y H . Pace was elected Gran d 
Exalted Rule r of the Elk s at their Boston meeting. Mr . Pace is cashier of the 
Citizens' Bank, Memphis, Tenn . 
•J A colored music festival held at At ­
lanta recently was very successful. Th e 
leading soprano was Mada m Anit a P. 
Brown , of Chicago. 
<J Th e Mosai c Templars' Gran d Lodg e 
has held a large meeting in Littl e Rock , 
Ark . Th e order is about to erect a fourstory buildin g as headquarters, at a cost 
of $40,000. 
q The Texa s State Federation of Col ­
ored Women's Clubs has met at Austin , 
Texas. The y are seeking to establish 
a colored reformatory, and a well-to-do 
colored man has offered five acres of 
land near Housto n for this purpose. 
CRIME . 
The record for the lynchin g and burning of colored men in 1911 bids fair to 
surpass the record of any recent year. 
Th e last horribl e affair took place in 
Coatesville, Pa.; a colored laborer while 
drunk fatally shot a night watchman. 
The man was pursued and attempted 
suicide. H e was brought wounded to 
town and placed in the hospital. Thenc e 
he was taken by a mob led by a policeman, dragged, chained to his cot, several 
miles, tortured and burned to death in 
the presence of a large concourse, including women . His bones and the chain 
with whic h he was bound were distributed as souvenirs. Coatesville is 
quite near to Philadelphia . 
A t the time of our goin g to press three 
arrests have been made. On e of the 
accused persons is a special policeman, 
thirty-five years old, in the employ of a 
traction company. Tw o are boys, one 
of them the nephew <5f a distinguished 
Philadelphi a physician. Th e chief burgess of Coatesville, in a letter to the 
Nationa l Association , published on another page, declares that the lynchers 
were mostly boys. Th e special investigator of the New Yor k Evenin g Post 
and the Nationa l Association , who went 
to Coatesville immediately after the 
crime, does not think that the real leaders were boys. 
"Othe r arrests are expected to-day," he 
writes on August 17, "but these first 
three cleared the atmosphere and served 
to show where the authorities stood and 
what progress they were making. Man y 
wil l criticize the district attorney for 
pickin g two boys'an d makin g scapegoats 
of them, while allowin g those wh o were 
really responsible for the lynchin g to 
escape free. But the county officers insist that the leaders of the mob were 
boys. It seems that if anybody made 
scapegoats of these boys it was* not the 
district attorney, but those wh o planned 
the outrage. Mostl y older men, they 
were evidently careful not to take any 
too active part in the actual seizing and 
burning of the Negro. The y contented 
themselves apparently wit h the more 
honorable task of acting as strategists 
of the expedition, and left the glor y of 
the actual wor k to the hot-blooded 
younge r men. 
"Tha t is wh y the authorities have 
found it easier to get evidence against 
the boys than against the rest. But the 
district attorney believes that it is only a 
matter of time and persistence before he 
can land the 'men higher up,' and he in -
A CARTOO N I N TH E NE W YOR K HERAL D 
185 186 THE CRISIS 
tends to prosecute to the full extent of 
the law all those arrested. O n the ground 
that the lynchin g was premeditated, he 
wil l urge the jury to return indictments 
for murde r in the first degree. If they 
should do this the men woul d be hanged. 
"If, as the district attorney contends, 
the leaders of the "mob were mostly boys, 
the police are open to still more blame 
than has already been put upon them. 
Fo r a slight show of firmness and determination to protect the Negr o prisoner 
might have deterred them. But it now 
appears that practically no effort was 
made by the police either to prevent the 
lynching, or to stop it when it was under 
way. N o 'mora l wave' has swept over 
the community. If the mass of the citizens felt any real repentance it woul d 
not be so difficult for the district attorney to collect evidence against the real 
leaders of the mob. Ther e were thousands of people in the mob, among them 
unquestionably some of the most prominent citizens." 
Governo r Cruce, of Oklahoma , has 
brought down on himself great indigna ­
tion by commutin g to life imprisonment 
the sentence of a youn g colored man 
named Prather wh o had murdered a 
white farmer. Prathe r pleaded guilty. 
H e was a wandering, friendless boy of 
seventeen, who shot the farmer after he 
had been drinking. Th e Governo r said, 
in the very manly letter announcing the 
commutation of the sentence, that only 
two persons had written to him asking 
mercy for the crimina l on the ground 
of his youth, one of these persons being 
an influential white man and the other 
a colored woman . Th e Governo r pointed 
out that of many murderers only one 
had been executed in Oklahoma City , and 
he had been a Negro . H e believed if 
the boy had been white he woul d have 
been deluged with petitions for his 
mercy, and since the law should show 
leniency to the weak rather than to the 
strong he felt it his duty to commute 
Prather's sentence, however much it 
might cost him politically. A storm of 
protest has come from many of the 
white papers. 
•I A respectable and prosperous colored 
man, wh o lived in one of the Georgi a 
cities, sold a piece of property, and it 
was supposed that he carried a considerable sum of money on his person. H e 
was the owner of a large automobile 
which he rented. Tw o white men engaged the automobile for a trip in the 
country and induced the owner—this colored man—to drive them on this trip to 
the country. His wife tried to dissuade 
him from going, but he went and never 
returned. O n a search a few days afterward a hamme r and a part of a man's 
skull were found, and later the man's 
body, wrapped in cloth, was found in a 
well. Furthe r search revealed the fact 
that the automobil e had been sold in a 
town one hundred miles away by strangers. Tw o white men have since been 
arrested on suspicion. 
<J A n attempt is being made to secure 
the release of Albert Thompson , of the 
Twenty-fifth Unite d States Infantry, wh o 
is serving a sentence of thirty years' 
imprisonment in California . H e was accused of assault on a white woman , but 
two successive juries refused to convict 
him on the evidence. H e was given his 
freedom, but as soon as he reported to 
the army he received a sentence by courtmartial. 
<J Withi n the past two years seventeen 
colored wome n have been murdered in 
Atlant a and not a single arrest has been 
made. 
<J Miss Grace Campbell has been appointed probation officer at the Crimina l 
Courts Building , Ne w Yor k City . 
<I Bo b Cole , the well-known colored 
comedian and composer, is dead. 
•I Charles H . Burrill , a colored printer 
and publisher, died at his home in 
Brooklyn . H e was born in Providenc e 
in 1843, and was a descendant. on one 
side from Patience Prophet, one of the 
Indian squaws wh o sold the Providenc e 
Plantations to Roge r Williams. A t the 
age of fifteen Burril l was apprenticed to 
A . Crawfor d Greene & Sons, printers, 
and remained wit h the firm for twentytwo years, becomin g assistant foreman. 
H e was later connected wit h the publication of various periodicals. A t one 
time he was a first lieutenant in the 
Rhode Island militia . 
SCIENCE . 
A n interesting controversy is goin g on 
in Englan d in regard to the declaration 
recently made by Dr. Frobenius, a German traveler, that he had discovered the 
site of the lost Atlantis, referred to by 
Plato in the "Timaeus. " 
In Ife. the sacred capital of the Yo -
ruba country in the Britis h colony of 
Southern Nigeria , Dr. Frobenius found 
a bronze head-and some other work s of 
art whic h he declared to be evidences 
of the lost civilization. Ther e has, by 
the way, been a dispute over the ownership of these objects, the doctor saying 
that he became legally possessed of 
them, whil e the Britis h Commissione r of 
the district has intervened, asserting that 
the objects are sacred and not to be 
touched. 
Dr. Frobenius' theory is discredited in 
an article by the president of the Society 
of Antiquaries. C. H . Read, in the 
Marc h issue of the Burlingto n Magazine . ALONG THE COLOR LINE 187 
Mr . Rea d speaks of the high possibilities 
of Negr o art, and points out that Nigeri a 
is ful l of monuments of vanished cults, 
remains being constantly unearthed of 
which the natives profess entire ignorance. 
Ife, where the bronze head was kept in 
a grove as an object of great reverence, 
under the guardianship of an old native 
priest, is a town ' of considerable importance in the locality. Th e On i of Ife 
is a kin d of Pope, wh o has the right of 
crownin g all the chiefs of the various 
Yorub a kingdoms, including the Kin g of 
Benin. It is therefore a very likel y spot 
in whic h to find art treasures of earlier, 
times. 
Wit h regard to the bronze head itself, 
Mr . Read points out that the headdress 
is peculiar, and that the upper part of 
the head above it is empty, as if a cavity 
had been left for the insertion of a cap 
of some other material. It is curious, 
he adds, that there is in the Britis h Mu ­
seum a cast of a small terra-cotta head, 
also from life, the features of whic h are 
practically identical wit h those of the 
bronze, so that there is no doubt they 
represent the same person. 
VAGARIE S O F PREJUDICE . 
Governo r Blease, of South Carolina , 
in makin g an address to the Orde r of 
Re d Men , congratulated them on the fact 
that there were no Negr o lodges of the 
order. H e said he had "positive proof 
that there were a man and his wife livin g 
in a distant State tryin g to perfect organizations throughout the Southern 
States amon g the Negroes, claimin g the 
societies formed woul d pay benefits in 
cases of sickness or death or distress, but 
before any Negr o could become a member of the society he had to sign an 
oath that he woul d not wor k but eight 
hours a day and woul d obey the mandates of superior officers and he was being taught that he was the social equal 
of the white man. " Governo r Blease 
said it was not true that he was unfriendly to the Negro , when the Negr o 
was in fiis place, but he wants to sound 
a wor d of warning . H e feels that it is 
of vita l importance to the white race 
to break up secret orders among colored 
people. 
A Southern athlete, Harr y Fitzpatrick, 
of Ne w Orleans, traveled all the way to 
Chicago to take part in the contest of 
the Amateu r Athleti c Union , but when 
he found that a colored man, F . T. 
Holmes, was to compete he withdrew his 
name. Mr . Everett C. Brown , president 
of the union, made no move to prevent 
Mr . Fitzpatrick's withdrawal, remarkin g 
that he could see no reason wh y a colored athlete should not be treated exactly like a white athlete. 
fj Th e Texa s Legislatur e has refused to 
allow Mr. ' B. T. Washington , principa l 
of Tuskegee Institute, to speak at the 
State capitol. 
<I Asbur y Par k is being agitated again 
over the question of allowin g colored 
people to bathe in the _ Atlanti c Ocean 
at that point. 
<I Th e city of Memphis is still unable to' 
purchase a decent site as a park for its 
Negr o citizens. 
MISCELLANEOUS . 
L . S. Berg , of Ne w York , president of 
the Ne w Orleans, Mobil e and Chicago 
Railroad, has made Davi d Mitchell , a 
Pullma n car porter, who saved his life 
in a train wreck, his "valet for life. " In 
the wreck, whic h occurred in northern 
Minnesot a some months ago, Mrs. Ber g 
was killed. Eigh t cars and the locomo ­
tive fell down an embankment, and Mr . 
Berg's private car and two Pullmans 
were burned before relief trains could 
reach the scene of the wreck. 
"Whil e there was much confusion and 
excitement among the passengers and 
the train crew," said a friend of Mr . 
Berg, "Mitchell , the porter on one of the 
Pullma n cars whic h had tumbled down 
the embankment, never at any time lost 
his head. H e saved six or eight persons 
in the 'Pullma n from being burned to 
death, and when he was certain all the 
passengers in -his car were safe he ran 
back to Mr . Berg's car, which by that 
time had been partly consumed by the 
flames. Mrs. Ber g was dead, but the 
Negr o succeeded in pryin g open a win ­
dow and rescuing Mr . Berg. " 
W e trust the position of "valet for 
life " is sufficiently agreeable to reward 
Mr . Mitchel l for his heroism. 
<5I W e are indebted to the sporting editor 
of the St. Paul Pionee r Press for the 
followin g information: 
"Th e three leading branches of sport 
in Americ a are baseball, racing and boxing. In boxin g and racing there is no 
distinction between the blacks and the 
whites. Baseball—that is the professional kind—bars the colored athlete. 
Recently it was reported that the Reds 
had signed two players from the Con ­
necticut league who have Spanish blood 
in their veins and are very dark skinned. 
A s soon as the news spread that the 
Reds were negotiating for the Cubans a 
protest went up from the fans against 
introducing Cuban talent into the ranks 
of the major leagues. Th e kic k wil l 
probably hold good, despite the fact that 
the boys from the island are received 
all over the East wit h as much hospitality as any of their comrades whose skins 
are white. Cubans are not Negroes, but 
there seems to be a sentiment against 
them in some quarters." OPINIO N 
• TH E COATESVILL E LYNCHING . 
Th e Coatesville horror is the subject 
of wide comment and of more whole -
souled denunciation than has often 
greeted outrages against the Negro . Th e 
Ne w Yor k Time s says there is not "one 
palliating circumstance, " and that probably "nowhere in the Unite d States was 
a man ever lynched with less excuse or 
wit h an equal heaping up of horror on 
horror. " Walke r was killed, it, says, "not 
because he was a murderer, but because 
he was a Negr o murderer, and for the 
same reason they display in killin g him 
a ferocity for which 'inhuman' is a wor d 
too mil d and 'brutal' a slander on the 
beasts." Th e Worl d asks: "Wha t are the 
thoughts, vengeful or gloomy, of the 
black men of the country as they ponder 
this outbreak of bestial frenzy, in which 
the whole race is struck at through one 
wretched man? Th e law, which was 
powerless to protect, must be strong to 
punish. Bu t no punishment can soon restore the social order to the level from 
which such deeds thrust it toward the 
abyss." Th e Heral d se«s evidence of 
growin g lawlessness against the Negro, 
and the Evenin g Post thinks that after 
the crime at Coatesville one would hardly 
feel safe in believing that a Negr o may 
not some day be tortured to death on 
Boston Common . • • 
The Springfield Republican observes: 
"The Nort h lon g since fell from the position where it could speak of white savagery toward the Negr o as peculiar to 
the South. W e can now, therefore, treat 
of the Pennsylvani a mob outbreak and 
Negr o burning as a national extremity 
in communit y crime and a broadly national shame." 
Th e Chicago Dail y News in a strong 
editorial says: " A peculiarly cruel and 
brutalizing crime is comin g to be characteristic of the white race in the Unite d 
States. Perhaps the progressive white 
race wil l next burn a Negr o on Plymout h 
Rock. Lynchin g as the favorite crime of 
self-righteous whites is likely soon to 
claim recognition in every quarter unless 
the self-righteousness whic h makes 
lynchin g possible gives way sufficiently 
to make room for a little sober reflection. This woul d disclose that the white 
race is in greater peril spiritually from 
the terribly infectious lynchin g plague 
than is the Negr o physically. Wh y is 
race prejudice spreading? Th e Negr o 
to-day is at a higher point in mental and 
mora l development than he ever was before. This being true, it becomes apparent that the spread amon g the whites of 
the lynchin g spirit and of the rage for 
shutting out the Negr o from gainful employment marks the progress of mora l 
breakdown in the self-satisfied superior 
race." 
VARDAMAN . 
Th e election of Vardama n of Mississippi to the Unite d States Senate by a 
plurality of about 20,000 votes leads the 
Detroit Journa l to remark that "the hope 
of the white race has disappeared from 
the prize ring, but now pops up in Mississippi senatorial politics. " Vardaman's 
campaign, with its theatrical "white 
pageant." has been described in TH E 
CRISIS . Th e Ne w Yor k Sun prints an 
account of the demonstration, written by 
a Norther n newspaper man. H e says: 
"It is impossible for people in our part 
of the country to appraise the importance and effect of this theatrical, not to 
say melodramati c pageant, but down 
here it was prodigious It materialized the essence of Vardaman's campaign. It was an apotheosis of the color 
line. It revived the terrors of the carpet-bag period, and invested wit h vicarious consequence the spooks of a longburied past. But Vardama n knows how 
to play upon the passions and prejudices 
of the red necks and the hill billies and 
he is doing it with a master hand. " 
Th e editor of the Ne w Orleans Pica ­
yune has an editorial whic h shows how 
Vardama n "plays on passions and prejudices." A "Mississipp i Wife " writes to 
the Picayune saying that the wome n of 
her State supported Vardama n as "the 
foremost champion and protector in 
Mississipp i of the white wome n from the 
encroachments and assaults of the 
Negroe s and the evils of -whisky." 
Whereupo n the Picayune remarks: 
"Majo r Vardama n has repeatedly, and 
for several years, declared his intention 
when he should become a Senator of the 
Unite d States to propose and wor k for 
the repeal of those amendments to the 
Nationa l Constitution whic h enfranchise 
the Negr o and assume the guardianship 
of the Negroes' citizenship. It is doubtless this announcement by the Major, 
who is now a Senator-elect, that has 
aroused the enthusiasm and special support of the wome n of his State." 
Th e Picayune does not find this unnatural. "Ignorance, " it says, "now dis-OPINION 189 
franchises most Negroes, but the free 
educational advantages which are being 
given to the Negroe s in all the Southern 
States wil l at no distant period in the 
future convert all male Negroes into voters, and the incessant demands for political and social equality which are being 
dinned into their ears and minds wil l one 
day bear most evil fruits. Therefore, the 
conflict over Negr o suffrage is going, 
sooner or later, to be fought over, and 
it matters little whether it be brought 
on by Senator Vardama n or not." 
However, most editors take a somewhat different view of the case. Th e 
Philadelphi a Recor d cannot see that the 
Fifteenth Amendmen t is a fit subject for 
attack, as lon g as "the white South is 
in no danger from the Negr o vote wit h 
the grandfather clause grindin g out its 
appointed task." Th e Buffalo Express 
observes: "This is organizin g and capitalizing race hatred for politica l purposes about as shamelessly as it has ever 
been done," and the Richmon d TimesDispatch declares that "to make the barbaric picture perfect, Vardama n should 
ride up Pennsylvani a Avenu e to the capitol wit h a hundred and sixty ebony 
Mississippians chained to his car of 
triumph. " 
A SYMPOSIUM . 
The International, a journa l published 
monthly in Ne w York , has collected the 
opinions of a number of distinguished 
gentlemen on the subject of race prejudice. Thre e questions were asked: 
(1) Does the existence of race prejudice 
in a nation presuppose the inherent 
superiority of the dominant race? (2) 
Is race prejudice necessarily injurious to 
the welfare of a community ? (3) Miscegenation, deportation, segregation, 
have variously been suggested as solutions of the so-called Negr o problem in 
our country. Whic h of these do you 
consider the most feasible; how woul d 
their several executions of these plans 
affect the nation; can yo u suggest any 
other plan? W e quote the answers in 
the order given in the International: 
Dr. W . E . B. DuBois sends the reply 
which leads off the discussion: 
"1. Th e existence of race prejudice 
shows that the race whic h possesses it is 
afraid that it is not superior. 
"2. Race prejudice is the most injurious thing in modern history. In earlier 
times race prejudice, hatred of the foreigner and the despising of the stranger, 
served for self-protection. The y do not 
so serve to-day. 
"3. Non e of the three plans are solutions of the Negr o problem. Miscegena ­
tion is impossible unless both parties 
wish it. Th e economi c and social cost 
of deportation woul d be too stupendous; 
segregation is physicall y impossible. Th e 
other plan whic h I suggest is to treat 
men as men according to their desert 
and ability despite their color. " 
Professor Friedric h Hirth , wh o holds 
the chair of Chinese in Columbi a Uni ­
versity, comes next: 
"If yo u add the wor d 'imaginary' before the wor d 'inherent,' I woul d certainly answer this question in the affirmative. Some nations like, some individuals, suffer from megalomania , and this 
alone is sufficient to create race prejudice." Professor Hirth , as the son of a 
Germa n father and a Frenc h mother, has 
no objection to miscegenation among 
European peoples. H e does not know 
enough about the Negr o problem, he 
says, to express an opinion as to the 
effect of a mixtur e of blood of black and 
white races. 
Mr . Edwi n E . Slosson, literary editor 
of the Independent, replies: 
"1. Th e root of race prejudice is fear. 
It is an outward manifestation of an inward misgivin g as to the reality of the 
assumed superiority in some particular. 
This self-distrust may not be justified, 
but the existence of race prejudice is in 
itself' a defect and, so far as it goes, a 
mark of inferiority. 
"2. O f course it is. It dwarfs the progress of both races and dissipates energy 
through friction that might be employed 
in useful work. 
"3. Non e of the plans are feasible. Th e 
problem cannot be solved by any such 
politica l expedients, but a solution may 
be rendered unnecessary by the simple 
application of the old-fashioned principles of liberty, equality and fraternity. 
"It is no longer wort h whil e quarreling 
about the relative standing of existing 
races because there is a greater difference between the highest and lowest of 
any one race than between the mean of 
any two races." 
Mr . Nissim Behar, director of the 
national Libera l Immigratio n League, 
says: "The existence of race prejudice 
presupposes merely ignorance and is a 
human failing commo n to all nations and 
races, though its expression may run 
from silent contempt through vituperation and physica l abuse to actual murder." Mr . Beha r thinks the color question in the Unite d States has always 
been discussed with so much emotion 
that adequate scientific suggestions have 
never been made. 
Mr . Joh n Spargo, the well-known Socialist author, goes into the economic 
side of the question: 
" A good deal of racial antagonism is 
due to economic competition, or the fear 
of it, rather than to race prejudice per 
se. Fea r and hatred of the Jew are often 
engendered by his superiority as a 
trader. It woul d be very foolish, however, to ascribe all manifestations of race 
prejudice and antagonism to economic 
competition or the fear of it. There is 190 THE CRISIS 
a real problem of race prejudice confronting the America n people. I am very 
much afraid that it is on the increase— 
intensified, possibly, by economic competition. 
"Al l race prejudice is, in some of its 
manifestations at least, injurious to the 
welfare of the communit y in whic h it 
exists. Whethe r anti-semitism takes the 
form of a pogrom, as in Russia , or social ostracism and exclusion from summer resorts and hotels, as in America , 
it is indubitably injurious and anti-social. 
An d whether prejudice against the Negr o 
takes the form of lynchin g where a 
white man woul d get a legal trial wit h 
a right to defend himself, or exclusion 
from theaters, hotels and simila r places, 
it is likewis e injurious to the community 
because it is anti-social. 
" I do not know that anyone to whom 
serious attention need be paid would contend that the existence of race prejudice 
in a nation presupposes the inherent 
superiority of the dominant race." 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise , the rabbi of the 
Fre e Synagogue, thinks the questions 
humorous. H e says: 
"1 and 2- Fa r from the existence' of 
race prejudice in a nation presupposing 
inherent superiority, I should say that 
the continuance of race prejudice is just 
as likel y to argue inherent inferiority in 
the prejudiced. This answers your second question, too, not only is race prejudice injurious to the welfare of a community, but it as an expression of lowered mora l status and hence intensifies 
the ill-fare which begets it. 
"3. A s for miscegenation, deportation 
or segregation being possiDle solutions 
of the so-called race problem, these plans 
are equally unfeasible. Th e three 'words' 
yo u name are equally feasible—their 
chief value lyin g in their polysyllabi c 
ponderosity. 
"A s for any other plan by way of 
solution of the so-called Negr o problem, wh y not cease tryin g solutions 
which are usually overfacile substitutes 
for hard effort? Th e plan is the American plan, and that is fair play, equal 
opportunity and the absolute democratization of the life of the America n 
nation. " 
Professor Edwar d A . Ross, the wellk.nown sociologist of the Universit y of 
Wisconsin , writes: 
"1. Th e existence of race prejudice is 
no proof of superiority in the race that 
feels the prejudice. In many instances 
in history there has been reciprocal race 
prejudice. 
"2. Race prejudice implies something 
of a break in the social tissue and is 
bound to hinder the norma l democratic 
development of the society in whic h it 
occurs. It prevents the higher unity of 
the people and makes the element of 
force more prominent in government. 
"3. I kno w of no practicable solution 
of the so-called Negr o problem, if by 
'solution' is meant the effective application of intelligence to the remova l of a 
difficulty. Non e of the suggested solutions strike me as practicable. Miscegenation is undesirable and deportation and segregation are not feasible. I 
judge the problem wil l never be 'solved.' 
but that the two races in the South wil l 
discover a modus vivendi involvin g the 
minimum amount of friction. " 
Mr . Booke r T. Washington , wh o closes 
the discussion, writes that "instead of 
directly answering the questions " he 
sends an essay on race prejudice which 
he thinks wil l serve the purpose. Mr . 
Washingto n goes over the history of 
race prejudice in the past in Europ e and 
says that prejudice can be eradicated only 
"when people get together on a practica l 
workin g basis wit h each other." H e 
continues: "Th e greatest example of the 
overcomin g of' race prejudice is in my 
opinion in the Southern States. Whe n 
the Southern people imported into America the wil d Africa n they brought among 
them a man mor e different, strange and 
mysterious than any they had ever seen. 
It took a very long time to accustom the 
Southern people to Negr o slavery. Fo r 
nearly a hundred years thay tried to get 
along wit h the white bond servant from 
England ; but in the competition between 
the two races the Africa n at that particular time and in those particula r circumstances proved the mor e valuable man 
and he remained. " 
RULIN G TH E "LESSE R BREEDS. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post has a 
delicious editorial on the appointment of 
Lor d Kitchene r to succeed the late Sir 
Eldo n Gorst as Britis h agent in Egypt. 
Mr . Roosevelt, Mr . Pric e Collie r and 
"other pillars of Britis h imperialism" wil l 
approve the appointment, the Post 
thinks. "Th e necessity for putting a 
'strong man' in charge of the Egyptia n 
Government has lon g been apparent to 
those students of the Orien t wh o have 
taken their viewpoint from the work s of 
Rudyar d Kiplin g and pursued their observations in the pleasant company of 
Britis h administrators and army officers. 
In that unprejudiced environment there 
was borne in upon Mr . Roosevelt in 
Egyp t and upon Mr . Pric e Collie r in 
Indi a the iniquity and peril of allowin g 
native Bengalis or Egyptian s to publish 
newspapers in their own vernacular and 
to find fault wit h their alien rulers. This 
was almost as atrocious as the gradual 
disappearance of that humbl e and unquestioning deference whic h it was decreed from all time should characterize 
the_ bearing of subject Orientals toward 
their foreign masters. N o wonde r Mr . 
Roosevelt felt it his duty to sound a 
solemn warning. Sir Eldo n Gorst's mil d OPINION 
and tolerant rule was breeding anarchy. 
Th e hour called for a strong man. 
"No w that the strong man has appeared in the shape of Lor d Kitchener, 
it woul d not be amiss to inquire into the 
fitness of this type of man for the difficult wor k of governing a tropica l people 
in this the second decade of the twentieth century. Ther e is no question here 
of mora l issues or other sentimental issues, but of that efficiency whic h in the 
strong man is supposed to compensate 
for the absence of qualities otherwise 
desirable. India serves as a good example because during the last decade India 
had the good fortune to have her destinies shaped, not by one strong man, 
but by two. One was Lor d Kitchene r 
in his post as commander-in-chief of the 
British forces in the peninsula. Th e 
other was the late Viceroy , Lor d Curzon. A great deal of the strong man s 
energy is always used up in shoving 
other strong men out of his way. An d 
that is what happened in India. Lor d 
Curzon , during his second term, fell 
afoul of Lor d Kitchener, and in the end 
was compelled to resign. Th e spectacle 
of the two highest members of the Gov ­
ernment engaged in bitter hostilities 
could not be said to have increased British prestige i n the eyes of the Indian 
natives; but that is a comparatively unimportant matter. Th e point is that 
Lor d Kitchene r had his own views about 
the reorganization of the Indian army 
and was allowed to carry them out. 
"W e do not recall by how many times 
the Kitchene r reforms were supposed 
to have multiplied the efficiency of the 
Indian army ; but the multiple was a 
large one. It may be that the northwest 
frontier was rendered quite impregnable 
against that Russian invasion whic h never 
has been and never wil l be withi n the 
realm of probability. Wha t is certain is 
that the native Indian army to-day is permeated wit h anti-Englis h feeling and 
wit h rank sedition. Th e Unionist press 
at home has roundly declared that disloyalty is mor e widespread among the 
native troops to-day than at any time 
since the Sepoy rebellion ; whic h forms 
one kin d of testimonia l to the efficiency 
of Lor d Kitchener's methods in India. 
"O f the efficiency of that other strong 
man, Lor d Curzon , there is still more 
striking evidence. Th e present unrest in 
India, whic h undoubtedly constitutes a 
very serious problem for its Englis h 
masters, may be explained in part as a 
result of Japan's triumph over Russia . 
Th e whole Orient caught the reverberations of that historic shock. But there 
are very few people to deny the fact 
that what gave life and body to Indian 
discontent was the partition of, the province of Bengal, whic h Lor d Curzo n 
made his pet measure, against the best 
opinion in India. T o the Bengalis this 
was a partial destruction of their fatherland; in any case, this notoriously unmilitary race has been thrown into a 
state of violent sedition. Th e Bengalis 
are also a quick-witted race, and have 
easily mastered the tools of modern revolutionism, the inflammatory proclama ­
tion and the bomb. If we are to judge 
strong men by their achievements, it 
should be written of Lor d Curzo n that 
he found India peaceful and left it aflame. 
"Compare d with this record in India, 
what is there to be said against the administration of Sir Eldo n Gorst, wh o was 
so conspicuously not a strong man that 
it nearly broke Mr . Theodor e Roosevelt's 
heart? Unde r the Gorst administration 
there has been a good deal of nationalist 
agitation, of newspaper warfare, of student manifestations, and just one lamentable case of assassination; Indi a by this 
time has had fully half a dozen. An d 
because no mailed-fist policies were 
brought to bear in Egypt, the movement 
there has fallen back into safe channels, 
and Lor d Kitchene r wil l succeed to a 
peaceful heritage. Th e movement has 
not died out. because civilization has not 
died out. T o expect the Hind u or the 
Egyptia n forever to bow obsequiously to 
the foreign Sahib or Sidi, forever to be 
content with having everything done for 
him and doing nothing for himself, is to 
court folly and disaster. Englan d has a 
choice between a policy of repression 
and a policy of wise concession and 
politica l education. 
"For, in the last resort, no white 
Powe r that rules over Eastern races can 
escape this dilemma : Eithe r the people 
yo u govern prospers under your rule or 
it does not. If it does not, there is no 
excuse, of course, for remaining where 
yo u are. If it does prosper, there is no 
powe r in the worl d that can permanently 
withstand the upward pressure of a people in whom national pride must keep 
pace with national efficiency." 
IRIDESCEN T HUE S O F TH E 
RAINBOW . 
Th e chairman of the Executive Com ­
mittee is sometimes the recipient of communications from persons in the South 
wh o have the darkest suspicions of his 
designs on the America n people through 
the medium of the Nationa l Association. 
Some of these letters we have published. 
W e now offer our readers another contribution, not a letter this time, but an 
article which appeared in the Issue, a 
paper published, apparently, somewhere 
in Mississippi. J. Potts Hol t is the author 
of the essay, and he pencils a note 
to the chairman on the margin : "Rea d 
and digest and be decent, if yo u are pure 
white. " 
191 192 THE CRISIS 
Th e Hon . J. Potts Hol t has read scientific works, he says, but he doesn't approve of them. "Professor Hyde , of 
England , now advances the theory that 
'origina l man was dark brown in color, 
not white.' Be that as it may, Darwi n 
monkeyed wit h the subject of man as 
well. Their privilege. Bu t commo n sense 
nor reason should not be dethroned. We , 
in this enlightened period, should not 
lose our equilibrium thereby." 
H e believes in the conservation of 
races, and this leads him to describe, in 
a burst of eloquence, the jim-crow 
heaven and hell: 
" I now plead, in thunder tones, for the 
conservation of the races—for the genus 
homo, man, ourselves. Th e line of demarkation between the races should be, 
must be, written in box-car letters, of 
flaming fire, warnin g the earth and its 
sister spheres, sweeping up 'mid the circlin g glories of halcyon heaven and extending down to the mudsills of remorseful, unquenchable hell. " 
A s to miscegenation "no white person 
this side of putrid passion and perfidy's 
perdition" can do anything but "hit it 
in the face" as soon as mentioned. 
Colone l Potts Hol t says if Go d had "in ­
tended in man all the iridescent hues of 
the rainbow" he woul d have been made 
them that way originally. 
H e says if yo u don't listen to him this 
fair land wil l run red wit h rivers of 
blood. H e says if yo u don't agree wit h 
him yo u produce "pandemonium for the 
real. " (W e do not . quite understand 
what that is, but we echo his conclusion 
—"from such a kismet may rleaven deliver us.") H e says how any man of 
commo n decency "from Main e to California, or elsewhere, can sit still for a 
moment knowin g there is a law on the 
statute books of his country permitting 
—suggesting that his daughter (if he is 
a white man) marry a Negro , Japanese 
or Chinese, or other of the darker color " 
is beyond the powe r of a J. Potts Hol t 
to contemplate much less comprehend. 
Such a man is a "blasting, blithering, 
blistering brute." 
W e regret that space forbids our givin g more of the essay. Should the colone l 
contribute further to our mora l uplift we shall be glad to share him wit h 
our readers again. 
TH E "SACRED " CAL F 
The Houston, Texas, Chronicle attacks 
the State peonage laws and then goes on 
to comment on the fact that property is 
more highly valued in Texas than human 
life. 
"The ownership of a hog is sacred, the 
property rights in chickens or ducks or old 
clothes or a boiled ham are sacred things. 
Property must not be trespassed upon, 
but life, that is a different thing. 
"The most noted feud in Harris county, 
one that has caused the death of three 
men and the wounding of a fourth, bids 
fair to come to an inglorious end, not by 
the punishment of anybody for taking or 
attempting to take human life, but by the 
finding of one of the principals in the 
possession of a stolen and slaughtered 
calf. 
"Tragedy after tragedy might occur and 
the quick bail process let the killers loose 
to kil l again, but when one of the feudists 
laid felonious fingers upon a calf and was 
caught in flagrant delictu, that was a different story. 
"Texas must face the problem of a 
revision of the entire penal code, or, at 
least, a change in enforcement methods. 
It is not enough to improve the conditions 
in the penitentiaries. The laws that send 
men there should be improved, and the 
very wisest and ripest and most humane 
and enlightened judgment invoked to make 
the punishment fit the crime. The punishment should not be so severe as to destroy the criminal in trivial matters and 
so uncertain as to be ridiculous and negligible in offenses that are really serious 
and involve the shedding of human blood." 
t[ Ther e was an attempt, fortunately unsuccessfully, to forbid colored men in 
Richmon d the use of the Cit y Audito ­
rium. A t one time the city attorney 
seems to have decided that to share the 
auditorium woul d be to violate the 
segregation ordinance. "This- is a deplorable legal mess," observes the Rich ­
mon d Leader. "Th e Negroe s are taxpayers; they have as much right-t o assemble in the auditorium as to meet in 
the Capito l Square. W e are not disposed 
to criticize the legal process by which 
the city attorney reached this remarkable conclusion, but we do not hesitate 
to say that if he is correct in his findings, 
the sooner the Vonderleh r ordinance is 
amended the better for Richmond , and 
the better for that ordinance. Th e colored people of this city'hav e rights that 
the white people cannot afford to with ­
hold. " 
<I "Segregation in Ji m Cro w cars, segregation in public places, segregation on 
certain streets in cities. Wha t next?" 
asks the Charlott e (N . C.) Star of Zion , 
of the A . M . E . Z. Church . "It does 
appear that Hon . J. M . Dickinso n is not 
far ahead of the times when he suggests 
segregation in a country under the protection of the Unite d States. No w here 
are some mor e questions. Wil l the Ne ­
groes segregated i n the city be granted 
the right of self-government-—can they 
send a Negr o membe r from their Negr o 
war d to the city council ? Wil l the Ne ­
gro State suggested by the Secretary of 
Wa r have a Negr o State government 
wit h Negr o representation in Congress? " TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
W e give some of the articles and bylaws of the Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancement of Colore d People, which , 
as we have noted, was incorporated in 
June. 
From the Articles of Incorporation. 
We , the undersigned, being of full age 
and desirous of associating ourselves together for the purpose herein below specified, pursuant to and in conformity with 
the Acts of the Legislatur e of the State 
of Ne w Yor k relating to membership 
corporations, do hereby certify and declare that we are of full age and twothirds of us citizens and residents of the 
Unite d States and residents of the State 
of Ne w York , and further as follows: 
Tha t the principa l objects for which 
the corporation is formed are voluntarily 
to promote equality of rights and eradicate caste or race prejudice among the 
citizens of the Unite d States; to advance 
the interests of colored citizens; to secure for them impartia l suffrage; and to 
increase their opnortunities for securing 
justice in the courts, education for their 
children, employment according to their 
ability, and complete equality before the 
law. 
T o ascertain and publish all facts bearing upon these subjects and to take any 
lawful action thereon; together with any 
and all things whic h may lawfully be 
done by a membership corporation organized under the laws of the State of 
Ne w Yor k for the further advancement 
of these objects. 
T o take, receive, hold, convey, mortgage or assign all such real estate and 
personal property as may be necessary 
for the purposes of the corporation. 
Th e corporate name by whic h the corporation shall be known is NATIONA L 
ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E AD ­
VANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEO ­
PLE . 
Th e territory in whic h the operations 
of the corporation are principally to be 
conducted shall be the Unite d States of 
America . 
Th e principa l office of the corporation 
and the center of its operations shall be 
in the City , Count y and State of Ne w 
York , but the directors may establish 
branch or auxiliary offices elsewhere in 
the Unite d States for the purpose of carryin g on the wor k of the corporation, 
each to be managed by its local organization under such powers as lawfully 
may be prescribed in the by-laws of the 
corporation. 
Th e principa l office of the corporation 
shall be in the Boroug h of Manhattan, 
in the City , Count y and State of Ne w 
York . 
Th e number of directors of the corporation shall be thirty. 
Th e names of the persons to be directors of the corporation until its first annual meeting are as follows: 
Mr . Moorfiel d Storey, Mr . Joh n E . Mil -
holland, Bisho p Alexande r Walters, Oswald Garriso n Villard , Mr . Walte r E . 
Sachs, Dr. Willia m E . B. DuBois, Mar y 
Whit e Ovington , Rev. Willia m H . 
Brooks, Dr. Joh n Lovejo y Elliott, Mr . 
Thoma s Ewing , Jr., Rev. Joh n Hayne s 
Holmes, Mrs. Florenc e R. Keyser, Mr . P. 
Kennaday, Mrs. Frances R. Keyser, Mrs. 
Mar y D . MacLean , Rev. A . Clayto n 
Powell , Mr . Charles Edwar d Russell, 
Prof. Joe l E . Spingarn, Miss Lillia n D . 
Wald , Mr . Willia m Englis h Walling , Dr. 
Owe n M . Waller, Mr . W . I. Bulkley . Mr . 
Albert E . Pillsbury , Miss Jane Addams, 
Mrs. Ida Wells Barnett, Dr. Charles E . 
Bentley, Dr. Noa h F . Mossell, Dr. Will ­
iam A . Sinclair. Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell, Rev. J. Milto n Waldron . 
The annual meeting of the corporation 
shall be held on the first Monda y of 
January in each year. 
In Testimon y Whereof, we have made 
and signed this certificate in duplicate 
and have hereunto set our hands and 
affixed our respective seals this 25th day 
of May , 1911. 
W . E . B. DuBois 
JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
WALTE R E . SACH S 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N . 
Fro m the By-Laws. 
Articl e I. 
Th e corporation shall consist of the 
origina l incorporators and such persons 
as may accept membership in writin g 
with the approval of the Directors, under 
and in accordance with these by-laws, 
and shall annually pay in advance such 
membership fee as may be fixed from 
time to time by the Directors. 
Articl e II. 
A t the first meeting of the corporation, 
held in January, 1912, there shall be 
elected and organized a Boar d of thirty 
Directors, ten of whom shall be elected 
for one year, ten for two years and ten 
for three years, and at each annual 
meeting thereafter ten Directors shall be 
elected for three years. Th e Boar d of 194 THE CRISIS 
Directors shall administer the business 
and affairs of the corporation. 
Loca l organizations may be formed under authority of the Boar d of Directors, 
each to be know n as the (name of city 
or town) Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colore d People, under 
such constitution, as the Boar d of 
Directors may approve. 
Articl e III. 
A t the first meeting of the Boar d of 
Directors, and annually thereafter at its 
first meeting followin g the annual meeting of the corporation,, officers of the 
corporation shall be elected from the 
Boar d as follows: A President, two or 
more Vice-presidents, a Chairma n of the 
Board , a Secretary and a Treasurer. 
Al l the officers shall perform such 
duties as usually pertain to their respective offices, or as may be assigned to 
them from time to time by the Board . 
The Board may also appoint a Director 
of Publicity and Research, and such other 
officers as it may from time to time determine consistently wit h these by-laws, 
for such terms and wit h such powers, 
duties and compensation as it may determine. Th e Boar d may fill vacancies in 
any office and may remove any officer 
appointed to it. 
N o salary or compensation shall be 
due or payable to any officer except as 
prescribed by the by-laws or by vote of 
the Board . N o purchase, sale, mortgage 
or lease of real property shall be made 
by the corporation unless by vote of or 
after written approval by two-thirds of 
the whole number of Directors in office. 
The Board may from time to time elect 
such number as it sees fit of persons in 
sympathy with the purposes of the corporations, but wh o shall have no financial or other responsibility for the conduct of its work, as a Genera l Advisor y 
Committee, of which the officers of the 
local conferences shall be ex-officio 
members. 
Articl e IV . 
Th e annual meeting of the corporation 
for the election of Directors and any 
other lawful business shall be held at 
such place and hour as the Boar d may 
determine. Notic e by mail of such meetings and of all nominations for Directors 
shall be given by the Secretary to each 
member not less than ten davs before 
the meeting. Th e annual meeting of the 
Boar d of Directors shall be held imme ­
diately upon the adjournment of such 
meeting. 
A t the annual meeting of the corpora ­
tion the Boar d shall present a report, 
verified by the Secretary and Treasurer, 
showin g the whole property of the corporation, where situated and where and 
'low invested; the property acquired durin g the year, and the manner of acquisition ; the amount expended during the 
year and the objects or persons to or 
for whic h such expenditure has been 
made; the names and .residences of new 
members, and any other information that 
the Boar d may require. Such reports 
shall be filed, and an abstract thereof 
entered in the records of the meeting. 
<I A s soon as the news of the barbarous 
lynchin g at Coatesvill e reached the Asso ­
ciation telegrams were sent to the Gov ­
ernor of Pennsylvania , the Chie f of the 
State Constabulary and the Mayo r of 
Coatesville, urgin g the instant and relentless prosecution of the guilty parties. 
Th e chief burgess of Coatesvill e at once 
sent the followin g letter: 
"I n answer to you r telegram just received we are certainly using every effort 
to brin g the perpetrators of the outrageous act of burnin g a human being while 
still alive. It is true that we have a 
pretty good idea of the identity of a few 
of the ringleaders in the lynchin g party, 
yet when yo u go into a court yo u must 
be fortified wit h positive proof of their 
participation. Muc h has been published 
in the daily papers that is ridiculously 
untrue. Yo u wil l bear in min d that we 
could not conceive that it woul d be possible to find fifteen or twenty people 
who could be found that had the nerve 
to commit the act (for there was not 
mor e than twenty and they mostly youn g 
men and the leader not over eighteen, 
wh o composed the mob that done the 
lynching); notwithstanding what may be 
said by those outside it wil l develop that 
the guilty ones wil l be found and punished to the full extent of the law; if 
there has been an error committed it 
was not that our officials in any way 
condoned the act. W e are strivin g to 
redeem ourselves, whic h the future wil l 
prove. 
"Yours, 
"JESS E SHALLCROS S 
"Chie f Burgess. 
"P . S.—Rum was the cause of the 
murder. " 
Q Th e followin g letter accompanied a 
recent money gift: 
Chestnut Hill.School , 
Dea r Mr . Garrison : 
W e have some money for the colored 
people. Al l the children in our class 
have given a little bit. W e want to have 
it shared between them all. 
W e think that the colored people are 
very badly treated, and we want them 
to be treated in a better way. 
Miss Elizabet h found a china bunny, 
and every mornin g we passed the bunny 
down the aisle and we got four dollars. 
Fro m all the children in our class, 
HELE N PAG E EDITORIA L 
TRIUMPH . 
LE T the eagle scream! Agai n the 
burden of upholding the best 
traditions of Anglo-Saxon 
civilization has fallen on the sturdy 
shoulders of the American republic. 
Once more a howling mob of the best 
citizens in a foremost State of the 
Union has vindicated the self-evident 
superiority of the white race. The 
case was perfectly clear; it was not 
that murder had been done, for we 
Americans are not squeamish at mere 
murder. Off and on we do more of 
that kind of thing than most folk. 
Moreover, there was not much of a 
murder—only the crazed act of a 
drunken man quite unpremeditated. 
The point is he was black. 
Blackness must be punished. Blackness is the crime of crimes, as the 
opeTa-bouffe senator-elect from Mississippi has amply proven. Wh y is it a 
crime? Because it threatens white supremacy. A black might—why, civilization might be black! It is therefore necessary, as every white scoundrel in the nation knows, to let slip 
no opportunity of punishing this crime 
of crimes. O f course, if possible, the 
pretext should be great and overwhelming—some awful stunning crime, 
made even more horrible by reporters' 
imaginations. Failin g this, mere murder, arson, barn burning or impudence 
may do; indeed, must do. 
Once the pretext given, then let 
loose the majesty of American culture. 
It must warm the hearts of every true 
son of the republic to read how the 
brawn and sinew of Coatesville rallied 
to the great and glorious deed. It deserves a poem; think of the hoary 
farmers, toilworn with the light of a 
holy purpose in their eyes and pitchforks in their hands. "The churches 
were nearly deserted," say the papers. 
Splendid! Was' it not fitting that 
Coatesville religion should lend its deacons and Sunday-school superintends 
ents to the holy crusade? Di d they 
not choose a noble day? Sunday, the 
festival of the risen Prince of Peace. 
Ah , the splendor of that Sunday 
night dance. The flames beat and 
curled against the moonlit sky. The 
church bells chimed. The scorched 
and crooked thing, self-wounded and 
chained to his cot, crawled to the edge 
of the ash with a stifled groan, but 
the brave and sturdy farmers pricked 
him back with the bloody pitchforks 
until the deed was done. 
Let the eagle scream! 
Civilization is again safe. 
"Oh , say, can you see by the dawn's 
early light" that soap box of blackened 
bones and dust, standing in the dew 
and sunlight on the King's highway 
to the City of Brotherly Love , while, 
as the press reports, "all day long, not 
only from Coatesville, but from all 
Chester County, and even from Phila ­
delphia, people walked and drove out 
to the scene of the burning. Me n and 
women poked the ashes and a shout of 
glee would signalize the finding of a 
blackened tooth or mere portions of 
unrecognizable bones. By noon the 
black, heap had been leveled and only 
the scorched ground was left to tell 
what had happened there." 
Some foolish people talk of punishing the heroic mob, and the Governor 
of Pennsylvania seems to be real provoked. W e hasten to assure our readers that nothing will be done. There 
may be a few formal arrests, but the 
men will be promptly released by the 
mob sitting as jury—perhaps even as 
judge. 
Americ a knows her true heroes. 
Again, let the eagle scream! 
But let every black American gird 
up his loins. The great day is coming. W e have crawled and pleaded 
for justice and we have been cheerfully spit upon and murdered and 
burned. W e will not endure it forever. If we are to die, in God's name 
let us perish like men and not like 
bales of hay. 196 THE CRISIS 
TH E WORL D I N COUNCIL . 
TH E greatest event of the twentieth century so far was the 
First Universal Races Congress. It was more significant than 
the Russian-Japanese war, the Hague 
Conference or the rise of Socialism. 
It was significant not on account of 
the size of its meetings, well attended 
as they were; not on account of the 
weight of its utterances, weighty as 
they were; not on account of the publicity it received or the influence it 
spread. 
The Universal Races Congress was 
great because it marked the first time 
in the history of mankind when a 
world congress dared openly and explicitly to take its stand on the platform of human equality—the essential 
divinity of man. 
Fo r the first time in history the representatives of a majority of all the 
nations of the earth met on a frankly 
equal footing to discuss their relations 
to each other, and the ways and means 
of breaking down the absurd and 
deadly differences that make men hate 
and despise each other simply because 
they do not look and think and act 
alike. 
Other world congresses there have 
been, and they have not dared to attack this problem openly and honestly. 
The Church has repeatedly dodged and 
temporized with race prejudice. The 
State has openly used it for conquest, 
murder and oppression. Great reform 
movements like the Peace and. Labor 
movement have again and again refused to see in race prejudice their 
greatest obstacle, their subtlest and 
deadliest enemy. 
Here at last is a full fair frontal 
attack on the nastiest modern survival 
of ancient barbarism. It was a great 
day for humanity. It was a great day 
even in the light of the expected criticisms that the Congress accomplished 
nothing. It accomplished wonders. It 
met successfully in peace and concord 
and yet with unusual freedom of 
speech. It secured the co-operation of 
many of the leading people of the 
world and induced them to stand 
openly on its platfdrm not simply of 
"Peace," but of ''Good Wil l Towar d 
Alen. " Finall y it took steps toward 
the perfection of a world organization 
for interracial concord, investigation 
and co-opeiation. 
Ever y word uttered, every step 
taken by this Congress is in direct 
opposition to the dominant philosophy 
of race hatred, suppression and lynching current in the United States. The 
sooner sane and honest Americans 
realize that the present policy of 
Americ a toward the Negro race is directly contrary to Christian, Mohammedan and Buddhist ethics, and is a 
disintegrating and degrading force 
which the best thought and conscience 
of the world condemns, the sooner will 
such people join the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People and fight for true liberty and 
decency. 
Can anyone doubt the ripeness of 
the time ? Awake , put on thy strength, 
O Zion ! 
PROMOTIO N O F PREJUDICE . 
COMPLACEN T people sit before 
race prejudice with folded 
hands. Ho w unfortunate,-they 
say, but how unchangeable! Then 
they select the appropriate adverbs 
"always " and "never" to show the impossibility of great change in such 
human attitudes within any reasonable time. 
The trouble with such people is that 
they have no idea of the active campaign carried on quietly in this country to foment race strife and increase 
race prejudice in quarters where they 
would seldom, if ever, appear. 
W e select, this week a single instance of this: There is in Massachusetts a sleepy, charming old town 
called Newburyport. It has a half 
dozen or so quiet colored folk. It also 
has a paper called the Herald. There 
is in Nashville, Tenn:, a paper called 
the Nashville Tennessean and American. These two papers recently had 
the following editorials—editorials, 
not articles, mind you : 
(Tennessean-American, July 28, 1911.) 
JH E NEGR O VOT E A N ANNOYIN G FACTOR . 
It is a significant fact-that 85 per cent, of the 
Negroes in the Texas election on the prohibition EDITORIAL 197 
amendment to the constitution voted against the 
proposition, and, when it is considered that the 
amendment was defeated by only about 5,000 votes 
out of a total number cast exceeding 450,000 it 
will be keenly appreciated how annoying it is for 
such a factor to hold the balance of power in 
deciding such a grave question. 
Equally as large a p<r cent, of the NegToes in 
Tennessee are opposed to the laws regulating and 
restricting the sale of liquors. It has been the 
boast that 85 per cent, of them oppose prohibition. 
Unde r normal conditions the Negroes arc Republican, but when it comes to political contests 
which imperil or threaten the liquor traffic the 
Negroes, like the liquor people, become non-partisan, and vote with the party or faction advocating the traffic. A large majority of them favor 
the open saloon. They like whisky, and they want 
it sold where they may purchase it without the 
least restraint. 
(Xewburyport Herald, August 7, 1911.) 
THE ) ANNOYIN G NEGR O VOTE . 
It is a significant fact that 85 per cent, of the 
Negroes in the Texas election on the prohibition 
amendment to the constitution voted against the 
proposition, and, when it is considered that the 
amendment was defeated by only about 5,000 votes 
out of a total number cast exceeding 450,000, it 
will be keenly appreciated how annoying it is for 
such a factor to hold the balance of power of 
deciding .such a grave question. 
Equally as large a per cent, of the Negroes in 
Tennessee are opposed to the laws regulating and 
restricting the sale of liquors. It has been the 
boast that 85 per cent, of tbem oppose prohibition. 
Unde r normal conditions the Negroes are Republican, but when it comes to political contests 
which imperil or threaten the liquor traffic the 
Negroes, like the liquor people, become non-partisan, and vote with the party or faction advocating the traffic. A large majority of them favor 
the open saloon. The y like whisky, and they want 
it sold where they may purchase it without the 
least restraint. 
Tw o things must be noted about this 
remarkable coincidence in the working 
of the minds of a country editor in 
Massachusetts and a city editor in 
Tennessee: 
(1) The alleged facts as to the 
Xegro vote in Texas and Tennessee 
are misstatements of the truth, if not 
deliberate lies. Negroes in both States 
have supported prohibition in large 
numbers repeatedly and it is ridiculously untrue that 85 per cent, voted 
for liquor. 
(2) This is not the first time that 
identical editorials have appeared in 
Southern, Western and New England 
papers on the Negro problem. The 
Newburyport Herald has had these 
remarkable inspirations repeatedly. 
Wha t does this mean? 
It means that the soul of Ne w Eng ­
land and the Middl e West is being 
progressively poisoned and aroused on 
race matters by matter manufactured 
by Negro haters in the South and then 
New England is calmly quoted to the 
South as coming around to their point 
of view. 
, Wh o is doing this philanthropic 
work? Wh o is paying for it? Is it 
our patriotic duty to sit and sleep 
while this deviltry is hatching? 
"SOCIA L EQUALITY. " 
ACOLORE D physician of 
Kansas City has made a 
speech at a large meeting in 
Denver in which he protests that he 
does not want "social equality." It 
happens, however, that social equality 
is precisely what this gentleman does 
want and we can prove it; if our 
readers will turn to the Marc h number of T H E C RISI S they will learn that 
this same physician got on a Pullman 
car to ride into Texas and was ejected. 
He protested vigorously, as he ought 
to have done, and brought suit. Now, 
riding on a Pullman car is social equality and there is no use in pretending 
that it is not. Equa l civil rights are 
impossible without social equality. 
Equa l political rights are impossible 
without social equality. Whe n American Negroes recently sent a protest 
to England complaining of civil and 
political degradation what did the 
South retort? Practically all the 
Southern white papers said this is 
"demanding social equality;" and it 
was. Social equality is simply the 
right to be treated as a gentleman 
when one is among gentlemen and acts 
like a gentleman. N o person who does 
not demand such treatment is fit for 
the society of gentlemen. O f course, 
what the speaker meant to say was 
that he had no desire to force his company on people unnecessarily if they 
objected to him, but such a right does 
not imply "equality" but "superiority," 
and this speaker knows or ought to 
know that every time a black man says 
publicly that he is willing to be treated 
as a social pariah, he is forging the 
chains of his social slavery. Let intelligent black men stop this sort of 
talk. If they are afraid to demand 
their rights as men, they can, at least, 
preserve dignified silence. 198 THE CRISIS Some of the Delegates to the First Universal Races 
Congress Gathered at the Entrance to London University. 
SEPTEMBER, 1911 < 199 TH E RACES CONGRESS 
B y Ou r Ow n Correspondent 
I.—What Was the Races Congress? 
Several years ago at Eisenach, Germany, Dr. Feli x Adle r suggested a congress of the races of the world . N o 
attempt was made to follow up this idea 
for several years; then the Ethica l Cul ­
ture Society permitted one of its best 
organizers, Gustave Spiller, to devote 
W . E . B . D U BOI S 
"Th e American Negro " 
two years to the organizing of such a 
congress. It was planned to hold the 
congress in the summer of 1911. Extra ­
ordinary difficulties faced the organizer. 
H e had no funds; he had no special 
clientele to appeal to, and he was embarking upon what large numbers of 
practical people thought a fanciful, if not 
an impossible, attempt. Then , too, other 
people feared and opposed it for politica l 
and social reasons. Nevertheless, Mr . 
Spille r went to work . 
Withi n two years he succeeded in enlisting the support of no less than fifty 
countries, over thirty presidents of parliaments, the majority of the members 
of the Permanent Court of Arbitratio n 
and of the delegates to the Second 
Hagu e Conference, twelve Britis h governors and eight Britis h premiers, over 
forty colonia l bishops, some hundred and 
thirty professors of internationa l law, the 
leading anthropologists and sociologists, 
the officers and the majority of the council of.the Interparliamentary Union , and 
other distinguished personages. A s 
writers of papers, Mr . Spille r secured 
representatives from over twenty civiliza ­
tions, and every paper referring to a particular people was prepared by some one 
of hig h standing belongin g to that 
people. 
A s president of the congress, the Righ t 
Honorabl e Lor d Weardale , a well-known 
figure in the World's Peace movement, 
was secured. Amon g the vice-presidents 
was the Prime Ministe r of England , Mr . 
Balfour, leader of the opposition, Viscount Morl'ey of Blackburn , the speaker 
of the Hous e of Commons, the Arch ­
bishop of York , and others. Th e general 
committee included some of the greatest 
names of the world . O n Wednesday, 
Jul y 26, whe n Lor d Weardal e opened the 
first session of the Congress, he looked 
into the faces of a thousand people representing fifty different races. . 
IL—The Object of the Cohgress. 
Wha t after all was the object of assembling a congress of this character? 
T o many people it seemed a visionary 
scheme; what practica l outcome could 
there be? Th e Executiv e Committe e 
stated the purpose of the Congress succinctly : "Th e object of the Congress wil l 
be to discuss, in the light of science and 
the modern conscience, the general relations subsisting between the peoples of 
the West and those of the East, between 
so-called white and so-called colored peoples, wit h a view to encouraging between 
them a fuller understanding, the most 
friendly feelings, and a heartier cooperation. " Lor d Weardal e i n his introduction to the volume of papers has enlarged upon this idea : "T o those who 
regard the furtherance of international 
good wil l and peace as the highest of all 
human interests, the occasion of the First 
Universa l Races Congress opens a vista 
of almost boundless promise. 
"N o -impartial student of history can 
deny that in the case of nearly all re-THE RACES CONGRESS 201 
D E CHAKLE S A . EASTMA N 
"Th e American Indian " 
corded wars, whatever the ostensible reasons assigned, the underlying cause of 
conflict has been the existence of race 
antipathies—using the wor d race in its 
broad and popular acceptation—which 
particular circumstances, often in themselves of trivia l moment, have fanned 
into flame. 
"I n the earliest times it took the form 
of one race attempting to subjugate and 
indeed enslave another; but even in mod ­
ern wars, while questions of frontier, the 
ambitions of rulers, or the rivalries of 
commercia l policies, may have provoked 
the actual crisis, it wil l be found, in almost every instance, that the pre-existence of social and racial enmity has in 
reality determined the breach whic h particular incidents had merely precipitated. 
"A s civilization progresses and the 
western worl d more fully recognizes its 
ethical responsibilities, it may be hoped 
that such influences wil l become an ever 
diminishing force; but the modern conscience has to-day, in addition, other and 
quite new problems to solve in face of 
the startling and sudden appearance of 
new factors i n the Eastern Hemisphere . 
"In less than twenty years we have 
witnessed the most remarkable awakening of nations lon g regarded as sunk in 
such depths of somnolence as to be only 
interesting to the western worl d because 
they presented a wide and prolific field 
for commercia l rivalries, often greedy, 
cruel, and fraught wit h bloodshed in their 
prosecution, but whic h otherwise *Mf e an 
almost negligible quantity in international concerns. 
"Ho w great is the change in the lifetime of a single generation, when, to 
select two instances alone, we contemplate the most remarkable rise of the 
power of the Empir e of Japan, the precursor, it woul d seem, of a simila r rePEOF . EAR L E . FINC H 
"Th e Kacia l Effects of Miscegenation" 
viva l of the activities and highly developed qualities of the population of the 
great Empir e of China ! 
"Neare r and nearer we see approaching 
the day when the caste population of the 
East wil l assert their claim to meet on 
terms of equality the nations of the 
West, when the free institutions and the 
organized forces of the one hemisphere 
wil l have their counterbalance in the 
other, when their mental outlook and 
their social aims wil l be in principle identical; when, in short, the color prejudice 
wil l have vanished and the so-called 
white races and the so-called colored 
races shall no longer merely meet in the 
glowin g periods of missionary exposition, but, in very fact, regard one another 
as in truth men and brothers. 
"Ar e we ready for this change? Hav e 
we duly considered all that it signifies, 
en d have we tutored our minds and 
shaped our policy wit h a view of successfully meeting the comin g flood? It 
is in order to discuss this question of 
such supreme importance that the First 
Universal'Race s Congress is being held." 
III.—The Program of the Congress. 
Th e program, as laid down, sought 
first to take up fundamental considerations concerning the meaning of race. 
The n there followed certain general matters of racial progress like government, 
politica l conditions, language, religion 
and miscegenation. Th e thir d session 
began with the special racial problems 
in China , Japan, Turkey , Persia, India, 
Egypt, Haiti , etc. The n the matter of 
interracial contact was spoken of: first, 
the economic side, and then the bonds of 
science, art and technique. Th e fifth session turned, to the question of the social 
conscience in relation to racial questions, 
and took up the problems of the Jew, 
and of the Negr o in Afric a and America , 202 THE 
HON . G. K . GOKHAL E 
"East and West i n India " 
and also the question of indentured labor 
and drink. Th e last two sessions were 
given up to positive suggestions for permittin g interracial friendliness. 
Th e really astounding thing about this 
program was the amount of agreement 
and sympathy among papers from widely 
different sources. Seldom has there been 
an international congress where there 
was so much unity in the underlying 
thought and where the enthusiasm for 
the central idea was so manifest and so 
well expressed. O f course i n the very 
multiplicit y of the problems, and the 
large number of speakers, there were 
manifest disadvantages; practically all 
the speakers were limited to seven min ­
utes, and yet there must have been at 
least 150 speakers. Then , too, the 
speeches were in different languages, in ­
cluding a good deal of broken English . 
Th e acoustics of the hall were not good 
and the heat was intense. Unde r such 
conditions it woul d have been natural to 
have had a large number of people in 
bad temper and a great many misunderstandings. This, however, was not so. 
and every one attending the sessions 
came away wit h a distinct feeling of uplift and hope. 
IV.—The Men Who Were There. 
The personnel of the Congress was 
marvelous. First, there was the natural 
difference in color, from the jet black of 
Genera l Legitime , of Haiti , to the blond 
Germans and Norwegians. Th e infiltration of Negr o blood was particularly 
noticeable; the two Egyptia n Beys were 
evidently negroid, the Portuguese was 
without a doubt a mulatto, and the 
Persian was dark enough to have trouble 
in the South. Next came the difference 
in language: English , French . Germa n 
and Italian were heard and used continually in speeches, in discussion and in 
CRISIS 
WTJ TING-FAN G 
"Conditions of Progress in China " 
conversation. I remember at one dinner 
party at the beautiful home of Feli x 
Moschele s there were eight people present and they were talkin g four languages 
nearly all the time. Afte r all this came 
the difference of dress and the many 
other subtle differences of civilizations; 
the turban, the fez, the ceremonies of 
greeting, all gave a peculiar picturesqueness to the assembly. 
Th e personalities whic h made the most 
impression upon me were : Mr . Spiller, 
the creator of the Congress, the indefatigable worker, unselfish and devoted; 
Dr. Seal, the Indian scholar, tall and 
brown , wit h a flowing white beard, full 
of simple but wholesome enthusiasm; 
Watanabe , the Japanese parliamentarian, 
a sweet-tempered scholar; Rubasana, 
the only Negr o membe r of the Cape 
Colon y Parliament; Hadj i Mirz a Yahya , 
the leader of. the Persian revolutionists; 
Genera l Legitime , of Haiti , and his interesting daughter; the Secretary of State of 
Liberia . Amon g the most forceful speakers were the Englishme n Robertson and 
Hobson , and Mrs. Anni e Besant. In the 
audience at various times were many distinguished persons: Princ e Kropotkin , of 
Russia ; Schreiner, of South Africa ; 
Finot, of France; the Prince di Cassano; 
Israel Zangwill , wh o was listened to wit h 
great attention. Wilberforc e Universit y 
sent four popular persons—-President 
Scarborough, Mr . Finc h and Chaplain 
and Mrs. Steward. T o all these one must 
add a large part of learned and philanthropic London , as. for instance, the 
Ranee of Sarawak, wh o is the daughterin-law of Rajah Brooke ; Frederi c Harrison, Sir Perc y Bunting , since deceased; 
Travers Buxton , and others. 
V.—Some of the Papers. 
A resume of several of the more important papers follows: THE RACES CON CRESS 203 
DR . FELI X VO N LUSCHAN , Germany.— 
B y what criterion can we distinguish between' "savage races" and "civilized 
races?" Color ? Beauty? Cleanliness? 
Decency? Abilit y to write? Powe r of 
abstract reflection? Science is abandonin g these points of view and recognizes 
the monogenetic origin of humanity. 
Whit e races and black races, dolichocephalic and brachycephalic—all of them 
come from the same stock. Circumstances, the environment, have caused 
some to advance more rapidly than 
others. Whe n this is recognized we may 
distinguish three principa l varieties: Th e 
ancient Indo-European race, the Africa n 
race and the Asiati c race of the East, 
diverging from each other in the course 
of thousands of years, but all of the 
same stock, and intermarryin g in all 
directions. Ther e has always, and everywhere, been a constant minglin g in consequence of invasions, conquest, commercial relations, etc. Tha t is often a 
condition of progress; England , Franc e 
and Germany are remarkable for the 
variety of their racial elements. Nevertheless, the barriers between races tend 
to persist, although there is an increasing mutual sympathy as the various races 
come to know each other. 
G. SPILLER, England.—Man y races are, 
at the present time, treated, or rather 
maltreated, as inferior races. Ar e there 
any sound arguments in favor of this 
supposed inferiority? Th e commo n 
standard provided by university diplomas 
shows almost all races, even the majority 
of those whic h are regarded as inferior, 
represented successfully in the universities of Europ e and America . Equa l in 
intellectual capacity, these races have 
proved by their intrepidity, activity and 
ingeniousness in war, hunting, cultiva ­
tion of the soil and commerce that they 
are not inferior to the others in the 
spirit of initiative. In regard to morality 
the sacred books of the East and other 
documents are penetrated by the most 
profound ethical sentiment; on the practical side, the so-called savages often display more real humanity than civilized 
people; and as to beauty, it is a question 
of conventional standards: a well-developed Japanese or Haitia n is as handsome as a European. Th e differences 
between races are, therefore, mere differences of physica l characteristics. It is 
only the social and historica l element 
that transforms man into a civilized 
being. 
JOH X M . ROBERTSON , England.—Al l conquering races are agreed, as a rule, in 
refusing autonomy to the conquered 
races. This autonomy, however, is the 
initial condition of an advanced social 
organism and of intellectual and mora l 
progress. It is only after a long and 
painful apprenticeship that European nations have attained autonomy. Wh y not 
admit that it may be the same with the 
so-called backward peoples? 
PROEESSOR CHARLE S S. MYERS , England . 
•—The author submits the followin g 
propositions: (1) Tha t the mental characters of the majority of the peasant 
class throughout Europe are essentially 
the same as those of primitive communities. (2) Tha t such differences between 
them as exist are the result of differences 
in environment and in individua l variability. (3) Tha t the relation between the 
organism and its environment (considered in its broadest sense) is the ultimate 
cause of variation, bodily and mental. 
(4) That, this being admitted, the possibility of the progressive development of 
all primitive peoples must be conceded, if 
only the environment can be appropriately changed. 
PROFESSOR LIONE L W . LYDE , England.— 
W e are in a position to say that primitive 
man was dark skinned, and that he, as he 
began to make his way northward, began 
to bleach, thus creating a semi-primitive 
yellow type. This yellow man, exposed 
to conditions of cold and moisture, might 
become entirely white. The human skin 
develops pigment to protect itself against 
a strong sun; and the quantity of pig ­
ment in the skin varies wit h the intensity 
of the sun. It is therefore the men who 
live in the hottest and least-shaded parts 
of the world—that is to say, in the Afri ­
can savana—that we find the blackest 
skin. Th e white peoples, on the contrary, are confined to a region where the 
humidity of the atmosphere forms a 
screen against the rays of the sun. 
Finally , between the Negr o and the white 
is the yellow man, who is a product of 
desiccating grasslands with seasonal 
extremes of temperature. 
PROFESSOR EAR L FINCH , Unite d States.— 
Race crossing has furnished so high a 
percentage of the population of the worl d 
that the character of the product is of 
the greatest social importance. Some 
sociologists hold that the mixture of 
races has always had, and must have, 
disastrous consequences; others have a 
diametrically opposite opinion. Th e facts 
support the first of these opinions. The 
crossing of an indigenous stock with a 
civilized race often gives rise to a progeny superior in fertility and vitality to 
the indigenous race itself. Whe n the 
latter is left to itself it often declines and 
disappears. Th e Maoris, Polynesians and 
Indo-Americans are convincing examples 
of this. But if the race mixes with 
Europeans it displays an increased fertility, as has been shown by many experiences, especially in the case of the Pitcairn Islands. If the crossing of races 
generally produces an inferior population 
from the mora l point of view, it is because prejudice and the withholdin g of 
legal and social sanction restricts these 204 THE 
unions, formed under unfavorable conditions, to the inferior classes. In the rare 
cases in whic h regular unions have been 
contracted between whites and natives 
the results have been excellent. 
MOHAMME D SOUROU R BEY , Egypt.—A n 
essentially agricultura l country on 
MOHAMME D SOUEOTJ R BE Y 
"Egypt " 
account of its fertility, Egyp t has 
only two industries—the cultivation 
of rice and of sugar. Bu t its real 
wealth consists in its cultivation of 
cotton. Th e nation has no part either 
in the makin g or the execution of laws. 
The reforms that it claims are: A real 
share in the government, a reorganization of justice, gratuitous and obligatory 
education, the creation of agricultura l 
and industrial unions to improve the -condition of the fellah, the founding of in ­
stitutions of public assistance and the 
putting into force of sanitary measures. 
GENERA L LEGITIME , Haiti.—I n possession 
of a fertile soil and an ideal climate, the 
Haitians have, nevertheless, a very im ­
perfect social organization. Althoug h 
schools have been multiplied in Haiti , 
and many Haitians have completed their 
studies with success in Europe , and although some efforts have been made to 
improve the routes of communication and 
the productiveness of the country had 
been greatly increased, its economic activity is so imperfectly organized that 
the population, devoid of method, direction or capital, is discouraged and emigrates. Enduring , active, plastic, having 
immense natural wealth in his country, 
the Haitia n is, if his government gives 
him the opportunity, as capable as any 
other man of attaining a high degree of 
prosperity and civilization. 
JOH N A . HOBSON , England.—Th e character of commerce has changed in our 
time. Industry having increased its production as a result of the invention of 
CRISIS 
machinery, it becomes necessary to get 
ri d of the surplus of manufactured products, and there is a struggle between the 
various nations to gain possession of the 
markets. Further, the importance of 
commercia l relations wit h primitive peoples has passed from importation to exGENEBA L LEGITIM E 
"Haiti " 
portation. An d as persuasion was necessary to induce these peoples to take our 
products, and as, in order to have new 
needs, they had to be "civilized, " commerce sought to exercise a pacific and 
civilizin g influence. Nevertheless, the 
wis h to secure or reserve to themselves 
new markets has dragged modern States 
into a policy of conquest and coloniza ­
tion in an aggressive form. Tha t seems 
to be a mistake. T o establish profitable 
commercia l relations wit h a people it is 
useless to take possession of it. Besides 
the expense of conquest and military 
occupation, the unfriendliness of the conquered people wil l give a very poor'guarantee of the development of commerce. 
Th e most profitable commerc e for Euro ­
peans is that wit h countries into which 
the commoditie s and arts of Europ e have 
been introduced under conditions of 
peace and mutua l sympathy. 
PROFESSOR FELI X ADLER , Unite d States.— 
It is urgently necessary for us to have 
a clearer conception of the ideal to be 
realized in international relations; for if 
we make incessant and ruinous preparations for a possible war, and find ourselves in a blind alley from whic h there 
is no escape, we owe it to a false military ideal—a false ideal of national prestige, materia l growth, etc. Wha t prin ­
ciple shall we put in its place? Th e 
appeal to sentiment and the progress of 
democracy are not in themselves a safeguard against war. It is not peace itself 
that we must keep in view, but the object 
to be secured by peace. Th e ideal prin -THE RACES CON CRESS 205 
ciple of international relations consists 
in the progressive organization of these 
relations between peoples and races. 
This organization involves two postulates: (1) T o attain the most extreme 
J . TENG O JABAV U 
"Native Races of South Africa " 
differentiation of types of culture, the 
maximum of variety and richness in the 
expression of human faculties. Th e peace 
and progress of the worl d wil l depend on 
the formation of a cultivated class of all 
civilized peoples. (2) This exchange between different types of culture wil l 
serve to brin g to light the weak points 
in each, and may lead to their improve ­
ment and healing. In accordance wit h 
this principle two practical results seem 
desirable: Th e first is that civilized nations should treat backward races wit h 
more humanity and intelligence, for the 
benefit of those races, and, in the lon g 
run, for the sake of the whol e of mankind. Th e second is that colonia l administrators should make a sympathetic 
study of the customs, manners, law and 
religion of the peoples to whom they are 
supposed to brin g civilization. 
SIR CHARLE S BRUCE , England.—Th e history of civilization passes through three 
great successive phases: Extermination , 
servitude and amalgamation. Thus, in 
the West, the conquering and dominating 
conception of Athens and of Rome was 
ruined by the revolt of the northern barbarians; the amalgamation took place 
under the guidance of Christianity. In 
the same way the Jews, after the periods 
of conquest and subjection, tend everywhere to be assimilated to the different 
peoples. Now , this idea whic h increasingly controls the relations of the western races to each other, should also control their relations wit h the peoples of 
the East. In this, however, the West 
has a new prejudice—that of color—to 
overcome. Englan d was one of the first 
to apply this policy of amalgamation, in 
India. In regard to the yellow peoples 
Europ e is, after a period of brutality, 
attaining to a conception of the same 
kind ; the progress of Japan has had a 
good deal to do with this transformation. A s to the blacks, they have lon g 
been the instruments of the cupidity, 
cruelty and luxury of the white ; but their 
intelligence, deliberately neglected for 
ages, needs only to be awakened. 
TH E LAT E RIGH T HON . SIR CHARLE S W . 
DILKE , Bart., England.—Slavery, which 
has been officially abolished, tends to revive in disguised forms: "Force d labor " 
(unpaid, or paid, at less than the norma l 
rate) for public works; porterage in 
Africa ; forced labor in the form of .a 
rubber tax in the Cong o basin. W e find 
the same systems in other parts of the 
worl d for the purpose of increasing the 
production of minerals, cocoa and cotton; 
by imposin g labor either on the natives, 
or on prisoners, or on Chinese or Hindo o 
immigrants. Publi c opinion in many 
countries is protesting against these 
practices, which seem to be bound up 
wit h the system of large concessions. 
Englan d and Franc e have made praiseworthy efforts to suppress them. 
SIR HARR Y JOHNSTON , England.—Th e 
Negr o type is that which is most markedly set off from the white or Caucasian 
subspecies. Hence , no doubt, a certain 
repugnance felt in regard to races that 
are impregnated wit h Negr o blood, such 
as the Hindoos, Moors and even the 
Jews. Th e negroid element is, nevertheless, very widespread; it is found, more 
or less ancient and more or less attenuated, in southern Italy, southern France , 
Spain and even Great Britain . Th e physical difference from the white is merely 
a question of taste. O n the other hand, 
the Negr o has a very lively feeling for 
music and the plastic arts, a great power 
of resisting disease, a high fertility and 
considerable talent. Th e Negr o race has 
produced men of great ability in all 
departments. 
BRAJENDRANAT H SEA L 
"Meanin g of Race, Tribe and Nation " 206 THE CRISIS 
J . TENG O JABAVU , South Africa.—Th e 
Bantu, a race livin g in the extreme south 
of Africa , number about six millio n souls. 
The y were a robust, healthy, viril e people, with advanced institutions; they had 
a high mora l level; they were temperate 
and religious. Bu t they lived a nomadic 
life and had no written language. Wha t 
have the whites done for them? Ver y 
little. Th e minin g system leaves much 
to be desired. The y have few or no 
politica l rights and no organized education. Th e Christian missions themselves 
have, in spite of their good intentions, 
aimed chiefly at attacking and destroying, 
instead of improving , the organization of 
these reputed barbarians. Th e solution 
woul d be to instruct these races in their 
maternal tongue, concentrating at first 
on a small number wh o wil l afterward 
devote themselves to teaching and guiding the others. Ther e has been some 
effort made to found a college, but ten 
thousand pounds are still needed. 
DR . MOJOL A ACBEBI , West Africa.—Th e 
problem is twofold. Th e task of Europe 
is to establish its politica l dominio n and 
an industrial and commercia l development. Fo r the Africa n the problem is 
to see what effect the contact wit h the 
whites wil l have on his life, modified and 
attached in its essential features by this 
contact. Europea n colonization woul d 
only gain by a more intimate and sympathetic penetration of these races whose 
civilization is so different. The y venerate ancestors and heroes, cultivate secret 
societies, practice polygamy (without 
grossness), as is commo n in Islam, and 
show certain superior characteristics 
even in their witchcraft, human sacrifices 
and cannibalism. 
DR . W . E . B. DUBOIS , Unite d States.— 
The Negroes number about ten millions 
in the Unite d States. Most of them 
descend from former slaves. The y live 
at the present time under a system of 
theoretical liberty, but it is restricted in 
practice by certain legal dispositions and 
by custom. The y are well disposed toward family life, in so far as they are 
enabled to enjoy it, and to education. 
The y have churches of their own. Abou t 
two hundred thousand of them are farmers, and fifty thousand are engaged in 
commerce and the liberal professions. 
Their situation is most distressing in the 
South, where they suffer civic incapacity, 
injustice in the courts of law, economic 
restrictions, discourtesy in public, etc. 
An d 75 per cent.' of the Negroe s live in 
the South. One theory proposes that 
they should emancipate themselves by 
acquiring wealth, but it woul d seem that 
intellectual emancipation should proceed 
hand in hand wit h economic independence. 
DR . JEA N BAPTIST E D E LACERDA , Brazil.— 
Durin g the first half of the last century, 
Negroes, bought in Afric a by Portuguese 
traders, were imported into Brazi l to the 
number of nearly two millions. Their 
masters, wh o treated them as cattle, 
made concubines of the female slaves, 
and the country was soon full of metis 
(half-breeds). These were treated wit h 
a certain liberality by the Portuguese, received some education, were often emancipated and had a happier time than their 
black ancestors. Fro m the intellectual 
point of view they are often superior to 
their white father and black mother; in 
regard to physique, they are graceful and 
vivacious; but they have not a great 
powe r of resisting disease, and it is not 
always possible to put implicit faith in 
their loyalty and probity. The y have, 
nevertheless, rendered notorious service 
to Brazi l and have produced a large number of capable men. Since the proclama ­
tion of the Republi c they have taken an 
important part in the direction of the 
affairs of State. 
PROFESSOR J . S. MACKENZIE , England.— 
Th e fundamental importance of mora l 
education in schools is now pretty generally recognized: (1) B y the judicious 
study of international history and literature we may foster sentiments of honesty, justice, humanity and respect for 
one's self and others. (2) Mora l education should lead to an appreciation of 
the essential likeness of the various races 
and classes, in spite of their superficial 
differences. (3) It is qualities of character that form the real basis of superiority in men of nations. (4) Different 
peoples, different classes, different sexes, 
and so on, have each a distinctive type of 
personality, with a distinctive value of its 
own. (5) Th e identity and the comprehensive character of the human ideal are 
evolved in different and many forms. 
EDWI N D. MEAD , Unite d States.—The 
First Universa l Races Congress might 
form the nucleus of a vast international 
federation. Al l the members of the Con ­
gress ought to form the followin g resolutions: "Eac h nation here represented 
shall organize a national society this year 
and hold a national congress next year; 
a second international congress shall be 
held three years from now. " It is desirable that this Congress should be held 
in the Unite d States in 1914, as it is the 
date when we shall celebrate the centennial of peace between the Unite d States 
and Great Britain . 
PROFESSOR N . R. D'ALFONSO , Italy.— 
Speculative psycholog y teaches that the 
man, to whatever race he may belong, 
has always the same psychologica l possibilities. Subject from childhood to certain conditions of climate, environment 
and education, he can reach the highest 
and most complex grades of civilization. 
It is the action and reaction of the external worl d on the internal worl d of the 
min d that issues in the creation of man. 
Hence , if there are psychologica l dif-THE RACES CON CRESS 207 
HADJ I MIKZ A YAHY A 
"Persia " 
ferences between races they are the outcome of the particular history of various 
peoples—a history that has entailed a different education. Th e psychologica l 
basis being the same in all men, all, from 
whatever part of the globe they may 
come, may evolve in the same way and 
attain the same psychic results. In the 
same way racial hostilities and prejudices 
are not due so much to organic heredity 
as to tradition and education. It is the 
place of the Universa l Races Congress 
to recognize and spread this theory and 
its consequences. 
VI.—The Race Problems. 
Whe n fifty races look each other in 
the eye, face to face, there rises a new 
conception of humanity and its problems. Fo r four days these representatives of the worl d walked and sat and 
ate side by side and heard speech after 
speech. Ther e were few set expository 
talks. Me n did not explain their problems as to some third person—rather 
they expressed their own inner feeling at 
this contact of soul. Some objected to 
this. The y said: "Ther e are fine phrases 
after phrases and endless allusions to 
human brotherhood, but after all there is 
little scientific ordered explanation. W e 
find our thoughts and sympathies 
aroused but unsatisfied." 
This was inevitable. T o explain means 
double knowledge : knowledge of the 
problem, knowledge of the worl d to 
whom the problem is being explained. 
Strangers, therefore, cannot easily reveal 
themselves to each other and the delegates to the Races Congress were largely 
strangers. 
Ye t in the continua l meeting of strangers comes gradual illumination and 
what the forma l speeches failed to do, 
informa l intercourse accomplished to a 
TONG O TAKEE E 
"Japan " 
wonderful degree. First, perhaps, the 
problem of racial and national integrity 
stepped to the fore: "W e built a great 
wall once," said the keen Chinese representative, "to keep out the world ; a wall 
so vast that it has been said to be the 
only wor k of man capable of being seen 
from the moon ; now yo u are buildin g a 
wall against us"—but in either case the 
clear implication was, Chin a stands and 
must stand as an independent nation. So 
with the Turk s and the Persians there 
was a certain frank appeal to the fair 
judgment of men. W e are a congeries 
of races, said the Turk s repeatedly, 
united in politica l bonds, and thus we 
typify the future of the world ; and the 
Persians appealed to a great past as earnest for a greater future. Ye t it was 
significant that while they were speaking 
Austri a was movin g all her influence to 
force European interference in Albania , 
the ex-Shah landed in Persi a and the 
Time s was publishing articles to show 
England's neglected interests in the Persian gulf. 
Nex t to questions of integrity came 
problems of autonomy among the great 
subject nations of India and Egypt. Ho w 
long are these to be held in leading 
strings? Ho w far can people not "Euro ­
pean" govern themselves? Ho w dangerous has been the rise of Japan? Th e 
clear unanswerable argument of John 
Robertson, M.P. , was but reason above 
foaming waters, and one felt the repression of those who talked on these subjects. 
Th e next great question discussed, not 
so much directly as by implication, was 
that of religion. Wha t right has one 
religion to discredit another and force 
itself on men, especially when it does 
not pretend to practice what it preaches? 
This was the repeated implication in con-208 THE CRISIS 
PASTO R MOJOL A AGBEB I 
"Th e West Africa n Problem " 
versation and speech. It was a hard 
thing to answer in face of the tolerance 
of the Mohammeda n and the Buddhist. 
Perhaps its best answer was the Races 
Congress itself. 
Afte r this the questions came nearer 
home and the color line appeared. Wh o 
and what are these black and brown 
men? Ar e they really men? And , in 
the same breath, is their ability due to 
white blood or is white blood fatal to 
them? One could, after all, think one's 
way through the politica l integrity of 
the East and the gradual freedom of India and Egypt, but could black men be 
free—were they wort h freedom? The 
answer from the Unite d States was sharp 
and strong and perhaps the most arresting thing in the whol e Congress. If 
Americ a is tryin g to treat civilized men 
as uncivilized simply on account of 
color what effect wil l this have on the 
worl d and on Africa ? 
Afric a was to the Congress as to the 
world , the land of the Sphinx. It said 
little that was articulate, but all knew 
that it was the land of that new forced 
and exploited labor on whic h Londo n 
and the worl d waxes luxurious, and that 
this exploitation is spread over Mexic o 
and South America ; is it not one with 
the economic exploitation of women and 
children and the mass of laborers generally? 
Th e question of the status of women 
leaped continually to the front. If wc 
speak of China , what of Chinese women? 
It was the wome n of Indi a and child 
marriage that created the keenest interest, 
and no paper was more eagerly listened 
to than that whic h told of the up strugglin g of the Negr o wome n of the Unite d 
States. 
O n the other hand, the labor question 
was hardly touched in its main modern 
phases, although a strong, masterly argument was made to show that the economic foundations of imperialism were as 
weak as those of the slave barons of the 
South and as wicked. 
O n the whol e the view of the race 
problems of the worl d as revealed in the 
Congress was strongly reassuring; but 
the reason of this was clear. It was 
because the men themselves were there. 
In their absence a terrible indictment 
against "lazy " Negroes, "dishonest " 
Chinese and "incompetent " Asiatic s 
could have been framed; but in the face 
of gentlemen from various human races 
of all shades and cultures, the fatal 
exceptions to sweeping rules of fitness 
continually occurred. Th e Southerner 
from the Unite d States was forced to 
explain that all Negroe s were not like 
this one; the Englishma n was forced to 
show that Indians, fine as they might be 
personally, had fearful caste hatreds. 
Th e wretchedness of the fellaheen had 
to be balanced against the culture of the 
Egyptia n delegates, and everywhere men 
found themselves facing old and familiar, 
human problems whic h but helped to 
make the essential worl d humanity 
plausible. 
It seems no exaggeration to say that a 
few worl d congresses like this-woul d do 
more for the unity of mankin d and reasonable sympathy between races, would 
do more for the stopping of war, slavery 
and oppression than any other single 
movement. 
VII.—The Socia l Side. 
Th e social side of a congress is usually 
the most interesting and this was true of 
the Races Congress. Th e opening reception was given Jul y 25 at Fishmonger's 
Hall . Ther e were fully a thousand 
guests and it was a gorgeous sight. On 
the day before Mr . and Mrs. Milhollan d 
gave an interesting reception. Lor d 
Weardal e entertained the writers of 
papers the followin g night, and on 
Thursda y there were two receptions; one 
TERTJAK T KOBAYASH I 
' 'Japan' ' THE RACES CONGRESS 209 
at the Lyceu m Clu b and one at Claridge's 
Hotel . O n Frida y there was an official 
dinner, and on Monda y the Countess 
of Warwic k entertained the Congress at 
Warwic k castle. Beside these official 
occasions there was an endless succession of luncheons, teas .and dinners, all 
given quite regardless of the color line 
or racial lines, and in all cases the genuine courtesy of the Englis h hosts was 
noticeable. 
VIII.—Results of the Congress. 
Th e tangible result of the Congress 
was the formin g of an international committee. This international committee has 
the followin g nine objects: 
(1) T o urge the establishing of harmonious relations between the various 
divisions of mankin d is an essential condition precedent to any serious attempt 
to diminish warfare ,and extend the practice of arbitration. 
(2) T o commen d to individuals of 
different races comin g into passing or 
permanent contact wit h one another 
conduct which shall be courteous and 
respectful. 
(3) T o induce each people to study 
sympathetically the customs and civiliza ­
tions of other peoples, since even the 
lowliest civilizations have much to teach, 
and since every civilization should be 
reverenced as having deep historic roots. 
(4) T o emphasize that difference in 
civilization does not, as is often supposed, necessarily connote either inferiority or superiority. 
(5) T o study impartially and on a 
broad basis the physica l and social effects 
of race blending and the cases which 
promote or hinder it, to request governments to compile statistics on the subject and to discourage hasty and crude 
generalizations on the subject. 
(6) T o point out the irreconcilability 
of the contention prevalent among the 
various peoples of the worl d that their 
customs, their civilizations and their 
physiques are superior to those of other 
peoples, and also to deprecate the loose 
manner in whic h the term "race" is popularly employed. 
(7) T o urge the paramount importance of providin g in all lands a universal 
and efficient system of education—physical, intellectual and moral—as one of the 
principa l means of promotin g cordia l relations within, and among, all divisions 
of mankind. 
(8) T o respect, or to endeavor to 
assimilate or change, the economic, 
hygienic, educational and mora l standards of immigrants, rather than to regard 
them as indefensible or fixed. 
(9) T o collect records of experiments 
showing the successful uplifting of relatively backward peoples by the application of humane methods, and to urge the 
application of such methods universally. 
It is also charged wit h the duty of 
holdin g future Races Congresses at least 
once in four years wit h the followin g 
leading object: "T o promote cordia l relations amon g all divisions of mankind, 
without regard to race, color or creed, 
and, in particular, to encourage a good 
understanding between East and West. " 
It is fifially asked to establish an international institution whose object shall be 
to investigate and publish as well as form 
local organizations throughout the world . 
From " A HYM N T O TH E PEOPLES " 
read before trie Races Congress 
Save us, Worl d Spirit, from our lesser selves! 
Grant us that wa r and hatred cease, 
Revea l our souls in every race and hue! 
Hel p us, O Huma n God , in this Th y Truc e 
T o make Humanit y divine ! 
W . E. BURGHARD T D u Bois. WOMEN' S CLUB S 
STAT E CONVENTIONS . By Mrs. W . A . HUNTO N 
Thos e familiar with the joys and benefits of the summe r conventions of clubwome n can understand wh y jt is the 
preferred season for makin g more 
real the great purposes and plans of the 
club movement. It is impossible to make 
the ideal real except by an actual comin g 
together. Th e summer is best for this 
because it is the season of greatest leisure; the time for counting gains and 
losses, and reviewing and revising for 
the comin g year in the light of past success or failure. Th e summe r convention 
takes the wome n into the fall work, 
alert because of the interchange of ideas 
and experiences and aglow wit h inspira ­
tion. 
Some years ago the possibilities of the 
State Federation in extending and unifyin g the club movement began to be felt. 
T o understand how many of these possibilities have been realized and others are 
in process of realization, it is simply 
necessary to sit in a convention of one 
of these Federations. Ther e one catches 
a glimpse, not only of the splendid constructive agencies that have been set in 
motio n for the betterment of humanity, 
and is won to a more intelligent appreciation of the difficult problems involved 
in such an effort, but is also able to see 
clearly a great advance in the idea of 
personal responsibility as well as in the 
jo y and efficiency of volunteer service. 
Al l of this is simpl y marvelous when we 
remember that wit h great ideas and perseverance as their only capital these 
State Federations have achieved, in so 
short a period, so much that is really 
tangible and of positive value. 
State conventions have been held the 
past summe r in every section of the 
country. Some have had scores of delegates in attendance; others less than a 
score, but whether in the far South, 
where the lash of oppression descends, or 
in Ne w England , where the conscience 
that was so lon g our cheer and hope 
seems now strangely held in leash, or yet 
in the far-off West where the problem 
has found its way, these conventions 
show but scant difference in their spirit 
and personnel. T o an onlooke r these 
women often appear overserious and 
restless, but it is rather an eagerness to 
grasp every fact and plan of the State 
Federation for the benefit of the local 
clubs wh o have honored them as deleDELEGATE S O F TH E ALABAM A STAT E FEDERATIO N WOMEN'S CLUBS 211 
gates. Lon g ago social functions were 
largely tabooed by these conventions, 
not only because they infringed upon the 
very limited time given to the sessions, 
but for the further reason that they necessitated trunks, when suitcases could 
have otherwise served, and often embarrassed delegates wh o were not prepared 
to attend such functions. 
The program varies in different sections. Ther e are addresses by people 
who, because of honored careers, add 
dignity and prestige to the convention, 
or by those whose wor k serves as an 
inspiration. Ther e are innumerable committee meetings; there is music, but by 
far the best features of the program 
are the reports that come from individual clubs, from the various departments 
of the Federation, and especially the 
plans and outlook of that particular wor k 
which is for the commo n good of the 
State, and which is being fostered by the 
State Federation itself. A few facts wit h 
reference to several of the recent conventions of State Federations wil l be 
amply sufficient to illustrate what has 
been written. 
Th e Mississipp i convention, whic h met 
at Natche z in June, had representatives 
from twenty-five clubs in fifteen cities. 
In addition to the regular delegates there 
were present a large number of women 
from the country districts of the State, 
where neighborhood wor k has been extended. One woul d scarcely realize how 
far into the dark interiors of that State 
the clubwomen had carried the light of 
mothers' meetings, homekeeping and 
morality except for the reports and experiences comin g out of that State 
convention. 
Afte r struggling for several years for a 
boys' reformatory the Alabama Federa ­
tion was able to report at its last convention that the institution, whic h they 
had worke d so faithfully to erect, had 
found favor with the Governo r and State 
officials, and had been accepted by them 
to be supported as a State institution. 
Immediately these same women bowed 
themselves to the burden once more by 
resolving to wor k as assiduously as ever 
for the erection of a reformatory for 
girls—-another of Alabama's great needs. 
Anothe r June convention was that of 
South Carolina . A few of the topics discussed show the trend of their work : 
"Chil d Study as a Preparation for Mora l 
Uplift, " "Wha t Steps to Elevat e Ou r 
Youn g People? " "Ho w to Safeguard Ou r 
Girls, " and "The Mother, Daughte r and 
Socia l Purity. " A s a result of the club 
movement the kindergarten idea has 
taken root in South Carolina , and in 
every considerable town this special 
blessing for children is being supported 
by local clubs. 
Th e Virgini a Federation was organized 
three years ago at the Hampto n Negr o 
Conference with fourteen clubs. Th e 
last convention had sixty-four clubs represented. A s a first offering for an industrial home for the waywar d colored 
girls of the State, $600 were laid on the 
table. Mr . C. H . Gilliam, of Roanoke , 
presented the convention with a tract of 
land in Appomato x County on which to 
MBS . F . E . KEYSE R 
President New Yor k State Federation 
erect the proposed home. Th e State 
Boar d of Charities is manifesting great 
interest in the work, and there is scarcely 
a doubt but that this wil l develop into 
another State institution. 
Thirt y clubs from Washington , Uta h 
and Colorado sent seventy delegates to 
their combined convention, recently held 
at Colorad o Springs. Funds to the 
amount of $200 were distributed among 
charitable institutions of these States. A 
large and valuable collection of fancy 
wor k was on exhibition and was subject 
to prize awards. Anothe r feature of the 
convention was a round table on "Ou r 
Boys: Their Work , Pla y and Religion. " 
The. Empir e State Federation held 
sway in the pretty little city of Yonkers 
for two days. The program, which it 
was gratifying to see so faithfully followed, was the most practical and, withal, 
the most ideal we have read. Th e 
annual address of the president, Mrs. 
F . R. Keyser, was an exhaustive review 
of conditions among colored people 
throughout the country and especially 
Ne w Yor k State, and an appeal for a 
larger and more earnest effort among 
clubwomen that not only stirred every 
hearer, but which was well worth y of 
preservation. A n important step was 
taken in the decision of this Federation 
to investigate and provide for the needs 
of Mothe r Tubman . Immediately after 
the convention, the new president, Mrs. 212 THE CRISIS 
Wm . H . Talbert, of Buffalo, made the 
investigation; her findings were made 
public and so soon a linen shower has 
provided this old warrio r wit h an abundance of good things, and the Federation 
wil l send twenty-five dollars per month 
to further he r comfort for the remainder 
of her life. 
Th e Northeastern Federation, which 
convened in Ne w Haven , can hardly be 
classed as a State Federation, being an 
aggregation of loca l clubs from a large 
number of States, and yet its ideals are 
essentially the same, as well as its work . 
A n organization of great power, it is 
bringin g the wome n of Ne w Englan d 
into an actual oneness that were otherwise .impossible. Muc h excellent wor k 
stands to honor this Federation, and 
now it proposes to give its means to the 
extension of the settlement idea at 
strategic points. Th e anti-lynching department has not onl y published a statistical pamphlet, but stirred the convention by exhibitin g a list of the yast year's 
lynchings. Th e Rev. Charle s Stowe and 
Mr . Joseph Mannin g were amon g the 
guests of this convention. 
Th e speaking, the reports, the plans 
have been made, but the end of the convention is but the beginning of work 
wit h a fresher, richer, mor e embracing 
vision of the possibilities of the club 
movement. 
JOH N BROW N 
The death of Eugene F . Ware , of Kansas, formerly Commissione r 
of Pensions, and author of "Th e Rhyme s of Ironquill, " suggests the 
publication in .TH E CRISI S at this time of his poem, "John Brown. " 
JOH N BROWN . 
States are not great 
Excep t as men may make them; 
Me n are not great except they do and 
dare. 
But States, like men, 
Hav e destinies that take them— 
Tha t bear them on, not knowin g wh y or 
where. 
Al l merit comes 
Fro m braving the unequal; 
Al l glor y comes from daring to begin. 
Fame s loves the State 
That, reckless of the sequel, 
Fights long and well, whether it lose or 
win . 
Tha n in our State 
N o illustration apter 
Is seen or found of faith and hope and 
will . 
Take up her story: 
Ever y leaf and chapter 
Contains a record that conveys a thrill. 
An d there is one 
Whos e faith, whose fight, whose 
failing, 
Fame shall placard upon the walls of 
time. 
H e dared begin— 
Despite the unavailing, 
H e dared begin, when failure was a 
crime. 
Whe n over Afric a 
Some future cycle 
Shall sweep the lake-gemmed uplands 
wit h its surge; 
When , as wit h trumpet 
O f Archange l Michael , 
Cultur e shall bid a colored race emerge; 
Whe n busy cities 
There, in constellations, 
Shall gleam wit h spires and palaces and 
domes, 
Wit h marts wherein 
Is heard the noise of nations; 
Wit h summer groves surrounding stately 
homes— 
There , future orators 
T o cultured freemen 
Shall tell of valor, and recount with 
praise 
Stories of Kansas, 
An d of Lacedsemon— 
Cradles of freedom, then of ancient days. 
Fro m boulevards 
O'erlookin g both Nyanzas, 
Th e statured bronze shall glitter in the 
sun, 
Wit h rugged lettering: 
"JOH N BROW N OF KANSAS : 
H E DARED BEGIN ; 
H E LOST, 
BUT , LOSING WON. " THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 213 
WHA T T O REA D 
BOOKS . 
Fothergill, Edward—"Fiv e Years in the 
Soudan. " London . 
A criticism of Britis h rule. Th e natives are growin g "insolent." 
Honey , James A.—"Sout h Afric a Fol k 
Tales. " Baker. 
Negr o folk lore. 
PERIODICALS . 
"Loca l Study of the Race Problem in 
Georgia. " R. P. Brooks. Politica l Science Quarterly, June. 
"Southern Justice to the Negro. " Outlook, June 17. 
"Message to the North. " C. T. Crowell. 
Independent. May . 
Negr o suffrage. 
RACE ADJUSTMENT 
By KELL Y MILLER . Howard University, Washington, D . C . A Standard Book on the Race Questioo. 
PRIC E 52.uO 
Social Equalit y Scents 
A n Appea l to Reason, open letter 
to John Templ e Graves 10 cents 
Roosevelt and the Negr o 10 cents 
Forty Years of Xegro Education. 10 cents 
Ultimat e Race Problem 10 cents 
The Politica l Capacity of the 
Xegro 10 cents 
Th e Talented Tent h 10 cents 
ADDRES S AUTHO R 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bugbear of Social Equality," which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York . N . Y . 
TRAD E JOURNA L 
SMALL' S NEGR O TRAD E JOURNA L 
A paper devoted to the commercial, financial 
and business world. 
We list you and send you our paper once each 
month—all for $1.00 a year. 
Send us your business card. 
T . FREDERIC K SMAL L CO . 
2225 Fift h Avenue New Yor k Cit y 
PAIN E COLLEG E 
AUGUSTA , GA . 
Normal, Preparatory , College and Theological 
Departments 
Girls receive superior training in Domestic 
Science." Instruction in Voca l and Instrumental 
Music . Hig h Location, Larg e Oampus, Thorough 
Instruction. Session of 1911-12 begins September 26th. 
Fo r full information write 
H . S. DUNBAR , Reg. 
Mention 
"Neg r o in the New World, " Review of 
Sir Harr y Johnston's. Nature , Dec. 
28, 1910. Livin g Age , Jan. 21, 1911. 
America n Journa l of Sociology, 
March . 
"Farc e of San Antonio. " Independent, 
Apri l 13. 
"Peopl e of Africa, " Etc., Review of 
Theal's. Nature, Feb. 23. 
"Colore d Boys' Broom Brigade. " Worl d 
To-day, January. 
"Healt h Problems of the Negroes. " J. A . 
Kenney . Annals of the America n 
Academy, March . 
"Legislatio n Concernin g Persona l and 
Racia l Problems. " F . J. Stimson. 
Popula r La w Making . 
"Negr o Segregation in Cities. " Chautauquan, March . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G. DILL 
Atlant a University , Atlanta , Ga. 
JOININ G TH E NAVT ; OR , 
ABROA D WIT H UNCL E SA M 
B y JOH N H . PAYNTER , A.M . 
Firs t Rac e Contributio n t o Nav y 
Literatur e 
Ordered b y the Government for Librarie s of 
Wa r Vessels 
"It is a perfect picture of life on board 
ship when I first went to sea. The story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so, that I read it through 
at one Bitting."—Richardson Clover, Rear 
Admiral , U . S. N. , Retired. 
Cloth Bound. 300 Pages. Full y Illustrated. 
SECON D EDITIO N 
Sent Postage Pai d on Receipt of One Dollar 
Address* care of 
SUDWART H PRINTIN G GO . 
WASHINGTON , D . C . 
HELP WANTE D 
LOCA L REPRESENTATIVE S for TH E CRISI S 
wanted in each locality. 
Some agents sell over 800 copies monthly. 
Writ e for particulars. 
Address: 
FRAN K M . TURNE R 
CIRCULATIO N MANAGE R 
Suite 311 
20 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
TH E CSISIS . 214 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHER E T O STO P 
Our readers are urged to use these columns in outlining their vacation 
and travel plans. These hotels and stopping places are modern in every 
sense, and the traveling public is assured comfort and efficient service. 
IJ For detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
The Trave l Editor of The Crisis, 20 Vesey St., Ne w Yor k 
NEW YORK CITY 
MARSHALL'S HOTEL 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
COMFORT — Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE — I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J- L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
TH E CLIF F HOUS E 
253 WES T 134T H STREE T 
NEWL Y OPENE D 
Special summer rates to permanent or transient guests. Special attention to out-of-town 
tourists. Up-to-date private house in every 
reBpect. Telephone connection. 
MRS . W . E . PERKINS , Prop. 
Telephone 4121 Harle m 
"TH E IDL E HOUR " 
Mrs. P . Brow n 
HANDSOM E FURNISHE D ROOM S 
Wit h Al l Improvements 
Permanent and Transient Guests Accommodated 
MEAL S SERVE D A T AL L HOUR S 
77 WES T 134T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenue s 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
'Phone Chelsea 2957 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WES T 20T H STREE T 
Between 7th and 8th Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Neatly Furnished Rooms for Permanent 
or Transient Guests by Da y or Week 
MRS . THOMA S L . TE N EYCK , Proprietress 
Mention T: 
" A quiet place for quiet people to dine' 1 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WES T 134T H STREE T 
Between Fift h and Leno x Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Sandwiches, Etc . Regular Dinner , 25c , from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
Privat e Dinin g Room. Furnishe d Rooms To 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOH N E . BRADFORD , Proprieto r 
TH E ALLE N HOUS E 
62 WES T 132D STREE T 
SELECT , NEATL Y FURNISHE D ROOM S 
Al l Improvements 
Wash-rooms, hot and cold water in every room 
FO R REN T B Y DA Y O R WEE K 
Prices Moderat e 
MRS . M . A . ANDERSO N JOHNSO N 
TH E ROSALIN E 
128 WES T 29T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
FURNISHE D ROOM S 
B Y DA Y O R WEE K 
EDWAR D D . SMALL , Proprieto r 
Telephone 5395 Chelsea 
TH E LAW S HOUS E 
FURNISHE D ROOM S 
B Y DAY , WEE K O R MONT H 
Convenient to the Pennsylvani a 
Depot and Al l Ca r Line s 
245 WES T 20T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
MRS . L . D . LAWS , Proprietress 
H E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 215 
WHER E TO STOP—(Continued) 
HARLE M PRIVAT E HOUS E 
Furnished rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Ho t and cold water in every room. 
MRS . BERR Y L . HICKS , Proprietress 
258 WES T 133D STREE T NE W YOR K 
Fou r doors from Eight h Avenue 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
(Unde r New Management) 
2229 FIFT H AVENU E 
Between 135th and 136th Streets NE W YOR K 
Real home cooking. Come and be convinced. 
Our motto is to please you. Meals at all hours. 
MRS . M . J . FERDINAND , Proprietress 
TH E VIRGINI A HOUS E 
MRS . MAR Y E . HILL , Proprietress 
NEATL Y FURNISHE D ROOM S 
Good Ol d Southern Cooking 
"Just Lik e Home " 
37 WES T 133D STREE T NE W YOR K 
NEW JERSEY 
TH E ROBINSO N COTTAG E 
220 BEAC H STREET , RE D BANK , N . J . 
Newly Opened 
Special Attention to Saturday and Sunday Parties 
Term s Reasonable 
MRS . M . H . ROBINSON , Proprietress 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Telephone Strictly Firat-claBa 
TH E NE W DELMONIC O HOTE L 
16th and Ridge Avenue , Philadelphia, Pa . 
STRIOTL Y PRIVAT E AN D HOM E COMFORT S 
Te n large bedrooms, with electric light, Bteam 
heat and baths. 
Cafe on second floor. Best meals only. 
This hotel is newly furnished and up to date 
in every particular . We solicit your trade. 
Permanent and transient rooms; they are the 
best. Tr y one of our meals. 
(Rin g bell after 12 m.) 
L . B . SMITH , Prop . A . R. SMITH , Mgr . 
ILLINOIS 
J . N. Washington Mrs. J . N. Washington 
Proprieto r Manage r 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
S262 WABAS H AVENU E 
CHICAG O 
First-class Service for First-class People 
Bates: 76c , $1.00 and $2.00 Pe r Da y 
Telephone Aldine 516 
OHIO 
Home 'Phone B-3244 American—Europea n 
HOTE L PLEASAN T 
P. H . WOO D 
NE W WIT H MODER N EQUIPMEN T 
9-11 ERI E STREE T 
TOLEDO , OHI O 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTOENE Y AN D COUNSELOB-AT-LA W 
Unio n Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
S t Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502, Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTOBNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TE E CRISIS . 216 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
fl Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
•I If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
(J If you want a POSITION , TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
tj You will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
•J Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
Cfl Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
CRISIS AGEN T 
TH E CRISI S 
CHARLE S D . LEV Y 
Agent, Ne w Orleans, La . 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of far m lan d i n the best localitie s of the Stat e fo r sal e at ver y flatterin g 
prices. Smal l tracts fo r goo d land s suitabl e fo r 
farming , truck , fruits an d an y domesti c product . 
W e hav e fo r sal e a numbe r of larg e farm s alread y i n cultivation , goo d house s an d barns, 
welts, an d nic e pastur e lands, whic h ca n be 
obtaine d at reasonabl e rates. Cit y propert y a 
specialty . Business bits i n the best part o f 
the city , improve d an d unimproved . Larg e lots 
suitabl e fo r factor y propert y wit h switc h 
f acilities. 
N o investmen t ca n be mor e valuabl e tha n an 
investmen t i n Texa s rea l estate . Land s ar c becomin g so valuabl e tha t the y ar e doublin g 
themselve s i n valu e i n less tha n a year's time . 
Fo r an y investmen t i n Texa s property , writ e 
T . B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company , 241 5 El m 
Street , Dallas, Texas. 
A n investmen t i n Ne w Yor k Cit y an d its 
suburba n Rea l Estat e offers the surest roa d to 
success an d wealth . Lots, far m land s an d house s 
fo r sale . Out-of-tow n correspondenc e invited . 
S. AUGUSTU S DUNCA N 
REA L ESTAT E AN D INSURANC E BROKE R 
222 9 Fift h Avenue New Yor k 
The Opportunity of a 
Lifetime 
Te n thousan d acre s at $1 0 pe r acr e ar e no w 
0 Ire re d to thousand s of progressiv e an d industriou s colore d peopl e throughou t the Unite d 
State s o f Americ a to substantiall y improv e their 
condition , regardless as to whethe r the y ar e i n 
moderat e circumstance s or wealthy , b y the 
Southern Land Development Co. 
whos e capita l stoc k is $2,500,000 , incorporate d 
unde r the law s of Arizona , wit h genera l office 
at 12-4 V. Sout h Unio n Avenue , PUEBLO , COLO. , 
has a holdin g of 167,40 2 acre s of some of the 
best lan d to b e foun d anywher e i n the world , 
whic h the y ar e no w sellin g at $1 0 pe r acre ; 
$1.2 5 pe r acr e dow n as first payment , the balanc e i n one , tw o o r thre e years, a t 0 % interest . 
Thi s lan d is locate d i n the Stat e of Campeche , 
Mex. , an d is know n as L a Montan a Tract . It 
is note d fo r its dyewood . It "is just nin e mile s 
fro m the Gul f o n the Champ0to n River , fou r 
hundre d an d fifty mile s southeast o f Mexic o City . 
QUALITY —Thes e land s hav e eightee n kind s 
of hardwoo d distribute d throughou t the property . 
The y ar e producin g oranges, limes, cocoanuts, 
pears, corn , cotton , suga r cane , bananas, tobacco , 
1 ice , an d ever y othe r kin d of tropica l product ; 
also henci|uen , the greatest produc t of the 
country , whic h yield s a ne t profi t of $7 0 to $8 0 
pe r acre . 
Th e climat e is excellent , plent y of rainfal l 
an d no drought , chea p labor ; the best chanc e 
on eart h fo r the colore d ma n to becom e wealth y 
and independent . Hundred s ar e goin g ther e to 
live , others ar e buyin g becau s e it is a safe 
an d profitabl e investment . 
W e wan t good , reliabl e agents throughou t the 
country . I f yo u ar e intereste d writ e at once 
to the 
Southern Land Development Co. 
PUEBLO , COLO . 
P . O . Bo x N o 5. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 217 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCIES 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
Ar e you in need of \ HEL P or POSITION ? 
Is your friend in need of j "*
 1 ' 
If so, 'phone, call or write the 
MIDDLESE X EMPLOYMEN T AGENC Y 
2229 Fift h Ave. , near 136th St. 
CHAS . A . KNOWLES , Mgr . 
References Carefully Investigated 
'Phone 6370 Harle m 
SITUATIONS WANTE D 
YOUN G LAD Y desires position us teacher in 
an Industrial School. Tw o years' experience. 
References furnished. 
AddreBS: 
E . K . care TH E CRISI S MAGAZIN E 
20 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
DRESSMAKING 
MRS . L . FROS T 
248 W. 133d Street New Yor k Cit y 
FASHIONABL E DRESSMAKE R 
Machine or hand-made gowns and 
waists made in up-to-date styles 
MRS . DOCI A A. McCLAI N 
119 W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
Shall continue to operate the dressmaking and 
tailoring establishment known as N . Vaughan, 
119 W . 134th Street, New Yor k City , and in a 
position to better satisfy her customers. 
EMBROIDERY 
ID A B. CURTI S 
15-18 W . 136th Street, Apt. A , New Yor k Cit y 
Embroiderin g done to order ; also instruction 
given at reasonable price. Special attention 
to misses. 
FUNERA L DIRECTORS 
Thos. A . Lester, Manage r 
Thomas Mangrum , Assistant 
MAMI E L. ANDERSO N 
LICENSE D EMBALME R 
FUNERA L DIRECTO R 
2293 Seventh Avenue New Yor k Cit y 
AL L MODER N IMPROVEMENT S 
LARG E FUNERA L PARLOR S 
Brooklyn Branc h Tel . 7949 Morn . 
4 7.3 Carlton Avenue ' Open Al l Night 
Tel . 3870-W. Pros. 
Sam. F . Taylor , Funera l Director 
TYPEWRITERS 
$1 0 TYPEWRITER S «1 0 
™* V AL L STANDAR D MAKE S «K-"- " 
GUARANTEE D FO R ON E YEA R 
We actually save you 25 per cent, on all 
rebuilt typewriters. Good as now. Wil l rent 
you a inachino and allow rent to apply on 
purchase price. Al l typewriter accessories. 
TH E TYPEWRITE R SHO P 
2 Vesey Street (Astor House ) New Yor k 
SECRETARY WANTE D 
WANTED—Competen t business man to act as 
Secretary and Assistant Manage r of Bric k 
Company. Must invest at least $500. Onl y 
correspondents furnishing references will be 
answered. This is a rare opportunity and 
should be investigated at once. 
Address, Bo x 226, Moun d Bayou, Miss. 
MUSIC 
SONGS. — Ther e is money to be made in songwriting. 
If you write poems or compose music, Bend us 
your work for examination. If terms are satisfactory we will publish and pay one-half profits. 
GO T HAM-A T TUCK S MUSI C CO . 
136 WES T 37T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
MISS EDIT H W. McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
310 W . 119th Street New Yor k City 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
at reasonable rates. 
Musi c furnished for private parties. 
SCHOOLS 
YOUN G MAN , HAV E YO U A TRADE ? 
B y our method we teach the Barbe r Trade in 
six weeks. 
We give you a complete set of tools and 
secure you a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NE W YOR K BARBE R SCHOO L 
Costello & Wis e 
Cor . Bower y and Rlvlngton St. NE W YOR K 
PICTURE S 
Most beautiful works of art suitable for parlor 
and bedroom. Should be in every Negro home. 
Pictures 16x20. ' 'Jesus Died for Both.' ' 
"Clingin g to the Cross. " "Beaco n Light. " 
"Booke r T. Washington. " "Protecting Angel, " 
1
 'Heavenward.'' ' 'Onward.' ' ' 'Jack Johnson. " 
' 'The Colored Troop Charging up San Juan 
Hill. " ' 'MoseB." ' 'The Littl e Shepherd." 
Price , postpaid, 25 centB. 
17 Beautiful Art Postcards, 15 Cents 
Mottoes, Lovers, Comics, Christmas, New 
Year's, Thanksgiving and other holiday cards. 
Seeing New Yor k on a postal card ; 25 in all. 
Postpaid, 25 cents. 
AGEN T WANTE D 
Ou r agents are coining money on these pictures and postcards. One agent made $15 in 
one day. 
JACO B GRIFFITH 
252 WES T 53 d STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH S CMISIS. 218 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
SEN D TJS 60 CENT S for a beautiful 1%-inch 
messaline Bilk shirred elastic belt, with a fine 
gilt or gray pear l trimmed buckle. Al l colors. 
State size. Buckl e alone 25c. If not satisfactory, money refunded. Send for free catalogue. 
PEEFECTIO N NOVELT Y CO . 
102-106 WOOSTE E STEEE T NE W YOR K 
t& A CRISI S representative has visited the factory of the Perfection Novelty Co., and was 
favorably impressed with the numerous bargains. 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. PriceB reasonable. 
24 WES T 136T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R . Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
To Colored People 
O R SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
* $30,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estate 
1218Vs Mf . Verno n Ave . Columbus , Ohi o 
Mention 
Bom , 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Go. 
100 Line n Finis h Cards b y Mall , 60c. 
COMMERCIA L PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
CORNS , CALLOUSES , BUNIONS , CHIL ­
BLAIN S positively removed by using Dr . 
Moore's wonderful discovery or your money 
refunded. Writ e to-day, explaining your troubles, with stamped envelope, your name and 
address. 
DR. E . L . MOOR E 
CH I MONTCAL M STREET , E . 
DETROIT , MICH . 
The Rock Cit y Sanitarium 
Corner Foster and Stewart Streets, 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
A quiet health home for invalids and 
sufferers from chroni c ailments. Located 
on an elevation, surrounded by spacious, 
shady lawns. 
Full y equipped for the successful 
treatment of diseases of the stomach, 
liver, kidneys, blood and nerves, by other 
methods than drugs. 
Th e famous Battle Creek Methods—• 
water, in the form of baths of all kinds, 
sprays, douches, packs, etc., electricity, 
massage, Swedish movements, dieting, 
etc., are used under the direction of a 
physician of fifteen years' experience in 
these procedures and a graduate of the 
Battle Creek Sanitarium. Surgica l and 
obstetrical cases received in special 
wards. Lad y physician gives especial 
attention to diseases of wome n and children. Rates, $10 per week and upwards. 
Fo r further information address 
TH E ROC K CIT Y SANITARIU M 
Nashville, Tenn . Telephone Walnu t 87 
VISITOR S ALWAY S WELCOM E 
Ciisn . Giv e th e Chil d a Dol l 
The Most Beautiful of All the Toys on the Market Are the 
NEGR O DOLL S 
<J YOU R child would be happy if it had a Negro 
doll such as are sent out by the National Negro 
Doll Company, Nashville, Tennessee. Every race 
is trying to teach their children an object lesson by 
giving them toys that will lead to higher intellectual 
heights. The Negro doll is calculated to help in 
the Christian development of our race. Al l dolls 
are sent by express, charges paid. 
DOLL S FO R TH E SEASO N 1911-1912 NO W READ Y 
Prices from 50c. up to $8.50 
Fo r Illustrated Booklets, Prices and Other Information, Send Five Cents to the 
Nationa l Negr o Dol l Compan y 
519 Secon d Avenu e N. , Nashville , Tenn . 
R. H . BOYD , President H . A . BOYD , Manager 
O. M . Waller , M.D. , Pres. A. M . Thompson, Treas. B . 0. Waller , M.D. , Sec. 
Sphinx Silver Polish 
The unsurpassed renovator of silver and plated ware. No acids; no scratching; absolutely harmless. Adopted in the largest hotels. Best for family use. Endorsed by silversmiths. Sells readily to the trade. Doubles your income. Agents wanted in every city 
and town. Fift y per cent, commission. Write to-day. 
Manufactured by 
Sphinx Labor-Saving Soap Co., Inc. 
Of lice and Factory: 117 West Street, New York City 
BROWN-SPENCER Correspondence School of Shorthand 
A syste m tha t ca n be learne d durin g spar e moments an d thereb y increas e you r salar y fro m 5 0 to 
10 0 pe r cent. A thoroug h knowledg e of Shorthan d 
make s the positio n sur e an d the one so skille d in 
great demand. Yo u pa y as yo u learn . Term s rea ­
sonable . Writ e fo r particulars. 
TH E BES T TH E EASIES T 
and MOS T RELIABL E 
TH E LORD' S PRAYER. . 
In the Bcnn FUman System o/Phonography— Corresponding Style. 
— -) 11- r * x -) .1 • c < "
v
-
Brown-Spencer Correspondence School of Shorthand 2145 MISSOUR I AVENU E 
EAS T ST. LOUIS , ILL . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . A limited number of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Other ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a free 
hed. 
Andrew F . Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F . MOSMO, M.D. , 
Medica l Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr . Franz 
"M y father has always lived in the 
South," a young colored man once said to 
me, "and has attained success there; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North, where my manhood 
would be respected. H e himself cannot 
continually endure his position of inferiority, and in the summer he comes North to 
be a man. No." correcting himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negro is wholly a 
man only in Europe."—From the Author's 
"Introduction." 
Boas, of Columbia University 
Miss Ovmgton's description of the status 
of the Negro in New Yor k City is based on 
a most painstaking inquiry into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties under 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of New York , It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negro 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failure to advance more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 