FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY 
CRISIS 
Xmas 
1922 The Southern Aid Society's 
Superior Service and Protection 
Causes An Expansion 
The Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc., herewith presents another link in its chain of modern 
office buildings. They are all evidences of the soundness of its policy 
contract, as well as its business 
policy. 
This three story, modern brick 
building is located at 529 N. 2nd 
Street, Richmond, Virginia, and was 
built to take care of the growth and 
expansion of the Society's business 
beyond the capacity of its present 
Home Office building, at 527 North 
2nd Street. 
The ground floor is occupied by the Commercial Bank and Trust 
Company, the coming financial giant of the Middle Atlantic States, 
while the Society and two leading dentists occupy suites on the 
second and third floors. It is therefore one more lighthouse emblazoning the Threefold Superior Service and Protection of the 
Society, and they are as follows: 
One Small Premium secures protection against Sickness, Accident 
and Death, providing employment to 500 young men and women 
of our group and supplying modern office facilities for the race's 
business and professional activities. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA. 
District and Agency Offices in Virginia and 
District of Columbia TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOE THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOBK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. BUBGHABDT DU BOIS ; JESSIE BEDMON FAUSET, LITEBABY EDITOB ; 
AUGUSTUS GEANVLLLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGEE. 
Vol. 25 No, 2 DECEMBER, 1922 Whole No. 146 
COVER Page 
The "Head of a Bethlehem Woman." Drawn for The Crisis by Henry 
Ossawa Tanner. Reproductions on heavy paper, without printing, may 
be had. 
OPINION 
The Crisis; Haiti; A Short Story Competition; The Problem of Sacrifice; 
Warning; The Great Surgeon 55 
MAGNIFICAT. A Poem. Effie Lee Newsome 57 
"WHE N CHRISTMAS COMES." Jessie Fauset 61 
MARIANNHILL. Father M. Thomas. Illustrated 63 
STEPS TOWAR D THE NEGRO THEATRE. Alain Locke 66 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 69 
"I A M OPPOSED TO LYNCHING,—BUT. " R. S. Underwood 70 
"W E BUILD GOLDEN HOUSES OR LOG CABINS." Julian E. Bagley 71 
THE HORIZON. Illustrated 73 
TH E OUTE R POCKET 81 
THE LOOKING GLASS 83 
MOTHE R TO SON. A Poem. Langston Hughes 87 
THE JANUARY CRISIS 
The January Cmsis will contain articles un the ntw colored school houses of Delaware, the 
representation of the South in Congress, and the Universal Negro Improvement Association. ' 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: Tke address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3. 1879. National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it ia young in history, tac Institution fecla a just pride in the work thai 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
ihvjs demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENT S ALREAD Y ESTABLISHE D 
The Grammar School The Teacher Trainlag Department: 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President Jame* E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. J. 
A Mill institution (or the training •! colored 
youth. Exwllen t equipment, thoreuih Instruction, 
wholesome surrounding*. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trades tor toys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic science and domestic art for 
•Irlc. 
A new trades nulldlae. thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and medernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana. Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN, President 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
Join B. Kendall, D.D., Llnoola VilTenlty, 
Ckeeter County, Banna. 
Th e Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
A Pennsylvania state Normal School offering. ID addition 
to the regular Normal Course of two years, professional 
three year courses in Home Economics and Shop Work. A 
diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate 
eligible to teach In the publie schools of Pennsylvania. 
A three-year High School Course Is offered t» all whs 
have completed the eighth granimer grade. 
Next term began September 20, 1922. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
Leslie PInckney Hill, Principal 
Cheyney. Pa. Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Norma] School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
Th e Presiden t 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers courses in the following departments. College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training and Industrial. 
Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term" began Wednesday, Sept. 13, 1922. 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT J. KELL Y GIFFEN 
Knox ville, linn . 
1870 1922 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings, with 
new $215,000 Administration Building with modern chapel, 
gymnasium and laboratories ready for use in September. 
Strong faculty—religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. 
Admission by application only. 
Junior High School—7th, 8th, 9th and 10th grades with 
certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th years High School with Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with Diploma. 
College—Four years abore High School or two years above 
Junior College course, with degree of A. B. 
Liberal Arts — Normal •— Pre-Medical — Commercial — Domestic Science. 
54th year of nine months opened September 19, 1922. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
JOH N WESLE Y SIMMONS , President . 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee , Florid a 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 187». 
The only Institution In the State having for Its object 
Collegiate. Ministerial, Medical, end Legal training far Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Berries. Naraln* and 
Hospital Wor t 
Normal, Commercial. Mule . Domestic Scieur», Mlsalenen 
training elaaa. 
sTienlag elaaasa, eerraasjamleaea senna. Degress asTerad 
Présidant C. H. Parrleb 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
lor its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address. 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneei 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
JOHNSON C. SMITH UNIVERSITY 
formerly 
BIDDL E UNIVERSIT Y 
CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments— 
High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School course is the 
requirement for entrance to the first year of the High 
School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses of 
stuciy, the Classical and the Scientific. In the scientific, 
German is substituted for Greek or Latin. The entrance 
requirement for the Freshman Class is 15 units of High 
School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew "are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroea. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing ana Tailoring. 
Far further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J, S. FLBPPEB. Chairman Trusties Boars) Howar d Universit y 
Washington , D. C. 
Founded by GENERAL O. O. HOWARD 
J. STANLEY DURKEE, A.M., Ph.D., D.D., President 
EMMETT J. SCOTT, A.M., LL.D., Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
Autumn Quarter. .Friday, Sept. 29 , and Saturday, Sept. 30,192 2 
REGISTRATIO N Winter Quarter Tuesday, January 2, 192 3 
Spring Quarter Saturday, March 17 , 192 3 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON, Registrar 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY WASHINGTON, P. C 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
BEREAN 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave. & N. 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fall Term Opening 
Tuesday, October 3rd, 1922 . 
DAY AND NIGHT SESSIONS 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, D.D. 
1926 B. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Fa. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
SEGISTSm HOW SEASONABLE TEBMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 21, Wilberforee, 0 . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
Talladega College 
Talladega , Alabam a 
Founded in 1(6 7 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders* 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurs e Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood. 
Fo r further information address 
F. A. SUMNER, President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1S66 Looation Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
SAMUEL A. OWEN, President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported fey Baptist State Woman's Borne 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Soolety of New York. Student! 
from six different states. Graduate! exempted on flrst trade fey Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O . L . COLEMAN , Pretithnt 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding: sokool for girls, under tke 
direction of the slaters of St. Mary. Address: THE 
SISTEB-IN-OHABOI, S1SS Germaatown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOU R GIRL" 
Dayton a Norma l an d Industria l Institut e fo r Negr o Girls , Daytona , Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, VocatienaL 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , - - Principe!. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 25. No. 2 DECEMBER, 1922 Whole No. 146 
Opinion of W. E. B. Du Bois 
THE CRISIS 
T
HE CRISIS has reached that degree of age and prosperity 
which is most dangerous for 
an institution. Every one recognizes TH E CRISIS as a valuable organ of public opinion, even though 
they neither buy nor read it. They 
do not think of it as needing help, and 
especially their individual help. Yet 
this is true. The circulation of TH E 
CRISIS ought to be doubled next year 
in order to reach precisely those people, black and white, who most need 
it. For this reason we are going to 
inaugurate in January a simple, quick 
and inexpensive plan of increasing 
our circulation. We want one thousand readers of TH E CRISIS voluntarily to offer their services. It will 
mean in all only a few hours' work. 
We ask, therefore, to hear immediately from 1,000 readers who are willing to help us to this slight extent in 
our campaign. Meantime, if any one 
at any time has paid for TH E CRISIS 
and has not received his copies completely or regularly, will he please 
write us immediately and state the 
circumstances ? 
HAITI 
S
LOWLY, remorselessly, the 
Federal Administration, representing and backed by huge 
financial interests, is crushing Haiti. The educated Haitian is 
being backed against the wall and 
every effort is made to drive him 
away to France or elsewhere. The 
ignorant and venal Haitians are 
being cultivated as pets and catspaws and pawns, the grip of the 
American banks is hardening ; sixteen 
million dollars worth of bonds is offered. When this loan is saddled on 
Haiti, the principal will sift through 
into the hands of American "contractors" and Haitians themselves for a 
hundred years will be paying a million dollars a year for benefits which 
they will never receive. This is the 
first step. 
The second is following close. Haitian industry is to be killed by the 
same methods that the English used 
in India. For instance, Haitian shoemakers used to import cheap leather 
from France and make their own 
shoes. The Americans are now raising the tariff on leather and lowering 
the tariff on shoes. This will drive 
the Haitian shoe-maker out of business and send the profits to Lynn. 
Finally, by appointing Napoleon 
B. Marshall to a diplomatic office in 
Haiti and sending there a commission 
of colored men President Harding 
perhaps expects to get Negro-American approval for his miserable betrayal of the Haitian. He will 
never do it. Marshall is a man and 
not a puppet. Robert Church is a 
man; the Republican party cannot 
find a dozen reputable Negroes who 
will wash its dirty linen in Haiti ; 
and even if it could find Negroes who 
would do this, they would have to account to twelve million of their fellows and it would be a warm accounting. 
Meantime, remember the gentle 
Warren Gamaliel Harding, candidate 
for the Presidency of the United States, how he said at Marion, Ohio, 
September 17, 1920, with tears in his 
eyes : 
"We must strictly maintain and scrupulously observe, in letter and in spirit, the 
mandates of the Constitution of the United 
States. We are not doing so noiv. We are 
at war, not alone technically with Germany, 
but actually with the little, helpless republics of our own hemisphere. The wars upon 
our neighbors to the south were made and 
are still being waged through the usurpation by the Executive of powers not only 
never bestowed upon him, but scrupulously 
withheld by the Constitution. 
"Of the fact there can be no question. 
Practically all we know noiv is that thousands of native Haitians have been killed by 
American marines, and that many of our 
own gallant men have sacrificed their lives 
at the behest of an executive department in 
order to establish laivs drafted by an Assistant Secretary of the Navy, to secure a 
vote in the League and to continue at the 
point of the bayonet a military domination 
which at this moment requires the presence 
of no less than 3,000 of our armed men on 
that foreign soil." 
A SHORT STORY COMPETITION 
The Delta Omega Chapter of 
the Alpha- Kappa Alpha Sorority, at Virginia Union University, offers through TH E 
CRISIS a prize of $50 for the best short 
story written by a Negro student, on 
the following conditions: 
1. Th e write r must furnish proof that he 
is at the time of writing a student in good 
standing in some department of a recognized 
America n institution, including colleges, 
norma l schools, professional schools, academies, and industrial schools. 
2. The story must be typewritten on one 
side of the page and must be not less than 
2,000 words or mor e than 4,000 words long. 
3. The story must deal with some phase of 
Negr o life in Americ a or elsewhere, in past 
or present time. 
4. All stories submitted must be accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope. 
5. Eac h story as it is received will be 
read b y a special committee consisting of 
members of the CRISIS staff and a third person to be chosen. The committee will choose 
the best story. The names of this committee will be announced in the January CRISIS. 
6. Stories must be in THE CRISIS office on 
or befor e April 1, 1923. The prize story 
will be printed in the June CRISIS and a 
check fo r $50 will be mailed to the author 
on June 1, 1923. 
TH E CRISIS wishes to offer a similar 
prize for a cover design and invites 
the correspondence of college fraternities and sororities. 
THE PROBLEM OF SACRIFICE 
T
HERE died yesterday, a man 
who was a living sacrifice for 
a cause. Rufus Meroney, 
Y. M. C. A. secretary for the 
colored Brooklyn, New York, branch, 
was a big, strongly-built man. He 
took no vacations, he never played, he 
attended no conventions, he simply 
worked. Night and day, summer and 
winter, he cultivated with fierce intensity his one field in one corner of 
a small world. That field was the welfare of a group of colored boys and 
young men. He molded, trained, and 
encouraged them. He gave them his 
advice, his money, his guidance. He 
let absolutely nothing interfere with 
this work. He married no wife, begot 
no children, and did not visit home 
and mother for eleven years; he had 
few friends, paid few visits. But in 
that one short street, flanked with 
sand and sound, he digged and delved 
and digged until there rose a Temple—a light and beautiful buff brick 
sanctuary with everything to delight 
the heart of a virile boy—a gym, a 
pool, a floor for dancing, a stage for 
theatricals, billiards and pool, a library, periodicals, pictures. And 
then within and above this Temple 
of brick, rose and shone the Temple 
of Souls : teams that won silver cups 
and played the game square ; boys who 
trained muscles taut and hearts 
steady; men who returned to school 
filled with ambition and studied late 
in Meroney's room ; outcasts who borrowed a dime and found a job and 
went to work;—all—all this and 
more. And into the glittering brick 
and soul of this vaster Temple, Meroney poured his life like oil, for eleven years, until the overflowing cup of 
his sheer physical stamina began to 
empty and fail. Yet he never fal-tered. He pooh-poohed the pain in his 
side, he brushed aside advice, he 
worked to the last drop of heart's 
blood and died half-conscious beneath 
the surgeon's knife that searched too 
late. 
He was just a Negro. He was not 
good enough to remain within the portals of the Central Y. M. C. A., Brook 
lyn, or the Twenty-third Street 
Y. M. C. A. of New York, or of thousands of other "white" and "CHRISTIAN" associations in America; 
much less to join their membership. 
He could not vote in Texas, his home ; 
and they who bore his corpse to his 
ancient mother, rode "Jim Crow". 
And yet he was a gentleman. A son 
of Tillotson and Yale, an upstanding, 
handsome, hearty fellow, broad and 
tall. A being fit for the presence of 
Kings and the kisses of women. And 
he dropped and died at forty. 
What shall we say—what shall we 
do before this Utter Sacrifice? Oh, it 
was foolish, of course, as men count 
fools. A little care, a little regular 
rest, a little better food, the diversion 
of home and babies and friends, the 
lure of the traveled trail—something 
of this and Meroney might have lived 
until 70 instead of dying at 43. 
But how many lives there are, 
nursed and tended and preserved for 
a generation, which are not worth a 
good full hour! And if a man has a 
life, who shall call him crazy if he 
spend it in a decade rather than dribble it to a century? Who knows? 
Who knows? 
WARNING ! 
Mrs.- THOMPSON, who 
has been operating in Mississippi an d Louisiana 
and Texas and representing herself as a field worker of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, is in no way 
connected with this Association. The 
public is warned against her, and evidence of her activities is urgently 
desired. 
MAGNIFICAT 
EFFIE LEE NEWSOME 
IN lapis lazuli— 
Such azure shot with gold!— 
On domes of sanctity 
Tha t chiseled tribute hold, 
Or breathe the Wor d through breath of 
brush 
In ripened tones and old; 
Through silence and in state— 
Still splendors everywhere!— 
Earth's tribute from earth's grea t 
Steeped deep in incensed air, 
•With praise imprint on wall and floor, 
An d even shadows there; 
Cathedrals strive to voic e 
The thanks of mild Mary , 
Wh o found herself the choice 
Fo r immortality, 
When, lowly-born, there came the word 
Earth's Mothe r she should be. 
God, we , thy lowly race, 
Woul d thank thee fo r such grace. 
Thoug h w e have never been 
Welcome at earthly inn, 
Th y glorious Son swung wide 
Those gates that scoff at pride. 
An d guard a Realm of Equity, 
Wherein abides the Wisdom Hol y 
Whic h shapes high purpose fo r the lowly. The Great Surgeon 
THE tall and beautiful hospital rose white and pure beside the taller 
and more beautiful cathedral; so that the silvery bell voices of 
matins and vespers out of cloud-swathed spires woke the sick and 
the dead daily to want Life and Joy, behind the purple Curtains of 
Pain. Within, the white and starched and immaculate Superintendent of Nurses towered slim and handsome amid the murmurous applause 
of a hundred white and starched and immaculate nurses. (Below in the halfcellar, where the steam hissed and curled, a score of black women on tired 
feet, with sweating tubercular bosoms and great, gnarled hands worked all day 
each day to keep these brilliant, beautiful things above, immaculate.) 
"It is a shame!" said the Superintendent of Nurses. "It is a shame!" 
echoed half a hundred voices. "The idea of a Jew operating at St. Michael's!" 
"It's a shame!" swore the Head Surgeon in his Holy of Holies, beyond the 
Nurses' hall. "No Jew has ever operated in this hospital." 
"And I thought", whispered the Junior Surgeon, kowtowing, "that our 
Patron was equally strict and steadfast for 'Anglo Saxon supremacy'." 
"He was—he was. 'No Jews, Japs, or Negroes', he has said to me again 
and again—never on the Staff and as seldom' in the wards as possible." 
"And what has changed him?" asked the Superintendent of Nurses as she 
glided in, shining and cooing with the faint rustle that suggested wings. 
"He's sick. He's sick unto death. He wants to be healed. He's scared 
blue—and he meets this quack." 
" 'The Great Surgeon' the advertisements call him, and they say that the 
deaf hear, the blind see, and the crippled walk!" 
"Yes, and Fools and their money part." 
"His charges are ridiculously low." 
"Precisely—he is unprofessional; he advertises—whole pages in the Journal 
and News] with 'Come unto me, all ye that labor', and such tommy-rot. He 
rents no offices and has no dignity; he roams the streets of the yellow East 
Side and the red West Side and black High Harlem. You can see him any 
day talking with harlots, touts and cripples, thieves, merchants and peddlers, 
grinning children, dogs and stray cats." 
"But", said the House Surgeon, "if your Millionaire wants him—why—" 
"He'll have him of course. But think of the reputation of St. Michael's!" 
"What ails the old man anyway?" 
"Damned if I know." 
"The quack says it's Stone." 
"Then Stone let it be. The man who gives us a hundred thousand a year 
can have Stone in the Head if he wants it,—and his will is properly made." 
"He comes—" "He comes!" "He is here!" 
"What—already? It's only 1:50. Whoever heard of a surgeon ahead of 
time! It's not professional." 
He came gowned in soft black, afoot, across the snow, up the stairs into 
the hall. He was short and square, bald with a fringe of black curly hair. His 
face was sallow, heavy and lined, and his blue eyes burned. (But his hands, 
his great and sinewy hands, calloused, thick, powerful, yet light, quick, with 
flattened finger tips and ever moving. The nurses rubbed their palms together, 
mimicking him behind his broad back.) Beside him moved a shadow—a small, thin, scrawny, almost shabby, man 
with tender eyes and a great reticule of papers, packages, pads, and pencils. 
He said no word. He looked. 
Below in the private parlor, ministered to by the Superintendent of Nurses 
and two attendant sprites, sat the rich and furred wife and daughter, waiting. 
They wore a quarter pound of gold, three ounces of platinum, 13 diamonds, 
6 pearls, one sapphire and one ruby, 25 yards of silk, two gorgeous plumes from 
mangled mothers of starving birds, twenty little fur coats of murdered martens 
and thirty pieces of silver fox. 
"I tried to dissuade him—I cannot understand. It is some spell that this 
Jew has cast over him. W e met him last Saturday, in the street where we 
were motoring as a short cut—a horrible street, dark, dirty and teeming. This 
Jew peered in at our window and my husband, groaning in sudden pain, 
muttered : 
'"What shall I do to be saved!' 
"And the Jew said, 'Follow me' and despite all I could do, my husband 
went." 
"Ah—well, but it may be all right—and the Head Surgeon will stand by," 
murmured the beautiful Superintendent. 
"If it isn't all right—if it isn't all right—" 
(The time passed by in mighty, sonorous pageant. An hour, in slow and 
stately tread, while the red sun of heaven burned the azure to darker, blanker 
blue. A half hour, in slower lagging pace, muffled in tread, thunderous in 
silence. And then fifteen myriad minutes of quivering hesitation with the 
twisting, flying, retreating, trailing, pounding of foot-sore pilgrims oozing blood. 
Then Time stopped and Visions came—knives slipping, cutting, maiming; blood 
pouring—Horror and Pain and Death—) 
The Head Surgeon came down the stairs muttering: 
"He would not let me stay in the room. He put the nurses out. He used 
no ether. It is—horrible. It is murder. Yet listening, I heard no cry nor 
groan." 
"Good God!" gasped the Superintendent. 
"Good God," answered the Great Surgeon as he entered noiseless, his vestments ghostly in dull grey white, his lips smiling, his eyes inscrutable. 
Wheeling the women faced him. They strove for speech and he made no 
move to help. 
"He will—live?" The wife faltered, at last. 
And the Great Surgeon whispered: 
"He will die!" 
Then the woman rose and shrieked: 
"Murderer! Quack! Accursed Jew! King of the Jews! Lynch him! Crucify 
him!" 
And she sank mumbling and sobbing into her daughter's arms. But the 
daughter, pale and straight, said: 
"Shut up, Mother!" And then to him, a voice wreathed in hate: "Lead us 
to him." 
Softly through hushed corridors, he led them, stepping lightly, almost joyously, with half-closed eyes and moving lips. Vespers rang sweetly above the 
falling snow without. Within angel-like forms, white-winged and lovely, flitted 
dimly, silently. (Below in the cellar the steam hissed and the irons flew and 
the black women coughed and sighed). At the top of the staircase, he did not turn right to the beautiful and expensive private rooms, but left to the general ward of the poor. The wife 
tottered, beating her hands in frantic disgust. The daughter gasped: 
"In the public ward?" 
"In the general ward!" fumed the Superintendent. 
"He wished it," said the Great Surgeon. 
And there they found him; there in the dying sunlight with fifty others, 
sick, maimed and crippled lying about him (and one stiff corpse screened in, 
afar) lay the mighty Patron, the richest man of all the rich city, dying. The 
shadowy clerk was perched beside him, sealing a long parchment with a 
blood-red seal. 
The face of the dying man was alight, blazing with the pale glory of the 
dying sun. There were lilies beside him. Wide bowls of rare and costly lilies, 
spreading weird fragrance, reflecting the sun and falling snow. 
Wearily, yet peacefully, he raised his dying hands—"Mother—old woman," 
he murmured fondly as he found her: "Daughter—honey! You are poor. You 
have left but the things on your backs. I have sold all my goods and restored 
them to the Poor. I have taken this hospital from the Rich and given it to the 
Son of Man—to the sons of men: to the good and the bad, the black and the 
white, Jew and Gentile—all human kind of every race and creed." 
("He is crazy—crazy!" sobbed the wife. "We'll break the will," hissed 
the daughter. "The testament, perhaps, but not his Holy Will," said the 
Surgeon.) 
The dying voice fell and whispered: 
"All and for all." 
The Patron paused and gasped: 
"Especially for—Jews—and—'Niggers'." And he died. 
The Great Surgeon closed the old and weary eyes of the dead potentate and 
folded the fat, big hands upon his wounded heart and lighted soft candles at 
his head and feet. And then slowly he passed down the ward whispering, intoning, to either side as he went: "Peace—Peace be with you." And there 
followed him his shadow and a murmur and a sigh like far off seas at sunset. 
Down in the hall below they stood as if paralysed, while the Great Surgeon, 
shadowed by his clerk, moved toward the snow-drifts and the star-lit night. 
The Head Surgeon dropped his eyes. The Superintendent of Nurses stared, 
fascinated. The nurses flew, fluttered and were still. 
Only an interne—the Last Interne, hastened noiselessly and threw back the 
great and oaken door. 
"He is—dead, Sir?" he asked. 
The Surgeon said: "He that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet 
shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die!" 
"Then—what ailed him, Sir?" 
The Great Surgeon answered softly: "Stone. Stone in the Heart!" 
(Below in the half cellar twenty black women twined their dark cloaks 
about them, swathed their tired feet in riven rubbers, clasped gnarled hands on 
aching chests, and went up singing to the night.) 
So the Eve of Christmas fell on the world in the year of salvation 1922: 
First came the Master, haloed in the gleaming snow; then his Shadow. And 
then the pain-swept Song of Angels. '-WHE N CHRISTMAS COMES" 
JESSIE PAUSET 
WHA T strange powe r does the sense o f 
smell wield over the gates of memory ? 
This morning, stepping into the cold, I 
sniffed a rush o f snow-laden air that carried me back down the slope of yesterdays 
to a scene which I had completely forgotten. 
It wa s Christmas Ev e in Philadelphia—a 
prope r Christmas Ev e I remember, fo r outside the snow wa s falling softly, thickly, 
warmly, but within, the house wa s bright 
with Christmas spirit, a light in every window. It wa s so like a conventional Christma s card and I had so often wanted to experience the sensation o f the wear y traveller wh o struggles up the snow-laden road 
toward the glowin g house, that yielding to 
the persuasions of a daring older sister, I 
ventured with her out into the street. 
"Aroun d the block " we ran, hatless and 
coatless, I believe, right in the fac e o f the 
soft, warm, blurry snow. Oh, what a sense of 
adventure and wha t a feeling o f jo y and relief wa s ours when we got back to the sheltering house with its bright, dry rooms! W e 
slipped in unnoticed except by another sis-
. ter who, perturbed by our vagrancy, had 
kept a discreet watch. She didn't tell on 
us—there's no fun in invoking punishment 
on Christmas Eve . Instead she produced 
unexpectedly a store of warm, soft ginge r 
cookies fresh from the batch then in process 
of manufacture in the kitchen. Never ask 
me how she procured them. 
Childhood, m y own childhood certainly, 
photographs many such sharp detached pictures destined to return to one in later 
years with a wistful, indefinable poignancy. 
Sometimes does it not seem that that childish life wa s the real, the permanent, thing, 
and that these grown-up days of flashing, 
restless achievement are hardly worth the 
long preparation which one in his teens and 
first twenties endures? 
My first trip to Franc e did not so completely, so lengthily absorb me as did the 
preparations which we children used to 
make fo r Christmas in that old squareroomed house in Philadelphia. I think we 
must have begun in November. Ther e wa s 
always a tree and so every year "Christmas 
things " had to be made fo r it. Such a buying of such gorgeous materials! Glazed 
paper in marvelous colors, a soft, deep, yet 
bright, blue ; a warm, passionate red; a 
heart-of-the-melon pink. An d because of 
the glaze on the pape r all these colors possessed a curious, palpable quality; you could 
feel the color as well as see it. A s a child 
I thought there must even be some wa y of 
absorbing it, especially that wonderful 
heartening, inspiring red. Besides the 
glazed pape r there wer e sheets o f thinner 
gold and silver with a slightly embossed figure ; smaller sheets o f gold stars, yards o f 
tinsel, white, creamy paper lace, dozens of 
glass icicles and, of course, paper-dolls. 
W e made endless chains o f the glowin g 
colors and dressed the paper-dolls in tissue 
paper and lace. I had forgotten the possibilities of the tissue pape r from which we 
contrived a round sort of pompoms which 
wer e fancifully designated "snow-balls " and 
another round but differently shaped paper 
mass called "wate r lilies." Yo u made the 
snow-balls b y twisting the ends of a circular piece o f pape r which had been slit down 
the edges into finger-width petals. Some ­
times you gave too sharp a twist and the 
end of the petal came off. The water-lilies 
achieved their perfection with the aid of the 
head of the ordinary hat-pin. I cannot describe how this was done—the process is at 
once too simple and too intricate. Snowballs and wate r lilies alike wer e of all colors, but that discrepancy never troubled us. 
Hav e I ever enjoyed anything since, I 
wonder, with the same intensity and the 
same sharp anticipation with which I enjoye d the Christmas season? There wa s a 
big square darkish room up in the top of the 
house where we children used to foregathe r 
and plan and plan fo r the holidays. Actu ­
ally we had a little chant, "Oh, won't it 
be joyous when Christmas comes! Oh, won't 
it be joyous ivhen Christmas comes!" Yo u 
said it with a stress on the second "won't " 
which converted it into a pleasing and irresistible rhythm which in itself created that 
jo y you wer e so happily anticipating. I 
think that whateve r modicum of unselfishness or generosity I now possess dates back 
from those days. Fo r it wa s then I learned 
the sheer jo y o f giving. W e children gave , 
I fear, with too little discrimination. Neckties and whisk-brooms fo r my father, and 
handkerchiefs fo r my mother. W e could not think o f anything else to give but w e 
wanted to give . Gloves sometimes, perhaps, 
but that strained our tiny purses. It took 
two donors to provide one pair of gloves. 
M y poor parents ! The y must have groaned 
at the inevitability of those unvarying presents. 
Christmas Da y when one is grown up is 
apt to be stodgy, too redolent of the taste 
of "the day after the night before. " But 
the Christmas Da y of my childhood (was an 
endless round o f new joys. First the stockings, always an orange in the toe and then 
quantities and quantities of nuts and raisins 
and candies. I can see us children now 
rushing from our rooms down the dark, 
chilly stairs, and exclaiming: "Oh, he did 
come, he did come ! That's my stocking, see 
I pinned m y name on it." Ther e wa s a 
bright, thin tinkle o f happy girlish voices 
and at intervals the discontented undertones of my brothers complaining because 
their stockings wer e not as long as ours. 
My mother always hung up my father's 
socks fo r them, I don't know why . 
Some grown-ups complain because they 
wer e fooled by the Santa Claus myth, but 
I have always been glad of it. Surely there 
can be no lovelier wa y o f starting one's 
own privat e little output of faith, hope 
and charity than this conception of an embodied spirit o f kindness, riding red-faced 
and jolly throughout the land. I wa s a big 
girl, almost ready fo r high school, b?for e I 
began seriously to consider the extreme inadequacy o f any chimney-place o f ours fo r 
a possible Santa Claus. Gradually I drifted 
into the truth of the matter, but I have 
never regretted fo r a moment the sweet 
foolery of my first belief. 
Bu t to return to the jo y of Christmas 
Day. Afte r the discovery of the bursting 
stockings, there were the presents to be 
examined. W e received dolls for which I 
did not care very much—useful presents, a 
dress, a coat, a ca p and books. An d that 
wa s my reason fo r liking Christmas! Afte r 
the long, wonderful dinner with its plethora 
of turkey and cranberry sauce, there wa s 
the long, dark, cozy afternoon to be spent 
in reading. Ther e wer e always relatives 
at Christmas dinner and these and the rest 
of the household, it is to be presumed, disported themselves according to their various tastes. M y own idea of indoor sport 
was to lie on the floor midway between the 
gorgeous tree and the glowing fire and to 
bury my head, m y mind, m y iwhole being, in 
some fairy tale or strange romance . I had 
been taught to read when I wa s just past 
babyhood. Small wonde r then that at eight 
some one either with or without (I've never 
been able to determine which ) a sense 
of humor, gave me a cop y of "Do n Quixote, " 
the hardest nut which my childish mind ever 
tried to crack. I missed the broad farc e and 
the sly wit which I am told penetrates that 
book. Doubtless I was a humorless child 
and took the story seriously. I know to this 
day I can never become interested in it. 
Wha t I did read with interest, with 
amazement, with resentment, with tears, 
wa s "Uncl e Tom's Cabin. " It lay a greyish 
brown volume, thick-leaved and large lettered on the kidney-shaped table in ou r 
parlor. It belonged to my grandmothe r 
whom I had never seen. But I had seen the 
book, and though the sight o f most books 
was a challenge to me, I had never glanced 
inside this one. But on a certain Christmas Day, wear y of Rose-Red and SnowWhite , I happened to peep within those 
prim covers. The y had to pr y the book 
from my unwilling fingers. A t the end of 
three or four days I had read it all, every 
wor d o f it. I do not think I have ever 
opened it since but the story remains part 
of my permanent mental furnishings. 
Supper on Christmas Night wa s negligible. Probably there would not have been 
any had it not been fo r "the boys. " But 
the time after supper stands out bright and 
sharp befor e me . Thos e relatives and older 
ones probably went on later to their own 
devices, but w e children grouped ourselves 
together and sang hymns, beautiful, immortal, glorious hymns: "Hol y Night" ; "Joy 
to the World" ; "Oh ! Come All Y e Faithful " 
(my father's favorite ) ; and "Hark ! The 
Herald Angels Sing. " Ho w sweet and solemn and altogether lovely that time was. 
I have felt the rush o f wings. . 
M y mother's favorite song wa s one which 
had nothing to do with the Christmas tide 
but which embodied the spirit of life in the 
house. It began "Whe n the woods are dim 
and dreary, " and asked "Wha t then? " The 
refrain ran as I well remember: 
"Ah! In spite of wind and weather, 
Round the fireside gleaming bright, 
We will sing old songs together, 
All the 'merry winter night!" 
Can anything mor e exquisitely define 
home ? Ah , lovely little pictures o f the heart borne back to me across the years on a 
breath o f snow-laden air! The y recreate 
fo r me each season o f the Nativity the 
spirit o f a Merr y Christmas. 
MARIANNHILL 
The Work of the Catholic Trappists in South Africa 
FATHE R M. THOMAS , R.M.M. 
MARIANNHIL L is situated about 17 
miles from Port Durban, Natal. It 
wa s founded b y Abbo t Fran z Pfanne r in 
1882. He started there with 32 men and 
as there wa s no human habitation nearb y they had to sleep fo r the first fe w months 
under wagons, piled up boxes and tents. 
Some Kraals wer e 
near the distant 
hills and the natives, their inmates, 
watched very suspiciously wha t the 
white men wer e doi n g. Temporar y 
buildings wer e gradually erected, gardens laid out, roads 
made, and fields cultivated; in a short 
time this spot o f 
wilderness looke d 
like an oasis in the 
desert. 
As early as the 
second yea r a school 
was opened fo r native boys and in order to provide also 
for the girls, Abbo t 
Franz again went 
back to Europ e to 
procur e some lay 
women to place in 
charge o f a girls' 
school. Thes e European ladies wer e 
later on formed into 
a congregation called the "Sisters of the 
Most Precious Blood " and have now 336 Sisters working on our Mission Stations. A s 
soon as the foundation of Mariannhill wa s 
secured and prospering, other new stations 
were opened, so that now we have 33 central stations distributed throughout Natal, 
Griqualand East and Rhodesia. 
A t Mariannhill we have a large Boys' 
Boarding School and a Norma l School. The 
fees fo r tuition vary from thirty to sixtydollars per annum. Th e majority of the 
pupils wor k for their tuition. These children have very good memories, and on the 
average, good talents for singing and 
music. I had the 
Boys ' School fo r 
three years at Mariannhill and started 
a band among the 
boys. It took a good 
measure of patience 
to teach these boys 
something about an 
instrument whic h 
they had never seen 
or heard o f before. 
They had to learn 
the chromatic scale 
and play everything 
by note. Afte r six 
to eigh t months' 
practice the band 
could play fairly 
well. There is extraordinarily good talent amon g them. 
Fo r instance, a clarionet, on account of 
the man y keys and 
holes to be manipulated, is not easy to 
learn and to finger. 
I gave one boy—Se ­
bastian MKulise—a B flat clarionet and 
taught him the natural scale. In two days 
he iplayed quite fluently a beautiful Christmas song. He is now head teacher at a 
Government school in Maritzburg. The 
band comprised 24 instruments. 
In our Boarding Schools the time is diA NATIVE ZULU BOY CHILDREN GOING TO DAY-SCHOOL 
vided between study and work—fou r hours 
school in the morning and four hours wor k 
in the afternoon. W e are convinced that 
industrial work is just as necessary for 
the boys and girls as book learning. There 
are 22 different trades taught at Mariannhill and a bo y has a chance to learn any 
trade he likes, to b e a stable or houseboy 
up to a first-class certified head teacher. 
A t Lourdes Station, Griqualand East, children study up to the 6th or 7th grade and 
then enter one o f our normal schools. The 
sub-classes begin in the native language 
and after the first yea r English is gradually 
introduced. From the 4th and 5th grades on, 
English is the medium of instruction. The 
children pass Government examinations. 
Native Zulu boys have a very hard time 
in their youth. Their wor k is to herd and 
milk the cattle. Driving their cattle on the 
hilltops or plateaus and herding them, they 
spend their leisure time in catching birds 
or field mice (called "izinbiba" ) and when 
they get a collection o f them, they will 
make a fire, roast them, and have a good 
meal. These children are very kind to each 
other. If I am riding along on horseback 
and meet a group o f these herding boys 
and give one of them a piece of bread, he 
will not eat it b y himself, he will give each 
one o f his comrades a small piece and keep 
the smallest for himself. 
These children are very eager to g o to 
school. Ver y often the parents object; then 
some will run awa y from home , and find 
refuge in some distant school. Of course, 
we missionaries do not favor such methods. 
It is better for them to have their parents' 
permission. Man y children attend a day 
school which generally opens at 9.00 A.M . 
and closes at 3.00 P.M. The school children 
look very inviting and attractive even 
though sometimes when they come to school 
they have not a ra g on them! In fac t at 
home at their Kraals, children generally 
walk about stark naked. 
Let me tell you something of their activities. The nursery at Centoeow is considered the best and cleanest fruit nursery in 
South Africa . Her e the boys are taught 
to plant and prune the trees, to excavate 
and ship them. The y send from 40,000 to 
50,000 fruit trees every year to all parts of 
South Africa . Al l forests near our mission 
stations are artificial forests. A t Lourdes 
Station, in Griqualand East, the school boys 
are busy replanting trees. All work is done 
under the supervision of one or mor e 
Brothers. The y first plant the seed in small 
square boxes and when the trees are about six to eight inches high, they are replanted 
in straight rows on the prepared fields. 
Ther e are about 200 boys at the school at 
Lourdes. 
Boy s take a grea t liking to carpentry 
work. The y learn to make plain tables, 
benches, clothes boxes, all without the help 
o f machine work. All pupils preparing 
themselves for teachers have to wor k four 
hours a week in the carpenter shop. It will 
be of grea t benefit to them in day schools 
where they can do their own repair work. 
The school girls thatch grass. All their 
huts, also the day schools, are generally 
covered with thatched grass. It takes several thousands o f bundles to cover a roo f 
o f a small day school. Th e girls like to do 
this work , and it is considered a special 
work fo r females. The girls learn to sew 
too. In the sewing room at Mariannhill 
there are about 120 sewing machines run 
b y motor. Wha t a change from 40 years 
ago ! Unde r the -supervision of the Sisters, 
these girls have become so proficient in 
manipulating a machine that some can sew 
from twelve to sixteen overalls a day. They 
sew blouses, shirts, overalls, etc., fo r the 
Johannesburg mines, wher e there are about 
240,000 natives working. Thus the children 
can earn something fo r themselves and 
also help their poor parents. The buttonhole machines are also run by the girls and 
the measuring, marking and cutting is done 
by them. 
Their native customs are very interesting. 
In time o f drought the native wate r girls 
sometimes have to g o miles to find a little 
water. Usually they are scantily clothed, 
only in calabashes, but even then they adorn 
themselves with beadwork. A Zulu bride 
will have a magnificent display of beadwork ornaments. The beads are of different 
colors but white is most prevalent. The 
girls are very clever in making these ornaments. Love letters amon g them are not 
written but made out o f beads and the different colors indicate the various loves or 
jealous emotions. Much could be said as to 
their wa y o f courting and their marriage 
ceremonies. Youn g men dress up, too, to 
g o to a dance or a wedding. They have 
a fine physique, are very muscular and are 
always ready for a good fight. A wedding 
without a good fight is a rarity amon g the 
pagans. 
This is only a sketch in simple language 
although books could be written on all o f 
these subjects. I have worked twenty years 
here amon g these people and b y speakingtheir language every day I have nearly forgotten all my own English. 
ZULU GIRLS CARRYING WATER STEPS TOWARD THE NEGRO THEATRE 
ALAI N LOCK E 
C
ULTURALL Y we are abloom in a new 
field, but it is yet decidedly a question 
as to wha t w e shall reap—a fe w flowers or 
a harvest. Tha t depends upon how w e cultivate this art of the drama in the next few 
years. W e can have a Gilpin, as we have 
had an Aldridge—and this time a few mor e 
—a spectacular bouquet of talent, fading 
eventually as all isolated talent must; or 
we can have a granary of art, stocked and 
stored for season after season. It is a question o f interests, o f preferences:—ar e w e 
reaping the present merely or sowing the 
future? Fo r the one, the Negr o actor will 
suffice; the other requires the Negr o drama 
and the Negr o theatre. 
The Negr o actor without the Negro drama 
is a sporadic phenomenon, a chance wayside 
flower, at mercy of wind and weed. He is 
precariously planted and still mor e precariously propagated. W e have just recently 
learned the artistic husbandry of race 
drama, and have already found that t o till 
the native soil of the rac e life and the race 
experience multiplies the dramatic yield 
both in quality and quantity. No t that we 
would confine the dramatic talent of the race 
to the fence-fields and plant-rooms o f rac e 
drama, but the vehicle o f all sound art must 
be native to the group—our actors need 
their own soil, at least fo r sprouting. But 
there is another step beyond this which 
must be taken. Our art in this field must 
not only be rescued from the chance opportunity and the haphazard growth o f native talent, the stock must be cultivated 
beyond the demands and standards o f the 
marketplace , or must be safe somewhere 
from the exploitation and ruthlessness o f the 
commercial theatre and in the protected 
housing of the art-theatre flower to the utmost perfection of the species. Conditions 
favorabl e to this ultimate development, the 
established Negr o Theatre will alone provide. 
In the past, and even the present, the Ne ­
gr o actor has waited to be born ; in the future he must be made. U p till now, our art 
has been patronized; fo r the future it must 
be endowed. This is, I take it, wha t we 
mean b y distinguishing between the move ­
ment toward race drama and the quite distinguishable movement towar d the Negr o 
Theatre. In the idea of its sponsors, the latter includes the former, but goes further and 
means mor e ; it contemplates an endowed artistic center wher e all phases vital to the art 
o f the theatre are cultivated and taught— 
acting, playwriting, scenic design and construction, scenic production and staging. 
A center with this purpose and function 
must ultimately b e founded. It is only a 
question of when, how and where . Certainly the time has come ; everyone will admit 
that at this stage o f our rac e development 
it has become socially and artistically imperative. Sufficient plays and sufficing talent are already available ; and the awakened 
race consciousness awaits wha t will probably be its best vehicle of expansion and expression in the near future. 
Ten years ago it wa s the theory o f the 
matter that wa s at issue; now it is only the 
practicabilities that concern us. Then one 
had constantly to be justifying the idea, citing the precedents o f the Irish and the Yid ­
dish theatres. No w even over diversity of 
opinion as to way s and means, the project 
receives the unanimous sanction o f our 
hearts. Bu t as to means and auspices, there 
are two seriously diverse views ; one strenuously favoring professional auspices and a 
greater metropolitan center like Ne w Yor k 
or Chicago fo r the Negr o Theatre ; another 
quite as strenuously advocating a university 
center, amateur auspices and an essentially 
educational basis. Whoeve r cares to be doc ­
trinaire on this issue ma y be: it is a question to be decided b y deed and accomplishment—and let us hope a question not o f 
hostility and counter-purpose, but of rivalr y and common end. 
A s intended and established in the wor k 
o f the Department o f the Drama at Howard University, however, the path and fortunes of the latter program have been unequivocally chosen. W e believe a university 
foundation will assure a greater continuity 
of effort and insure accordingly a greater 
permanence of result. W e believe further 
that the development of the newer forms 
of drama has proved most successful where laboratory and experimental conditions have 
obtained and that the development of rac e 
drama is b y those very circumstances the 
opportunity and responsibility of our educational centers. Indeed, to maintain this relation to dramatic interests is now an indispensable item in the program o f the progressive America n college. Throug h the 
pioneer wor k o f Professor Baker, o f Harvard, the acting and writing of plays has become the natural and inevitable sequence, 
in a college community, of the mor e formal 
study of the drama . Partly through the 
same channels, and partly as a result of the 
pioneer wor k o f Wisconsin, college production has come to the rescue o f the art drama, 
which would otherwise rarely get immediate 
recognition from the commercial theatre. 
An d finally in its new affiliation with the 
drama, the America n college under the 
leadership of Professor Koch, formerly of 
North Dakota, now of the University of 
North Carolina, has become a vital agency 
in community drama, and has actively promoted the dramatization o f local life and 
tradition. B y a threefold sponsorship, then, 
race drama becomes peculiarly the ward of 
our colleges, as new drama, as art-drama, 
and as folk-drama. 
Thoug h concurrent with the best efforts 
and most significant achievements of the 
new drama, the movement toward Negr o 
drama has had its own wa y to make. In 
addition to the common handicap o f commercialism, there ha s been the singular 
and insistent depreciation to stereotyped caricature and superficially representative but 
spiritually misrepresentative force . It has 
been the struggl e o f an artistic giant in artengulfing quicksands; a struggle with its 
critical period just lately safely passed. 
Much o f this has been desperate effort o f the 
"bootstrap-lifting kind, " from the pioneer 
advances of Williams, Cole, Cook, and Walk ­
er, to the latest achievements o f "Shuffle 
Along. " Bu t the dramati c side has usually 
sagged, as might be expected, below the art 
level under the imposed handicap. Then 
there has been that gradual investment of 
the legitimate stage through the backdoor 
of the character rôle ; the hard wa y b y 
which Gilpin came, breaking triumphantly 
through at last to the major rôle and legitimate stardom. But it is the inauguration 
of the Negr o art drama which is the vital 
matter, and the honor divides itself be ­
tween Burghardt DuBois, with his "Sta r 
of Ethiopia" , staged, costumed, and manned 
by students, and Ridgeley Torrence , with 
his "Thre e Plays for a Negr o Theatre. " In 
the interim between the significant first performance s and the still mor e significant attempts to incorporate them in the Horizon 
Guild and the Mrs. Hapgood's Players, there 
wa s organized in Washingto n a Drama Committee of the N. A . A . C. P. which sponsored and produced Miss Grimké's admirable 
pioneer problem-play, "Rachael, " in 1917. 
Between the divided elements o f this committee, with a questionable paternity of minority radicalism, the idea of the Negr o 
Theatre as distinguished from the idea of 
race drama wa s born. If ever the history 
of the Negr o drama is written without the 
scene o f a committee wrangle , with its rhetorical climaxes after midnight—the conservatives with their wraps on protesting the 
hour; the radicals, mor e hoarse with emotion than effort, alternately wheedling and 
threatening—it will not be well-written. 
The majority wanted a performance ; the 
minority, a program. One play n o mor e 
makes a theatre than one swallow, a summer. 
The pariah of the committee by the accident of its parentage became the foundling 
and subsequently the ward of Howar d University. In its orphan days, it struggled 
up on the crumbs of the University Dramati c Club. One recalls the lean and patient years it took to pass from faculty advice to faculty supervision and finally to 
faculty control; from rented costumes and 
hired properties to self-designed and selfexecuted settings; from hackneyed "stage 
successes " to modern and finally original 
plays; and hardest of all progressions, 
strange to relate, that from distant and 
alien themes to the intimate, native and racial. The organization, under the directorship of Professor Montgomery Gregory of 
a Department o f Dramatics, with academic 
credit fo r its courses, the practical as well 
as the theoretical, and the fullest administrative recognition and backing of the wor k 
have marked in the last two years the eventual vindication of the idea. But from an 
intimacy of association second only to that 
o f the director, and with better grac e than 
he, ma y I be permitted to record wha t we 
consider to be the movement's real coming 
of age ? It wa s when simultaneously with 
the production o f two original plays on 
race themes written in course b y students, staged, costumed, and manned b y students, 
in the case of one play with the authoress in 
rôle, there was launched the campaign fo r 
an endowed theatre, the successful comple ­
tion o f which would not only give the Howard Players a home, but the Negr o Theatre 
its first tangible realization. 
A s will already have been surmised from 
the story, the movement has, o f course, had 
its critics and detractors. Happily, most of 
them are covered by that forgiveness which 
goes out spontaneously to the opposition of 
the short-sighted. No t they, but their eyes, 
so to speak, are to blame. Rathe r it has 
been amazing, on the other hand, the proportion o f responsiveness and help that has 
come, especially from the most prominent 
proponents of the art drama in this country ; names too numerous to mention, but 
representing every possible section o f opinion—academic, non-academic ; northern, 
southern, western; conservative, ultra-modern; professional, amateur; technical, literary ; from within the university, from the 
community o f Washington ; white, black. 0f 
especial mention because of special service, 
Gilpin, O'Neil, Torrence , Percy Mackaye , 
DuBois, Weldon Johnson, and the administrative officers of the University; and most 
especially the valuable technical assistance 
for three years of Clem Throckmorton, technical director o f the Provincetown Players, 
and for an equal time the constant and often 
self-sacrificing servie ;s of Miss Marie Forrest in stage training and directing, services 
recently fitly rewarded b y appointment to a 
professorship in the department. But despite the catholic appeal, interest and co ­
operation it is essentially as a race representative and race-supported movement that 
we must think of it and that it must ultimately become, the best possible self-expression in an art wher e w e have a peculiar 
natural endowment, undertaken as an integral part o f our higher education and pursuit of culture. 
The program and repertoire o f the Howard Players, therefore, scarcely represent 
the full achievement o f the movement; it is 
the workshop and the eventual theatre and 
the ever-increasing supply of plays and 
players that must hatch out o f the idea. The 
record o f the last two years shows in performances: 
1920-21— 
"Tents of the Arabs"—Lor d Dansany. 
"Simon the Cyrenean"—Ridgeley Torrence. 
"Th e Empero r Jones"—Guest performanc e 
with Charles Gilpin at the Belasco ; 
student performanc e at the Belasco. 
Commencement Play, 1921-22— 
"Th e Canterbury Pilgrims"—Perc y Mackaye. Repetition o f first bill in compliment o f the delegates to the Washingto n 
conference on Limitation of Armaments. 
"Stron g as the Hills " (a Persian play ) — 
Matalee Lake. 
Original Student Plays— 
"Genefrede,"—a play o f the Life o f Toussaint L'Ouverture—Helen Webb . 
"Th e Yellow Tree"—DeReat h Irene 
Busey. 
Commencement Play— 
"Ari a de Capo"—Edn a St. Vincent Millay. 
"The Dans e Calinda"—a Creole Pantomime Ms. performanc e — Ridgeley 
Torrence . 
A movement o f this kind and magnitude 
is, can be , the monopoly o f no one group, no 
one institution, no paltry decade. Bu t within a significant span, this is the record. The 
immediately important steps must be the 
production o f original plays as rapidly as 
is consistent with goo d workmanship and 
adequate production, and the speedy endowment of the theatre, which fortunately, with 
the amateur talent of the university, means 
only funds fo r building and equipment. I 
am writin g this article at Stratford-onAvon . I know that when stripped to the 
last desperate defense o f himself, the Eng ­
lishman with warrant will boast of Shakespeare, and that this modest Memoria l Theatre is at one and the same time a Gibraltar 
of national pride and self-respect and a 
Mecc a of human civilization and culture. 
Music in which we have so trusted ma y sing 
itself around the world, but it does not carry ideas, the vehicle of human understanding and respect ; it ma y pierce the heart, 
but does not penetrate the mind. But here 
in the glass of this incomparable art there 
is, fo r ourselves and fo r the world, that 
which shall reveal us beyond all propaganda 
on the one side, and libel on the other, more 
subtly and deeply than self-praise and to 
the confusion of subsidized self-caricature 
and ridicule. " I saw Othello's visage in his 
mind, " says Desdemona explaining her love 
and respect; so might, so must the world of 
Othello's mind be put artistically to speech 
and action. 
Stratford-on-Avon, August 5, 1922. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
ANNUA L MEETING 
T'H E Annua l Meeting o f the National 
Association fo r the Advancement of 
Colored People will he held in the South 
Hall of the Sage Foundation, 130 East 
Twenty-second Street, New Yor k City, on 
the afternoon o f Tuesday, January 2, 1923, 
at two o'clock. Ther e will be reports from 
officers and branches, and the nominations 
fo r directors will b e voted upon. 
Th e Nominating Committee for members 
o f the Boar d of Directors of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
Peopl e reports the following nominees for 
terms expiring Decembe r 31, 1925: 
Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, 111. 
Dr. Charles E.. Bentley, Chicago, 111. 
Rev. Hutchens C. Bishop, Ne w Yor k City 
Hon. Arthu r Capper, Topeka , Kas. 
Mr. Robert R. Church, Memphis, Tenn. 
Dr. W . E. B. D u Bois, New Yor k City 
Mrs. Florenc e Kelley, Ne w Yor k City 
Hon. Charles Nagel, St. Louis, Mo . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, New Yor k 
City 
Mr. Harr y H. Pace, New Yor k City 
Mr. Charles Edwar d Russell, Washington, 
D. C. 
Mrs. Mar y B. Talbert, Buffalo, Ne w York. 
TH E NOMINATIN G COMMITTEE , 
D R . W M . A . S INCLAIR , Chairman. 
M R . P AU L K ENNADAY , 
M R . A RTHU R B. S PINGARN . 
The evening mass meeting, which is held 
on the day o f the annual meeting, will be 
held at the Town Hall, 121 West 43rd Street, 
between Sixth Avenu e and Broadway, New 
Yor k City, at 8:00 P. M. Invitations have 
already gone forwar d to several eminent 
men and women, and it is expected that the 
meeting will be one of the greatest ever held 
under the auspices o f the Association. 
The mass meeting will have peculiar significance. If the Dye r Bill shall not have 
been passed b y January 2, the gathering 
will be used to bring greater pressure on the 
United States Senate. If, however, our expectations that the Anti-Lynching Bill will 
have become a law b y that time are justified, 
the meeting will be a grea t celebration o f 
this victory at the end of nearly twelve years 
of warfar e on lynch-law. The press will 
contain further information on the meeting 
and also the January CRISI S and Branch 
Bulletin. W e extend herewith to all interested persons a very cordial invitation to 
be present at this meeting. 
BRANCHES 
THE most encouraging evidence of the 
progress of the organized powe r of 
the N. A . A . C. P. is the effective work being done b y its branches in the field of legal 
defense. Hardl y a week passes but some 
splendid accomplishment is reported to the 
National Office in cases which the branches 
have taken up and carried through to successful conclusions. Throug h the pages o f 
T H E CRISIS , the Branch Bulletin and the 
N. A . A . C. P. Press Service, the National 
Office is glad to make these facts known, not 
only that the public ma y be acquainted with 
this wor k but that these victories ma y serve 
as examples to other branches, and at the 
same time a warnin g to those wh o need to 
be advised that there is a powerful organization which is fighting fo r the victims o f 
rac e prejudice. 
Amon g recent notable achievements b y 
N. A . A . C. P. Branche s is that of the 
Princ e George, Md., County Branch which 
fo r mor e than a year sought information 
regarding the murde r of a white woma n 
in Maryland fo r which crime a colored man 
named Joseph Keller wa s arrested. Work ­
ing in co-operation with the District of 
Columbia Branch through Mr. James A . 
Cobb, Attorney, and Mr. Shelby J. Davidson, Executive Secretary, the Princ e George 
County Branch proved Keller innocent and 
secured his release from jail. 
The Buffalo, N. Y., Branch, in similar 
fashion took up the case of a nine yea r old 
colored girl, who had been brutally raped 
by a white man, Morris Deitch. A s a result 
of their efforts Deitch wa s tried, found 
guilty and sent to prison for from six to 
twenty years. 
The City Council of Oakland, Cal., passed 
an ordinance in October at the instance of 
the Northern California Branch making it 
a crime "fo r any person in the City of Oak-land to appear in public in any mask, cap, 
cowl, hose, or other thing concealing the 
identity o f the wearer. " The ordinance is 
aimed directly at the Ku Klux Klan. Unde r 
its provisions any Klansman who violates 
this law will be punished b y a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or will be imprisoned not mor e than six months or ma y 
be both fined and imprisoned. 
The National Office is taking this means 
o f expressing its sincere congratulations 
and commendation to these branches fo r this 
notable and effective work. 
"I A M OPPOSED TO LYNCHING, 
BUT " 
THE other two Negroe s stoutly maintained their innocence, but it wa s decided to burn them on the statement of the 
condemned ma n that they wer e guilty. 
Rope s wer e tied about their waists and they 
wer e dragged on to the fire and burned, one 
after the other. " 
The above news story comes neither from 
the heart o f Borneo nor the brain o f a novelist. It is simply the truthful account o f the 
wa y of a mob with a man in these United 
States o f America , A.D. , 1922. An d to our 
shame, b e it said that it is not a particularly 
unusual tale. The simple fac t that Americans in large numbers have acted like fiends 
calls fo r an explanation. What do these 
people think would happen if their atrocities 
should cease? This is the phase o f the 
problem that is usually passed over in silence ; and it is the failure to fac e this 
question openly that weakens the antilynching case. 
The question, however, will bear facing. 
Suppose we grant that the Southern Negr o 
is a type o f human being wh o must be ruled 
b y fear. Suppose we say that as soon as 
a lynch law is passed which is drastic 
enough to stop lynching and burning, a 
flood o f excesses will be let loose upon the 
nation which will be far wors e than the 
evil attacked. Suppose the write r is as ignorant as a babe of Negro psychology. Suppose , after all, that mob rule does mor e 
goo d than harm. Al l this woul d give no 
justification for the argument probably soon 
to be heard on the floor of Congress, " I am 
opposed t o lynching, but—we shouldn't do 
anything about it." Fo r the sake of commo n honesty, let some brave man speak up 
and state the position o f the opposition thus : 
" I am in favo r of lynching, because—" 
Ther e must be a clarifying o f the issue. 
Newspape r after newspape r lifts up its editorial hands in holy horror at the cruelty of 
the modern savages wh o roast a human be ­
ing at the stake—and then leaves the matter up in the air with a final broad gesture 
calling attention to the problems o f communities wher e such customs are in vogue . 
Thos e problems should be given full weight, 
to be sure, as considerations bearing directly upon the question as to whether mo b rule 
should or should not be tolerated. If, when 
weighed in the balance, good against evil, 
its total effect is found to b e good, let's make 
it legal; if bad, only a law "with teeth in 
it" will stop the pleasant pastime o f butchering b y popula r acclamation whosoeve r is 
possibly guilty of a crime. Ther e is, unfortunately, no wa y of requiring a mo b to 
hold a sober trial or to tempe r its excesses; 
if we sanction mo b mercy fo r offenders w e 
must agre e that, as matters stand, a large 
number o f innocent persons ought t o roast 
fo r the good o f the race. 
There is a possible middle course—a dishonest course. It is the course which finds 
expression in the folded hands and the smug 
comment : " I am opposed to lynching, but you 
can't stop a crowd—and after all, between 
you and me, I am not sure that w e should. 
Let us pretend to disapprove it fo r the sake 
of the world's good opinion, but let us continue to hold immune from punishment the 
gentlemen wh o do our dirty work. " It is 
the course of those wh o stand nominally for 
trial b y jury , but who, b y declaration o f 
sympathy for the mob, encourage it to think 
that it has the tacit approva l o f the American people. It is the course whic h is at 
present branding us as a nation o f hypocrites; fo r so long as we do not have upon 
our statute books specific laws which impose penalties upon grou p murderers like 
those upon other criminals, the worl d will 
rightly think that we have no serious intention of stopping the barbaric atrocities of 
our mobs. 
No w a question arises: If the America n 
people show that they mean business and 
will not brook without the severest penalties the crude criminal justice o f the crowd, 
will that actually mean a tremendous increase in the most repulsive form of crime ? 
The write r cannot say, and he refuses to 
weaken his case with a dogmati c assertion upon a non-essential matter about which he 
has little knowledge and needs less. Let 
that matter be threshed out b y the debaters 
on the question, "Shall we outlaw lynching 
or legalize it? " Fo r those wh o agre e that 
mob justice is undesirable, a mor e pertinent 
question is this: "Wha t can we do to minimize or completely counteract the increase 
in individual crimes, if any there be, due to 
the suppression o f mass crimes? " To this 
there is at least one obvious answer. Following the exampl e o f Detroit, which reduced 
recorded crimes sixty-eight percent in- one 
year, we can speed up the wheels of justice 
and make as certain as humanly possible 
swift punishment to him wh o transgresses. 
If fea r on the part of those who have not 
erred is mor e essential than merc y to the 
degenerate wh o is certainly known to have 
done so, there might be legalized public 
whippings befor e executions. Yes, suppose 
we g o the limit, and condemn to death b y 
public burning those guilty o f particularly 
heinous offenses. W e can't do it, o f course, 
and we won't; but how infinitely better 
and mor e worth y o f the respect o f the 
world that course would b e than the prac ­
tice o f allowing a mass o f men untrained 
in the laws of evidence to select off-hand 
the ones to be burned—and get away with it. 
This is a question not of party, but of 
humanitarianism. Ther e is a law befor e 
Congress which puts to the test our sincerity in our belief that the methods o f th? 
Spanish Inquisition are not fit for the twentieth century. If w e truly believe that, we 
shall be willing to endure, if necessary, 
a slight added risk fo r those wh o are dearer 
to us than life itself. W e shall not be warring rac e against race, but shall have the 
best elements in two grea t races united 
against the worst in each. By our support 
o f this measure we ar e votin g fo r law as 
against anarchy, civilization as against barbarism, love as against hate. W e are asserting our will to those wh o would disgrace 
our rac e with the cruelest kind of savagery 
known to man. Our influence, after all, is 
decisive; wha t are we goin g to do about it ? 
R. S . U NDERWOOD . 
"WE BUILD GOLDEN HOUSES OR LOG CABINS" 
J ULIA N E LIH U B AGLE Y 
IT wa s at a colored farmers' meeting in 
one of the Carolinas. Fo r two hours or 
mor e they had discussed peanuts and cotton 
and corn and pigs. But these wer e dry 
subjects, that is, from the usual oratorical 
point o f view. Th e audience wa s drifting 
into restlessness. The chairman sensed the 
situation and called upon someone to "raise 
a hymn " whereupon an old colored woma n 
burst forth in an ecstasy of delight: 
"Wha t kind o' shoe you goin' to wear, 
Golden slippers! 
Golden slippers I'm goin' to wear, 
Whe n I get up in Glory! " 
A s soon as the singing was ove r an old 
colored man sprang to his feet, gav e his 
name as Josiah Gooseberry and announced 
that he wanted to say something on how 
whit e folks should co-operate with colored 
folks. Ther e wa s a sprinkling o f white 
folks in the audience and the chairman hesitated about giving this old man permission 
to talk lest he should embarrass some of 
these "white friends. " But Josiah Gooseberry wa s not to be dissuaded from talking 
b y mere intimation that it would be unwise fo r him to do so. An d so after a flowery introduction he plunged into his subject. He informed his audience that he had 
come down from the days of slavery and, 
therefore, understood whit e folks very well. 
I must confess that the first few minutes 
of his rambling, roundabout talk, in a dialect that wa s ridiculously crude, almost 
drowned my interest in his subject. But I 
wa s patient. I waited and finally the old 
man got off some real gems. He wa s in the 
middle of his talk when he thundered: "Ye s 
—I know dere's some good white folks-—an' 
den dere ain't. An ' hits de bad white folks 
whut w e cullud folks 's spoiled b y praisin' 
'em u p too much. Why , doan you know 
dere's some folks when you praises 'em up 
too much yo u commits a crime? " 
Th e audience gasped. But he went on 
developing his co-operative talk in his own 
way. Finally he wound up b y telling a 
story. It sounded like an interesting plot 
in the very announcing o f its title and b y 
the time he had approached and reap-proached it several times in his introduction 
I had snatched out my note book, pricked 
my ears and this is wha t I set down—mind 
you, in his own words: 
"Onc e durin de days o f slavery dere wa s 
a pow'ful mean ole master who useter whip 
an' whi p his po ' slaves all de time. No w 
he had two ole slaves—Uncle Joe an' Aun t 
Viney—if my mem'ry serves me right, dat he 
je s lived on. Ye s suh, he je s whi p an' whi p 
dem all de time. An ' Uncl e Joe an' Aun t 
Vine y dey ain't mek no complaint—no dey 
didn', but dey je s kep ' on talkin' to de Lord 
in prayer—praye r fo r to change de ole master's heart. But he ain't mek no change . 
But de Lord he works in might y mysterious 
ways—yes, he do. Bimeb y dat ole master 
took down sick—yes ! An ' he had dreams an' 
visions—yes! No w in one o f dese dreams 
he went up to Glory an' ole Saint Petuh 
met him at de gate an' dey start' walkin' 
down de street o f Jerusalem. Bimeb y dey 
come to monstrous beautiful house all made 
of gold. An ' de ole master ask Saint Petuh 
whose fine house wa s dat all made of gold. 
Saint Petuh he 'low, 'Dat's old Uncl e Joe's 
place.' 
"'Whu t sortah ole Uncle Joe's place? ' 
"'Ol e Uncl e Joe wha t useter live on yo ' 
place,' says Saint Petuh,—'seems lak to me 
you oughta know him.' De ole master commence to 'spute an' argue an' mek 'miration an' bimeby he says right flat dat no 
nigge r ain't never had no house lak dat. 
But Saint Petuh ain't argue wid him, he 
didn'. N o indeed. 
"H e je s tuck him u p to de house o f gold 
an' says, 'peep in an' see fo r yo'se'f.' An ' 
de ole master poked his head in de do ' an' 
sho nuff dere wa s ole Uncl e Joe all crowned 
in glory an' a-playin' on a har p of gold. De 
ole master wa s dumfounded. He backed out 
de house an' ax Saint Petuh how in de worP 
did a nigge r git sich a fine house all made 
of gold. An ' Saint Petuh says, 'B y de prayers he done sent up to hebem. De y kîp ' o r 
walkin'. Bimeby dey come to anudder house 
of gold, an' right off quick de ole master 
ax Saint Petuh whose house wa s dat. 'Dat's 
ole Aun t Viney's house,' says Saint Petuh. 
'She useter live on yo ' plantation too.' 
"'Lemm e see,' says de ole master, 'lemme 
see if dat's Vine y fo r true.' An ' he went 
an' poked his head in de do ' an' sho nuff dere 
wa s Aun t Viney. She wa s all crowned in 
glory an a-tuning up her voice fo r de hebemly choir. De ole master shook his head 
an' 'low'! 'Well, well, well, I never spec 
to see niggers live in fine houses lak dem 
houses of gold. Ho w did ole Aun t Vine y 
git her house o f gold? ' says he. 
"'Sh e prayed hern u p too,' says Saint 
Petuh. 
"Bu t dey ain't stop goin' yet. De y je s 
kep' on walkin' down de streets of Jerusalem till bimëby dey come to a li'l broke 
down log cabin wid de windows all knocked 
out an' de steps all flopped down an' de 
chimney all tumblin' over. An ' right off quick 
ag'in de ole master ax whos e house wa s dat. 
'Dat's yo ' house,' says Saint Petuh. De ole 
master go t sortah pal e an' ax : 'Ho w come 
I gits sich a house as dat, Saint Petuh? ' 
Saint Petuh says, 'Cu z stid of sendin' up 
prayers fr'm yo ' ole plantation fo r to build 
a house o f gold, yo u wa s down on earth 
a-whippin' an' a-tearin' up folks. An ' yere's 
whu t you done : you tore down yo ' house 
o f gold an built dis yer e cabin. 
"D e ole master poked his head in de little 
cabin do' an' he ain' seen nothin' but a bare 
empty room. 
"It looked zackly lak de ones he built for 
Uncle Joe an' Aun t Vine y down on earth. 
De ole master commenc e to cry : 'Oh Saint 
Petuh, can't you help me ? Won' t you help 
me fo r to pra y up a house o f gold? ' Saint 
Petuh says, 'I'm sorry, but you done wait 
too late now. ' 
"S o de ole master he kept' on cryin' till 
he done woke u p Uncl e Joe an' Aun t Viney. 
De y come runnin' up to de Bi g House a-hollerin', 'Oh master, whut's de matte r wid 
you—whut's de matter wid you, master? ' 
"'I's e been dreamin',' says de ole master, 
'I'se been dreamin' whut kind o f house we 
all is buildin' up in glory—house s o f gold 
or lo g cabins.' 
"No w dat ole master had chance to change 
his low down ways—whic h he did—" coneluded Josiah Gooseberry, 'an' I spec he's 
livin' somewhere up in de sky now in his 
house o f gold. But we-all might not git 
dat chance. So I wan t you to think 'bout 
dis—what kind o f house is we buildin' today. Is w e workin ' against on e 'nother or 
is w e workin' together ? Is we buildin' log 
cabins or houses of gold ? Ah-ha ! folks— 
'tain't whut kind o f shoe you goin' to wear, 
but hits whut kind of houses is you buildin' 
up in glory—houses o f gold or log cabins? " The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G. ALLISO N 
Amon g 83 members of the Constitutional 
Committee o f Missouri there wa s a Negro , 
Mr. B. F. Bowles, wh o wa s a membe r o f 
the Committees on Education and Military 
Affairs. One anti-race measure, forbidding 
the inter-marriage o f whites and Negroe s 
and of whites and Mongolians, wa s introduced "b y request." Th e committee included forme r members o f Congress, a former membe r o f the President's Cabinet, and 
three women. 
Ruth Whitehead Whaley , a Negr o student in Fordham La w School, Ne w Yor k 
City, is the winner o f two scholarships,-— 
one fo r attaining the highest average in 
the first year, and the other for the highest 
average in a class of over 500 students. 
He r marks are : contracts, agency, property, 
torts, jurisprudence, A plus; domestic relations, pleading, criminal law, A minus. 
Dr. Robert R. Moton, principal o f Tuskegee Institute, has gone abroad to address 
the Scottish Churches Missionary Congress, 
in Edinburgh. He is accompanied by his 
wife , Majo r Allen Washington, and the 
Rev. Mr. G. S. Imes. Anothe r passenger 
wa s Mrs. Casely-Hayford, a native of West 
Africa , wh o has been lecturing in the 
States in an endeavor to raise funds fo r a 
school in Africa . 
The two Carnegie libraries fo r colored 
people in Louisville, Ky., have a staff o f nine 
workers and an annual circulation o f over 
100,000 volumes. Mr. Thoma s F. Blue, a 
colored man, who is in charge o f the work , 
has trained not only his own assistants but 
TH E DINING ROOM IN A NEGRO HOME, NE W YOR K eleven wome n from southern cities. One o f 
his pupils is now librarian o f the Howar d 
Branch Library fo r colored people, which 
wa s dedicated recently in Chattanooga, 
Tenn. 
The "Folie s Bergères " are to Paris wha t 
the "Ziegfeld Follies " are to Ne w York . The 
leading dancing role o f the Paris Follies is 
being taken b y Bertha Rhetta Moxley, a 
colored girl formerly o f Chicago. In the 
cast also are a colored Frenchman and several whit e America n actors and actresses, 
one o f whom, the forme r star, Miss Moxle y 
replaces. Ther e has been some friction and 
criticism b y America n tourists ove r the actors; but on the whole, things have gone on 
smoothly and the management is pleased. 
Miss Moxley's photographs are on the Grand 
Boulevards and she writes: "M y costume 
is silver cloth and crimson velvet, Egyptian 
style, with the cutest headdress and pointed, 
turned-up slippers. Ther e is drapery about 
the hips, with long silver fringe to my 
ankles." 
Fo r the first time the British Colonial 
Office has sent a commission to the West 
Indian colonies. This wa s caused b y the activity of the Granada Representative Government Association, o f which T. Albert 
Marryshow is the founde r and secretary. 
Mr. Marryshow edits The West Indian, a 
daily and weekly pape r which ought to make 
Negro America n editors sit up and take notice. He has been active in the agitation 
which is widespread ove r the English West 
Indies fo r a large r measure o f self-government. He wa s a delegate to the Second PanAfrica n Congress and took a prominent part. 
Edwar d W . Beasley is an interne in the 
Cooke County Hospital, in Illinois, being the 
third colored physician to win this coveted 
opportunity. Internes are chosen b y competitive examinations. In the last examination Dr. Beasley ranked highest. He is a 
graduate of Fisk and o f the Northwestern 
Medical School. Befor e his present appointment he wa s senior bacteriologist at the City 
Hospital in Chicago. 
Amon g those present at the Paris session 
of the Second Pan-African Congress wa s a 
colored girl, Bessie Coleman. She wa s born 
in Texa s 24 years ago and went to Franc e 
as a nurse during the war, wher e she wa s 
brigaded with the French, after the manner 
o f whit e Americans wheneve r a capable 
colored person appeared overseas. Miss ColeMISS BERTHA R. MOXLEY 
MR. T. A. MARRYSHOW MR. C. S. DUKE 
JUDGE C. H. PAYNE MISS BESSIE COLEMAN 
PROF. C. H. BOYE R DR. E. W . BEASLE Y man received instruction in flying and finally 
the French pilot's license. Recently she go t 
the first pilot's license for flying granted 
to an America n woman in Germany, and she 
has piloted machines in Holland and in 
America . 
Christopher H. Payne wa s born in West 
Virginia , 68 years ago, of free Negr o parentage. He wa s trained at Richmond Institute and afterward studied law. Mr. Payne 
was the first Negr o to be elected to the 
legislature of West Virgini a in 1896 and in 
1903 he became America n Consul to the 
Danish West Indies where he served 14 
years. Whe n the United States bought the 
Islands, he returned to the practic e of law 
and then wa s successively appointed Actin g 
Assistant Government Attorney, Actin g 
Judge in St. Thomas, Police Judge and Justice o f the western part of the island o f St. 
Croix, and finally Police Judge for the whole 
island. Judge Payn e is also a membe r o f 
the Colonial Council. 
This summe r the Episcopalians held a 
conference at Wellesley College. Amon g 
the instructors wa s Professor C. H. Boyer, 
Dean of the College Department at St. Au ­
gustine Institute in Raleigh, N . C. Mr. 
Boye r is a graduate o f Yale . He held classes 
on the subject o f mission wor k amon g colored people. 
Sometimes persons writ e to ask if it is 
worth while fo r a colored bo y to study engineering. W e always reply : "Yes. He will 
have a hard time getting a job , bu t it can be 
done. " Th e career o f Charles S. Duke, in 
Chicago, prove s this. Mr. Duke is a graduate of Philips Exete r and Harvard and a 
civil engineer o f the University of Wiscon ­
sin. He secured his first position on the 
Missouri-Pacific Railroad and afterward he 
worked for the Pennsylvani a Railroad, the 
Chicago and Northwestern, the Commonwealth Edison Company, and George W . 
Jackson, Inc., wh o have a nation-wide reputation as tunnel builders. Later Mr. Duke 
entered the employment o f the City of Chicago as bridge designing engineer. He 
served o n the engineering staff o f the Transportation Commission, wa s in charge of 
the city's wate r exhibit at the "Pagean t of 
Progress, " and is a membe r o f the engineering staff of the Sanitary District of 
Chicago. Recently he wa s appointed one 
of the 22 Zoning Commissioners. Beside 
his regular wor k he is the author of numbers 
BETHEL CHURCH, COLUMBIA, S. C. 
of technical papers on Engineering in engineering periodicals and of a pamphlet on 
"The Housing Condition of the Colored People in Chicago. " 
Bethel A . M. E. Church, in Columbia, 
S. C , is rated as the third important building operation in that city during the year,-— 
the Post Office and the Telephone buildings 
preceding it. The church, with furnishings, 
cost $90,000 ; it has an electric lighted cross, 
seats 1,500 people, and wa s designed by a 
colored architect, Mr. J. A . Lankford, o f 
Washington, D . C. Bethel has a membership of 1,800 with the Rev. Mr. Wiseman, 
formerly of Aver y Chapel, Oklahoma City, 
as pastor. 
CHICAGO UNIVERSITY OF MUSIC MISS LULU J. CARGILL 
Th e Chicago University of Musi c has 
secured the forme r residence o f Mme . Schumann-Heink for its work. Th e building 
is located on the corner of 37th and Michigan Boulevard, and includes well appointed 
studios, practise rooms, recital and reception halls, offices, and a tea room. Instruction is given in piano, violin, organ, win d instruments, harmony, counterpoint, composition, orchestration, dramatic art, singing, 
public school music, and the history o f music. Miss Pauline James Lee, who is in 
charge of the work, is a youn g woma n who 
has been associated wit h Mme . Hackley. 
Mrs. Camille Cohen Jones, formerly o f Ne w 
Orleans, is also on the staff. A s an expresIN ONE OF SANTA CLAUS' WORKROOMS 
AT A HEALTH STATION IN NEW YORK CITY 
sion o f appreciation to Mme . SchumannHeink fo r turning over the lease to her 
home fo r this worth y cause, a reception 
wa s given in her honor and over 2,000 people wer e present. 
Lulu J. Cargill, a clerk in the Varic k 
Street Branch o f the Ne w Yor k Post Office, 
has beaten the record of Nina Holmes, o f 
Detroit, as the fastest mail sorter. Miss 
Cargill's record is 30,125 pieces of mail inside of 8 hours, or mor e than a letter a 
second; Miss Holmes' record wa s 20,610 
letters in 8 hours. 
Ther e are health stations in man y cities 
where the best milk can be purchased at 
the lowest cost. Th e baby in ou r picture 
is being weighed at one of the stations in 
CLAUDE McKAY New Yor k City. Should anything ail the 
baby, the nurse is ready with advice for 
the mother. 
Our photograph shows one of Santa 
Claus' workrooms, in New Yor k City, where 
no color line is drawn. 
Claude McKay , the Jamaican poet, has 
arrived in London, England, en route to the 
continent. H e will send news dispatches 
on European affairs and politics as they 
affect the colored races o f the world. Whil e 
in New York , Mr. McKa y wa s a membe r 
of the staff o f The Liberator. He has published "Harlem Shadows, " a book of poems, 
and other works. 
The Hon. Andre w F. Stevens, o f the 
Pennsylvania Legislature, has been elected 
to membership in the Bry n Maw r Hors e 
Show Association, which is composed of 
Philadelphia's wealthy and exclusive set. 
Th e Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity has 42 
chapters, stretching from Harvard University, in Massachusets, to the University 
of California. Other Negr o college fraternities and the numbe r o f their chapters 
are the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, 20; 
the Kappa Alpha Psi, 28 ; Omega Psi Phi, 
20; Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, 19; Phi 
Beta Sigma, 20 ; and Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, 
7. With the exception o f the Alpha Phi 
Alpha and the Kappa Alpha Psi, each o f 
these fraternities and sororities had its 
origin amon g students o f Howar d University. The Alpha Phi Alpha will hold its 15th 
annual convention in St. Louis, Mo., during December. The national president is Mr. 
Simeon S. Booke r of Baltimore, Md. ; the 
national secretary, Mr. Norma n L. McGhe e 
o f Howar d University, Washington, D . C. 
The Alpha Kappa Alpha meets in Kansa s 
City, Decembe r 27-31. 
Several hundred colored public school 
teachers in Washington, D. C. have severed 
connection with the Education Association 
of the District and organized the Columbian Education Association o f Washington. 
There wer e 329 colored teachers wh o joined 
the Education Association, which is made 
up of Sections A and B,—white and colored, 
respectively. B y a vote of that body their 
initiation fees wer e returned on account of 
dissatisfaction which arose ove r the 
designations. Miss Luc y D . Slowe , forme r 
principal o f Shaw J.unior Hig h School, is 
president of the new organization. 
Negr o bankers have organized the Overseas Navigation Corporation and the Overseas Trading Company, to supply needs 
which will gro w out o f the America n loan 
to Haiti. The president of the companies 
is Mr. Charles E. Mitchell, wh o is president o f the Mutual Savings and Loa n Compan y of Charleston, W . Va. ; Napoleon J. 
Francis is director in Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti. Offices have been established at 80 
Wall Street, Ne w Yor k City. All business 
will be transacted through Negr o banks 
and each bank has been asked to assist in 
the underwriting. 
NEGRO CHIEFS AT THE BASTILLE DAY CELEBRATION IN PARIS MRS. HATTIE B. WALKER 
The Atta h of Idah is one of the native 
kings of Southern Nigeria, British West 
Africa , and rules a large population under 
the English overlordship. 
A t the Bastille Da y celebration in Paris, 
France, amon g special guests wer e 26 
Chiefs from Africa , representing six French 
colonies. They were decorated b y President 
Millerand and thanked fo r the 200,000 fighters they sent to Franc e during the war. 
Attired in their brilliant native robes, they 
are sitting along the fence of Longchamp 
race course at a vantage point from which 
they witnessed the military review of the 
French Army . The presidential and honor 
tribunes are in the background. 
Amon g recent appointments of Negroe s 
to political positions we note John W . 
Schenck, a Republican in Boston, to Assistant U. S. Attorne y for Massachusetts; 
James S. Watson, a Democra t in New Yor k 
City, to Special Deputy Assistant Corpora ­
tion Counsel in franchise tax proceedings, 
at a salary of $3,500 a year; Mrs. Monen L. 
Gray to Supervisor of the colored section 
in the Office of the Register of the Treasury 
in Washington, D. C. ; Captain Napoleon 
B. Marshall to a position in Haiti under 
the Commissioner o f Haiti. Captain Marshall is a graduate o f the Harvard La w 
School and one of the organizers of the 
15th Ne w Yor k Regiment. 
There have been the following victories 
for Negroe s in discrimination cases: In 
the Supreme Court in Little Rock, Ark., 
American Negr o Shriners wo n the right 
to use the name and the emblems of their 
organization; segregation signs in the city 
bathhouse at Wyli e Avenu e in Pittsburgh, 
Pa., have been ordered removed ; in Ne w 
Yor k City, the Misses Margare t and Ardell e 
Wiggin s wer e awarded $100 each against a 
restaurant-keeper. 
Dr. J. W . Goodgame and Messrs. H. H. 
Glover and H. C. Harris are members of the 
Federal jur y in Birmingham, Ala . Dr. 
Goodgame is pastor of Sixth Avenu e Bap ­
tist Church ; Mr. Glover is secretary o f Tug -
gle Institute; Mr. Harris is a prominent 
barber. 
Through orders of Mayo r Remington of 
Ne w Bedford, Mass., Estelle B. Kno x has 
been appointed to the municipal service as a 
clerical assistant at police headquarters. 
Miss Kno x had been turned down for two 
municipal positions, regardless o f the fac t 
that he r standing on the Civil Servic e list 
was 82.39 per cent., the highest o f any in 
Class 2. 
In Ohio, Miss Helen Chestnut has been 
appointed head o f the Latin Department at 
Central Hig h School in Cleveland; Mrs. 
Hattie Brown Walke r has bee n made a librarian in the Public Library in Cincinnati ; 
THE ATTAH OF IDAH AT THE SESSION OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED WOMEN'S CLUBS, IN RICHMOND, VA. WOODMEN OF UNION HOSPITAL AND BATH HOUSE 
Mar y R. James has been appointed Assistant Chemist in the Huron Road Hospital, 
Cleveland. 
A n Endowment Fund has been started at 
the A . and T. College in Greensboro, N. C , 
through the bequest of the late Mrs. Florence Garrett, of Greensboro. 
The America n Negr o Academy will hold 
its 26th annual session in Washington, D. C , 
Decembe r 27-28. The speakers will be Professors Robert T. Kerlin, J. E. Aggre y and 
T. M. Gregory, Dr. C. V. Roman, Dr. Joseph 
J. France , and the Rev. Mr. C. C. Alleyne . 
Fifty-five Negro students are enrolled at 
the University of Southern California. 
William M. Peters is doing graduate research wor k in bacteriology. 
The outstanding feature of the annual 
Grand Lodge session of the Woodme n of 
Union, held in Ho t Springs, Ark., wa s the 
dedication of its $150,000 hospital and bathhouse. There wer e 2,000 delegates present, 
representing 1,200 local lodges in Arkansas, 
Illinois, Oklahoma, Mississippi, Tennessee, 
Florida, and Missouri. Mr. John L. Webb , 
the supreme custodian, said : "An y organization among any people that can in six years 
turn a $5,000 deficit into a credit balance 
o f $206,000 and during the same period pay 
out $610,000 in sick and death claims, is 
worth y o f the confidence and support of the 
people everywhere. " The supreme president is Dr. E. A . Kendall. 
The Rev. Mr. J. W . Simmons has succeeded Dr. Harve y A . Kin g as president of 
Clark University in Atlanta, Ga. Mr. 
Simmons is a graduate of Columbia and 
Boston Universities and Dickinson College. 
He is 40 years o f age and has traveled 
extensively in Europe . Harr y W . Greene, 
at the age of 26 years, has become the dean 
of Samuel Huston College in Austin, Texas. 
Mr. Green wa s awarded the degrees of 
Bachelor and Master of Arts at Lincoln 
University in 1917-18. 
Th e 42nd annual session of the National 
Baptist Convention, Incorporated, will meet 
in St. Louis, Mo., on Decembe r 6. Amon g 
important matters will be the election of 
a president to succeed the late Dr. E. C. 
Morris. 
Attorne y William F. Denny has been 
chosen counsel o f record in the case of Prof. 
Robert T. Kerlin against the Staunton Military Institute. This is said to be the first 
instance in Virgini a fo r a Negr o attorney 
to conduct a civil case o f importanc e in 
which the client is white. The Outer Pocket 
Fresno, California. 
FRESN0 is in need of a good doctor and 
dentist. There are between 20 and 25 
hundred Negroes and about twice that 
many Latin people that get no care from 
white doctors. They almost refuse to wait 
on them. There is only one colored drug 
store, but a doctor that would come here 
now will earn from $500 a month to $1,000 
if he will look after just what we have 
in this one district to care for. So if you 
have one in mind send him out immediately 
or put us in touch with one. 
MRS. IZETTA CLAY. 
New York City. 
I was very much surprised to learn what 
a large number of colored people had graduated from northern colleges and had received the B. A. and M . A. degrees. I particularly enjoyed your comment on the useless struggle being made by the aristocrats 
in New England to maintain their supremacy in all matters affecting the government, 
and that instance you mention of the man 
whose parents were very poor, making the 
wonderful speech he did, being interrupted 
by a profligate, intoxicated scion of an 
aristocratic New England family, is very 
much to the point. 
I would give a good deal to have your 
comment of this month read by every Jew 
in America. If you will try and get together a certain number of people who will 
contribute a certain amount towards about 
200 annual subscriptions to TH E CRISIS, I 
will gladly be one of such a committee and 
contribute my share towards such a consummation, for I feel that TH E CRISIS does 
not reach the great number of people that 
it should reach. I would like to see every 
white boarding school in the South as well 
as in the North receive TH E CRISIS, and 
would also like to see the Judges of the different courts get it. 
J. D. WET M ORE. 
Washington, D. C. 
The statement of Dr. DuBois for the Association in the November CRISIS in rejoinder to the demand of the Negro World 
for an accounting of funds in the Bundy 
case is admirable. No one need now require an explanation of the relations of the 
Association to the case. 
R. C. EDMONDSON. 
Nashville, Tennessee. 
I am a Southern Methodist deaconness, 
and I want you to know that I am thoroughly converted. I want to say to you 
that I believe ignorance is the main trouble 
with white people now. Of course it is 
criminal ignorance. For myself I can only 
say "I did not know," otherwise I should 
have been long ago doing all in my power 
to bring about justice for all. 
ROSA BREEDEN. 
Rhodesia, Africa. 
The fact is the more intelligent of your 
race are bound to refuse the poison you 
are constantly trying to f?ed them. A 
man of your race should be the last on earth 
to publish such statements about Lincoln 
even if they were true, which they are not. 
"Smutty" is not the word to apply to Lincoln's stories. But if it were, a proper 
appreciation of the man and what you owe 
him should forever prevent you from applying the term. 
Your constant tendency to dwell upon sexual and questionable social matters, and 
your love for the sensational and obscene, 
unmistakably reveal the fact that you are 
deep in the mire. The Negro race will 
make no progress in following yor.. A man 
who will write as you have written fhould 
in all justice be denied the protection and 
opportunities offered by our cov.ntry : but 
because America is America you will doubtless be protected even in your licence. 
The men who should answer you will not, 
as they are busy with bigger things. And 
you doubtless go on thinking they cannot. 
But take this word from one who is truly 
interested in the progress of the Negro, 
for what you can get out of it. I wish I 
had time to give you more for I am sure it 
is the kind of medicine you need. 
T. A. O'FARRELL, Missionary. 
Camden, Mississippi. 
Well, I read your "Souls of Black Folks" 
the other day for the first time. It moved 
me immensely—it moved me immensely. I 
like that book because of the emotional tone 
among other things. Now, Mr. DuBois, I 
am a planter here in Mississippi, and have 
in the past four years undertaken to study 
my plantation Negroes. I would like to 
have you do me the kindness of assisting 
me by telling me of a few works which you consider good on the religion and religious life of plantation Negroes. I shall 
appreciate this very much. 
HOWARD SNYDER. 
Chicago, Illinois. 
"Opinion" savors of deep conviction, of 
logic, at times so revolutionary it calls the 
attention of other editors to "sit up and 
take notice" in print. You are saying "an 
eternal no" to the half-loaf of race compromise. 
S. D. BROWN. 
Los Angeles, California. 
I consider the very recent "Children's 
Number" in a class by itself. The articles 
on "Marriage, Birth, Children, Infancy, 
Childhood and Education", would that every 
member of our group could read and apply the wisdom taught in these articles. 
MRS. JOHN PRAYER. 
Detroit, Michigan. 
I have just been reading your "Darkwater". The other night I sat up until 
two o'clock trying to break its spell. When 
one begins to see the Negro problem, as 
pointed out by our own people, one awakes 
to a fuller realization of life. 
EVERETT E. CARTER. 
Cabin John, Maryland. 
Your statement that the World War was 
fought for the mastery of the black man 
or the colored races generally, was a revelation. Rear Admiral Fisher says that luxury is the cause of all wars, but the two 
statements have such an obvious relation 
that they mean the same thing. The racerepulsion which (to speak frankly) the 
Whites profess, is more acquired through 
suggestion than natural ... . While a 
child in the Channel Islands we attended 
missionary meetings where a Negro preacher from the West Indies was the attraction. At the close of all meetings a number of children (urged by their elders) 
went forward and kissed him. My father 
was always careful to inquire whether we 
had remembered this quasi-obligation, and 
as I considered it rather an interesting performance I was rather nettled at his insistence. 
H . DE JERSEY. 
Trinidad, B. W. I. 
Port-of-Spain (the capital) has over 70,-
000, with a proportion of 3 to 1 in favor 
of the colored people. (Let me state right 
here that I am writing of East Indians 
and Chinese as colored people.) We have 
a Public Library of which no town of the 
same size should be ashamed. Is your brain 
capable of imagining that, with the exception of Dumas' works, there is not another 
bit of literature by Negro or negroid people? I asked for P. L. Dunbar the other 
day as I thought that although it was not 
mentioned in the catalogue, yet there must 
surely be a copy of his works somewhere 
on the creaking shelves of this modern 
stronghold of literature. Believe me, Sir, 
there was no such copy. Yes, these English 
here are very careful what they give us 
for our mental pabulum—and who can 
blame them? I doubt if you would get any 
of our schoolboys to tell you the birthday 
of L'Ouverture, or Delaney. Why? Poor 
fellow, he does not know, he has never heard 
—you cannot blame him. What encyclopedia will inform you that either Pushkin 
or Hamilton and a host of others, were 
colored? They cannot hide about Dumas. 
Why? Because you could see it in his face 
and feel it in his hair. 
G. E. TRACEY. 
Greensboro, North Carolina. 
On looking over a recent number of The 
Crisis I noticed the list of schools given 
prominence in your columns. Do you know 
of any school or schools for special training of defective children? Have written 
several but all are strictly for whites. My 
little boy is normal in every w
r
ay except 
speech. I am sure with proper systematic 
training he could and would learn to talk 
perfectly. 
MRS. E. B. MEARES. 
I thought you were a Negro only from 
circumstances. I am beginning to feel that 
I was laboring under a false impression 
during the earlier years of your public 
career. And somehow or other your editorial entitled "The Demagog" in the April 
CRISIS together with your activities during the past few years in behalf of the 
American Negro, and the Negro of the 
world, have convinced me that I was in 
error. 
SAMUEL BARRETT. THE Lookiiva Glass 
LITERATURE 
S
O crowded was the little town 
On the first Christmas day, 
Tired Mary Mother laid her down 
To rest upon the hay. 
(Ah, would my door might have been thrown 
Wide open on her way!) 
But when the Holy Babe was born 
In the deep hush of night, 
It seemed as if a Sabbath morn 
Had come with sacred light. 
Child Jesus made the place forlorn 
With His own beauty bright. 
The manger rough was all His rest; 
The cattle, having fed, 
Stood silent by, or closer pressed, 
And gravely wondered. 
(Ah, Lord, if only that my breast 
Had cradled Thee instead!) 
JAMES S. PARK. 
The October number of the English 
Journal, official organ of the National 
Council of Teachers of English, publishes 
"Dangers and Possibilities of the Project," 
by Melissa A. Jones, a colored public school 
teacher of Atlantic City, N. J. 
The Church Missionary Review publishes 
an article on "Missions and the African 
Liquor Traffic," by Charles F. Hartford, M. 
D. "Education in Kenya Colony" is also 
discussed by J. R. Orr, B. A., who protests 
against the short-sightedness of East African missionaries in teaching the natives 
only Swahili, which possesses no literature. 
Mr. Orr concludes: 
"If the backward races are to be given 
self-government, they must be enlightened 
in order to understand the principles of 
such government and the history thereof. 
So strongly do I feel upon this subject and 
also upon the question of co-operation that 
at the Imperial Education Conference, 
which meets next year, I hope to have opportunity of urging a more progressive policy as to the education of backward races, 
which will include the compulsory teaching 
of the English language." 
George Madden Martin, the author of 
"Children of the Mist," discusses in McClure's for October the activities of the Inter-racial Co-operative Commission. 
The January CRISIS will contain our semiannual book review, which will include 
among others the following recent publications: "Bronze," a volume of verse by 
Georgia Douglas Johnson; "Nigger," a novel 
by Clement Wood; "The Negro in Chicago," 
a compilation of the findings made by th? 
Chicago Commission on Race Relations in 
connection with the race riots in that city; 
"The Negro Press in the U. S.," by Frederick G. Detweiler; "A Boy's Life of Booker 
T. Washington," by W. C. Jackson; "The 
Trend of the Races," by George Edmund 
Haynes; and "The Black Border," Gullah 
Stories of the Carolina Coast by Ambrose 
E. Gonzales. 
OUR NEGRO ARTISTS 
TH E Boston Public Library has been 
holding an exhibit of the Negro's 
achievement in Art, Literature and Labor. 
The Boston Evening Transcript comments: 
The collection of booksj prints, manuscripts and pictures that is shown in the 
Public Library is of a peculiar interest. It 
not only calls attention to the advance made 
by the Negroes in the United States in the 
last fifty years, but it shows that advance. 
The collection and the objects it embraces 
are intended as a memorial to Miss Maria L. 
Baldwin, for many years the beloved and 
respected principal of the Agassiz School, 
and takes place under the auspices of the 
League of Women for Community Service, 
the rooms of which are at 558 Massachusetts avenue. To one who has taken the 
Negroes in America for granted according to 
our easy-going way, we can but say that 
this exposition has much to enlighten him. 
. . . Aside from what it has to say to the 
student of economics or literature or politics, the collection tells a story which has 
not its like in modern history. It does not 
argue that the Negro has no great defects 
to overcome nor does it give any ground for 
hasty conclusions, however kindly these may 
be. . . . It shows that from a body that 
a very few years ago were slaves and so 
considered by the world, there have come 
men and women who have done those things 
which cannot be disregarded, which must 
be respected and above all make for the 
good of the Commonwealth. The good-fornothing Negro is probably the same as ever, 
but the Negro who has been wise enough, 
plucky enough and honest enough to see 
where his real manhood lay and to seek it, 
has given us chapter and verse for believing that he is a very good citizen. Here are the works of Henry 0. Tanner, 
Laura Wheeler, the late Richard Lonsdale 
Brown, S. A. Collins, Charles H. Osborne, 
William Edward Scott, Edmonia Lewis, 
Meta Warrick Fuller, and Albert A. Smith; 
Pushkin, the poet; Dumas, the writer; Ira 
Aldridge, the actor; Jacobus Joannes Captein, the navigator; Toussaint L'Ouverture, 
the statesman and liberator; Paul Laurence 
Dunbar, the poet, and W. E. B. Du Bois, 
author and editor. The Boston Globe says: 
The most interesting thing about the exhibition is not the sporadic evidence of what 
the Negro did a century or so ago so much as 
it is what the Negro is doing today to show 
the world that abolition was not a mistake. 
Here is the evidence in education, in industry, in literature, music, painting, sculpture, 
and other activities." 
The Christian Science Monitor of Boston 
commenting on the projected exhibit, concludes thoughtfully: 
The Negro race has furnished two widely 
different pictures of its own mind which 
are full of suggestion for the white man. 
One of these pictures is drawn in a book 
written by a French-speaking native African Negro, Maran, and distinguished by intellectual France by the award of the De 
Goncourt prize. It is a picture of primitive, 
violent, resentful and irreconcilable savagery. In its brutal frankness it is unfit for 
general circulation in its original form, and 
even in the more restrained English translation is offensive. It took courage of a 
certain kind to make intellectual France 
recognize with its highest approval this 
product of the Negro mind. For it is a bitter arraignment of the white race, and especially of the French administrators. 
The other picture will be unveiled in the 
Boston Public Library next month, when an 
exhibit of the products of Negro culture and 
intellectual achievement will be opened as an 
introduction to the establishment of a room 
devoted to the political, intellectual and 
artistic achievements of the Negro race. 
Among the exhibits will be such participation as that of Henry 0. Tanner, the American Negro whose works are to be found in 
the Luxembourg, in Paris; the Dumas, 
father and son; Alexander Pushkin, the 
great Russian author, also Paul Laurence 
Dunbar, and that remarkable portrayer of 
the mentality of his race, Dr. W. E. B. DuBois, whose masterpieces were rejected in 
the O. Henry memorial competition because 
the committee lacked the courage shown by 
intellectual France in crowning the work 
of René Maran. 
The suggestion pressed upon the attention 
of the white man by these two pictures of 
the Negro mind is impressive in its import. 
By sympathetic contact with the white 
man, Tanner, the Dumas, father and son, 
Pushkin, and Dunbar have demonstrated 
beyond peradventure that they possess unlimited capacity for culture, which the white 
man has heretofore but too readily arrogated to himself. Mercilessly exploited by 
the white man, as shown in Maran's book, 
the Negro clings to his savagery. We have 
heard much of the "white man's burden." 
How is the white man bearing that burden? 
DON'T GORE MY OX 
NOTHING shows up the Anglo-Saxon's 
utter inability to envisage fair play 
toward black men like the following comments on Siki's victory over Carpentier. F. 
S. Joelson writes in the African World of 
London : 
Siki's victory over Carpentier is a tragedy to those of our race who are bearing the 
burden and the heat of the day 'neath Africa's sun, for the humiliation of the white 
at the hands of the black, the stirring of 
racial consciousness in millions of men barely higher than savages in the scale of evolution, must inevitably detract from the standing and safety of the European. News 
travels quickly to-day in the last Continent, 
and soon railway platforms and isolated 
clusters of huts in out-of-the-way spots will 
be the gathering-places of idlers discussing 
the event with all manner of distortions. 
No man who has lived in Savage Africa, 
no man who knows anything of the African 
but feels that fistic bouts between black and 
white are a scandal that should be prohibited, either by the laws of boxing, or, if necessary, by those of European lands. Not 
one Negro in a million can understand that 
to us the event is merely a sporting incident 
unconnected with life itself. As in the days 
of yore armies sometimes elected to stand 
by the result of a combat between one 
doughty knight chosen by each side, so to 
the black man in his tropic home Siki (of 
whom he had never heard) will now be the 
national champion, the emblem of racial superority. What is without significance to 
us is fraught with meaning in Africa. 
An editorial also in the African World 
complains : 
We do not think that the British Colonies 
and other African States will have received 
the news of Siki's unquestionable victory 
over Georges Carpentier with unmixed feelings, for, despite the personal success of the 
gallant Senegalese boxer, the event opens 
up a vista of increased trcv.Me in the future between the two races. An evidently 
well-informed writer to the Daily Express 
emphasises how the contempt for the Englishman will be accentuated in India by the 
latest news, and, as far as West Africa and 
the other Equatorial regions of the Dark 
Continent are concerned, there can only be one voice of the gravest disapproval and 
surprise that such contests should even be 
permitted. However, the latest incident is 
only another of the many regrettable traits 
in the dominant French policy as far as the 
colored races are concerned, a policy which 
we are certain is creating a maelstrom of 
coming troubles between White and Black in 
the Tropics, the full effect of which cannot 
probably be gauged in anything like its full 
magnitude in our time. It is a far cry from 
the quite unjustifiable policy of placing 
Black troops amongst White communities in 
the occupied districts of Central Europe to 
the suicidal methods pursued for many years 
in French Equatorial Africa. 
What about the "suicidal methods pursued" by white troops in black communities? 
—e.g., Belgium in the Congo. This same 
F. S. Joelson mentioned above also remarks : 
Deep in the bush, where black outnumbers 
white by tens of thousands to one, it is 
prestige alone that makes it possible for the 
European to carry on. His moral superiority, backed now and then by a demonstration of physical force, holds sway over natives, who, once conscious of their power, 
could crush him in a moment. 
To which the Boston Evening Record aptly, if unwittingly, remarks: 
The knockout of the French champion 
comes at a time when a series of blows from 
Turkish fists are being imprinted on the ruddy countenance of John Bull himself. The 
Turks are hailed by the millions further 
East as belonging with them. The situation 
at the Dardanelles is being felt in India and 
beyond, where the natives are deeply conscious of antagonism to white interlopers 
from the West. . . . 
The white monopoly of force seems to 
have had its day. If white folks are to hold 
their supremacy they must find a basis 
which knockouts will not disturb. 
WHY PICK ON TURKEY? 
T
HE Nation says : 
There are atrocities enough to meditate upon in our own country. Another Negro was lynched in Georgia the other day, 
and the four white men whose indictment 
for participation in a lynching was so loudly 
heralded have been found not guilty. In 
Texas still another Negro has been lynched, 
and no one knows—or will say—what for. 
In Tennessee two white men were taken 
from jail on October 20 and lynched. In 
Portland, Oregon, the witchcraft delusion 
persists; 200 men have been rounded up, 
charged with the fearful crime of carrying 
membership cards in the I. W. W., and deported from the city without warrant of 
law. Meanwhile some seventy I. W. W.'s, 
against whom no overt act is charged, are 
still held in Leavenworth Prison because of 
wartime expression of dissenting opinion, 
and President Harding, in commuting the 
sentences of six of them, attaches the condition that they respect the laws—of which 
respect he, or some one of Mr. Daugherty's 
understudies who will speak in the President's name, will be the sole judge. Brethren, let us pray that the heathen nations 
may, in the course of centuries, mount to 
our civilized level! 
Rothschild Francis tells in the New York 
Call of the petty persecution received by the 
Virgin Islanders at the hands of naval 
officers who represent the U. S. Government : 
"Naval men cannot understand a people 
of our kind. They are accustomed to command men who dare not question or disobey 
their commands. Coming to these Virgin 
Islands they put in practice these same 
traits and are prepared to punish every son 
of the soil who attempts to criticize their 
methods. For example, it is commonly believed that native police cannot arrest United States marines, no matter how much they 
violate law and order. 
"We want the American people to understand that prior to the advent of these tars 
the natives were never treated in such a 
manner and they can see no reason now why 
native policemen should not arrest and carry them to jail when they violate our laws. 
Marines have met policemen on their beats 
and publicly called them all kinds of mean 
names. It is a splendid example to us. But 
natives are much more civilized than to beat 
out their assaulters' brains or burn their 
bodies to a cinder upon a slow fire because 
they are white, ignorant and aggressive. 
We want this thing stopped immediately. 
"We are not citizens of the United States. 
We are without a voice in our local government. Our civil liberties are openly assailed, and yet the Congress railroaded a bill 
that forced national prohibition upon us. 
"We live on a small island and eke out a 
livelihood by selling coal, oil and foodstuff 
to passing steamers. They also bought beer 
and light wines. Drunkenness is unknown 
in our community, and, now that this medium of livelihood—the right to trade with 
foreign sailors without unnecessary molestation—has been removed, our people are 
practically on the verge of starvation and 
our business men are without anything to 
do." 
G. L. Morrill writes in the Minneapolis, 
Minn., Twin City Reporter: 
The agents of the Belgian rubber companies, endorsed and protected by a Belgian 
king, Belgian soldiers, Belgian financiers, 
Belgian lawyers and Belgian capital, fixed up some 450 alleged treaties with the native 
[Congo] chiefs. They seized the land and 
gave in return gin and calico cloth to the 
chiefs. The chief thought he was only giving permission for the establishment of a 
station. The idea he was bartering away 
land never entered his mind, for it was held 
by a communal tenure by the whole tribe. 
On the strength of such treaty tricks, 20,-
000,000 pople were expropriated and their 
wealth seized in the name of Leopold. The 
unhappy Africans were robbed, debauched, 
degraded, tortured, mutilated and murdered, 
all on such a scale as has but seldom occurred in the whole course of history. 
Emaciated old women, with ropes around 
their necks, were forced to work in chaingangs from morning till night. The blacks 
received nothing for their rubber work in 
the fever and beast-infested jungle except 
lashes over the back with the "chicotte," a 
horrible hippopotamus rawhide whip, hard 
as wood, trimmed like a corkscrew, and 
with knife-blade edges. A few blows 
brought blood, and few more pounded the 
victim into insensibility. The hireling press 
and missionary priests of Leopold stated 
that it was "the general policy of the State 
to promote the regeneration of the race by 
instilling into it a higher idea of the necessity of labor." The manner of teaching was 
strikingly effective. Each town in the district was forced to bring in a certain quantity of rubber to the headquarters of the 
Commissary every Sunday. The soldiers 
drove the natives into the bush; if they 
were unwilling to go they were shot down, 
their left hands being cut off and taken in 
baskets as trophies to headquarters. The 
victims were often helpless women and 
harmless children. These hands were counted and placed in rows before the Commissary to see the soldiers had not wasted the 
cartridges. Often the severed hands were 
smoked in a kiln and carried in on top of the 
baskets of rubber. This was hardly a fair 
interpretation of the Scripture which says, 
"Work earnestly with both hands." Native 
villages were burned and the people massacred. According to one Belgian agent 
it was worth while to slaughter one-fourth 
of the population if the effect was to drive 
the others to frenzied and unceasing work. 
In the Mongalla District 60 women at one 
time were put in irons and left to die of 
hunger because the village of Mummumbula had not brought enough rubber. 
White America and white Europe, dwellers in glass houses, must not throw stones 
at the unspeakable Turk. 
NEGRO BAITERS PLEASE COPY 
THE assistant professor of sociology at 
Ohio University, Edwin L. Clarke, says 
the Boston Christian Science Monitor, gives 
a course in "Eliminating Prejudice." He 
pursues these common sense methods: 
To each student in his class is given a 
mimeographed sheet headed "Prejudice in 
the United States is Most Frequently Directed Against the Following Groups—Religious, National, Racial, Occupational, and 
Political." A number of examples of each 
group is listed after the headings, as, for 
instance, after "Political" are specified 
"Anarchist, Bolshevist, Capitalist, Communist, Free Trade, Liquor Interests, Militarist, 
Pacifist, Prohibitionist, Protectionist, Single Tax, and Socialist." 
The student is then required to write a 
paragraph of 100 to 200 words, explaining 
his antipathy for the group against which 
he has the most violent prejudice. He is 
asked to give free rein to his thought and 
is not required to defend his position logically. 
The next step in the course requires the 
rewriting of the first paragraph, eliminating 
from the previous indictment all charges 
which the student would not care to attempt 
to prove to be true of the body accused as 
a whole, before the Supreme Court of the 
United States. 
The next step is to show the pupil that 
something may be said on the other side. 
The third assignment requires the writing 
of as strong a defense of the group as the 
student can do in the same amount of 
space as the indictment. 
In the fourth assignment the student is 
asked to state in 100 to 200 words, to what 
extent his antipathy is based on reason and 
to what extent on prejudice, and to explain 
the origin of the prejudice in so far as he 
is able. 
The fifth requirement is to state definitely 
what the student intends to do to free himself from his prejudice. 
Nor does he stop here: 
Having found out how his students think, 
he requires each one to read and report on 
a novel, an autobiography, or a series of 
dramas, sympathetically presenting the case 
of the group against which he is prejudiced. 
Problems are made real and vivid when approached from a selected list of readings, 
Professor Clarke finds, and the kindly treatment which is given by more friendly writers often throws a new light on questions 
previously difficult for the individual student. 
When race problems are at issue the class 
is frequently addressed by representative 
Negro citizens, followed by an open forum. 
The group visits institutions, schools, and 
homes which show the achievements of the 
Negro. One class started the Ohio Student 
Inter-Racial Conference, which holds annual 
meetings at Wilberforce University to discuss race problems and their solutions. WE WONDER 
WE'D like to hear Gourdin, Robeson, 
Drew, Butler and others on these findings on "Racial Traits in Athletics," by Elmer D. Mitchell, quoted in Good Health: 
It is very common in the Northern States 
to find Negroes playing on teams representing educational institutions. Even those 
most prejudiced to the intermingling of 
races, cannot but admit that the Negro is 
usually a clean and sportsmanlike player. 
A colored youth who remains in school until 
the age of interscholastic competition is 
usually of the bright industrious type, and 
the same qualities show when he participates in athletic games. The Negro mingles 
easily with white participants, accepting an 
inferior status and being content with it. I 
have often seen a gay-spirited crowd of college players play pranks upon a colored 
team mate, even to overheaping his share of 
the equipment that was necessary to be carried, or to decorating-his uniform so that it 
showed conspicuously, and in all cases the 
spirit of reception was a good humored one. 
This same spirit enables the player of this 
race to meet intentional rough play and jibes 
of his opponents with a grin. The Negro 
as a fellow player with white men, is quiet 
and unassertive; even though he may be the 
star of the team, he does not assume openly 
to lead. 
The colored person is very adaptable and 
plays all games that the Americans have 
popularized, not showing any marked favoritism to certain ones. As a professional, 
most often he has gained notoriety through 
boxing, Jack Johnson, Joe Gans, and Sam 
Langford being well known figures in ring 
circles; and as an amateur, as a member of 
college teams, the All-American halfback, 
Pollard of Brown, and the All-Western 
tackle, Slater of Iowa, can be cited as examples. 
Is that so? And all so easy and convincing and scientific ! One was white, one was 
yellow, one was brown, one was black and 
all prove so much about the "Negro" race! 
STRAWS IN THE WIND 
That Negroes are making 
rapid strides in athletics 
outside of the prize ring was 
shown on Saturday at Newark, when the first three places in the 
running broad jump at the national championship of the Amateur Athletic union 
were taken by colored men, while first place 
in the hop, step and jump also went to a 
member of that race.—Paterson, N. J., Call. 
"I wa t to say this for fie 
colored people," says the 
director of Associated Charities work in a city with a large Negro population. "They take care of themselves and 
each other as no other group does. And 
when bad times came upon them, the colored 
people who came to us for help showed records of savings deposits amounting to from 
$300 to $400, which they had used in their 
extremity. They were the first group to recover themselves, for when work was offered 
them they took it. Maybe it was not always 
what they wanted or would have chosen to 
do, but at least they got to work again. . . . 
"The Negro does save. And he takes care 
of himself without whining, and helps take 
care of his neighbor. His happy-go-lucky 
air is deceptive. There is more shrewdness 
and sense underneath it than he is usually 
given credit for. He is a sort of natural 
philosopher, who can be contented in modest 
circumstances and smile through his misery."—Martinez, Cal., Gazette. 
According to a recent report, in the last sixty years 
Negroes in this country have 
acquired 22,000,000 acres of 
land, 600,000 homes and 45,000 churches. 
They operate 78 banks and 100 insurance 
companies, besides 70,000 other business enterprises with a capital of $150,000,000. 
Owing to the large number of schools and 
colleges for colored children illiteracy has 
been reduced to less than 27 per cent.—The 
Pathfinder. 
WATCH 
YOUR 
STEP 
TH E TRUE 
PHILOSOPHER 
OUR 
WONDERFUL 
RACE 
MOTHER TO SON 
LANGSTON HUGHES 
WELL, son, I'll tell you: 
Life for me ain't been no crystal stair. 
It's had tacks in it, 
And splinters, 
And boards torn up, 
And places with no carpet on the floor— 
Bare; 
But all the time 
I'se been a-climbin' on, 
And reachin' landin's, 
And turnin' corners, 
And sometimes goin' in the dark, 
Where there ain't been no light. 
So boy, don't you turn back; 
Don't you sit down on the steps, 
'Cause you finds it's kinder hard; 
Don't you fall now— 
For I'se still goin', honey, 
I'se still climbin', 
And life for me ain't been no crystal stair. Hampton Institute 
Hampton, Virginia 
Founded in 1868 by General Armstrong 
to train selected colored youth who should 
go out to teach and lead their people. In 
1878 Indians were first admitted. 
Hampton stands for "a sound body, a 
trained capacity, and an unselfish outlook 
on life." 
Hampton is an industrial village: 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; 850 boarding students, 
500 day pupils in practice-school; 600 summer-school students; 200 teachers and 
workers. 
Hampton has over 2,000 graduates and 
8,000 former students; also numerous outgrowths, including Tuskegee, founded by 
Booker T. Washington. 
Hampton offers courses in four schools 
of normal and collegiate grade—Agricultural, Business, Home-Economics, Normal— 
and in two schools of secondary grade— 
Academy and Trade (11 four-year courses). 
Hampton needs annua] scholarships at 
$100 each and endowed scholarships at $2,500 
each; also $135,000 annually above regular 
income. 
JAMES E. GREGG, Principal 
FRANK K. ROGERS, Treasurer 
Edward Waters College 
JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA 
An Ideal Christian Home School 
In the Heart of Beautiful Florida 
For students unable to stand the rigors of 
a Northern winter. 
Grammar School, Junior High School, 
Senior High School, Normal School, School 
of Theology, Music, Commercial Courses, 
Manual Training, Domestic Science and 
Art, Band, Military training for men, 
Physical education for women. 
JOHN C- WRIGHT, President , 
BISHOP JOHN HURST, 
Chairman, Board of Trustees. 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSITY 
RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
is offering young men an excellent opportunity to secure a liberal education 
along a variety of lines. Every effort is 
made to stimulate a full, well-rounded 
development. High school, college and 
professional courses are offered. The 
faculty is strong, the rates are reasonable. 
For further information address 
The President 
1882 LANE COLLEGE 1922 
Jackson, Tennessee 
A growing College with a splendid history 
and a bright future. It offers modern courses 
in Collegiate, Theological, Musical, Colleg-e 
Preparatory, Teachers Training, Home Economics, Agricultural and Pre-Medical subjects. 
Several vocational courses are also taught. 
Proper standards of conduct as well as 
scholarship are maintained. Registrations of 
students are now being made for the next 
session. Well equipped laboratories, dormitories with modern conveniences and facilities 
under positive Christian influences are supported. For further information address 
J, F. LAKE, President, Jackson, Tennessee, 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FO R GIRLS ) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Write for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
WALDEN COLLEGE 
.Large New Beautiful Site. College organized to salt advanced standards and to do well what is undertaken. 
COURSES—Junior College, emphasizing two years' standard 
college work above approved high school; Arts Course; Science 
or Pre-Medlcal ; Teachers Training. 
High School ; Music ; Home Economics ; Practice School : 
Seventh Grade ; Eighth Grade ; Kindergarten. 
Fifty-sixth session begins October 3rd. For Information address T. R. Davis. President, Walden College, Nashville, Tonn. 
KINDERGARTE N DEPARTMEN T 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two yean 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlanta University Atlanta. Ga 
THE 80 LESSONS in BUSINESS and 
PRACTICAL BOOKKEEPING 
AT EDWARD T. 
"DUNCAN'S BUSINESS SCHOOL" 
will fit you to do business in the right way. 
No school can excel the system of Comprehensive (Pitman) Shorthand and Expert Typewriting. 
1227 S. 17th STREET PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
WANTED 
A position in some school as teacher of 
Dressmaking by a young woman who had 
her training at Temple University. Write 
G. W. J. 
c/o THE CRISIS 70 Fifth Are., New York, N. Y. MEHARR Y MEDICAL COLLEGE 
with departments of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmacy and a Nurse Training School 
ALL DEPARTMENTS RECENTLY REORGANIZED 
Two years (Class One) college work required for admission to the study of medicine. Graduation 
from a four years' High School or Normal School required for admission to the departments of dentistry and pharmacy and nurse training. For catalog and application blank address 
John J. Mullowney, M.D., President of Meharry Medical College, Nashville*, Tenn.' 
TH E LINCOL N SANATORIU M 
FO R TUBERCULOSI S 
and other respiratory diseases. 
For further information write 
DR. I. E. MOOR E 
314 W . Williamet Street, Colorado Springs, 
Colorado 
YOU CAN BANK BY MAIL 
FIRS T STANDAR D BAN K 
Louisville, Xy. 
Capital and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilson Lovett, President 
Is it a Holiday Gift to a friend? Then make it a year's subscription to 
TH E CRISIS. Subscription is $1.50 per year. A S A SPECIAL OFFER 
we will send a year's subscription free to anyone sending us A T ON E 
TIM E five paid up yearly subscriptions to TH E CRISIS. This offer 
holds good until 31 December, 1922. 
BOOKS 
You can make no better gifts to your friends than good books. Consult 
the inside back cover page of this issue of TH E CRISIS for suggestions 
and prices and send your orders early. 
STUDENTS 
W e would like to secure the services of students during the school term 
to act as agents—taking subscriptions and selling single copies of 
THE CRISIS 
Liberal commission is offered. 
Address : The Crisis 
70 FIFT H AVENUE NEW YORK , N. Y . THE NEGRO IN OUR HISTORY 
By 
Dr. CARTER GODWIN WOODSON 
$2.15 by mail 
Published in June, this book has already been adopted as a textbook for 
schools conducting courses in History and Sociology. The following desirable 
features make it the most useful book on the Negro: 
It contains 20 chapters, 126 illustrations, references for future study and important 
documents in the appendix. 
It is well-thought-out, logically developed, tersely written and beautifully illustrated. 
It has a logical arrangement, accurate citations, a vigorous style and positive 
statements to avoid ambiguity and inspire clear thinking. 
It shows an admirable balance between the economic and the political, between 
the purely narrative and the material. 
It analyzes and discusses every phase of Negro life and history without the bias 
of many writers on social problems. 
It is the only textbook on the Negro written from the point of view of the 
student and in conformity with the requirements of the schoolroom. 
There is no better volume to recommend either to the man in the street or to 
the serious student. 
THE ASSOCIATED PUBLISHERS, INC. 
1216 You Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
DO YOU KNOW WHAT CIVILIZATION OWES 
TO THE NEGRO? 
Can you give the names of Negro men and women who 
have helped to make the world's history 
The 2-Foot Shelf of Negro Literature 
covers these vital subjects and supplies a liberal education 
in Negro history and achievement. 
You need these books in your library. You should use 
the knowledge they contain to break the studied silence of 
our educational system about millions of Negroes of thiB and 
earlier civilizations. 
Cultivate Racial Self-Respect by learning something of your 
own race. The 2-FOOT SHELF OF NEGRO LITERATURE 
consists of 12 books selected with care and discrimination. 
In them are condensed a life-time of reading, study and 
research. 
Write for List and Prices. 
KATHRYN M. JOHNSON 
576 Greene Avenue Brooklyn, N. Y. 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated In public and secondary school 
libraries as an Introduction to the study of American 
History from the American Negro viewpoint. 284 paces, 
32 chapters, 17 full paie illustrations. Index and 
bibliography other features. Price $2.00; postage prepaid 
$2.15; sent on receipt of net price. Order through any 
bookseller; c. O. D. or postage remittance. For further 
information address the autnor. 
JOHN W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann St., Washington, D. C. 
THE UNFORGETABLE CHRISTMAS GIFT 
"THE VENGEANCE OF THE GODS" 
BY WILLIAM PICKENS 
PRICE $1.25 POSTPAID 
WILLIAM PICKENS 
260 West 139th Street New York, N. Y. 
A. M. E. BOOK CONCERN 
631 Pin* Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
CHESTER A. SMITH 
Baritone 
Concerts and Recitals 
For terms and dates, 
address 
67 MOUNTFORT STREET. 
BOSTON, MASS. 
A MONET GETTER because 't u A CROWD GETTER 
Churches and Clubs looking fer • play that will afford au 
evening of Sid*-Spllttlno Fun, should ha?e 
The Slabtown Convention 
As entertainment In one set; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared turn 
On» te Two Hundred Dollars In Ons Night. PRICE, iOa. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Auther 
Llnteln Holohts. Washington, P. o 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
641 W. 8th Si. Cincinnati. Ohio 
OIL PORTRAIT only $9 
LIFE SIZED BUST FROM any photograph. Gives distinction to home or 
office. Special Christmas offer; only 
$9 for a $50 genuine hand painted oil 
portrait. Send $2.50 now and pay 
balance when delivered. Satisfaction 
guaranteed. State whether light, dark 
or medium. 
THOMAS BROWN, Artist, 
Box 18, Philadelphia, Pa. Passing for Colored 
Has become popular since we established Black Swan Records 
as the only genuine Colored Records, sung by Colored Artists 
and made by a Colored Company. 
At least three white concerns are now catering to Negro 
buyers and advertising in Negro newspapers who never did so 
previously. 
One Company issues a catalog and calls its Record "the new 
Race Record". In other words it is attempting to "Pass for 
Colored". 
"The World Do Move!" 
Don't be deceived. We Repeat: The Only Genuine Colored 
Record is 
BLACK SWAN 
Buy them regularly from your Agent and Dealers. 
We have some exceptionally good records of recent issue and 
they are better and better. 
Every kind of Record from Blues to Grand Opera. 
Send for Complete Catalog. 
Agents Wanted In Every Community. 
Black Swan Phonograph Company, Inc. 
Harry H. Pace, Pres. 
2289 Seventh Ave. New York, N. Y. The Life and Works of Paul Laurence Dunbar 
Containing his Complete Poetical Works , his 
best short stories, numerous anecdotes and a 
COMPLET E BIOGRAPH Y by 
LIDA KECK WIGGINS 
With an introduction by 
WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS. 
Besides, the book contains over Half a Hundre d 
Intensely Interesting and Attractive Illustrations, consisting of Full-Page Half-Tone s and 
Photo-Engravings . 
A UNIQU E BOO K :—This work stands in a class alone as 
the only volume ever published in the memory of a BLACK 
POET and literary man. Paul Dunbar was the WORLD'S 
GREATEST NEGRO POET. 
NATIONAL CAPITAL CODE OF ETIQUETTE 
Combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PAR T 1 
A Book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored 
Society Leaders on the street ; at the Theatre ; at 
Church ; in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls, Parties, Weddings, Dinners, &c , &c. The illustrations 
are so perfect and natural that the well bred, correctly clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any 
and all occasions ; correct dress for men and 
women ; suggestions in colors and materials for the 
ladies ; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, &c , for both sexes. See wonderful dress 
chart for men telling just what to wear, whether 
shoes, cravat, coat, vest, &c , for every occasion. 
How to write every imaginable form of letter— 
on affairs of business, society, invitation, love, proposals of marriage. This chapter alone is worth 
the price of the book. Price $2.50. 
DARKWATE R 
OR 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
A human document of extraordinary intensity and insight, and dealing with the place of the darker races in 
the modern world. The book contains as a frontispiece, 
a good picture of Dr. Du Bois. The book is selling like 
wild fire. 
Price only $2.00 postpaid. 
One or more of these valuable books mailed to anyone upon receipt of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money promptly 
refunded. AGENTS WANTED. We will mai] a prospectus of 
one book for 25 cents; workers make $10.00 per day. Write 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. , 523 Nint h St., Washington , D . C. Cable Address: "DOMAR." 
Codes, A.B.C. 5th Edition. 
Established 1914 
COTTMAN CO., Inc. 
IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS 
and DEVELOPERS 
2313 SEVENTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
U. S. A. 
Importers of Hides, Skins, Rubber, Cocoa, 
Cocoanuts, Limes, Lime Juices, Plantains, 
Eddoes, Pigeon Peas, Mangoes, Ginger, 
Cassia Fistula, Spices, Etc. 
Exporters of American Foodstuffs, Flour, 
Meal, Meats, Vegetables; also General 
Merchandise. 
Bonded produce department — Handling 
Southern and Western produce in carload 
lots. 
Merchandise forwarded for individuals 
and firms to the West Indies, South America, Europe and Africa. 
Commercial agents wanted in 
the United States and abroad. 
P. S.—We cannot handle small shipments 
of vegetables. Car lots only. 
SEASHORE LOTS 
50 x 150 
$200.00 Upward 
EASY TERMS 
Positively the prettiest cottage and bungalow sites in the suburbs of Atlantic 
City on the Pleasantville, Atlantic City 
Million Dollar Boulevard opposite Douglass Park. 
Advance to builders, use of additional 
space for garden free. For further particulars and prospectus, write, 
CRESCENT CORPORATION 
WM. B. SOUTHERN, PRES. 
Suite 404-5-6, Odd Fellows Building 
12th and Spruce Streets 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
RELIABLE AGENTS WANTED 
CHARLES D. CAMPBELL, A. B. 
Analytical Chemist 
(Graduate University of Colorado, 1912). 
Consultation by mail and analyses made. (Expert in Technical Commercial Analysis.) 
Formulas, Trade Secrets and best Manufacturing Processes 
for sale. 
Raw Materials and Essential Oils for Cosmetics, Fruit Flavors. 
Beverage Extracts and Certified Colors for sale. 
Laboratory Fully Equipped. 
Address Box 204, Dept. D. , Newport, R. I. 
BERESFORD GALE CORPORATION 
FINANCIERS, BROKERS AND GENERAL AGENTS 
Large and growing enterprises desiring connections, expansion or correspondents are cordially 
invited to transact their business thru our nationally known organization. 
Gal e Building , 413 S. Broad Street, PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Asbolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled bv Nearnes in the United State.% 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth. Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. Agent s Wante d 
I n Ever y 
Tow n an d 
Locality . 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAS T INDI A 
TOILET GOODS ] 
MFG . CO . 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA 
NATURA L HAI R WIG S 
DIRECT FROM THE MANUFACTURER 
Every wig is made to your measure by hand, 
using only the best of materials. (Not machine 
made.) 
S. Wig 
This is a short curly 
wig made with a short 
part in front, the hair 
rolled in back. 
Price $12.50. 
L. Wig 
This wig has a part 
on each side to center 
of head. Ventilated 
bang in front and 
dressed in a Psyche 
between the parts 
back of bang. Bobbed 
all around. 
Price $19.50 
_ Many Other Styles 
Full line of hair goods and straightening combs. 
Send for free catalog. 
ALE X MARK S 
662 S-8th Ave., at 42nd New York City 
Manchuria n Fo x 
in sty 
this season .T&^SZZ?^ ssfiS 
you need one of these smart, fp?$ 
stylish scarfs. Our price is 
low. Compare it with others -
T 
and see for yourself. 
Sen d N o Mone y 
Just send your name and address 
and we will send you this scarf, 
postage paid. Pay mailman our 
Bargain Price of $3.49. We guarantee satisfaction. If you are not 
perfectly satisfied, return it and 
we will refund your money. 
Scarf is made of Manchurian 
Fox, has long, soft, silky hair and 
will wear a long time. Has animal 
head, tail and paws. Silk lined. 
Colors—black or brown. 
Statement of Ownership. Management, Circulation, 
etc., required by the Act of Congress of August 24, 
1912, of THE CRISIS, published monthly, at New 
York, N. Y. , for October 1, 1922. 
State of New York, 1 
County of New York, ) ss-
: 
Before me, a Notary Public In and for the State 
and county aforesaid, personally appeared W. E. 
Burghardt DuBois, who, having been duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he is the 
Editor of THE CRISIS and that the following is, 
to the best of his knowledge and belief, a true 
statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the 
aforesaid publication for the date shown in the above 
caption, required by the Act of August 24, 1912, 
to wit: 
1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, 
editor, managing editor, and business managers are : 
Publisher—National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fifth Ave., New York, 
N. Y. 
Editor—W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth Ave., 
New York, N. Y. 
Managing Editor—W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 
Fifth Ave.. New York, N. Y. 
Business Manager—Augustus Granville Dill, 70 
Fifth Ave., New York, N. Y. 
2. That the owners are: The National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation 
with no stock. Membership 90,000. 
Moorefield Storey, President. 
.Tames Weldon Johnson, Secretary. 
Joel E. Spingarn, Treasurer. 
Mary White Ovington, Chairm&n Board of Directors. 
3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees and 
other security holders owning or holding 1 per cent, 
or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other 
securities are : None. 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 26th day 
of September, 1922. 
Frank M. Turner, Notary Public, Queens Co. No 
7 54, Certificate filed N. Y. Co. No. 208, N. Y. 
Reg. No. 4056. Term expires March 30, 1924. 
Health ? Tak e Turkis h Bat h 
at Home—Onl y 2 Cent s 
Physicians are abandoning drues for this 
new treatment. If your mind or body is 
tired, open your porea and feel tbe rapid 
change in your condition, at a cost of 2c a 
bath. The Robinson Bath Cabine t is the 
only scientifically constructed bath cabinet 
ever made for the home. Grea t $ 2 Book 
Sent Free—' "The Philosophy of Health and 
Beauty." Writ e Today. Agents A/anted. 
The Robinson Household Mfg. Co., 
1,085 Factorie s Bide- Toledo , O. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOMEN WITH THE AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
THE HEART OF A WOMAN AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
THE SOUL OF JOHN BROWN. (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W . E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
THE CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. (James F. Morton) 2 5 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
THE NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .50 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
UNSUNG HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
THE SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E. B . DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford).. 1.00 
THE VOICE OF THE NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
THE NEGRO. (W . E . B. Du Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
THE NEGRO FACES AMERICA. (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W . E. B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.5 0 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
THE NEGRO IN LITERATURE AND ART. (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTH YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
THE HISTORY OF THE NEGRO CHURCH. (Carter G. Woodson).. 2.1 5 
THE UPWARD PATH. (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.S5 
FIFTY YEARS IN THE GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G. Steward)... 2.70 
HARLEM SHADOWS. (Claude McKay) 1.35 
THE BOOK OF AMERICAN NEGRO POETRY. (James Weldon Johnson) 1.75 
AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND THE NEGRO. (C . V . Roman) 3.00 
THE NEGRO IN OUR HISTORY. (Carter G. Woodson) 2.00 
Address: THE CRISIS, : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. Madam C. J. Walker's 
Superfine Preparations Make Acceptable Gifts for Christmas 
Hair Grower Tetter Salve 
Temple Grower Glossine 
Vegetable Shampoo Cleansing Cream 
Cold Cream Vanishing Cream 
Witch Hazel Jelly Superfine Face Powder 
Floral Cluster Talc Powder Compact Rouge 
Complexion Soap Dental Cream 
Vegetable Oil Antiseptic Soap 
Expensively Compounded 
But Conservatively Priced 
The Madam C. J. Walker Mfg. Co. 
640 North West Street 
Indianpolis, Inb. 