Edition—Thirty-two Thousand 
THE CRISIS 
A. RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Vol . 6—No . 3 JULY , 1913 Wkol e No . 33 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENTS A COP Y 
Educational Number Bu y a Lo t No w an d Plan t You r 
Fortune Seed in Beautiful 
WALTONI A 
One of New York's A Colored Colony of 
Nearest Suburbs Character and Culture 
***** * 
Where Money Grows! 
Statistic s sho w tha t Ne w Yor k rea l estate investments hav e yielde d 
mor e fortune s tha n al l the commercia l enterprise s i n this countr y com ­
bined . Tha t the annua l increas e i n valuation s is greate r tha n the tota l 
outpu t of al l the gol d mine s i n the world , an d as the cit y is growin g at 
the rate of ove r 300,000 per annum , the chance s for makin g mone y i n 
suburba n investments are bette r to-da y tha n eve r before. 
Hence , as Waltoni a is the onl y Ne w Yor k subur b invitin g colore d 
residents, it is undoubtedl y destine d to become the greatest colore d colon y 
ever establishe d i n America , an d for the first time i n histor y the colore d 
citizen s of othe r States are no w offered a n opportunit y to bu y high-class 
Ne w Yor k suburba n propert y upo n easy monthl y payments, withou t 
interest or taxes, i n a refined, delightfu l neighborhood , high , dr y an d 
healthy , an d ever y ma n an d woma n throughou t the countr y wh o ca n 
convenientl y spare the pric e shoul d secure one of these splendi d lots 
withou t delay . $5 cash an d $5 pe r mont h wil l secur e you r choic e whil e 
the y last. First come , first served, so writ e to-da y to 
ROSALIN D REALT Y CO. , Inc. 
Owners an d Developers 
27 WILLIA M STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED BY TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE. A T 26 VESE Y STREET. NE W YOR K CITY 
Conducted by W. E. Burghardt Du Bois 
Contents for July, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE. STUDENTS A T TH E UNIVERSIT Y O F INDIANA. 
ARTICLE S 
Page 
TH E SCHOOLIN G O F TH E NEGRO. By Jose Clarana 133 
FRO M IOWA T O MISSISSIPPI. By G. S. Dickerman 137 
ROBER T GOUL D SHAW HOUS E AN D ITS WORK . By Isabel Eaton.. 141 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E Ill 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 122 
OPINION 127 
EDITORIA L 130 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPL E 144 
AS OTHER S SE E 145 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN" SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWAlS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given Two „ PP i
 ; 
notice is required. ' 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accom 
panied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. accomEntered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York N Y 108 TH E CRISIS 
"I n th e Hear t o f th e Health y Hills " 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
NORMAL , ALABAM A 
Makes a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out their own salva 
tion. It gives breadwinners a chance to go to 
school and so puts a first--class English education and 
a trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose. 
Board, lodging and washing cost $9 per month. 
An entrance fee of $10 covers medicine, hospital 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the first Monday in October and 
closes the last Thursday in May. 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President 
Send your boy South—the land of Opportunity. 
The Prairie "View State Normal and Industrial 
College of Texas. E. L. Blacksnear, Principal. W. 
C. Rollins, Treasurer. Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the United States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industrial advantages. Expenses low—ideal climate—new buildings. 
For particulars address: 
H . J . MASON, Secretary 
Prairie View Waller County, Texas 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
ADVERTISE R 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 H . H . Wright, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 6a. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANT A GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1913. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
State summer school for colored 
teachers. Fourteenth annua l 
session began June 23, 1913, and 
continues five weeks. Board , 
lodging and fees for the session, 
$14.00. Limited accommodations. 
Send $1.00 in advance and reserve 
room. Fo r catalog or further 
information address: 
STAT E SUMME R SCHOO L 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanica l College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 109 
REBECC A L . FUR R SHERMA N S. FUR R 
Fisk, '01, Principal Pres. and Gen. Mgr. 
NEWPOR T NEW S TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , INC . 
1251 Twenty-seventh Street 
Newport News .. . Virginia 
Inter-State Industrial College 
We Train the Head, Heart and Hand 
One hundred and fifteen acres of land situated in 
healthy climate. Capable faculty; efficient work in 
industrial and literary training. Dormitories for 
boys and girls. Assistance for deserving poor. 
Interdenominational contributions solicited. 
RUFU S S. STOUT , President 
Texarkana ------ - Texas 
A Race Between Two Straits 
A New Book on Labo r Unions and Bad 
Politicians by Rev. W . B. Reed, 
Newport, R. I. 
The book shows that labor unions are the 
greatest menace to-day to American manhood and freedom. Read the book and 
know the truth. Price 25c. Sold by The 
Crisis. Agents wanted everywhere. Write 
REV . W . B. REE D 
Newport - - - - - R. I. 
INFORMATION WANTED 
Information regarding the present residence of 
Susan Smith, who lived at 2049 Seventh Avenue, 
New York, in the vear 1895. Valuable information 
for her. Address F . E . S., care TH E CRISIS. 
THE TEXARKANA GRUB-AX 
A paper for 1 Lho ma ,nos as woll as for the Classen. 
Primarily It la a home ^papor, as It appeal* to every member 
of the family. Subscription price. $1 the year. 
Rov. J. H. CLAYBORN , Editor and Manager 
119 E. 9th Street Texarkana , Ark . 
'Phonos: Resident, ,".15; OlTico, 642; Hospital, 403. 
OR. J. R. SH E PPAR D 
Physician and Surgeon 
Chief surgeon and superintendent of Sheppard Sanitarium and 
Nurse Training School. 
Marshall Texas 
'Phone 288. 
DR. CHARLE S B. JOHNSON 
Surgeon Dentist 
II I'/a W. Houston Avenue - - - - Marshall, Tex. 
'Phones: Residence, 159; Office, 402. 
DR. P. L. HARROL D 
Physician and Surgeon 
Practicing Physician of Wiley University and King Home 
Marshall Texas 
DR. 0. LOYATU S BLEDSO E 
Medicine and Surgery 
Office, McPhail Bldg., 111 </2 W. Houston Avenue 
Residence*, 727 W. Grand Avenue 
Marshall, Tex. 
Long distance 'phone 2008. 
FRED . T. JONES. M. D. 
Founder and House Surgeon of Mercy Sanitarium 
Office, 852 Texas Avenue ... . Shreveport, La. 
'Phones: Old, 2008; New, 606. 
DR. WILLIAM HOWARD 
Dentist 
Special attention given to children 
Offlce hours: 8:30 a. m. to 5:30 p. m. Night, 8 to 9 p. m. 
G50 Texas Avenue Shreveport, La. 
'Phone 801. 
CENTRA L PHARMAC Y DRUG STOR E 
Recently installed new and modern equipments. The most 
up-to-date colored drug store in East Texas. Orders by 
mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. Wheel delivery. 
213 State Street Texarkana, Tex. 
TH E 0. K. SHINING PARLOR 
For Ladies and Gentlemen 
Excellent service. The most up-to-date parlor in the 
city. Also clothes cleaned and pressed. All work guaranteed. 
3l4'/ 2 W. Broad Street Texarkana, Tex. 
R. L. D. EASLE Y handles life, health and accident 
insurance for old, reliable companies of New York and 
Chicago. Write or call 1225 Phcnia Ave., Texarkana, Tex. 
For auto service or physician call 
DR. J. W. LONG 
Office. 218 W. Broad Street; New 'Phone 976 
Residence. 1508 North Street; New 'Phone 955 
Texarkana Texas 
'Phones: 
Residence, New 831: Old 964. 
Offlce. New 854; Old 973. 
DR. G. U JAMISON 
Physician and Surgeon 
213 State Street Texarkana. Tex. 
'Phones 973 and 1172. 
DR. HARVE Y SPARK S 
Physician and Surgeon 
Offlce over Central Pharmacy Texarkana, Tex. 
'Phones: Residence, 80; Office. 09. 
DR. T. E. SPEE D 
Physician and Surgeon 
National Grand Master U. B. F. & S. M. T.; 
Medical Director K. of P. Lodges of jurisdiction of 
Dean Nurse Training Department, Bishop College. 
JefFerson 
Grand 
Texas; 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 
Texas 110 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l metho d of singin g for 
dail y practice , based upo n artisti c 
principles, togethe r wit h a carefull y prepare d numbe r of exercises. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier," N . Y. : 
A ver y practica l littl e book is 
"Tone Placing and Voice Development," b y Pedro T . Tinsley . It 
contains some ver y excellent materia l and vocal 
exercises, and shoul d be i n the hand s of all voca l 
students. 
WORDS OF APPRECIATIO N 
I offer yo u the heartiest possibl e endorsement 
of you r work , whic h I believe to be the most complet e cours e of the kin d that has eve r come 
unde r m y notice.—Glen n Dillar d Gunn , Chicag o 
' 'Tribune.' 1 
Fro m "Musi c News, " Chicago , 111.: Accordingl y 
his "Practical Method of Singing" is a most concise an d practica l littl e manual , containin g man y 
valuabl e voca l exercises. It cannot fail to be 
helpfu l to all ambitious voca l students. 
CANNOT FAI L OF GOOD RESULT S 
Th e wor k is especiall y commendabl e becaus e it 
treats i n a clear an d systemati c manne r all the vita l 
points so essential to the Btudent, makin g it easy 
fo r hi m to advanc e to the highest point of 
development.—Geo . I. Holt , De s Moines, Iowa. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
Price 
S7. 
Up 
*7 > Made $30 First Bay 
B. Basha. of Bell Island. Newfoundland, did this with out 
CHAMPIO N 
Minut e Photo Machine 
Tha t beginners make such profit 
at the start, shows that n o experienc e is neede d in this wonderful money-making business. 
Root. Bock,Willow Hill . Pa , took 
in $33 in one day. Vernard Baker, 
Holbrook, Neb., $29.90. Jas. F.Wende . Ashton. Idaho, 
$26. C.V. Lovett, Ft- Meade, Fla„ made $60 in one day. These 
testimonials are just a few of many hundreds we have on file. 
Pictures in Post Cards and on Buttons all the rage 
at Fairs, Carnivals, Picnics, Resorts, Schools, Depots, Faotories, on Streets—anywhere—everywhere. 
Our Champion Camera takes pictures size 2^x3?^, 
13^x2^ and buttons. Finishes complete photo in 30 
seconds: 200 an hour. No dark room. Easiest, quickest, 
bi sires t money-maker known. Small investment. About 85c 
pronton each dollar you take in. Be your own boss. Write at 
once for Free Book, Testimonials and Liberal Offer. 
AMERICA N MINUT E PHOT O CO . 
2214 Ogden Ave., Dept. E.649, Chicago, Illinois 
^WANTED^ r 
Agents to handl e TH E CRISI S i n 
al l sections of the country . Splendi d 
opportunit y for money-makin g an d 
dignifie d employment . 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
26 Vese y Stree t - - Ne w Yor k 
GUARANTEED 5 YEARS 
cent s 98 
Pos t Pai d 
To advertise our business, make new friends and Introduce 
our catalogue of Elgin watches, we will send this elegant 
watch by mail, postpaid, for ONL Y 93 CENTS . Gentlemen's 
size, full nickel silver plated case, Arabic dial, lever escapement, stem wind and stem set: a perfect timekeeper and fully 
guaranteed for five years. Send this advertisement to us with 
9S cents and watch will be sent by return mail postpaid. 
Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. Send 98 cents 
to-day. Address 
R. E. CHALMER S & CO., 538 So. Dearborn St., Chicago, III. 
WANT A JOB? 
Sleeping-car Porter s 
wanted for summer and 
permanent service. No 
experience necessary. 
Writ e to-day for full 
information. 
AMERICA N SERVIC E SCHOO L 
Instruction Department 
80 Fifth Avenue - - - New York City 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
FO E POLISHIN G AL L METALS , SIGNS , PIANOS , 
FURNITURE , GUNS , HARNESS , AUTOMOBIL E 
BODIES , LAMPS , HARDWOO D FLOORS , ETC . 
Full y Protects the Han d Save s Tim e an d Labo r 
A n incomparabl e duster . A combinatio n shoe 
polisher . Ca n be use d wit h o r withou t oil or polish . 
Mad e of specia l 
tanne d lamb's 
woo l on the hide , 
thoroughl y cleaned 
an d combe d of 
all grit. Wil l 
not scratc h the 
finest surface . 
Adopte d b y the Pullma n Compan y fo r porters' 
use on the best train s an d used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furnitur e houses; 
on dinin g cars, ocean liners, yachts an d thousands, 
of households becaus e it's the best practica l polishin g devic e on earth. 
B y mai l postpai d 25c. each (stamps or currency) . 
A splendi d propositio n fo r agents. Writ e to-day 
for particulars. 
J . E. REDDIC K 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
IF NOT, WH Y NOT? 
Own a Home in the North 
We have an increasing demand for ambitious, progressive 
colored people who are seeking homes in the North. We 
are the medium through which these demands can be 
supplied. Only such as can satisfy us that they are desirable 
will be considered. Before locating be sure you get our 
Troperty Bulletin. It's free for the asking. 
P . H . SYKES , Rea l Estate Broke r 
Cor. 19th and Ellsworth Streets - - - Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 6—No. 3 JULY , 1913 Whole No. 33 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 
EDUCATION . 
"I'L L find a way or make one" is 
the inscription on the commencement 
program of Atlanta University. The same 
motto is imprinted on the face of everyone 
who has gone through the struggle that the 
children of the slaves must make in order 
to secure their title to be free. In this 
fiftieth year since the slaves were cast adrift 
these are the names of some of their children 
who have found and followed the way to 
honor and distinction in the places where 
free men are made: 
TH E HIG H SCHOOLS . 
Baltimore Colored: Valedictorian, Pearl 
Wicks; salutatorian, Charles Rusk. This 
year there are eighty graduates, 639 enrolled 
pupils, thirty instructors. Graduates admitted to Northern colleges. 
Wilmington Colored: Annie Jane Anderson, Mari a Augusta Parker. Twelve graduates; average attendance,, eighty; one alumnus 
graduates from Cornell this year. Others are 
at Oberlin, Lincoln, Howard, Columbia, 
Cornell. 
Three Rivers, Mich. : Hild a Ma y Coates 
won the second prize for essay on "The 
Curse and Cure of Lynching. " 
Seattle, Franklin School: Ethel A . Stone, 
distinction in literary work and music. 
Alfred Hall , honors in physics. 
Ithaca: Three colored graduates — 
Edward Newton, Edith Loftin, Bernice 
Walker. Honors to Edith Loftin, former 
pupil of Oglethorpe School, Atlanta. 
Derby, Conn.: Valedictorian, Lottie 
Jefferson. 
New Haven : Emmett Caple, winner of 
four-year scholarship at Yale. 
To these we add little Marian Carr, of 
Cincinnati, whose public school essay on 
civic ideals was posted in all the schools of 
the city by order of the superintendent. 
TH E HIGHE R SCHOOLS . 
Wiley University: Highest average held 
by Hobart T. Tatum, who intends to go to 
Harvard. 
Talladega: Arthur Clement MacNeal and 
Eunice Trammell. 
MARIA N CARE . PEAR L WICKS . CHARLE S RUSK. MARI A PARKER . JAN E ANDERSON . ALFRE D HALL . ETHE L STONE. 
MISS WILLIAMS . JOH N DUNBAR . MISS WHITE . MISS HAYES . JERR Y LUCK . MISS CHISOM. 
W. A. ROBINSON. MISS FAGG . NORMA N WILLIAMS . 
MISS G. ANDERSON . ARTHU R VAUGHAN . MISS CORT. 
VERNO N COOPER. MISS HOLMAN . MATTHE W LINDSAY . 114 TH E CRISIS 
C. E . WILSON. MISS SANDERS . EMMET T CAPLE . 
Paine: Katherine Hily a Williams, John 
Dunbar. 
Atlanta University, college department: 
Valedictorian, William A . Robinson; salutatorian, Mabelle A . White. 
Atlanta Baptist: Joseph A . Ely . 
Knoxville : Pauline Fagg, Norman D. 
Williams. 
dent of the Classical Club ; Zephyr J. 
Chisom, prominent in the Social Science Club 
and the Dramatic Club and leading spirit 
in the organization of the college branch 
of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
Wilberforce : Berniee Sanders, Crawford 
E . Wilson. 
C. V. FREEMAN . E . W. SCOTT. F. A. MYERS . 
Lane : Ernestine Ginevra Anderson, 
Arthu r N . Vaughan. 
Fisk:- Vernon Lamont Cooper, Martha 
Carlotta Corl. 
State College. S. C.: Lul a A . Holman, 
Matthew Lindsay. 
Hartshorn: Minnie Tyler Hayes, honors 
in music and normal. 
Howard : Jerry Luck, first student presiLincoln : Valedictorian, Clinton V . 
Freeman; salutatorian, Frankli n A . Myers. 
TH E HIGHEST SCHOOLS. 
Marquette University, Milwaukee: Eugene 
W . Scott, of the law school, competes for 
senior oratorical prize. 
Boston University, school of theology: 
W . J. King , who possesses "the best mind 
DR. HUGHES . DR. COLLINS . DR. HARDING . DR. ANDERSON . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 115 
DR. TERRY . G. E . DAVIDSON , Ph. G. 
that ever went from Wile y University," Terry, A . B. (Lincoln) ; Peyton L . Andergraduates in first rank. son. Drs. Anderson and Harding took part 
Rochester Theological Seminary: James in the musical program of the commencement. 
T. Simpson, good work in Arabic. University of Illinois, school of pharmacy: 
MISS RAY . J . T. SIMPSON. J . H . ROBINSON. 
Purdue University: Two engineers— 
D. N . Crosthwait, H . M . Taylor. 
New Yor k Homeopathic College: Paul 
A . Collins, A . B. (Lincoln) ; Henry Oswi 
Harding, John C. Hughes, Clifford E . 
J . A. DUNN . 
George Edward Davidson, A . B. (Fisk), is 
one of the'two men in a class of thirty-three 
to receive "honorable mention for excellence 
in scholarship." 
Cornell: Five graduates in law and arts 
W. J, KING . 116 TH E CRISIS 
MISS HOWARD . B. H . LOCKE . MISS JOHNSON . 
and sciences. Pauline A . Ray, who completed high school in three years, satisfies 
requirements for A . B. in three and a half, 
registers in graduate school, but does not 
receive A . M . because of residence 
requirement. 
Ohio State: James Arthur Dunn, architectural engineer. First Negro to graduate 
from this department: Excellent record.' 
Thesis for graduation—design of a building 
for the college of education, Ohio State 
University. 
Indiana University: B. K . Armstrong, 
A . B. , received favorable comment on his 
thesis on "The Worl d Race Problem." 
Clark University: Thomas Isaacs Brown, 
of Jamaica, receives graduate scholarship in 
economics and sociology. 
Columbia: Benjamin H . Locke, Juanita 
Howard and Vivia n Johnson, all Howard 
A . B., receive A . M..; first in sociology, 
others in English. 
Yale : Charles H . Wesley, Fis k A . B. , 
held scholarships during two years of graduate study and received A . M . in economies 
for thesis on ''The Business of Lif e Insurance Among NegToes." Age 22. 
Yale : James Hathaway Robinson, Fis k 
A . B. (magna cum laude), receives Lame d 
Fellowship in economics. Mr . Robinson is 
organist of a colored church in New Haven. 
Age 26. 
Chicago: Julian H . Lewis, 22, son of 
Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Lewis, principal and 
assistant principal of Sumner Hig h School, 
Cairo, 111., is awarded a teaching fellowship 
in pathology. He expects to receive his 
Ph. D . in a year and a half. He holds 
A . B. and A . M . for work i n physiology at 
the University of Illinois. 
A t McGil l University, Montreal, with sixtyone graduates of the medical school, the 
Holmes gold medal for the highest average 
in all subjects throughout the entire course 
and the McGil l Medical Society's senior prize 
were awarded to R. H . Malone, of Antigua , 
West Indies. Drs. Gowdey and Massiah, of 
Barbados, were next on the honor list. 
Geographically, as well as in consequence 
of their poor equipment, the colored colleges 
and, with the exception of those in the 
border States, the colored high schools are, 
as a whole, of lower standing than corresponding institutions i n the North. It often 
CHARLE S H . WESLEY . JULIA N H . LEWIS . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 117 
happens that graduates of the preparatory 
schools which do so large and important a 
part of the work of the institutions for the 
higher training of the colored youth of the 
South are obliged to take a year or so of 
high school work in the North before they 
can receive diplomas which will entitle them 
to entrance in Northern universities. Wit h 
perhaps the single exception of Howard, the 
graduates of the Southern colleges must do 
one and sometimes two years of undergraduate or special studies before they can 
receive their first degrees from institutions 
like Yale, Harvard or Columbia. 
Despite the handicap of lack of means and 
of the contempt which is expressed by most 
white folk and some black folk for their 
work, the colored colleges fill a real and 
growing need of the Negro race. In a report 
on Negro universities in the South, prepared 
under the auspices of the John F . Slater 
Fund, Mr . W . T. B. Williams, of the Hampton Institute, expresses the "fear that the 
very important service they have rendered in 
supplying teachers, especially' for the city 
schools and for the industrial and other 
smaller schools, is not fully appreciated." 
The lack of appreciation for the colored 
high school or college is more than a fear with 
most of its white neighbors. It is very much 
of a reality with the Baltimore school board 
man who tried to eliminate from the curriculum of the colored high school i n that city 
every subject which would fit its graduates 
for the work they must do. The Muskogee 
namesake of the New Orleans TimesDemocrat states in the following terms its 
ideal of Negro education and the reasons 
therefor: 
"The nine good cooks who will be graduated this week from the domestic science 
department of the manual training school 
for Negroes will have no difficulty whatever 
i n securing jobs. Last year there were 
three graduates from the domestic science 
department of the school. Al l three have 
been holding good positions in Muskogee 
ever since. One of these Negro girls is cook 
for a prominent family in the city, getting 
$7 a week, her board and room. The other 
two hold positions almost equally good. 
''Negro girls who graduate from a high 
school seem to feel that the only positions 
open to them which their dignity will allow 
them to accept are positions as teachers. 
The Negro girls who graduated in domestic 
science from the manual training school last 
year have jobs that pay better than positions as teachers in Negro schools and that 
last all the year round. They are trained 
cooks who have a profession at which a 
good living can be earned and a profession 
where the demand far exceeds the supply. 
There are dozens of families in Muskogee 
and thousands elsewhere clamoring for 
capable colored help, (rained in the work 
and taught to hold a sense of responsibility 
toward their work and respect for themselves and the rights of others. If the Negro 
schools of Muskogee can turn out trained 
cooks, capable houseworkers among the 
Negro girls and can teach the Negro boys 
self-supporting trades, they will have placed 
themselves in line with the work that the 
Tuskegee institute is doing." 
Mr. Williams rates as highest among the 
colored institutions offering collegiate training, the following six universities and five 
colleges in the South: Howard, Fisk, Vir ­
ginia Union, Atlanta. Shaw. Wiley, Talladega, 
Atlanta Baptist (now Morehouse), Knox -
ville, Benedict, Bishop. To these should be 
added Wilberforce, in Ohio, and Lincoln, i n 
•Pennsylvania. 
Mr. Williams' study comprises only the 
institutions classed as universities i n the 
South. In the twenty of these which offer 
college work the total enrollment in the past 
year was 945. There are nineteen other 
schools, including Wilberforce and Lincoln, 
which devote themselves especially to the 
higher training of colored young men and 
women. Mr. Williams' estimate of their 
work is very instructive, coming as it does 
from a colored teacher in an industrial school 
for Negroes: 
"Although many of these schools fall far 
short of what institutions of their type should 
be, nevertheless they meet a real need in 
Negro education. In offering college work 
to Negro youth they set up a worthy ideal 
and aid the students in the realization of it. 
Practically, too, this college work serves the 
Negro well. As the Negro is being pushed 
further and further out of touch with cultivated white people, he has an increasing need 
of highly trained men and women of his own 
race as exemplars and leaders. These the 
college departments are training as well as 
they can. They also prepare the Negro 
professional man, for whom there is a grow-118 TH E CRISIS 
ing demand, to meet the properly severe 
requirements of their States." 
In attempting to realize their ideal in 
Northern colleges, students from the colored 
schools—and most of them do come from 
the schools of the South—have sometimes to 
face difficulties and opposition that would 
keep away any but men and women with 
strong hearts. This opposition is very 
rarely based on any prohibition in the 
statutes of Northern universities or on any 
strong tradition or sentiment among the 
students against the admission of colored 
folk. Most often, as at the Newton 
Theological Institution, it is the unauthorized 
and unqualified prejudice of some influential 
individual. A t this seminary the president 
tried, without avail, every subterfuge to prevent a graduate of Fis k from registering 
until, on the eve of the opening of the 
institution, he sent to the young man the 
following special delivery letter: " I do not 
deem it expedient that you present yourself 
to-morrow morning for admission to 
Newton." 
The Rev. President Horr, of Newton, has 
been obliged to admit that his school has had 
Negro graduates and that "most of them havedone well. " He continues: "In my judgment, most of them would have done better 
with a course more closely adapted to their 
future work. What they gain in breadth they 
lose in sympathetic touch with their own 
people." His denomination provides this 
touch in Virgini a Union University, and 
therefore colored men should go there. 
The Rev. Horr's judgment as to the best 
interests of the colored people must be a 
very poor one. We have never heard that 
any complaint of lack of sympathy with his 
people has been lodged against Alexander 
Crummell, of Oxford University, or Samuel 
Crowther, the first black Anglican bishop. 
Ha d there been cause for such a complaint, 
the colored people would surely have made 
it before it reached the ears of the Rev. Horr, 
or Dr. Lyman Abbott, or any other advocate 
of the isolation policy of Negro education. 
A n exhibition of narrowness such as that 
displayed by the Rev. Horr is exceedingly 
rare among responsible persons in the schools 
of the North. Even among the students, 
although a good deal of prejudice exists 
where there are a large number of white 
Southerners, the door to good will and appreciation is open to young people of Negro 
descent. The Greek letter fraternities which 
have recently been established among the 
colored college men are doing much to urge 
high school students i n the North not to 
neglect the opportunities, afforded them i n 
the universities. The Kapp a Alph a Nu , of 
Indiana, has this year brought the number 
of colored students at that university to 
twenty-five, an increase of 92 per cent, over 
last year's registration. The Alph a Ph i 
Alph a is principally responsible for these 
large enrollments: Ohio State, forty-eight; 
Cornell, twenty-two; Yale, nineteen; Columbia, fourteen; Syracuse, eighteen. Chicago, 
Harvard and the smaller New England colleges continue to attract increasing numbers 
of colored students. Lik e their parents 
before them and like the schools that trained 
them, these young men and women are finding and making the way to worthy citizenship in this great democracy. 
PERSONAL. 
IN appreciation of his unremunerated and 
•*• unaided work i n successfully fighting the 
Baltimore segregation ordinance, Mr . W . 
Ashbie Hawkins was tendered a banquet by 
his leading fellow beneficiaries of the Elliott 
decision. 
*& We are indebted to Mr . Kar l Bitter, the 
sculptor, for the pictures of the Carl Schurz 
monument which we reproduce i n this 
number. 
^ Miss Isabel Eaton, who contributes the 
article on the Shaw Settlement House, has 
carried to the management of that institution 
the fruits of her study at Smith College and 
Columbia University and her long experience 
at the Hul l House, in Chicago, and with the 
Ethical Culture Society of New York . 
<I Mr. Walter Wright, of Cleveland, is secretary and chief clerk to President Conniff, 
of the Nickle Plate Railroad. 
<I Mr. Julian F . Adger, of Philadelphia, has, 
after an examination, been admitted to membership in the American Organ Players' 
Club. Mr. Adger was formerly organist of 
St. Philip's Church, New York . 
*I John Barry, formerly a barber i n Indianapolis, has received $3,467 for the sale of a 
comic opera and two sacred songs. H e is 
now devoting himself exclusively to music. 
*I Hilbert Earl Stewart has received a gold 
medal for his work with the piano at the 
Chicago Musical College. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 119 
<I Miss Hazel M . Brown, a senior in the 
high school at Santa Monica, Cal., has won 
a prize for the best design for a school seal. 
I n an athletic meet in which Harvard defeated Cornell, twenty of the sixty points 
for Harvar d were scored by Cable and Jackson. Cornell does not like colored athletes. 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
The Washington Dramatic Club, a suc-
•*• eessful organization which owes its 
inception to Mrs. Anna J. Cooper, presented 
its second annual play, " A Midsummer's 
Night's Dream," at the Howard Theatre. 
*I Commencement programs of colored 
schools included the presentation of 
"Macbeth," at Lincoln Institute, Jefferson 
City, Mo. ; "Twelfth Night, " on the campus 
of the Florid a A . and M . College; "Comedy 
of Errors, " at Atlanta University. 
^ Mrs. Hackley has been appearing with 
her usual success in Xenia, 0., and in 
Washington. 
*B The Coleridge-Taylor concert in Washington, D. C., in aid of the composer's widow, 
netted a considerable sum. A t Albert Hall , 
London, a concert brought $5,000. A movement is on foot in England to secure a 
civil list pension for Mrs. Taylor. 
*I The Ma y number of the Metronome, New 
York, contains a portrait of Mr. Federico 
Ramos, who is characterized as "one of the 
most distinguished musical composers and 
teachers of Porto Rico. " 
*3 Most of the members of the band of the 
cruiser Cuba, which came to New Yor k to 
participate in the ceremony of unveiling the 
monument to the sailors of the Maine, are 
colored. The band played to a large throng 
i n Central Park. 
*I Cloyd L . Boykin, a graduate of Hampton 
Institute, who is now studying at the Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts, has attracted much 
attention with an exhibit of thirty paintings 
at the Twentieth Century Club. Of his work 
the Boston Globe says: 
"He has applied himself to the task with 
enthusiasm, as this exhibition proves, for the 
work is unusually comprehensive in its scope 
and shows a broad, sensitive mind in both 
portraits and landscapes. 
"There is one life-size portrait here of 
Deacon Edward Kendall, of Cambridge, 
which, perhaps, better than anything in the 
exhibition, shows the remarkable progress 
Mr. Boykin has made, for it is not only expressive in character as a likeness, but it is 
painted with fine freedom and skill, showing 
an especial power in the rendering and blending o f flesh tints and i n the subtle modeling 
of the facial characteristics. There is also 
a portrait of a West Indian girl which is 
well done and characteristic, and all of the 
sketches show a splendid grasp of the fundamentals in both drawing and color." 
«I A painting entitled "To the Highest Bid ­
der," representing a slave girl on the auction 
block, has been rejected b y the Brooklyn 
Art Institute because it might "tend to keep 
alive the memories that had better be 
forgotten." 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
FOURTEE N colored delegates attended the 
•*• international congress of the World's 
Students' Christian Federation at Lake 
Mohonk, N . Y . They came away feeling 
that the Y . M . C. A . movement would solve 
the race problem. 
*I The National League on Urban Conditions 
Among Negroes conducts a housing bureau 
at 127 West 135th Street for the free service 
of visitors seeking accommodations in New 
York. 
Governor Goldsborough, of Maryland, 
urged a colored audience to aid him i n the 
suppression of vice. 
•J Governor Sulzer has signed, Governor 
Tener has vetoed, the bills for NegTO militia 
regiments in New Yor k and Pennsylvania, 
respectively. 
<J Here is an exhibition of savagery that the 
governor of South Carolina could not excel. 
It comes from a paper called The ClubFellow : 
"Julius Rosenwald is becoming more and 
more entangled i n the mesh of behavior that 
does not make for popularity. There are 
those who evince scant surprise at the disfavor in which Rosenwald is being rapidly 
submerged. His actions are such that one 
cannot view them with equanimity. His latest 
bid for criticism was to threaten to discharge 
all the white elevator employees of an offlce 
building, recently acquired by him, and supplant them with . Negroes. Rosenwald's extreme fondness for the chocolate-colored 
denizens of the south side is too well known 
to merit more than brief mention, but it was 
hardly supposed that he would overstep the 
limits. He did, and the tenants of the build-120 TH E CRISIS 
ing, which is populated largely by physicians, arose i n a body and protested. Rosenwald hastily pulled i n his horns and ate 
humble pie. He apologized profusely—he is 
getting used to that now—and promised that 
the white men would stay; and the incident 
was forgotten. Unforgotten, however, is the 
fact that he contributed $25,000 to a Negro 
Y . M . C. A. , and the additional fact—as 
brought out in O'Hara's vice probe—that he 
pays the thousands of toil-harassed girls 
who work for him starvation wages gave the 
thing a very unsavory odor. Nobody, except 
possibly the black-skinned Africans, relishes 
the idea of white girls working at slavish toil 
to support a home for Negroes. I am reliably informed that Rosenwald is vexed to 
see that his 'philanthropies' are considered a 
joke by the majority. Wit h his wealth he 
cannot understand why so many portals are 
barred to him. If he would only do a little 
real charity, forget that he was snubbed by 
the University Club, renounce his petty backbiting and stop catering to Negroes he would 
very likely note a gratifying change." 
TH E GHETTO . 
"If I were a colored man," says Dr. James 
H . Dillard, of New Orleans, director of 
the Jeanes Fund, "the 'Jim Crow' cars alone 
would drive me out of the South." 
W . S. Green, supreme chancellor of the 
Colored Knights of Pythias, bought a Pullman seat in New Orleans for a journey to 
Jacksonville, Fla . Some occupants of the 
day coach for white people observed him as 
he sat alone and instructed the conductor to 
advise him to leave the seat he had paid for 
and go to the "Ji m Crow" ear. He obeyed 
and reached Jacksonville i n safety. Fo r his 
return journey, however, he engaged a whole 
drawing room, keeping the door closed so 
that he could not be seen by other passengers. He was seen by an increasing number 
of loafers at each successive station, and at 
Milton, although he had gone back to the 
"Jim Crow" ear, he was taken from the train 
by a band of men who professed to have a 
warrant for his arrest. The sheriff and his 
deputy were fortunately not "called away on 
important business." so Mr. Green paid the 
judge a fine of $25 and returned to New 
Orleans as a "Ji m Crow" passenger. 
Some gentlemen in South Carolina were 
very much wrought up over the presence of 
a Negro in a Pullman from Washington en 
route to Savannah. The colored man here, 
as i n the Florid a case, was acting within his 
rights under the interstate commerce laws, 
but the chairman of the South Carolina railroad commission, who happened to have discovered "the Nigger i n the woodpile," has 
notified the general solicitor of the Pullman 
Company that if they "continue to aggravate the white people i n this matter an appeal wil l be made to Congress," and, i n fact, 
Senator Smith, of Blease's State, has made 
this appeal i n the national Senate. 
Meanwhile gentlemen of the South continue to have the colored nurse cool each 
spoonful of pap i n her own mouth before 
she gives it to the baby. 
«J A t Texarkana, Tex., the principa l of the 
high school was dismissed for eating lunch 
with his colored housekeeper. 
*i The mother of Miss Ethel F . Edwards, the 
only colored graduate of the high school at 
Bellaire, 0., was requested to sit i n the 
gallery of the theatre where the commencement exercises were held and on refusing 
she was ejected by the proprietor. 
*I The colored employees of the Cincinnati 
postoffice and the Cincinnati Protective and 
Benevolent Association have sent to responsible persons a protest against a plea of the 
white clerks from Arkansas for segregation. 
*1 The Supreme Court of the United States 
is called upon to decide the right of a colored man to bury his wife i n a Chicago 
cemetery. He had buried four children i n 
the cemetery before its trustees started the 
Ghetto of the Dead. 
CRIME . 
BLEAS E of South Carolina proclaimed 
a reward of $2,500 for the body, "just 
so there was enough of it to be recognized," 
of a Negro who had killed i n self-defense 
three white men who were attempting to 
arrest him without warrant on suspicion of 
crime. Afte r having eluded posses for a 
month, the Negro was shot and killed as he 
was begging food at a farmhouse. The body 
was decapitated and dismembered for souvenirs and the remains burned, so that the 
South Carolina treasury still contains its 
$2,500 and Blease is satisfied. 
Wh o reads the details of the holocaust will 
understand what Clark Howell of the At ­
lanta Constitution meant when he spoke of 
the colored people as "the half-heathen in ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 121 
our midst." The whole heathen are not all 
i n the Congo Basin. Some vote for Blease 
and others read the Constitution. 
^ Jack Johnson was specifically mentioned 
i n an order issued by the mayor of Chicago 
directing the police to arrest all persons who 
used a "cut-out muffler," apparently a very 
noisy kind of automobile horn. Johnson will 
pay very few fines under this order, however, for he has been sentenced to imprisonment for a year and a day, with a fine of 
$1,000 for his conviction under a liberal 
interpretation of the white-slave law. A s the 
Nashville Post says: "The Mann Ac t 
is a very good substitute for the white hope." 
But since, according to reliable information 
from Chicago, a number of white men—hopes 
as well as non-pugilists—have been punished 
under the Man n act for infractions of the 
moral code not contemplated i n the spirit 
of that law, it can hardly be said that Johnson has been the victim of flagrant discrimination i n the courts. There can be little 
doubt, however, that the jury was prejudiced 
by the prosecutor's appeal and, although the 
judge instructed the jury to try the case and 
not the color question, he evidently made 
this the basis of his own decision. 
"We have had a number of cases of violation of the Mann Act, " he said, "and in only 
two of them were fines assessed. 
"The defendant is one of the best-known 
men of his race and his example has been 
far reaching. The court is bound to take 
these facts into consideration in determining 
the sentence to be imposed." 
*I A white judge and jury in Baltimore have 
sent a white doctor to the penitentiary for 
having, for many years and i n many cases, 
abused his professional privileges with 
colored women patients. 
<I In Cape May, N . J. , two street-car conductors have been arrested for assaulting a 
lone colored girl passenger. 
^ Governor Cox, of Ohio, has pardoned 
Louis H . Peck, a Negro, who was sentenced 
to life imprisonment on a charge (since 
proven false) of assault upon a white child 
i n Akron , 0., in 1900. In a riot which followed the accusation the city hall was burned 
and two persons killed. 
<E A t Harlem, Ga., for drunkenness, and at 
Hogansville, Ga., for the murder of a white 
man, Negroes have been lynched. Governor 
Brown has offered a reward of $100 for the 
arrest and conviction of each participant. 
*I A t Dangerfield, Tex., a Negro, sentenced 
to death for murder, was lynched because the 
governor had granted him thirty days' 
respite. 
*I A t Fort Worth, Tex., a riot, resulting 
in the destruction of $15,000 worth of Negro 
property, was precipitated by the killing of 
a policeman and two other persons by an 
insane Negro. 
EQUALIT Y AN D JUSTICE. 
(One of the panels of the Schurz monument.) DEFENDER S OF LIBERT Y AN D FRIEND S 
OF HUMA N RIGHT. 
" I KNO W not where, in all human history, 
•*• to any given thousand men i n arms 
there has been committed a work at once so 
proud, so precious, so full of hope and 
glory," said Gov. John A . Andrews, of the 
Fifty-fourth Regiment of Massachusetts 
Infantry, the regiment of black men whose 
vainly and long proffered arms it was his 
privilege to accept in the supreme hour of 
their country's need. 
The Fifty-fourth Massachusetts left 
Boston Ma y 28, 1863. Their first engagement took place at James Island, S. C , 
Jul y 16. Two days later, at Fort Wagner, 
the bayonets of these black men "pricked 
the name of Colonel Shaw into the roll of 
immortal honor;" and, in pricking, thirty of 
them, including their gallant young commander, camped on "the bivouac of the 
dead." 
The total casualties at Fort Wagner 
amounted to 266. A large percentage of 
these soon answered the last roll call. In the 
hands of the wounded Sergeant Carney, "the 
old flag never touched the ground" at Fort 
Wagner. During the two years of active 
service following this heroic charge, the 
flag of the United States was always held 
aloft by the men of the first black regiment. 
On a September morning in 1S65, as its depleted ranks marched through the streets of 
that Boston from which they had gone forth, 
the New Yor k Tribune spoke as follows of 
the way they had acquitted themselves of 
the task that had been set to them and of 
the way in which they and their fellows had 
been treated by the republic to save which 
they had left their all : 
"To the Massachusetts Fifty-fourth was 
set the stupendous task of convincing the 
white race that colored troops would fight, 
and not only that they would fight, but that 
they could be. made, in every sense of the 
word, soldiers. It is not easy to recall at 
this day the state of public opinion on that 
point—the contemptuous disbelief i n the 
courage of an enslaved race, or rather of a 
race with a colored skin. Nobody pretends 
now that the Negro won't fight. Anglo-Saxon 
prejudice takes another shape—and says he 
won't work, and don't know how to vote. 
But in the spring of 1863, when this regiment marched down State Street i n Boston, 
though it was greeted with cheers and borne 
on by the hopes of the loyal city which had 
trusted the fame and lives of its noblest 
white sons to lead their black comrades, yet 
that procession was the scoff of every Democratic journal in America, and even friends 
feared half as much as they hoped. 
"Many a white regiment had shown the 
white feather i n its first battle, but for this 
black band to waver once was to fall forever, and to carry down with it, perhaps, the 
fortunes of the Republic. It -had to wait 
months for an opportunity. It was sent to 
a department which was sinking under the 
prestige of almost uninterrupted defeats. 
The general who commanded the division and 
the general who commanded the brigade to 
which this regiment found itself consigned— 
neither of them believed in the Negro. When 
the hour came for it to go into action there 
was probably no officer in the field outside of 
its own ranks who did not expect it—and 
there were many who desired it—to fail. 
When it started across that fatal beach 
which led to the parapet of Wagner, it 
started to do what had not been successfully 
attempted by white troops on either side 
during the war. It passed through such an 
ordeal successfully; it came out not merely 
with credit, but with an imperishable fame. 
"The ordinary chances of battle were not 
MEN OF THE MONTH ME N O F TH E MONT H 123 
all which the Massachusetts Fifty-fourth had 
to encounter. The hesitating policy of our 
government permitted the rebels to confront 
every black soldier with the threat of death 
or slavery if he were taken prisoner. If he 
escaped the bullet and knife, he came back 
to camp to learn that the country for which 
he had braved that double peril intended to 
cheat him out of the pay on which his wife 
and children depended for support. We 
trust Mr. Secretary Stanton is by this time 
heartily ashamed of the dishonesty which 
marked his dealings with the black troops, 
but we are not going into that question. We 
(Copyright by Augustus Saint-Gaudens. THE SHA
W MEMORIAL, BOSTON, MASS. 
From a Copley Print, Copyright by Curtis & Cameron.) 124 TH E CRISIS 
said then, and we reiterate now, that the 
refusal of pay to the colored soldiers was 
a swindle and. a scandal, so utterly without excuse that it might well have seemed to them KS 
if intended to provoke a mutiny. Few white 
regiments would have borne it for a month. 
The blacks maintained their fidelity in spite 
of it for a year and a half. When the Fifty -
fourth was offered a compromise the men 
replied with one voice: 'No, we need the 
money you offer; our families are starving 
because the government does not pay us what 
it promised, but we demand to be recognized 
as soldiers of the Republic, entitled to the 
same rights which white soldiers have. 
Until you grant that we will not touch a 
dollar.' 
"It was a sublime heroism, a loftier sentiment of honor than that which inspired them 
at Wagner. They would not mutiny because of injustice, but they would not surrender one iota of their claim to equal rights. 
Eventually they compelled the government 
to acknowledge their claim and were paid in 
full by a special act of Congress. 
"The name of Colonel Robert G. Shaw is 
forever linked with that of the regiment 
which he first commanded, and which he in ­
spired with so much of his own gentle and 
noble spirit as to make it a perpetual legacy 
to the men who fought under and loved him. 
His death at Wagner did as much, perhaps, 
for his soldiers as his life afterward could 
have done. Colonel Hallowell, who succeeded 
him, proved the faithful and intelligent 
friend of the regiment. Its other officers, 
with no exception that we know of, were 
devoted and capable. They are entitled to 
a'share of the renown which belongs to the 
regiment; they would be unworthy of it i f 
they did not esteem that their highest 
testimonial." 
The history of the colored soldier continues to repeat itself. Despite his loyalty 
and efficiency, i n this year we have witnessed 
an effort to eliminate him entirely from the 
Federal service. I n the North people 
are slow to believe that Negroes ought to be 
trained before the time comes to fight. 
Governor Tener has vetoed a bill for the 
creation of a Negro regiment of militia in 
Pennsylvania and, i n New York, Governor 
Sulzer signed a like measure at the very last 
moment, though i n the face of considerable 
opposition from soldiers who think chiefly 
of parades and social assemblies. 
But the time may come again when those 
who now begrudge the Negro a soldier's 
uniform will be glad to call to the defense 
of their country black men who have never 
been found wanting in this nation's battles, 
before and since Jul y 18, 1863. 
SOLDIER AND STATESMAN. 
COLONE L SHA W was only 25 years of 
age when he fell. A great soldier who 
was spared to continue i n peace the work for 
which he had fought i n battle was Carl 
Schurz. Of German birth, the young 
studiosus of the University of Bon n took a 
leading part i n the revolutionary movement 
of 1848. Wit h the temporary failure of this 
effort for freedom i n his own country, Mr . 
Schurz came, in 1852, to the United States, 
where he soon plunged with all the ardor of 
deep conviction into the struggle for the 
suppression of slavery. 
In Wisconsin his speeches and editorials 
swung the German element to the side of 
liberty. He campaigned for Lincoln i n 
Illinois and, after the election of 1860, was 
appointed minister to Spain. This office he 
promptly resigned on the outbreak of the 
war to become a brigadier-general of volunteers. Fo r distinguished service at the 
second battle of Bul l Ru n he was appointed 
major-general; he was division commander 
at Chancellorsville and had temporary command of the eleventh corps at Gettysburg. 
Afte r the war he was appointed a special 
commissioner to report on the Freedmen's 
Bureau. Fo r six years he served as United 
States Senator from Missouri, and later became editor of the New Yor k Evening Post. 
In three successive campaigns he supported 
Cleveland, because he thought that the Democratic candidate was the worthiest available 
successor of Lincoln. He died i n 1906. 
Carl Schurz, by word and deed, always 
upheld the cause of liberty and justice for 
black men and all men. A man of brilliant 
intellect, he believed i n the education of the 
Negro. It was a most fitting tribute to him 
that the surplus funds from the memorial to 
him which has been erected i n New Yor k 
were donated to Hampton. 
A HEROINE OF PEACE. 
THE task of fighting the third battle of 
A
 Bul l Run, the struggle to liberate from TH E SCHUR Z MONUMENT . 126 TH E CRISIS 
JENNI E DEAN . 
ignorance the descendants of the humble 
slaves who had been the unwitting and 
unwilling cause of the fearful carnage about 
them, fell to a daughter of black folk who 
has just ended on the field of Bul l Ru n a life 
of usefulness which began thereon. 
Jennie Dean, the founder of the Manassas 
Industrial School, was about 5 years old 
at the outbreak of the Civil War. The story 
of her own upbuilding for the advancement 
of others is the story of nearly every colored 
man or woman who has made a mark on the 
roll of honor of their race and country. She 
died at Sudley Springs, Va. , near Manassas. 
Ma y 4. 
SURGEO N AN D PROFESSOR . 
AFTE R the disastrous engagement at 
Fort Wagner, the Fifty-fifth Massachusetts was sent clown from St. Helena 
Island to reinforce the Federal troops. Like 
the dead colonel of the Fifty-fourth, the 
assistant surgeon of the second black regiment was a young Harvard graduate—Burt 
Green Wilder—who had always believed in 
the ability and urged the duty of black men 
to fight for their liberty. 
Dr. Wilder's army service consisted not 
only i n rendering succor to the wounded. 
He has been of signal value to the descendants of those soldiers whose wounds were 
beyond all human aid. The opportunity 
afforded him on the battlefield and i n army 
morgues for the study of the brain of the 
Negxo has made him the greatest living 
authority on this subject. 
In all the years that have followed the 
great conflict Dr. Wilder's confidence i n the 
capacity of the Negro has remained unshaken. A s a professor at Cornell University he always gave inspiration and encouragement to the colored students who 
attended that institution i n the forty-three 
years of his connection with it, and when in 
1911 he resigned he was presented with a 
loving cup by the colored townspeople of 
Ithaca. 
Dr. Wilde r is at present engaged i n writing" his memoirs of the war and intends to 
place on record the work of the Fifty-fifth, 
as Captain Emilio, of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts, has done in " A Brave Black 
Regiment." 
BUR T G. WILDER , M . D. BALTIMORE IN THE SUIT IN WHICH MR. W. 
SEGREGATION. Ashbie Hawkins defended 
John E . Gurry for an alleged 
violation of the Baltimore segregation law, 
Judge Thomas Ireland Elliott, after several 
months of careful deliberation, handed down 
the following decision invalidating the 
ordinance: 
"Section 1 of the ordinance undertakes to 
make it unlawful for any white person to 
move into, or use as a residence or place of 
abode, any house situated or located on any 
block, the houses on which block are occupied 
or used as residences or places of abode, in 
whole or in part, by colored persons. 
''Section 2 has the same provision with 
regard to colored persons in blocks where 
the houses are occupied as residences, or 
places of abode, in whole or in part, by white 
persons. 
''These are the inhibitions, the violation of 
which is made a misdemeanor punishable by 
fine. 
"In an effort to interpret these sections we 
are forced to the conclusion that the thing 
prohibited is the residence of a white person 
in a block occupied in whole or in part by 
colored persons, or the residence of a colored 
person i n a block occupied, in whole or in 
part, by white persons. 
"There is no other definition in the ordinance of what is intended to be the prohibited blocks respectively. 
"Now it is needless to remark that the 
same block could be, as a great many blocks 
now are, occupied at the same time in part 
by colored persons and in part by white 
persons, and by the sections above quoted it 
would be unlawful for either white or 
colored persons to move into or remain in the 
block. 
"So that every block in the city containing at the present time both white and 
colored persons would be at once depopulated 
upon enforcement of the ordinance. 
"When, then, by the definition in the ordinance a block can be at the same time both 
a white block and a colored block, it would 
seem unnecessary to say that the ordinance 
is invalid and unenforceable to punish either 
white or colored persons. 
"This court does not concern itself with 
the considerations which may have suggested 
the enactment of the ordinance in question, 
but it is possible that the evident difficulty 
of securing the objects which its framers may 
have had in view had the effect of confusing 
them, so that in the endeavor to please certain interests they have overlooked the rights 
of the citizens generally. 
"It is otherwise difficult to understand 
sections 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the ordinance, which 
appear intended to have no general, but only 
local application, and not even a local application, except under provisos so various 
and involved as to prevent any reasonable 
or equal enforcement of them. 
"The court, however, contents itself with 
sustaining the demurrer in this case because 
there is no such reasonable interpretation of 
the ordinance now before it as to make amenable to its penalty the traverser, who, admitting the facts set out in the indictment, 
denies any liability thereunder. 
"Demurrer sustained." 
This decision of Judge Elliott has been 
appealed. Meanwhile the Negro haters of • 
Baltimore, led by Councilman Curtis, have 
prepared and are urging the passage of a 
more drastic Ghetto ordinance. Al l the leading colored people of. Baltimore and, for 
various reasons, a good many whites, are 
arrayed against the law. A t a meeting of 
OPINION 128 TH E CRISIS 
protest Mr . Harr y S. Cummings, a colored 
member of the city council, expressed i n the 
following terms his and his people's opposition to the proposed ordinance: 
"Better home life means fresher air, 
healthier bodies, better minds, better labor, 
physical and mental: and, as a consequence, 
better citizens. This ordinance will place a 
premium on poverty, laziness, squalor and 
unhealthy surroundings, all of which produce idleness, filth and disease. We respectfully deny that we have invaded or intend to 
invade any section except by peaceable 
and lawful means. We are in no way responsible for unreasonable objections which 
may emanate from those who may happen 
to live in the same or adjoining block, which 
objections are not based upon their rights, 
but simply upon our race and color. That 
this ordinance applies to white and colored 
alike is no answer to its injustice, for it is 
a violation of the white man's property 
rights, as well as the colored man's property 
rights, and two wrong's never have made a 
right. I beg this committee to make an unfavorable report of this measure, for it will 
stimulate us to become better and more intelligent citizens and to become more vitally 
interested in the progress of our great and 
progressive city." ^ 
TH E NEW SOUTH PROF. E. H. WEBSTER of 
Atlanta University, writes as follows in the Atlanta Independent 
on the conference on race problems at the 
second Southern Sociological Congress, 
which took place recently in the Georgia 
capital: 
"Probably no event i n the South since the 
close of the war is of more significance than 
this conference on race problems An d this 
is so, not from what was said, as from the 
speakers and the audience addressed. The 
conference might have been one of the annual conferences of the Atlanta University 
upon 'race problems,' save that the speakers were Southern men, and the audiences 
were composed of Southern whites and colored persons. Audiences averaging between 
300 and 400 were in attendance at each of 
the four sessions. 
"Nothing was said that we are not fully 
aware of; but it was the occasion that made 
the significance. A s the keynote to the spirit 
of the conference, the following sentences 
from the opening address of the chairman 
are noteworthy: 'We recognize that the 
Negro is a permanent portion of the Southern population;' 'Justice calls for fair play 
and fair dealing;' 'Righteousness demands 
good will among the people of the South.' 
"Most interesting for . the rural colored 
schools was the fact that Virgini a and Ala ­
bama have both appointed a State supervisor of State colored rural schools, and the 
work that has been inaugurated i n these two 
States for the betterment of rural schools, 
coupled with the work for the rura l schools 
of the Jeanes foundation was a distinctly 
hopeful note for the attack of one of the 
crying evils of rural life. I n addition to 
this, the statement was made by the chairman that hereafter the 800 expert farm 
demonstrators who have hitherto given attention to white farmers only are i n the future 
to do the same farm-demonstration work for 
the Negro farmers. This brings the national 
government to the aid of the rural problem. 
"Commenting upon needed reforms in the 
social and hygienic conditions of the Negro, 
Professor Morse, of the University of South 
Carolina, was constrained to recognize that 
the likenesses among the races are far more 
marked than their differences, so that there 
can be no school of medicine, no psychology, 
no logic, no sociology, no religion of the one 
different from and apart from that of the 
other. 
"No words can do justice to the plea of 
Mrs. J. D. Hammond upon the topic, 'The 
White Man's Debt to the Negro.' Whil e 
not distinctly following her topic, Mrs. Hammond's words were a burning plea, not for 
the Negro, not for ex-slaves, not for an inferior race, not for an undeveloped or an 
infant race, but for all 'unprivileged peoples.' In the words of the speaker the 
problems of the unprivileged classes exist 
in all nations; their problems are worldwide; they are the people whose lives are 
lived under compulsion from which they cannot escape. These are the people who live 
just below the poverty line ; they furnish the 
paupers and the criminals of all nations. In 
the South we have mixed up the poverty line 
with the Negro problem. It is only that a 
larger proportion of the 'submerged tenth' 
are colored than white that the colored people furnish the larger proportion of criminals. An d as the great ones elsewhere are 
studying the causes and alleviations of poverty and crime, let us show ourselves like-OPINION 129 
wise great by studying those conditions that 
have made our submerged tenth, and not 
content ourselves that, having made the conditions that develop Negro criminals, we 
charge upon the Negro criminal propensities. 
"Perhaps no one address of the conference 
was more striking than that of Dv. Roman, 
of Nashville, upon 'Racial Self-respect and 
Race Antagonism,' in which the speaker deplored : 1. The politician whose stock in 
trade is the Negro problem. 2. That the 
two races believe i n the vices and not in 
the virtues of each other. 3. That racial 
contact is only in the saloon, the gambling 
hell and the brothel. 4. The scorn of the 
strong for the weak and the fear of the weak 
for the strong; and 5. The lack of business intercourse. He urged, 1, that the two 
races must live together; 2, that they should 
encourage interracial intercourse for things 
good; 3. should face facts; 4, that the press 
should drop for the present the discussion of 
the Negro, should not report the race of 
criminals, and should cease to report the 
speeches of political agitators. 
"U p to this point i n the conference much 
had been said that was favorable to the 
Negro. But nothing had been said as to 
the handicap under which what has been 
accomplished i n half a century has been 
wrought out. It was left to Professor 
Seroggs, of the University of Louisiana, to 
point out this phase of the situation. Among 
the elements of this handicap the following 
were stated: 1. Not equal accommodations 
for equal fare; because of this the whole 
principle of segregation in transportation is 
i n jeopardy. 2. Abominable housing. 3. 
Unfair division of the school fund; the Negro 
i n proportion to his ability is the more highly 
taxed; 40 per cent, of the population get 
15 per cent, of the school fund. 4. Inequality of administration i n municipal affairs, 
parks, libraries, etc. 5. Intelligent Negroes 
disfranchised; arbitrary power placed in the 
hands of registrars, and the 'grandfather' 
clause a piece of special legislation abhorrent 
to the spirit of American institutions, but 
fortunately a clause with a time limit. 6. 
The lot of the Negro before the courts may 
be recognized as legal, but as decidedly unequal in comparison with that of white men; 
while juries frequently fail to convict whites 
upon Negro evidence; and 7. The Negro is 
too frequently the victim of mob violence. 
"The concluding address was made by Dr. 
Weatherford, of Nashville, the secretary of 
the conference. His topic was 'How to 
Enlist Southern Forces for Improvement of 
Conditions Among Negroes.' His opening 
statement was that 'Humanity is humanity,' 
and his demands were an appreciation of 
the sacredness of human life, the co-operation of the church, more money for schools, 
new curriculum, better teachers, better supervision, United States farm-demonstration 
work, city charity organizations, which 
should work not for but with the Negroes, 
decent wholesome recreation for adults and, 
again, playgrounds for children. 
"Such of the general conferences as I 
attended seemed permeated with the spirit of 
the special conferences. Dr. Barton made 
his appeal, not to arithmetic, but to the 
heart. I n the preservation of human rights 
the Negroes must be preserved. Fo r illustration, the Negro to-day has no real chance 
before the courts. In the realm of industry 
these rights must be respected despite immigration and the importation of white servile 
labor. In education the same principles must 
hold as with other races. 
"The concluding injunction of the conference on race problems stated the magnitude 
of the problem opened by the conference. 
'We know these things,' said the chairman. 
'There lies before us the duty of making 
them known to others.' This is the problem 
which the sociological congress has set itself. 
It behooves every man of us to assist. 
"Certain things would not have been said 
at an Atlanta University conference. No 
speaker there would have hedged his fine 
address by concluding it with the famous 
illustration of 'the fingers and the hand,' 
or have demanded 'equal but separate 
accommodations in transportation.' Such 
would have to accept the conditions under 
which he lives, but would not accept the 
philosophy behind those conditions. So none 
of us would refer to the Negro people as a 
race i n the infant or bottle stage of civilization, a phrase which forgets that the Negro 
has been in America about as long as the 
white man, and has for nearly three centuries 
entered into the Western civilization. The 
generous recognition of what the Negro has 
accomplished since 1863 would indicate that 
the colored race is at least i n a stage of 
civilization approximating youth. But the 
conference was significant in its admissions 
rather than in its omissions, and none of us 
but can be thankful for its spirit and can 
gladly 'lend a hand.' " EDITORIAL 
TH E NEWES T SOUTH . 
FOR the first time in 
history, Southern white 
men and Southern black 
men have met under 
Southern white auspices 
and frankly discussed 
the race problems of the South before 
an audience of both races. A t the 
Southern Sociological Congress the professional Negro lover was absent, and the 
white demagogue was silent. There was 
scarcely a word uttered which TH E 
CRISI S does not cordially endorse. 
It was a splendid occasion. It was 
epoch making, and men like Dillard, 
Hunley, Branson Morse, Hammond and 
Scroggs are the real leaders of the 
newest South. 
But the old South is not dead. The 
Atlanta Constitution refused to report 
the congress. Hoke Smith's Journal 
refused to report the congress and 
Hearst's Georgian, under the disreputable John Temple Graves, did its best 
to foment lynching a black man since 
proven innocent, filling its columns with 
venom and lies and printing scarcely a 
word concerning the congress. The 
Bourbon South dies hard, but its doom is 
written in the stars. 
I GO A-TALKING . 
I HAV E made a grea t 
journey to three of the 
four corners of this 
"Western world, over a 
distance of 7,000 miles, 
and through thirt y 
States; and I am overwhelmed almost to 
silence over the things I have seen, the 
persons I have known and the forces I 
have felt. 
First, of course, and foremost, comes 
a sense of the vastness of this land. The 
sheer brute bigness of its distances is 
appalling. I think of the endless ride 
of three days and four nights from the 
silver beauty of Seattle to the sombre 
whirl of Kansas City. I think of the 
thousand miles of California and the 
empire of Texas, the grim vastness of 
the desert, the wideness of the blue 
Pacific at San Diego—but all. is it not 
all typified at the Grand Canyon? 
TH E GRAN D CANYON . 
It is a cruel gash i n the bosom of the 
earth down to its very entrails—a wound 
where the dull titanic knife has turned 
and twisted in the hole, leaving its edges 
livi d scarred, jagged and pulsing over 
the white and red and purple of its 
mighty flesh, while down below, down, 
down below, i n black and severed vein, 
boils the dull and sullen flood of the 
Colorado. 
It is awful. There can be nothing like 
it. It is the earth and skies gone stark 
and raving mad. The mountains uptwirled, disbodied and inverted stand on 
their peaks and throw their bowels to 
the skies. Their earth is air—their ether 
blood-red rock engreened. Yo u stand 
upon their roots and fall into their pinnacles a mighty mile. 
Behold this mauve and purple mocking of time and space. See yonder peak! 
No human foot has trod it. Into that 
blue shadow only the eye of God has EDITORIA L 131 
looked. Liste n to the accents of that 
gorge whic h mutters: "Befor e Abraha m 
was, I am. " Is yonde r wal l a hedge of 
black, or is it the rampart between 
Heave n an d hell ? I see greens—is it 
grass o r giant pines ? I see specks that 
ma y be boulders. Eve r the wind s sigh 
an d dro p into those sun-swept silences. 
Eve r the gorge lies motionless, unmoved, unti l I fear. It is an awfu l 
thing , unholy , terrible . It is human— 
some might y drama unseen, unheard, 
is playin g there its tragedies or mockin g 
comedy an d the laug h of endless years 
is shriekin g onwar d from peak to peak, 
unheard, imechoed an d unknown . 
TH E TALKS . 
Throug h such a gateway I came out 
to the cities of me n an d i n these I made 
twenty-eight talks to audiences aggregatin g 18,000 huma n souls. 
Wha t wonderfu l an d varie d audiences 
they were : there was the vast theatre 
i n Lo s Angele s where I strained to 
reach the last di m galler y rows; there 
was the littl e grou p of a hundre d or so 
i n Stockton, an d the thoughtfu l half 
thousand down i n Sa n Dieg o an d over 
i n Indianapolis. Most of all , perhaps, I 
felt the throb of persona l appreciatio n 
an d understandin g i n St. Louis an d 
Oakland , whil e the stillness of a deep 
earnestness, almost tragedy, la y on the 
audiences i n For t Wort h an d Atlanta . 
A t Lo s Angele s I spoke again and 
again to audiences tha t di d not seem to 
tire , whil e i n the wonderfu l Northwest 
I met the littl e grou p at Portland , the 
people o f Tacoma—so tireless i n their 
thoughtfu l care—and crowne d it al l at 
Seattle, the wonde r cit y that sits gleamin g ami d its waters wit h its face to the 
great North . 
I n the eighteen cities where I spoke 
live 500,000 American s of Negr o descent, 
an d I cannot cease marvelin g at their 
gri t an d energy an d alertness. The y 
complai n at themselves an d criticise , but 
they are pulsin g an d alive wit h a new 
ambitio n an d determinedness whic h were 
to me astounding . 
TH E MI D WEST . 
I n Indianapolis, St. Louis an d Kansa s 
Cit y strong groups of Negroes are unitin g to fight segregation, to improv e an d 
defend the schools an d to open the gate 
of opportunit y for their children . The y 
are not yet unite d or agreed, but their 
steps towar d unio n an d agreement i n the 
last ten years have been most encouraging . The y welcomed a gospel of fight 
an d self-assertion. 
SOUTHER N CALIFORNIA . 
Lo s Angele s was wonderful. The air 
was scented wit h orange blossoms an d 
the beautifu l homes la y low crouchin g 
on the earth as though they loved itsseen ts an d flowers. Nowher e i n the 
Unite d States is the Negr o so well an d 
beautifull y housed, no r the average o f 
efficiency an d intelligenc e i n the colored 
populatio n so high . Her e is an aggressive, hopeful group—wit h some wealth, 
large industria l opportunit y an d a 
buoyant spirit. 
Dow n at Sa n Diego, wit h its bol d and: 
beautifu l coast on the great Pacific , is a 
smalle r group, but kindl y an d thrifty , 
wit h pushin g leaders. 
TH E GOLDE N GATE . 
Th e shadow of a great fear broodsover Sa n Francisco . The y have not 
forgotten the earthquake, an d the 
strange r realizes wha t it was by the awei n their tones. One misses here the 
buoyanc y an d aggressiveness of Souther n 
Californi a an d yet the fifty-eight leaders, 
who met me at dinne r were a fine group 
of men, an d they expect the colored 
worl d to greet them i n 1915 at theexposition. 
This grou p stands closer to the progressive whites tha n man y others and' 
has a chance to share i n the great movements of uplift. 
A t Sacramento I di d not speak, but- a 
littl e grou p made my hours of waitingpleasant—an unassumin g group wit h 
pleasant manners an d war m hearts. I 
shall not forget them. 132 TH E CRISIS 
TH E NORTHWEST . 
U p the n I rushe d throug h a rich , 
green valle y an d then throug h high , 
full-bosomed hills—throug h tha t contrast an d astonishment whic h is 
California . 
Portlan d is the olde r Northwest—• 
stai d an d quiet, wit h a certai n strength 
an d bigness. Th e audience was small 
an d the people were not sure of m y message an d purpose ; but they themselves 
were awakenin g an d they showed new 
homes an d enterprises wit h pardonabl e 
pride . 
Tacoma wil l always seem to me like a 
place of home coming . I have seldom 
come to a strange cit y wit h so intimat e 
an understandin g an d sense of fellowship. Th e audience was whit e an d black 
an d sympatheticall y blended. The mayo r 
came an d spoke an d ate an d an ol d 
Harvar d schoolmate introduce d me. 
The y gave me a lovin g cup an d it di d 
not seem inappropriate , so tha t I went 
awa y thinkin g not so muc h of a separate 
strivin g grou p as of a bod y of good 
friends wit h scant color line . 
Then , as I have said, the wonderfu l 
Wester n pilgrimag e was crowne d at 
Seattle. The magi c cit y of 300,000 lies 
on its hills above silver y waters, dreambeautifu l an d al l but uncann y i n its 
unexpectedness. Th e grou p of me n who 
welcomed me were unusua l i n vigo r an d 
individuality . Ther e was the lawye r who 
thoughtfull y engineered it all ; the youn g 
doctor wit h his cheery face ; the drol l 
politicia n wit h his reminiscences an d 
strong opinions; the merchan t from u p 
countr y an d his littl e daughte r whose 
beautifu l face of the lon g years ago I 
remembered suddenl y ami d the cheer of 
he r perfect littl e home. Ther e was. the. 
caterer, an d the minister—i t was a fine 
group . I have seldom seen its equal. 
. Fo r one da y I turne d m y back o n the 
perfect memor y of this golden journe y 
an d sailed out across the seas an d 
thanke d Go d for this the kindliest race 
on Hi s green earth, for whom I ha d the 
privileg e of workin g an d to who m I ha d 
the prid e of belonging . 
TEXAS . 
The n I plunge d into Texas. One da y 
the white , drifte d snows o f Montan a 
an d then, i n less tha n a week, the soun d 
of the reape r i n the golden grai n o f the 
Re d Rive r valley ! 
One shivers at the "Ji m Crow " cars 
of Texas. Afte r the luxur y o f the West 
an d the publi c courtesy an d hospitality , 
the dirt an d impudenc e of a lan d wher e 
to trave l at al l meant twelve to twenty -
fou r hours i n the most primitiv e accommodations, was a n awfu l change. Fo r 
twenty-fou r hours on one journe y I was 
able to purchas e onl y two must y ha m 
sandwiche s to eat, an d I sat u p three 
nights i n succession to keep engagements. 
Bu t wha t was lackin g i n publi c an d 
whit e courtesy was mor e tha n compensated i n privat e an d Negr o hospitalit y 
an d appreciation . 
A t Dalla s was one of the strongest, 
truest religious leaders I have met. A t 
Austi n were growin g colleges an d an 
audience gathered from thirt y mile s 
around . A t Marshal l wa s a grou p of 
fine me n an d women, an d it al l came to 
clima x at For t Worth . 
"Ar e yo u goin g to For t Worth? " 
everybod y asked, knowin g of the recent 
riot. I went. I spoke to 400 Negroe s 
an d a handfu l of leadin g whites, an d I 
spoke the clear, plai n trut h as I conceive it. It was received withou t dissent 
or protest an d its receptio n gave me 
deepest hope an d satisfaction. 
Atlant a is anothe r story ; so her e let 
me en d and, i n ending , let me than k 
those who welcome d me, wh o pai d m y 
fees willingl y an d promptly , who were 
eager to liste n to the message whic h I 
brought, not because it was wholl y to 
their liking , but because it wa s sincere. 
Al l this b y wa y of preface . I n late r 
numbers of TH E CRISIS I shal l take u p 
these group s an d cities i n greate r detail 
an d tell of their meanin g an d promise . TH E SCHOOLIN G O F TH E NEGR O 
B y JOS E CLARAN A 
OONE R or later, often and 
again, every colored man of 
intelligenc e and some 
colored men of no intelligence must face the question, "Whic h do you think 
is the better way of elevating your people—industrial or higher 
education"?" Not infrequently this query 
takes the form, "Whic h of the two leaders 
of your race do you follow?" Assuming that 
one of two men can have absolute control 
over the destiny of ten millions of people who 
must in all places and under all circumstances . blindly and unthinkingly regulate 
their conduct according to the supposed will 
of this demigod, the white solver of the 
Negro problem has been in the habit of 
formulating an answer to his own proposition in the following typical opinion of a 
sophomore debater in a Northern university, 
who had lived some time i n Alabama. 
"The Negroes are an inferior race, but 
though they can never equal the achievements 
of the white man, they ought to be trained 
to be useful members of society and to be 
self-dependent. The only way by which 
this end can be accomplished is by giving 
industrial education to the masses. It is 
true that a few individuals have displayed 
great mental capacity, but experience has 
shown that it is unwise to give to these men 
opportunities to cultivate their talents, for 
as soon as a Negro becomes highly educated 
he wants to marry a white woman. Fo r this 
reason I am for educating the whole people 
industrially instead of wasting time and 
money in trying to give to the few privileges 
which they are bound to abuse. Of the two 
Negroes whose opinion is-worth considering, 
the former position is held by Booker T. 
Washington, the latter by Du Bois. Washington is therefore the only real leader of his 
race. 
" I do not believe in allowing Negroes to 
attend schools with white people in the North, 
for they are not allowed in the South. I 
once heard Booker T. Washington say that 
he did not want colored men to go to Yal e 
and I suppose he would say the same thing 
of this university. Negro teachers should 
be trained for the Negro industrial schools, 
but this work should be done at normal 
schools in the South, where the masses of 
the race will always be." 
Fortunately the wisdom of.this young fool 
readily became apparent to his fellow sophomores when the junior who had given rise to 
the color query chose to answer it in his 
own way by asking the questioner to name 
any co-ed who had expressed a willingness 
to marry a highly educated Negro, with or 
without his having particularly "wanted" to 
marry her; to reconcile the statement that 
the "only real leader" of the Negroes did not 
want his people to attend Northern schools 
with the fact that this same man had sent 
his own children to the best schools that 
would admit them and was at that moment 
searching these universities for colored 
graduates to teach the pupils of his school 
for colored people; to explain, finally, where 
the Negro teachers in the Negro normal 
schools, who would be the ultimate teachers 
in the Negro industrial schools, would get 
their training if not i n the universities, 
North and South, which offer the broadest 
training to students who have had the fullest 
and most thorough preparation i n high 
schools and colleges, North and South. 
It is thus evident on the slightest investigation that "industrial" education for 
Negroes is inseparably dependent upon 
"higher" education and that, far from neglecting the latter for the supposed advantage 
of the former, both processes must go on at 
the same place and time if either is to 
succeed. 
In America there can be no arbitrary 
selection of Negroes for high, higher or 
highest education and of Negroes for 
"lower" or industrial education, for in 
America there is no such selection of white 
people. The caste and class system of 
European educational methods has never 
been reproduced among white Americans, and 
there is no reason to suppose that it would 
be advantageous among Negro Americans. 
In Alabama, as i n New York, all children 
should have equal educational opportunities 
at the public expense. When once these 
opportunities are secured, those Negro 
children who have the capacity and ambition 
to rise above their fellows will do so, just 134 TH E CRISIS 
as white children have done and are doing. 
Deny these opportunities to Negro children 
anywhere, and you defeat your purpose of 
uplifting the race by robbing it of its 
potential agents of self-dependence. No 
colored man who has the interest of his 
people at heart and can see far enough into 
its future could say otherwise. 
The young sophomore was unable to state 
when or where he had heard a colored teacher 
say that colored men should not go to Yale. 
He had probably confused a statement of the 
clean of Yale College to the effect that that 
institution tolerated rather than encouraged 
Negroes. Ha d the debate taken place two 
years later the sophomore might have 
learned that one young man who declined to 
take a hint from the dean of Yal e to the 
effect that his room was preferable to his 
company, stayed and got probably the first 
fellowship in economics ever conferred upon 
a Negro at that university. Surely no 
optimist of the future of the American 
Negro would seek to prevent a colored man 
from obtaining in Connecticut educational 
advantages which he may not have yet, and 
perhaps not soon, in his native Kentucky, or 
in Tennessee, or in Alabama. 
It cannot be denied, however, that the most 
prominent and the most influential Negro 
has, I doubt not unintentionally, given to 
sophomores, deans and other white people 
in and out of college an untenably biased 
attitude toward the educational needs of his 
people by reiterating, in one way or another, 
the notion that certain excellent forms of 
mental training were not good for his people 
—an assumption that readily finds causation 
in the fact that this man has made his own 
remarkably successful career without having 
had such training. But this does not prove 
that he has not felt the lack of such training in the years when he was best able to 
absorb it; that he could not have been a more 
prominent, more influential, more successful 
man if his youthful schooling had not been 
confined almost solely to the grim struggle 
for existence of an orphan of slavery. Above 
all, it does not give him the right to say that 
other Negro children should not have privileges and opportunities which he himself has 
not enjoyed. 
No colored educator has a more promising 
future of the humblest beginning than the 
young man who, on receiving from the 
University of Iowa the degree of Bachelor 
of Philosophy—a degree which suggests 
familiarity with Greek roots rather than with 
potato sprouts—set out for Mississippi and 
established a school beneath a cedar tree, 
with a dilapidated barn for change of 
scenery when shade was turned to sunlight. 
Speaking of him the other day, a German 
cab driver said to a white classmate of the 
young Negro: " I knew Jones when he was 
night clerk in the O'Reilly Hote l at Iowa 
City, working his way through the State 
University. He used to put i n most of his 
spare time studying, and whenever I was 
hanging around for the night trains he would 
practice his German on me. He was a 
'live one' all right. I always knew that 
colored boy would show up somewhere." 
When this young man "shows up " i n Europe 
on his quest of the man farthest down he 
will hardly need the services of a Germanspeaking secretary and companion. 
The teaching of languages to Negroes has, 
I think, been the especial object of adverse 
criticism by the colored educator who receives the readiest hearing from white 
people. A s to time and place, I am i n as 
much of a quandary as was the sophomore, 
but I have a vague remembrance of an 
animadversion of Dr. Booker T. Washington 
upon a colored boy whom he saw sitting 
under a tree poring over a French grammar. 
This was industry with a vengeance, especially i f the sun was hot. It was useful 
conservation of time and of bodily energy. 
But the apostle of industrial education 
thought the lad ought to have been picking 
cotton or husking corn. 
I have, on the other hand, a very definite 
recollection of the young woman who came 
to a Northern university to fit herself for 
teaching at Tuskegee, the institution which 
had sent her out to teach i n the small rural 
schools for Negroes in the South. She had 
the courage, and the courage presupposed the 
intelligence to do the work of this university. 
But prospective teachers of Tuskegee who 
wish to study even in an agricultural college 
are required to have a good knowledge not 
only of English, but of some modern foreign 
language as well. The young lady had the 
English, because she had not lived in a rural 
community in Alabama, but she did not have 
the French and could not acquire it in the 
time at her disposal and with the work that 
she was doing to support herself. She had 
never seen a French word in its Lati n form. TH E SCHOOLIN G O F TH E NEGR O 135 
She had heard much of potato roots, but had 
never had anything to do -with a Greek root. 
A t 22 she could not change her way 
of thinking and speaking as readily as she 
might have at 12. He r chemistry and 
physics were of the same stamp as her 
French, for these subjects are studied in 
Northern colleges mostly from books or from 
classroom demonstrations, and not from outdoor "object" lessons, with the emphasis on 
the object rather than on the lesson. The 
university authorities admired this young 
woman's pluck and, partly from a spirit of 
chivalry, they stretched her entrance units 
enough to let her attend the classes for just 
one term. Then they "busted" her. An d 
this brave little soul returned to her home, 
rueing bitterly the day she had set out for 
far-away Alabama thinking that industry, 
usefulness to one's self and to others, capacity for adaptation to circumstances, were 
qualities which could be acquired only in 
some school labeled "industrial." 
The acceptance of the dollar ideal of 
scholarship by colored people who prefer to 
have a "leader" think for them rather than 
to use their own minds is not a very encouraging aspect of the future of the American Negro. I n Greater New York, with a 
colored population of more than 90,000, 
only seven young men are to receive diplomas 
from the high schools this year. The reason 
assigned by the hundreds who have failed 
to use the opportunities so fully and freely 
given to them is not far to seek: "There is 
nothing for us to do with a good education. 
We could only use it among our own people 
and they are i n the South. We do not want 
to go down South, so we quit school and 
work for enough to keep body and soul together, though we can always find a little 
change for dancing and a little time for the 
street corners. Ain ' nothin' we can git out 
o' school. Ain ' no money in books." 
The problem of finding employment for an 
educated colored man is undeniably difficult, 
but it is becoming less and less difficult 
proportionately with the increase of educated 
colored men. The greater breadth of vision 
insures keener and quicker perception of 
opportunities. The possession of a good education is more often an incentive rather than 
a detriment to industry and respect for 
labor. The difference between the waiter, the 
bricklayer, the coachman who knows Greek 
and algebra and the one who does not is 
that the one who knows must get a chance 
to do something else if he will only try hard 
enough, whereas the one who does not know 
anything else but waiting can never expect 
to do something to which he has not been 
trained to adapt himself. As a matter of 
fact, colored men hold positions in New Yor k 
and other Northern cities that they could 
never occupy in the South because they are 
not white, and their own people have no such 
places to offer. These men have the courage 
and the patience to seek their positions, and 
their courage rests on the knowledge that 
they have the ability to fill the positions 
which they seek. 
But why expect to see a green or yellowback to every book you open? In education 
the Negro must "cast down his bucket" where 
he is, but he need not stop casting and hauling i f he cannot draw a load of gold every 
time. Not all commodities are equally readily 
exchangeable for money. Cotton and corn 
and cane will sell almost anywhere and at any 
time, because their value, like their cost, is 
comparatively less than that of Greek, French 
or German, for which the market is not 
always apparent, though always real and 
enduring. Yo u can grow cotton at any time 
without having gone to any school, provided 
only you have the sense, the interest and the 
experience to do it. Sam McCall, an illiterate 
ex-slave, 75 years old, grew eight bales 
of cotton on an acre of land that would 
not have produced one-eighth of a bale when 
he got it. The experts of the United States 
Department of Agriculture have never done 
likewise; no other farmer, white or Negro, 
has ever approached this achievement. 
But Sam McCall, at 75, could hardly 
make much headway with an English 
copy book or a French grammar, for although Cato began to study Greek at 80, 
he was already acquainted with Roman letters. 
Without the study and the schooling no 
amount of sense and interest will open to 
you the treasures of other people's mind 
and thought as expressed in their language; 
no amount of patient hope and longing will 
give you that contact with other people which 
is the basis of all civilization and without 
which human beings speedily degenerate to 
the level of the Bleasites of South Carolina, 
who dismembered a dead Negro in order to 
get and take away souvenirs of a lynching 
party that had reached their man too late. 136 TH E CRISIS 
It is this broadening, civilizing, humanizing aspect of the so-called "higher" education that makes it so essentially and so 
practically valuable to Negroes and to whites 
alike. A young sailor on a United States 
warship is sent to ship's prison for five 
days' solitary confinement on bread and 
water for wanting to read when his work 
is done and for telling a white petty officer 
not to call him Rastus. Whil e he is supposed to be brooding over the consequences 
of a Negro's "insolence" to a white man, he 
strengthens the foundation of a knowledge 
of Italian from a grammar book which he 
has had smuggled in to him. Some months 
later, when the ship is at an Italian port, 
the same Negro boy has the satisfaction of 
seeing himself appealed to by every other 
man on the ship, the captain and the brutal 
petty officer included, to act as interpreter. 
He gets no dollars and scant thanks from 
them, but though dollars enough have since 
come in to pay several times over the cost 
of that Italian grammar, the greatest factor 
in the subsequent career of this young man 
can be traced to the wholesome use of those 
five days on bread and water, and not the 
least important part of this career has been 
the winning of the friendship of Italians, 
dead and living. 
Again, a Negro enters a candy store in 
New Yor k and, before the proprietor comes 
to him, his eye is attracted by a Greek daily 
paper lying on the counter. When the 
proprietor does come he wants the Negro to 
read aloud something from the paper. The 
colored man who reads Greek, ancient or 
modern, is not the one who was struck on 
the head with a bottle by a Hellenic 
restaurateur. 
The Shaw Settlement House in Boston 
very wisely provides instruction in French 
as well as in cooking and waiting. The 
colored waiter who knows French is far less 
likely to have a dispute with a Parisian chef 
than the servitor whose only recommendation to the good graces of a white man is his 
dark skin and his half-understood speech. 
More than this, the. Negro who reads the 
letters of Toussaint l'Ouverture and the novels 
of Dumas i n the original wil l see for himself 
that Theodore Parker, the Boston abolitionist, was wrong i n saying that a colored 
man could at best be only a good waiter. 
The Negro who reads i n Spanish the poems 
of Placido, the novels and speeches of Moru a 
Delgado, of Gualberto Gomez and of other 
representative colored men of Cuba, cannot 
fail to receive new inspiration and new confidence i n the power of black blood to 
redeem itself, without as well as within the 
United States. 
These observations may not prove anything, but they have an important bearing 
on the Negro problem. Those who look out 
for the future of the American Negro cannot 
fail to see that the component elements of 
white America are changing and have 
rapidly changed since the Civi l War. The 
faithful old Negro was more or less 
thoroughly "understood" by his aristocratic 
master, his red-shirt neighbor and rival, and 
his philanthropic liberator. Bu t the new 
Negro who wants to be faithful to himself 
as well as to others must adapt himself to' 
the character of his new neighbors—the 
Italian i n the South, the cosmopolitan immigrant everywhere i n the North. The 
Negro's best hope for a place i n the new 
America lies i n learning to understand the 
new Americans. He can best do this by 
going to school with them, using the same 
books they use, thinking the same thoughts 
they think. Where the humanizing influence 
of this contact is denied to them, colored 
youth may still insist on equality of opportunity for the broadest and fullest education 
that their white fellows receive. "Cast down 
your buckets where you are" is the gospel 
to Negro boys and girls of school age. I f 
there be no well of knowledge i n sight, then 
go where you can find one, or insist that 
your elders make you one. Do not stop 
to assay the haul, but cast a bucket now and 
always and everywhere for high, higher, 
highest education, for without this you could 
have no industrial education—you could have 
no education at all. 11 FRO M IOW A T O MISSISSIPP I 
G . S. DICKERMA N 
SOM E four years ago I made 
a trip to Mississippi for the 
anniversary exercises of 
Tougaloo University. During my visit a young 
colored man came and 
asked for a chance to talk 
with me. He was from Iowa, where he had 
acquired a good education, having completed a course in the Marshalltown Hig h 
School and then graduated with honor at 
the State University. Believing that the 
clearest path to distinction lay in using his 
abilities for the good of his own people he 
had set his face toward the South. He was 
i n Mississippi because this seemed to be an 
especially needy region, and he had been 
looking about to see if he could find a good 
place to begin. He had taught at 
Holzclaw's School at Utica, and was now at 
Tougaloo to see the people gathered there for 
this fortieth anniversary. 
In the conversation with me he asked particularly what I thought of the opportunities 
for building up schools for the colored 
people, and among other things he wished 
to know whether the people of the North 
were likely to continue their help to this 
kind of work. He had been told by some 
one that the North was getting tired of contributing and was beginning to withdraw its 
support. To this I replied: "Why , look at 
the facts. There never has been a time when 
so much money was coming down from the 
North to maintain colored schools as today. Here are all the old schools, like 
Tougaloo, putting up new buildings, extending their courses and increasing the number 
of their students at . an outlay that tends 
to advance; these are all sustained with a 
growing interest. Then you will find a 
whole new crop of schools like that at Utica, 
which have sprung up within the last five 
or ten years—schools having considerable 
tracts of land, numerous buildings and 
various industrial features; large new sums 
of money are being given for their maintenance. An d then, besides, quite a number 
of the schools are working to obtain endowments that shall put them on a self-sustaining 
basis, and many of them are having remarkable success. No, that is a false alarm. Yo u 
need have no fear about the Northern 
people's abandoning a field into which they 
have put so much as they have here." 
The young man listened eagerly, but he 
said nothing of what he had i n mind. I 
returned to my home and after a few weeks 
I received a letter from him postmarked 
with a name wholly unfamiliar to me, and 
enclosed was a small kodak picture of a 
dilapidated shack with a flock of sheep at 
its door. He wrote in the letter that he was 
out in the "piney woods" and that he was 
arranging to start a school there. 
I had never heard of the "piney woods" 
country as offering unusual attractions for 
a colored school. It was supposed to be 
a sort of white man's country, but actually 
in the two counties for which this school was 
started the colored children were nearly as 
numerous as the white. In many of the 
counties of Mississippi the colored people 
outnumbered the white four or five to one. 
Statistics would seem to point to such 
counties as the best places for such an enterprise; but the man who follows the direction 
of statistics sometimes finds himself astray. 
Certainly this man made no mistake in breaking into the "piney woods" country, for he 
found a large number of neglected people 
eager to welcome him to his undertaking and 
a great many white neighbors ready to join 
in the welcome and to assist his efforts. 
He opened school under a widespreading 
cedar tree. An d such a looking school! The 
group that were brought together there were 
so uninteresting as to be interesting; there 
was so much room for improvement. He 
saw in each a sort of tree, alive but only 
half alive, so overgrown with scales and 
parasites of ignorance. It was a "human 
orchard," as he calls it, and now he had his 
job to "spray" it. He was there alone. Nobody had sent him. He had no missionary 
society behind him and no substantial backers. 
He asked for a contribution. A n old man who 
was born a slave, but whose keen eyes "had 
seen the coming of the glory of the Lord, " 
made the first gift, and it was $50 i n cash 
and forty acres of land. This was great. 
The school adjourned to the old cabin to 
see what could be done with it. They cleared 
out the rubbish and made it clean. They 138 TH E CRISIS 
rigged up some shelves in one corner and 
spread pictures over the rough walls. They 
found some planks and made them into 
tables, on which in due time were set a typeLAURENC E C. JONES, Ph. B. 
writer and a small printing press. They 
began to think of a new building and picked 
out a spot close by the cabin where they drove 
their stakes as the first step. 
This is Laurence Clifton Jones, of the Iowa 
State University, class of 1907, honor man, 
scholar, thinker, prospector, promoter of 
education • and character. He is coming to 
his own here in the pine woods of Mississippi. 
Three miles away is Braxton on the railroad, with its postoffice, bank, stores, 
churches and prosperous business concerns. 
He goes down there for his mail, to send off 
letters and to buy supplies. The people 
want to know what he is doing out there in 
the woods. He tells them and he does it in 
such a way that some of them drive out to 
look at his operations. They like his work 
so well that they ask him to let them help, 
and they raise money among the white 
neighbors to put up another building for the 
new school. 
Next, he writes home to his old friends in 
Iowa an account of what he has found and 
what he is doing. They write back i n warm 
congratulation and tell him they, too, would 
like to take some stock in his enterprise. Some 
of them have in mind to take a winter trip 
to the South, and here is just the kind of 
thing that they want to see; so they get 
their tickets to Braxton, where Jones meets 
them and takes them out to his "plant," which 
by this time is fairly booming with its new 
buildings and its people who have seen the 
new light and found their way to it through 
the woods from all the region around. The 
visitors are men of some distinction. One of 
them had been a captain in the Union army 
and later the president of the Iowa Corn 
Growers' Association; the other was a graduate of the Iowa Agricultura l College at 
Ames. Prominent citizens of Braxton were 
glad to welcome them and to accompany them 
to the new school which was now becoming 
an object of local pride. It need not be said 
that it was a great day for these poor 
people when they gathered in crowds to meet 
these visitors, some from the North and 
some from the neighboring city, who were 
taking so great an interest in this school and 
in the welfare of those for whom it was 
established. It was a great clay for the 
principal also, for it brought to him the warm 
approval and helpful assurances of men whose 
endorsement of his work would give it reputation and standing throughout the country. 
One episode more. "It is not good for a 
man to be alone." Principa l Jones was 
fully aware of this. Wherefore he returned 
about a year ago to Iowa for one who had 
MRS . LAURENC E C. JONES . FRO M IOWA T O MISSISSIPPI 139 
TH E ORIGINAL SCHOOL. 
been educated at the Burlington Hig h School 
and had proved her fitness to share in his 
ambitions by a number of years' service in 
successful teaching. The two were married 
at Iowa City last Jul y and took their wedding trip to their home at Braxton. 
Mention has been made of a small printing press that was set up in the little log 
cabin with the other furniture. From this 
press a little four-page paper, called The 
Pine Torch, has gone forth from time to 
time to the friends of the new enterprise. 
It is an odd little sheet, printed from type 
of many sorts and sizes, but alive in every 
FARMERS ' CONFERENCE . 140 TH E CRISI S 
line with the spirit o f the man who gets it 
up, who is author, editor, compositor, printer 
and publisher, all i n one. This paper has 
been the medium of personal communication 
with readers in different parts of the country 
and has kept them informed of the progress 
made. 
The March number of The Torch tells o f 
the recent acquisition of 129 acres of land 
which generous contributors have added to 
the original tract and it says: "From New 
Yor k to California, Iowans helped buy this 
plantation. The boys are now cutting down 
bushes and getting it i n condition for farming. Several acres of oats have been planted 
and the tiny blades have covered the earth 
with a carpet of green." In another column 
are given the following statements concerning the school: "Organized in 1909 
without money, land or friends. A n ex-slave 
gave the first substantial gift, forty acres 
of land and $50 i n money. Local interest 
awakened; friends i n other sections became 
interested; the result was the establishment 
of a school and center whose influence is 
felt for miles around. This year we en ­
rolled 169 and had to refuse admittance to 
many for lack of accommodations. There 
are eight teachers, who teach academic wor k 
in the morning and industrial training i n the 
afternoon. Cooking, sewing, housekeeping, 
gardening, agriculture, carpentry, shoe 
mending, broom making, printing and 
laundrying are the industries. W e have 169 
acres of land, three large buildings, seven 
smaller ones used for shops, barns, poultry 
house, live stock and industrial apparatus. 
Al l is free from debt, with a total valuation 
of $10,000." 
What a demonstration this is o f the 
chances offered i n neglected parts o f the 
South for well-educated, thoroughly equipped 
young colored men! I could give a number 
of other examples i n confirmation of the 
lesson. Fo r men like Laurence C. Jones 
there are chances wherever there are ignorant people, and when such an one shall 
appear among them it will be quickly seen 
how ready they are to respond to his 
efforts for them. 
A CORN SHOW A T BRAXTON , Robert Gould Shaw House and Its Wor k 
M B y ISABE L EATO N MM 
TWO monuments to Robert 
Gould Shaw are standing in 
his native city to-day: the 
bronze memorial on Boston 
Common and a neighborhood house in the South 
En d which bears his name 
and which, we dare claim, is working in the 
same great cause for which the heroic young 
soldier fell, fifty years ago. on the ramparts, 
o f Fort Wagner—for freedom and justice. 
Inscribed on the Shaw Memorial are 
Emerson's words: 
"Stainless soldier on the walls, 
Knowin g this needs know no more: 
Whoever fights, whoever falls. 
Justice conquers evermore." 
An d the lines might well be written over 
the door of Robert Gould Shaw House as 
its motto, for this house, indeed, has in hand 
a struggle for justice. 
"What is this settlement." we are asked, 
"and what does it do? When did it begin 
and who brought it into being?" 
The initial impulse toward the work now 
going forward at Shaw House came from 
one of America's foremost social workers, 
distinguished among them all for breadth of 
outlook, for wisdom and sincerity, Mr. 
Robert Archey Woods, of South En d House. 
The first step i n the work was taken when 
Mr . Woods discovered, as the result of a 
general survey of the South End , that there 
were several odd corners in which colored 
people were congregated. These little 
colonies were at a considerable distance from 
centers of good influence, and a tentative 
effort to reach these people was made by 
opening a few rooms in the midst of one 
of these recesses. In time, however, the 
question arose why there should not be a 
fully equipped settlement in Boston's great 
central colored community on the border line 
between the South En d and Roxbury. It 
is not to be denied, of course, that while 
nearly all the Boston settlements steadily 
refuse to draw the color line, there has been 
all along a bias on the part of club and 
class members who would often, when 
colored persons did attend settlement gatherings, leave them conspicuously isolated in 
the midst of the company, would comment 
offensively, or otherwise discriminate against 
them. This bias among the American-born 
white members of club organizations acted 
practically to close the doors of settlement 
houses against the colored people; and so 
SHAW HOUSE . 
it came about that on Mr. Woods' initiative 
a group of social workers conferred' and 
decided to establish a settlement house dedicated to the ideal of fair play and equal 
opportunity—a house in which the colored 
people should have first claim, though none 
should be excluded. A n early annual report shows this to have been the spirit of 142 TH E CRISIS 
the founders when it states: "The house 
was established to give colored people the 
same privileges that other settlements are 
giving- people of other races. The house is 
primarily for colored people—that is, giving 
them first consideration, but not excluding 
whites. It aims to bring about the cooperation of both white and colored." 
Afte r one or two experiments the work 
took final shape as a social settlement located 
at 6 Hammond Street, and was authorized 
to use the honored name of Shaw, the man 
who gave his life to champion the rights of 
the Negro-American. His name was taken 
with the cordial consent of the only living 
member of his immediate family, his sister, 
Mrs. Francis C. Barlow, who, in permitting 
its use, as well as by her generous contributions to the work of the house, has 
heartily endorsed the work which the directors and residents are doing in the 
community. 
This much regarding the founding of the 
settlement. The remaining questions commonly 
asked, "What Robert Gould Shaw House is 
and what it does," are easily answered. 
It is a neighborhood house which works 
through clubs and classes, like all settlements. 
It has concerts, parties, dramatics, dances, 
entertainments, lectures and socials, like all 
settlements. It has conferences rather more 
than most settlements, as it has a perplexingproblem to deal with more or less constantly, 
for though it is essentially a neighborhood 
house with doors open to all, it is natural 
that, situated in the midst of a large colored 
population, its clientele is chiefly colored and 
its problems, therefore, those of the colored 
people—how to secure an occupation on a 
basis of individual fitness, and how to make 
a living on this basis, being the chief of 
them. The question of occupation and its 
remuneration is undoubtedly the most conspicuous aspect of the problem facing the 
colored man in Massachusetts, where his 
civil and political rights are customarily secured to him, or, if in some instances denied, 
can always be secured by raising the point 
and fighting the issue. 
The method of work at Shaw House is 
also like that of other settlements. Three 
resident workers—two white and one colored 
—assisted by some forty teachers, paid and 
volunteer, do the work, under the advice and 
direction of a council and governing committee of seventeen members. These three 
residents do much neighborhood visiting, 
and there are at the house classes for girls 
and women in millinery, dressmaking, housekeeping, drawing, pottery, raffia, basketry, 
brasswork, etc.; classes for boys i n brasswork, woodwork, bent iron, chair caning, 
electricity, baseball, basketball; music, dancing and gymnastics for both sexes; a young 
women's orchestra, a boys' orchestra, a 
choral club, the beginning of a music school, 
with a pupil of John Orth as volunteer in ­
structor, a class i n English literature led by 
Miss Baldwin, a class i n stenography and one 
i n French, while a study room with a teacher 
always in charge has been planned for next 
year to help the older boys and girls with 
their home work. 
Among our clubs the Mothers' Club, of 
fifty members, is perhaps the one with 
greatest possibilities for good influence in 
home and neighborhood. A neighborhood 
leagne has been organized at Shaw 
House under the presidency of Mrs. Dora 
Cole Lewis, and has done something toward 
getting cleaner streets and alley's, moralizing 
public parks and co-operating with the 
Women's Municipa l League, the Watch and 
Word and other reform organizations. There 
is a club of fine promise for young girls of 
15 to 18 years and a similar one for young 
men, as well as for younger girls and boys, 
while our troop of Boy Scouts of America 
numbers about forty members, eight of them 
white boys. 
The summer work of Shaw House begins 
directly after the public schools close, the 
house being open summer and winter, and 
running to capacity all the time except 
Saturday afternoons and Sundays. In summer a kindergarten and playroom, with 
sewing, basketry, etc., is i n session every 
morning except Saturday. Also picnics, outings and "country weeks" are arranged for 
our mothers, babies and children. Halfmonth vacations at Groton School camp, 
X . H. , are also secured for some of our 
boys every summer. There are many other 
activities at Shaw House, the description of 
which space forbids, but it is clear from what 
has been said that the house fills a real need 
in our city life. 
Shaw House not only believes i n every 
man's right to earn an honest livin g and to 
enjoy congenial and healthful recreation, but 
it strives to secure these things for him. 
Realizing that "the industrial exclusion is in ROBER T GOUL D SHA W HOUS E AN D ITS WOR K 143 
MEMBER S O r MOTHERS ' 
CLUB . SHA W HOUS E SCOUTS. 
a measure responsible for the social exclusion which often makes the colored people 
so unhappy when they do show themselves in 
gatherings of white people," the house has 
made a beginning in counteracting these 
tendencies. Each year one or more conferences on industrial disability, etc., have 
been held, which have been marked by the 
frankest and most sympathetic interchange 
of opinion between the white and colored 
persons who have attended them, and have 
resulted directly in a number of appointments of competent people to positions rarely 
secured by colored people. Through one 
of our councilors three young colored girls 
have been given positions to do clerical and 
stenographic work, and through a resident, 
three other stenographers have secured 
similar work. Through another councilor 
a colored graduate of the Y . W . C. A . 
course in domestic science has for two years 
done all the catering for Trinity Church and, 
latterly, for the new Episcopal Cathedral 
also, which means constant and well-paid 
employment. Through another councilor 
our scout master and sixteen of our scouts 
were sent to Blue Hills camp, and through 
the influence of still another member of our 
council, backed by Mr. Bradley's own good 
work, the latter has just been appointed to 
a salaried position on the camp staff of 
officers. Another councilor has enabled us 
to give a stock clerk's place to one of our 
boys who was running an elevator at South 
Station, and to advance another boy to a 
place where he has a chance for promotion, 
if he makes good. The council has also appointed on its own residential staff of paid 
social workers Mrs. Hannah C. Smith and 
Miss Josephine Crawford, while a considerable number of the colored friends of 
the house have acted as paid teachers. 
While this is not a long list it is not without promise, and it leaves entirely out of 
account the large number of persons who 
have been placed, through Shaw House, in 
the usual avenues of work. 
A colored woman who knows well what 
have been the relations of the white and 
colored people in Boston assures us that 
nothing in recent years has been so notable 
a step forward, nothing has gone further to 
advance a real sympathy and understanding 
between the best people of the two races, 
than has this series of conferences at Robert 
Gould Shaw House. 
Both the directors and active workers on 
the residential staff are confident that the 
work is making headway in the cause of 
righteous treatment of our colored citizens. 
There is the steady effort and constant aim 
to keep the doors of Shaw House open 
toward the broadening future, and to connect the bright and able and faithful young 
people who come to us with the larger life 
of the community, rich in promise and in 
opportunity, "for who can reach." NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE 
BRANCHES . 
BALTIMORE. 
TH E Baltimore branch announces a series 
of public meetings were held during 
the month of June i n the interest of the 
National Association. Two very successful 
meetings were held i n May , at both of which 
Dr. Mason made addresses. Over 100 new 
members were secured. 
The Baltimore segregation matter, which, 
as already stated in TH E CRISIS, was decided 
by Judge Elliott i n favor of the colored 
people, has been appealed. 
The branch announces that it will continue its work on this case. Mr. Charles A . 
Boston, of the firm of Hornblower, Mille r & 
Potter, of New York , a member of the 
National Association's legal redress committee and of the Maryland bar, has expressed his willingness to co-operate in this 
ease with the Baltimore branch and with Mr. 
William M . Wherry, Jr., the association's 
counsel. 
NE W YORK. 
The New Yor k vigilance committee is 
vigorously pushing cases of discrimination in places of public amusement. Over 
forty-three cases have been reported by complainants and investigated by the executive 
secretary. A number of these were very good 
cases and are on the court calendars to come 
up i n the near future. In all cases the policy 
has been to visit the proprietor and convince 
him that he was violating the law. One case, 
won within the month, has been that of 
Hul l vs.. the 86th Street Amusement Company, which conducts a moving-picture 
theatre on 86th Street, New Yor k City. The 
defendant in this case refused to sell Mr. 
Hul l tickets for any part of the theatre other 
than the topmost gallery. Afte r careful deliberation, Judge Marks, i n the sixth 
district Municipa l Court, rendered a 
decision i n favor of Mr . Hull , giving judgment for $100. The attorneys for Mr . Hul l 
were Messrs. Studin & Sonnenberg. A n 
appeal has been taken by the defendant to 
the appellate term of the Supreme Court, but 
the management of the 86th Street Amusement Company has evidently been decidedly 
impressed by the verdict, for their policy of 
discrimination has been changed i n favor of 
that of admitting colored people to any part 
of their theatres, of which they own several. 
CHICAGO. 
The Chicago branch reports through the 
legislative committee that the intermarriage bills pending i n the Illinois legislature are dead beyond any possibility of 
resurrection at the session now drawing 
rapidly to a close, and that the "full-crew" 
bill has been successfully blocked i n the 
railroad committees of both houses, and in 
all probability will not be reported i n time 
to pass. 
INDIANAPOLIS. 
The Indianapolis branch is investigating 
the condition of colored women i n the 
women's prison. Enthusiastic meetings held 
in Ma y and June were addressed by Dr. 
D u Bois and Dr. Mason. 
QUINCY. 
The Quincy branch last month succeeded 
i n publishing statements i n the white papers 
giving the facts of discrimination. A S OTHER S SE E 145 
TACOMA. 
The Tacoma branch reports most enthusiastic meetings given for Dr. Du Bois 
on his Western tour. Besides the Tacoma 
meetings, at one of which the mayor of 
Tacoma presided, a banquet and reception 
were given for Dr. Du Bois, and lie was presented with a loving cup by members of the 
branch. The members of the branch also 
arranged for meetings in many other Northwestern cities! A n account of the splendid 
activities of this branch in connection with 
Dr. Du Bois' visit will be given later. 
LYNCHING. 
A s a result of the association's work 
in Coatcsville, a hill has been introduced 
into the Pennsylvania legislature which 
charges the damages inflicted by mobs to the 
city or town and automatically dismisses the 
sheriff who loses a prisoner. 
A S OTHER S SE E 
DR. ISAA C N . KENDAL L was a man 
who never gave way in his conviction 
that the Negro should have precisely similar 
opportunities in education with any other 
race. He never faltered in his effort to make 
this an institution of higher education. His 
was a self-forgetting life and for this reason 
he was not as well known as some of the other 
benefactors of the race. Again, he advocated 
the unpopular side—complete courses in, 
languages and science for the Negro—and so 
was looked upon as unpractical. Once more 
he tried to make and keep Lincoln University 
a place of contact between the races, where 
the philanthropic white man could serve on 
the board o f trustees and where the educated 
white man might teach if he wished. Fo r 
this, also, he was criticised. He was called 
narrow, etc. His desire, however, was merely 
to keep intact one of the fast vanishing 
points of contact between the races. He had 
no race feeling whatever and I can personally 
testify that he considered the Negro equal in 
capacity, possibility of culture and ability 
to develop to any race on earth."—Dean 
Johnson, of Lincoln University. 
"We heard the baccalaureate sermon delivered last Sunday by Dr. Johnson, dean of 
Lincoln University, at Haines School, in this 
city. His text was: 'Thou hast brought me 
out into a large place.' A few weeks ago, when 
TH E CRISIS stated that Lincoln University 
had never got to the place where it thought 
any o f its colored graduates worthy ' o f 
teachers' places in that institution, Dr. Johnson wrote Dr. D u Bois asking him please to 
stop sending TH E CRISIS. It is a bad sign 
when a man (any man) stops taking a newspaper simply because he dislikes something 
it says."—The Georgia Baptist, Augusta. 
" I am so delighted with TH E CRISIS. It 
was a most interesting number."—The wife 
of a Northern professor. 
" I am always glad to hear about the good 
things our people are doing and their wonderful progress. I have enjoyed this number 
of TH E CRISIS very much. It is the best 
ever and should be taken by every black man 
and woman in the country."—A black 
woman. 
" I have got five persons who had been 
very much opposed to Negroes to reading 
TH E CRISIS and have one of the largest 
firms in the city (Chicago) that I do business 
with to treat me with more courtesy, and 
likewise other colored people who cross their 
doorsill to do business with them. I wish 
you continued success."—A black man. 
"After my encounter with the dean, a 
fellow with fight in him began sending him 
a marked copy of TH E CRISIS every month. 
Since then his attitude toward me has 
gradually undergone a complete change."— 
A student in the North. 
"Hearty congratulations to TH E CRISIS 
again for the splendid work it is doing."— 
A white social worker. 
"The best piece of propaganda journalism 
in the country."—A white editor. 
"We prize TH E CRISIS very much."— 
President McGranaban, of Knoxville College. 
" " I shall just send information about one 
student, as I feel that we ought to be satisfied to have one representative from Ohio 
State University in the Educational Number 
of our invaluable CRISIS."—A student. 146 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
" I assure you that I appreciate the opportunity to bring our work to the attention of 
the readers of TH E CRISIS."—President 
Ware, of Atlant a University. 
" I read every issue of TH E CRISIS from 
cover to cover, although not a subscriber. I 
hope, however, to become one in the autumn. 
I wish TH E CRISIS every success."—A Yale 
student. 
" I take TH E CRISIS every month from your 
local agent and highly recommend it in my 
church and community. It pleads the cause 
of an oppressed people who cannot in many 
instances plead for themselves. It puts the 
Negro in the true and proper light before the 
world. It counteracts the infamous falsehoods circulated in and by the daily press. 
It manifests the ability of the Negro to produce such a splendid review as TH E CRISIS." 
— A Negro clergyman, Covington, Ky . 
PUBLISHERS ' CHA T 
For the past three months we have been printing 30,000 copies of TH E CRISIS. 
Telegraphic orders for additional copies of the May and June numbers could not 
be filled. This month we print our record edition of 32,000. 
In this year of fiftieth anniversaries—Emancipation, Fort Wagner, etc.— 
TH E CRISIS wants to reach its fiftieth thousand by its third birthday, November 1. It can be done if you help do it. If you have not yet made up your mind 
as to just what TH E CRISIS is and means to the American people, read carefully and ponder over the above letters, then do not delay until the autumn to 
send in your subscription, but forward it now, with as many others as you can get. 
You will thus secure these interesting numbers: 
AUGUS T CALIFORNI A 
SEPTEMBE R TH E NORTHWES T 
OCTOBE R TH E CHILDRE N 
TELLIN G A STOR Y 
T o friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over" to 
strangers is quite different. 
Telling a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch," for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
You r business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch" they won't "pull." 
Correct business stationery is the "punch" that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'l l show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
W e print for Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print Th e CRISIS. 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 147 
No. 4 Special Buggy only $65.00 
HIGHEST GRAD E 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 Profit Margin. 
FRO M FACTOR Y T O USER 
Write for prices and other styles. Send for Catalogue. 
C . R . PATTERSO N & SONS , 
GREENFIELD , OHIO. 
LARGES T NEGR O CARRIAG E CONCER N IN TH E UNITED STATES . 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
113 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressin?, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Intr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
Something New 
Kell y Miller' s 
Monographic Magazine 
Issued monthly. Complete treatment of some phase of the race 
problem in each issue. 
"Education for Manhood" in the 
Apri l number. 
Price, 10 cents a single copy; 25 
cents for three months' subscription; 
$1 per year. 
Rates to agents: 7j4 cents a copy 
on orders under ten; 5 cents a copy 
on orders over fifteen. 
Agents wanted everywhere. On 
account of liberal rates, remittance 
must accompany order. Address 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Washington ----- - D. C. 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
I specialize in every phase of artistic picture making. 
Send me your photos for enlargement. Prices reasonable 
Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phon e 6688 Douglass 
WEB B STUDI O 
3519 State Street Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 148 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which YO U 
have been looking may possibly be here on this page. 
SELLS LIKE HOT CAKES 
Agents wante d 
everywhere to sell 
this ironing wax in 
pad form. It perfumes the clothes 
with a lasting violet 
perfume. 
WAX-IN-PA D MANUFACTURER S 
Lynbrook - New York 
EARN WHIL E YO U LEAR N 
A splendid opportunity for 
ambitious young men and 
women. 
We teach Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping 
and Business Arithmetic, according to the latest 
methods of modern business science. Earnest, 
efficient instructors. 
We also maintain an EMPLOYMEN T BUREA U to 
assist our students and graduates in securing positions. Many of them now hold steady positions 
with some of New York's largest business houses. 
The service of the Bureau is FREE . Correspondence 
invited. Address 
Harlem Commercial School 
T. WALTE R MOTTLEY , Principal 
110 West 139th Street ... . New York 
ii r WANTE D ~w: 
Men "and women everywhere to start pleasant, 
profitable home work. Manufacture toilet articles, 
perfumes and household specialties. I start you 
right and give free advice one year. Send for my 
list, select any three formulas, mail to me with $1, 
and get formulas and plain, complete directions. I 
guarantee satisfaction or money back. List and 
valuable information free. Fourteen years' practical chemistry. Address 
HARVE Y L. PITTMAN , Manufacturing Chemist 
618 Fifth Avenue, East - - - Duluth, Minn. 
SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents, male or female, are wanted everywhere to take orders for our high-grade calling 
cards, invitations, etc. We are furnishing highgrade calling cards in correct styles and sizes for 
ladies or gentlemen at 50 cents for 100 or 25 cents 
for 50; no extra charge for address. Big demand 
everywhere. Liberal commissions allowed. Outfit 
free. Exclusive territory given. Write now for 
terms. 
TH E HOUS E OF CHOWNING 
Indianapolis ... . Indiana 
WANTED—ON E MA U OR WOMA N IN EVER Y 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Best paying 
small business on earth 1 Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Write for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
Folding BAT H TU B 
Costs little, no plumbing , requires little water. 
Weight 15 pounds, an d folds into 6mall roll. 
Full length baths, for botter than tin tubs. L*st« for 
Write for special •gente offer and description. RJIIUMHON 
1 Vanc e S t Toledo, 0. Mfru. Turklah B»th Cabinet*. 
VENTRILOQUISM 
TanRht Almost Anyone at Home . Small coat. Send today 2c stamp 
for particulars and proof. 0. A. SMITH, Room R 103, 823 BlgelowSt.. PEORIA, ILL. 
LEAR N PIAN O B Y EA R 
I N A WEEK Write F. W. LITT E 
192 46,h Street, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Madam My toilet articles will add the 
Ilfl51|15l | 1 final touch of refinement and 
I'*******" * good taste to your dressing table 
Earle's Skin and Complexion Food $ .25 
Princess Hair Oil SO 
La Quinine Hair Tonic 50 
Antiseptic Toilet Water 25 
Earle's French Bay Rum 25 
Earle's Violet Extract 35 
Earle's Violet Water 50 
Earle's Lilac Water 50 
Agents wanted everywhere. Write for terms. 
JAMES T. EARL E 
Manufacturing Perfumer 
5 Collins Street Newport, R. I. 
JUS T THIN K O F I T 
Gordon Safety Razors made to retail for 25c. Shaves 
as smoothly as some of the highf-priced razors 
Splendid seller. Will last a lifetime. Sample, 10c. 
GORDON COMPAN Y 
Northwestern Building Chicago, HI. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: 
E . A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 149 
PLACE S T O STO P 
RIGHT ON TH E BEACH ! 
or e Hote l 
Open from May to October 
The best summer hotel with the 
most delightful surroundings. 
Situated on Chesapeake Bay, right 
on the beach, three miles, from Fortress Monroe, Va . 
A charming location, a fine and safe 
bathing beach and good fishing. 
Thirty-two bedrooms, spacious parlors, broad piazzas and a large 
pavilion. 
The hotel has just been greatly improved by the addition of several 
bedrooms, baths, porches and an upto-date kitchen. 
Our patrons will be delighted with 
"Dear old Bay Shore" enlarged and 
beautified. 
No restless nights here, for the 
breezes blow while you sleep. Terms 
moderate. Address 
TH E BA Y SHOR E HOTE L CO. 
P. O. Box 364, Hampton, Va. 
J. Henry Robinson, Manager 
Good trolley car service between the 
hotel and Hampton, Fortress Monroe 
and Newport News. 
HOTE L COMFOR T 
MBS . M . B. COMFORT, Proprietress 
The ideal summer resort—open all the year 
Corner Second St. and Bay Ave. - - Ocean City, N. J . 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, 111. 
BISHOP COLLEGE . MARSHALL , TEX . 
Maintains college, academic, theological, musical, normal 
grammar and industrial departments. Offers the most advanced courses and is the best-eQuJpped school for Negroes in 
the Southwest. For Information address 
C. H. MAXSON , President 
ARCHITECT S 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H. HENR Y HARRIS 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment tor teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Sti. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
J e w e t t s, $11.50 each; 
Franklins, Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. All guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Park Row, New York 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August. 
Box 25, Wilberforee University 
Wilberforee, O. 
REPRESENTATIVE S WANTE D 
A number of bright young men and women wanted 
at once to represent us in their communities. A 
splendid opportunity for energetic young people. 
From $25 to $45 easily made by ordinary young 
person willing to work. Double that amount can 
easily be made by the right kind of young people. 
Address the 
NO RTHW B STER N EXTENSIO N UNIVERSIT Y 
207 South Sixth Street - - Minneapolis, Minn. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Agents , Look ! 
$60.0 0 
WEE K 
Selling our Beacon Lights, W . E . Burg -
hardt D u Bois, Booke r T . Washington , 
Littl e Shepher d an d 12 othe r Negr o 
pictures. Exclusiv e territory given. Por ­
traits, 16 x 20 frames, 14 cents. Pillow tops 
Address BERLI N AR T ASSOCIATIO N 
(Established 1898) 
Department C 233 North Fifth Ave., Chicago, 111. 
Mrs. DAIS Y TAPLE Y 
Teacher of voice and piano, will take a limited 
number of pupils during the summer months. 
Choruses trained, soloists coached. Engagements 
for concerts solicited. For terms and appointments 
address the studio: 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK 
t 
Telephone Connection 
, "DEACON " JOHNSON 
(That Cheerful Entertainer) 
Leader, Mandolin and Second Tenor with 
TH E "DEACON " JOHNSON QUARTE T 
Montreal New York Philadelphia 
Permanent Address: 
Times Sq. Sta., Box 317, New York City 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dram at ic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte liethod. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
EDglish Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio: 231 W. 134th St. New York City 
Mme . MARI E JACKSO N STUART' S 
School of Expression, Music and Dramatic Art 
A thorough, well-defined course of instruction, 
designed to give the student a comprehensive grasp 
of each subject in the shortest time. Terms 
reasonable. 
Drama* staged. Amateurs trained. Plays revised. 
ADDRES S 
35 West 131st Street ... . New York 
Miss MINNI E BROW N 
SOPRANO 
May be engaged for commencements, concerts and 
recitals For terms address: 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK 
Care of Tapley Studio 
TH E EQUITABL E ASSURANC E 
SOCIET Y O F OKLAHOM A 
Incorporated and licensed by the Insurance 
Department of the State of Oklahoma to write life, 
health and accident insurance on the level premium 
basis. No assessments. Address Home Office 
Peoples Bank & Trust Company Bldg. 
Muskogee ------ - Oklahoma 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 151 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
BBF* If you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 2546 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-2161 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
117 W. 6th Street Kansas City, Mo. 
FRANKLI N W. WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public -
Real Estate Conveyancer 
206 Parrish Street Durham, N. C. 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone, 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
BROW N S. SMITH 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Attorney-a t-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOOL STRBB T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-a t-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M. 
Residence, New 733-A. 
THOS . E. GREENE , JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary PuhUc 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
Menti 
LEGA L DIRECTORY—Continued 
Telephones: 
Central 104W 
Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVIS 
Attomey-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Bldg. Cleveland, O. 
ELIJA H J . GRAHAM , Jr. 
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
1026 Market Street Wheeling, W. Va . 
William H . Austin Edmund O. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTI N & AUSTI N 
St. Paul Building, 220 Broadway, New York 
Suite 7—H, I, ,T, K 
Telephones: 7400, 5365, 5366 Cortlandt 
Telephone 5552 Cedar 
R. O. LE E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Practice in All Courts 
25 and 26 Union Block, 4th & Cedar, St. Paul, Minn. 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningside 
DR. D. W. ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W. Cor. 133d St. and Lenox Ave., New York 
Office Honrs: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Snndays by Appointment 
Telephone 4048 Prospect 
JOH N B. MOSELE Y 
REA L ESTATE and INSURANCE 
640 Fulton Street Brooklyn, N. Y. 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertaken and Embalmeri 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 Welt 63d Street New York, N. Y. 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPING 
ANDRE W J . BRANI 0 
469 SEVENT H AVENU E New York City 
Orders by mall or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V. B. A. 
TH E CRISIS. 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapter I. Ho w the colored people won their civil and political rights. 
Chapters II. and III. The Negro tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV. and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living, with a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . The colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivid description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapter VIII . The Negro in politics in New York . 
Chapter IX . The author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of The Crisis, 26 Vesey St., N . Y . 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim : To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department ; "when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional 
endowment needed, $50,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 36th and Dearborn Sts., Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 153 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 26 Vc*ey Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25, 191 1 
OFFICER S 
National President—Mr. Moorneld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr . John E . Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller, Baltimore, Md. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Vlllard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W. E . B. Du Bois, New York. 
National Organizer—Dr. M . C. B. Mason, Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss May Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which TH E CRISI S puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY , join this 
Association and help us to put our words into 
DEEDS . . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2.. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 154 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
$1.25 WORT H FOR $1.00 
An d a Teaspoo n FRE E 
T o introduc e ou r high-grad e 
teas an d coffees int o ever y home 
w e will , for $1, send to an y ad ­
dress, b y prepai d parce l post, 
1 pound Superior Blen d Coffee. 
1/2 pound Choic e Mixe d Tea . 
1/4 poun d Groun d Spice (your 
choice) 
an d a handsomely engraved 
Roger s teaspoon. Guar ­
anteed 10 years. 
LADY AGENTS WANTED; dignified work; 
everybody drinks tea and coffee. Good 
commission. Handsome premiums free. 
Write Department A . 
KANISTE R TE A & COFFE E 
COMPAN Y 
"Modern Day Service in Cup Quality" 
681 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn, N . Y . 
If You Plan to Visit 
New York This Summer 
For study, sightseeing or pleasure 
and desire quiet, respectable accommodations with the bes t 
privat e families, write the 
Housing Bureau of the National 
League on Urban Conditions 
Amon g Negroes, at 127 W . 135th 
Street, New York. 
Our Service Is Absolutely FREE 
We will do you r typewritin g 
an d save yo u money . 
These s an d lega l papers 
promptl y an d accuratel y executed . 
Send us your manuscripts. 
We'l l typewrit e them—hav e the m 
revised , if necessary—an d hel p 
3-ou get the m place d wit h 
publishers. 
Send us your song poems. 
We'l l have the m set to musi c an d 
tell yo u ho w an d wher e to ge t 
them published . 
W e construc t circulars, follow -
up letters an d advertisements 
whic h create business. 
ANIN' S SERVIC E BUREA U 
115 Nassau St. - - - New Yor k 
The new odorless disinfectant at 
less than one-quarter cent per gallon. 
Safe, efficient, economical. 
The only disinfectant that absolutely destroys any odor without leaving another. "U-Zit " is just starting. 
Start with it. Antiseptic and harmless. 
One teaspoonful makes three gallons. 
Ho t or cold water. 
"U-Zit" for scrubbing. "U-Zit" for 
dishwashing. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning woodwork, 
windows, refrigerators. 
"U-Zit" for thoroughly disinfecting 
toilets, etc. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning the barn, 
dairies, etc. 
"U-Zit" to kill all germs and better 
preserve health. 
"U-Zit" is guaranteed to be as represented or money refunded. Sample 
test free. Can we be of service to 
you? Personal references given. 
"U-Zit" is put up in cans and retailed 
for the small sum of $1 per pound. 
Special five-pound can, $4, F. O. B. 
Chicago. Terms, thirty days. Address 
U-ZIT SPECIALTIES CO. 
3726 S. Dearborn St., Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS PRINTYP E RECEIVES THE PLAUDITS 
OF THE PUBLIC 
Vigilan t 
Haile d 
of Enthusiastic Admirers 
Responds with Becoming 
Protector of People's Eyesight 
as a Benefactor by Man y Thousands 
'Officer Printype " 
Modesty. 
Officer Printype says: "I am overwhelmed by the 
ovation which has greeted my appearance in your 
midst. I am simply doing my sworn duty in ridding 
the Business and Financial Districts of the Bad 
Characters that for years have made Typewriters 
a menace to your eyesight. I have mercilessly 
exposed and relentlessly pursued these dangerous 
Typewriter Types, which are responsible for more 
cases of Defective Vision than all other causes 
combined. 
"Report direct to my headquarters in the Oliver 
Typewriter Building, Chicago, any machine whose 
type is violating the Optical Law and I'll have the 
offender haled before the Court of Public Opinion." 
PRINTYPE 
OLIVER 
Printype is owned and controlled 
exclusively by The Oliver Typewriter Company 
America rings with praise and applause for 
Printype. 1 his superb new typewriter type lias 
attracted more at ten tion than any typewriter 
innovation brought out in recent years. 
Hundreds of thousands of people have seen 
this new type anil wondered what it was that 
marie Printype Corres pondence seem like a 
spoken message. There's virility, strength and 
charm in Printype correspondence. There's 
refinement an«l "class" and style. 
Not because of its novelty—it's inherent in 
the type! 
A VAS T IMPROVEMEN T 
Printype is designed in shaded letters and 
numeral-, like the type in winch books and 
magazines are printed. Jt is book type transformed and adapted to modern typewriter 
requirements. 
This radical departure from the old style 
"outline" letters makes it possible to produce, 
on The Oliver Typewriter, a page of manuscript 
as clear and attractive as that of the finest 
hook. The Oliver is the first and only typewriter 
that successfully prints print! 
TH E PRIMAR Y REASO N 
Printype resulted from our discovery that 
"outline" type, with its sameness, due to absence 
of shading, was harmful to the eyes. 
TH E SILEN T TES T 
For months, without any advertising, we put 
hundreds of Printype Oliver Typewriters into 
actual service, in many divers lines of business. 
We wanted the public's verdict. It came in a 
burst of admiration and a flood of orders that 
proved Printype a brilliant success. 
Printype letters, whenever seen, excited the 
keenest interest. Business men who received 
their first Printype letter almost invariably 
answered, post haste—"Where did you get that 
type:'" Thus Printype captured the country 
without firing a single shot. 
PRIC E NO T ADVANCE D 
The Printype Oliver Typewriter sells for $100. 
You can pay at the rate of 17 cents a day. The 
"Printypcr" is our latest and best model. The 
new type adds 25 per cent, to the value, but not 
one cent to the price. A small cash payment 
brings the machine. (-48) 
SEND PRINTYPE COUPON NOW! 
If you or anyone 
in whom you arc interested c o n t e mplate going to a 
Business College, 
write us first and we 
will, without charge, 
supply you wit h 
some very valuable 
information on the 
subject. 
The Ol iver Typewriter Company, 
310 Broadway, New York, N. Y . 
Tell Officer "Printype" to write me 
a letter and send me his Book. I'm 
interested. 
Name 
.address 
Mention TH E CKISIS. £ \ CAF E MAY , N. J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
3£ patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
<^r> ladies and children. Send for booklet. E . W. DALE , Owner. 
S
OUTHERN 
RAILWA Y 
Premie r Carrie r of the Sout h 
The Nation's Highway of Trave l from 
the North, East and West to the cities 
of the Southland—Asheville, "Th e Lan d 
of the Sky, " Columbia, Aiken, Augusta , 
Charleston, Summerville, Savannah, 
Brunswick, Jacksonville, St. Augustine, 
Palm Beach, Atlanta, Birmingham, 
Mobile, New Orleans, Chattanooga, 
Memphis. The most direct route from 
New York to Texas, Mexico, California, Panama and Cuba. 
Quickest Time Finest Service Luxurious Trains 
Fo r literature, rates and complete in ­
formation apply to 
ALE X S. THWEAT T 
Eastern Passenger Agent 
264 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Cor. 29th Street Telephone 2214 Madison Square 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 