GREA T NORTHWEST NUMBER 
O F 
TH E CRISIS 
SEPTEMBER TEN CENTS 
"1913 A COPY STAT E O F NE W YOR K 
The Emancipation Proclamation 
Commission 
O F TH E STAT E O F NE W YOR K 
WIL L HOL D A NATIONA L 
EMANCIPATIO N EXPOSITIO N 
I N NE W YOR K CIT Y 
OCTOBE R 22-31 , 191 3 
Fo r information address the Commission at its offices 
Corne r of 7th Avenue and 131st Street, Ne w Yor k City 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted b y 
W. E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S G . DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents for September, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE. From Photo by Scurlock. 
Page 
CARTOON. By Lorenzo W. Harris 247 
ARTICLE S 
TH E GREA T NORTHWEST 237 
SEGREGATION. By a Veteran Civil Service Clerk 242 
NOCTURNE. A Poem. By Alice Hathaway Cunningham 243 
GETTING OF F TH E COLOR LINE. By Jose Clarana 244 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 215 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 222 
OPINION 224 
EDITORIA L 232 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPL E 241 
WHA T TO READ. By Jessie Fauset 248 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired_ 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. • 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 212 TH E CRISIS 
"I n the Heart of the Healthy Hills " 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
NORMAL, ALABAM A 
Make s a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out thei r own salvation. It gives breadwinner s a chance to go to 
school and so puts a first-clasa Englis h education and 
a trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose . 
Board , lodging and washing cost $9 per month. 
A n entrance fee of $10 covers medicine , hospita l 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the firBt Monda y in Octobe r and 
closes the last Thursda y in May . 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President 
Morehous e College 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly 
development—the only institution in the far 
South devoted solely to the education of 
Negro young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by 
greatest Northern universities. Debating, 
Y. M . C. A., athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
ADVERTISE R 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 H. H. Wright, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifull y located i n the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
ma l School and College, with manua l trainin g 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth , Smit h 
and Wellesley. Forty-two yearB of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal , Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Goo d water, steam heat, electri c lights, good 
drainage . Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1913. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of hig h standards and 
modern curriculum . 
A Theologica l Department, with all subjects 
generally require d in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy , with manua l training , giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entranc e and of cla^s 
work, its fine new building s an d well-equipped 
laboratorie s and librar y prepar e a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RICE HOVEY , President 
Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Open all the year'. Fall 
term begins September 1, 
1913. Best opportunities 
for Negro youth. Board, 
lodging and tuition, $7 per 
month. Write to-day for 
catalo g or free tuition. 
Addres s JAME S B. 
DUDLEY , President 
Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 213 
Virgini a Theological Seminary and 
College, Lynchburg , Va . 
COLLEG E O F LIBERA L ART S — Standard 
Bachelo r of Arts Cours e (B.A.) . Scientific Cours e 
leading to the degree Bachelo r of Scienc e (B,SO -
THEOLOGICA L SEMINARY — Wit h full theological course leading to degree of Bachelo r of 
Divinit y (B.D.) , includin g Greek, Hebrew, Sociology 
and Social Psychology . 
ACADEMI C COURSE — Whic h prepare s for college, teaching and professional schools. 
NORMA L DEPARTMENT — Offerin g special training to teachers. Doin g extensive work in Pedagogy 
and Education . Co-educational. 
Thre e hundre d and five students last year , repre ­
senting fifteen States, South and West Coast Africa , 
South Americ a and Britis h West Indies. 
Strong , efficient, experienced faculty. 
ROBERT C. WOODS, President. 
The Downingtown Industrial 
and Agricultural School 
Will begin its ninth session 
September 16, 1913 
Higher English, Trades, Agriculture, 
Domestic Science, Dressmaking, Millinery, 
Typewriting, Stenography, Music, etc. 
Address all communications to Wm. A. 
Creditt, President, 628 S. 19th Street, Philadelphia, Pa., or B. C. Burnett, Secretary, 
Downingtown, Pa. 
School of Medicine of 
Howard University 
INCLUDING MEDICAL, DENTA L AND 
PHARMACEUTICA L COLLEGES 
1867-1913 
Edward A. Balloch, M. D., Dean 
William C. McNeill, M. D., Secretary 
The forty-sixth annual session will begin 
October 1, 1913, and continue eight months. 
The medical college of Howard University 
is now recognized by the British authorities 
and its graduates are admitted to the final 
examinations on the same conditions as the 
graduates 'from other recognized medical 
colleges. 
Advanced requirements for admission to 
the medical college. 
Four years' graded course in medicine. 
Three years' graded course in dental 
surgery. 
Three years' graded course in pharmacy. 
Full corps of instructors, well-equipped 
laboratories, unexcelled hospital facilities. 
For further information or catalog, write 
W. C. McNEILL, M. D., Secretary 
Fifth and W Sts., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Inter-State Industrial College 
We Trai n the Head , Hear t and Han d 
One hundred and fifteen acres of land Bitv/ated in 
healthy climate. Capabl e faculty ; efficient work in 
industria l and literary training . Dormitorie s for 
hoys and girls. Assistanc e for deserving poor. 
Interdenominational contributions solicited. 
RUFUS S. STOUT, President 
Texarkana - Texas 
Morgan College and Branches 
JOH N O. SPENCER , President 
MORGA N COLLEGE , Baltimore , Md . 
LOCATION : Centra l in great college town between 
Nort h and South. 
COURSES : Preparatory , Normal , Music , Advance d 
Education , Collegiate, Appropriat e Degrees. 
INSTRUCTORS : College and Universit y trained. 
Seven Colleges and Universitie s represented in 
Faculty . 
DORMITORIES : Fo r a limited number , furnished. 
TERMS : Ver y reasonable. 
DEAN : Rev. Charle s Edmun d Young , D . Jj. 
PRINCES S ANN E ACADEMY , Princess Anne , Md . 
(The Easter n branch of the Marylan d Agricultura l 
College.) 
LOCATION : Th e famous Easter n shore of Mary ­
land, Somerset County . 
COURSES : Preparatory , Normal , Industrial, Do ­
mestic Science, Music . 
INSTRUCTORS : Collegiate and Technicall y trained. 
DORMITORIES : Carefull y supervised, furnished. 
TERMS : Fre e tuition; other expenses moderate. 
PRINCIPAL : Rev. Thoma s H . Kiah , A . B . 
VIRGINI A COLLEGIAT E and INDUSTRIA L 
INSTITUTE , Lynchburg . Va . 
LOCATION : O n beautiful hill, suburbs of growing 
city. 
COURSES : Preparatory , Normal, Domesti c Science, 
Gardening , Music . 
INSTRUCTORS : College trained ; carefully selected. 
DORMITORIES : Furnished ; steam heat; accommodations for 50 girls; carefully supervised. 
TERMS : Withi n the reach of all. 
PRINCIPAL : Fran k Trigg , A . M . 
AL L SCHOOL S OPE N SEPTEMBE R 29, 1913 
WH Y not enroll your son or daughte r in the 
Berean Manua l Trainin g and Industria l 
School, which has for its object the training of the head, hand and heart of our youth, thus 
fitting them for the practica l requirements of everyday life? 
Da y and night sessions. 
Fou r Departments: Domesti c Art, Domesti c 
Science, Industria l Art, Academi c and Musical . 
Printin g and Plumbing ; special new trades for 
the boys. 
Comfortabl e dormitor y facilities for both girls 
and boys on the premises. 
Non-resident students are required to board in 
the dormitories. 
A well-equipped gymnasium for use of the 
students. 
A n improved Literar y Cours e for day students. 
Fal l term and 15th year opens Tuesday , Octobe r 
7, 1913. 
Writ e Matthew Anderson, Principal . 
BEREA N MANUA L TRAININ G AN D INDUSTRIA L 
SCHOO L 
South College Avenu e - - - Philadelphia , Pa . 
Familie s 
£25-$30 ; cooks, $30-
$30$35 ; chamberwaitresses, $25-$30. 
^•ftr,n • useful m«n. 
COLORE D HEL P WANTE D 
Privat e ramilie s 
Houseworkers, $25 
$50 ; laundresses, 
maids, $25-$28; wait 
Als o butlers, $35-$B0; useful men 
$25-$35; couples, $55-$75. 
Appl y with references. • 
N . Y . & N . J . Industria l Exchang e 
Mille r Building , Room 302, Thir d Floo r 
1931 Broadway , Corne r 65th St. 
Mrs. E . Marrow , Mgr . New Yor k Cit y 
Positively Leadin g Agenc y for Colored Hel p 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 214 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACING 
AND VOICEDEVELOPMENT 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breat h 
i n Singing , Tryin g the Voice , the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano , the 
Contralto , Teno r Leggier o or Hig h 
Tenor , the Baritone , the Bass, 
Parts of the Voca l Apparatus, the 
Mouth , the Tongue , Positio n Whe n 
Practising , Positio n Whe n Singing , 
Ho w to Practice , Goo d Rule s for 
Singing . 
Comment fro m the world-renowned conductor or" 
the Paulist Choi r of Chicago, 111., whose choi r has 
just received the first priz e awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. TInsley: 
"I take great pleasure In commending your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially yours, 
' 'Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P.. 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: " A very practical little 
book la 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' by Pedro T. 
Tinsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be In the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly his 
'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
cannot fail to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Sinc e I practised you r exercises of 'Tone-Placin g 
and Voice-Development' m y voice is mor e resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice.'' Prof. Joh n T . Layton , 
Directo r Coleridge-Taylo r Musica l Society, 1722 10th 
St., N . W. , Washington, D . C. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher : PEDR O T . TINSLE Y 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL . 
FREEShotGun 
.FULL CHOKE 
1 
a 
i 
Hammerless, 
Double-Barrel Shot 
Gun—very superior. Fitted with 
top snap-break, bar side locks, forged 
frame, case hardened locks and frames. 
Nicely finished, highly polished stock and 
fore end. Polished blued steel barrels; 
choke bored, 12 Gauge and either 30 or 32 
inch barrels. Well balanced and accurate. 
A perfect beauty. The same model used by 
some of the best shots in the country. We give it mm som e o i tne Dest snots i n cne couniry . vvegivei L » 
5 Absolutely FREE to Our Agents 2 E
HUdi/nuci y rnk L iw vu i Mgcm a • 
Al l that we require is that you show our fl 
samples and take a few orders for our 
special made-to-measure clothes. We 
pay highest cash profits and give extra 
presents besides. Your choice of 628 
valuable premiums—such as Leather Suit 
Cases, Musica l Instruments, Pipes, 
Watches, Sporting Goods, Hats, etc. 
Write for elegant free outfit and full particulars 
H
SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept . S46 , CHICAG O • 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
1 
I 
1 
SHEE T MUSI C 
3 Big Hits—10 Cents 
Popula r selections at wholesale. T o introduc e our 
proposition we wil l send THRE E BIG- HIT S FO R 
10c , postpaid. 
KELLER , ROBINSO N & MON K 
36 W . 118th Street Ne w Yor k 
MAK E 
EXTRA MONEY 
EAC H WEE K 
In a light, pleasant and profitable work. We 
want a good colored pereon(male or female) 
In every colored community to take orders 
for our high-grade calling cards. We are 
furnishing theBe cards at 50c per 100 or25c for 
50 cards with name and^address. We allow 
our agents a liberal commission on all orders 
they send in You are sure to make a success 
of this work for calling cards are in great demand everywhere Outfit furnished free. Ex ­
clusive territory given. Write now for terms 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNIHG 
Dosk 21 INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
$2,000 in Five Weeks! 
Made by one Robinson salesman. You—yourself—can positively 
make $00 and expenses every week. I want men like you, 
hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, anxious to make money, 
who are willing to work with me. Not for me. but with me. 
I want you to advertise, sell and appoint local agents for the 
biggest, most sensational seller in 50 years—the ROBINSON 
FOLDING BAT H TUB. Here's an absolutely new Invention 
that has taken the entire country by storm. Nothing else 
like it. Gives every home a modern up-to-date bathroom in 
any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. 
Folds In small roll, handy as an umbrella. Self-emptying and 
positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 5 years. 
Hustlers—east, north, west, south—coining money. Orders, 
orders, everywhere. Badly wanted, eagerly bought, for, remember, fully 70% of homes have no bathrooms. Immense profits 
for you. Two sales a day means $300 a month. Here's 
proof—real proof. Will Gunckel, Ohio, got $240 worth of 
orders first week. A. Bernider, Kansas, made $30 In four 
hours. Hamlinton, of Wyo.. made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, permanent, fascinating work. 
This Is not idle talk. Make me prove it. Write a postcard. Let me write you a long letter. Then decide. No experience needed, no capital. Tour credit Is good if you mean 
business. But you must be ambitious, you must want to 
make money. That's all. Write a postcard now. I want 
to pay you sixty dollars every week. 
Sales Mgr. , THE ROBINSON MFG. CO. 
HI Vance Street Toledo, Ohio 
Mention T H E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 6—No. 5 SEPTEMBER . 1913 Whole No. 35 
POLITICS. 
GABE E . PARKER , the alleged Cboctaw Indian, whose appointment as 
Registrar of the Treasury has been confirmed, "may have more Negro blood than 
Patterson, if he is not a white man," says 
a colored man who has seen some of the 
"Indians" in Oklahoma. If this be the case 
it is to be hoped that the Negro blood in 
these men came from different tribes, for 
Patterson's, as shown by his declination of 
the place which Parker got, must be of a 
very anaemic quality. 
^ The appointment of a white man from 
Missouri to the office of United States Min ­
ister to Haiti marks the complete surrender 
of President Wilson to Vardaman, etc., in 
the matter of official recognition of the 
Negro. To be consistent with their segregation policy, the President's advisers should 
oppose this nomination, for it is inconceivable that a true-blue Southern gentleman and a Democratic politician can overstep the color line far enough to accept the 
"social equality with Niggers" without 
which there can be no American diplomatic 
intercourse with Haiti. 
Perhaps the people of the black republic 
will intimate to Mr. Wilson that a white 
man is persona non grata with them. Some 
years ago, when Roosevelt was considering 
the name of a colored man for Santo 
Domingo, a deputation of Dominicans, who 
all and always want to be considered white, 
called at the White House and informed 
the President that their government did not 
care to accept a Negro minister. Some 
days later, when Roosevelt for the first 
time saw the blue-eyed, pink-cheeked, disappointed- candidate for Santo Domingo, 
he exclaimed: "Why, are you a colored 
man 1 If I had seen you in time you 
would have had the appointment, for you 
are whiter than most of them down there." 
This particular Negro is "whiter" than 
Vardaman also, and his ancestry may show 
him to be more of an Anglo-Saxon than 
the Senator from Mississippi. 
^ For a number of years a colored man, 
while exercising tremendous influence as the 
power behind the throne in the appointment of Negroes to office and enjoying 
political power and privileges which were 
the legacy of men like Frederick Douglass 
and Wright Cuney, whose fearless and uncompromising advocacy of unrestricted 
Negro suffrage made • it possible for the 
black man's vote to become a thing of 
value to the Republican party and the black 
man's complaint one that had to be heeded, 
went about the country telling all the people that colored men should have nothing to 
do with politics. A few months ago, when 
a Negro newspaper correspondent forecasted 
the Wilson Negro policy in a letter to the 
New York Times, that most influential 
mouthpiece of Southern reaction jauntily 
replied:' "The Negroes of the United States 
are doing very well. Thanks to the leadership of men like Booker T. Washington, 
they have become a law-abiding and industrious race and their interests are not centered in politics or officeholding. If 
President Wilson is doing precisely what 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 216 TH E CRISIS 
Mr. Allen accuses him of doing (i. e., 
'closing the political door of hope against 
the Negro'), he will meet with no opposition from men like Doctor Washington, 
who have the interests of the race at heart." 
But Negroes were no less industrious and 
law abiding twenty-five years ago than they 
are to-day, and it cannot be denied that 
Frederick Douglass and Wright Cuney, who 
might have left the NegToes and become 
white, always had all the interests of all 
the Negroes at heart. Cuney lived in 
Texas, but no one ever hurt him for telling 
all the people all the time that Negroes 
should vote. When he was appointed collector of the port of Galveston he did not 
decline the nomination because of the opposition of white men all over the South, 
except those who knew him in his home 
town, and yet, when he died, the professional Nigger haters hastened to do him 
honor, as the whole country had honored 
Frederick Douglass. Neither of these men 
ever counseled the surrender of the political 
rights of the Negro. No man who advises 
the black man to sacrifice his well-earned 
franchise can have the interests—the best 
interests—of the colored race at heart. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE New York emancipation commission has been progressing rapidly 
with its preparations for the exposition 
next month. Monroe N . Work, statistician 
of Tuskegee Institute and compiler of the 
Negro Year Book, has been making the 
charts and graphic exhibits of the Negro's 
rapid development, which will be a prominent feature of the exposition. The clergy 
throughout the State are helping in the 
work of publicity. Mrs. Mary W. Talbert, 
of Buffalo, and Mrs. W . R. Lawton, of 
New York, have been actively and successfully directing the women's department. A 
corps of organizers are gathering exhibits 
and exhibitors throughout the State. 
^ The New Jersey commission is weathering its difficulties and hopes to make a 
splendid display at Atlantic City in October, and not this month, as originally 
planned. A special feature of the exposition will he the chorus of 1,000 voices and 
an orchestra of thirty pieces, under the 
direction of Mr. Evermont P. Robinson. 
The program includes a Coleridge-Taylor 
night, when "Hiawatha" will be rendered. 
and another evening will be devoted to the 
music of other composers. 
^ The Pennsylvania exposition takes place 
during the whole of this month. The Illinois commission has been busy in its work 
for the State exposition, and a company 
has been organized at Springfield, Ill., to 
promote a national Negro exposition in 
1915. 
«J The United States Patent Office at Washington, D. C , lias appealed for information 
about the names and work of colored 
inventors. 
*I There will be a Negro day at the Na ­
tional "conservation congress at Knoxville, 
Tenn. The congress lasts from September 
to November. The Negro exhibit is housed 
in a beautiful building, and the promoters 
of the congress have announced that "Negroes will positively be admitted to every 
building and amusement in the exposition 
grounds." 
<I The Colored Cricketers of America, a 
team of West Indians, were defeated by an 
Australian team in a two-clay match at 
Celtic Park, L . I. 
<I Mrs. E . J. Wheatley, of Baltimore, 
started a campaign which resulted in the 
closing of 163 saloons in that city. Mrs. 
Wheatley has also been instrumental in 
relieving the congestion in colored schools 
by securing for colored children a halfempty school used by whites. 
^ The current issue of the Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social 
Science, of Philadelphia, is devoted to 
"Fift y Years of Negro Progress." Members of the staff of TH E CRISIS have contributed articles on "Negro Literature" and 
"The Negro and the Immigrant in the Two 
Americas: A n International Aspect of the 
Color Problem." Monroe N . Work also 
contributed a statistical account of the advance of the colored people. 
1 The Frogs, the New York association of 
colored theatrical performers, began in that 
city a one-week series of successful entertainments. The proceeds of these performances will go to a fund for recording the 
achievements of colored people in science 
and art. 
§ Mr. F . H . M . Murray has delivered at 
Howard University and at several of the 
churches in Washington, D. C , an illustrated lecture on "Black Folk in Art. " ALON G TH E 
MEETINGS . 
THE National Negro Business League 
assembled in Philadelphia, where the 
city council had contributed $5,000 toward 
its entertainment. 
^ The fourteenth annual convention of the 
I. B. P. 0. E . W . was held in Atlantic 
City during- the last week in August. 
*J At the fiftieth anniversary celebration of 
the battle of Fort Wagner, which took place 
in Boston, Mr. A . E. Pillsbury made a 
stirring address, from which we quote the 
following: 
"How is it possible to account for this 
monstrous treatment of the Negro? Have 
the American people no honor or sense of 
justice'? Yes, they have a sense of honor 
and of justice, but away down below it, 
deeper and stronger in the average man 
than his sense of justice are his prejudices, 
unworthy it may be, unwarrantable, despicable, but inexorable as the grave. The 
Negro is the victim of what is perhaps the 
meanest and the most universal trait of 
human nature. Yo u cannot convince it. 
Yo u cannot reason with it. No law or laws 
will control it. You cannot, as a rule, make 
laws in the face of a public prejudice, and 
if made they cannot be enforced. The only 
thing you can do with prejudice is to live 
it down. This will require infinite patience 
and infinite courage, but it can be done. 
The meanest man will come to a sense of 
shame if you give him reasons enough and 
time enough. 
"It is, in my opinion, no friend of the 
colored race who preaches dependence upon 
the white man, or holds out any promise or 
expectation of' justice from him, or tells 
them to look to the white man, North or 
South, for their rights. The fate of the 
colored race is now in its own hands. You 
will get your rights when you are fit to 
have them, for when you are fit to have 
them you will take them, and until you 
take them you are not fit to have them. 
There is one serious difficulty in the way 
which none but yourselves can remove. 
There seems to be a fatal lack of what may 
be called the genius of organization, the 
get-together and stick-together. Do you 
suppose that ten millions of Irishmen or 
Hebrews could be treated in this country 
as the Negro is treated? Yo u say no, and 
you are right. You cannot conceive of 
COLOR LIN E 217 
such a thing, and why? Because they 
would stand as one man. Ten millions of 
Irishmen or Hebrews would pull down a 
government which treated them as you are 
treated, or tolerated or connived at such 
treatment, just as the Irish at home pulled 
down one government after another until 
they extorted from a reluctant Parliament 
and people the promise and the performance 
of home rule. It may be that this is a 
fundamental defect in the Negro race, or it 
may be that the right leader has not appeared. He will not be a white man. When 
the leader appears, and when you have 
learned that union is indispensable and 
division fatal, your cause is won." 
EDUCATION . 
The problem of "educating the black 
man" includes the problem of educating the white man in some of the fundamentals of his highly prized and rightly prized 
democracy.—Chicago Evening Post. 
*I Among the four or five summer schools 
especially for colored teachers, those at Wil -
berforce, 0., Institute, W. Va., and Greensboro and Durham, N . C , were the most 
important. The experiment at Wilberforce 
was new but promising. Mr. W. A . Joiner, 
superintendent of the State department of 
Wilberforce, conducted the school and was 
assisted by Mrs. Jennie Cheatham Lee and 
Mr. Woodard, of Tuskegee, Doctor Woodson 
and Doctor Moore, of the District of Columbia, Miss Cooper, of New York, and many 
of his own staff. Among the lecturers were 
Doctor Du Bois, Kelly Miller and G. N . 
Grisham. Wilberforce is growing in interest 
and as a great natural center for the Negro 
race. Its newer buildings are of singular 
beauty and the summer-school body was a 
most intelligent and companionable group. 
*I The executive committee of the Association of Negro Industrial and Secondary 
Schools met in Atlanta and formulated 
plans for its work. The association explains 
the need and purpose of its existence in the 
following paragraph: 
"It cannot be too often repeated that this 
association proposes to be a thoroughgoing 
business auxiliary and practical helper of 
all the schools that join it. We want to 
work out in a scientific spirit and with 
scientific persistence some of the great problems now confronting our schools. The 
attitude of the country toward Negro edu-218 TH E CRISIS 
cation to-day is vastly different from what 
it was ten years ago. Of all the changes 
which might be catalogued, two are most 
significant: first, the growing coolness of 
Northern philanthropy; secondly, the way 
in which the burden of education in the 
South is being thrust back more and more 
upon our own shoulders. We are, therefore, the more called upon to get together 
among ourselves. If we do not face this 
situation squarely and fearlessly, and organize in the most practical and helpful ways, 
who can tell what the future holds in store 
for us, especially at a time when our 
political life and status are so much in 
jeopardy!" 
*1 Four colored young women were graduated from the New Jersey Normal School 
at Montclair. They will teach in the colored schools of South Jersey. 
1 Miss Frances B. Grant received the 
highest honor which the Girls' Latin School 
of Boston offers to a graduate—the Griswold scholarship, tenable at Radcliffe College. She was one of sixty-two in the 
graduating class. 
*I Morgan College, of Baltimore, is the 
alma mater of W . Ashbie Hawkins and 
many other distinguished colored citizens 
of Baltimore. A t its last commencement 
it conferred degrees upon forty-five students from nine States and one foreign 
country. The college conducted successfully 
a summer school at Princess Anne, Md . 
PERSONAL. 
ISAAC FISHEE , of East Lake Station, 
Birmingham, Ala., a teacher, was 
awarded the first prize of $100 offered by 
the St. Louis Post-Despatch for the "ten 
best reasons why persons should come to 
Missouri." There were thousands of competitors from more than twenty-five States. 
Mr. Fisher has never been in Missouri, so 
he was compelled to rely on books for his 
information. Not only the amount he secured, but his method of arranging it, decided the judges in his favor. His first 
reason for boosting Missouri. is, "Security 
of life is assured in the State." One proof 
of this, he says, is the excellent climate. 
The other is, "As regards homicide, the 
courts and not Judge Lynch rule." The 
second best reason is, "Missouri ratified the 
Thirteenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, and she has a constitutional 
provision forbidding slavery." 
<I Mrs. Mary Church Terrell has been 
elected a vice-president of the Alumna? 
Association of Oberlin University. 
<J Miss Blanche Beuzard, who was the only 
colored girl to receive this year a diploma 
in the course of household science and art, 
at Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, N . Y. , goes 
to direct this department in the Lincoln 
High School, Wilmington, Del. 
<I Mr. S. H . Hubert, a graduate of Atlanta 
Baptist College, who held last year a fellowship offered by the Urban League for 
sociological studies at Columbia University 
and the New York School of Philanthropy, 
is doing a successful practical missionary 
work among the Indians at Gay Head, 
Mass. 
*I P. G. Wolo, a Kru chieftain from the 
hinterland of Liberia, has entered Harvard 
with an excellent preparatory record. 
*I Chicago has been very much exercised 
over the discovery that William H . Lee, a 
wealthy publisher who died intestate and 
with no known relatives, had led the life of 
a hermit because his business might have 
been ruined if he had disclosed the fact of 
his Negro blood. Colored men who knew 
him say that he had relatives either in 
Louisiana or in Canada, though he never 
committed himself. Lee contributed much 
to charitable work among the colored 
people. 
*I Fred. McKinney and Artee Fleming, 
graduates of Howard University, have 
passed the bar examinations in Missouri 
with high ratings. 
1 The colored people of Norfolk, Va. , have 
presented to Captain Taylor, a prominent 
white lawyer, a silver loving cup because 
of his services to the race in the abolition 
of twenty saloons in four short blocks 
occupied chiefly by colored people. Doctor 
Morris, who secured the assistance of Mr. 
Taylor, led in the movement to reward him. 
«I L a Porte, Ind., a town of 12,000, laments 
the death of the most prominent of its hundred colored residents, Bolar B. Banks, who 
had been a member of the city council. The 
local daily says: "His going pulls at the 
heartstrings and brings memories of his 
well-spent years." ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 219 
*I William Eliot Furness, a member of the 
"Old Guard" of fighters for humanity and 
justice to the black man, died at Chicago. 
Mr. Furness, who was an eminent lawyer, 
had served in the Civil Wa r as captain in 
a colored regiment. He was a director and 
one of the founders of the Frederick Douglass Center, and he withdrew from the 
American Bar Association when it drew the 
color line. 
^ Miss Helen Simpkins Jackson has the 
distinction of being the first and only colored graduate of the Manasquan (N. J.) 
High School. 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
IN RECOGNITIO N of the eminence as 
a composer of music of her husband, 
the late Mr. Samuel Coleridge-Taylor," 
says the London Times, "and in consideration of the circumstances in which she has 
been left by his premature death," t he 
British government has awarded to Mrs. 
Jessie Coleridge-Taylor a pension of £100 
under the civil-list act, which provides for 
the relatives of persons who have distinguished themselves in art or literature. The 
daughter of Justin McCarthy and the widow 
of Sir Francis Purdon Clarke, who was at 
one time the director of the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York, appear on 
the same list with the English widow of the 
lamented Anglo-African composer. 
^ The largest theatre in Knoxville, Tenn., 
was given over to an enthusiastic audience 
of white and colored people at the initial 
concert of the Coleridge-Taylor Choral 
Society. Vocal soloists on the program 
were Mmes. A . D. Fugett and R. H . Lattimore and Mr. Lacey. Their work, as well 
as the violin solo of Mr. George McDade, 
was received with great applause. The 
chorus, under the direction of Mr. C. S. 
Cornell, a white man, has won itself a place 
in the esteem of all Knoxville. Its next 
presentation will be the "Hiawatha" of the 
composer whose name it is honored in 
using. 
Coleridge-Taylor enjoyed the distinction, 
unusual for an artist, of public favor and 
appreciation during his short lifetime, but 
his popularity continues to increase among 
the white people of his native England even 
more rapidly than among the American colored people. Many compositions "of his, 
unknown in America, have recently been 
produced at various places throughout the 
British Isles. Over the master's grave at 
Croydon a stone has been erected, bearing 
a beautiful inscription in the words of his 
faithful friend, the poet, Alfred Noyes, and 
ending with four bars from "Hiawatha": 
"In memory of Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, 
who died on September 1, 1912, at the age 
of 37, bequeathing to the world a heritage 
of an undying beauty. His music lives. It 
was his own, and drawn from vital fountains. It pulsed with his own life, but now 
it is his immortality. He lives while music 
lives. Too young to die—his great simplicity, his happy courage in an alien world, 
his gentleness, made all that knew him love 
him. 
"Sleep, crowned with fame, fearless of 
change or .time. 
Sleep like remembered music in the soul, 
Silent, immortal; while our discords climb 
To that great chord which shall resolve 
the whole. 
Silent, with Mozart, on that solemn shore; 
Secure, where neither waves nor hearts 
can break; 
Sleep, till the Master of the world once 
more 
Touch the remembered strings and bid 
thee wake. * * * 
Touch the remembered strings and bid 
thee wake." 
FOREIGN. 
THE Venezuelan government has erected 
in Caracas a monument to Petion, the 
President of Haiti who gave substantial aid 
to Simon Bolivar in his struggle for the 
independence of Spanish America. 
The French government has decided hereafter to make colonial troops do service in 
France. 
*1 A colored man commanded the detachment of Mexican troops which shot an 
American immigration officer at Juarez, 
across the Rio Grande from E l Paso, Tex. 
«I When the Anglo-Dutch Union of South 
Africa was formed it limited federal 
suffrage to "white people of European 
descent," and since then repeated attempts 
have been made to deprive the non-white 
races of their long-established local suffrage 
in Cape Colony. Throughout the union the 
colored, or mixed and Asiatic, people and 220 TH E CRISI S 
the natives, realizing from the start that 
political exclusion must ultimately place 
them completely at the mercy of the white 
man, have never yielded an inch of ground 
in their fight for a say in the government 
of their country. The African Political 
Organization, representing primarily the 
mixed and alien colored people, and the 
South African Native National Congress, 
have co-operated and gone "from strength 
to strength" toward the triumph of their 
cause. P. K . Isaka Seme, a Zulu who won 
the Curtis gold medal for oratory at Columbia University and afterward studied law 
in England, is secretary of the native 
congress. • He evidently learned in the 
United States something that a good many 
black people not so far removed from 
civilization as the Zulus have yet to learn. 
1 The Anti-Slavery Society of Rome has 
awarded a medal to Senhor Alfredo H . 
Da Silva for his labors for the suppression 
of slavery in the Portuguese colonies. Senhor Da Silva, who came to this country 
as a delegate to the recent conference of the 
World's Students' Christian Federation, 
made an address at St. Mark's Church in 
New York City. His pamphlet, " 0 Monstro da Escravatura"—Slavery the Monster 
—led to the Portuguese government's taking 
steps to repatriate the black workers unlawfully held in the colonies. 
Portuguese slavery at the present day is 
not more cruel than the slavery of the 
Putumayo Indians in Peru nor of Kin g 
Leopold's Negroes in the Congo, whose 
blood and tears built the mammoth white 
skyscraper of the United Tire Company in 
New York and adorned the necks of French 
actresses with pearls and diamonds. The 
only difference between Portuguese slavery 
and the indentured labor of East Indians 
in British colonies, which followed the 
liberation of the blacks and still persists, is 
that the East Indians may go home if they 
live through their servitude, while, until 
Senhor Da Silva became active, the Portuguese planters would not let the blacks go 
on the completion of their contracts. In 
this respect slavery in Angola and Mozambique is exactly like slavery in Alabama 
and Mississippi. Senhor Da Silva suffered 
much for the cause of the Portuguese 
blacks. He was called a traitor to his 
country and a disturber of its peace. He 
now has the satisfaction of knowing that 
his country has placed human rights over the 
rights of dollars and dividends and cocoa 
crops. We need some Da Silvas i n Alabama 
and elsewhere in America. 
ECONOMICS. 
I
N a paper upon the economic status of 
the Negro, Professor Hunley, of the State 
University of Virginia , says: "In '63 there 
were 3,000,000 slaves in the South, valued at 
an average of $500, or a total of one and 
a half billion dollars. This represents the 
shrinkage of property values in slaves as the 
result of the war. To-day there are 3,000,000 
Negro men who represent an economic value 
of $2,500 each, or a grand total of seven 
and a half billions. In fifty years the loss 
has been made good five times. There are 
20,000 Negroes i n the government service; 
20,000 are in business; 70 per cent, are literate; 800,000 are either farm owners or farm 
renters." 
TH E GHETTO . 
RIV E back to the support of the rebellion the physical force which the 
colored people now give and promise us, 
and neither the present nor any coming 
administration can save the Union. Take 
from us and give to the enemy the hundred 
and thirty, forty or fifty thousand colored 
persons now serving us as soldiers, seamen 
and laborers, and we cannot longer maintain the contest." 
f§ Forty years after Lincoln, in 1864, made 
the above defense of his enlistment of colored soldiers and seamen, it had become the 
settled policy of the United States navy to 
enlist colored men only aS "boys" for the 
officers and, occasionally, as stokers, according to a white sailor's substantiation of the 
charges of discrimination made by Cleveland G. Allen. Secretary Daniels, in denying these charges, only resorted to the 
diplomatic fraud and subterfuge which recruiting officers have been using for the 
past ten years to keep colored men out of 
the naval service. 
*1 Senator Clapp, the member and friend 
at court of the N . A . A . C. P., has introduced a resolution demanding the authority 
and the reason for the segregation in the 
civil service at Washington. 
<I Passaic, N . J., has been very much overwrought because Samuel DeFrees, who, 
"save for a dark-olive complexion, has no ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 221 
appearance of being a Negro," married a 
' girl whose complexion is other than olive 
and who is heiress to a considerable estate. 
The lady is well educated, 28 years old, and 
had spurned several suitors, more of her 
own complexion. She is satisfied with 
DeFrees, for she "had eyes to see and chose 
him." 
•3 In Jamaica, N . Y. , and in Wilmette, a 
suburb of Chicago, efforts are being made 
to prevent Negroes from purchasing 
property. In the latter place all colored 
workers have been dismissed. 
*I The colored people of Cincinnati are 
protesting, for more reasons than one, 
against the statement in an anonymous 
letter, the author of which was discovered, 
that "some Niggers voted under the names 
of white men who did not vote" in a 
municipal election. 
«! Dr. H . E. Lee, of Houston, Tex., was 
informed by the New York Post-Graduate 
Hospital that he would be admitted to practice in their clinics.- A colored friend then 
told him of an experience with the same 
institution. Doctor Lee then wrote to the 
hospital authorities telling them of his 
color. He received a telegram instructing 
him to "await letter." The letter said he 
was not wanted. He is going to Rochester, 
Minn., where he will be the second colored 
man to study under the Mayo brothers. 
<I The hypocritical inconsistency of the 
Southern fire eaters displayed in their acquiescence in the appointment of one of their 
own to the legation at Port-au-Prince is 
probably of deeper significance than the mere 
elimination of the colored officeholder. Jeffersonian Democracy is just a little more 
imperially inclined than the government 
which took possession of the Philippines, 
and the United States has long been anxious 
to get control of Haiti. 
It will be recalled that Fred. Douglass 
incurred the displeasure of his government 
because he failed to. get the Mole St. Nicolas 
for an American coaling station. A man 
who is particularly close to (he Wilson administration, and who is now a special agent 
of the State Department, has long advocated 
a general American protectorate over Central American States and Haiti. Perhaps a 
white man is more likely than a colored man 
to surrender the independence of the country 
of Toussaint l'Ouverture to the American 
friends of slavery. 
CRIME. 
THE St. Paul Pioneer-Press, discussing 
McReynolds' attempt to exculpate the. 
accused in the Diggs-Camminetti cases, says: 
"The point the Attorney-General denies 
having ruled on was* brought out by the 
attorneys for the prizefighter Johnson in 
his trial in Chicago. It was sustained by 
the court. While the law, as it has been 
interpreted, may be more sweeping than it 
was at first expected, or possibly intended, 
no one will contend that its wide reach is 
not in the interest of right and decency. An 
interpretation such as was credited to the 
Attorney-General would have exempted Jack 
Johnson and others arrested on similar 
charges." 
At Port Tampa, Fla., one white man met 
death and two were wounded—one of thorn 
fatally—in an assault on the home of a 
Negro. The county solicitor released the 
Negro from arrest for justifiable homicide. 
*I Six colored boys under 18 set out from 
Cookeville, Tenn., for Oneida, to work on 
railroad construction. On the way they 
learned of serious trouble between the white 
and Negro laborers, and turned homeward 
along the railroad track. They were fired 
at from ambush. Two fell dead. Another, 
wounded, ran into the woods. Two of the 
other three got home and reported their 
experiences. 
1 Atlanta tried to lynch a Negro for the 
alleged murder of a young white girl, and 
the police inquisition nearly killed the man. 
A white degenerate has now been indicted 
for the crime, which he committed under 
the most revolting circumstances. 
<J At Blountstown, Fla., a Negro was 
lynched, with the usual side attractions of 
gun play and the torch, for having given 
sanctuary to a Negro accused of killing the 
deputy sheriff. The alleged murderer had 
escaped. 
<J Two colored men have been lynched at 
Ardmore, Okla., one on account of a dispute 
over the price of a watermelon, in which a 
white man was killed, the other on account 
of the killing of a white boy, who was found 
in a colored man's watermelon patch. The 
integrity of the white race must be preserved! OUR BUSINESS MANAGER . 
MR. A . G . DILL , who joins the staff of 
TH E CRISIS this month as business 
manager, is an example of the type of progressive young men who are making themselves felt in colored America. Born at 
Portsmouth, 0., in 1881, he began at the 
age of 17 to teach in his native town. In 
li)02 he entered Atlanta University, receiving 
the degree of A . B. in 1906. He then supplemented his studies at Harvard, where 
in 1908 he received the bachelor's degree. 
In 1909 Atlanta conferred upon him the 
degree of A . M . 
While at Harvard Mr. Dill taught in the 
evening schools of Cambridge, and from 
AUGUSTUS G. DILL 
1908 to 1910 was Northern secretary and 
agent of Atlanta University. In the latter 
year he went to Atlanta, where, conjointly 
with his duties as associate professor of 
sociology and organist of the university, he 
did the work for which he is best known, as 
joint editor of the "Atlanta University 
Studies." 
m 
A CHEMIST, 
MR. RICHAR D H . PARKER , of Newark, N . J., is a specimen of that 
rara avis among us, the man who prefers 
to be sought after rather than to seek; who 
has, as he says, "always avoided publicity," 
or, in other words, has steered clear of the 
cuts and writeups which so many of our 
people, fully alive to the advantages of 
advertising, have made a prominent feature 
of the colored weekly newspaper. Seldom, 
however, has TH E CRISIS persuaded a man 
more deserving of honor to emerge from 
his cocoon of modesty and give to the 
youth of the race the inspiration and encouragement of the releasing of his own 
wings for a career far more enduring than 
that of a butterfly. 
Some fifty years ago Mr. Parker was 
born in Marlborough, Md. , where he had 
the advantage of an elementary education. 
While, in his teens he went to Baltimore, 
and later to Washington, where he became 
an apprentice in a printing establishment. 
After having learned to set type as well as 
anyone else, he enlisted in the United States 
navy and became steward of the President's 
yacht "Despatch." In 1886 he left the 
navy and became an assistant in the laboratory of the engineer for the city of Washington. Here he began the training and the 
study which have made him an authority on 
MEN OF THE MONTH ME N OF TH E MONT H 223 
RICHAR D H . PARKER . 
asphalt, cement, paving and building materials, and secured him his present position 
as chief analytical chemist in the laboratory 
of Col. J. W. Howard, one of the leading 
engineers and contractors in the country. 
He continues his independent researches 
and has frequently contributed to the trade 
and technical journals. 
Mr. Parker had been for twelve years a 
member of the Society of Chemical Industry, a British organization, before the 
American Chemical Society decided that it 
would be honored by including him in its 
membership. He has the distinction of 
being, so far as is known, the only colored 
member of either of these bodies. But there 
is no reason why he should be the last, if 
some youth possessing the ability devoted 
himself to the "patient study and hard 
work" to which Mr. Parker attributes his 
success. 
m 
A JOURNALIST. 
TO those who argue that the colored 
man's opportunities, such as they are, lie 
only and exclusively south of the Mason 
and Dixon line, where alone there is no 
prejudice against the Negro who "has something that the while man wants or can 
use," the career of Mr. Parker is a glaring 
contradiction. Another is thai of Mr. J. R. 
Bourne, who is chief proofreader for the 
Riverside Press, of Cambridge, Mass. Mr. 
Bourne was born in 1875, at Barbados, 
West Indies, where he received his education. He was associated with two other 
colored men in founding the first of the 
four daily papers now published in that 
island. In British Guiana and at Trinidad 
Mr. Bourne divided his attention between 
prospecting for gold and journalism, serving as a reporter for the Daily Standard 
and the Argosy of Demerara, and as the . 
official proofreader for the government of 
Trinidad. He later held the same office 
with the Imperial Department of Agriculture for the West Indies. In 1903 he came 
to the United States, and three years later 
married Miss Ida May Sharp, of Cincinnati, who had been a teacher at the College 
of West Africa, in Liberia. Mr. Bourne is 
a member of the British Institute of Journalists and finds time in his present position for reviewing and private editorial 
work. 
J . R. BOURNE . Opinion 
LABOR. 
With flare of trumpets and rolling 
of drums and multi-colored uniforms the white workingmen of the United 
States dignify labor on the first day of 
September. By murder and intimidation 
and threats and coercion the white workingman degrades labor every day in the year 
by denying to the black man the opportunity of earning his bread or, when the 
black man is permitted to work, by cheating him of the just reward of his labor. 
That the increasing opposition of organized and unorganized labor to colored men 
is limited to no one section of the country 
is clearly pointed out by the Philadelphia 
Public Ledger: 
"The movement against Negro labor is by 
no means confined to the North. The country has not forgotten the determined strike 
against Negro firemen on the Georgia Railroad in the year 1908. In the spring of 
1011 there was precipitated for the same 
purpose on the Cincinnati Southern Railroad one of the fiercest and bloodiest strikes 
that this country has ever witnessed. This 
strike had scarcely subsided when the firemen on the Southern Railroad of Georgia 
threatened to strike unless certain of their 
demands against Negro firemen were acceded 
to. A strike was finally averted only by the 
railroad officials agreeing to employ no 
Negro firemen north of Oakdale. Tenn. It 
was also stipulated that the white firemen 
and hostlers should be paid approximately 
30 per cent, more in wages than was received by Negroes for identical service. 
"In a recent address before the Evangelical Ministerial Alliance of Atlanta, Ga., 
former Gov. W. J. Northen, of that State, 
called attention to the fact that there 
is in that commonwealth 'a strong combination determined to eliminate the Negro' 
from various lines of employment to which 
for decades he formerly had been admitted 
without question. Governor Northen expressed it as his opinion that this studied 
effort to submerge the Negro industrially is 
one of the gravest questions that confront 
the people of Georgia. An d in this conclusion there are few thoughtful persons who 
will disagree with him, not only with reference to Georgia, but to the entire country." 
"When this one of a series of editorials 
appeared in a paper which is controlled by 
a Southern Jew who has no particular love 
for the Negro, a colored man who makes it 
his business to glorify the South at all 
times and at all hazards sent a letter challenging the accuracy of the Ledger's observations and conclusions. Without admitting 
the labor conditions in the South to be ideal 
for the Negro, the Ledger maintained "this 
contention merely emphasizes all the more 
by contrast what we have been trying to 
show," that wherever white labor of any 
quality is obtainable the Negro, however 
skilled and capable he may be, is not given 
an opportunity to work. The Ledger emphasizes the "moral lapsing" of the Negro 
as a cause of his disabilities, but points out 
the reason for the existence of what it considers an "unwonted amount of recklessness 
and crime among the American Negroes of 
to-day. 
"One State after another is conducting 
investigations in an effort to connect an 
inadequacy of wages with the widespread 
existence of so-called white slavery.. There 
is not an industrial opportunity which is 
enjoyed by Negro women that is not enjoyed much more fully by white women; 
while most of the opportunities enjoyed by 
white women are as a sealed book to Negro 
women. If economic restrictions are conducive to degradation among white women 
it may, therefore, readily be appreciated OPINION 225 
how immeasurably more baleful to colored 
women are (he slavish conditions under 
which they exist. 
"This is but a concrete illustration of the 
disparity of economic opportunities between 
the two races. The country is almost continuously in a turmoil because of the industrial strikes by which both native and alien 
labor is seeking to increase wages, shorten 
hours and improve conditions generally. 
Yet, who pauses to consider that these 
strikes are almost invariably against work 
and conditions that Negro citizens (by 
actual test in at least one notable instance) 
are not permitted to share, even though 
they offer to work for nothing and board 
themselves ? 
"There is scarcely a section of the country which is not gradually displacing 
Negroes as menials, hotel servants and the 
like, thus virtually forcing upon countless 
thousands of non-professionals among them 
the dire alternative of making a living by 
questionable means. 
"The American people will one day hang 
their heads in shame at having been parties 
to any such wholesale oppression and repression of a people who are so intricately 
linked with the destinies of this nation." 
The Ledger finds the chief cause and 
points the way to the solution of the gravest 
problem in American life: 
"Many white people are guilty of an unreasoning race prejudice. This prejudice 
blinds them to the good qualities of the 
Negro, and prevents them from seeing the 
difference which does exist between the better and lower strata of the Negro race. 
Such prejudice speedily grows into antipathy, an antipathy which manifests itself 
in unjust laws and in making the Negro's 
life harder and harder. 
"Under such circumstances the thing to 
be done is that both races shall recognize 
the facts of the case and act accordingly. 
White people should be willing to acknowledge the Negro's manhood and to give him 
a chance to earn an honest living. They 
should aid every endeavor by the better 
class of Negroes to elevate and purify their 
race. They should take a sincere interest 
in the Negro's welfare. Above all, the two 
races, instead of cultivating prejudice and 
animosity, should do their utmost to understand and aid one another. Indifference 
and antagonism can lead only to disaster." 
That the determination to deprive the Negro 
of the opportunity not, only of working for 
a living as an employee, but of working 
for himself, is taking hold of all classes of 
white men in all branches of labor all over 
the country is exemplified by I lie recent 
experience of chauffeurs. In New York 
City, when a gentleman decided to employ 
a colored driver, he was asked for permission to change the garage. "If I put the 
car where you keep it now, the other men 
will puncture the tires and damage the 
machine." This condition has led to the 
refusal of garage proprietors to store machines driven by Negroes. "Each day," 
says the New York Commercial, "sees accessions to the list of auto storage places 
where the brother in black is not wanted. 
Whether the white chauffeurs are banded 
together in league against the black is not 
clear, but certain it is that garage proprietors are daily inviting auto owners with 
Negro chauffeurs to store their machines 
elsewhere. 'If I keep your machine,' one 
auto owner was informed, T shall lose six 
or eight now stored here. It's a business 
matter with me.' " 
After a column of editorial dribble about 
the futility of the colored man's "journey 
to social equality at the North," which section "has not yet learned that the Negro 
may be kept in his place at the kitchen 
door while the parlor door remains slightly 
ajar," the Commercial suggests the superior 
economic opportunities of the Negro in the 
South, where "we shall next hear of the 
formation of associations for the advancement of the interests of the Negro of the 
North, and the Southern white man will 
embark on a campaign of education." 
Meanwhile, in Fort Worth, Tex., and in 
Miami, Fla., the white taxicab drivers and 
chauffeurs have assaulted and beaten Negroes who dared to engage in an occupation 
which ought to be reserved exclusively for 
white men, and the Southern Progressive 
Farmer has started a campaign to educate 
the white people to the need of confining 
the Negro farmer to the land which he now 
occupies, or which the white man is not 
likely, to be able to use in the future. On 
every hand, the purpose of the average 
white man, of the white man of Southern 
birth who believes that the Negro's only 
place is in the kitchen, and of the immigrant 
who fears that there will be no room for 226 TH E CRISI S 
himself in the kitchen or the garage if the 
Negro is allowed to enter, seems to be to 
deprive the colored man of the right to 
exist. The only thing for the Negro and 
his white friend to do is to band together 
to secure respect for the manhood of the 
Negro and to fight tyranny and oppression, 
whether in the parlor, the garage or the 
kitchen, in land segregation in the South, 
or in home segregation in cities, as those 
who sympathize with the aims of the Na ­
tional Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People are fighting successfully in 
Baltimore and elsewhere. 
• The Chicago Evening Post says: 
TILLMAN et al. "Those labor organizations which 
avowedly exclude the black man 
do so chiefly from the instinct of imitation"—not from the instinct of economic 
self-preservation. "They have very little 
proletarian feeling; they imitate the middle 
classes as much as they know how to, and 
so for a real class policy of co-operation 
with the black man which would eventually 
be to their economic advantage they substitute a middle-class policy of social exclusion." Wh y should they not, when they 
have so exalted an example as that set by 
the bar association? If a white lawyer 
cannot admit a colored man to his union, 
why should a colored man have a chance to 
enter the union of commercial telegraphers, even if he had the skill of the 
record-breaking wireless operator on the 
Brazilian dreadnaught "Minas Geraes"? 
An d if no Negro is to be admitted into the 
union, no Negro may engage in the labor 
whose interests the union is organized to 
protect. If a colored man may not answer 
the roll call at a convention of railway 
mail clerks, there is no reason why his 
name should be placed on the payroll of 
the United States as a railway mail clerk, 
if the white mail clerks say so. 
The white mail clerks have been saying 
so, and Tillman, Vardaman et al have 
added to their renown by segregating colored clerks in the departments at Washington, with a view to their ultimate elimination, and by defeating the nomination of 
colored men to offices which white men 
want. 
The press has been too busy to give more 
than passing attention to A . E . Patterson's 
cowardly declination of his nomination for 
the office of Registrar of the Treasury and 
to President Wilson's more cowardly attitude i n permitting this forced refusal of a 
well-earned office by a man who wanted it, 
but such comments as have been made in 
decent quarters are reminiscent of the general disgust at the action of the American 
Bar Association with regard to colored 
members. The Brooklyn Eagle, which is 
not at all characterized by any particular 
sympathy for the colored race, must have 
been disappointed at the inaccuracy of its 
forecast of the result of the nomination: 
"Since the years following close on the 
reconstruction period, when the name of 
Blanche K . Bruce, a former Senator from 
Mississippi, appeared as Registrar of the 
Treasury on our greenbacks, the position 
has been a sort of prescriptive right of the 
Negroes loyal to the party in power, 
whether Democratic or Republican. President Wilson follows custom in naming 
Adam E . Patterson, leader of the Democratic Negroes of Oklahoma, as Registrar. 
It is likely that there will be no hitch about 
the confirmation of Patterson. Custom is 
a binding force in Washington. 
"It is fair to say that, without exception, 
the Negroes who have filled" this place have 
been faithful, hard-working officials, and 
have justified their selection. White men 
might have done as well, but could not have 
done better. 
"The number of Negro Democrats in the 
United States, North as well as South, is 
likely to grow immensely before the Wilson 
administration is over. That will be a particularly wholesome thing for the race as a 
whole. Thinking Negroes have long regretted the substantial solidarity of the colored vote for Republicanism. They know 
that the hope of the Afro-American lies in 
voting, as do other citizens, on principles at 
issue in a given election." 
The Wheeling (W. Va.) Intelligencer 
sees in Mr. Wilson's breach of faith with 
the colored voter a "serves him right" for 
the former Negro Republican: 
"How deep and abiding is the love of the 
Democratic politician for the colored man 
and brother? 
"Every once in a while we see earnest 
efforts made by Democratic candidates for 
office to create the impression that they, as 
individuals, and the Democratic party as a OPINION 227 
party are friendly to the black man. As a 
matter of fact, the backbone of the Democratic party in that section of the country 
which gives to democracy the majority of 
its electoral vote and its representatives in 
Congress is inspired by no stronger sentiment and bound together by no stronger 
tie than hatred of the black man and enmity 
to the colored race. 
"A n illustration is now to be had in 
Washington. One Patterson, a Negro from 
Oklahoma, made himself conspicuous in the 
support of Wilson. Mr. Wilson was elected 
President, and Democratic politicians 
thought it a wise thing to recognize Patterson's service by the appointment to the 
position of Registrar of the Treasury. This 
is a position that has been held by black 
men. The great Frederick Douglass, under 
a Republican President, was honored with 
this office, and filled it with credit. Now, 
what happened when Patterson's nomination was sent to the Senate? Immediately 
there came up from the Democratic Senators of the South a roar of protest that 
shook the walls of the Capitol, and was 
heard even in the White House. Vardaman, of Mississippi, who was elected to the 
Senate as a Negro hater, and Tillman, of 
South Carolina, and their followers served 
notice on Woodrow Wilson that the nomination of Patterson could not be confirmed. 
Mr. Wilson, with the power of the Presidency in his hands, could force recalcitrant 
Democrats to support a tariff bill to which 
many of them objected. He could drive 
them to the support of a currency measure 
which did not meet their views, but he 
could not drive them to accept the supreme 
humiliation of voting for a black man for 
a responsible public office. There the 
Southern warriors drew the line, 'sah,' and 
were willing to shed their blood, 'sah,' if 
need be, in defense of the sacred privilege 
of the white Democrats of the South to 
hold all the offices." 
"It may be doubted if intelligent public 
opinion anywhere," says the Philadelphia 
Public Ledger, "is averse to the holding of 
public office, where conditions favor it, by 
colored men. Ostracism of colored men in 
the public service will not be permitted, in 
all probability, by the President, who received thousands of colored votes. Mr. 
Wilson does not believe in social equality 
between the races, but he does believe in 
political equality and equality of opportunity, or acquiesces in the principle. 
Otherwise he could not conscientiously have 
taken the oath of office." But Mr. Wilson 
has belied the confidence which "intelligent 
public opinion" placed in him by permitling "the ostracism of colored men in the 
public service." The Boston Evening Transcript hopes that "these things are not being clone with the knowledge and approval 
of the preacher of the gospel of 'the new 
freedom.'" But the Philadelphia Bulletin 
asserts: 
"Negro blood ought not to be a bar 
against a nominee otherwise fit for the position, and the President, having made the 
appointment, pays tribute to Vardaman and 
his virulent prejudice in permitting it to 
be withdrawn." 
The German Volkszeitung, of New York, 
sarcastically comments on a sentence in the 
first chapter of Mr. Wilson's "The New 
Freedom": "No man may arrogate to himself the right to place a fellow man, whom 
nature and training have placed on an 
equal footing with him, upon a plane of 
inferiority." "This cravenness," says the 
Volkszeitung, of Patterson's conduct, "will 
be of no use to the crafty President. He 
will, nevertheless, have to answer whether 
he is disposed, from contemptible fear of 
the Southern 'gentlemen,' to tread under foot 
all the rights of the Negroes—much as they 
are already unlawfully limited and forcefully cut down—or whether he is willing 
to consider fitness for office at least to the 
extent that he will not suffer the whole 
colored population to be excluded from the 
Federal service. A remarkable 'new' freedom, indeed, which has brought us this 
Democratic administration, a reversion to 
the darkest times of the past century, when 
the colored man was without protection and 
without rights, being little more than cattle 
to be sold in the auction mart to the 
highest bidder." 
The New York Evening Post rebukes 
Patterson for declining the nomination, but 
sees in Vardaman and his ilk the wind that 
may blow some good: 
"Mr. Patterson asked to be allowed to 
withdraw because of the violent opposition 
of the Negrophobe Southern Senators— 
Vardaman, Tillman, Hoke Smith, and the 
rest. That he lacked the courage to stick 
it out and to insist on having his name 228 TH E CRISIS 
passed upon is greatly to be regretted. In 
a sense, he was recreant to his race; that 
he has not helped either Mr. Wilson or the 
colored people appears clearly from Vardaman's glorying in the defeat of Mr. Pattersou's ambitions. The integrity of the AngloSaxon race, Mr. Vardaman adds, depends 
upon the 'faithful consummation' of this 
program. What a delicate integrity it must 
be! 
"Fo r the first time since we have heard 
of him, it occurs to us that this Senator 
from Mississippi is serving a useful purpose. He has flung down a challenge to 
this Democratic administration which Mr. 
Wilson cannot avoid. Shall the President 
give up the historic right of the executive 
to appoint to office, to the extent, at least, 
of permitting a fraction of the Senate to 
bar out ten millions of American citizens 
from serving the government, save in the 
lowest positions, and then as lepers set 
apart? Shall he fling the Negro overboard 
after more of his race voted for Wilson than 
for any other Democratic candidate; shall 
he be a just President of all the American 
people, or only of those of the white race? 
Is the 'New Freedom' to be accepted as 
preaching political doctrines whose truths 
are no longer truths when they meet the 
color line?" 
The Post further discusses the segregation at Washington, and concludes: 
"That all of this will go without challenge 
is not to be expected. The Progressive 
Senators are already alive to their opportunity. The colored people themselves are 
beginning to be heard from, and their political influence is not to be despised. But 
we do not believe that this phase of it will 
concern Mr. Wilson. We think that when 
the matter is put before him in its true 
light he will withhold his sanction from it, 
just as we believe that he will not permit 
any Southern reactionaries, however influential, to deter him from giving, in the 
matter of offices, fair play to a heavily 
disadvantaged race." 
THE NEW Someone has said that the 
EMANCIPATION . most effective gag to the 
blatant ran tings of Vardaman would be to employ detectives to find 
out just how much Negro blood courses 
through the veins of this yellow champion 
of the "delicate integrity of the AngloSaxon race," or how much of his blood, 
whatever it may be, has been transmitted 
to children whom he calls Negroes. A man 
of experience recently observed: "No one is 
more uncompromising on the subject of 
Negro inferiority than he who fears that 
he has in his veins a drop or two of 
African blood." Perhaps the "Southern 
journalist" who writes in the Boston Evening Transcript is more careful about preserving a more genuine Anglo-Saxon integrity than are a good many men in the 
Congress of the United States, or in the 
Southern legislatures. Describing as a 
"campaign based on error" the activities of 
a society recently organized in Philadelphia, 
this writer says in part: 
" A society in Philadelphia, in this semicentennial year of emancipation, has appealed for funds wherewith to begin a campaign 'to curb the vicious elements of the 
Negro race,' the undertaking having its 
origin in acceptance of the conclusion that 
throughout the country there is a growing 
tendency to ostracize industrially all colored 
people on account of the criminal activities 
of a comparatively small proportion of 
them. 
"Omitting consideration of perfectly obvious reasons for crime, such as whiskey 
and drugs, a second incitant is the practice 
of miscegenation, which invariably is irritating to Negro men, and in some instances 
leads to reprisals in kind. 
"Abuse of the Negroes by money lenders 
is another cause of crime. In the lumber 
camps, the phosphate camps and other 
places where Negroes labor in numbers, the 
petty exactions of men who have lent them 
money, or the physical cruelty, sometimes, 
of gang bosses, arouse a spirit of revenge, 
which does not last long, but is extremely 
dangerous while it does last. There are 
gangs of Italians in the North more harshly 
treated and driven more sordidly, but they 
are not of the same mold as the black 
man. An d in these camps, it should be 
added, the vices of civilization abound, 
while its emollient elements are conspicuously absent. 
"There are many so-called desperate black 
criminals who, at the worst, are guilty of 
only misdemeanors. A case, for instance, 
in which a Negro was condemned to death 
went on appeal to the United States Supreme Court. It refused to interfere. The OPINION 229 
governor of the State, however, commuted 
the sentenc to life imprisonment. 'I am 
glad lie did it,' said one of the jurors in the 
case. ' A desperate criminal like that ought 
never to have escaped hanging,' said a 
drummer. 'Well,' answered the other, "I 
served on the jury and 1 know he was not 
guilty. Hut one of the white jurymen was 
sick and the judge wouldn't let him go until 
there was a verdict. They finally persuaded the three of us who were for 
acquittal that it was better to hang the 
darkey than to have the white man die, so 
we acquiesced.' That Negro is in the penitentiary to-day, or was at last reports. If 
he is pardoned now his degeneracy into 
criminality would not be remarkable. 
"There are no organizations such as the 
Black Hand and the East Side gangs in New 
York among the Negroes, no alliances 
among desperate men for the perpetration 
premeditatedly of felonies. Such major 
crimes as Negroes commit are due either to 
intoxicants or some sudden, passing fury. 
Negro desperadoes are not numerous. There 
are fewer of them in proportion to population than there are among the whites. The 
surest way to convince one's self of the 
utter fallacy of the idea that the Negro is 
innately criminal in instinct is to read the 
history of the hundreds of thousands of 
them who, during the war, protected not 
only the property, but the families of their 
absent masters, when no physical power 
held these faithful servants in check. 
"It would be idle to question the harm 
that has resulted to Negroes in the aggregate by the prevalence of the belief that 
they are innately criminal; but it is very 
much worth while to show that this reputation is essentially unearned and undeserved. 
It is a cruel injustice. Were it true, the 
cotton fields of the South must have been 
abandoned by the whites years ago. It is 
possible to go further; 9,000,000 white people in similar conditions of poverty would 
probably have produced two criminals for 
every one the Negroes have produced. It 
might be profitable to analyze the origin of 
such colored criminals as there are and discover how many of them have white blood 
in their veins. The truth is that the Negro 
is innately not criminal and any campaign 
for 'curbing the vicious elements of the 
race' should be based on that conclusion and 
not on the contrary of it. 
"The generation of colored people which 
is now growing up has advantages thai no 
previous generation enjoyed, In many 
cases the parents have achieved real prosperity and arc giving their children the 
benefit of it. Schools arc more numerous 
and arc better administered. The dawning 
of prosperity in the South has made work 
more remunerative and has opened new 
fields of endeavor. The churches are becoming more and more efficient. The whites 
are being of more material assistance in 
the advancement of the race. The courts 
arc beginning to administer a more evenhanded justice. The better enforcement of 
prohibition laws and more stringent regulation of the liquor traffic where sales are not 
absolutely unlawful are beginning to show 
effects. 
" A more reasonable attitude toward the 
race question on the part of the North, 
and the Hareback in Southern sentiment 
from the noisy vulgarities of men like 
Blease, together with the sane work being 
done by such institutions as the Jeanes 
Fund, under the wise administration of Pro*-
lessor Dillard—these things are sympathetically and otherwise effective in elevating the moral perspective of the race. It is 
giving it virtue instead of vice to imitate 
that will completely rehabilitate the reputation of the black man. Al l he needs is a 
fair chance and the moral support, in all 
kindness, of the whites." 
TH E MULATTO . To those who know the 
perils to which any man 
exposes himself in the South by frankly 
and honestly admitting that the mulatto is 
not necessarily a degenerate, and, consequently and ultimately, that racial intermixture by lawful means should not be prohibited when everything has been and is 
being done to promote it by the subjection 
of the woman of the weaker race, it was 
something of a surprise to find Prof. H . E. 
Jordan, of the University of Virginia, declaring in an article in Popular Science 
Monthly that "the mulatto is the leaven 
with which to lift the Negro mass." This 
declaration in itself was not strange, for 
Professor Shaler, himself a Southerner, has 
said the same thing, and the late Edward 
Wilmot Blyden, with the pride of his unadulterated Negro origin and the confidence 
derived from residence in a country where 230 TH E CRISI S 
black is the fashionable color, claimed that 
white blood has been the salvation of the 
Negro in the New World, for the black man 
who was weak enough to be caught and 
shipped away as a slave was naturally in ­
ferior in mind and body to the black man who 
possessed ingenuity enough to escape from 
the toils of slavery and remain at home as 
a slave hunter. 
This theory of Doctor Blyden does not 
take into account the fact that those blacks 
who survived the horrors of the passage 
across the Atlantic and lived through 
American slavery at least went through a 
test of endurance unknown to those who 
stayed to bask on the sun-swept banks of 
the Niger, and it will hardly withstand the 
opposing argument of the career of Toussaint l'Ouverture, not to mention Phyllis 
Wheatley, Benjamin Banneker, and the 
hundreds of able leaders of apparently unadulterated blood among the American 
Negroes of to-day. But the thing that 
makes the mulatto especially useful is that, 
with the white man, he shares the pride of 
his white blood and is less likely than the 
black to submit to artificial distinctions of 
race where nature has bridged them. Frederick Douglass, the son of a white man, 
expected and demanded everywhere, and at 
all times, the treatment that would be 
accorded to any other white man's son. 
The most prominent present-day mulatto, 
although ostensibly an advocate of servility 
to the white man, has generally managed 
to secure, for himself at least, the consideration given to a while man. Vardaman, 
whose friends own up to his possession of 
"Indian" blood, not only considers himself 
the equal of the white man, but sets himself 
up as the preserver-in-chief of the white 
man's civilization. It is not unnatural that, 
if this civilization is to be measured chiefly 
by the length of the hair, the shape of the 
face, and the "spissitude" of the lips, the 
Negro and Negroids, since they have to live 
and maintain some civilization, should seek 
to conform to the orthodox physical qualities which alone will guarantee the preservation of their life. Professor Jordan made 
in his article a statement which, as a general tendency resulting from the color 
prejudice in this country, it would be ridiculous to deny. He was exceedingly cautious in his words, but he did not altogether 
succeed in avoiding offense to the sensibilities of the South. He now comes forward 
with a lengthy explanation and a refutation humbly confessing his sins before the 
almighty god of fear and lying and lynching and murder: 
"In view of what I have said"—in preceding paragraphs of a letter "to the 
press"—"I think that a dispassionate rereading of my entire article will show that 
my argument was in favor of the intermarriage of mulattoes and Negroes. Now 
that my attention has been called to it I 
confess that the statement that the Negro 
aspires to be mulatto and the mulatto to be 
white, and that in this they should be 
encouraged was most unfortunate. To interpret this as meaning that intermarriage 
between the white and the Negro should be 
encouraged contradicts, however, all the rest 
of the argument as I intended it. I do not 
defend the sentence as written. I explicitly 
deny that I approve or ever approved, or 
meant to suggest the miscegenation of the 
white and colored races. If I deserve censure it is for the unfortunate manner in 
which was expressed the idea that the 
ambition on the part of an inferior race to 
ascend from a lower to a higher moral and 
intellectual status is a worthy one." 
Mr. Jordan, in his original article, had 
spoken of the white man's natural aversion 
to the pure Negro woman, as if, with the 
existence of such aversion, the mulatto 
could have come into being. H . G. Creel, 
a Socialist writer, has been investigating 
the "low-down depravity and unprintable 
immorality" of the lumber camps i n Arkan ­
sas. He has printed some of what he saw 
in the National Rip-Saw of St. Louis. TH E 
CRISIS reprints from Tsala E a Bathoe (The 
People's Friend), of Kimberley, a quaint 
treatise on the origin and maintenance of 
miscegenation in the form of a letter from 
a paramount chief in Bechuanaland: 
" I have a garden of wild nuts (Morama). 
What I wish to draw attention to is the 
following: I have read from many South 
African newspapers and thought it was 
mere jealousy on the part of the writers 
to the natives. To-day I am writing about 
'white peril' in Kanye, the chief town of 
the Bangwaketse, in the Bechuanaland Protectorate. In the first place, when we plant 
wild nuts, we do not expect to reap 
oranges. Many people in this town who OPINION 231 
had gardens of wild nuts are reaping yellow oranges, which is quite a shameful 
business. There are ten illegitimate white 
children in this place born of native women 
by white men. It is very often said that 
when a native is found in this business 
with white women, the native is to be sentenced to death. I therefore ask what 
should be done to these white men in 
Kanye? We do not want to see white 
babies among natives, unless they are born 
in lawful wedlock, but these are not. 
"This shameful intercourse will not do 
for this town or for any territory occupied 
by the natives. 
"In all the European towns I have visited 
no black children are found as a result of 
illicit union between black men and white 
women, except of those who are married 
according to law." 
m 
The Union of South Africa, 
SOUT H AFRICA . • ... ^ T T •. 
in imitation of the United 
States of America, and especially the southern section thereof, having decreed that a 
white skin is always to be the sine qua non 
to the realities expressed by the high-sounding phrases about "life, liberty and the 
pursuit of happiness," has been so industriously pointing to the black man the way 
to become white that the government of the 
South African Union has had to make a 
special investigation of the so-called black 
peril, for the native has been led at times 
to make those "reprisals in kind" of which 
the Southern Journalist speaks and which 
the Rip-Saw man thought of while in the 
dance hall of a lumber town where there 
was "absolutely no color line," except that 
which gave to a white man the prerogative 
of replacing a black man in the attentions 
of a Negro woman. These reprisals have 
generally had additional provocation in the 
system of native "boy" service to white 
women, the "boy" of whatever age being 
considered rather-in the nature of a block 
of wood. Under the circumstances the 
"boys" in South African homes or on trains 
and in hotels in America have played the 
part of the wooden Indian remarkably 
well. 
The native's occasional reassertion of his 
humanity brought forth from the South 
African black peril commission the recommendation that "measures be taken to check 
this evil by upholding and, where necessary, 
uplifting the status and prestige of the white 
race, by maintaining the respect in which it 
should be held, and by doing away with 
aught and all that may tend to diminish 
that status, prestige and respect." 
"The defects of the report," says the 
conservative missionary organ, the Christian Express, "lie in its inevitable onesidedness. The status of the natives is also of 
importance, and every denial to them of 
the consideration due to citizens is a shortsighted error fraught with evil consequences 
in the future." A. P. 0., the unmuffled 
organ of the African Political Organization, 
makes a caustic criticism of the commission 
for publishing a report embodying facts 
which "we have reiterated ad nauseam in 
our columns": 
"The whole report is simply a condemnation of the laxity of conduct of many white 
women, and of the greed for gain that impels others to corrupt the raw native. 
"The system of having native boys as 
domestics . should have been condemned in 
stronger terms. It is unfair to the 'boys.' 
" 'To eliminate the house boy would enforce a very great hardship on many a 
homestead in the absence of any substitute 
which at present can be found.' The elimination of the house boy is thus not a matter that calls for any consideration of the 
'boy' himself. His elimination would take 
place to-morrow if a substitute could be 
found. But that would at present prove 
a very great hardship to many a white 
household. Hence the commission recommends two precautions which we should 
think any rational being would take without being reminded of their importance by 
a corky government report printed in a 
blue book. The two recommendations are: 
care in selecting a good moral boy and the 
removal of temptations to the commission 
of crimes. Such are the feeble methods by 
which the whites think they are doing their 
duty toward those to whom they owe their 
protection. What we contend is that the 
system of house-boy service is radically 
wrong. It does not matter whether the 
house boys are whites or blacks. The only 
difference would be that the while boy 
being more civilized and more sophisticated 
would constitute the greater danger. Let 
the commission on such questions report 
heroically and honestly, and the perils would 
soon end." EDITORIAL 
TH E FRUIT OF TH E TREE . 
LET no one for a moment 
mistake that the present 
increased attack on the 
Negro along all lines is 
but the legitimate fruit 
of that long campaign 
for subserviency and surrender which 
a large party of Negroes have 
fathered now some twenty years. It 
is not necessary to question the motives 
of these men nor to deny that their 
insistence on thrift and saving has had 
its large and beneficent effect. But, on 
the other hand, only the blind and foolish can fail to see that a continued 
campaign in every nook and corner of 
this laud, preaching to people white 
and colored, that the Negro is chiefly to 
blame for his condition, that he must 
not insist on his rights, that he should 
not take part in politics, that "Ji m 
Crowism" is defensible and even advantageous, that he should humbly bow 
to the storm until the lordly white man 
grants him clemency—the fruit of this 
disgraceful doctrine is disfranchisement, segregation, lynching, and that 
last straw, the cowardly and unspeakable Patterson. Fellow Negroes, is it 
not time to be men? Is it not time to 
strike back when we are struck? Is it 
not high time to hold up our heads and 
clench our teeth and swear by the 
Eternal God we will NOT be slaves, 
and that no aider, abetter and teacher 
of slavery in any shape or guise can 
longer lead us ? 
ANOTHE R OPE N LETTE R TO 
WOODROW WILSON. 
SIR: On the occasion of 
your inauguration as 
President of the United 
States, TH E CRISI S took 
the liberty of addressing 
to you an open letter. 
TH E CRISI S spoke for no inconsiderable 
part of ten millions of human beings, 
American born, American citizens. TH E 
CRISI S said in that letter, among other 
things: 
"The only time when the Negro 
problem is insoluble is when men insist 
on settling wrong by asking absolutely 
contradictory things. Yo u cannot make 
10,000,000 people at one and the same 
time servile and dignified, docile and 
self-reliant, servants and independent 
leaders, segregated and yet part of the 
industrial organism, disfranchised and 
citizens of a democracy, ignorant and 
intelligent. This is impossible and the 
impossibility is not factitious; it is in 
the very nature of things. 
"O n the other hand, a determination 
on the part of intelligent and decent 
Americans to see that no man is denied 
a reasonable chance for life, liberty and 
happiness simply because of the color 
of his skin is a simple, sane and practical solution of the race problem in 
this land. " 
Sir, you have now been President of 
the United States for six months and 
what is the result? It is no exaggeration to say that every enemy of the 
Negro race is greatly encouraged; that EDITORIAL 233 
every man who dreams of makin g the 
Negro race a group of menials and 
•pariahs is alert and hopeful. Varda -
man, Til l man, Hoke Smith , Cole Blease 
and Burleso n are evidently assuming 
that their theory of the place and destin y of the Negro race is the theory of 
you r administration. They and others 
are assuming this because not a single 
act an d not a single word of yours 
since election has given anyone reason 
to infe r that yo u have the slightest 
interest i n the colored people or desire 
to alleviate their intolerable position. 
A dozen worthy Negro officials have 
been removed from office, and you have 
nominated but one black man for office, 
an d he, such a contemptible cur, that 
his very nomination was an insult to 
every Negro i n the land. 
To this negative appearance of in ­
difference has been added positive 
action on the part of you r advisers, 
wit h or without you r knowledge, 
which constitutes the gravest attack on 
the liberties of our people since emancipation. Publi c segregation of civi l 
servants i n government employ, necessaril y involvin g personal insult and 
humiliation , has for the first time i n 
history been made the policy of the 
Unite d States government. 
I n the Treasur y and Postoffice Departments colored clerks have been 
herded to themselves as though they 
were not human beings. W e are told 
that one colored clerk who could not 
actually be segregated on account of 
the nature of his work has consequently 
had a cage built around him to separate 
hi m from his white companions of 
man y years. Mr . Wilson , do yo u know 
these things? Ar e yo u responsible for 
them? Di d yo u advise them? Do you 
not know that no other group of American citizens has ever been treated i n 
this way and that no President of the 
Unite d States ever dared to propose 
such treatment? Her e is a plain , flat, 
disgraceful spittin g i n the face of people whose darkened countenances are 
already dark wit h the slime of insult. 
Do yo u consent to this, President Wil ­
son? Do yo u believe i n it? Hav e yo u 
been able to persuade yourself that 
nationa l insult is best for a people 
struggling into self-respect 1 
President Wilson , we do not, we cannot believe this. TH E CRISIS still clings 
to the conviction that a vote for Wood -
row Wilso n was NO T a vote for Cole 
Blease or Hoke Smith . Bu t whether it 
was or not segregation is going to be 
resented as it ought to be resented by 
the colored people. W e would not be 
men if we di d not resent it. The policy 
adopted, whether wit h you r consent or 
knowledge or not, is an indefensible 
attack on a people who have i n the 
past been shamefully humiliated. There 
are foolish people who think that such 
policy has no limit and that lynching , 
"Ji m Crowism, " segregation and insult 
are to be permanent institutions i n 
America . 
W e have appealed i n the past, Mr . 
Wilson , to yo u as a man and statesman ; to you r sense of fairness and 
broad cosmopolitan outlook on' the 
world. W e renew this appeal and to it 
we venture to add some plai n considerations of politica l expediency. 
W e black men still vote. I n spite of 
the fact that the triump h of you r party 
last fall was possible only because 
Southern white men have, through our 
disfranchisement, from twice to seven 
times the politica l power of Norther n 
white men—notwithstanding this, we 
black men of the Nort h have a growing 
nest egg of 500,000 ballots, and ballots 
that are counted, which no sane part y 
can ignore. Does you r Mr . Burleson 
expect the Democratic party to carry 
New York , New Jersey, Pennsylvania , 
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, by 200,000 
votes? If he does wil l it not be well 
for him to remember that there are 
237,942 black voters i n these States. 
W e have been tryin g to tell these voters 
that the Democratic part y wants their 
votes. Hav e we been wrong, Mr . Wil -SEATTLE : MR . SCOTT' S CATERIN G BUSINESS . (See page 240.) TH E SUMME R SCHOO L A T WILBERFORCE : A TENNI S CLUB . (See page 217.) 236 TH E CRISIS 
son ? Hav e we assumed too great and 
quick a growth of intelligence i n the 
part y that once made slavery its 
cornerstone ? 
I n view of all this, we beg to ask the 
President of the Unite d States and the 
leader of the Democrati c part y a few 
plai n questions: 
1. D o yo u want Negro votes? 
2. Do yo u think that a "Ji m Crow " 
civi l service wil l get these votes? 
3. Is you r Negro policy to be dictated by Tillma n and Vardama n ? 
4. Ar e yo u going to appoint black 
men to office on the same terms 
that yo u choose white men ? 
This is information, Mr . Wilson , 
which we are very anxious to have. ' 
TH E CRISIS advocated sincerely and 
strongly you r election to the Presidency. TH E CRISIS has no desire to be 
compelled to apologize to its constituency for this course. Bu t at the present rate it looks as though some apology 
or explanation was going to be i n order 
very soon. 
W e are still hoping that present indications are deceptive. W e are still trying to believe that the President of 
the Unite d States is the President of 
10,000,000. as well as of 90,000.000, and 
that though the 10,000,000 are black 
and poor, he is too honest and cultured 
a gentleman to yiel d to the clamors of 
ignorance and prejudice and hatred. 
W e are still hoping all this, Mr . Wilson , 
but hope deferred maketh the heart 
sick. Ver y respectfully yours, 
TH E CRISIS. 
LIES. 
AS WE have repeatedly 
intimated, the Bourbo n 
South lies. It lies so 
repeatedly and openly 
that most innocent bystanders cannot believe 
it possible. Take, for instance, this 
letter i n Life from a Georgia 
Congressman : 
"I n regard to the leasing of convicts 
by the State of Georgia , I desire to say 
that above five years ago Georgi a di d 
away absolutely wit h that system. N o 
convicts are leased i n Georgi a an d have 
not been for about five years. " 
This is a deliberate attempt to deceive 
the public . Georgi a does lease convicts. 
The only change made i n the law five 
or six years ago was to let the State 
pa y the guards over the privat e contractors' camps, an d to call those 
twenty-five or more privat e camps scattered through the State, unde r the 
control of privat e lessees, the "penitentiary !' ' The n the State says we do 
not "lease " our convicts, but does not 
forget to boast i n its own reports: 
' ' The contracts so made wil l brin g 
into the State treasury annually, for a 
period of five years, beginnin g Apri l 
1, 1904, the gross sum of $340,000, and 
after deducting the necessary expenses 
of this department estimated at 
$115,000, wil l leave a net amount of 
$225,000 per annum, which, unde r the 
law. wil l be divide d among those counties not using convict labor upo n their 
publi c roads, according to population, 
to be used for school or road purposes. " 
What , i n the long run, can any cause, 
gain by systematic lying ? 
TH E GREA T NORTHWEST . 
FOR the enterprising colored ma n wit h either a 
good trade or profession 
or a few hundre d 
dollars of capita l the 
Great Northwest offers 
extraordinary inducements. Fo r this 
reason we give this month muc h space 
to this extraordinar y section of this 
great lan d and we urge persons minded 
to go there to communicate wit h TH E 
CRISIS for advice. Empty-hande d 
laborers without skil l or money are not 
needed. Le t them work an d save where 
they are. Bu t young, vigorous, educated persons or thrift y folk of middl e 
age wil l be more than welcome. THE characteristic of the 
Great Northwest is its unexpectedness. One looks 
for tall black mountains 
and ghostlike trees, snow 
and the echo of ice on the 
bills, and all this one finds. 
But there is more. There is the creeping 
spell of the silent ocean with its strange 
metamorphoses of climate, its seasons of 
rain and shine, until one is puzzled with his 
calendar and lost to all his weather 
bearings. 
Then come the cities. Portland one receives as plausible; a large city with a 
certain Eastern, calm and steady growth. 
hit over a thousand, but it is manly and 
holds its head erect and has hopes. Portland was the only place out of nearly fifty 
places where TH E CRISIS has lectured that 
did not keep its financial contract, but this 
was probably a personal fault and not 
typical. Typical was the effort to establish 
a social center, to enlarge and popularize a 
colored hotel, to build new homes and open 
new avenues of employment. 
From Portland one goes with a sense of 
puzzled inquiry. Why have colored folk 
come here? • Why should they stay and 
what is their outlook? Then comes Tacoma 
and the first surprise. Why is Tacoma? 
one asks—so dainty a city high on its hills, 
The colored population is but a handful, a with the breath of promise in its lungs? 
MR . HARRIS ' GROCERY , TACOMA . 
The Grea t 
Northwest 
.rfOu. .u$)Mi .u$Ui .u&a. .u&* 238 TH E CRISIS 
MR . CHANDLER' S EXPRES S BUSINESS , TACOMA . 
Here are less than a thousand colored folk, 
but peculiarly free and sturdy and individual. They have a colored paper which is 
not colored. They have a branch of our 
association with a genius for secretary—a 
soft-voiced woman, utterly feminine, and 
yet an untiring leader of men, who may yet 
make colored Tacoma famous. Here the 
fight against race prejudice has been persistent and triumphant. There is no freer 
.city in America, in hotel and restaurant 
and soda fountain. Laborers have a man's 
chance, and in the civil service are many 
colored people. The mayor of the city, 
being wise, came to our lectures and ate at 
our banquet and saw the passing of the silver 
loving cup, the treasure of all the journey. 
Next day three of us went to Seattle. See 
America and then—Seattle. Seattle is the 
crowning surprise—the embodied unexpectedness. Imagine, if you please, north of 
the northmost woods of Maine, a city of 
300,000, gleaming with mighty waters, where 
the navies of the world may lie. Washington has over 6,000 Negroes and 2,500 live 
in Seattle. 
They rival Los Angeles as a group. 
There is the lawyer, Andrew Black; the 
doctor, David Cardwell; there is caterer 
Stone, who dined us, and the inimitable 
Norris, who looks at you with twinkling 
gravity and talks of "your" people. There 
was the minister, clean in body and soul. 
Above all there was Beattie. I remember 
her as a chubby schoolgirl in Boston out 
of Denver. Then twenty long years and 
more, and we meet here in Seattle in the fire 
glow beside the cut glass and silver of a 
dinner that I hunger and thirst for yet. 
Another mayor came to our lecture, jolly 
and strenuous, and in the midnight I said 
good-by and went my way. 
There came an interlude—a perfect day 
on perfect waters, flying northward where 
hurry the shadow of undropped snows and 
the peace of endless understanding. For 
that one day of rest I thank thee, Perfect 
Spirit. 
So the journey in the Great Northwest 
ended. Ended as this stupendous land 
could end in three whole days and four 
whole nights in one sleeping car on the 
way back to Kansas City. In that journey 
[ recalled everything from the Grand Canyon to Seattle. I recalled the charming and 
simple hospitality of the best-bred race on 
earth. It takes extraordinary training, gift 
and opportunity to make the average white 
man anything but an overbearing' hog, but 
the most ordinary Negro is an instinctive 
gentleman. He may transgress the letter 
of the social law but seldom its spirit. TH E GREA T NORTHWEST 239 
MB . MOKTON' S HOM E A T EVERETT . 
Thinking of all this I came out of fairyland 
back to the world again. Coming out of 
the West I have some way again and again 
dreamed a vision of some city set like 
Seattle on a hill with the roses of Los 
Angeles an d th e 
Golden Gate of San 
Francisco in the dim 
distance an d th e 
Grand Canyon loomin g dow n fro m 
heaven. Through that 
city two great and 
thick-thronged avenues cross forming 
four arms—Prince's 
Street of Edinburgh 
is one, the Elysian 
Fields of Paris another, Orange Grove 
Avenue of Pasadena 
is a third, and the 
fourth may be the 
Kansas City Paseo, 
or Piccadilly—I am 
not sure which. Then 
high in that central ATTORNEY A. R. 
square I think would Chairma n of TH E 
be fit place for the Throne of God. 
The singular thing is why a thousand 
colored people in Tacoma, or 3,000 in 
Seattle, should mean so much more to 
themselves and the world than 100,000 of 
the same people in 
parts of Alabama or 
Georgia. The answer is clear to the 
thoughtful. The colored folk in Tacoma 
and Seattle are educated; not college' 
bred, but out of the 
shackles of dense ig ­
norance; they have 
push, fo r their very 
coming so far westward proves it; and. 
above all, they are 
a part of the greater 
group and they know 
it. The great gToup 
recognizes them as 
me n an d women. 
Their social educa-
" tion goes on apace. 
BLACK , SEATTLE . m l i • 
CRISI S Committee .
 The
y glor y i n 240 TH E CRISIS 
ME . CHANDLER' S 12-FAMTL Y APARTMEN T HOUSE , SEATTLE . 
Tacoma, for Tacoma is theirs; they glory 
in Rainier,, for Rainier is their God of the 
Mountains. They are one with the land 
and their spirit has grown big with its 
bigness. Yet they have not forgotten their 
people. They want them to come and find 
freedom as they have. They want picked 
men—good hard-working vegetable farmers; merchants, men with a few hundred 
dollars of capital, men with well-trained 
brains. To such colored men they cry on 
-to Washington; It is a great State. It 
may lie a great colored State. The land is 
there in sheer abundance. The climate is 
there mild and alluring. The mountains 
and the sea are there. Come! 
What shall our pictures say of all they 
might say 1 Little, indeed, and that with 
much apology for thing's omitted and 
slightly touched on. Out of a dozen 
prominent citizens we choose Mr. Andrew 
L. Black, a well-known and pushing lawyer, who made the visit of the editor of 
TH E CRISIS possible and most pleasant. 
Then as headpieces are two business people 
—a clothier of Bellingham and a hairdresser of Seattle. Of numerous businesses 
we have selected a caterer's shop, a grocery 
store and a fuel and express enterprise. 
Then of a number of pretty homes we call 
attention to Mr. Morton's and to an apartment house, not forgetting this: INTERNATIONA L CONGRESS ON 
SCHOOL HYGIENE . 
THE National Association has been in-
* vited to participate in the fourth 
international congress on school hygiene to 
be held in Buffalo, August 25-30. A n exhibit will be sent, consisting of wall charts 
and mounted photographs illustrating the 
contrast in white and colored schools in 
the South. 
Mr. James B. Clarke, who has been acting on the staff of TH E CRISIS, will give 
Dr. Du Bois' illustrated lecture, "Following 
the Color Line." The association is most 
fortunate in having Mr. Clarke, a Cornell 
graduate and a linguist of rare accomplishments, as its representative at this international congress. Mention of Mr. Clarke 
was made in TH E CRISIS for October, 1911, 
under "Men of the Month." 
M 
SEGREGATION . 
BALTIMORE.—On August 5 the Maryland Court of Appeals unanimously 
sustained Judge Elliott's opinion that the 
West Segregation Act was unconstitutional. 
The court, however, took pains to point out 
how an ordinance could be drawn which 
would be constitutional, thus really supporting the principle of segregation. Such an 
ordinance has already been drawn by Mr. 
Dashiell, and it is claimed by friends, of 
segregation that this new ordinance can be 
carried out immediately after its passage 
without fear of attack in the courts, because it meets the objections pointed out 
by the court of last resort in the State. 
•> SEGREGATION IN CIVIL SERVICE. 
The association regards the recent segregation in the government departments at 
Washington, which is commented upon elsewhere in this issue, as the most serious 
condition the colored people have had to 
face since the war. The association is giving the matter its closest attention and will' 
publish later the result of its work. 
BRANCHES . 
THE hearty spirit of co-operation in our 
•** branches is indicated by the responses we 
are receiving to our request for contributions to the new lawyer's salary. In addition to those mentioned in the last issue of 
THE CRISIS, Detroit, Topeka, Quiney and 
Tacoma have each contributed $100. This 
evidence of confidence in the work we are 
trying to do is most encouraging. We 
realize it is particularly difficult to raise 
funds in the summer. In their generous 
and prompt response branches of the small 
membership of Quiney and Tacoma have 
set a pace that is most stimulating. 
PHILADELPHIA. 
The constitution of the Philadelphia 
branch has been approved. The officers 
are as follows: President, Ellwood Heacock; vice-president, Dr. E. W. Johnson; 
second vice-president, James H . Williams; 
secretary, Mrs. S. W. Layten; treasurer, 
Howard C. Roberts; directors, Rev. John 
MacCallum, Richard R. Wright, Mrs. Mary 
Mendale, Rabbi El i Mayer, Bishop J. S. 
Caldwell, Rev. E . W. Moore, Hon. George 
H . White, Miss Frances Bartholomew, Mrs. 
Addie Dickerson. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
Or COLORED PEOPLE 242 TH E CRISI S 
QUINCY . 
A June feast was given by the Quiney 
branch at the Eighth and Elm Streets 
Baptist Church with the following program: Invocation, Rev. T. L. Smith; instrumental solo, Miss Stella Zimmerman; 
reading, Mrs. Dyson; vocal solo, Garfield 
Mosby; address, "Our Colored Americans," J. Frank Garner; vocal solo, Mrs. 
Nannie Hall ; address, "The Grandfather 
Clause," Prof. Willis N . Brent; selection 
by Fields' Orchestra. The address of Prof. 
Brent was well received. Mr. Potter spoke 
in the place of the mayor. 
TACOMA . 
The following have been elected to fill 
vacancies in the executive committee: Mr. 
R. L . Winn, Mr. D. H . Parker, Mr. Leon 
Dumas. 
A strawberry festival for the benefit of 
the association was given at the home of 
Mr. and Mrs. Percy Robinson and was 
most successful, a substantial sum having 
been realized. 
WASHINGTON . 
At the meeting of the board of directors 
on August 5 it was voted to adopt the following report of the committee on branches 
in regard to the situation in the Washington group mentioned in the last issue of 
TH E CRISIS : 
We find that the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People has 
no official branch in the District of Columbia. We therefore recommend that all members of the association who have paid dues 
in the city of Washington up to and in -
eluding June 20 (the date of the last 
meeting of the Washington group) shall be 
recognized as constituting the official branch 
of the association in the District of Columbia, and we further recommend that a 
constitution shall be provided by your 
board of directors for this branch which 
shall require an election of officers on the 
third Friday in January and which shall 
give authority to the committee on branches 
to select officers for the branch to hold 
office until that date. 
(Signed) J. E . SPINGARN , 
CHAS . H . STUDIN , 
M . C . NERNEY , 
Committee on Branches. 
PERRY' S VICTOR Y CENTENNIAL . 
THE chairman of the board of directors, 
who has been endeavoring to secure the 
representation of the colored' people at 
Perry's victory centennial, has been advised 
by the secretary-general of the celebration 
that a resolution has been unanimously 
adopted authorizing the committee on the 
Put-in-Bay celebration to name an orator 
representing the colored people of the country at the interstate ceremonies to be held 
at Put-in-Bay, September 10, the one hundredth anniversary of the battle of Lake 
Erie. The name of the orator thus authorized will be announced in connection with 
the general program in due time. 
Segregation 
By a Veteran Civil Service Clerk 
THE segregation of colored workers in the 
employ of the United States civil service 
is a proposition presented to the attention 
of the country for the first time during the 
124 years that colored persons have been 
employed in various capacities in the civil 
branch of the government. From the 
beginning of the government under the 
Constitution down to the present colored 
people have been numbered among the officers. At first, and up to 1863, they were 
employed only in the minor and menial 
positions. In 1863 Salmon P. Chase, 
Secretary of the Treasury in President 
Lincoln's Cabinet, appointed the first colored man to the position of clerk in the 
government service. Fo r fifty years the 
precedent has been followed. From 1863 to 
1883, the period of the spoils system, the 
number of appointments of colored persons 
to clerical positions, (hough considerable, 
was the cause of little comment, and of no 
adverse criticism. 
Wit h the reform of the civil service and 
the introduction of the system of appointments by competitive examinations and the 
establishment of a register of eligibles, it 
was predicted that colored people would be 
entirely eliminated from the clerical grades 
of the service. Such, however, has not been SEGREGATION 243 
the case. From the very beginning those 
of the colored people who had any sort of 
educational equipment embraced the opportunity to enter the competitive examinations. Wit h what success their venture was 
attended, the report of the Civil Service 
Commission for the year 1S91 will testify. 
It was therein stated that large numbers 
of colored persons had successfully passed 
the tests and had received appointments; 
and the opinion was expressed that they 
were of higher intellectual attainments and 
moral ideals than those who had found their 
way into the service through the methods of 
the spoils system. In the succeeding years 
that record has been repeated and even 
excelled. 
It cannot escape comment that the first 
appointment of a colored man to a clerical 
position in the service of the government 
was made by a Cabinet officer of Democratic 
antecedents, and that the first proposition 
to segregate such employees comes from a 
Democratic administration. A t no time in 
the history of the government has any colored person .ever been appointed to any 
position, except after the most careful and 
painstaking scrutiny of his experience, faithfulness, reliability and general reputation. 
It would be a revelation of the heights 
of moral excellence and practical usefulness 
to which colored people are capable of 
attaining if the archives of the government 
would yield up the "endorsements", upon 
which the appointments were based. The 
records of these persons in the positions of 
all kinds to which they were appointed 
would, in the great majority of eases, corroborate the "endorsements." This applies 
particularly to those who come into the 
service without the reformed competitive 
test. As to the others the matter of 
appointment and the record made since 
appointment can be no subject of dispute. 
It is the rarest thing in the world to hear 
of a colored employee being dismissed from 
the service for misconduct or inefficiency. 
Officials of superior rank in administrations 
by each of the political parties have had 
colored employees promoted strictly on the 
ground of merit, testifying to their intelligence, reliability and general efficiency. 
Segregation as applied to these persons 
is deprived of the usual pretext put forward in its justification. Here are persons 
sought to be wronged and humiliated, who 
are not ignorant, nor immoral, not indecorous, not given to crimes against white 
women or other women. By every test by 
which men seek to try men they have been 
tried, and have been found not wanting. 
Nothing could better illustrate the injustice 
and cruelty of race prejudice than this 
blow aimed at a class of persons whose only 
fault is their excellence, whose only crime 
is a difference in external aspect from their 
fellows. Segregation, if accomplished, will 
be but a step in the direction of complete 
elimination of colored persons from the 
government service, and of loss of citizenship and ultimate expatriation, if not 
extermination. Those who appear as the 
strongest advocates of segregation avow 
this. No argument is now offered in favor 
of segregation that was not put forth in 
defense of the institution of chattel slavery. 
Segregation is intended to make colored 
people feel that they are inferior to white 
people. 
The feeling and acceptance of inferiority 
is the foundation upon which slavery rests. 
NOCTURN E 
By ALIC E HATHAWA Y CUNNINGHA M 
Wreathed with a silver cloud, the moon 
Sails o'er an azure sea, 
A flute-voiced shepherd trills a tune 
Of haunting melodv. 
Sweet heavy scents from blossoms pale 
On lazy zephyrs float. 
A hush!—the song of the nightingale 
Bursts from its golden throat! 
The stars come out in a sapphire sky 
Bejeweling one by one, 
To glow just for a night, with dawn they 
die 
At the kiss of their Lord, the sun. TTTj Getting Off the Color Line y j 
c^V ^ By JOSE CLARAN A e^u^S ) 
BRAZIL is a country where 
there is no color line. The 
chief reason for this remarkable phenomenon, which 
"passeth the understanding" and excites the ire of 
the tourist or newspaper 
writer from North America, is, perhaps, 
that Negro slavery in Portuguese America 
was, like Indian slavery or any other kind 
of slavery, simply and purely an economic 
system. The fact is it never was anything 
else anywhere else, but in North America, 
because of the general diffusion of the spelling book and the Family Bible, the idea 
became widespread that black slavery should 
be maintained, even after it had been 
proved to be impoverishing all but a few 
white men, out of sheer obedience to the 
word of God. True enough, with all the 
slave traders there was the pious motive of 
bringing the black heathen into the knowledge and love of the God of the slave 
hunter, but the followers of Luther and 
Calvin found additional justification for 
keeping him therein from a perverted 
understanding of the Hebrew scriptures. 
Moses, they contended, had it directly from 
God himself that the black man was foredoomed and foreordained to be a drawer 
of water and hewer of wood for somebody 
else. Thus expounded the Luthero-Knoxic 
advocates of slavery like the Reverend 
Doctor Wilson, whose orthodox predestination Presbyterian son is now the President 
of the United States. Nowadays those of 
us who are liberal enough to admit that 
Confucius and Buddha also knew something 
about the word of God are inclined to see 
in that declaration of Moses the perfectly 
human desire to "get even" with black people for all time for what the Israelites had 
suffered at the hands of the blackish people 
of Egypt. My chronology may be a little 
more hazy than that of the Kin g James 
Version, but I think my theory has been 
well deduced from Judah P. Benjamin, Ochs 
and (he lawyer who beat me in a quick-lunch 
discrimination suit. 
To be able to read and write is not altogether an unmixed blessing. When this 
faculty is unaccompanied by any other 
intellectual quality, it is quite often more 
dangerous than analphabetism. This is 
particularly true when applied to the Book 
of Hebrew Law and Lore. The Portuguese 
never, "placed much stock" in spelling 
books and, as their branch of the Christian 
religion replaced Hezekiah, Zachariah. 
Nehemiah and the other IAH S with Xavier 
and Ignatius Loyola and the other saints 
and doctors, as prophets and lawgivers, 
they did not know, as Blease, Vardaman, 
Tillman and Hoke Smith so eloquently 
expound and explain whenever they invoke 
a blessing on a lynching bee or on a new 
color screen in an office building of the 
United States, what God Almighty intended 
to do with the man with a flat nose or 
who and what caused the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah. But the sound 
business sense of the Portuguese, acquired 
in no small measure from their contact with 
living, modern, post-Aaronic, extraJerusalem Jews, told them when slavery 
had become an unprofitable speculation 
which ought to be abandoned without delay. 
Then, too, a great many realized that it was 
not exactly right to the slave. So. with the 
expenditure of a little oratory and no 
blood, such Negroes and Negroids as were 
not themselves slaveholders, or at least 
freedmen, were emancipated without engendering the aftermath of animosities revived 
in America by the Civil War. Thus, less 
than twenty-five years ago, the new Republic 
of Brazil, under Deodoro, a colored man, 
started with a heritage of Order and Progress 
such as no other American country had ever 
known, for, with the exception of the long 
and costly war with Paraguay, monarchical 
Brazil had enjoyed greater peace and a 
more orderly development than even the 
United States. 
As matters now stand, the Brazilians 
could not draw the color line, for they 
would not know where to begin. They 
know that the early settlers seldom took 
European women with them. They point 
with pride to a tradition which surrounds GETTING OF F TH E COLOR LIN E 245 
FORWAR D TURRET S O F TH E "MINA S 
GERAES. " 
Diogo Alvarez, the first Portuguese to get 
a footing in Bahia, with a seraglio of Indian 
wives, and descent from this source is considered equivalent to Mayflower genealogy. 
They do not seek to deny that the same process of whitewashing was applied to the 
African, who in turn darkened the Indian 
and the half-breed. They realize that 
it is futile to try to check the natural 
process of evolution which is making a 
homogeneous people out of the various 
constituent elements, Indian, Negro and 
Caucasian of every tribe and nation, in the 
population of their vast country. At the 
Races Congress in 1911 Dr. Joao Baptista 
de Lacerda said 
that in less than 
one hundred years 
all the people of 
Brazil would be 
white. One hundred years after 
that, perhaps , 
they may be calling themselves the 
only genuine, unadu l terated descendants of redheaded Cato and 
th e ancient Romans, and may 
lead armies and 
armadas north - O N TH E QUARTERDEC K 
O N TH E FORECASTLE . 
ward to make reprisals against the Britons, 
Goths, Gauls, Vandals, Parthians, Cherokees, 
Iroquois, Mandingoes and Yorubas who go 
and will go to make up the Anglo-Saxon 
race in North America. Meanwhile they 
have sent an ultra-modern war galley just to 
show the ultra-modern interpreters of the 
Monroe Doctrine what they have and what 
they can do. 
The Brazilian battleship, "Minas Geraes," 
which recently came to the United States on 
a diplomatic mission, is of peculiar interest 
to colored people. The most powerful ship 
afloat when she went into commission three 
years ago, her first task was to convey 
from Norfolk to 
Rio de Janeiro the 
body of Joaquim 
Nabuco, the late 
Ambassador to the 
United States, 
who bega n his 
public career by 
throwing his scholarly attainments 
and masterl y 
statesmanship into 
the cause of abolition. Hardly had 
this errand been 
completed w he n 
the men of the 
"Minas Geraes"— 246 TH E CRISIS 
which is named after General Mines, the 
richest and most populous State in Brazil— 
led by Joao Candido, a colored man, startled 
the world by killing the captain, a man. of 
Indian blood, and by threatening to bombard 
the city of Rio de Janeiro if the government 
did not grant their demands for certain reforms in the naval service, chief of which 
was the abolition of corporal punishment. 
The "Sao Paulo," the sister ship of the 
"Minas," and the "Deodoro," also joined the 
revolt, and for several days a city of 
1,000,000 inhabitants was at the mercy of a 
handful of determined men. 
The people, the government and, with 
the exception of the line officers, the navy 
department itself were in favor of the 
sailors. They were granted an amnesty on 
promise of, surrender 
and, contrary to reports 
in the American press 
at the time, the provisions of the amnesty 
were carried out in good 
faith by the government. Joao Candido is 
alive and well and has 
the satisfaction of knowing that as a result of 
his "revolution" the 
Brazilian man-of-war's 
man now receives more 
than the American of 
corresponding rating, 
and corporal punishment, which an English 
gymnastic instructor on the "Minas " had 
been very anxious to enforce, is now a thing 
of the past. But Candido himself does not 
enjoy any of these reforms, for the government took good care to get rid of most of 
the old sailors and make a navy of raw 
recruits. 
One Sunday, when the "Minas " was in 
the Hudson River, a number of shore folk 
made a peaceful invasion and capture of 
the great ship. The surrender, in fact, had 
been prearranged with three gallant officers, 
one of whom is a genuine Iberian, another 
Anglo-Iberian and the third Afro-Iberian. 
In other words, at Norfolk the first two 
had to sit "from front to rear," the other 
"from rear to front" in the street cars. 
I obtained a picture which shows them 
reunited on their ship. It was taken by a 
OFFICER S O F TH E "MINA S GERAE S 
—I N THRE E COLORS . 
young man who is rated at 99.25 as a 
teacher of English to white people in a 
high school, but who would have to sit 
"from rear to front" if Heflinism were 
applied to the street cars in the city which 
is guarded by the Statue of Liberty. 
Another picture shows a group of happy 
visitors with their courteous hosts on the 
quarterdeck of the vessel. To prove that 
their survey was complete the friendly foes 
took a picture of some of their party on the 
forecastle. They did not photograph the 
inside of the turrets, but they secured an 
outside view of the big twelve-inch guns 
which are operated by Jim Crow, more or 
less. 
The lines which appear above the guns 
are for wet, newly washed jumpers and 
hammocks. In the background appears the 
color line on Uncle 
Sam's Ship "Arkansas." 
The gentleman whom 
Hearst's editorial man 
Friday calls "Thrice 
Weekly" Daniels did 
not put it up. That he 
is not likely to haul it 
down is proved by his 
abandonment of his idea 
of democratizing th e 
American navy when he 
found that it would 
give colore d men a 
chance to sit down to 
eat, instead of standing 
up, as they now do. At the present time a 
colored man has no more chance of operating 
a twelve-inch gun on an American battleship 
than of becoming governor of Alabama. 
There was a time though when Uncle Sam 
was glad to have Jim Crow behind the 
ancient muzzle loaders, as the occasional 
weatherbeaten, superannuated colored gunner's mate attests. At the present time the 
colored aspirant to seafaring and sea fighting 
must needs go to France or Brazil. But he 
must not fail to take some ability along 
with his color and his aspirations. A better and less expensive way, however, would 
be to stay in his native land and fight for 
the "right to be killed" or to do anything 
honorable and patriotic and self-respecting 
in a country which is his by right of services alreadv rendered. TH E NE W EDUCATIO N I N TH E SOUTH : "DOMESTI C SCIENC E FO R COLORE D GIRL S ONLY. " WHA T T O REA D 
The "Passin'-on" Party. By Effie Graham. 
A. C. McClurg & Co., Chicago, 1912. 
A very pretty story this, amateurish it is 
true, but sweet and very pathetic. It deals, 
after a humorous description of "Aunt 
June's" house, with the desire of that oldtime "mammy" for a reception, which she 
calls a "passin'-on party." One is glad to 
know that this desire is realized before too 
late. 
There is a good deal of very apposite 
description in the book, and a really remarkable use of dialect, such as one hears 
rarely nowadays, and which the average 
educated man, white or black, would have 
difficulty in reproducing. Doubtless the 
picture drawn by the author is faithful in 
many respects—one feels as much—but one 
is glad to feel that these things are of the 
past. The picturesqueness of the peasant, 
the artistic value afforded by the ex-slave— 
these are all very well. But meanwhile 
what about the subjective life of the peasant 
or ex-slave himself? The fact that the 
story may awaken such reflections renders 
it no less attractive. 
Evolution and Life. Bv Algernon B. Jackson, 
M. D. Printed by the'A. M. E. Book Concern, 
Philadelphia, 1911. 
Doctor Jackson very fittingly first makes 
clear the theory of evolution and then attempts to make its "application practical in 
our every-day lives." He does this in a 
few very interesting chapters, and also contrives to reconcile the teachings of science 
with those of Christianity. This really is 
the purpose of the book, which, despite a 
number of necessary technicalities, makes 
attractive and profitable reading. 
Character Sketch of the Late Rev. J . Claudius 
May, F. R. G. S. Delivered by Rev. J . T. 
Roberts at Wesley Church, Trelawney Street. 
This slim volume contains an account of 
the Rev. J. Claudius May, F . R, G. S., who 
was the first principal of the Wesleyan Boys' 
High School, Freetown, Sierra Leone. The 
account is both attractive and encouraging 
and fills a long-felt want. Two passages, 
one chosen from the preface by J. Denton 
and one from the Reverend Roberts' own 
introduction, show the value of such a piece 
of work as this. The first passage reads: 
"The paucity of local biography puts the 
West African teacher at a serious disadvantage as compared with his European or 
American confrere when making biography 
the basis of moral appeal to his scholar. 
His heroes are perforce of another race 
whose circumstances and environment are 
not those of the lad in whose soul the 
spirit of emulation is to be awakened. The 
lad knows that mentally he makes allowance and the force of the appeal is seriously 
discounted. How different if the story had 
been drawn from the life of James Quaker 
or Sir Samuel Lewis"—prominent West 
Africans. 
Again Reverend Roberts says: "We owe 
it as much to ourselves as to our eminent 
men and women that their virtues should be 
portrayed and their memory kept green in 
records accessible to posterity. That community is blind to its own interests that 
enjoys their self-sacrificing labors and 
neither sing their praises in gratitude to 
them nor recounts their deeds for the emulation of others when its heroes quit this 
mortal life." 
PUBLISHERS ' CHA T 
Next comes the beautiful CHILDREN' S NUMBER . 
Is your baby there? 
W e must have the picture by September 10. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 249 
2 0 Inches Wide 
19 Inches Long 
Only 4.45 
The wonderful Pta.v-Tyd© patent process, owned by us. 
prevents the dr 1 icai « dues from breaking*. Yut they coat 
you less than you pay elsewhere for ordinary willows. 
StayTyd e Willo w Plume s 
23 in. wide 22 in. Ions 5.90 26 in. wide 25 in. Ions 7.9 0 
25in. wide 24 in. Ions 6.9 0 29 in. wide 27 in. long 9.90 
30 in. wide 27 in. long $11.9 0 
French furl Plume* 
17 in.. Special, $1.95 
18 " " 2.*S 
19 " Ex.wide, S.OO 
20 *' ** 7.50 
22 " " IO.OO 
We have established a worldwide reputation on our No. 401 magrnificent l&-mch French Curl Plume, 
made of rich, glossy best male 
stock, with wide, broad fibres and 
T" French head. 1 
K . white and colors ' 
Send 25c to cover express charges and we will ship 
any of above C.O.D. for free examination. Or, send 
full purchase price and we will Bend all charges pre 
paid. Money promptly refunded if for any reason yoD 
axe not satisfied. 
Send for free catalog of French or Willow Plumes, 
Ostrich Bands and Aigrettes, and get a complete $25 
Course in Millinery, Dyeing, Cleaning, Curling, etc. 
SOUTH AFRICAN IMPORTING CO. 
1841 Wabas h Ave . Dept. 46)3 CHICAG O 
The Loya l Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
Grand Supreme 
Governor 
is incorporated unde r the 
laws o f the Distric t o f Col ­
umbia . Itsobjectistocom -
bine the Negroe s of the 
world for thei r mutua l ad ­
vancement alon g industria l and commercia l lines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment b y the Negr o o f 
his civil and political rights. 
Thi s movement is interna ­
tiona l i n its scope; we have 
lodge s not onl y in the Unite d States but in 
Jamaica , B.W . I.; Colon , BocasdelToro , Panam a (Cana l Zone ) and Costa Rica . It is a dark 
da y for the Negr o an d he must com e together. 
Rac e movements hav e failed because our peopl e were told that b y contributin g thereto the 
rac e onl y woul d be benefited, but no tangibl e 
individaal benefits were offered. By our pla n 
the membe r pay s 35c . pe r month in the Association an d receives $4.0 0 pe r week sick benefits an d $10 0 at death. W e not onl y look 
after the rac e but each individua l membe r as 
well. A bi g convention is soon to be held here. 
W e want a lodg e i n every village , hamle t and 
town an d a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizer s wante d everywhere . Fo r 
full particulars, writ e 
KNIGHT S O F MALACHITE S 
1111 Yo u St. N . W . Washington, D . C . A 
Let Adler 
The Organ 
Maker v 
Take 
Your Own 
Time to Pay. 
have originated the 
wonderful Adler plan of selling organs which has 
made fhe'*J 4d/er"a household word; more than 75,000 
of these famous organs are now in the homes of the 
people. The time has arrived—this very day—for you 
to send for my Wonderful Free Organ Catalog. Learn 
how you can have the World's Best Organ- winnerof 
highes*. prize at St. Louis World's Fair—sent to your 
home for 30 Days* Trial without paying a cent. 
Just send for my Catalos- Select the Adler Organ 
you like best. I will ship it at once. Have it a month 
free. Send no money until you decide to buy. Then, 
if you decide to keep it. after thorough examination, 
pay me at your convenience in small amounts. You 
take no risk and if, at the end of a year, the "Adler" 
fails to make good on every point I will refund every 
dollar you have paid. I give the longest andstrongest 
guarantee ever made on an organ—for SOfullyears. 
I save you $48.75 because 1 sell direct from the $500,000 
f Adler Organ Factory (greatest in existence). The 
Adler Plan wrecks all retail organ prices. 
Write For Free Organ Book. Name 
and Address on Postal—or 
Mai l the 
Coupon 
C.L . 
Adler , Pres' t 
Adle r Orga n Co. , 
3559W. ChestnutSt.. Louisville, Ky . 
Send me—FREE — my Copy of your Wonderfu 
Organ Book, 
• IN AM . 
J ADD] 
[Seal) 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
St a ten ent of the • Ownership, Management, etc., 
of TH E CRISIS , published monthly at 26 Vesey 
Street, New York , required by the Ac t of August 
24, 1912. 
Edito r and Business ManagRr : W . E . B. D u Bois, 
20 Vese y Street, New Yor k City . 
Publisher : Th e National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People, 26 Vese y Street, New 
Yor k City . 
Owners: Th p Nationa l Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People, a corporation, composed of 30 directors; no stock issued. 
Know n bondholders, mortgagees and other 
security holders, holding 1 per cent, or more of 
total amount of bonds, mortgages or other 
securities, none. 
W . E . B . D U BOIS , 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this first 
day of October. 1912. 
HATTI E KASBERG , 
Commissione r of Deeds. 
5 Beekman Street, 
New York . 250 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEAR N TO REA D MUSIC AT SIGHT 
FO R $1.00 
One copy of any of the following included: 
Educate d Frog , Octoroon, New Centur y 
March , New Centur y Waltz , Anthe m Collection, Song Service ; or whole list for $2. 
Musi c published or arranged for publication. 
"Smith's Orchestra" 
HIGH-CLAS S MUSIC REPRESENT ­
IN G OU R OW N COMPOSER S 
Smith's Sight Reader , 50c copy. 
"Emancipatio n Hymn, " single copy 5c; 
per doz., 55c; per 100, $4.35, prepaid. Ban d 
and Orchestr a arrangement, 50c a copy. 
Positions at actual pitch for Cornets, 
Altos, Trombones, Valv e and Slide, scales and 
valuabl e hints. Neve r been offered before by 
anyone ; to anyone. 
"We'v e Walke d Side by Side " (Song 
Brin g Bac k M y Childhood Days) 25c 
Song Servic e for Sunda y Schools 10c 
Anthe m Boo k 25c 
Marche s for Piano . . . 25c 
' 'Delawar e Triumph,' ' ' 'Delawar e College," "Lovers' Retreat, " "Tuskege e 
March " (To Dr . B. T. Washington), Strin g 
Quartettes, Violi n and Piano selections, 
Violi n ' 'positions'' and scales; instruction 
diagrams for 'Cello and Bass, Viol a and 
Piano . Send cash with order . 
Publishe d b y WM . D . SMIT H 
1547 Nort h Cama c St. Philadelphia , Pa . 
Telephone Connection 
, "DEACON " JOHNSON 
(Tha t Cheerful Entertainer ) 
Leader , Mandoli n and Second Teno r with 
TH E "DEACON " JOHNSO N QUARTE T 
Montrea l New Yor k Philadelphi a 
Permanent Address: 
Time s Sq . Sta., Bo x 317, New Yor k Cit y 
MME. FANNIE BELL E D E KNIGHT 
Dramati c and Dialec t Reader . Engagements solicited. Students given special trainin g in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
Englis h Gramma r and Rhetoric . 
Term s Reasonable . 
Telephone Morningsid e 9045 
Studio : 231 W . 134th St. New Yor k Cit y 
Mme . MARI E JACKSO N STUART' S 
School of Expression , Musi c and Dramati c Ar t 
A thorough, well-defined course of instruction, 
designed to give the student a comprehensive grasp 
of each subject in the shortest time. Term s 
reasonable. 
Drama s staged. Amateur s trained. Play s revised. 
ADDRES S 
35 West 131st Street New Yor k 
TH E EQUITABL E ASSURANC E 
SOCIETY O F OKLAHOM A 
Incorporated an d licensed by the Insuranc e 
Departmen t of the State of Oklahom a to writ e life, 
health and accident insuranc e on the level premiu m 
basis. No assessments. Address Hom e Office 
Peoples Bank & Trust Company Bldg. 
Muskogee Oklahoma 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxo n 
champion of equal rights. Startlin g facts and crushing arguments. Fascinatin g reading . A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda . 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send order s to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York , N . Y . 
START A BUSINESS OF YOUR OWN 
W e want live, hustling men an d women i n every 
village, town and city to start a bi g successful 
business of their own. Experienc e not needed; we 
teach yo u the business. If yo u have the real 
will powe r you can have an independent business 
that wil l pa y yo u fro m $75 to $100 pe r mouth. 
Writ e to-day before some one in you r territor y 
gets ahead of you. Just inclose a 2-cent stamp for 
particulars. 
A . BLOUN T & COMPAN Y 
Washingto n - - N . C . 
WE wil l do you r typewritin g 
and save yo u money . 
These s and lega l papers 
promptl y and accurately executed. 
Send us your manuscripts. 
We'l l typewrit e them—hav e them 
revised, if necessary—and help 
you get them place d wit h 
publishers. 
Send us your song poems. 
We'l l have them set to musi c and 
tell yo u ho w and wher e to get 
them published . 
ANIN' S SERVIC E BUREA U 
115 Nassau St. - - - New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 251 
Free Tuition Scholarships 
CARNEGIE COLLEGE-HOME STUD Y 
"60 PAG E BULLETI N FREE " 
COURSE S B Y MAI L 
orammai School Agricultural 
High School Poultry 
Norma 
P rotation* 
PeDmanihip 
Type-writing 
Snort-hand 
Boo It-keeping 
Law 
Domestic Science 
Civil Service 
Engineering 
Drawing 
English 
Language 
Real Eitale 
Pre*. GALRREATB 
Reduced rates of tuition to flmt 
applicants. For "Free Bulletin'' 
and "Special scholarship," apply 
CARNEGI E COLLEG E 
No. 19D St.. KOGEBS . Ohio. 
Take a Course by Mail. "Do It Now." 
HOME STUDY MAGAZINE. Send to us 25c. In stamps 
for six months' subscription to New Education—a 40-page 
monthly educational magazine devoted to home study. Address 
CARNEGIE COLLEGE, Rogers, Ohio 
TYPEWRITERS—Send to us for our prices and terms on 
all the latest makes of typewrit ere sold by us at students' 
rates of only $3 per month without interest. Address 
TYPEWRITE R DEPT. , CARNEGIE COLLEGE , Rogers, Ohio. 
FREE TUITION SCHOLARSHIPS 
The Carneyie College will grant to you a "Free Tuition 
Scholarship" for a complete course by mail. Matriculation 
fee. $5; tuition, free. Apply at once. Do not delay. Send 
us your name and address to-day. 
OVER 100 BRANCHES FROM WHICH TO SELEC T 
"Free Tuition Scholarships" granted to the first applicants 
from each post office. Send us your name and address now. 
to-day. To-morrow may be too late. "Do It now." Address 
FREE TUITION DEPT. , CARNEGIE COLLEGE,- Rogers, 0. 
Handsome Silverware 
Souvenirs 
T o introduc e our superior grade 
teas, coffees and spices, we are 
givin g awa y handsome premiums 
wit h our special orders. 
Thre e Pounds of Coffee. .$1.00 
Regula r price, 35c. lb. 
Five Pounds Mixe d Tea . . 2.00 
Regula r 50c. qualit y 
SUMME R DESSERT S 
Easy Pudding 10 
Easy-Jell 10 
(All Flavors) 
FRE E premiums wit h each 
order. Al l packages sent b y prepai d parcels post. 
KANISTER 
Tea and Coffee Company 
681 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn, N . Y . 
AGENTS, make big money. Get onto 
the real live wire and make fifty per cent, 
profit. Article sells at every door. A 
household necessity. Send l(Jc. for sample 
and instructions. 
TH E LORAT E COMPANY 
642 De Kalb Avenue - - Brooklyn, N. Y. 
THE TEXARKANA GRUB-AX 
A paper for the masses as well as for the classes. 
Primarily It in a home paper, as it appeals to every member 
of the family. Subscription price, $1 the year. 
Rev. J. H. CLAYB0RN , 
119 E. 9th Street 
Editor and Manager 
Texarkana, Ark. 
'Phones: Residence. 515; Office, 642; Hospital, 403. 
OR. J. R. SHEPPAR D 
Physician and Surgeon 
Chief surgeon and superintendent of Sheppard Sanitarium and 
Nurse Training School. 
Marshall Texas 
'Phones; Residence, 159; Office, 462. 
DR. P. L. HARR0L D 
Physician and Surgeon 
Practicing Physician of Wiley University and King Home 
Marshall Texas 
DR. 0. L0YATU S BLEDSOE 
Medicine and Surgery 
Office, McPhail Bids., IH'/a W. Houston Avenue 
Residence, 727 W. Grand Avenue 
Marshall, Tex. 
Long distance 'phone 2008. 
FRED . T. JONES, M. D. 
Founder and House Surgeon of Mercy Sanitarium 
Office, 852 Texas Avenue ... . Shreveport, La. 
'Phone 854. 
CENTRA L PHARMAC Y DRUG STORE 
Recently Installed new and modern equipments. The most 
up-to-date colored drug store in East Texas. Orders by 
mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. Wheel delivery. 
213 Stats Street Texarkana, Tex. 
TH E 0. K. SHINING PARLOR 
For Ladies and Gentlemen 
Excellent service. The most up-to-date parlor in ths 
city. Also clothes cleaned and pressed. All work guaranteed. 
3l4'/ a W. Broad Street Texarkana, Tex. 
R. L. D. EASLE Y handles life, health and accident 
Insurance for old, reliable companies of New York and 
Chicago. Write or call 1225 Phenia Ave., Texarkana, Tex. 
For auto service or physician call 
DR. J. W. LONG 
Office, 218 W. Broad Street; New 'Phone 976 
Residence, 1508 North Street; New 'Phone 955 
Texarkana Texas 
'Phones: 
Residence, New 831; Old 964. 
Office, New 854; Old 973. 
DR. G. U. JAMISON 
Physician and Surgeon 
213 State Street Texarkana, Tex. 
'Phones 973 and 1472. 
DR. HARVE Y SPARK S 
Physician and Surgeon 
Office over Central Pharmaoy Texarkana, Tex. 
'Phones: Residence. 8G; Office, 69. 
DR. T. E. SPEE D 
Physician and Surgeon 
National Grand Master U. B. F. & S. M. T.; Grand 
Medical Director K. of P. lodges of Jurisdiction of Texas; 
Dean Nurse Training Department, Bishop College. 
Jefferson Texas 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 252 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 26 Ve*ey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25, 191 1 
OFFICER S 
Nationa l President—Mr . Moorfleld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors — 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, Ne w York . 
Directo r of Publicit y and Research — 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois, Ne w York . 
Nationa l Organizer—Dr . M . C . B . Mason , Cincinnati . 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Child s Nerney , Brooklyn , N . Y . 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which TH E CRISIS puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY , join this 
Association and help us to put our words into 
DEEDS . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 253 
Madame , use you r spare time selling m y 
Princess Hai r Oi l an d Toile t Preparations. 
The y are all first-class goods. Writ e for 
terms. 
JAMES T. EARL E 
P. O. Box 390 - - - - Newport, R. I. 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to 
settle on FRE E Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom ---- - New Mexico 
im r U-ZIT~V I 
The new odorless disinfectant at 
less than one-quarter cent per gallon. 
Safe, efficient, economical. 
Th e onl y disinfectant that absolutely destroys any odo r without leaving another . "U-Zit " is just starting. 
Start with it. Antisepti c and harmless. 
On e teaspoonful make s three gallons. 
Ho t or cold water. 
"U-Zit" for scrubbing. "U-Zit" for 
dishwashing. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning woodwork, 
windows, refrigerators. 
"U-Zit" for thoroughly disinfecting 
toilets, etc. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning the barn, 
dairies, etc. 
"U-Zit" to kill all germs and better 
preserve health. 
"U-Zit" is guaranteed to be as represented or money refunded. Sample 
test free. Can we be of service to 
you? Personal references given. 
"U-Zit" is put up in cans and retailed 
for the small sum of $1 per pound. 
Special five-pound can, $4, F. O. B. 
Chicago. Terms, thirty days. Address 
U-ZIT SPECIALTIES CO. 
3726 S. Dearborn St., Chicago, 111. 
^TELLIN G A STOR Y 
W T o friends wh o know you, ma y be easy, but "putting one over" to 
II strangers is quite different. 
Tellin g a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch, " for he hears the same story every da y a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
You r business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch " ihey won't "pull. " 
Correc t business stationery is the "punch " that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'l l show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
W e print for Mr . Cond e Nast, of Vogue; we print T H E CRISIS. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 254 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which. YO U 
have been looking may possibly be here on this page. 
SELLS LIKE HOT CAKES 
Agents wante d 
everywher e to sell 
this ironin g wax in 
pad form. It perfumes the clothes 
with a lasting violet 
perfume . 
WAX-IN-PA D MANUFACTURER S 
Lynbroo k New Yor k 
EAR N WHILE YOU LEARN 
A splendid opportunit y for 
ambitious youn g men and 
women. 
We teach Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeepin g 
and Business Arithmetic , according to the latest 
methods of modern business science. Earnest, 
efficient instructors. 
W e also maintain an EMPLOYMEN T BUREA U to 
assist our students and graduates in securing positions. Man y of them now hold steady positions 
with some of New York's largest business houses. 
The service of the Burea u is FRETS . Correspondenc e 
invited. Address 
Harlem Commercial School 
F . WALTE R MOTTLEY , Principa l 
525 Leno x Avenu e New Yor k 
WANTE D 
Me n and women everywher e to start pleasant, 
profitable home work. Manufactur e toilet articles, 
perfumes and household specialties. I start you 
right and give free advice one year . Send for m y 
list, select any three formulas, mail to me with $1, 
and get formulas and plain, complete directions. I 
guarantee satisfaction or money back. List and 
valuabl e information free. Fourteen years' prac ­
tical chemistry. Address 
HARVE Y L . PITTMAN , Manufacturin g Chemist 
618 Fift h Avenue , East - - - Duluth , Minn . 
WANT A JOB? 
Sleeping-car Porter s 
wanted for summer and 
permanent service. No 
experience necessary. 
Write to-day for full 
information. 
AMERICA N SERVICE SCHOOL 
Instruction Department 
80 Fifth Avenue - - - New York City 
IF NOT, WHY NOT? 
Own a Home in the North 
We have an increasing demand for ambitious, progressive 
colored people who are seeking homes In the North. We 
are the medium through which these demands can be 
supplied. Only auch as can satisfy us that they are desirable 
will be considered. Before locating be sure you get our 
Property Bulletin. It'9 free for the asking. 
P. H . SYKES , Real Estate Broke r 
Cor. 19th and Ellsworth Streets Philadelphia. Pa. 
Matte $3O First Day 
B. Basha. of Bell Island. Newfoundland, did this with our 
CHAMPIO N 
Minut e Phot o Machin e 
Tha t beginners make such profit 
at the etart, shows that n o experienc e Is needed in this won* 
derful money-making business. 
Robt. Bock,WillowB:ill,Pa.. took 
in$35 inoneday. VernardBaker , 
Holbrook, Neb., $29.90. Jas. F . Wende. Ashton. Idaho, 
$26. C.V. Lovett, Ft. Meade. Fla., made $50 in one day. These 
testimonials are inst a few of many hundreds we have on file. 
Pictures in Post Cards and on Buttons all the rage 
at Fairs, OarnivalB, Picnics, Resorts, Schools, DeS
ots, Factories, on Streets—anywhere—everywhere, 
ur Champion Camera takes pictures size 2^x3Jj», 
l
;,
4'x'2L
.'. and buttons. Finishes complete photo in 30 
seconds: 200 an hoar. No dark room. Easiest, quickest, 
bircest money-maker known. Small investment. About 86c 
profit on each dollar yon take in. Be your own boss. Write at 
once for Free Book, Testimonials and Liberal Offer. 
AMERICA N MINUTE PHOT O CO . 
2214 Ogutn Ave., Dept. E.649, Chicago, Illinois 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PER MONT H acting as 
AGENTS for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FINE PROPOSITION WHTCH WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY. Address 
REEVES REALTY CO. 
Department G 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made i n commissions by partie s handlin g 
"Histor y of Negr o Soldier s in Spanish-America n 
War " combined with "Histor y of the Negr o Race. " 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: 
E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street Ne w Yor k 
JUS T THIN K O F I T 
Gordo n Safety Razor s made to retail fo r 25c . Shaves 
as smoothly as some of the high-price d razor s 
Splendi d seller. Wil l last a lifetime . Sample , 10c. 
GORDO N COMPAN Y 
Northwestern Buildin g Chicago , 111. 
WANTED—ON E MA N O R WOMA N I N EVER Y 
locality to start a Cand y Kitchen . Best payin t 
small business on earth 1 Fe w dollar s starts you. 
Ge t away from wage slavery . Writ e for particulars. Nativ e Herbariu m Co. , Ambler , Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 255 
The Colored Doll Is a Live One 
For emancipation celebrations, bazaars, fairs and the holiday trade. Children are 
going wild about the beautiful E. M . S. Colored Dolls. The dolls have becoming 
features, are light brown in color, have jointed limbs and eyes that open and shut. 
Imported by us, and endorsed by the leading clergymen and educators. Best and 
cheapest. Send for catalog. Agents wanted. Can make big profit. 
E. M. S. NOVELT Y CO., Dept. A, Jamaica, N. Y. 
Only 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A v.iltie Unequalcd. Sulilonfi.o o 
Profit Margi n pro m 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
an d other styles. 
Sen d for catalogue. 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS . 
Greenfield. Ohi o 
1. ir„ . M Negro Carriage concern In the Unite d States. 
WILLIAM L. BEL L 
Architect 
138^ Auburn Avenue - - - Atlanta, Ga. 
Beautiful, Artistic Post Cards 
of Negro Subjects 
Advance sale of Christmas and New Year 
cards. We announce the sale of calendars 
of Negro subjects done in three to twelve 
colors. Nothing comic, but works of real 
art. Prices very reasonable. New catalog 
which is just out contains confidential prices 
to agents and retailers. Samples of all 
calendars and post cards sent for 35 cents, 
postpaid. 
J. GRIFFITH AR T COMPANY 
36 Beekman Street - - - - New York 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing , Hai r Grower , Scalp Toni c and Fac e Lotio n have no equal. 
Guaranteed unde r roo d and Dru g Act, Jun e 30, 1906. 
Price , 50c each. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone , Mornlngsid e 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing , Marce l Wav ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage , Hai r Making , Chiropody , 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice i n parlo r 
da y and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Specia l Summe r Course , $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mine . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen'l Intr.; Dr . Samue l 
A . Kelsey , Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
NUMEROU S OPPORTUNI -
TIE S FO R AL L T O 
LEARN A 
USEFUL TRADE 
In Enterprise Institute, Incorporated and Located at Chicago, 111. 
Mor e than forty trades taught. 
Price s ver y lo w and terms easy. 
Cal l at or address 
Enterprise Institut e 
Rev. G. H . McDaniel, D. D., Pres. 
3711 State St. - - -Chicago, 111. 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago's Exper t Photographe r 
I specialize In every phase of artistic picture makinK 
Sen d me your photos for enlargement. Prices reasonable 
Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phone 6688 Douglass. 
WEB B STUDI O 
3519 State Street Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH B CRISIS . 256 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PLACE S T O STO P 
RIGHT ON THE BEACH ! 
The Bay Shore Hote l 
Open from May to October 
The best summer hotel with the 
most delightful surroundings. 
Situated on Chesapeake Bay, right 
on the beach, three miles from Fortress Monroe, Va . 
A charming location, a fine and safe 
bathing beach and good fishing. 
Thirty-two bedrooms, spacious parlors, broad piazzas and a large 
pavilion. 
The hotel has just been greatly improved by the addition of several 
bedrooms, baths, porches and an upto-date kitchen. 
Our patrons will be delighted with 
"Dear old Bay Shore" enlarged and 
beautified. 
No restless nights here, for the 
breezes blow while you sleep. Terms 
moderate. Address 
TH E BAY SHORE HOTE L CO. 
P. O. Box 364, Hampton, Va. 
J. Henry Robinson, Manager 
Good trolley car service between the 
hotel and Hampton, Fortress Monroe 
and Newport News. 
HOTE L COMFOR T 
MRS . M . B. COMFORT , Proprietress 
ARCHITECT S 
Th e ideal summe r resort—open all the year 
Corne r Second St. and Ba y Ave . - - Ocean City , N . J . 
HOTE L WASHINGTON 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, 111. 
BISHO P COLLEGE , MARSHALL , TEX . 
Maintain s college, academic , theological, musical , norma l 
gramma r an d industria l departments. Offers the most ad ­
vanced courses an d is the best-equipped school for Negroe s i n 
the Southwest. Fo r Informatio n address 
C. H. MAXSON . President 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H. HENR Y HARRIS 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
MUTUA L TEACHERS ' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8th and Plu m Sts. 
Cincinnati , Ohi o 
TYPEWRITER S 
Agents' Prices 
One machine at wholesale 
pric e to introduc e our goods. 
Bargain s in every make . 
Typewriter s for $5.00 up. 
STANDAR D TYPEWRITE R 
EXCHANG E 
31-B Par k Ro w Ne w Yor k 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Ope n for 
engagements Jul y and August. 
Bo x 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O. 
REPRESENTATIVE S WANTE D 
A number ' of bright youn g men and women wanted 
at once to represent us in thei r communities. A 
splendid opportunit y for energetic youn g people. 
Fro m $25 to $45 easily made b y ordinar y young 
person willing to work. Doubl e that amount can 
easily be made by the right kin d of youn g people. 
Address the 
NORTHWESTER N EXTENSIO N UNIVERSIT Y 
207 South Sixt h Street - - Minneapolis, Minn . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 257 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
If you need a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 2546 Michiga n Office Phone 
Bel l Phone E-216 1 Hom e 58 Mai n 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
Attorne y and Counjelor-.it U w 
Notar y Publi c 
117 W . 6th Street Kansa s City , Mo . 
FRANKLI N W. WILLIAMS 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Rea l Estat e Conveyance r 
206 Parris h Street Durham , N . C 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone , 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A. DOUGLAS 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolita n Buildin g 
113 Marke t St., Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
Attorne y and Counaelor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolita n Lir e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
BROWN S. SMITH 
Attorne y and Connselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suit* 610, Syke s Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Gable Address, Epbe n 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
S4 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKINS & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratog a Street Baltimore , Md . 
Phones: Office, Bel l 4059; Ne w 420-M. 
Residence , New 733-A. 
THOS. E. GREENE, JR. 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Malone y Bloc k Youngstown , Ohi o 
LEGAL DIRECTORY—Continued 
Telephones: 
Centra l 104W 
Mai n 61 
HARR Y E. DAVIS 
Attorne y .it La w Notar y Publi c 
1607 Williamso n Bldg . Cleveland, O. 
ELIJA H J . GRAHAM , Jr . 
Attorney-at-Law and Notar y Publi c 
1026 Marke t Street Wheeling , W . Va . 
Willia m H . Austi n Edmun d 0. Austi n 
La w Offices of 
AUSTI N & AUSTI N 
St. Pau l Building , 220 Broadway , New Yor k 
Suite 7—H , I, ,T, K 
Telephones: 7400, 5365, 5366 Cortlandt 
Telephone 5552 Ceda r 
R. O. LE E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Practic e in Al l Courts 
26 and 26 Unio n Block, 4th & Cedar , St. Paul , Minn . 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 6277 Morningsid e 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4886 Mornlngsld e 
DR. D. W. ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W . Cor . 133d St. and Leno x AT*. , New Yor k 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 te 8 p. m. 
Sunday s by Appointment 
Telephone 4048 Prospec t 
JOHN B. MOSELE Y 
REAL ESTATE an d INSURANCE 
640 Fulto n Street Brooklyn , N . Y . 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Ope n Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertaker s and Embalmer t 
Notar y Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Promp t Seryic e 
266 West 63d Street New York , N . V . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th ATenue 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRESS 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI O 
469 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Order s b y mai l or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressma n for the C . V . B . A . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 258 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HAZE L 
By MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Autho r of "Half a Man " 
Haze l is the story of a little Boston colored girl 
who goes to visit her grandmother in Alabama. 
He r successful efforts to teach her hard-working boy neighbor to read, the children's daily 
good times, these and many other happenings 
make an enjoyable child's book. Be sure that 
your child is among the first to learn about 
Hazel. 
The book is charmingly illustrated by the wellknown artist, Harr y Roseland. 
Price $1.00 net. Postage prepaid, $1.08. Fo r 
sale through our agents and at TH E CRISIS 
office. 
CRISI S PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim : T o keep its technic equal to the best 
Founde d 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses i n this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department ; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may he undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and i n 
administration; (lie institution is the 
only one of its kin d in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additiona l 
endowment needed, $50,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 
36th an d Dearbor n Sts. , Chicago , III. 
Mention THE ; CRISIS , 
Homes in Long Island! 
Fe w people realize the wonderful possibilitie s of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growt h of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLIN G GOO D HOME S IN CORONA , wit h all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to Ne w York . Coron a is in the 
very center of Greate r Ne w York , and in a few months wil l be reached 
by the rapi d transit lines of Manhattan , givin g to the people of that 
section of the cit y a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan . 
Th e onl y place withi n thirt y minute s of Time s Square, Gran d 
Centra l Station or the Pennsylvani a Station, where the ma n of small 
means can get a moder n home wit h all improvements at a moderate 
cost. W e woul d be glad to have yo u visit Coron a at our expense. 
Coron a is one of the highest elevations in Ne w Yor k City , has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent wate r supply and the best 
place in all Ne w Yor k for children. Fo r full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L . S. REE D & COMPAN Y 
142 Hunter Avenue ------- - Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms CAP E MAY , N . J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world ; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestr a daily . Garage , bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Specia l attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E . W . DALE , Owner . 
The New Jersey 
State Emancipation Exposition 
A Jubilee Festival and Exposition to be held in Exposition Hall , 
Kentucky Avenue and Boardwalk, Atlantic City , 
October 6th to October 12th, inclusive. 
Al l manne r of exhibits in industries, trades, handicrafts, women's work, fine and prac ­
tical arts, mementos, antiques an d curios. 
Feature d exhibit, by charts, photographs and special exhibits of the condition an d 
progress of the New Jersey Negro, including all phases of the business, professional, industrial , 
social, religious and home life of the race. 
Special days and features: Fraternit y day, with exhibition drills by uniforme d orders; 
women's and home day, and women's congress; business men's and farmers' conferences; 
a religious day, with, sermons and addresses; an educational and professional day, witb 
teachers' conference and school-children's festival ; an athletic meet; a special day of recollections for personal experiences of slavery, wa r times and historical events. 
Prize s and awards: Amateu r and professional contests i n many lines. 
A grand musica l festival throughout the week, participate d in by a mass chorus of 
1,000 voices, a juvenil e chorus of 500, assisted by many noied soloists, and an augmented 
orchestra of 30, with concerts daily . 
N . B.—Sen d all exhibits, which will be insured and cared for, C . O. D . b y Adam s or 
Unite d States Express or by Parcels Post, care of Expositio n Building , Kentuck y Avenu e and 
Boardwalk , Atlanti c City , N . J . 
Application s for booths and space for business, selling or advertisement should be made 
to the 
CHIE F ORGANIZE R 
Rooms 105-6, American Mechanic Building, TRENTON , N . J . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 