THE CRISIS 
TEN CENTS NOVEMBER.191 7 President 
MOORFIELD STOREY 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBALD H. GRIMK£ 
REV. JOHN HAYNES HOLMES 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
JOHN E. MILHOLLAND 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
Executive Officers 
DR. J. E. SPI'NGARN, Chairman of Board 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer 
DR. W. E. B. DUBOIS, Direotor of Publications and Research 
ROY NASH, Secretary 
JAMES WELDON JOHNSON, Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JANE ADDAMS 
DR. C. E. BENTLEY 
Boston 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOUD 
BUTLER R. WILSON 
Baltimore 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
D R F. N. CARDOZO 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV. G. R. WALLER 
DIRECTORS 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIAM COOK 
Brooklyn 
DR V. MORTON JONES 
DR. O. M. WALLER 
New Haven 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIAM A. SINCLAIR 
New York 
REV. HUTCHINS C. BISHOP 
MRS. FLORENCE KELLEY 
PAUL KENNADAY 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 
ARTHUR B. SPINGARN 
CHARLES H. STUDIN 
DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
LILLIAN D. WALD 
WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLING 
This is the one National Organization fighting to 
abolish race prejudice and discrimination in America. 
We need greater numbers to give us greater power. 
We now have more than 8,500 active members. 
Will you not help to push the membership over the 
10,000 mark ? 
Fill in the following blank today. 
Date , 1917. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR: 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name .. . 
. . .Street 
Gity'and'State 
MENTION THE CRISIS SUFFRAGE NUMBER—Edition 45,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. 
BURGHARDT DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for November, 1917 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER. A STUDY FROM LIFE. By Frank Walts. 
TO AMERICA. Drawn by Laura Wheeler 13 
MEN OF THE MONTH 23 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT. 
With Portraits of Mrs. Coralie Franklin Cook, The Empress Taitou and 
the Cadets of Officers' Training Camp No. 17 24-27 
ARTICLES 
TO AMERICA. A POEM. By James Weldon Johnson 13 
HOUSTON. AN N. A. A. C. P. INVESTIGATION. By Martha Gruening.. 14 
VOTES FOR ALL. A SYMPOSIUM. By Anna Howard Shaw, Carrie 
Chapman Catt and Mary Garrett Hay 19 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 7 
MEN OF THE MONTH 22 
THE LOOKING GLASS 28 
THE HORIZON ,' 36 
THE CHRISTMAS CRISIS 
W e expect this to be the greatest of a remarkable series of Christmas numbers. The cover 
is being done in colors by a gifted artist. The story is striking. The recent expansion of the 
colored Y . M . C. A. will be told and Jessie Fauset and Laura Wheeler will colaborate. Ready 
November 20 and liable to be sold out before December 1. Order early. 
Look for TH E CRISI S Calendar December 1. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March S, 1879. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM, N. C. 
Open to Students of Either Sex. 
It is more than a mere school. It is a community at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections 
of the country in improved Negro community life wherever 
our trained workers locate. 
The following departments are already in successful operation: Teacher Training, Industrial, Literary, Academic and 
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Household 
Economics and Departments of Music. 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed b y any School for 
the Education of Negro Yout h in the South. 
Th e next term opened Monday, October 1, 1917. For catalog 
and detailed information, address 
President, JAMES E. SHEPARD, 
DURHAM - - - NORTH CAROLINA 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
Twenty-fourth Annua l Session. 
Fall term began Sept. 1, '17. 
Thre e Strong Departments: Ag ­
ricultural, Mechanical and Aca ­
demic. 
Short Practical Courses of 
Thre e Months; Maintained by 
the Governments of North Carolina and of the United States. 
Special training for teachers of 
vocational subjects. 
Board, Lodgin g and Tuition, 
$9.00 per Calendar Month. 
For Catalog and Further 
Information, address 
President Dudley, 
A. & T. College, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
For reasonably mature students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$100. Fall term began Wednesday, September 19, 1917. 
The Summer School for Teachers, from 
July 5 to August 2 inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
For further Information write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, 
Principal. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 5 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-eight years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For farther information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar. School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September 19, 1917-
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La. 
Situated on the main thoroughfare of the 
largest city of the South. 
Thorough training in High School, Teachers' Course and College, with special work 
In Music and Manual Training. 
Teachers represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
oountry. 
For full Information, address 
T. T. Cater, Registrar. 
TOUGALO O COLLEG E 
MISSISSIPPI 
"The host school for Negroes in the State"— 
Bishop Theodore D. Bratton. 
COLLEG E 
Regular Four Year A. B. Course 
Two Year Teacher Training Course 
ACADEM Y 
Choice of Seven Courses—College Preparatory, 
Agricultural, Mechanical, Home Economics, 
Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical. 
Out in the country. Expenses low, 
Four Prize Scholarship? of $25.00 Each Offered Boys 
for Best Entrance Examinations to ninth Grade. 
For Particulars 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
Tougaloo, Hinds County, Mississippi. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Gass 
by Texa s and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yal e and Columbia 
represented on its faculty ; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W . DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chsirrman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religious Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session Opens Wednesday, October 3, 1917, 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS, President or 
3, E, Aggrey, Registrar. 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1917 
SOUTH ATLANTA GEORGIA 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—-Coeducational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUDY 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical—Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opens October 3, 1917. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O. DRAWER 524 
0,1
 BEREAN SCHOOL y°ur»a
elt1
i
e
n
quip 
Don't Waste Your Evenings 
Never before in the history of the race has 
the demand for skilled colored help been 
so great as at the present time. Fall in 
with the spirit of the times for preparedness and learn a useful trade for the demand is greater than the supply. 
Enroll 
at 
Stenography, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Upholstery, Woodworking, Plumbing, Dressmaking, Tailoring, Printing, Cooking, Waiting, Millinery, or Power Machine operating. 
19th year and Fall Term opened 
Tuesday, October 2nd, 1917. 
Late afternoon and evening sessions, twice 
a week, specially adapted for the convenience 
of the day wage earners. Painstaking and 
efficient teachers, specialized training in all 
departments a marked feature. 
Efficiency our aim Helpfulness our object 
The doors are open now. Wil l you enter ? 
Visitors welcome Gymnasium Beautiful location 
Writ e the Principal of 
Berean Manual Training and Industrial School 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue Philadelphia, Pa. 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of .the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
All Races 
Prepare in the best school of its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH. 
COMMERCIAL CLASS 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 
Lenox Avenue and 136th St., New York City. 
Open Alt Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W. Mottley, President. 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
Fall Term opened October 1, 1917. Shorthand, 
typewriting, bookkeeping, business correspondence, 
business law, multigTaphing, mimeographing, 
arithmetic, grammar, spelling, reading and writing. Apt students operate typewriters blindfolded 
accurately in two months and are able to pass 
Civil Servloe Examinations with ease in eight 
months. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, President, 
1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
D_ _|__ 0 See the Selected List on 
DOOKS: the Back Cover 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 15—No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1917 Whole No. 85 
Editorial 
THE OATH OF THE NEGRO VOTER 
As one of the Earth's Disowned I swear to hold my Ballot as the 
sacred pawn of Liberty for all mankind and for my prisoned 
race. 
I will accept no price for my priceless Vote, save alone just 
laws, honestly dealt, without regard to color, wealth or strength. 
I will make the first and foremost aim of my voting the Enfranchisement of every citizen, male and female; and particularly the restoring of the stolen franchise to my people, by which continuing theft the 
1
 enemies of the Negro race sit in high places today and wretchedly 
misgovern. 
I will make the second object of my voting the division of the Social 
Income on the principle that he who does not work, be he rich or poor, 
may not eat; and that Land and Capital ought to belong to the Many 
and not to the Few. 
I will accept no Office which I cannot efficiently fill; I will judge all 
Officials by their service to the common weal and I will not regard the 
mere giving of Office to my friends as payment for my support of any 
party. 
I will judge all Political Parties not by their past deeds or their 
future promises but simply by the present acts of the Officials who represent them, and I will cast my vote for or against those officials accordingly. 
I will scan carefully the Record of every candidate for whom I must 
vote and especially of Congressmen, Legislators and local Officials, learning what manner of man each is, how he has carried out his trust and 
what pledges he makes in general; and in particular I will ask his attitude toward my race. 
I hereby solemnly pledge myself to join with others like-minded to 
myself in thus before each election, agreeing upon a list of suitable Candidates who by their records or promises seem most likely to secure good 
government and justice to black folk, and I will vote for these candidates, 
regardless of their party, race or sex. 
I will have firm faith in Democracy, despite its mistakes and inefficiency, knowing that in no other way can the common Experience, Want 
and Will be pooled for the common good, and that no Despot or Aristocrat can ever be wise or good enough to rule his fellowmen. 
In order to accomplish the above ends I hereby entrust the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and its local branches 
with the investigation and co-operation necessary to the listing of suitable candidates for my franchise at each election. 
Persons minded to sign the above oath will send their names to the 
Editor of TH E CRISIS. 8 TH E CRISIS 
VOTES FO R WOMEN , 
SOM E 75,000 Negro voters in 
the State of New Yor k will 
be asked to decide this month 
as to whether or not they are 
willing that women should have the 
vote in this State. It is an unpleasant but well-known fact that hitherto American Negro voters have, in 
the majority of cases, not been favorable to woman suffrage. This attitude has been taken for two main 
reasons: First, the Negro, still imbued by the ideals of a past generation, does not realize the new status 
of women in industrial and social life. 
Despite the fact that within his own 
group women are achieving economic independence even faster than 
whites, he thinks of these as exceptional and abnormal and looks forward to the time when his wages will 
be large enough to support his wife 
and daughters in comparative idleness at home. 
Secondly, the American Negro is 
particularly bitter at the attitude of 
many white women: at the naive 
assumption that the height of his ambition is to marry them, at their artificially-inspired fear of every dark 
face, which leads to frightful accusations and suspicions, and at their 
sometimes insulting behavior toward 
him in public places. 
Notwithstanding th e undoubted 
weight of these two reasons, the 
American Negro must remember, 
First, that the day when women can 
be considered as the mere appendages of men, dependent upon their 
bounty and educated chiefly for their 
pleasure, has gone by ; that as an intelligent, self-supporting human being a woman has just as good a right 
to a voice in her own government as 
has any man ; and that the denial of 
this right is as unjust as is the denial 
of the right to vote to American Negroes. 
Secondly, two wrongs never made a 
right. We cannot punish the insolence of certain classes of American 
white women or correct their ridiculous fears by denying them their undoubted rights. 
It goes without saying that the 
women's vote, particularly in the 
South, will be cast almost unanimously, at first, for every reactionary 
Negro-hating piece of legislation that 
is proposed; that the Bourbons and 
the demagogs, who are today sitting 
in the National Legislature by the 
reason of stolen votes, will have additional backing for some years from 
the votes of white women. 
But against this consideration it 
must be remembered that these same 
women are going to learn political 
justice a great deal more quickly than 
did their men and that despite their 
prejudices their very emergence into 
the real, hard facts of life and out of 
the silly fairy-land to which their 
Southern male masters beguile them 
is going to teach them sense in time. 
Moreover, it is going to be more 
difficult to disfranchise colored women in the South than it was to disfranchise colored men. Even southern "gentlemen," as used as they are 
to the mistreatment of colored women, cannot in the blaze of present 
publicity physically beat them away 
from the polls. Their economic 
power over them will be smaller than 
their power over the men and while 
you can still bribe some pauperized 
Negro laborers with a few dollars at 
election time, you cannot bribe Negro 
women. 
It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that every single black voter 
in the State of New Yor k should this 
month cast his ballot in favor of woman suffrage and that every black voter 
in the United States should do the 
same thing whenever and as often as 
he has opportunity. 
It is only in such broad-minded 
willingness to do justice to all, even 
to his own temporary hurt, that the 
black man can prove his right not 
only to share, but to help direct 
modern culture. EDITORIAL 9 
CO-OPERATION. 
THE CRISI S ha s now for several months been developing 
a program looking toward an 
economic forwar d movement 
among the Negroe s of the United 
States. Th e matte r has been developed slowly in order to have as large 
a numbe r of people as possible understand just wha t it is tha t THE CRISIS 
ha s in mind. 
Th e first duty of a modern citizen 
is to earn a living ; but earning a living today is a complicated thing and 
it would be a grea t mistake for Ne ­
groes to tr y the old, individualistic 
laissez-faire method. 
Co-operation in economics can, perhaps, best be explained by quoting a 
leaflet by Dr. J. P. Warbasse : "Th e 
Co-operative Movement is an organized non-political effort of the people 
to control the production and distribution of the things needed to satisfy 
their wants. It is devoted to the 
principle tha t things should be done 
and commodities produced fo r use 
rathe r than for exchange . . . . 
"Wit h a regularity of increase 
whic h ha s seemed almost fatalistic, 
the movement ha s spread. In most 
European countries the membership 
in the co-operative societies has about 
doubled itself every ten years. Now, 
after three-quarters of a century, in 
many of these countries the numbe r 
of people embraced in the movement 
is passing from a large minority 
toward a majority of the total population. In some sections it ha s already become a large majority. 
"Food, clothing, housing, fuel, insurance, transportation, and entertainment are all provided b y cooperative societies for their members. 
To attain these things ha s meant, 
first, the organization of people as 
consumers, and then production for 
these organized consumers. This ha s 
involved study, consecration, and organization talent. Ther e have been 
man y conflicts wit h the forces of capitalism, but co-operation ha s won . 
"Th e powerful combines, wit h capital, unscrupulous control of politics, 
and the force of vested interests behind them, have been beaten by organizations largely composed of work ­
in g people. Co-operation ha s succeeded against the greatest economic 
odds. No w the distributing agencies, 
the lands and mills of the co-operators, have become noteworthy objects of industry. Some of these are 
amon g the largest flour mills, shoe 
factories, clothing factories, canneries 
and bakerie s in the world—all producing things, not for the competitive market, but for the people wh o 
own and consume them. . . . 
"Experienc e and not theor y ha s 
developed the fac t tha t the successful 
co-operative movement whic h leads 
straight to the goal, begins wit h the 
organization of the people as consumers. Thes e have an immutable 
economic principle workin g for them. 
Th e consume r has the money ; if he 
has not he cannot consume ; or he consume s wit h somebody's else money. 
He and his purse are the aim and objec t of business. Commerc e is addressed to him. It is for him that 
the honey of trade is spread, musi c 
plays, lights sparkle, and all the prostitution of business is made as alluring as genius can contrive. A s consumers, business take s off its ha t to 
the workers; bows, flatters and 
smirks, and licks the dust from their 
shoes. 
"Wheneve r the people organiz e as 
consumers, then they begin to enjoy 
the economic advantage s of their organization ; not a t some remote day, 
but from the moment they organiz e ; 
not whe n all ar e organized, but when 
even a few ar e gathered together. 
"Thes e ar e some of the important 
things which experience ha s revealed, 
and it ma y be assumed tha t they will 10 THE CRISIS 
hold as true for the future as for the 
past." 
This is the movement which TH E 
CRISIS wishes to bring more and more 
to the attention of the Negroes of the 
United States. It firmly believes that 
this is our economic way out, our industrial emancipation. 
HAMPTON 
THE death of Hollis Burke 
Frissell, principal of Hamp-ton 
ton Institute, brings that institution and its work prominently before the public. It is, 
therefore, peculiarly fitting that the 
following correspondence should be 
made public: 
Dear Dr. DuBois: 
In preparation for the Fiftieth Anniversary of Hampton Institute, 
efforts are being made to collect the 
necessary material for the history of 
the school. It is a matter of history 
that for many years the colored people were opposed to the type of education offered them at Hampton and 
were consequently also opposed to the 
school itself. For the sake of learning the facts in regard to this matter 
I am writing to you and to a number 
of other prominent colored men to 
ask for statements in regard to the 
facts in the case. 
I shall be very grateful if you will 
send me a statement in regard to the 
attitude (with reasons) of the colored people who were opposed to industrial education during the early 
days of Hampton and who are still in 
some cases opposed to it. 
Will you kindly say in this connection whether you will object to the 
use of your name, if that is thought 
desirable? * * * 
(Miss) J. E. DAVIS . 
Dear Miss Davis: 
I have a wide acquaintance with 
educated colored folk. My interpretation of their attitude is that they 
do not oppose and never have opposed 
Hampton Institute because it teaches 
industries. On the contrary they 
recognize Hampton as probably the 
best center of trade-teaching for Negroes in the United States. 
It is true, however, that educated 
Negroes in the past and at present 
hold Hampton and some of her methods in grave distrust. They recognize the worth of her work—the fine 
spirit of many of her teachers, past 
and present, and the splendid character of her graduates, but at the 
same time, they cannot forget three 
important facts: 
1. The course of study at Hampton 
is so arranged that it cannot be made 
to fit in with the higher courses of 
education, as adopted by the leading 
educational institutions of the United 
States. Granted that Hampton is 
and ought to be the finishing school 
for nine-tenths of her students, the 
fact remains that Hampton deliberately makes it impossible for her 
most promising and brilliant students to receive college training or 
higher technical and professional 
training, save at great disadvantage 
and a wellnigh fatal loss of time. 
Friends of Hampton have defended 
this action by asserting (a) that the 
Negro does not need college training 
and (b) that if the colleges do not fit 
the Hampton course of study, they 
are wrong and not Hampton. Both 
these assertions educated Negroes regard as preposterous. There are 
hundreds of Hampton men who deserve and could efficiently use longer 
and more thorough courses of training than Hampton gives, but who 
find themselves at the age of nineteen 
or twenty in an educational blind alley, with further progress barred. 
They must go out as half-educated, 
partially-trained men, when they 
might be developed to full efficiency. 
It is, undoubtedly, true that colleges 
ought to recognize a broader fittingschool course of study than they do 
at present, but so long as they do not, EDITORIAL 11 
it is criminal to make the Negro the 
peculiar sufferer from their exclusiveness and to deny the undoubted 
value of the present college curriculum to the finest Negro minds in Virginia. 
2 . It may be said that Hampton 
simply specializes on technical training and high school work and that 
students fitted for higher training can 
go elsewhere. This brings us to the 
second indictment against Hampton 
—her illiberal and seemingly selfish 
attitude toward other colored schools. 
She holds little or no fellowship with 
them; she has repeatedly loaned herself to decrying their work, criticizing and belittling their ideals while 
her friends continually seek to divert 
to. Hampton the already painfully 
meager revenues of the colored colleges. Few schools can equal in its 
own field the efficiency of Hampton, 
with its millions of endowment, but 
certainly the splendid work of Atlanta, Fisk, Howard, and other 
schools, done in poverty and travail 
and in the face of hostile public opinion, deserves better recognition and 
less criticism than it gets from 
Hampton and her friends. 
Moreover, the students who go to 
Hampton go for "education." They 
do not know their own bent and aptitudes. They come from homes 
where they can hope for little educational guidance. It should be the 
work of Hampton not simply to train 
but to sift and to send to colleges or 
other schools those fitted for work 
higher or different from that offered 
by her curriculum. This she never 
voluntarily does. She feeds no colleges or professional schools; she encourages no artists or musicians; she 
helps no writers, but apparently proceeds on the assumption that every 
Negro must be trained to farm, or to 
be an artisan or a servant. We have 
no silly illusions as to the number 
of talented Negroes who deserve 
higher training, but surely in fifty 
years it seems that out of tens of 
thousands of students Hampton 
might have found a few worthy of 
the highest training. Small wonder 
that educated Negroes resent this 
and demand that Hampton cease to 
bury talent and deflect genius. 
3. The third indictment of educated Black Folk against Hampton is 
more difficult to express than the 
others, and one of which we are less 
sure, and yet it is a real grievance in 
our minds. We believe that an institution that professes to teach the Negro self-respect and self-control should 
give the Negro a larger voice in her 
government. We do not wish Hampton to be an exclusively Negro institution, but we do think that there 
should be Negroes on her Board of 
Trustees; that there should be a 
larger recognition of Negro achievement, instead of an almost exclusive 
emphasis of the white philanthropists ; and that there should be a closer 
touch between the school and the 
body of educated Negro opinion. In 
fine, we think that Hampton should 
consider what we want and not simply what she wishes us to want. We 
do not feel, at present, that Hampton 
is our school—on the contrary, we 
feel that she belongs to the white 
South and to the reactionary North, 
and we fear that she is a center of 
that underground and silent intrigue 
which is determined to perpetuate 
the American Negro as a docile peasant and peon, without political rights 
or social standing, working for little 
wage, and heaping up dividends to 
be doled out in future charity to his 
children. 
Such a feeling as this may be 
wrong and ill-founded, but it is real 
and it easily lies within Hampton's 
power to disprove it. 
These are the reasons why many 
educated Negroes are and have been 
"opposed" to Hampton. We have seldom voiced this opposition, and I 
voice it now only at your invitation. 12 TH E CRISIS 
I reiterate my respect for the Institution and my firm belief that it has 
done great good, but I insist that no 
school which deliberately curtails 
the training of the talented, refuses 
to guide her apter students to their 
greatest development, save in restricted lines, and not only gives her 
beneficiaries little or no voice in its 
control, but seems even to harbor and 
encourage their enemies—no such 
school is reaching its greatest usefulness. w . E. B. DU BOIS. 
THE KIGHTS OF PYTHIAS . 
THE gift of one hundred dollars 
for the purposes of this Association by the Grand Lodge 
of Knights of Pythias of Illinois through their Grand Chancellor, 
Dr. Allen A. Wesley, was a most significant action. It has already been 
followed by the Grand Lodge of Masons of Colorado, the Order of Calanthe of Cincinnati, Ohio, and it was 
preceded by the Northeastern Federation of Colored Women's Clubs, the 
National Federation of Colored Women, the New Jersey State Federation 
and other organizations. 
The action of these bodies foreshadows a time when all of the great 
fraternal orders and industrial bodies of America will choose the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People as a clearing 
house for united action on the problems in which they are so intensely 
interested. 
MR . FLIPPER. 
LIEUTENANT HENR Y 0. 
FLIPPER is at present living in El Paso, Texas. He 
was the first colored cadet to 
graduate from West Point and was 
dismissed from the army, as every 
American Negro believes, on account 
of race prejudice. It is most unfortunate that a man like this should be 
found saying: "The men composing 
the Twenty-fourth Infantry are gamblers, thugs, bums and the scum of 
our people." 
It is equally unfortunate that reputable colored American papers should 
publish such a libel. 
There is abundance of testimony 
that the men of the Twenty-fourth 
Regiment are in the main brave and 
honest men and just as worthy of the 
respect of their race and nation as 
Henry 0. Flipper. 
A RESOLUTION 
AT a meeting of the official 
board of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, Thursday, October 
4, the following resolution was 
passed: 
WHEREAS , It is essential to the success of the war that America's contribution be that of a nation that knows 
no dividing line within itself, no halfhearted allegiances, no pseudo-patriotism ; therefore, be it 
Resolved, That the official board of 
the National American Woman Suffrage Association, now in session in 
New York, urges unqualified loyalty 
to the Government in this crisis; protests as un-American those discriminations and injustices that set class 
against class, race against race, sex 
against sex, and furnish opportunity 
for insidious alien propaganda that 
trades upon them to the internal disturbance of our country; maintains 
that all American men or women, 
white or black, in the trenches or in 
the home and the factory, who are 
giving their lives to uphold the ideals 
of democracy, shall share equally in 
the privileges and protection of democracy ; and deplores all lawlessness 
based on race or sex or class prejudice ; and, be it further 
Resolved, That this Board set forth 
its belief in and its stand for that 
broad type of American democracy 
that knows no bias on the ground of 
race, color, creed or sex. To the end 
that Americans may stand united not 
as Irish-Americans, German-Americans, Negro-Americans, Slav-Americans, and "the women," but one and 
all as Americans for America. To America 
James Weldon Johnson 
Holy would you have us, as we are 
Or sinking 'neath the load we bear 
Our eyes fixed forward on a star 
Or gazing empty at despair 
Rising or falling? men or things? 
With dragging pace or footsteps fleet? 
Strong willing sinews in your wings? 
Or tightening chains about your feet? National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
HOUSTON. 
AN N. A. A. C. P. INVESTIGATION 
By MARTHA GRUENING 
TH E primary cause of the Houston riot 
was the habitual brutality of the 
white police officers of Houston in their 
treatment of colored people. Contributing 
causes were (1) the mistake made in not 
arming members of the colored provost 
guard or military police, (2) lax discipline 
at Camp Logan which permitted promiscuous visiting at the camp and made drinking 
and immorality possible among the soldiers. 
Houston is a hustling and progressive 
southern city having the commission form 
of government and, as southern cities go, 
a fairly liberal one. Its population before 
the Negro exodus, which has doubtless decreased it by many thousands, was estimated at 150,000. Harris County, in which 
it is situated, has never had a lynching, and 
there are other indications, such as the comparative restraint and self-control of the 
white citizens after the riot, that the colored 
people perhaps enjoy a greater degree of 
freedom with less danger than in many 
parts of the South. It is, however, a southern city, and the presence of the Negro 
troops inevitably stirred its Negrophobe 
element to protest. There was some feeling 
against the troops being there at all, but I 
could not find that it was universal. Most 
of the white people seem to have wanted 
the financial advantages to be derived from 
having the camp in the neighborhood. The 
sentiment I heard expressed most frequently 
by them was that they were willing to endure the colored soldiers if they could be 
"controlled." I was frequently told that 
Negroes in uniform were inevitably "insolent" and that members of the military 
police in particular were frequently "insolent" to the white police of Houston. It was 
almost universally conceded, however, that 
the members of the white police force habitually cursed, struck, and otherwise maltreated colored prisoners. One of the important 
results of the riot has been an attempt on 
the part of the Mayor and the Chief of 
Police of Houston to put a stop to this 
custom. 
In deference to the southern feeling 
against the arming of Negroes and because 
of the expected co-operation of the city Police Department, members of the provost 
guard were not armed, thus creating a situation without precedent in the history of 
this guard. A few carried clubs, but none 
of them had guns, and most of them were 
without weapons of any kind. They were 
supposed to call on white police officers to 
make arrests. The feeling is strong among 
the colored people of Houston that this was 
the real cause of the riot. "You may have 
observed," one of them said to me, "that 
Southerners do not like to fight Negroes on 
equal terms. This is at the back of all the 
southern feeling against Negro soldiers. If 
Corporal Baltimore had been armed, they 
would never have dared to set upon him 
and we should not have had a riot." This 
was the general feeling I found among the 
colored people of Houston. 
Several minor encounters took place between the military and civil police shortly 
after the troops arrived. As a result, Chief 
of Police Brock issued an order calling on 
his men to co-operate with the military 
police, to give them full assistance, and to 
refer to them as "colored" and not as "nigger" officers. Chief Brock is a northern 
man and though apparently sincere and 
well-meaning, does not seem to have the full 
confidence of all his men for this and other 
reasons. The order was obeyed in a few 
instances and more often disregarded. 
On the afternoon of August 23, two policemen, Lee Sparks and Rufe Daniels—the 
former known to the colored people as a 
brutal bully—entered the house of a respectable colored woman in an alleged search for 
a colored fugitive accused of crap-shooting. 
Failing to find him, they arrested the woman, striking and cursing her and forcing 
her out into the street only partly clad. 
While they were waiting for the patrol 
wagon a crowd gathered about the weeping 
woman who had become hysterical and was 
begging to know why she was being arrested. In this crowd was a colored soldier, Private Edwards. Edwards seems to 
have questioned the police officers or re14 N. A. A. C. P. 15 
monstrated with them. Accounts differ on 
this point, but they all agree that the officers immediately set upon him and beat him 
to the ground with the butts of their sixshooters, continuing to beat and kick him 
while he was on the ground, and arrested 
him. In the words of Sparks himself: "I 
beat that nigger until his heart got right. 
He was a good nigger when I got through 
with him." Later Corporal Baltimore, a 
member of the military police, approached 
the officers and inquired for Edwards, as it 
was his duty to do. Sparks immediately 
opened fire, and Baltimore, being unarmed, 
fled with the two policemen in pursuit 
shooting as they ran. Baltimore entered a 
house in the neighborhood and hid under a 
bed. They followed, dragged him out, beat 
him up and arrested him. It was this outrage which infuriated the men of the 24th 
Infantry to the point of revolt. Following 
is the story of the arrest as given by its 
victim, Mrs. Travers, and by eyewitnesses 
whose names are in the possession of the 
Association, but are withheld for their protection. 
Mrs. Travers, an evidently respectable, 
hardworking colored woman, said: 
"I was in my house ironing. I got five 
children. I heard shooting and I'd run out 
in my yard to see what was happening. 
Sparks he came into my house and said, 
'Did you see a nigger jumping over that 
yard?' and I said, 'No, sir.' He came in 
the house and looked all around. Went in 
back. Then Daniels, the other policeman, he 
came around the corner on his horse. I 
called to Mrs. Williams, my friend that 
lives across the street, and asked her what 
was the matter. She said, 'I don't know; 
I think they were shooting at crap-shooters.' 
"He (Sparks) came in again just then 
and said, 'You're a God damn liar; I shot 
down in the ground.' I looked at her and 
she looked at me and he said, 'You all God 
damn nigger bitches. Since these God damn 
sons of bitches of nigger soldiers come here 
you are trying to take the town.' He came 
into the bedroom then and into the kitchen 
and I ask him what he want. He replied 
to me, 'Don't you ask an officer what he 
want in your house.' He say, 'I'm from 
Fort Ben and we don't allow niggers to talk 
back to us. We generally whip them down 
there.' Then he hauled off and slapped me. 
I hollered and the big one—this Daniels— 
he ran in, and then Sparks said to him, 'I 
slapped her and what shall we do about it?' 
Daniels says, 'Take and give her ninety 
days on the Pea Farm 'cause she's one of 
these biggety nigger women.' Then they 
both took me by the arm and commenced 
dragging me out. I asked them to let me 
put some clothes on and Sparks says, 'No, 
we'll take you just as you are. If you was 
naked we'd take you.' Then I take the baby 
in my arms and asked him to let me take it. 
He took it out of my arms and threw it 
down on the sidewalk. Took me with my 
arms behind my back and Daniels, he says, 
if I didn't come he'd break them. They 
took me out on Tempson Street. He rung 
up the Police Department. Whilst I was 
standing crowd began a-coming (all I had 
on was this old dress-skirt and a pair panties and a ol' raggedy waist. No shoes or 
nothing)—crowd and a colored soldier man 
came. [Private Edwards.] Sparks, he says 
to me, 'YOU STAND HERE,' and I did and 
a lady friend brought me shoes and a bonnet 
and apron and he (Sparks) says, 'Stay 
here,' and went over, and before the soldier 
could say a word he said, 'What you got to 
do with this,' and he raised his six-shooter 
and he beat him—beat him good. He didn't 
do a thing but just raise his hand to ward 
them off. Didn't even tell them to quit, 
nor nothing. Then another soldier, this 
Sergeant Somebody, came, and the first one 
called to him and the policeman said to him, 
'If you come here, we'll give you the same.' 
Edwards said, 'Must I go with them?' and 
the second one says, 'Yes, go with them and 
we'll come along after you.' I hear they 
shot that second soldier but I didn't see it, 
for they took me away. They take me to 
the Police Department and locked me up for 
using 'abusive language'—but they dismissed the case today. 
"I ain't never been before no court of inquiry, no ma'am. Only just to the court 
when they dismissed the case against me, 
and there ain't no generals nor no one been 
out to see me or ask anything. I don't know 
why they don't come to me. They been to 
most everyone else around here, and I could 
tell them the truth. Seems like they might 
ask me, when I'm the one it happened to, 
and I'm not afraid to tell, even if Sparks do 
come back afterwards and do some more to 
me, but you're the only one yet that's come 
to ask me." 16 THE CRISIS 
When interviewed a second time, Mrs. 
Travers added the following to her statement : 
"I been down to the Prosecutor's office today. He asked me what did I know about 
the riot. I said, 'I don't know nothing about 
it. I was in bed with my children when it 
happened. Where else would I be at that 
time of night?' He said to me didn't I 
know beforehand that the soldiers were coming; didn't none of them tell me beforehand. 
I told him no, but I could tell him what 
happened before the riot to make it happen, 
and I started to tell him that Sparks came 
into my house and hit me. He say he didn't 
want to hear anything more about that and 
he sent me home. That's what I had to 
spend my carfare for. " 
One eye-witness said: 
"I didn't see them arrest Mrs. Travers. 
I don't know what happened in the house, 
but I saw her afterwards and I know she 
said they slapped her in the house and 
pinched her arms and threw her baby under 
the bed. They had her right outside here 
waiting for the patrol wagon. She hadn't 
on but two pieces of clothes—and she was 
hollering and asking what she'd done to be 
arrested. Then Private Edwards came up 
and asked if he could take her. I heard the 
policeman say, 'Stand back,' and landed him 
on the head with his six-shooter. Then Baltimore he came and asked him about the 
other soldier. They beat him, too, and he 
ran and they shot after him. I saw Sparks 
fire after him three times, myself. Daniels 
shot, too, but I don't know if it was more 
than once. Baltimore ran away around the 
corner, with them firing after him, and his 
head was bloody. I thought he'd drop any 
time, but he didn't get hit. They said afterward they fired at the .ground—but they 
didn't. They shot right straight at him and 
(they fired) into a street full of women and 
children. They haven't found any bullet 
holes in the sidewalk either, and it wasn't 
there that they fired. It was at Baltimore, 
and no mistake." 
A second eye-witness said: 
"I drive a butcher wagon. I make deliveries all about here and I saw a lot of what 
happened about here before the riot. When 
Sparks and Daniels came along that day I 
was driving past where three boys were 
shooting craps at the corner of Felipe and 
Bailey Streets. They fired a shot to scare 
the boys and they ran. Then the officers 
couldn't locate them. When I rode by again 
they had this woman, whose arrest was the 
cause of the riot, by the patrol box. She 
was insufficiently dressed to be out on the 
street and barefoot. There was a young 
soldier there (Private Edwards) who came 
up and asked the officers to let her put on 
shoes and clothes. The officers struck at 
him with their six-shooters. He put up his 
hand and blocked the first blow. The second 
hit him on the head and made him bloody. 
They followed that up and beat him to the 
ground. When he was down, one of them 
took the muzzle of his gun and punched him 
in the side, and Sparks said, 'That's the 
way we do things in the South. We'r e running things not the d niggers.' 
"It was later—at the same spot—the policemen were still there when the military 
officer (Baltimore) came. I didn't hear 
what he said, but whatever was said between him and the police officers made him 
stop about half a block away and fold his 
arms, and at that one of the officers took 
out his revolver and commenced firing at 
him—right at him. He ran away around 
the corner of Mr. May's place. That's all 
I saw then." 
When word of the outrage reached camp, 
feeling ran high. It was by no means the 
first incident of the kind that had occurred. 
A few days before a Negro had been beaten 
on a car by city detective Ed Stoermer, who, 
according to his own testimony before the 
Citizens Investigating Committee, cleared 
the car of its white passengers, telling them 
that he "might have to kill the nigger. " I 
was reliably informed that on another occasion two colored soldiers were brutally beaten up by city detectives who boarded the 
car in which they sat from a Ford machine; 
that this machine drew up alongside of the 
car which was halted by the conductor longenough for the beating to take place, after 
which the detectives again got into the car 
and drove off. 
Baltimore was popular among the men of 
the 24th Infantry, and for some time the 
rumor persisted that he had been killed. To 
quell the excitement Major Snow telephoned 
in to Police Headquarters to ascertain the 
facts and asked that Baltimore be returned 
to the camp immediately. A t roll call that 
evening Snow addressed the men, telling 
them what had happened and stating that 
Sparks was to blame and would be punished. 
The men, however, were by that time beyond N. A. A. C. P. 17 
his control. In this connection it has been 
pointed out several times that Sparks has 
been suspended and is under indictment for 
the assault on Baltimore and for murder 
for the shooting of another Negro. There 
is no reason to believe that this indictment 
is anything but a bluff, the purpose of 
which is to show that there was no excuse 
for the soldiers taking the law into their 
hands. Chief Brock, who throughout has 
given evidence of good faith, did his duty in 
suspending Sparks, but there is no reason 
to believe that Sparks will receive any punishment at the hands of a white jury, and 
if he is acquitted, he probably cannot be 
kept off the police force. "Of course, Sparks 
will be let off with a fine. Our policemen 
have to beat the niggers when they are insolent. Yo u can't expect them to let a nigger curse them," one white man told me. 
The same man, in reply to my question 
whether Sparks did not have a reputation 
as a bully, replied, "Oh, no ; at least only 
among the colored people." The feeling of 
the colored people in regard to Sparks and 
the police in general is best illustrated by 
the statement of another colored man whose 
name I was unable to learn: 
"It's like this, lady—I could talk all right, 
but I'm afeard. I know a lot, but I live here, 
and my family lives here, and all I got—all 
my savings of a lifetime is here—and there's 
prejudice here—and you see how 'tis. I 
made up my mind—I took like an oath to 
myself I wouldn't say nothing. I just made 
up my mind that I didn't know nothing. 
Only that my friend here says you're all 
right, I wouldn't say this much—but I got 
confidence in him. 
"There's been a lot of dirty work here. 
I'm not saying nothing, but you find out 
who it was killed that colored man who was 
drafted into the army on Washington Street, 
and who shot that colored man, Williams, in 
the back, they say was killed in a crap game 
on Dallas Avenue. They can't find out that 
no one did it—but we know Sparks was in 
the gang that did the shooting. And that 
soldier man—the police shot him running— 
I saw him and he was hit in the back of the 
neck. And, what's more, I've seen three 
more colored men beat up without any cause 
by the police since the riot. There's a lot 
more I could say, only I'm afeard." 
It is the Negro mentioned in this statement, Williams, for whose murder Sparks 
has been indicted. While I was in Houston 
the other Negro fugitive mentioned, who 
turned out to be an enlisted man under the 
selective draft law, was shot by a city 
detective simply for refusing to halt. The 
detective was "amicably" arrested by the 
Chief of Detectives and almost immediately 
released on a five hundred dollar bond. 
Sparks is also at liberty and although without the prestige given him by his position 
on the police force, was, at last report, 
using that liberty to further molest the colored people. About a week after the riot he 
entered the house of a respectable colored 
physician on Robbin Avenue early in the 
morning while the latter was in his bath 
and his wife partly dressed, on the pretext 
of looking for a fugitive, insulted and bullied them both when they protested, and 
threatened them with a drawn gun. On the 
same day he threatened a colored woman 
that he would "blow her damned head off" 
because he thought she had laughed at him. 
It was in pursuit of this woman that he entered several colored houses in this block, 
threatening and cursing the colored people. 
When investigation made it apparent that 
the police were to blame for the beginning 
of the riot, a systematic attempt was made 
to shift the blame for this also on to the 
colored people. Strange stories began to be 
circulated in the papers and by word of 
mouth as to the real cause of the friction 
between the soldiers and the police. It was 
again the insolence of the Negro soldiers 
which in this case took the form of ignoring 
the "Jim Crow" regulations of Houston, 
particularly on the Houston Street cars. 
Testimony to this effect, which was obviously absurd, was given and reported apparently in all seriousness before the Citizen's 
Board of Inquiry. Several motormen and 
conductors were subpoenaed to testify to 
this effect, and one of them told a pathetic 
story of one occasion on which his car was 
boarded by a number of Negro soldiers (unarmed) who threw the "Jim Crow" screen 
out oif the car window, over ran the car. 
forcing white passengers to get up and give 
them their seats, and who escaped unscathed 
to tell the tale. He was unable to give the 
names of any witnesses to this occurrence, 
although he stated that many of the white 
passengers left the car in great anger 
threatening that he would be reported and 
lose his job. The legend continued to the 
effect that white police officers were finally 
called in to deal with the Negro soldiers 18 THE CRISIS 
who were terrorizing the peaceable white 
citizens and demoralizing colored civilians, 
and that the former by merely doing their 
duty won the undying enmity of the colored 
soldiers. 
Another outrageously false impression 
which was deliberately given by the white 
press was that Mrs. Travers was a woman 
of the underworld and that her arrest was 
the result of drunken and disorderly conduct. Mrs. Travers is unmistakably a hardworking, respectable woman. She had no 
connection with either Edwards or Baltimore, whom she had never seen before the 
day of the riot. The story, however, was 
never denied, and was still being circulated 
while I was in Houston, although so many 
white people who had employed her testified 
to her good character that it was necessary 
to acquit her at her trial for "using abusive 
language." She was also never called before the Citizen's Board of Inquiry. 
Police brutality and bad discipline among 
the soldiers led up to the riot, which cost 
the city of Houston eighteen lives. Amon g 
them was that of Daniels, the policeman 
who had taken part in the beating of Baltimore and Edwards. There is abundant testimony from both white and colored people 
that there was excessive drinking and immorality among the soldiers at the camp, 
and there is testimony by white people to 
the effect that Edwards was drunk when he 
was arrested. While this may have been 
the case, it does not seem to materially 
effect the situation, as Baltimore, who was 
sober, received even worse treatment at the 
hands of the police officers. It is also very 
probable that some of the leaders were inflamed with drink at the time of the outbreak. That outbreak, acecording to a 
statement made by Major Snow before he 
received orders not to talk, was not an out 
and out mutiny, although the men were undoubtedly guilty of repeated disobedience 
to orders before they left the camp. If they 
did, as is allleged, shoot at their officers, 
they did not kill or wound any of them, 
though they did wound a colored soldier 
who was guarding the ammunition supply 
and who later died of his wounds. When 
the soldiers left the camp their slogan was, 
"On to the Police Station," where their idea 
was to punish the police for their attack on 
Edwards and Baltimore. Even the white 
people of Houston do not believe that their 
original intention was to shoot up the town. 
When on the way to the police station they 
met with opposition, they gave battle with 
terrible results. As in every riot, innocent 
bystanders were killed, one very pathetic 
case being that of a little white girl who 
was killed by a stray bullet which penetrated the room where she slept. The bitterness of the white people over this and 
other casualties is understandable, but the 
worst features of the Houston riot do not 
for one moment make it comparable with 
the massacre of East St. Louis. It was not 
a cold-blooded slaughter of innocents but 
the work of angry men whose endurance 
of wrong and injustice had been strained to 
the breaking point, and who in their turn 
committed injustices. There was no burning of women and children, no hanging, no 
torturing of innocent victims. The only 
atrocity reported being the bayoneting of 
Captain Mattes of the Illinois National 
Guard, spoken of b y the Houston papers 
as the work of "black fiends," although bayoneting is not a practice discouraged by the 
United States Army . 
All the men who are alleged to have 
taken part in the outbreak have been captured and are facing a court martial at El 
Paso. The one fact which admits of no uncertainty is that if they are found guilty 
they will be fully and sufficiently punished. 
After the riot the white citizens of Houston behaved with unusual coolness and restraint and they have taken unto themselves full credit for so doing. The presence 
of United States troops undoubtedly assisted materially in keeping order. A half hour 
after the riot started Governor Ferguson 
had declared martial law which lasted for 
several days and order was restored without 
any lynching or other form of reprisal on 
the part of the white people. It was not to 
be expected that martial law or any other 
kind of law could be enforced impartially 
under the circumstances, and it wa s not so 
enforced. White citizens were given arms 
"to protect their homes " and the homes of 
Negro civilians were visited and their arms 
taken away from them. Many Negroes 
were also unjustly arrested, locked up for 
several days, and then dismissed without 
any charge having been made against them. 
That further disorder did not occur under 
such circumstances is one of the most remarkable things about the situation, and VOTES FOR ALL 19 
credit for it should be given to both races. 
The Houston Post and the white people generally explained it as another illustration 
of the well-known fact that "the South is 
the Negro's best friend"; that race riot and 
bloodshed are really indigenous to northern 
soil; and that the relations between black 
and white in the South are highly cordial. 
The colored people of Houston, however, are 
migrating North, and to this more than to 
any element in the case I attribute the new 
restraint in the attitude of white Houstonians. While I was in Houston, 130 colored 
people left in one day. In June, one labor 
agent exported more than nine hundred Negroes to points along the Pennsylvania 
Railroad. The Houston Chamber of Commerce became so alarmed over the Negro 
exodus that it telegraphed to the head of 
the railroad asking that this exportation be 
discontinued. The railroad complied with 
this request, but the colored people continued to leave. Colored men and women 
in every walk of life are still selling their 
homes and household goods at a loss and 
leaving because, as one of them, a physician, put it to me, "Having a home is all 
right, but not when you never know when 
you leave it in the morning if you will really 
be able to get back to it that night." White 
Houston, especially its business men, are 
beginning to realize this. For the first time 
they are showing some slight signs of seeking to make the South safe for the Negro. 
While the northern exodus of the Negroes, 
which began with the war, is largely responsible for this, occurrences such as the 
Houston riot must be admitted to quicken 
the sense of justice which has so long lain 
dormant in the white southern breast. 
However much the riot is to be condemned 
from the standpoint of justice, humanity, 
and military discipline, however badly it 
may be held to have stained the long and 
honorable record of Negro soldiers, however 
necessary it may be that the soldiers should 
be severely punished, it seems to me an undeniable fact that one of its results will be 
a new respect and consideration for the 
Negro in the South. 
VOTES FOR ALL 
A SYMPOSIUM 
RESPONDIN G to your request for a 
brief message with regard to the Colored American and Suffrage, I wish to repeat a statement which I have made so 
many times that I believe the whole world 
is familiar with it, and that is that I hope 
the time will come when there will be no 
such thing as a Colored-American any more 
than a German-American or an IrishAmerican or any other kind of American, 
except a plain American citizen. What I 
say in regard to the vote of the American 
citizen I should say in regard to the vote of 
any citizen who is an American—that I 
trust we are approaching the time when 
every loyal, law-abiding citizen of the country shall have an equal right with every 
other law-abiding citizen of the United 
States to express, through the ballot box, 
the will of the citizen, regardless of sex or 
color, in connection with those problems of 
the Government which affect the lives of 
American citizens. 
I have never been able, and doubtless 
never shall be able, to understand why one 
citizen who contributes to the support of the 
Government, and who is submissive to its 
authority, should have any more right than 
any other citizen, under like conditions, to 
free access to the ballot box. 
I believe in democracy, and there is no 
such thing as democracy under conditions 
which deny to any citizen who obeys the law 
and contributes to the support of the Government the right to a voice in making the 
law. ANN A HOWARD SHA W 
Honorary President, National American 
Woman Suffrage Association; Chairman, Woman's Committee, Council 
of National Defense. 
OVE R in Europe the greatest war that 
history has ever known is shaking 
the foundations of kingdoms and empires. 
Millions of men have been blown to atoms 
in the Titanic struggle. Billions of dollars have been burned up in the smoke and 
fire of its battles. The whole world is 
locked in the struggle and the struggle is 
to the death. 20 THE CRISIS 
Wha t is it all about? 
Wha t is the idea underneath the horror 
and the heartache? 
Wha t is it for ? 
W e all know the answer. Every soldier 
who straps on his knapsack and marches 
away to camp, bound later for "somewhere 
in France," every mother, every wife who 
weeps to see him go, every woman who 
steps forward to take his place in industry, 
even the little child who is lifted to kiss 
him good-by, knows the answer. 
"Fo r democracy,—for the right of those 
who submit to authority to have a voice 
in their own government." 
In those nobly simple words of the President of the United States is set forth the 
whole story, the great ideal, the democratic 
faith that is sustaining alike the men of 
the Allied Armies on the battlefields of 
Europe, the women of the world waging 
their own double struggle to meet the new 
economic demands upon them while trying 
to secure a voice in their own government, 
and the Negro facing the selfsame problem 
and often refusing to see that through the 
Negro women his race is as vitally involved 
in the woman suffrage question as race 
can be. 
For just as the world war is no white 
man's war but every man's war, so is the 
struggle for woman suffrage no white 
woman's struggle but every woman's 
struggle. Once long ago, the Negro man 
made the white man's mistake of deciding 
that the suffrage was the prerogative of 
men only. That was just after the Civil 
War. He had his chance then to stand by 
the woman's rights cause that stood by 
him. He did not do it. Like the white 
men around him, he could not and would 
not recognize that women were people, and 
that women, as well as men, must have a 
voice in their own government. Like the 
white man, he wanted democracy applied 
for himself, but not for woman. That is 
the crucial error of all men, white or black, 
in their efforts to apply democracy. It 
seems to be wholly a matter of sex, not 
at all of race or color. White man, black 
man, Mongolian, Malay, and Redskin are 
wonderfully alike when it comes to counting women out in any scheme for the political salvation of the world. 
But however men have seen it, and may 
continue for a time, to see it, women do 
count. Everybody counts in applying democracy. And there will never be a true 
democracy until every responsible and lawabiding adult in it, without regard to race, 
sex, color or creed has his or her own inalienable and unpurchasable voice in the 
government. That is the democratic goal 
toward which the world is striving today. 
In our own country woman suffrage is 
but one, if acute, phase of the problem. 
The Negro question is but another. The 
enfranchisement of the foreign-born 
peoples who sweep into this country and 
forget to leave the hyphen at home is yet 
another. 
How are we so to apply democracy that 
one and all of these problems may be fairly 
and squarely met by a voice in the government? 
All along the line we fail of the right 
answer and the whole answer. Capital 
clashes with labor, class clashes with class, 
man-made laws are imposed on women who 
are denied all voice in the law-making, the 
individual sells his vote and pockets his 
dollar, race is arrayed against race, even 
to the perpetration of some such awful 
crime against common humanity as that 
against black people in the East St. Louis 
horror, and in woman's own struggle for 
democracy we hear some such retrograde 
outburst as emanated from the picket prisoners at being housed with Negro prisoners 
—not because they were prisoners, because 
they were black—a strangely and cruelly 
undemocratic protest! 
Nowhere can we find the complete working basis for the democratic ideal. Ye t 
everywhere that ideal rises again from the 
ashes of our wasted effort and again moves 
on ahead of us, a light that beckons. 
Shall we shut our eyes and see it no 
more, remembering how hard it is to follow? 
Shall we give up because we can't make 
a democracy work perfectly as yet? 
Shall we cry quits because our patience 
wears out under the sorry failures and the 
long delay? 
We could, of course, forswear democracy 
and herd together under an autocracy that 
would whip us into a grand machine, efficient as Germany's. 
But who wants to be a Germany? 
With all its failures, its delays, its harsh VOTES FOR ALL 21 
injustices, we will stick to democracy. We 
will not give up. W e women, at least, will 
not even falter. We will press straightforward, knowing that the cure for the 
ills of democracy is more democracy. 
As suffragists we have a profound belief that with the enfranchisement of all 
women will come improvement in our body 
politic. W e believe that the vote will d.o 
woman good and that women will do politics good. If we did not believe it, if we 
held the franchise as a light thing, to be 
neglected, or idly cast, or bartered and 
sold, it would not be worth working for, 
and democracy would not be worth fighting 
for and dying for. 
For centuries women have been trying 
to make their convictions, their feeling 
against oppression, carry without the franchise. And century by century, the need 
of the franchise has come steadily uppermost. Fo r decades, since women have been 
working for the vote, they have been urged 
to condemn this, espouse that, and work 
for the other before they get the vote, or 
as a condition of their getting the vote. 
Such delaying, such conditioning are but 
added affronts to democracy. As suffragists women stand on but one plank today 
and that the plank of equal rights, for 
women as for men, without delay and without conditions. Standing on that plank 
alone they bespeak for and from America 
that broad application of democracy that 
knows no bias on the ground of race, color, 
creed, or sex. To the end that Americans 
may stand united, not as Irish-Americans, 
German-Americans, Negro-Americans, 
Slav-Americans and "the women," but, 
one and all, as Americans for America. 
CARRIE CHAPMA N CATT, 
President, National American Woman 
Suffrage Association. 
T
HE colored race is a progressing race. 
Woman constitutes a progressing sex. 
This similarity should make colored men 
sympathetic toward woman's struggle for 
political freedom. Colored men in New 
York State have been granted the right to 
vote and they must realize that the ballot 
gives them a power that is very valuable 
to them in their advance toward better conditions. Women ask for that same power, 
colored women want that power to help 
the men of their race more effectively to 
solve their problems. 
Over one million women in the State of 
New York have enrolled under the woman 
suffrage standard; 512,093 women in the 
City of New York have signed up for suffrage during the last few months. In view 
of this great demand for the ballot, men 
can no longer say that the women of their 
community do not want to vote. They can 
no longer say, if they oppose suffrage, that 
they represent women at the polls. 
Women in New York City ask for the 
vote for many reasons. Those who pay 
taxes think that it is only fair that they 
have something to say about how the tax 
money shall be expended. Those who are 
out in the world earning their own living, 
and over eight hundred thousand do this in 
the State of New York, believe that they 
should have the right, accorded to men, to 
help make the laws that relate to labor conditions. Those who are wives and mothers 
want to exert influence over the public officials elected by votes who supervise the 
schools, the food, markets, sanitation, playgrounds, housing conditions, places of public amusement and all the things that vitally 
affect the welfare of the home and the children. Politics has already entered the home, 
therefore, it is only fair for the homemaker 
to have a voice in politics. 
For these and other good reasons, notable 
among them the fact that war lays more 
and more burdens and responsibilities on 
women which should be offset by privileges 
and advantages, the women of New York 
City, colored and white alike, appeal to men 
to be just and democratic and to make them 
voting citizens. Since colored men have 
come forward as bravely and nobly as the 
men of any race to help the nation fight for 
democracy in Europe, I am sure they will 
show on election day by ballots cast in favor 
of suffrage that they believe in working for 
democracy at home. Let them vote for the 
woman suffrage amendment on November 6. 
MAR Y GARRETT HAY , 
Chairman of New York City Woman Suffrage Party. Men of the Month 
A LEADING EDUCATOR. 
KELL Y MILLER, Dean of the College of 
Arts and Sciences, Howard University, was born at Winnsboro, S. C , July 23, 
1863. He was graduated at Howard University in 1886 and did post-graduate work 
in mathematics and physics at Johns Hopkins University, 1887-89. He began his 
active work as a clerk in the Civil Service, 
then taught in the Washington High School 
and in 1890 became Professor of Mathematics at Howard University, a chair which he 
still holds. 
Dr. Miller is a writer and critic of unusual power and grace. He has written two 
books of essays, "Race Adjustment" and 
"Out of the House of Bondage," and has 
contributed widely to periodicals and newspapers. Recently he has sent out a series 
of excellent brochures on various phases of 
the Negro problem which have had wide circulation and attracted much attention. His 
latest one is "The Disgrace of Democracy, " 
an open letter to President Wilson, which is 
a striking contribution to war literature and 
has been widely commented upon. 
Dr. Miller is, without doubt, not only a 
prominent Negro but a leading American 
and one of the few whose biographies are in 
"Who's Who. " 
A PHYSICIAN. 
•pv R. CONWEL L BANTON , of Wilmington, Del., was recently elected to the 
Board of Education of that city. He is a 
graduate of the Institute of Colored Youth 
and the School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania. He began his practice 
of medicine in Wilmington sixteen years 
ago. Together with Dr. J. 0 . Hopkins he 
conducts a drug business and outside of his 
regular work has held health-week exhibits, at which physicians, teachers and social 
workers have spoken, and also conducted a 
tuberculosis clinic at a local hospital. As 
a result of his efforts the Delaware AntiTuberculosis Society has erected Edgewood 
Sanitorium for colored tubercular patients. 
The colored people are fortunate in having 
Dr. Banton to represent them on the Board 
of Education. 
A HE AD WAITER. 
Mr. WILLIA M H. WHITE , a native of 
North Carolina, is headwaiter at 
Emerson Hotel in Baltimore, Md. He has 
served here and at the Merchants' Club fo r 
ten years and receives a salary of $1,680 a 
year. Mr. White and his crew replaced 
white help at this leading hotel and they 
have given satisfaction. He and his men 
contributed recently $1,000 to the Provident 
Hospital Fund, and in many other ways Mr. 
White has shown himself a public-spirited 
citizen. A CIT y COUNCILMAN. 
W
HE N West Virginia's Democratic 
state law librarian recently assumed 
office his first official act was directed toward 
the removal of James Arthur Jackson, who 
had served as assistant librarian for sixteen 
years under men of his own race. So indispensable were his services considered by 
the Judges of the Supreme Court and members of the Bar, Democratic and Republican, throughout the state, that pressure had 
been brought to bear on the governor-elect 
to retain Mr. Jackson, even before his chief 
had been decided upon. Mr. Jackson remained in office, but thought seriously of 
resigning, because of the humiliations to 
which he was subjected. In the meantime, 
the bench and bar had again busied themselves in his behalf. The result was the 
creation by the legislature of the office of 
Supreme Court librarian and page, to which 
Mr. Jackson was immediately appointed by 
the Supreme Court judges. The tenure of 
this office is not dependent upon changes of 
administration. Mr. Jackson is, therefore, 
assured of the position as long as he cares 
to hold it. 
A LIBRARIAN. 
HARR Y SMYTH E CUMMING S was 
born in Baltimore, Md., May 19, 1866, 
and died September 7, 1917. He was educated at Morgan College and graduated from 
Lincoln University in 1886. He took his law 
course at the University of Maryland and 
soon after graduation was elected a member 
of the City Council from the Eleventh 
Ward. He has served in this capacity for 
thirteen years, a longer term than any other 
councilman. He has done much for Negro 
education while in the Council and was, at 
the time of his death, working to secure a 
much-needed modern high school building. 
A t the Presidential convention in 1904 he 
made a national reputation by his speech 
seconding Roosevelt's nomination. He leaves 
a widow and four children. 
22 J. A. JACKSON W. H. WHITE 
KELLY MILLER 
After the Bust by May Howard Jackson 
THE LATE H. S. CUMMINGS DR. C. BANTON 
2 3 MRS CORALIE FRANKLI N COOK 
Member of the Board of Education, District of Columbia; born at Lexington, Va.; educated at Storer 
College; wife of George William Cook, Secretary of Howard University. 
• 
Shadows of Light 
24 THE EMPRESS TAITOU, WIDOW OF THE LATE MENELIK II, EMPEROR OF ABYSSINIA, AND 
MOTHER OF THE PRESENT EMPRESS OUIZERO ZEODITU. 
25 CADETS Or OFFICERS' TRAINING CAMP NO. 17, AT FORT DES MOINES, IOWA, WHO WILL VE THEIR COMMISSIONS AS OFFICERS IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY THIS MONTH. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
DOROTH Y CANFIELD , the novelist, 
writes in the Outlook of heartbreaking-
 experiences in Belgium. A woman tells 
her: 
"W e have tried, you know, to keep the 
children as busy as possible with their 
studies, so that they would not have leisure 
to brood over what they see and hear every 
day. I've had little Marguerite go on with 
her English lessons steadily and read as 
much English as possible. One of the books 
her teacher gave her was 'Uncle Tom's 
Cabin.' She looked up from it one day, 
with a pale face, and said, in a sad, wondering voice: 'Why, auntie, this might have 
been written about us, mightn't it? It tells 
about things that happen to us all the time 
—that we have seen. The men who are 
flogged and starved and killed, the mothers trying in vain to follow their daughters 
into captivity, the young girls dragged out 
of their fathers' arms—it's all just like 
what the Germans do to us, isn't it?' " 
A "Study of Economic Co-operation 
Among the Negroes of Georgia," issued as 
Atlanta University Publication, • Number 
nineteen, has been edited by Thomas I. 
Brown. It is, in reality, a study of Negro 
business enterprises, of which it finds 577 
in the City of Atlanta, capitalized at $651,-
000, and owning property to the value of 
over $1,000,000. They do an annual business 
of over $6,000,000, with an average annual 
profit of $650,000. Twenty-three hundred 
colored people are employed and 61 per cent, 
of the patronage is colored. 
Throughout the whole State of Georgia, 
1,907 businesses were listed, capitalized at 
nearly $2,000,000, with $2,500,000 worth of 
property and an average annual business of 
$15,000,000. They employ over 5,000 people. Among the businesses are 359 grocery 
stores, 249 restaurants, 207 barber shops, 
144 shoe repairers, 65 blacksmith shops, etc. 
The Journal of Heredity for October has 
a full-page picture of Colonel Young and 
something about Negro soldiers. Perhaps 
most interesting to us is a statement of the 
present scientific division of races, which 
replaces the old fairy-tale about the "Ary ­
ans" : 
The Nordic race probably took its present 
form somewhere in eastern Russia, although 
it may have come from Africa at an earlier 
period in the world's pre-history. It is one 
of the three principal races of Europe, the 
other two being the Mediterranean and the 
Alpine. The former came into Europe from 
the south—i. e., Africa—and is represented 
mainly by the Latin races; in appearance it 
differs from the Nordic mainly in being 
shorter and darker. The Alpine race is 
made up of a flood of round-headed, longbeai'ded invaders who came from middle 
Asia, bringing copper implements and 
spreading over the Balkans and the near 
east until they pushed a wedge clear across 
Europe to the Atlantic. 
ELECTION LAWS IN SOUTH 
CAROLINA 
A N extraordinary revelation of election 
methods in South Carolina is contained in a series of editorials in the Columbia, S. C , State: 
Opinion is growing in South Carolina that 
the time has arrived for far reaching 
changes in the election laws. On the one 
hand it is said that the intricacy of the 
ballot restrictions is no longer necessary 
and no longer serves its original purpose. 
Another view is that the only safety lies in 
adding to the suffrage restrictions. 
After the restoration of the government 
to white men in 1877, ballot restriction was 
one of the first great tasks undertaken. The 
late General Edward McCrady, of Charleston, devised the "eight box law" and perhaps the registration law, too. The former 
was in its operation an educational qualification. Underlying both statutes was the 
aim that they would reduce the Negro vote 
more than the white 
The suffrage limitations imposed by the 
Constitution of 1895 had little or no effect 
on the voting by Negroes. The registration 
and eight box laws would, perhaps, have 
continued to keep the Negroes out of politics. In Georgia no constitutional convention has been held to restrict Negro suffrage, and Georgia has had no more trouble 
with the Negro vote than South Carolina 
has had. 
In 1892 the primary for the nomination 
of state officers and U. S. senators wa s 
adopted and in 1896 it was adopted in its 
present form. For the last twenty years 
it has been incomparably more effective in 
disfranchising the Negroes than the constitutional qualifications have been. The Negroes have never had a majority in South 
Carolina, except when manhood suffrage 
practically was without qualification. The 
slightest statutory restrictions gave and 
still give the whites a majority; hence, so 
28 THE LOOKING GLASS 29 
long as the whites nominate as a party and 
stand together in the general election the 
Negro is politically defunct. Of course, 
there is nothing in the Constitution or the 
statutes, federal or state, prohibiting the 
formation of a racial political party. 
The object of South Carolina election laws 
is frankly stated: 
To be kept in mind is that in all legislation in South Carolina relating to elections 
and registrations since 1876 the foremost 
object has been to restrict the ballot so 
that the whites shall dominate the state despite the majority of the Negro population. 
A t first the aim was to preserve white supremacy. Later this was enlarged to a 
purpose to confine the elections to the whites 
and this has been effected bv the substitution of the white state primary for the 
general election. Before the emancipation 
of the Negroes only the whites voted. So 
long as we have a white racial primary, 
which the white voters accept as the final 
election, the condition preceding emancipation is restored, with the important qualification that the white electorate has been 
enlarged. 
The number of possible Negro voters 
under honest election laws is thus stated: 
To arrive at the number of Negro males 
who could qualify as voters, under the law, 
is, to a large extent, a matter of guessing. 
If, however, there are 30,000 who pay taxes 
on property assessed at $300 or more, some 
of these are illiterate and are to be added 
to the number that could qualify by reason 
of ability to read and write. We reach the 
conclusion that under the present constitution and statutes there are at least 50,000 
and possibly 60,000 Negroes in the state who 
might under a fair administration of the 
law qualify to vote. There are at least 135,-
000 or 140,000 white males who could qualify 
and there should, therefore, be a white majority in the state of 75,000—or the proportion should be more than two to one in 
favor of the whites. 
Finally we come to the crux of the matter: 
In view of the fact that, soon or late, 
there may be a division of the white 
people of South Carolina, the plain and 
inescapable mandate of common sense is 
that the suffrage and election laws be surrounded with every possible safeguard calculated to confine the voting in general 
elections to the most intelligent and informed class of Negroes. It was the advice 
and wish of Abraham Lincoln to give the 
suffrage only to the most worthy and intelligent Negroes and in that, as in many 
other things, Lincoln was wise, just, and 
far-seeing. 
But the State hesitates at its own logic. 
"Go slowly" it advises: 
Under present conditions the simplification of voting is dangerous. Less than any 
other state, except Mississippi, because of 
the preponderence of Negro population, 
South Carolina should move slowly toward 
democratic government—or government by 
all the people. Our government must be, 
for a long time, representative, not democratic. Government by a part of the people 
is necessary in South Carolina, unless we 
wish to have government by blacks and 
whites. 
The State can think of no just and lawful way of excluding the great majority 
of Negroes from the polls and preserving, 
for a long time, a great white majority, 
except by rigid educational qualifications, 
and it can think of none of these that will 
not prevent a few whites from voting. 
To this we must come in South Carolina 
or commit the white people as a whole, for 
the sake of the 15 per cent of illiterates, 
to a course of corruption and fraud. 
Meantime, what about this dominant 
white majority? Is it honest and efficient? 
It is not. It is dishonest. It cheats itself! 
It produces Bleases and Tillmans. Hinc 
illae lachrimae! 
The most discouraging symptom now observable in South Carolina is an unwillingness to enforce the election laws that we 
have. The registration is loose and the 
methods of it, in many places, utterly at 
variance with the purposes of the constitution and statutes. We have rigorous statutes against the corruptions of voters in 
primaries and against frauds. Charges 
of infraction are numerous. This year, 
and in former years, politicians have set up 
that they were cheated, and have vociferously declared that they had the evidence. 
But no one prosecutes. No one swears out 
a warrant. The evidence is pigeonholed. 
If the charges that frauds are committed 
be true, and if it be true that the evidence 
of it is ample, the only conclusion from the 
failure to prosecute is that there is no 
wish to put an end to frauds in South Carolina primaries. The Australian ballot 
system would greatly increase the difficulty 
of election crimes, but nothing will end 
them so long as the people and their leaders tolerate them. * * * * 
Without efficient administration of our 
registration laws, to which some new legislation is perhaps a condition precedent, 
there can be no permanent security for 
good government under our present election 
system. During forty years South Carolina has drifted along on the assumption 
that in elections all white men are honest, 
so far as white men are concerned, with the 
result that the way has been left open for 
dishonest white men to practice frauds 
with the greatest facility and freedom from 
detection. 
In hundreds of precincts, a majority of 
them, the people are honest. In them there 
has never been a thought of cheating. 
These people, in the country precincts es-30 THE CRISIS 
pecially, do not ask to be paid for conducting an election. Hence, they are unwilling 
to incur any expense, as taxpayers, for the 
protection of the elections in other precincts. They fancy that because they are 
honest all other voters are and the thought 
of an Australian ballot law, with its expense and slight inconvenience, offends 
them. They are opposed to innovation. 
Rather than submit to it, they are entirely 
willing to jo g along and allow their votes 
to be cancelled by some rotten precinct 
where heelers abound who see to it that 
fraudulent votes are cast or that honest 
votes are fraudulently counted. 
WOMAN SUFFRAGE IN TENNESSEE 
O N Sunday, January 21, 1917, the staff 
correspondent of the Memphis, Tenn., 
Commercial Appeal wrote from the State 
Capitol as follows: 
The main question before many of the legislators now is the suffrage question. It is 
particularly important since the poll tax 
provision has been eliminated from the 
woman suffrage bill, and since the Republicans, on account of that elimination, have 
come over so unitedly for it. Wha t effect, if 
any, will the extension of the franchise to 
women on Presidential elections in Tennessee have on the state's vote hereafter in 
the electoral question? 
The Republicans could have killed the 
woman suffrage bill which the House passed 
Friday. A t any stage of the proceedings 
they could have cast their strength to the 
minority on the Democratic side. They 
have twenty-seven votes in the House. The 
Democrats voted twenty-four against woman 
suffrage, and if the situation had not been 
so strongly in favor of the question a half 
dozen others who voted yes would have been 
recorded as voting no. 
But to analyze: When the bill was up in 
the Senate four of the six Republicans there 
were unalterably against it. Senator Houk, 
of Knox, favored it, but his colleague, Senator Ogle, was undecided. The Republicans 
of the House were openly declaring themselves this way and that, without any indication of a fixed determination. Even 
Thursday found them divided. When they 
took their seats in the House Friday morning every single one of them was enthusiastic for the bill. The old argument that 
they did not propose to vote for a bill that 
would only increase the Democratic strength 
of Tennessee gave way to a hearty support 
and even leadership. The Republican floor 
leaders took a decidedly active part in the 
debates and the arguments leading up to the 
passage of the bill. The elimination of the 
poll tax caught them. 
Of course, it is not proper to question 
any motives, except those which may show 
politics. It is true that the bill, as passed 
by the House, gives every woman in the state 
the right to vote, and that vote may be cast 
without the payment of a poll tax. Every 
woman, white or black, in Tennessee can 
g o to the ballot box, if this bill is passed, 
and cast a vote without any poll tax receipt. 
This has set the west Tennessee Democrats to thinking. The Senate is yet to consider the bill. There are ten senators from 
west Tennessee. Of course, if every white 
woman in west Tennessee should g o to the 
polls and vote as her husband has been voting, the Democratic majority would tie increased from 20,000 to 40,000. But, they 
argue, what would have been the situation 
in Memphis last November? 
There are some ambitious Negroes in 
Memphis. They undertook to make themselves felt at the polls. Not only did they 
undertake to carry Shelby County for 
Hughes for President, but they got out candidates of their own, and those candidates 
ran second. 
And this was done, too, after the Negroes 
themselves had paid upwards of $3,000 poll 
taxes. If they had had no poll taxes to pay, 
there is no telling how many would have 
voted. There is no telling how many women 
they would have been able to corral and lead 
to the polls. These observations are not 
urged by Democrats as reasons why the 
suffrage should not be extended, but, after 
all, they are food for thought. They are 
such good food that the Senate, no doubt, 
will seriously consider the question of putting the poll tax clause back into the bill. 
It is a question that will be seriously considered by west Tennessee senators from 
counties in which the Negro population exceeds the white population. 
These west Tennessee senators are confronted with this also: That the Negro 
woman is far less ready for the important 
and sacred right of voting than the Negro 
man. The man has had fifty years of it, 
and still it is a novelty to him. Certainly, 
the ballot in the hands of Negro women, 
without any restrictions, would at least remind the older citizens of the wild and exciting times in reconstruction days. 
That is the plain truth of the whole matter. 
It is a proposition that west Tennessee 
Democrats should wrestle with long and patiently. It is not a question of denying the 
right to vote ; it is a question of throwing 
the proper safeguards around the ballot box. 
In county after county in west Tennessee 
there is not even a registration required, 
nor is the Dortch ballot voted. The women 
would have the right to vote for President. 
The laws of the United States would apply, 
and those laws and their judges are sometimes pretty diligent about seeing that voters are not interfered with in federal elections. The Republicans last fall sent $50,000 
into Tennessee to throw this state against 
Woodrow Wilson. 
It occurs to many that if our good women 
want to vote it would not be ungallant to 
suggest that they pay (two dollars) a year 
to the public schools for the privilege. They THE LOOKING GLASS 31 
are perfectly willing to do so if the legislature requires it. 
The Republicans for forty years have 
fought against a poll tax qualification. 
Now, under this bill, half of the voters are 
exempt from poll tax. 
It is worth thinking about. 
So much for the thinking of the South on 
woman suffrage. A s a sequel a colored Tennessee correspondent writes us: 
The suffrage bill for women passed in the 
House, and was killed in the Senate, for no 
other reason than they did not want Negro 
women to have the right to vote. They remembered the activity of the Lincoln 
League, at the polls in Memphis and Shelby 
County last Fall, and they feared the results 
if they passed the suffrage bill with, or 
without, the poll tax qualification. 
PHILLIP, DRUNK AND SOBER 
THE Columbia, S. C , State complains 
that the Negro problem keeps the South 
continually "explaining." It does; and unless these explanations are a little less 
contradictory in the future than they have 
been for some months past, they will leave 
an unpleasant taste in the mouths of honest 
readers. 
Fo r instance: / 
EDUCATION 
Instead of taking 
him into our white 
schools we provide 
schools where he 
may be educated as 
a Negro, not as a 
nondescript pariah, 
respected by nobody, 
embarrassed, embittered an d handicapped b y compulsory association with 
a superior race.— 
Beaumont, Tex., Enterprise. 
The rural schools 
for Negro children 
where they exist at 
all are a joke. 
There are in Texas some 200,000 Negro children of scholastic age, the great 
majority of whom 
live in the rural districts. The $1,500,-
000 of the State 
school fund, which 
constitutes the Negroes' share, is for 
the greater part diverted to the white 
schools in most counties.—Houston, Tex., 
Post. 
WAGES 
The Negro earns 
as a rule mor e 
money in the South 
than in the North. 
The Negr o as a 
rule lives better in 
the South than in 
the North, and with 
fa r less exertion on 
his part. In sickness he is treated as 
well or better here 
than there, and in 
death he is buried 
That they are underpaid is a fact 
well nigh universally admitted. Their 
wages in general are 
such as they can not 
live on comfortably 
and they are often 
forced to steal or 
starve. The homes 
rented to them are 
nothing short of a 
scandal to us. The 
Negro quarters in 
quit e as decently. 
Here is his opportunity ; her e in the 
South he may be all 
he is worthy of being; he can work out 
his destiny unhampered by restrictions 
of any kind beyond 
the rule of separation of the races.— 
Beaumont, Tex., Enterprise. 
our cities are places 
of darkness, filth 
and neglect. They 
become veritable incubators o f every 
kind of disease to be 
distributed by them 
throughou t our 
cities and states. Our 
laws are discriminatory in their application toward them, 
criminal traps are 
set for them in busin e s s transactions 
and when the plot 
matures they are 
punished fo r th e 
sins which others 
have committe d 
against them.—Correspondent in Columbia. S. C . State. 1 Lllill 
TREATMENT 
So long as the Negro remains in his 
place in the Southland, he is going to 
be treated right by 
the whites, wh o 
know and understand him. And he 
is going to get a fair 
deal here. — Columbus, Ga., Ledger. 
Only a few days 
ago two young Neg r o e s, who left 
Lowndes County the 
latter part of last 
year because they 
could not make a living (and against the 
will of the white 
man whom they had 
been working for all 
their lives, for nothing) , hearing that 
their old father was 
dying, went back to 
see the last of him. 
Simply because they 
would not agree to 
stay, the white man, 
as usual, began to 
cuff and kick them 
around. When they 
attempted to defend 
themselves, and having made their way 
to Montgomery, they 
wer e arrested as 
they started to board 
the train for Birmingham, wher e 
they had work. Carried back, on the 
way a mob, as usual, 
o v e r p o wered the 
sheriff and hanged 
them both to the 
first tree they could 
find, simply because 
they would not stay 
and work on the 
farm, where they 
could not even get 
enough to eat.—Letter from Birmingham, Ala., in New 
York Sun. 32 THE CRISIS 
MIGRATION 
If the Negro prefers the North to the 
South; if he prefers 
th e opportunities 
there to the opportunitie s unde r 
Southern skies, then 
let him go, and may 
peace go with him. 
—Fort Worth, Tex., 
Record. 
Sheriff Alcorn of 
Chicot County publishes a notice to 
planters in the Chicot Spectator asking 
them to notify him 
of supposed agents 
who claim to be selling small articles to 
the Negroes. The 
sheriff's information 
is that these supposed agents or peddlers are labo r 
agents fro m the 
North, and he advise s plantation 
owners to warn them 
that they will be arrested and prosecuted if they attempt to 
spread dissatisfaction among the laborers in C h i c ot 
County . — Forest 
City, Ark., Messenger. 
THE COURTS 
"A t that moment 
a black form was 
seen to move forward through the 
Confederate lines , 
and, in spite of the 
lead and iron hail, 
he rushed to th e 
wounded officer. He 
took him in his arms 
tenderly and carried 
him back to safety. 
That Colonel was my 
brother. A hero who 
could do that at Gettysburg cannot be a 
murderer. Stand up, 
Tom, and open your 
shirt." 
The prisoner rose, 
opened his shirt and 
showed the scar of 
th e wound which 
marked his heroic 
devotion to his master. Not another 
word did the brilliant orator utter. 
He submitted the 
case to the white 
jury before him and 
without leaving their 
seats they rendered 
the verdict of not 
guilty. 
Generally this is 
the attitude today of 
the white people of 
the South toward 
the Negro. — New 
Orleans, La., States. 
In Roland v. State 
i n th e Supreme 
Court of Tennessee 
(May, 1917, 194 S. 
W., 1097), a conviction of a Negro for 
an alleged assault 
upon a white woman 
was reversed because 
of gross misconduct 
of the public prosecutor in summing up 
to the jury. The 
court observes tha t 
"the situation was 
one calculated to excite the strongest 
passions of the jurors." The principal 
question was as to 
the identity of the 
assailant. The defendant had introduced proof of an 
alibi, and several 
witnesses, including 
respectable Negroes 
and two white men, 
testified to the defendant' s good 
character. This being the situation, 
the assistant district 
attorney, after animadverting upon the 
Negr o witnesses, 
said: 
"But even at that, 
I have more respect 
for these nigger witnesses than I have 
for these two white 
witnesses who have 
volunteered to come 
here and testify in 
favor of a nigger 
that he has a good 
reputation." — New 
Yor k Law Journal. 
FARMERS 
Additional legislation may be necessary to reach the 
drifting Negroes , 
but all should be 
rounded up without 
delay, and those fit 
for service in the 
arm y sen t t o 
France, and all other s placed under 
guard and forced to 
get bus y on the 
Souther n farm. 
These blacks have 
no business in the 
North making trouble when they can 
be used to so much 
advantage in th e 
South, or in France. 
By all means these 
Negroes should be 
gathered up at once 
and pressed into service of the country, 
and at the same 
time, especial attention should be directed to labor agents.— 
Columbus, Ga., Ledger. 
There is money in 
farming, lots of it, 
but the Negro farmer has been systematically robbed by 
the white man since 
the close of the Civil 
War. They haven't 
been treated right 
and no on e ca n 
blame them for quitting the soil. If the 
Negro f a r m e r s 
would be returned 
all the interest in 
excess of 8 per cent, 
charged them for 
money advance d 
them, they would today be living in 
brown s tone mansions, just as the 
rich white advancers 
do. — Mayor W . T. 
Robinson, Montgomery, Ala . 
MOBS 
As twelve persons 
were killed and seventy were murderously assaulted, and 
as, by all accounts, 
a number took part 
in each assault, it is 
clear that several 
hundred murderers 
or would-be murderers are at large in 
this community. — 
Report of the white 
City Committee on 
the Atlanta riot, 
1906. 
In the South even 
lawless punishment 
runs against the individual. I n th e 
Nort h i t run s 
against the entire 
membership of the 
race that is in sight. 
—Memphis, Tenn., 
Commercial-Appeal. 
Southern people 
engage in an occasional lynching bee, 
but they never murder Negroe s in 
wholesale lots like 
they do in East St. 
Louis, Springfield, 
111., an d For t 
Wayne , Ind.—Sioux 
City, Iowa, Tribune. 
INDUSTRIAL FREEDOM 
A compromise of In his address to 
the controversy con- the Rotary Club yescerning the driving terday, President I. THE LOOKING GLASS 33 
of automobiles by 
Negroes has been 
agreed upon by committees representing 
the white churches 
of Miami and the 
colored Boar d of 
Trade. 
The terms of the 
proposed compromise 
are: 
Negroes are to be 
fully protected in 
their right to drive 
their own cars. 
Negroes are to be 
allowed to driv e 
buses and cars for 
hire, for the transportation of Negroes 
only. 
The solicitation of 
Negro patronage by 
white car and bus 
drivers is to be discouraged as far as 
possible. — Miami, 
Fla., Metropolis. 
H. Fetty of the Port 
Wentworth Lumber 
Company predicted 
for Savannah a wonderful industrial future, but he directed 
attention also to a 
lamentable obstacle; 
the shortage of labor. He urged upon 
the civic organizations and business 
men of Savannah 
the imperative need 
of such steps as will 
check the outgoing 
tide of Negroes and 
a 11 r a ct additional 
Negro laborers to 
the city.—Savannah, 
Ga., News. 
PERSONAL SAFETY 
Every decent Negro at the South is 
as safe in his life, 
his liberty and his 
property as the decent white man. It 
is only the vicious 
Neero who is unsafe 
in the South.—Mobile, Ala., Ledger. 
If a Negro should 
insult me, as a white 
man, the community 
would expect me to 
forcibly resent it. 
Because the RULING sentiment demands that AL L 
white men must do 
so, for our mutual 
protection. If I did 
that and the Negrc 
hea t me instead, 
then the community, 
this community, any 
community, whether 
they liked me or not, 
would be forced to 
beat the Nesro to 
show others that 
they must not strike 
a white man. If he 
resisted and fought 
back they would kill 
him. That is the 
cas e of Anthony 
Crawford, an d it 
will be the same with 
any other Negro in 
any community who 
dares to raise his 
hand against white 
men. no matter what 
the immediate cause. 
—Abbeville, S. C . 
Scimitar. 
Which is the real South? Which papers 
are telling the truth and which are writing 
for "Northern Consumption?" We are not 
pausing for replies. 
BLACK SOLDIERS 
THE letter of Colonel Charles Young, 
anent his retirement, is published in 
the Pittsburg Courier and is a document of 
which any race may be proud: 
S. 0 . No. 175, Wa r Department, retires 
me from active service with the rank of 
Colonel and places me on active military 
duty with the Militia, State of Ohio. Since 
the Militia is mustered into the service I 
am, so far as that goes, jobless at this date. 
It seems regrettable for both the country 
and our people, for I could have done good 
work for both, but as the President willed 
it and ordered it, I submit cheerfully, like a 
soldier. He is the Commander-in-Chief, you 
know. 
Perhaps I may yet be able to convince the 
authorities that I am not sick and thus be 
permitted to serve. While I know the chagrin that many of our people, and not a few 
whites, feel in this regard, still I pray that 
there shall be no word of protest at this 
time. Let us not embarrass the administration which has only too many serious 
problems on its hands anyway. We love our 
country too well not to desire its early success in this war. If its interests can be best 
subserved by the attitude which in spite of 
ourselves and our desires seems to be shaping itself toward colored officers, we are too 
broadminded not to allow it free hand. . . . 
In spite of the findings of the doctors in 
my case (and I believe them sincere and 
perfectly honest and upright in their dealings) still I am not now nor have I felt a 
sick moment. I believe my case is a supernormal one in which the high blood pressure is compensatory for the great amount 
of work that in recent years has fallen to 
my lot in the Tropics, and I believed such 
to be the final opinion of the board. But let 
it go as it is. I mention this fact to simply 
reassure any and all that physically I believe myself in condition to render as full 
and as strenuous service as ever, when the 
occasion arises. 
Testimony of the efficiency of Negro 
troops abroad continues to come. It is said 
that the German line has been broken but 
once during the war and that by black 
Turcos, who penetrated to a depth of ten 
miles. They were not taken prisoners. 
They were surrounded by Germans and shot 
to death in cold blood. 
The Southern Workman quotes Hugh 
Brown as saying of the Senegalese: 
They are excellent with the bayonet and 
stand the strain in the trenches even better 
than some of the white troops. It is particularly significant that the Senegalese Negroes were used to aid in the retaking of 
Douamont; it is an excellent compliment to 
their ability. In glancing over the art posters of the war and the literature of the last 
year, one finds any number of references to 34 THE CRISIS 
the soldats noirs of France. They have 
made a name for themselves. 
Not only are the Senegalese troops brave 
and efficient, but they have the physical 
strength which enables them to undergo 
constant fighting with but little food and 
rest. They have more than once formed the 
backbone of France's fighting force. They 
have fought in the battles of Champagne, 
Soissons and Verdun in France. They were 
in the expedition at the Dardanelles and 
afterward in Northern Greece and Serbia. 
They have been worthy of the French. 
The correspondent for the New York 
Tribune writes from France, concerning the 
black troops in Africa : 
The American was loud in his praises of 
the black troops. He thought them the superior of any soldiers for African work and 
almost the best for warfare in any clime. 
"I never saw such courage as the King's 
African Rifles displayed under fire," he said. 
"These were men recruited out of savage 
tribes and given perhaps a year's training 
in soldiering. 
"W e had a very heavy scrimmage with 
the Germans one day and an officer was hit. 
He managed to crawl behind a bush, but 
• the Germans had him spotted as a white 
man and kept peppering away to finish him. 
One of our black soldiers, about thirty yards 
off, crawled very cautiously to the bush, 
keeping under cover, and then suddenly 
stood up and began to limp away. He succeeded in fooling the Germans into thinking 
he was the wounded officer and he drew all 
the fire away from the bush and on himself. 
He was hit a dozen times. We got him to 
a field hospital, and he was still conscious." 
In America, alas, we are still wandering 
in the shadows, although Secretary Baker, 
according to the Army and Navy Journal, 
has made the following announcement: 
The rule of the Regular Army In the matter of the training of colored troops, which 
is that they are trained in separate organizations, will be adhered to. The call for 
colored men will be postponed until one of 
the later calls, so that they will be called at 
a separate time, giving an opportunity to 
the officers at the camps to assemble the 
organizations, of which they are a part, 
substantially all at one time. They will not 
be the last called, but they will be called 
separately. All colored men called in a 
state which has a cantonment in it will be 
organized and'trained there; provision will 
be made, but it has not yet been made for 
the assembling of colored troops for training 
from those states which have not cantonments of their own. An opportunity will be 
given to both white and colored men, among 
the selected forces, to volunteer for training 
service and in line of communication organization, which it is necessary to organize, 
and it is hoped that an adequate number 
will volunteer for this military but non-combatant service; but there will be both combatant and non-combatant organizations of 
colored men just as there are for white men. 
Incipient trouble at Camp Upton, L. I., 
has been quickly dealt with, according to 
the Brooklyn Eagle: 
From all accounts the colored troops wer e 
not the aggressors, but once the trouble 
started they were ready for it. Since the 
men have been in camp they have been continually made the butt of abuse of the white 
workmen who unfortunately are quartered 
within a stone's throw of the Negro quarters. 
Disorder was quickly quelled and the colored troops unmolested. 
Even in the South there are signs of 
sanity. The Charlotte, N. C , News says on 
hearing that colored soldiers are coming: 
There must be displayed by them a recognition that the colored man has rights, inalienable rights, that he has come forward 
just as his white neighbor to put his life at 
the disposal of his government, that he has 
made himself ready for whatever sufferings 
arid sacrifices may be thrust upon him, that 
he has yielded himself to the test, that he 
will unstintedly and unselfishly toss himself 
into the oceans of anguish whose waves are 
rolling through Europe. He must be dealt 
with as a patriotic -citizen. From the people 
of this community who will make exactions 
of him he has a right to take a toll of respect and wholesome regard. If he is treated otherwise, he will keenly feel the pangs 
of it, and disorder and discord and mutiny 
may arise. If he is insulted and made to 
believe that he is unworthy of the uniform 
his government has clothed him with, naturally enough, there will be resentment 
which is the first flame of revolt. The obligations entailed by the incident are many, 
and they rest more heavily, we are of a mind 
to believe, upon the white man than upon 
the Negro. 
The Lexington, Ky., Herald denies that 
there was any such race riot as the Associated Press reported: 
Impossible it is to estimate accurately 
the damage done to Lexington, because of 
these widespread publications. Ye t in the 
highest sense, that damage is the smaller 
part of the injustice done. The Negroes of 
the United States will be called upon, have 
been called upon to serve in the armies of 
the nation. Hundreds of them have volunteered. Thousands of them are as ready 
as any men of Anglo-Saxon, Latin, Gaelic, 
or Teutonic blood to give their lives for the 
only nation they know in which they have 
risen from a state of slavery to a state of 
independence. When they wea r the uniform 
of the nation, when they are sent to France, 
there to shed their blood and give their 
lives, they are not only the wards but the 
defenders of the nation. 
There could be no greater damage done 
than to foment between the races inhabiting THE LOOKING GLASS 35 
this country an unfriendly or hostile spirit. 
Unfortunate, criminally unwise, has been 
the policy of some of the public officials of 
the Southern States in drawing a distinction between the white and colored troops. 
Every community should welcome the presence of any troops, it matters not what their 
color may be, who wear the uniform of the 
nation and are ready to give their lives in 
defense of the nation. If this nation cannot 
so_ train and discipline its troops that there 
will not be such outbreaks as that which 
occurred at Houston, there is but little hope 
of its winning the wa r against Germany. 
If any community cannot so regulate and 
manage its own affairs, as to prevent what 
seeems to be the unjustifiable attacks on 
individual soldiers by the peace officers of 
Houston, that community is not representative of American ideals or American purpose. 
A colored man, D. W . Cannon, writes 
thus plainly to the Atlanta Constitution: 
Yo u further admonish, and I fully agree 
with you, that the Negro must feel that he 
is on trial to-day as never before in history; 
and as one engaged in the educational and 
religious training of the Negro and who will 
do his part to help save the Negro young 
men who will be at Camp Gordon, I assure 
you that our boys there will deport themselves as becometh soldiers going out to do 
and die for the Stars and Stripes. 
But I ask that you be as careful to admonish the white people of this community 
that these soldiers are human and know 
when they are treated right and feel as 
keenly as anybody else an unnecessary insult. Also, remind the white people that 
in some crisis across the sea, these same 
black boys, whom they fear and the wisdom 
of whose presence they question, may eventually have to save the shattered remnants of 
some company of their own white sons who 
may have fallen into some trap set by the 
wily and resourceful Germans. 
Treat the Negro soldiers right! And you 
will have no more trouble with them than 
you will have with white soldiers. 
Our Dumb Animals finds this clean voice: 
Unless the Government of the United 
States sets itself resolutely to protect the 
sacred rights of its citizens, who, at last, 
will blame the twelve millions of the colored race if they rise in determined rebellion to vindicate their rights by the only 
forces left at their command? No other 
race has equalled, in patient suffering of 
injustice and wrong, the colored race. A t 
times it has almost seemed as if they had 
won their plea for justice by obedience to 
the Christian teaching of returning good 
for evil. But they, too, are human, and 
the day may be nearer than we think when 
lowly, enduring patience, outraged beyond 
measure, will give way to the spirit which 
will demand justice. It was out of this 
spirit that America was born. 
Put yourself, white American citizen, in 
the colored man's place! How long would 
you endure at the hands of your fellowcitizens the cruel injustices that are being 
heaped upon him? 
HOUSTON 
TH E Twenty-fourth Infantry, which 
made the outbreak at Houston, Tex., 
was with General Pershing in Mexico. He 
said to them and to the colored Tenth Cavalry, December 27, 1916: 
"Men, I am authorized by Congress to tell 
you all that our people back in the States 
are mighty glad and proud at the way the 
soldiers have conducted themselves while 
in Mexico, and I, General Pershing, can say 
with pride that a finer body of men never 
stood under the flag of our nation as we 
find here tonight." 
But The Public knows better and has this 
extraordinary editorial: 
Wha t was looked upon as a"n accident at 
Brownsville will now be considered by many 
as an inherent weakness of character; and 
it may take generations to live it down. 
But whatever the cause it must be removed. 
The Negro is a part of our citizenship. If 
he is not worthy of that responsibility he 
must be made so. If there is a weakness 
in his moral nature that has given way 
under the terrible strain of race prejudice 
it must be fortified. 
Miss B. W. Stillman, a white teacher, 
wrote the following letter in answer to this 
extraordinary statement: 
" A weakness in his moral nature?"-— 
Wha t about the moral nature of the whites 
in East St. Louis? Wha t about the moral 
nature of the lynching mobs? Wha t about 
the moral nature of those who put through 
segregation laws, "Jim Crow" laws? 
George Eliot makes one of her characters 
say, in substance, "I'm not denying the 
women are foolish; God Almighty made 
them to match the men." And I say, "I'm 
not denying there is moral weakness in the 
nature of the Negro; God Almighty made 
them to match the rest of humanity." 
This country demands that the Negroes 
risk their lives in this war, "to make the 
world safe for democracy," and then, while 
they are making ready for the sacrifice, it 
is made very plain, in many galling' ways, 
that they are not considered the equals of 
the white men whose dangers they are to 
share. Would the moral nature of all 
whites (who, by the way, on the whole have 
far greater opportunities for growth and 
development) stand such a strain? If it 
were not so tragic, it would be humorous. 
Democracy! 
Instead of suggesting moral weakness in 
the Negro will not The Public, which so 
often speaks eloquently for fundamental 
democracy, cry out against the moral weakness of the white citizens in their relations 
to the Negro? 
This letter The Public refused to publish, 
a thing that could not have happened under 
the editorship of Louis F. Post. The Horizon 
POLITICS. 
TW O colored candidates in New York 
City were nominated by the Republican Party; Attorney E. A. Johnson for the 
Assembly of the Nineteenth District and Attorney James C. Thomas, Jr., for the Twenty-sixth Aldermanic District of the Twentyfirst Assembly District. 
ATTORNEY J. C. THOMAS, JR. 
C Colored women suffragists were in attendance at the convention of the Suffragists 
at Saratoga, N. Y. 
THE WAR. 
rT H E power shops at Springfield, Mass., 
are being guarded by 125 colored soldiers from Connecticut. 
Information from Red Cross headquarters at Washington, D. C, states that 150 
colored registered nurses are to be selected 
for a Government Base Hospital at Des 
Moines, Iowa, in connection with the training camp for colored troops. 
The colored draft will consist of eightythree thousand troops distributed among 
sixteen cantonments. From these a Negro 
division of thirty thousand, officered by the 
colored officers from Des Moines, will be organized for service in France. Beside these, 
volunteer units for labor will be organized 
among both white and colored persons. 
RIOTS. 
TH E September Grand Jury has not yet 
taken up the investigation into the 
race riots in East St. Louis, 111. The last 
Grand Jury indicted 144 persons and recommended that the new Grand Jury continue the work. Though the Grand Jury at 
Bellville indicted Mayor Mollman and his 
private secretary, Maurice Ahearn, as a result of the recent riots, the Mayor says: 
"As far as the recommendation of the Grand 
Jury, that I resign pending trial, is concerned, it is too silly to discuss." While 
only one white man has been tried, ten 
Negroes have been convicted of murder! 
Speaker Clark of the House has named 
Representatives Johnson of Kentucky, 
Baker of California, Foster of Illinois, Democrats; Cooper of Wisconsin and Foss of Illinois, Republicans, to investigate the recent race riots in East St. Louis, 111. 
ft Lee Sparks, a police officer in Houston, 
Tex., has been indicted by the Harris County 
Grand Jury for assault on Sergt. Baltimore, 
a Negro trooper of the 24th Infantry, and 
with murder in connection with the death of 
Wallace Williams, a Negro civilian. Chief 
of Police Brock testified that his orders to 
policemen to treat colored troopers with restraint were stolen from two record books, 
and Lee Sparks denied ever having heard 
such an order. 
ft Race rioting was renewed in Chester, Pa., 
September 16 when George Ford, a Negro, 
shot Patrolman Joseph Hardman. 
ATTORNEY E, A. JOHNSON. 
36 THE HORIZON 37 
INDUSTRY. 
MR. WILL TURNER, a colored farmer 
in Lebanon, 111., thrashed 4,082 bushels of wheat this season, which he sold at an 
average of $2.43 per bushel. This crop was 
gathered from 175 acres. 
Colored women are loading and unloading 
freight in the New York Central yards in 
Cleveland, Ohio. Their wage is $2.60 per 
day. 
Messrs. W. H. C. Brown, Watt Terry and 
E. C. Brown, Negro bankers and real estate 
operators, took over the property of the 
Philton Holding Company in Harlem, New 
York, which was controlled by the late Philip 
A. Payton. Mr. Terry then bought out his 
partners. 
The New York Age, of New York City, 
edited by Mr. Fred R. Moore, has celebrated 
its thirtieth anniversary. 
The Red River County Colored Fair was 
held at Clarksville, Tex., October 4-6. 
C The Southern Beneficial League, an organization of colored Southerners in New 
York City, reports $22,971.81 on deposit. 
Mr. Thomas W. Griggsby is president. The 
organization has been in existence thirty-one 
years. 
Colored and white longshoremen in New 
Orleans, La., have declared a strike. There 
are 1,500 men in the colored organization. 
Colored carpenters are being used pretty 
generally in preparing buildings for the 
southern cantonments. They are receiving 
from four to seven dollars a day. 
Mr. F. W. Lancaster has invented a cash 
register for clubs and churches. 
The colored waiters at Copley Square 
Hotel, Boston, Mass., have returned to their 
places, the management recognizing the 
Union. Some of the waiters had been in the 
employ of the hotel for twenty-five years, 
when the Union ordered a strike. 
The hosiery mills in Elizabeth City, N. 
C, which formerly employed white labor, 
are now employing Negroes. 
Gen. Lewis T. Bryant, State Commissioner of Labor in New Jersey, announces the 
establishment of a Negro Welfare and Employment Bureau. 
Dr. G. E. Haynes of Fisk University finds 
that 3,500 out of the 7,000 men employed by 
the Newport News, Va., Shipbuilding and 
Dry Dock Company, are colored. Some of 
the colored men have worked twenty-five 
years for the company, and are earning 
from fifteen to thirty dollars a week. Much 
community work is being done for the colored workmen. Mr. Paul G. Prayer, a colored man of New York City, is now labor 
representative for this company. 
Mr. J. H. Collins, Jr., is in charge of 
colored employees at the Bush Terminal in 
New York City. 
Negro cotton handlers of New Orleans 
struck and raised their wages from $2.80 to 
$3.60 per day. 
A Commercial Study Club has been 
opened in Washington, D. C, with C. W. 
Banton as president. It aims to encourage 
the establishment of Negro business enterprises. 
The General Electric Company, which 
formerly had no colored employees among 
22,000 persons, has now 125 colored men 
and one colored woman stenographer. 
Strikes among Negro workmen have occurred in various points. At Rocky Mount, 
N. C, 500 workers struck because increased 
wage was given to the whites and not to 
the Negroes. In Norfolk, Va., 300 colored 
women, working for the American Tobacco 
Company, struck for increased wages and 
shorter hours. 
I 
MEETINGS. 
THE Negro Organization Society and the 
Virginia Negro State Teachers' Association will meet in Portsmouth, Va., December 5-7. 
The fourteenth annual session of the 
Pennsylvania State Federation of Negro 
Women's Clubs has been held. The seventh 
annual session of the colored women's clubs 
in Oklahoma was addressed by Mrs. Mary 
B. Talbert, national president. Thirty 
active clubs were represented and reported 
$5.10 per capita for maintenance of state 
work. Mrs. Judith C. Horton was re-elected 
president. 
The fortieth session of the Masons in 
Alabama re-elected W. T. Woods, of Mobile, Grand Master. The Grand Lodge and 
Chapter collected $118,855.89 during the 
year. 
The forty-second annual convention of 
the Masons in Kansas was held in Winfield. Mr. H. I. Monroe, of Topeka, was 
elected grandmaster. 
The Mississippi Rural Conference was 
held at Jackson, September 26-28. City 38 THE CRISIS 
and state officials were among the speakers 
and the Negroes' condition was discussed. 
A Race Congress convened in Washington, D. C, October 3 and 4. 
The twenty-first session of the Lott 
Carey Baptist Foreign Mission Convention 
was held during September in Richmond, 
Va. The total receipts for the year 
amounted to $11,000. Dr. C. S. Brown was 
elected president. 
At the meeting of the National Equal 
Rights League, held in New York during 
September, Rev. Byron Gunner was elected 
president and William Monroe Trotter, of 
Boston, Mass., secretary. 
The thirty-seventh annual session of the 
National Baptist Convention, unincorporated, recently held in Atlanta, Ga., reelected Rev. E. P. Jones, president. Every 
state in the Union, except Maine, New 
Hampshire and Vermont, was represented; 
and $15,000 in cash and subscriptions was 
raised. The purchase of the Theological 
Seminary in Nashville, Tenn., valued at 
$100,000, was ratified. The Educational 
Board headquarters will be moved to Nashville, Tenn.. and the Foreign Mission Board 
will be established in Louisville, Ky. 
Dr. E. C. Morris, of Helena, Ark., was 
unanimously re-eletced president of the 
National Baptist Convention, incorporated, 
held during September in Muskogee, Okla. 
Over 7,000 people from twenty-six states 
were in attendance. Gov. R. L. Williams 
and Mayor J. E. Wyand addressed the 
body. 
The sixteenth annual convention of the 
American Federation of Catholic Societies 
was held in Kansas City, Mo. Resolutions 
were adopted denouncing lynching and mob 
violence. Capt. L. C. Valle is Chief of the 
Colored Roman Catholic Bureau in Chicago, 111. 
Four hundred representatives attended 
the first national convention of the Madam 
C. J. Walker Company held in Philadelphia, Pa., and elected Mrs. C. J. Walker 
president. Mrs. Margaret Thompson, of 
Philadelphia, was unanimously elected honorary president. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
THE Louisville Music Association has 
been organized by colored people in 
Louisville, Ky., with Miss Mildred Bryant, 
supervisor of music in colored schools, as 
directress. 
Colored people in Omaha, Neb., through 
Mrs. S. Joe Brown, presented the episode 
"Colored Americans" at the missionary 
pageant given by white missionary workers. 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression opened late in 
September. It has forty graduates and 
will have Mr. R. D. C. Dorsey and Miss 
Grace Gibbs added to its faculty. 
Mrs. Fannie R. Givens organized in 
1914 a National Historical Art League 
Club and writes us that art leagues have 
been incorporated in fifteen states with a 
membership of about 1,600. The co-operation of persons interested is asked, particularly for a gallery which it is proposed to 
erect in Washington, D. C. 
A portrait of the late Dr. B. T. Washington, by Henry Salem Hubbell, has been 
painted for the chapel of Tuskegee Institute. 
The Music School Settlement for Colored People in New York City, directed by 
J. Rosamond Johnson, opened October 4. 
Messrs. W. J. Carle and H. G. Marshall 
have been added to the faculty. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS. 
THE city council in Los Angeles, Cal., 
has ordered that colored men be 
placed in the Fire Department at Fourteenth and Central Avenue. 
Miss Caroline B. Chapin has been elected president of an organization for the welfare of colored people in Englewood, N. J. 
Mr. William M. Ashby, a graduate of 
Yale University, has taken up his duties 
as executive secretary of the Negro Welfare League of New Jersey. 
The Mosaic Templars, a colored organization founded by the late John E. Bush in 
Little Rock, Ark., own $30,000 worth of 
Liberty Bonds and the organization has 
$183,000 cash in the banks of Little Rock. 
The Pennsylvania Railroad Company 
has installed a playground for colored children, living near Summerdale, at Enola, 
Pa. 
Mr. George Foster Peabody laid the 
cornerstone of the new colored Y. M. C. A. 
building in Brooklyn, N. Y. Its cost will be 
$204,534. 
At the tenth session of the National 
Association of colored graduate Nurses, 
held in Louisville, Ky., a National Nurses' THE HORIZON 39 
Registry at Lincoln Hospital, New York, 
was established. Miss Adah B. Thomas, 
Lincoln Hospital, New York, "was elected 
president. 
Colored people in Chicago, 111., are to 
have a new Pythian Temple, costing $20,-
000. 
The State Board of Health in North 
Carolina is planning a health campaign 
among colored people. Rev. James E. 
Holder, of Kinston, has been selected as an 
agent for this work. 
A bill to make lynching and prevention 
of race emigration a Federal offense is soon 
to be introduced in congress. It has been 
brought to Washington by Mayor Curley, 
of Boston, Mass., and was drawn by William H. Lewis, former Assistant U. S. Attorney-General. 
Ten thousand people witnessed the laying of the cornerstone of the new $180,000 
colored Y. M. C. A. building in St. Louis, 
Mo. Nearly 4,000 people participated in a 
street parade led by Grand Marshal William H. Butler and his staff as BrigadierGeneral of the Uniform Rank of Knights 
of Pythias as military escort. The collections passed the $25,000 mark. 
At the recent bankers' convention in Atlantic City, John Mitchell, Jr., chairman of 
the special thrift committee for work 
among colored people, made a report. 
At the recent conference of the Intercollegiate Socialists at Bellport, L. I., addresses were made by W. E. B. DuBois and 
James Weldon Johnson. Mr. Johnson spoke 
on "The Negro in Art and Literature." 
At the National Association of Letter 
Carriers, which met at Dallas, Tex., the 
segregation of Negroes in separate locals 
was advocated. It was opposed by P. M. 
E. Hill, a Negro delegate from Yazoo, 
Miss., who was warmly applauded. 
A National Home for Colored Children 
has been started at Absecon, N. J. A farm 
of forty acres is being used. 
The Home for Aged Colored Women, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., was founded in 1883. It 
houses thirty-eight women at an annual 
expense of about $6,000, of which the state 
appropriates about one-third. There js also 
a small endowment. The property is worth 
$46,000 and is out of debt. Contributions 
for the support of the home are earnestly 
solicited. They may be sent to the president, Mr. David S. Richards. 
The thirty-third annual conference of 
church workers among colored people was 
held at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, 
Baltimore, Md. The Rev. S. W. Brice was 
elected president. 
Dr. W. S. Brooks, of Bethel A. M. E. 
Church, Baltimore, Md., has raised $15,-
000 to pay off the second mortgage on the 
church. 
Charles S. Morris, Jr., has been acting 
as field agent for the association which is 
collecting funds for colored French war 
orphans. Over $1,400 has been raised to 
date. 
A colored Country Club, with a membership of over 200, has been formed at Chesire, Conn. It is about twenty-five miles 
from New Haven. It has tennis courts, 
golf links, billiard and ball rooms. 
Miss Mary Pulliam, a Kentucky white 
woman who has done excellent work at the 
head of the Red Cross during and since the 
East St. Louis riots, has been dismissed at 
the request of the authorities of East St. 
Louis. 
The National Board of the Young 
Women's Christian Association has called 
to its staff Miss Mary G. Evans as student 
secretary, Miss Josephine V. Pinyon as war 
worker, and Miss Adela Ruffin and Miss 
May B. Belcher as field workers. 
The Silent Parade Committee, of New 
York City, who organized the march of 
10,000 Negroes protesting against the 
atrocities at East St. Louis and elsewhere, 
have voted to merge themselves into the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People as the "New York 
Branch." 
EDUCATION. 
DR . J. B. SHAW will succeed Dr. A. B. 
Camphor, who is now a bishop in 
Africa, as president of Central Alabama 
College. 
J. W. E. Bowen, Jr., has been elected 
Dean of Walden University, Nashville, 
Tenn. 
An increase of 3,600 colored school children is estimated in Philadelphia, Pa. 
The New Orleans, La., Board of Public 
School Directors has changed McDonough 
number 13, a white school, to McDonough 
number 35 for colored children. The school 
will have a high school department. 
At an educational and missionary convocation held in Tyler, Tex., at Texas Col-40 THE CRISIS 
lows. Bishop R. A. Carter, of the C. M. E. 
Church, Atlanta, Ga., raised $14,000 for 
education and missions. 
Rt. Rev. John E. Burke, Director-General in New York of mission work among 
colored Catholics, proposes to establish 
"The One Hundred Thousand League," in 
which 100,000 persons will give one dollar a 
year in the interest of colored missions in 
the South. The Catholics support 126 
churches and 158 schools for colored people. 
A course in the ethnography of Africa 
will be given at Columbia University during the winter and spring by Agnes C. L. 
Donohugh. 
*A reception to nearly 300 graduates of 
the public schools of Greater New York for 
the year 1917 was given by the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a committee of citizens at 
Mt. Olivet Baptist Church. 
Dr. Anson Phelps Stokes, secretary of 
Yale University, has been elected principal 
of Hampton Institute. 
The American Church Institute for Negroes, an Episcopal body supporting nine 
schools, reports total receipts of $79,443 
during the last year. 
An intercollegiate oratorical prize contest was held in Hartford, Conn., among 
colored students from various southern colleges, who had been working in the vicinity 
during the summer. The judges were from 
the Hartford Public Schools and awarded 
first prize to S. F. Hogan, of Livingston 
College. 
Texas Negroes have given $10,000 for 
the educational work of the Freedmen's Aid 
Society of the M. E. Church. 
In Bibb County, Ga.,, the seventh grade 
will hereafter be taught in the colored public schools. Heretofore only six grades have 
been taught. 
Ten thousand colored children have been 
enrolled in the schools of St. Louis, Mo., 
which is 1000 more than last year and 1500 
beyond the seating capacity. 
PERSONAL. 
MISS LOLA B. GRAHAM, a colored 
typist, has received appointment in 
the Navy yards at Brenerton, Wash. 
Prof. David W. Parker, a colored man, 
has been appointed Collector of Religious 
Statistics among Negroes of the South for 
the National Government. 
Mr. Frank R. Willis, with his Mohawk 
strain of dark cornish fowl, won the highest honors, scoring 37 points, which was 12 
more than any breeder, at the State Fair 
in Louisville, Ky. 
Arthur U. Craig, a colored man, has 
been appointed head of food administration 
among colored people, with offices in the annex to the Department of Justice in Washington, D. C. Charles Stewart, a colored 
Associated Press correspondent, is in charge 
of publicity. 
Mr. Anderson Russell, the pioneer colored undertaker, in St. Louis, Mo., is dead. 
His real estate and personal property is estimated at $50,000. 
Miss Florence M. Hunt, colored woman, 
has been appointed a clerkship in the Surgeon-General's Office of the War Department. Her average as a typist and accountant was 100 per cent. The Misses Alberta 
Johnson and Agnes A. Adams have been appointed to the Bureau of Engraving and 
Printing. 
"Major" Taylor, a colored bicyclist, of 
Worcester, Mass., won the mile "oldtimers' " race, September 18, competing against 
white riders. 
Mr. Handy Wilder, a colored farmer, of 
Franklin County, N. C, contributed $2000 
to the Colored Orphan Asylum, at Oxford, 
N. C. 
Mr. Benjamin Fowler has six sons enlisted in the Glen Cove, L. I., Company of 
the Fifteenth colored Infantry, N. Y. N. G. 
Patrolman Moses P. Cobb, a colored man 
on the police force in New York, has been 
retired on a pension. 
Mrs. L. C. Clark is the first woman to be 
elected president of the Oklahoma State 
Negro Teachers' Association. 
Mr. Littleton McDuff, a colored police officer in Los Angeles, Cal., has been promoted to a detective sergeant. He passed 
the highest examination of all examined by 
six points. 
Edward A. Lord, of Toledo, Ohio, was 
drafted. Afterwards it was discovered that 
he was "colored." He was thereupon segregated and finally committe'd suicide by cutting his throat. 
Dr. Reverdy M. Hall, a colored graduate of 1872 from Harvard University Medical School, died recently in Baltimore, Md. 
His estate is valued at $100,000. THE HORIZON 41 
Mr. Alexander E. Manning, a colored 
man in Indianapolis, Ind., has been appointed Deputy Collector of Internal Revenue, tax division. 
Mr. William D. Allen, a member of 
Chemical Engine Company, Number 1, 
Pittsburg, Pa., who has been in the service 
fifteen years, has been promoted to the position of captain. 
Major Walter R. Loving, retired, has 
been called by the Government to active 
service. 
Mr. William F. Jordan, of Philadelphia, 
Pa., retired as Chief Gunner's Mate, has 
been recalled to active duty by the Navy 
Department. 
Miss Blanche Lois Shepard, of Durham, N. C, was: married on September 29 
to Dr. Charles W. Kerr, of Boston, Mass. 
Miss Norma Keene is the first colored 
woman to be placed on the state pay roll in 
Portland, Ore. She is stenographer for the 
State Parole Officer, J. F. Keller, at Salem, 
Ore. 
William Snell, a colored man, is the only 
survivor of the crew of the Belgian steamship, Belgian Prince, which was sunk with 
a loss of thirty-eight lives. All life preservers were ordered to be taken from the crew, 
but he managed to hide his life belt under 
his coat. 
Joseph C. Marshall of Savannah, Ga.; 
won first prize, a silver loving cup, in a 
drummers' contest in Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Charles F. Ryder, a white secretary 
of the American Missionary Association 
and well known among colored schools, is 
dead. 
GHETTO. 
EFFORTS to force colored children to 
attend Stowe School in Cincinnati, 
Ohio, have failed, through the agitation of 
these children's parents. 
In the case of Stuart-Ferguson Timber 
Company vs. Harding Orchard Company, 
the Negroes have won their title to the 100 
acre apple orchard at Roseburg, Oregon, 
which involves a transaction of $60,000. 
The Georgia colored Masons have resumed their fight in court for the right to 
use the name and wear the emblem of the 
Order. 
At Murphysboro, 111., 200 white high 
school students struck because colored children refused to be segregated, and entered 
the high school. 
In Woodstown, N. J., last year a school 
for white children was completed, costing 
$100,000. This year a four-room school, 
costing $12,000 is to be built in South 
Woodstown for Negro children. 
CRIME. 
TH E courts of Richmond, Va., have 
freed Mrs. V. C. Sear, a white woman, for the murder of Miss Louise Brown, 
her colored servant. 
By the decision of the Grand Jury, Postmaster Meek McGill and Carson Lattimore 
of Hickory Grove, S. C, have been put in 
jail for complicity in the murder of W. T. 
Sims, a colored preacher. 
At Altheimer, Ark., September 21, Dr. 
Hardin, a white planter, shot and killed 
James Ellis, a colored farmer, because Ellis 
ginned his cotton with another man, so as to 
keep Hardin from robbing him. 
The Superior Court in Raleigh, N. C, 
said to Rueben Bailey, a white rapist: "Let 
the prisoner pay the colored woman $25 and 
cost of the court and you give $100 bond 
for good behavior until the September term 
of court." 
In Arcadia, La., John Lewis and his aged 
mother, colored, were shot to death and several white and colored people wounded as a 
result of a white man, Pierce Dance, trying 
to settle a quarrel with the Negro by means 
of a pistol. 
Rueben Mason, a Negro truck driver for 
the Tripod Paint Company, in Atlanta, 
Ga., was shot and killed by J. B. McElroy, 
because he failed to move his truck out of 
the way of the white man's automobile. 
At Moultrie, Ga., a white overseer shot 
and killed Will McCray, a Negro farm 
hand, because of "insolence." 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Marshall, Texas, August 23, Charles 
Jones, hanged for entering room of a white 
woman. 
Beaumont, Tex., Sept. 3, Charley Jennings was shot to death. Cause unknown. 
Athens, Ga., September 18, Rufus Moncrief, hanged for attacking a white woman. 
Goose Creek, Texas, September 21, unknown Negro hanged for attacking a white 
woman. 
England, Ark., September 21, Sam Cates, 
shot to death by a mob of white men. He 
was accused of annoying white girls. 4 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
DR. G. W. 
ATKINS 
Memphis, Tenn 
Formerly 
Practising 
Physician An Insurance Company 
E. H. CARRY 
little Rock, Ark. 
Formerly 
Principal Gibbs 
High School 
W. S. LOVETT 
Louisville, Ky. 
Formerly 
Teacher 
Tuskegee 
Institute 
L. E. LOWE 
Valdosta, Ga. 
Formerly 
Industrial Insurance Agent 
The custodian of the surplus of today and the 
guardian of the heritage of the future. 
Such responsibility demands men of character and 
ability, therefore 
BIG MONEY is paid to BIG MEN 
The members of this group average more than 
$220 0 annually and a much larger group earn. $1500 . 
Are you of that class? 
These men were drafted from the better walks of 
life to a field of greater usefulness and greater pay 
by America's greatest financial enterprise among 
Negroes. 
Standard Life has policyholders in every state— 
An Agency force is maintained in nine different 
states including the Nation's Capitol. 
The Company's policies are such as to meet the 
approval of the insuring public. 
The services of more such men as these will enable 
Standard Life to establish more Branches to the 
profit of more men, and enable the Company to 
increase its usefulness to the Race. 
Our Agency Contracts permit the Agent to earn 
while learning, thus making even the apprentice 
period profitable. 
If your knowledge of yourself convinces you that 
you have the right qualities, write at once. 
The Company also desires to hear from capable people for 
its Office staff. Natural growth occasions frequent promotions and the consequent employment of additional bookkeepers, stenographers and clerks. Our policy is to name 
our Officials and Department heads from those within the 
Organization. During this year one new Division and a 
new Department of four Bureaus have been created, and 
every month's business serves notice of still greater expansion. 
STANDAR D LIF E 
INSURANCE COMPANY 
HOME OFFICE: 200 AUBURN AVENUE 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA. 
Over $4,000,000 Insurance in Force 
H. It. GILLEAN 
Denison, Texas 
Formerly 
Railway Mall 
Service 
4 
V 
J. T. LTJNDY 
Statesboro, Ga. 
Formerly 
County School 
Teacher 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 43 
ABRAHA M LINCOL N 
believe d i n vote s fo r wome n 
Why not follow so good an example? 
Hel p u s i n ou r figh t fo r th e ballo t 
Communicat e with the N. Y . City Woma n Suffrage Party 
3 EAS T 38t h ST . 
VOT E FO R TH E 
Woman Suffrage Amendment Nov. 6th 
Th e Journa l o f 
Negr o Histor y 
Publishe d Quarterl y 
10 0 Page s 
Edited by CARTER G . WOODSON 
THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY is 
the official organ of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, 11.00 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Single numbers, 26 cents; 80 tents by mall. 
Checks should be made payable to THE 
JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY and 
addressed to 
CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
1216 Yon St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Th e 
Disgrace of Democracy 
An 
Open Letter to President Wilson 
By 
KELLY MILLER 
Professor Kelly Miller has written 
a remarkable open letter to President 
Wilson.—N. Y. Evening Post. 
A constructive proposal for suppression of lynching and race riots.— 
The Springfield Republican. 
A very fair, temperate and strong 
letter on a most import-ant matter.— 
Senator John Wesley Jones. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
IOC. the Copy 
Terms to Agents: 
Sc. per copy on orders over 10. 
Address: Kelly Miller, 
Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Mention Th e Crisis 44 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A Christian Duty 
compels you to provide for your family and dependents. Then why not 
provide for a perpetual income during sickness and accidental injuries? Will 
you consider your duty properly discharged if you make provision only 
down to death, and leave the widow and those dear little orphans penniless 
after your death ? It is the privilege of every man and a duty every man 
owes himself and family to carry sufficient insurance to provide the necessities of life during illness, and to pay off the expenses and the mortgage 
on the home after death. 
Why would a man provide well for his wife and children during his life 
and leave them beggars after his death? A good Insurance Company is next 
to the Church; a SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY policy is better than a bank 
account; you draw from the bank your deposit plus interest; you draw from 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY, not what you put in, but as long as you are sick 
and an undiminished death claim paid to the family after death. Some 
have put in $50.00 and drawn out $500.00. Why not act today? Tomorrow you may not be able to pass the examination for a good policy in a 
reliable Insurance Company. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOME OFFICE: 527 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va. 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINST SICKNESS, ACCIDENT AND DEATH. 
A. D. PRICE, President. THOS. M. CRUMP, Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN, Asst. Secretary. 
^UUIUIIIII jtiimi iiiiiiiiaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiijiiiiiijiiiiiiiitiijiaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiijiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiHiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiti ii JIIIIU JIIIHII J iuiiuujiiiitiiiiii]ii»iiiiiNiiiiiiiiiij»»iiiiiijjaiiiiiiii II jiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHuiiiiiiiiinuuiiiiiiuiiB 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 46 
The CRISIS, monthly, 
One Dollar per Year. 
The AMSTERDA M NEWS , 
weekly, One Dollar per Year. 
Both Together, $1.50. 
Book Keeper 
An experienced book 
keeper and stenographe r to kee p 
books for an Institutionandteach Double 
Entry System. Must 
be goo d penman. 
Must be most exemplary and efficient. 
Reference. 
Address 
"INSTITUTION " 
Care of "THE CRISIS" 
70 Fifth Ave. New York City 
PANTS MEASURE 
$1.00, not even 50c, not one cent 
cost to you under our easy conditions. 
No extra charge for fancy, swell styles,/~ 
no extra charge for extra big, extreme \ 
peg-tope, pearl buttons, tunnel orfancy^ 
belt loops, no extra charge for any- y 
thing, all FREE. Before you take another order, before you buy a suit or , 
pants, get our samples and new _ 
offer. Agents of other tailoring houses 
please writs, we have a new deal that 
will open your eyes. We ask every man 
to answer this, every boy in long pantB, 
every man, everywhere. No matter 
where you live or what you do,4 write 
us a letter or postal and say "Send 
Me Your New Free Offer"'the big, new 
different tailoring deal. Costs nothing 
and no extra charges. Write today, this 
minute. Address 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 56 9 m Chicago. Ill, 
THIS SUIT?APPROVAL 
TR Y it before you decide to 
keep it. Compare it with 
others, wo guarantee our 
quality best, our prices lowest. 
Perfect fit. and long wear guaranteed. Suit made to your measure, 
we deliver free. Send today for 
heavy sample outfit,cloth patterns, 
style book, etc., all FREE to you. 
AGENTS WANTED HlTgS, 
you. Our I NI I i.in . i r .«. , 
wonderful values, beautiful fabrics and elegant quality can't I 
De equalled. No | 
matter where yon 
live send us a cardY 
today. Save money / 
and make monay . [ 
Just say: "Send
 1 
me your wonderful sample book 
I and grand offers to introduce." 
American Woolen Milts Co. 
World's Greatest Tailors Dapt . 115 1 CHI C AO * 
A "Womanly" Way 
To Remove Hair 
ElRado si 
anitary 
tqutd 
Washe s the hair off b y dissolving it. 
Wome n fairly revel in the comfort and 
Cleanliness of hair-free underarms. 
After using El-Rad o chiffon sleeves 
can be worn without any dress shields. 
Entirely harmless. Money-back guarantee. 
At all toilet counters. SOc and $1.00' 
I f you prefer, we will fill your order by 
mail if you write enclosing stamps or coin. 
MME. LELIA W. ROBINSON 110 W. 136th Street, NEW YORK 
sui r 
BOO K AN D 
SAMPLE OUTFIT 
'Yourchoiceof 1920 
suits.We deliver free, let you try your 
suit and compare with others before 
you buy. Our prices lowest, our style 
and quality unexcelled. Wear a Para-
§
on suit and know yoa have the best, 
end us your name and address today. 
$ 5 to $1 0 a Day 
We pay bier money for showing 
your friends your own suit, adver 
tisiner us and taking orders. Our 
agents are sure of success, we show you 
how, furnish complete equipment, give 
you everything needed free. No money 
required. "Simply send me your name and 
address." Look into this, costs you nothing. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. Chicago 
Something NEW : 
UNDER THE SUN t 
*1 
llianceskm Pantsl 
bt r..i> '• r Xtiftl "AlHanceskin' fl Lion's Skin 
W a Pa y Exprea a o r Parce l Pos t Charge s 
Made As You Like Them. Anew cloth 
—beautiful flu i eh an d texture. Can bo wurn 
(or dreBS or work and the formula for 
weaving "Allianceskin" Is our exclusive 
property. Wondorfu l value . Only $1.00. 
We make suits to measure frnn > $8.6 0 °P, 
also overcoats and "Yearonnd" Raincoats 
ot$3.8.
r
t Just mail us you r name 
Agent s and address and we will seDd 
Wante d FREE all our catalogs, with real 
AtOnCG of cloths, illustrations. 
tupe line, order blanks, etc. Bigbargains you ever saw. Our prices save 
half. Satisfaction guaranteed. S<-e all 
references and with them Mak e Big Money . 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE 
Dept. Mi Wholesale Tailors, Chicago 
Mpntifi n Th e Crisi s 4G THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr. BELL, 4709 State St., Chicago, 111. 
BUST S O F 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1 60 each. The 4 busts for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
THE ISAAC HATHAWA Y ART COMPAN Y 
719 S TTTfTKORY ST.. PINE BLUFF, ARK. 
Just from the Press 
"SOLVING THE PROBLEM " 
Lectures of the Famous Negro Orator, the 
late Rev. Dr. M. C. B. Mason, author of 
the "Gospel Message," etc. 
The eight lectures in this volume include 
"Africa in America and Africa Beyond the 
Seas," with its wonderful peroration _ or 
apostrophe to Africa which is almost without an equal in the English language. 
"NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO " 
"HEREDITY OR SOUR GRAPES " 
"TH E SECOND EMANCIPATION" 
Mr. Alfred Flude, manager of the Chautauqua Association, Chicago, in the introduction writes; "The volume needs no comment; 
it speaks for itself." 
$1.25 postpaid 
BUY YOUR COPY NOW 
THE PLATFORM PUBLISHING CO. 
205 E. 50th Street CHICAGO, ILL. 
NEGRO JUBILEE SONGS, PLANTATION MELODIES 
Nothing that the South has produced Is attracting more 
attention than the NATIONAL JUBILEE MELODIES, a 
song book containing the songs and melodies of the "AnteBell urn" Negro. Thoso songs were originated and sung by 
the Negro on the plantations of the South before the war, 
and have been pronounced by critics as the only real American 
music. They have been collected, set to music and printed in 
book form and are being distributed at 30 cents per copy by 
the NATIONAL BAPTIST PUBLISHING BOARD, R. H. 
Boyd, D. D., secretary, 523 2nd Ave., N., Nashville. Term. 
Send 30 cenLs for a sample copy, send 2 cents for reply to 
letters of inquiry. 
Hale Infirmary and Nurse 
Training School 
328 Lake Street, Montgomery, Alabama. 
Hale Infirmary School of Nursing offers to intelligent young women between the age of eighteen 
and thirty-five a three years' course in the profession of nursing. Students of this school are eligible 
to Alabama examinations for the degree of R. N. 
For further information apply to the superintendent. 
THE STANDARD TEACHERS' AGENCY, Est. 1897. 
1011 New York Avenue, Washington, D. C. 
Situations Wanted—Domestic Science, Biology, Music, Academic work (College, Seminary, Graded School)—Graduates. 
TEACHERS A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas. Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland. Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and Weat 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUA L TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1408 New York Avenoj Waafcioffton. D. C. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help You Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Services Free to School Officials. 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforoe, O. 
EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY for Men and Women 
School of Mechanical Dentistry 
Complete in Eight Months 
A. O. BRANSON & CO., 
Night or Day. Write for Booklet, .to. 
52 W. 135th St., New York City 
Mention Th e Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your .Society FRBE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pre*, 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plu m 
Cincinnati . Ohi o 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph* Sold Separate!. 
AcUrws 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y a ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr. , A . M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR . 
211 Wes t 138th Street •:• Ne w York, N. Y . 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
10 0 CALLIN G CARD S SO CENT S 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The House of Clowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
We GIVE it toYOU 
Take, this fine Made-to- flgh fluality 
Measure Suit and don't 4r~jfc an d Fit 
pay U9 on e cent for it. xf% Guaran-
We want you to get one of our high- JtX »h* ee ^ 
class Buits, absolutely Free , so y^^^^^mS^ 
can show it to your friends. It will a ^^^^^^ M 
b e a big advertisement for us. &^^jS^m 
I f you have a little spare time, jgjXimf f Mm c 
you can easily make from O8*™ 
'35to'50 E v^YT3§W 
and besides that be th e best 
dressed man in your town. It'sai 
opportunity you cannot afford tc 
overlook. Don't delay a minute. 
Write for this Big Offer at Once 
Drop us a line or send us your name 
on a postal card and we will send 
you absolutely Free , our wonderfu 
eLyle book, containing dozens of 8 
pies and fashion plates to choose f 
Writ e Now . Everything sent I 
and postag e prepaid . 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept . 981 , ' CHICAG O 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
342 8 Sout h Par k Avenue , Chicago * 111. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Bound in Full 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swan n St. Washington , D . C . 
AGENT S WANTED : $18 to $45 per week 
No w being made selling Prof. Kelly Miller's new book PROGRES S O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE. 50 0 large pages, only $1.95 . Teachers, students, ministers, widows, 
anyone with a little spare time can make $ 1 per hour. Everybody buys, it's easy 
to sell. Writ e for outfit and terms at once. This is an extraordinary offer. Ac t 
today. AUSTI N JENKINS CO. , No . 52 3 Ninth St., Washington, D . C . 
Mention Th e Cusi s 4 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
REA L HUMA N HAI R 
Hand-Made Natural Hair Wigs 
Transformations, Switches, Puffs, Plaits, Bangs, Coronet Braids, that 
can be combed the same as your own hair. Human hair for sale by 
ounce or pound. Hair Nets. 
Thes e illustrations show only a few of our styles of perfect fitting 
natural hair wigs. The y cannot be detected from your own hair. The y 
can be washed and combed. 
11 
WE CARRY THE 
LARGEST STOCK IN 
ELECTRIC COMBS 
A REAL HAIR GROWER FOUND AT LAST 
MME. BAUM'S WEL L - KNOW N 
HAIR SUCCESS 
PE R JA R 35c & 50c 
Mme . Baum's Cold Cream, for 
Cleansing the Skin 
HAIRDRESSERS' TOOLS, WEAVING FRAMES, 
HACKLERS. MOUNTING MACHINES, 
CARDS, BLOCKS 
MME. WALKER'S TOILET PREPARATIONS 
50 c 
Mme . Baum's Famou s Shampoo for Cleansing the Hair . 
Per bo x 
Mme . Baum's 
Powder . 
Pe r bo x 
Creole Face 
50 c 
35 c 
MME . BAUM' S HAI R EMPORIUM , Inc . 
486 EIGHTH AVE. Bet. 34th & 35th Sts., (Upstairs) NEW YORK 
One Minute's Walk From Pennsylvania Depot 
Mail orders sent to any part of the U. S. or B. W. I. Send 2c stamp for our 
beautiful new 1918 Illustrated Catalog. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 49 
Beauty for Women 
CLEAR , SMOOT H SKI N 
-PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
Famous Deluxe Beauty Book, illustrated 
and complete. Sent to you postpaid free 
of charge. Tells all about the Kashmir 
Wa y and describes the wonderful methods 
which hundreds of women are using to get 
A Kashmi r Gir l pretty skin and hair. You can do the same. 
5 or 1 0 minutes a day caring for your skin and hair the Kashmir 
Wa y will bring wonderful results. You Won't Know Yourself in a 
few days. 
WRITE TODAY DON'T SEND ANY MONEY 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO. , De P t. K 
4709 State Street Chicago, 111 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM Introducing 
LLYRA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
A Guaranteed Food Preparation for 
the Hair. Price 50 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gamble 
3001 LAWTO N AVENUE ST. LOUIS. MO . 
AGENTS WANTED FOR THE 
SUPERIOR HAIR PREPARATION 
On e of the World' s Finest 
$1.10 for C weeks ' treatment SYSTEM TAUGHT BY MAIL 
Mme. J. E. DENSMORE 
4321 Forestville Avenue CHICAGO, ILLINOI S 
Why Are New York Women 
So Beautiful? 
RE D ROSE FAC E POWDE R 
an d 
FL0RESSENC E PRODUCT S 
Quality high and prices reasonable 
Flor esse nee Mfg. Co., Inc. 
1919-1929 Broadway New York, N. Y. 
Ho w Much 
| Woul d Yo u Giv e 
1 If you could make your Hai r grow 
1 long, glossy and beautiful—and free 
§ from dandruff? 
1 Send for free trial sample of PHYL1 LIS HAIR DRESSING & GROWER. 
M . J. MILLER 
1 6th and John Sts. Cincinnati, O. 
Mention Th e Crisis 50 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
Recitals Concert s Oratori o Oper a 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, In the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Addressi 3 WARWIC K ST. . BQSTQIS . MASS . 
Telephone Greeley 4214 Established 1911 
BRANIC' S 
New York and Brooklyn Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WEST 35th STREET 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C New York City 
LEARN TH E S. T. TAYLOR SYSTEM 
o f Garmen t Cutting , Fitting , Designing , Drap ­
ing, Embroidery , Han d Decoratio n o f Gar ­
ments , Dressmakin g an d Ladies ' Tailorin g 
Term s reasonable . Writ e fo r Catalog . 
S. T . TAYLO R SCHOO L AN D PATTER N PARLOR S 
Mrs. Maybel B. Evans, Prirx. 
34 N. Garfield Avenue Columbus, O. 
ing. 
sight. 
You can make $60 a week 
and get Free Auto . I want 
hustlers, money-makers, to 
work with me, to advertise, 
sell and appoint agents. Biggest tiling in years. City 
conveniences without plumbUsed in any room. Sells on 
Demonstrating tub furnished. 
•"^Owv Folds small, self-emptying, non-leakable, 
Guaranteed 10 years. 
AGENT S MAK E SALE S EASIL Y 
Two sales daily means $60.00 a week. Leggett, Ohio, "Worked 
two hours, took two orders, profit $10.00." Hayhurst, Nebr., 
"Took 11 orders in 4 ^ days—profit $55.00, ordered 12 more 
tubs." Manning, Iowa, ' "Sold 10 tubs In one day—profit 
$50.00." DeHut, Nebr., "Sold 12 tubs in three daya—profit 
$60.00." And hundreds of others making big money. 70 per 
cent of homes have no bath tubs. Experience and capital unnecessary. Credit given to the right man. Get full particulars 
and "special plan;" all Free. 
H. S. Robinson, Pres., THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO. 
4746 Factorie s Building TOLEDO, OHIO 
$ 3
Q O Bring s This 
SUIT 
Tailored to Your Measure 
on an offer so easy, bo liberal, bo wonderful, you can hardly believe it. The t 
very latest 1918 style, a perfect fit, 
magnificent new design, delivered 
prepaid. Send no money now, not /',, 
one cent, just writ© us a letter or 
postal and szy/'Send me your new 
amazing $3 suit offer" and get
 1 
the latest big set of cloth samples 
to pick from, a great book of all the brand 
new 1918 fashions shown in gorgeous colors 
all FREE, a tailoring offer so splendid, 
bo marvelous, it's hard to believe; greater 
and better than any tailoring: offer you ever 
saw. Mow to get all your own 
clothes free, how to make all your I 
spending money in your extra spare time, 
how to become moreimportant.influential 
and prosperous. Don't wait, don't put it 
off.t, write us your name and address . 
now, today, this very minute. Address 
BANNER TAILORING CO., DEPT. 507 CHICAGO 
T.W....... . /Central 104-W 
Telephones: | Maj n 6 , 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorney-at-La w Notaby Publi c 
1607 Williamson Building Clereland, Ohio 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Court set or-a t-LaW 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building, Rooms 603 and 604 
Office'Phone, 3297 Mulberry M CM7 »r, ^ ki i 
Residence'Phone, 5277-M Market NEWARK , N. J 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Couhseixor-at-Law 
818 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney-at-La w 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykcs Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
TeL J4J7 Tort HIT! Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
Attorne y ano Counsbllor-at-La v 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Aahbie Hawkins George W. P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-La w 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Lenox Ave., New Yor k 
DOLLS DOLLS DOLLS 
A complete line of colored dolls of every 
description ready for immediate delivery at 
popular prices. Catalog on request. 
GADSDEN DOLL CO. 
30 Church St., Room 439, New York City. 
Mad e to 
Yoti r 
Order 
Mention Th e 
| V Special Offer 
to prove our fine quality: 
These line Panta for Dress or 
^^^ H Business, choiceof man y hand -
4^H B some styles, guaranteed for 13 
^^^^ m months solid wear and satisfaction or MONEY BACK, absolute $5.00 value—while they 
last, one pairto a customer, m ^ —• 
1335 rfi $l.95/*3«£gi 
No Extra Charges 
No charge for Big Extreme Peg Tops or 
Cuff Bottoms, nothiDg extra for fancy Belt 
Loops or Pocket Flaps, no charge for Open 
Welt Seams or Large Sizes—all novelty 
*—"ff i GOLD FINISHED 
PINFREEvTo°u 
SeaAHoW 
Money 
'few hundred on' hand, get yours quick. 
Cash Prof itSu^^^efs S 
neighbors. Young George Gekovich made 
$66.16 in one day. Write for free samples today. 
Chicag o Tailor s Associatio n 
Dept. D 12 . SIS South Franklin Street, Chicago 
Crisi s A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 3 4 West 33 d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per _ _ _ . 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - - OVsC. UGl 
Postage extra 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 6o cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W . Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or throug h 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention Th e Crists The CRISIS Book mart 
You can order through the CRISIS any book printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIVE LIFE IN SOUTH AFRICA. (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN. . (Anonymous). 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
THE LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (B. F. Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN. (T. Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
THE NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, THE CRISIS, : : : : : 70 fifth Avenue, New York 