The CRISIS 
Christmas, 1917 
TE N CENT S A COP Y President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H . GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
MAJO R J. E. SPINGARN , Chairma n o f Boar d 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR . W . E. B. DUBOIS , Director of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR . F. N . CARDOZ O 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washington 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brooklyn 
DR. V . MORTO N TONE S 
DR . O. M . WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A . SINCLAI R 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR . JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D . WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
The N. A. A. C. P. has secured the best legal 
talent in the country to defend the colored men accused of murder in the East St. Louis race riots and 
to prevent the responsibility and blame for that horror 
being placed upon the American Negro. 
In this case the race is on trial. Help to win 
it by joining the N. A. A. C. P. today. 
Date , 1917 . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
Th e Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying tw o dollars or mor e 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer , 
7 0 Fifth Avenue , New York. 
SI R : 
I desire to become a membe r of the National Association for the 
Advancemen t of Colored People and to receive Th e Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year , ] enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
$ City and State 
Mention THE CRISIS CHRISTMAS NUMBER—Edition 48,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. 
BURGHARD T DU BOIS , AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for December, 1917 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER. A Photograph from Life. By F. H. Cloud. 
LEADERS OF THE YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION 66 
MEN OF THE MONTH 75 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT 82-84 
ARTICLES 
THE TREASURE OF THE POOR. From the French of Jean Richepin. Done 
into English by Jessie Fauset. With Illustrations by Laura Wheeler. . . . 63 
THE YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION AND THE WAR. By 
Dr. Jesse Edward Moorland 65 
SEGREGATION. TEXT OF THE SUPREME COURT DECISION 69 
THE NEGRO AND THE WA R DEPARTMENT. By Emmett Jay Scott .. . 76 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 59 
MEN OF THE MONTH 74 
THE LOOKING GLASS 77 
THE HORIZON 85 
TH E CRISIS FO R 191 8 
TH E CRISI S for 1918 will issue a series of special numbers on Negro homes, Negro churches, 
Negro industry, etc. 
W e have begun a drive for a circulation of 75,000. Write U S for details. 
In our January number another special article on the Congressional investigation in East 
St. Louis. 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 8, 1879. 5 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM, N. C. 
Open to Students of Either SEX . 
It is more than a mere school. It is a community at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections 
of the country in improved Negro community life wherever 
our trained workers locate. 
The following departments are already in successful operation: Teacher Training, Industrial, Literary, Academic and 
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Household 
Economics and Departments of Music. 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed by any School for 
the Education of Negro Youth in the South. 
The next term opened Monday, October 1, 1917 . For catalog 
and detailed information, address 
President, JAMES E. SHEPARD, 
DURHAM - - - NORTH CAROLINA 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
For reasonably mature students who have 
A good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$100. Fall term began "Wednesday, September 19, 1917. 
The Summer SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS, FROM 
July 5 to August 2 inclusive, WILL this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should he made early. Cost FOR the four 
weeks $15.00. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION WRITE TO 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL, 
PRINCIPAL. 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
Twenty-fourth Annual Session. 
Fall term began Sept. 1, '17 . 
Three Strong Departments: Ag ­
ricultural, Mechanical and Aca ­
demic. 
Short Practical Courses of 
Three Months; Maintained by 
the Governments of North Carolina and of the United States. 
Special training for teachers of 
vocational subjects. 
Board, Lodging AND Tuition, 
$9.0 0 per Calendar Month. 
For CATALOG and Further 
Information, address 
President DUDLEY , 
A. & T. College, 
Greensboro, N . C . 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 57 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal 
School and College, with manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortyeight years of successful work have been completed, 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and 
Thorough Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September 19, 1917. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La. 
Situated on the main thoroughfare of the 
largest city of the South. 
Thorough training in High School, Teachers' Course and College, with special work 
in Musi c and Manual Training. 
Teachers represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
country. 
For full Information, address 
J. T. Cater, Registrar . 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific. Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light 
COURSES OF STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A . B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened October 3, 19l7. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta , Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W . A . FOUNTAIN , Presiden t 
BISHO P J. S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 58 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religions Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to AD Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session Opened Wednesday, October 3, 1917. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS, President or 
J. E. Aggrey, Registrar. 
Don't Waste Your Evenings 
Neve r befor e in the history o f the race has 
the deman d for skilled colore d help bee n 
so great as at the present time. Fall in 
with the spirit o f the times fo r preparedness and learn a useful trade fo r the deman d is greater than the supply. 
Enroll at BEREAN SCHOOL now and equip yourself in 
Stenography, Typewriting. Bookkeeping, Upholstery, Woodworking , Plumbing , Dressmaking. Tailoring , Printing, Cooking , Waiting, Millinery, or Powe r Machin e operating. 
19th yea r and Fall Term opene d 
Tuesday , Octobe r 2nd, 1917. 
Late afternoo n and evenin g sessions, twic e 
a week, specially adapted fo r the convenienc e 
o f the day wag e earners. Painstaking and 
efficient teachers, specialized training in all 
departments a marked feature. 
Efficiency our aim Helpfulness ou r objec t 
Th e doors are ope n now . Wil l yo u enter ? 
VISITORS WELCOME GYMNASIUM BEAUTIFUL LOCATION 
Writ e the Principa l o f 
Berean Manual Training and Industrial School 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D . 
1926 S. College Avenue Philadelphia, Pa . 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUT E 
Fall Term opened October 1, 1917. Shorthand, 
typewriting, bookkeeping, business correspondence, 
business law, multigraphing, mimeographing, 
arithmetic, grammar , spelling, reading and writing. Apt students operate typewriters blindfolded 
accurately in two months and are able to pass 
Civil Service Examinations with ease in eight 
months. Edward T. Duncan, President, 
1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA 
OFFERS LONG AND SHORT COURSES IN 
MECHANIC ARTS, IN HOM E ECONOMICS, 
IN AGRICULTURE, IN EDUCATION AND IN 
SCIENCE. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O . DRAWE R 524 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of Ne w York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
Al l Races 
Prepare in the best school of its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 8 9 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W . Mottley, President 
10 0 CALLIN G CARD S 5 0 CENT S 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Wrise 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The Hous e of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
SPECIAL OFFER. A year's subscription to 
THE CRISI S will be given to anyone sending in at one time five paid-up yearly subscriptions to THE CRISIS . The offer holds 
good until midnight of December 31 . 1917 . 
LULU ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
TELEPHONE 6393 MORNINGSIDE 
126 W . 134th Street Ne w Yor k Cit y 
ROLAND W. HAYES , Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Oper a 
"A n unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWIC K St. . BOSTON . MASS . 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
VOL . 15-NO . 2 . DECEMBER, 191 7 Whole No. 8 6 
Editoria l 
The Secon d Coming 
THREE bishops sat in San Francisco, New Orleans and New York, 
peering gloomily into three flickering fires which cast and recast 
shuddering shadows on book-lined walls. Three letters lay in 
their laps and said: 
" And thou, Valdosta, in the land of Georgia, art not least 
among the princes of America, for out of thee shall come a Governor who shall 
rule my people." 
The white Bishop of New York scowled and impatiently threw the paper 
into the fire. 
"Valdosta?" he said, "that's where I go to the Governor's wedding of 
little Marguerite, my white flower—" Then he forgot the writing in his musing; but the paper flared red in the fireplace. 
"Valdosta?" said the black bishop in New Orleans, and turned uneasily 
in his chair. " I must go down there. Those colored folk are acting strangely. 
I don't know where all this unrest and moving will lead to. Then, there's poor 
Lucy—" And he threw the letter into the fire; but eyed it suspiciously, as it 
flamed green. 
" Stranger things than that have happened," he said slowly, " and ye shall 
hear of wars and rumors of wars ... . for nation shall rise against nation 
and kingdom against kingdom." 
In San Francisco the priest of Japan, abroad to study strange lands, sat 
in his lacquer chair with face like soft yellow and wrinkled parchment. Slowly 
he wrote in a great and golden book: 
" I have been strangely bidden to the Vale of Dosta where one of those 
religious cults that swarm here will welcome a Prophet. I shall go and report 
to Kioto." 
So, in the dim waning of the day before Christmas, three bishops met in 
Valdosta and saw its mills and storehouses, its wide-throated and sandy streets 
in the mellow glow of a crimson sun. The governor glared anxiously up the 
street as he helped the Bishop of New York into his car and welcomed him 
graciously. 
" I am troubled," he said, " about the Niggers. They are acting queer. 
I'm not certain but Fleming is back of it." 
" Fleming? " 
"Yes; he's running against me next term for governor; he's a fire-brand; 
wants niggers to vote and all that— Pardon me a moment, there's a darky 
I know " and he hurried to the black bishop, who had just descended from 
the " Jim Crow " car, and clasped his hand cordially. They talked in whispers. 
" Search diligently," said the governor in parting, " and bring me word 60 THE CRISIS 
again." Then returning to his Guest: "You will excuse me, won't you?" he 
said, " but I am sorely troubled. I never saw niggers act so. They're leaving 
by the hundreds and those who stay are getting impudent. They seam to be 
expecting something. What's the crowd, Jim? " 
The chauffeur said that there was some sort sf Chinese official in town and 
everybody wanted to glimpse him. He drove around another way. 
It all happened very suddenly. The Bishop of New York, in full canonicals 
for the early wedding, stepped out on the rear balcony of his mansion, just as 
the dying sun lit crimson clouds of glory in the East and burned the West. 
" Fire! " yelled a wag in the surging crowd that was gathering to celebrate 
a southern Christmas Eve; all laughed and ran. 
The bishop did not understand. He peered around. Was it that dark little 
house in the far back yard that flamed? Forgetful of his robes, he hurried 
down—a brave white figure in the sunset. He found himself before an old 
black rickety stable. He could hear the mules stamping within. 
No, it was not fire. It was the sunset glowing through the cracks. Behind 
the hut its glory rose toward God like flaming wings of Cherubim. He paused 
until he heard the faint wail of a child. Hastily he entered. A white girl 
crouched before him, down by the very mules' feet, with a baby in her arms, 
A little mite of a baby that wailed weakly. Behind mother and child stood a 
shadow. The bishop turned to the right, inquiringly, and saw a black man 
in bishop's robes that faintly echoed his own. Hastily he turned away to the 
left and saw a golden Japanese in golden garb. Then he heard the black man 
mutter behind him: 
"But He was to come the second time in clouds of glory, with the nations 
gathered around Him and angels—" at the word a shaft of glorious light fell full 
upon the child, while without came the tramping of unnumbered feet and the 
whirring of winds. 
The Bishop of New York bent quickly above the baby. 
It was black! 
The bishop stepped back with a gesture of disgust, hardly listening to and 
yet hearing the black bishop who spoke almost as if in apology: 
" She ain't really white; I know Lucy—you see, her mother worked for 
the Governor—" The bishop turned on his heel and nearly trod on the yellow 
priest, who knelt with bowed head before the pale mother and offered incense 
and a gift of gold. 
Out into the night rushed the bishop. The wings of the Cherubim were 
folded black against the stars. As he hastened down the front stair-case, the 
governor came rushing up the street steps. 
" We are late," he cried nervously. " The Bride awaits." He hurried the 
bishop to the waiting limousine, asking him anxiously: 
" Did you hear anything?1 Do you hear that noise? The crowd is growing 
strangely on the streets and there seems to be a fire over toward the East. I 
never saw so many people here—I fear violence—a mob—a lynching—hark!" 
What was that which the Bishop, too, heard beneath the rhythm of unnumbered feet? Deep in his heart a wonder grew. What was it? Ah, he knew. 
It was music—some strong and mighty chord. It rose higher as the brilliantlylighted church split the night and swept radiantly toward them. So high and 
clear that music flew, it seemed above, around, behind them. The governor, 
ashen-faced, crouched in the car; but the bishop said softly as the ecstacy pulsed 
in his heart: 
" Such music, such wedding music! What choir is it?" EDITORIAL 61 
VICTORY 
"MINNEAPOLI S BRANC H 
and friends of the Northwest join in grateful 
thanks and congratulations to you, Storey, Spingarn, Villard, and army of leaders, and friends 
wh o secured the splendid victory in 
Segregation fight. It is the most consoling and inspiring news received 
within a quarter century." 
"The colored citizens o f Denver 
and Colorado desire that the Denver 
Branch convey to you, Moorfield 
Storey, and associates their deepest 
gratitude and appreciation of the 
noble wor k and splendid victory wo n 
befor e the United States Supreme 
Court in the Segregation cases, the 
most important step toward world 
democracy since the Civil Rights 
Bill. " 
Messages like the above have come 
to us from many persons and places. 
W e are thankful; and the National 
Association fo r the Advancement o f 
Colored People and TH E CRISIS , in 
turn, pause to raise their hats to one 
man wh o bore the burden in the heat 
o f the day, initiated the fight against 
segregation, carried it victoriously up 
through the state courts, and filed a 
brie f in the Supreme Court case— 
WILLIA M ASHBI E HAWKINS , the 
attorney o f our Baltimore Branch. 
No r do we forge t the heroic efforts of 
our branches in Louisville and St. 
Louis. 
A s Moorfield Storey, our honored 
president says, this is the most mo ­
mentous utterance of the Supreme 
Court since the Dred Scott decision. 
THE SPINGARN CAMP. 
I HAV E just learned that 687 
men have received commissions 
at Fort Des Moines. Yo u know 
ho w much I have hoped and 
worked for this thing. Yo u know 
that when I said I looked forward 
to the time when there would be 
five hundred colored commissioned 
officers in the American Army , it 
seemed to many a preposterous dream. 
Yo u know that few men, white or colored, wer e behind me when I started 
my fight—very few indeed, except you 
and Professor Cook and Dean Pickens. An d now the dream has come 
true. There will be many mor e officers, when these have proved that 
our faith was justified; and these men 
have the solemn duty of proving our 
faith to the whole world. 
Today is my daughter's birthday, 
and today comes this happy and inspiring news. All is not perfect in 
our country today, but thank heavens, 
there are many, many things to be 
proud and grateful for. 
J. E. SPINGARN . 
FIFTY THOUSAND. 
THE net-paid circulation o f TH E 
CRISIS , estimating the last 
month o f 1917, has been as 
follows: 
1911 9,000 copies 
1912 22,000 
1913 27,000 " 
1914 31,450 " 
1915 32,156 " 
1916 37,625 " 
1917 40,400 " 
Fo r the last three months our circulation has averaged over 44,000. 
The Editor of TH E CRISI S will be 
fifty years of age next February. He 
would be glad to celebrate his jubilee 
with a net-paid circulation of 50,000 
copies. 
BAKER. 
LET us raise our hats to Newton 
Diehl Baker, Secretary o f 
War. He has not done everything we could wish, but he 
has accomplished so much more than 
President Wilson or any other member o f this administration that he deserves all praise. He has carried out 
the draft with absolute fairness, notwithstanding delays. He has put 
black troops in nearly every cantonment. He has commissioned nearly 
700 Negro officers in the United States 62 THE CRISIS 
Army . He has sent black troops to 
the front. He has made no discrimination in treatment or pay or opportunity. T o be sure, w e are segregated ; but that wa s according to a 
foolish law fo r which the Secretary 
wa s not responsible. W e are not permitted to volunteer beyond our four 
regiments but there, again, the authority o f the Secretary is, at least, 
in doubt. Considering his limitations 
and the tremendous opposition to any 
act of justice to the Negro, Secretary 
Baker has done well. An d he has 
crowned his well-doing by appointing 
an official advisor wh o belongs to the 
Negro race. 
There remains one mor e thing fo r 
Secretary Baker to do. We have not 
yet our full quota of Negro officers. 
There were 86,300 Negroes called in 
the first draft. Allowing us no officers higher than captain, this would 
call for a thousand colored officers, 
and if we furnish 200,000 Negro 
troops in the second draft, as seems 
likely, we should have at least three 
thousand officers. W e have at present seven hundred. We need a second officers' training camp next January. We can furnish the men ; will 
the Government furnish the instruction? Every reader o f TH E CRISI S 
should urge this upon Secretary 
Baker and upon his congressmen. 
Don't delay. Write immediately. 
EAST ST. LOUIS. 
THER E has been sent out from 
Chicago an appeal for funds 
which says among othe r 
things: 
"By our parades and protests and prayers, the Negro has succeeded in securing the 
Congressional investigation of these outrages, but not a dollar has been raised with 
which to keep someone on guard to take 
note of the doings of this Investigation Committee. Everyone knows that even in the 
case of an individual on trial his friends 
must give him their moral support and that 
he must employ a counsel to see that his ininterests are looked after. Nothing of this 
kind has yet been done." 
This statement is not true. The 
National Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored Peopl e has already 
spent ove r $4,000 fo r investigation, 
succor, and defense. W e have sent 
special representatives to St. Louis 
and have one there at present. W e 
have hired counsel to defend accused 
colored men and to defend Dr. Bundy. 
W e are prepared to expend any reasonable sum to secure justice. W e 
have, o f course, no possible objection 
to other persons and organizations 
collecting and expending such monies 
as they see fit, but their appeals should 
be based upon fact and not fancy. 
THE ELECTIONS. 
WE congratulate the wome n 
o f the State o f Ne w York , 
white and colored, on the 
splendid recognition of 
their humanity in the last election. 
By this decision, 75,000 colored women became voters. W e congratulate 
the colored people of Ne w Yor k on 
electing their first representative to 
the Assembly, Edwar d A. Johnson, 
and their first representative on the 
Board of Alderman of the greatest 
city in the world, James C. Thomas, 
Jr. 
N. A. A. C. P. 
THE following nominations fo r 
the Board of Directors o f 
the National Association fo r 
the Advancement of Colored 
People have been made to be voted 
on at the January, 1918, annual meeting : 
Professor George William Cook, 
Washington ; Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Washington ; the Rev. Mr. John 
Haynes Holmes, Ne w York ; Dr. V. 
Morton Jones, Brooklyn ; Mr. John E. 
Milholland, Ne w York ; Majo r J. E. 
Spingarn, Ne w York ; Mr. Moorfield 
Storey, Boston; Mr. Oswald Garrison 
Villard, Ne w York ; Colonel Charles 
Young , U. S. A . (retired) ; Mr. William English Walling, Ne w York . 
The Seventh Annual Conference 
will be held in Ne w York , Decembe r 
27-30. The Treasure of the Poor from the French of Jean Richepin 
DONE INTO ENGLIS H B Y 
JESSIE FAUSET 
DECORATION BY LAURA WHEELER 
THIS is a little Christmas story for 
little children. However, grownups may read it, too, and perhaps 
they will find in it both pleasure and profit. I am telling the story 
for little folks, but I am taking care 
to extract its moral for big ones. I shall be 
fortunate if I succeed in amusing the ones 
and in causing the others to reflect. 
Once upon a time in a country whose 
name I no longer remember, there were 
two very, very poor people who possessed 
nothing—absolutely nothing. 
They had no bread to put in their cupboard, and no cupboard in which to put 
any bread. They had no house either in 
which to build a cupboard and no field in 
which to build a house. 
If they had had a field, they might have 
been able to earn the wherewithal to build 
a house. If they had had a house, they 
might have been able to put up a cupboard 
in it. And if they had had a cupboard, 
doubtless from time to time in one of its 
corners, they might have been able to find 
a bit of bread. 
By having neither field, nor house, nor 
cupboard, nor bread, they were indeed very, 
very poor people. 
What they missed most was the house. 
For of bread they received plenty out of 
charity, and even sometimes a bit of bacon, 
too, not to mention a drink of cider. 
But they would have preferred to fast 
forever and to realize that they were in 
their own home, in a house where they could 
set dry wood a-blaze and chat in front of 
the embers. For the best thing in the 
world, better even than eating, is to be in 
possession of four walls, for otherwise one 
is little better off than a roving wild beast. 
And these two poor folks found themselves poorer than ever one sad Christmas 
Eve,—sad for them only, whereas it was 
gay enough for everyone else who had fire 
that night on the hearth and their stockings hanging up in the chimney-place. 
As they were bemoaning their 
lot in the gloomy night, on the 
high road, they met a poor cat 
mewing. 
It was, indeed, a very poor 
cat, quite as badly off as themselves, for it was only skin and 
bones, and had no hair worth 
mentioning on its skin. If it 
had had any hair on its skin, 
doubtless its skin would have 
been in a better condition. If 
its skin had been in a better 
63 G4 TH E CRISIS 
condition, doubtless it would have been 
strong enough to catch mice and not to 
stay so thin. 
But having no hair, and with its poor 
skin clinging to its bones, it was, indeed, a 
very wretched cat. 
II 
Poor folks are kind folks and help each 
other. So these took the poor cat along with 
them and did not even think of eating it, 
but, on the contrary, gave it a little bacon 
which some one had given them for charity's sake. 
The cat after eating began to walk in 
front of them and led them to an old abandoned hut. There they saw two stools and 
a fire-place lighted up for an instant by a 
ray of moonlight, which then disappeared 
immediately. And the cat disappeared, too, 
with the moonlight. 
So there they were seated in the shadows 
before the black fireplace which the absence 
of fire made blacker than ever. 
"Ah! " said they, "if only we had two' or 
three embers. It is so cold! And it would 
be so fine to warm ourselves a bit and tell 
stories!" 
But alas! There wasn't any fire in the 
fireplace, for these were really and truly 
the poorest folks in the world. 
Suddenly two coals flared up in the back 
of the fireplace, two blazing coals yellow 
as gold. And the old man rubbed his hands 
together joyously and said to his wife: 
"Do you feel how fine and warm it is?" 
"Yes, indeed," replied the old lady. An d 
she stretched out her open palms to the fire. 
"Blow on it," said she, "so the blaze will 
flare up." 
"No, " said the man, "that will make 
them burn up too quickly." 
And they began to talk of bye-gone days, 
quite without sadness, because they were 
so completely cheered up by the sight of the 
two burning coals. 
Poor folks are satisfied with little, so 
these two were perfectly happy as they 
looked at the beautiful gift of fire which 
the little Christ-child had made them, and 
they thanked him with all their hearts. 
Al l night long they continued to tell each 
other stories, as they warmed their hands, 
sure now that the little Christ-child wished THE Y. M. C. A. AND THE WA R 6 5 
them well, for the two coals kept on shininglike pieces of gold, and it seemed impossible 
for them to burn out. 
And when Christmas morning came, the 
two poor people who had been so warm and 
happy all night long saw in the back of the 
fireplace the poor cat, staring at them with 
its big yellow eyes. 
And it was the reflection of its eyes that 
had made them so warm and comfortable. 
And the cat said to them: 
"The treasure of the poor is illusion." 
TH E YOUN G MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION 
AN D TH E WA R 
By DR. JESSE EDWARD MOORLAND * 
THERE are far more dangerous foes to 
meet the soldier than the enemy's 
bullets. In no recent war has the enemy 
killed or disabled the largest number of 
men but, rather, the forces of evil which 
became aggravated under abnormal conditions created by warfare. 
In the Spanish-American War the work 
of the Young Men's Christian Association 
was so effective and so largely depended 
upon for its efficient service by the Government as well as a right thinking public 
that the Army and Navy Department of 
the International Committee was organized 
and has been ministering to the needs of 
soldiers on the firing line, in forts, on battleships, in national guard camps, and wherever their services were needed. It has 
proven its ability to minister to men in all 
climes and of all races. However, the Association's largest opportunity has come in 
this, the world's crisis, when it is said that 
forty million men and boys are under arms. 
No sum of money needed to carry on this 
work has in any way daunted the ardor of 
the leaders, neither has the demand and 
* Senior Secretary, Colored Men's Department, 
International Committee of the Young Men's Christian Associations. 
call for the best trained men in the movement to leave their various fields of labor 
and serve in any part of the world been 
questioned for a moment. The service extends not only to soldiers here and over 
seas, on the battle front, and in hospitals 
but, also, to those in prison camps who need 
help and encouragement even more than 
the men who are fighting. Schools have 
been organized among the prisoners, bands, 
orchestras, and various recreational activities to offset the danger of millions of men 
being entirely ruined during these years of 
enforced idleness. The American Associations have been foremost in the furnishing 
of money and men for this work from the 
beginning of the war. When our country 
severed peaceful relations with Germany, 
the Young Men's Christian Association organized the National War Work Council, 
composed of many of the best men of the 
land, and quickly raised the sum of five 
million dollars to carry on this important 
work among our soldiers at home. In less 
than six months it was found necessary to 
plan for the raising of a sum, the like of 
which was never attempted to be raised in 
the world before by any organization for a MA X YERGA N SHELB Y J. DAVIDSO N R. T. WEATHERB Y 
DR. MOORLAND , DR. CABANIS S AN D MESSRS. BECKET T MAJO R WEBSTE R AN D MESSRS . 
AN D D E FRANT Z A T FORT DES MOINES LLOY D AN D BALLOU , "SOMEWHER E I N AFRICA " 
E. SNYDE R W . H. KINDL E B. B. CHURC H 
66 THE Y.M . C. A. AND THE WA R 67 
Christian cause, viz.: thirty-five millon dollars for our work at home and over seas. 
In the beginning, to make sure that 
there would be no miscarriage of justice, a 
resolution was spread upon the minutes to 
the effect that whatever was done for white 
soldiers would be done in the same proportion for colored soldiers, and this is being 
carried out in a satisfactory way. 
When the Officers' Training Camp for colored men was established at Fort Des 
Moines, a spacious Y. M. C. A. tent was 
raised and became at once the rallying 
point, which had much to do in helping to 
keep the men fine in their lives during the 
four months' stay at that historic spot. Ice 
water was provided for the men, stationery 
was given them, writing tables, pens, and 
ink were furnished, stamps were kept on 
sale and postal cards, opportunity for sending express money orders, and many thousands of dollars were sent home in this way 
by the men. Arrangements were made 
with a bank to pay the men off at the Y. M. 
C. A. tent. 
Mr. Robert B. DeFrantz, whose life and 
work largely made possible the splendid 
association equipment in Kansas City for 
colored men, was the secretary. Mr. William H. J. Beckett, a physical director of 
thorough training and large experience, had 
charge of the physical work. Dr. George 
W. Cabaniss, Chairman of the Y. M. C. A. 
Branch in Washington, and a prominent 
physician, entered the camp with the men 
on the first day and left with them on the 
last day. During that time, he gave his 
services free of charge, working with the 
secretaries. His services were so important that the Colonel remarked to me that 
he could not have gotten on without him. 
The handing out of a sheet of paper, filling 
the water tanks, picking up scraps of paper, 
etc., were cheerfully done by Dr. Cabaniss 
as a matter of service and help to the men 
in camp. 
The large tent provided ample facility 
for entertainments, lectures, and religious 
meeetings. A Sunday School was organized 
and conducted by the men themselves— 
Bible classes and religious meetings were 
regularly held. Nearly two hundred of 
these young men made their first promise 
to follow Jesus Christ while in camp. These 
secretaries formed a link between the men 
and the officers and were often sought as 
friendly counsellors concerning matters of 
far reaching importance to both. It would 
be hard to write the story of this training 
camp and leave the Y. M. C. A. out. 
The work in the cantonments where the 
drafted men are in training is and will be 
even more interesting. It was a question 
as to what would happen when colored 
men would be called into the cantonments 
in the South. The first men called, entered 
Camp Gordon in Atlanta, Ga. They were 
met by our secretary, who proved to be a 
link between them and the young southern 
officers who were to train these men. These 
officers showed the men every courtesy and 
manifested deep interest in them. The 
Colonel, a native of Tennessee and a West 
Pointer with eighteen years of experience 
with colored troops, quickly demanded that 
one of the Y. M. C. A. buildings in the camp 
be turned over to his men. This was done. 
It proved a rallying point, for the men 
crowded it until many climbed on the rafters that they might enjoy the first entertainment provided by good citizens of the 
city, the officers, and the men themselves; 
so, at once, a spirit of good feeling was created and in a few days colored soldiers 
were as much a matter of fact in that camp 
as white soldiers. What is true here is true 
of most if not all the cantonments. Buildings are provided in most of the cantonments, except where the weather may be 
warm enough to work in a tent. Where 
there is a regiment of men five secretaries 
are provided: An executive secretary, and 
one each for religious, physical, educational 
and social work. Some of our leading men 
in professional and business life have been 
called to turn aside from their work to 
render service in this way. Dr. Cabaniss, 
of whom I have spoken, giving up his practice, for the time being, to become secretary 
at Camp Meade, and Mr. Shelby J. Davidson, a prominent lawyer and real estate 
man, giving up his business to become secretary at Camp Dix. These are examples 
of many other patriotic men of the race. 
Not only is there effective work through 
the Association being done for our soldiers 
in camp at home, but General Pershing had 
hardly gotten to France before we were 
cabled to send two capable colored secretaries for work among our troops over seas. 
Two splendid men were willing, one of them 
to sacrifice home and accept a much smaller 
salary and the other to turn aside from 
professional preparation in school, to go. 68 THE CRISIS 
Before they sailed the request came for two 
more, and already a college president and a 
leading minister have offered their services, 
and as our troops go over seas others of 
our very best men will be called upon to 
go with them. 
There is another phase of this beneficent 
work which challenges our attention. One 
night in May, 1915, the National Secretary 
of War Work in the Far East made an appeal for forty men to go into parts of the 
world where soldiers were fighting, surrounded with every conceivable danger of 
life known to man. The reward for service 
offered them was most likely a body broken 
with disease and maybe death. However, 
the tremendous needs made the challenge 
attractive to red blooded men. Max Yergan, 
the youngest member of my staff, student 
secretary for the Southwest, a graduate of 
Shaw University, only twenty-five years old, 
strong, courageous, devout, faithful in caring for every detail of responsibility entrusted to him, heard that call and went 
out to India. Not a question was raised 
by our Committee regarding his race. The 
reports of his service to troops and of his 
splendid addresses at mission stations in 
India are most encouraging. After some 
months, at his own request, he went with a 
number of troops to British East Africa, 
where he has been serving East Indian 
troops, West Indian troops, British troops, 
South African troops, and native troops 
from many parts of Africa, rendering a 
service which almost parallels the labors of 
the Apostle Paul himself. He has suffered 
with the fever, he has been surrounded 
with every danger known to man in that 
region. He is now broken in health and 
is on his way home; but his story will be 
like that of Livingstone. Last Christmas 
day he only had palm trees for Christmas 
trees and the sands of the desert for presents, but he told the Christmas story to 
more than three thousand men who had 
never heard of Christmas. He went from 
hospital to hospital in his little "Ford" machine and from camp to camp in the spirit 
of the Christ,—sometimes near the coast 
and at others far in the interior, under the 
shadow of Kilima Njaro, the tallest mountain in Africa, whose summit is covered 
with eternal snow; many nights without 
shelter, with small quantities of unwholesome food,—yet the ring of his letters never 
showed any sign of dissatisfaction with the 
discomforts, but joy at the privilege of service. It was not long after his arrival in 
Africa before we were cabled to send six 
more men to join him in his work. To the 
colleges we went for these men, and the 
young men of this promising race were 
willing to consider the claims of this great 
need. 
A little less than a year ago Lloyd, from 
Howard University, and Ballou, from 
Knoxville College, sailed and they have been 
working for many months with Yergan. A 
few months later, Richey, from Fisk, and 
Pritchett, from Lincoln University, started 
on what proved to be a perilous journey, 
for when in sight of Table Mountain, South 
Africa, their vessel unfortunately struck a 
floating mine and was lost. For hours 
they with others were tossed in their little 
boat by the waves of the briny deep. It was 
fortunate that they with most of those 
aboard, though not all, were rescued; however, they lost all they possessed. Not 
one word of murmur came from them, as 
they have written to their friends, but they 
have rather rejoiced in the privilege of suffering that they might minister to others. 
An industrial leader has been asked for 
along with other men for this important 
field, and these picked men will shortly 
sail. This means more than a Y. M. C. A. 
movement; it means the movement which 
will open the doors of this great continent 
in a way they have never been opened 
to such of our young manhood and womanhood who will be willing to give others 
the chance they themselves have had, and 
may it not be seen by those who scan this 
article that the men referred to at the 
beginning, many of whom are sleeping in 
some favored corner of a school campus, 
did not labor in vain, but the same heroism 
which they manifested in their lives has 
been imparted to their spiritual sons. 
Today the Young Men's Christian Association has the opportunity of serving our 
men in uniform in such a manner that 
health and morals may be saved for the 
more difficult and longer task of helping to 
rebuild and regain many things lost in the 
war—still more important that they be 
saved to make right use of larger opportunities which are bound to follow. This 
task the Association is pledged to fulfill in 
honor and for the sake of those at home 
who care. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
SEGREGATION. 
THE first city ordinance to segregate Negroes in residential districts was passed 
in Baltimore, Md., December 10, 1910. In less than a month this law was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Maryland in a case brought by an 
N. A. A. C. P. attorney, Mr. Ashbie Hawkins. A second ordinance was enacted April 
7, 1911 and re-enacted May 15. In June, 1913, this enactment was declared unconstitutional. A third ordinance was introduced and the final decision in the Court of 
Appeals was withheld, pending the decision of the Supreme Court. 
Meantime, ordinances were passed in various parts of the country as follows: 
1912—Winston-Salem and Mooresville, N. C. 
1913—Madisonville, Ky., Birmingham, Ala., Atlanta, Ga., Richmond, Norfolk and 
Roanoke, Va., Ashville, N. C. 
1914—Louisville, Ky. 
1916—St. Louis, Mo., Dallas, Tex., and since then ordinances have been passed 
in various cities of Texas and Oklahoma. 
These ordinan?es have been upheld by the courts of Georgia and Kentucky and 
thrown out by the courts of North Carolina, Georgia, and Missouri. Finally, the 
Louisville case reached the Supreme Court of the United States. It was argued April 
11, 1916, and re-argued April 27, 1917. The unanimous decision of the Court, which 
follows in full, was handed down November 5, 1917. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
No. 33—OCTOBER TERM, 1917. 
Charles H. Buchanan, Plaintiff in Error, j i n Error to the Court of 
vs. > Appeals of the State 
William Warley. j of Kentucky. 
[November 5, 1917.] 
Mr. Justice DAY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Buchanan, plaintiff in error, brought an action in the Chancery Branch of Jefferson 
Circuit Court of Kentucky for the specific performance of a contract for the sale of 
certain real estate situated in the City of Louisville at the corner of 37th Street and 
Pflanz Avenue. The offer in writing to purchase the property contained a proviso: 
"It is understood that I am purchasing the above property for the purpose of having 
erected thereon a house which I propose to make my residence, and it is a distinct part 
of this agreement that I shall not be required to accept a deed to the above property or 
to pay for said property unless I have the right under the laws of the State of Kentucky 
and the City of Louisville to occupy said property as a residence." This offer was 
accepted by the plaintiff. 
To the action for specific performance the defendant by way of answer set up the 
condition above set forth, that he is a colored person, and that on the block of which the 
lot in controversy is a part, there are ten residences, eight of which at the time of the 
making of the contract were occupied by white people, and only two (those nearest the 
lot in question) were occupied by colored people, and that under and by virtue of the 
ordinance of the City of Louisville, approved May 11, 1914, he would not be allowed to 
occupy the lot as a place of residence. 
In reply to this answer the plaintiff set up, among other things, that the ordinance 
was in conflict with the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, 
and hence no defense to the action for specific performance of the contract. 
In the court of original jurisdiction in Kentucky, and in the Court of Appeals of 
that State, the case was made to turn upon the constitutional validity of the ordinance. 
The Court of Appeals of Kentucky, 165 Ky. 559, held the ordinance valid and of itself 
a complete defense to the action.' 
The title of the ordinance is: "An ordinance to prevent conflict and ill-feeling 
between the white and colored races in the City of Louisville, and to preserve the public 
peace and promote the general welfare by making reasonable provisions requiring as far 
as practicable, the use of separate blocks for residences, places, of abode, and places of 
assembly by white and colored people respectively." 
By the first section of the ordinance it is made unlawful for any colored person to 
move into and occupy as. a residence, place of abode, or to establish and maintain as a 
69 70 THE CRISIS 
place of public assembly any house upon any block upon which a greater number of 
houses are occupied as residences, places of abode, or places of public assembly by white 
people than are occupied as residences, places of abode, or places of public assembly by 
colored people. 
Section 2 provides that it shall be unlawful for any white person to move into and 
occupy as a residence, place of abode, or to establish and maintain as a place of public 
assembly any house upon any block upon which a greater number of houses are occupied 
as residences, places of abode or places of public assembly by colored people than are 
occupied as residences, places of abode or places of public assembly by white people. 
Section 4 provides that nothing in the ordinance shall affect the location of residences, places of abode or places of assembly made previous to its approval; that nothing 
contained therein shall be construed so as to prevent the occupancy of residences, places 
of abode or places of assembly by white or colored servants or employees of occupants 
of such residences, places of abode or places of public assembly on the block on which 
they are so employed, and that nothing therein contained shall be construed to prevent 
any person who, at the date of the passage of the ordinance, shall have acquired or 
possessed the right to occupy any building as a residence, place of abode or place of 
assembly from exercising such a right; that nothing contained in the ordinance shall 
prevent the owner of any building, who when the ordinance became effective, leased, 
rented, or occupied it as a residence, place of abode or place of public assembly for 
colored persons, from continuing to rent, lease or occupy such residence, place of abode 
or place of assembly for such persons, if the owner shall so desire; but if such house 
should, after the passage of the ordinance, be at any time leased, rented or occupied as 
a residence, place of abode or place of assembly for white persons, it shall not thereafter 
be used for colored persons, if such occupation would then be a violation of section one 
of the ordinance; that nothing contained in the ordinance shall prevent the owner of any 
building, who when the ordinance became effective, leased, rented or occupied it as a 
residence, place of abode, or place of assembly for white persons from continuing to 
rent, lease or occupy such residence, place of abode or place of assembly for such purpose, if the owner shall so desire, but if such household, after the passage of the ordinance, be at any time leased, rented or occupied as a residence, place of abode or place 
of assembly for colored persons, then it shall not thereafter be used for white persons, 
if such occupation would then be a violation of Section Two thereof. 
The ordinance contains other sections and a violation of its provisions is made an 
offense. 
The assignments of error in this court attack the ordinance upon the ground that 
it violates the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, in that 
it abridges the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States to acquire and 
enjoy property, takes property without due process of law, and denies equal protection 
of the laws. 
The objection is made that this writ of error should be dismissed because the alleged 
denial of constitutional rights involves only the rights of colored persons, and the plaintiff in error is a white person. This court has frequently held that while an unconstitutional act is no law, attacks upon the validity of laws can only be entertained when made 
by those whose rights are directly affected by the law or ordinance in question. Only 
such persons, it has been settled, can be heard to attack the constitutionality of the law 
or ordinance. But this case does not run counter to that principle. 
The property here involved was sold by the plaintiff in error, a white man, on the 
terms stated, to a colored man; the action for specific performance was entertained in 
the court below, and in both courts the plaintiff's right to have the contract enforced 
was denied solely because of the effect of the ordinance making it illegal for a colored 
person to occupy the lot sold. But for the ordinance the state courts would have enforced 
the contract, and the defendant would have been compelled to pay the purchase price 
and take a conveyance of the premises. The right of the plaintiff in error to sell his 
property was directly involved and necessarily impaired because it was held in effect 
that he could not sell the lot to a person of color who was willing and ready to acquire 
the property, and had obligated himself to take it. This case does not come within the 
class wherein this court has held that where one seeks to avoid the enforcement of a law 
or ordinance he must present a grievance of his own, and not rest the attack upon the 
alleged violation of another's rights. In this case the property rights of the plaintiff in 
error are directly and necessarily involved. See Truax v. Raich, 239 U. S. 33, 38. 
We pass then to a consideration of the case upon its merits. This ordinance prevents the occupancy of a lot in the City of Louisville by a person of color in a block 
where the greater number of residences are occupied by white persons; where such a 
majority exists colored persons are excluded. This interdiction is based wholly upon 
color; simply that and nothing more. In effect, premises situated as are those in question in the so-called white block are effectively debarred from sale to persons of color, 
because if sold they cannot be occupied by the purchaser nor by him sold to another 
of the same color. 
This drastic measure is sought to be justified under the authority of the State in 
the exercise of the police power. It is said such legislation tends to promote the public N. A. A. C. P. 71 
peace by preventing racial conflicts; that it tends to maintain racial purity; that it 
prevents the deterioration of property owned and occupied by white people, which 
deterioration, it is contended, is sure to follow the occupancy of adjacent premises by 
persons of color. 
The authority of the State to pass laws in the exercise of the police power, having 
for their object the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare is very broad as 
has been affirmed in numerous and recent decisions of this court. Furthermore the 
exercise of this power, embracing' nearly all legislation of a local character is not to 
be interfered with by the courts where it is within the scope of legislative authority and 
the means adopted reasonably tend to accomplish a lawful purpose. But it is equally 
well established that the police power, broad as it is, cannot justify the passage of a 
law or ordinance which runs counter to the limitations of the Federal Constitution; that 
principle has been so frequently affirmed in this court that we need not stop to cite 
the cases. 
The Federal Constitution and laws passed within its authority are by the express 
terms of that instrument made the supreme law of the land. The Fourteenth 
Amendment protects life, liberty, and property from invasion by the states without due 
process of law. Property is more than the mere thing which a person owns. It is 
elementary that it includes the right to acquire, use, and dispose of it. The Constitution 
protects these essential attributes of property. Holden v. Hardy, 169 U. S. 366. 391. 
Property consists of the free use. enjoyment, and disposal of a person's acquisitions 
without control or diminution save by the law of the land. 1 Blackstone's Commentaries, 
(Cooley's Ed.) 127. 
True it is that dominion over property springing from ownership, is not absolute 
and unqualified. The disposition and use of property may he controlled in the exercise 
of the police power in the interest of the public health, convenience, or welfare. Harmful occupations may be controlled and regulated. Legitimate business may also be 
regulated in the interest of the public. Certain uses of property may be confined to 
portions of the municipality other than the resident district, such as livery stables, 
brickyards and the like, because of the impairment of the health and comfort of the 
occupants of neighboring property. Many illustrations might be given from the decisions of this court, and other courts, of this principle, but these cases do not touch the 
one at bar. 
The concrete Question here is: May the occupancy, and. necessarily, the purchase 
and sale of property of which occupancy is an incident, he inhibited b y the states, or by 
one of its municipalities, solely because of the color of the proposed occupant of the 
premises? That one may dispose of his property, subject only to the control of lawful 
enactments curtailing that right in the public interest, must be conceded. The question 
now presented makes it pertinent to enquire into the constitutional right of the white 
man to sell his property to a colored man, having in view the legal status of the purchaser and occupant. 
Following the Civil War certain amendments to the Federal Constitution were 
adopted, which have become an integral part of that instrument, equally binding upon 
all the states and fixing certain fundamental rights which all are bound to respect. The 
Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery in the United States and in all places subject 
to their jurisdiction, and gave Congress power to enforce the Amendment by appropriate legislation. The Fourteenth Amendment made all persons born or naturalized 
in the United States, citizens of the United States and of the states in which they 
reside, and provided that no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge 
the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States, and that no state shall 
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, nor deny 
to any person the equal protection of the laws. 
The effect of these amendments was first dealt with by this court in The Slaughter 
House Cases, 16 Wallace 36. The reasons for the adoption of the amendments were 
elaborately considered by a court familiar with the times in which the necessity for the 
amendments arose and with the circumstances which impelled their adoption. In that 
case Mr. Justice Miller, who spoke for the majority. pointed out that the colored race 
having been freed from slavery by the Thirteenth Amendment, was raised to the dignity 
of citizenship and equality of civil rights by the Fourteenth Amendment, and the states 
were prohibited from abridging the privileges and immunities of such citizens, or 
depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. While a 
principle purpose of the latter Amendment was to protect persons of color, the broad 
language used was deemed sufficient to protect all persons, white or black, against discriminatory legislation by the states. This is now the settled law. In many of the cases 
since arising the question of color has not been involved and the cases have been decided 
upon alleged violations of civil or property rights irrespective of the race or color of 
the complainant. In The Slaughter House Cases it was recognized that the chief inducement to the passage of the amendment was the desire to extend Federal protection to 
the recently emancipated race from unfriendly and discriminating legislation by the 
states. 72 TH E CRISIS 
In Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U . S. 303, this court held that a colored person 
charged with an offense was denied due process of law by a statute which prevented 
colored men from sitting on the jury which tried him. Mr. Justice Strong, speaking for 
the court, again reviewed the history of the Amendments, and among other things, in 
speaking of the Fourteenth Amendment, said: 
"It (the Fourteenth Amendment) was designed to assure to the colored race the 
enjoyment of all the civil rights that under the law are enjoyed by white persons, and 
to give to that race the protection of the general government, in that enjoyment, whenever it should be denied by the States. It not only gave citizenship and privileges of 
citizenship to persons of color but it denied to any State the power to withhold from 
them the equal protection of the laws, and authorized Congress to enforce its provisions 
by appropriate legislation. .. . It ordains that no State shall make or enforce any 
laws which may abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States. 
. . . It ordains that no State shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property 
without due process of law, or deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
"What is this but declaring that the laws in the States shall be the same for the 
black as for the white, that all persons, whether colored or white, shall stand equal 
before the laws of the States, and, in regard to the colored race, (for whose protection 
the Amendment was primarily designed) that no discrimination shall be made against 
them by law because of their color? . . . 
"The Fourteenth Amendment makes no attempt to enumerate the rights it designs 
to protect. It speaks in general terms and those are as comprehensive as possible. Its 
language is prohibitory; but every prohibition implies the existence of rights and 
immunities, prominent among which is an immunity from inequality of legal protection 
either for life, liberty or property. Any State action which denies this immunity to a 
colored man is in conflict with the Constitution." 
Again this court in Ex parte Virginia, 100 U . S. 339, 347, speaking of the Fourteenth Amendment, said: 
"Whoever, by virtue of public position under a State Government, deprives another 
of property, life or liberty, without due process of law, or denies or takes away the 
equal protection of the laws, violates the constitutional inhibition; and as he acts in 
the name and for the State and is clothed with the State's power, his act is that of the 
State." 
In giving legislative aid to these constitutional provisions Congress enacted in 1866, 
Chap. 31, Sec. 1, 14th Stat. 27, that: 
"Al l citizens of the United States shall have the same right in every State and 
Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, 
and convey real and personal property." 
And in 1870, by Chap. 114, Sec. 16, 16th Stat. 144, that: 
"Al l persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall have the same right 
in every State and Territory to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give 
evidence, and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security 
of persons and property as is enjoyed by white citizens, and shall be subject to like 
punishment, pains, penalties, taxes, licenses and exactions of every kind, and no other." 
In the face of these constitutional and statutory provisions, can a white man be 
denied, consistently with due process of law, the right to dispose of his property to a 
purchaser by prohibiting the occupation of it for the sole reason that the purchaser is 
a person of color intending to occupy the premises as a place of residence? 
The statute of 1866, originally passed under sanction of the Thirteenth Amendment, 14 Stat. 27, and practically reenacted after the adoption of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, 16 Stat. 144, expressly provided that all citizens of the United States in 
any state shall have the same right to purchase property as is enjoyed by white citizens. Colored persons are citizens of the United States and have the right to purchase 
property and enjoy and use the same without laws discriminating against them solely 
on account of color. Hall v. DeCuir, 95 U . S. 485, 508. These enactments did not deal 
with the social rights of men, but with those fundamental rights in property which it 
was intended to secure upon the same terms to citizens of every race and color. Civil 
Rights Cases, 109 U . S. 3, 22. The Fourteenth Amendment and these statutes enacted 
in furtherance of its purpose operate to qualify and entitle a colored man to acquire 
property without state legislation discriminating against him solely because of color. 
The defendant in error insists that Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U . S. 537, is controlling 
in principle in favor of the judgment of the court below. In that case this court held 
that a provision of a statute of Louisiana requiring railway companies carrying passengers to provide in their coaches equal but separate accommodations for the white and 
colored races did not run counter to the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment. It is 
to be observed that in that case there was no attempt to deprive persons of color of 
transportation in the coaches of the public carrier, and the express requirements were 
for equal though separate accommodations for the white and colored races. In Plessy v. 
Ferguson, classification of accommodations was permitted upon the basis of equality 
for both races. N. A. A. C. P. 73 
In the Berea College Case, 211 U. S. 45, a state statute was sustained in the courts 
of Kentucky, which, while permitting the education of white persons and Negroes in 
different localities by the same incorporated institution, prohibited their attendance at 
the same place, and in this court the judgment of the Court of Appeals of Kentucky 
was affirmed solely upon the reserved authority of the legislature of Kentucky to alter, 
amend, or repeal charters of its own corporations, and the question here involved was 
neither discussed nor decided. 
In Carey v. City of Atlanta, 143 Ga. 192, the Supreme Court of Georgia, holding 
an ordinance, similar in principle to the one herein involved, to be invalid, dealt with 
Plessy v. Ferguson, and The Berea College Case, in language so apposite that we quote 
a portion of it: 
"In each instance the complaining person was afforded the opportunity to ride, or 
to attend institutions of learning, or afforded the thing of whatever nature to which in 
the particular case he was entitled. The most that was done was to require him as a 
member of a class to conform with reasonable rules in regard to the separation of the 
races. In none of them was he denied the right to use, control, or dispose of his property, as in this case. Property of a person, whether as a member of a class or as an 
individual, cannot be taken without due process of law. In the recent case of McCabe v. 
Atchison, etc., Ry. Co., 235 U. S. 151, where the court had under consideration a statute 
which allowed railroad companies to furnish dining-cars for white people and to refuse 
to furnish dining-cars altogether for colored persons, this language was used in reference to the contentions of the attorney-general; 'This argument with respect to volume 
of traffic seems to us to be without merit. It makes the constitutional right depend upon 
the number of persons who may be discriminated against, whereas the essence of the 
constitutional right is that it is a personal one.' . . . 
"The effect of the ordinance under consideration was not merely to regulate a business or the like, but was to destroy the right of the individual to acquire, enjoy, and 
dispose of his property. Being of this character it was void as being opposed to the dueprocess clause of the constitution." 
That there exists a serious and difficult problem arising from a feeling of race hostility which the law is powerless to control, and to which it must give a measure of 
consideration, may be freely admitted. But its solution cannot be promoted by depriving 
citizens of their constitutional rights and privileges. 
As we have seen, this court has held laws valid which separated the races on the 
basis of equal accommodations in public conveyances, and courts of high authority have 
held enactments lawful which provide for separation in the public schools of white and 
colored pupils where equal privileges are given. But in view of the rights secured by 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution such legislation must have its 
limitations, and cannot be sustained where the exercise of authority exceeds the 
restraints of the Constitution. We think these limitations are exceeded in laws and 
ordinances of the character now before us. 
It is the purpose of such enactments, and, it is frankly avowed it will be their 
ultimate effect, to require by law, at least in residential districts, the compulsory separation of the races on account of color. Such action is said to be essential to the maintenance of the purity of the races, although it is to be noted in the ordinance under consideration that the employment of colored servants in white families is permitted, and 
nearby residences of colored persons not coming within the blocks, as defined in the 
ordinance, are not prohibited. 
The case presented does not deal with an attempt to prohibit the amalgamation of 
the races. The right which the ordinance annulled was the civil right of a white man 
to dispose of his property if he saw fit to do so to a person of color and of a colored 
person to make such disposition to a white person. 
It is urged that this proposed segregation will promote the public peace by preventing race conflicts. Desirable as this is, and important as is the preservation of the 
public peace, this aim cannot be accomplished by laws or ordinances which deny rights 
created or protected by the Federal Constitution. 
It is said that such acquisitions by colored persons depreciate property owned in 
the neighborhood by white persons. But property may be acquired by undesirable white 
neighbors or put to disagreeable though lawful uses with like results. 
We think this attempt to prevent the alienation of the property in question to a 
person of color was not a legitimate exercise of the police power of the State, and is in 
direct violation of the fundamental law enacted in the Fourteenth Amendment of the 
Constitution preventing state interference with property rights except by due process 
of law. That being the case the ordinance cannot stand. Booth v. Illinois, 184 U. S. 
425, 429; Otis v. Parker, 187 U. S. 606, 609. 
Reaching this conclusion it follows that the judgment of the Kentucky Court of 
Appeals must be reversed, and the cause remanded to that court for further proceedings 
not inconsistent with this opinion. 
Reversed. Men of the Month 
TO THE RESCUE 
THE War Council of the Young Women's 
Christian Association has pledged itself to raise four million dollars for work 
among women in relation to war conditions. Two hundred thousand dollars is 
being used in Negro communities affected 
by the war. This work is under the direction of Miss Eva D. Bowles, secretary for 
colored work in cities. Miss Bowles was 
educated in the public schools of Columbus, 
Ohio, and taught in Lexington, Ky., Lawrenceville, Va., Raleigh and Beaufort, N. C. 
She has been a district visitor for the Associated Charities in Columbus and volunteer worker for the Charity Organization 
Society in New York. She is a member 
of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the National 
Convention of Charities and Correction, and 
the National Federation of Women's Clubs. 
Miss Bowles became interested in the 
society in which she now holds so important a position seven years ago, through 
being secretary of the Colored Branch in 
New York City. During these years of 
work she has developed plans for the 
proper supervision of work and recreation. 
The plans which she is putting' in effect 
have, of course, been affected by the war 
crisis, but they are essentially the same 
ones that she has slowly matured through 
years of dealing with the handicaps of the 
race. 
A MISSIONARY 
THE Rev. G. M. P. King, D.D., Professor 
at Virginia Union University, died 
October 8 at Christiansburg, Va. 
With the passing of Dr. King, the colored 
people have lost a tried and true friend. 
From the pastorate of a northern church, 
Dr. King, at the outbreak of the Civil War, 
entered the service of the United States 
Christian Commission, whose work during 
the Civil War corresponded very closely to 
the present war work of the Y. M. C. A. At 
the close of the war, feeling the need of 
the colored people, he gave himself to work 
among them, serving under the auspices of 
the American Baptist Home Mission Society from then until the time of his death. 
For many years he was president of Wayland Seminary at Washington, D. C, and 
when that school united with Richmond 
Theological Seminary to form Virginia 
Union University he moved to Richmond 
and has served there continuously. 
AN INVESTIGATOR OF CRIME 
CLEVELAND BUCHANAN was born in 
Shelbyville, Tenn., June 9, 1899, and 
was educated there and at Tuskegee. Subsequent to that time he was manager of a 
stock farm in Virginia and director of the 
agricultural department at Normal, Ala. 
In 1914 he went to Los Angeles, Cal., and 
gave his spare moments to the study of 
criminal investigations. On May 9, 1916, 
he was appointed by the District Attorney 
as Criminal Investigator and March 1, 1917, 
was reappointed for four years. The position is one of the most responsible ever 
held by a Negro in the State of California. 
A YOUNG PHYSICIAN 
TRAVIS JAMES JOHNSON was born 
in Chichester, England, July 30, 1883, 
and died in New York City, July 12, 1917, 
at the age of thirty-four years. He was 
the son of the late Dr. Johnson and was 
brought to America in infancy. He was 
educated in the public schools, graduating 
from DeWitt Clinton High School and the 
College of the City of New York and receiving his degree of M.D. from the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons at the age of 
twenty-four years. He left at his sudden 
and painful death a widow and one infant 
son. He was a man of unusual ability and 
made a striking record during his course in 
medicine. If he could have devoted himself to research, as his teachers advised 
him, he might have made a great name in 
the medical world. 
DABNEY 
WENDELL PHILLIPS DABNEY was 
born in Richmond, Va., November 
4, 1865. He was educated in the public 
schools and at Oberlin College. For a few 
years he taught school; then he turned his 
attention to music, teaching in leading 
families of Richmond and 'Cincinnati. He 
is a master of the guitar and has published 
several pamphlets on musical methods. Today he is editor of The Union and Assistant Paymaster of the City of Cincinnati, a 
responsible position and an unusual one for 
one of his race. 
All of this, however, says little about 
the real man. He is genuine, unafraid, 
and strikingly original. 
74 TH E LAT E DR . G. M. P. KIN G CLEVELAN D BUCHANA N 
MISS EV A D. BOWLE S 
W . P. DABNE Y TH E LAT E DR. T. J. JOHNSON 
75 TH E NEGRO AN D TH E WA R DEPARTMEN T 
By EMMETT JAY SCOTT, Special Assistant to the Secretary of War 
THE CRISIS asked Mr. Scott for the following statement. Mr. Scott was born in 
Houston, Tex., February 13, 1873, and educated at Wiley University. He began life as 
a newspaper man and became secretary to the late Booker T. Washington in 1897. He 
is secretary of the National Negro Business League and was a member of the American 
Commission to Liberia. He is joint author with Lyman Beecher Stowe of a biography 
of Mr. Washington. Mr. Scott still retains his position as secretary of Tuskegee Institute. 
THE Secretary of War recognizes that 
in the unqualified support of this 
group of Americans, "whom I have the honor 
to represent, he, in Our Country's Defense, 
has behind him an asset of appreciable value 
in the prosecution of 
the present war. On 
the other hand, he is 
equally desirous that 
we, as American citizens, shall have full 
and free opportunity to participate, as 
officers, as soldiers, 
and as loyal, selfsacrificing citizens, 
in this, the greatest 
conflict of all the 
ages, and that now 
and hereafter we 
shall receive the rewards which justly 
follow upon services 
well rendered. 
The reason which 
actuated the Secretary of War in this 
matter is, perhaps, 
most clearly stated 
by the Mobile NewsItem, a southern 
white newspaper, in 
an editorial which 
appeared in its issue 
of October 5, 1917, under the caption: "The 
Negro Recognized." With due apology for 
citing this article, because of the personal 
reference therein made, I venture to quote 
the following extract: 
"The appointment is a wise move and a 
wise selection. While the Government is coordinating all the interests of the country 
in the movement to win the war with Germany, it should not overlook the colored 
people. Thousands of them have been drafted and are being trained for duty in the 
trenches. They are to wear their country's 
uniform and represent their country in the 
greatest conflict of all times. Millions will 
stay at home tilling the fields and working 
in the country's industries. They have 
their problems no less than others, and it is 
well that one who knows them so intimately 
is to advise the Government how to meet 
those problems." 
All who are conversant with the 
history of our race 
in this country 
know that there are 
and likely will be 
problems arising out 
of the presence of 
white and colored 
soldiers in National 
Army cantonments 
an d in National 
Guard camps, aside 
from many other 
delicate matter s 
which have, and will, 
come up during the 
progress of the war, 
involving relationships between the 
races. It is highly 
desirable that all 
these matters shall 
be equitably adjusted with the minimum of friction in 
order to produce 
th e maximum of 
efficiency, to the end 
that all groups of Americans may work 
together in harmony and present a solid 
front to a dangerous and united foreign foe. 
I am not unmindful of the fact that the 
Secretary of War has not sought to honor 
an individual but to recognize the just 
claims of a race. Therefore, acting in this 
representative capacity, it is highly essential and earnestly desired that I have behind me the loyal support of the thoughtful 
men and women of our race, and I shall 
value and appreciate at all times their counsel and suggestions. 
EMMET T JA Y SCOTT 
76 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
CHAPLAIN T. G. STEWARD writes in 
The New Republic: 
Many years ago, at a religious meeting 
in the woods in Georgia which I was carrying on, a tall black woman broke out with 
this song which seemed to have been born 
on the occasion: 
Dark clouds a-risin'! 
Thunder-bolts a-bustin'! 
Master Jesus comes a-ridin' by 
With a rainbow on his shoulder. 
We take great pleasure in announcing 
three books of poetry from colored poets, 
who belong peculiarly to THE CRISIS: The 
Cornhill Company, Boston, announces 
"Fifty Years and Other Poems" by James 
Weldon Johnson, with an introduction by 
Brander Matthews. There will be a limited edition of 110 copies on Japan vellum 
at five dollars per copy, and a popular edition at $1.25. The same company will, also, 
issue a book of poems by Mrs. Georgia 
Douglass Johnson. Mr. Roscoe C. Jamison 
will shortly issue a book of poems. 
Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, who supervises 
the Music and Art notes for THE CRISIS, 
will issue her second book, "The Message 
of the Trees," in December. The publishers are The Cornhill Company, Boston. The 
price is two dollars. Mrs. Hare has had 
two articles recently in The Musical Observer. 
G. Schirmer, Inc., announce the first 
volume of a Book of Negro Songs by 
Natalie Curtis. Mrs. Curtis-Burmarr has 
been studying these songs under the auspices of Hampton Institute. 
An interesting article on "The Superiority of the Mulatto" is in the July issue of 
The American Journal of Sociology. The 
author, E. B. Reuter, has his figures wrong; 
he assumes, for instance, that there are 
only four full-blooded Negroes on THE 
CRISIS list of 139 distinguished colored men. 
As a matter of fact, there are fifteen. He 
asserts, however, that: 
The possession of inferior civilization in 
itself proves nothing in regard to the race's 
capacity for cultural advancement. The 
fact must be taken in connection with the 
opportunity which the race has had for the 
acquisition of civilization. Achievement 
alone is not a test. Culture is a social 
product, not a biological fact. Its absence 
from a race no more proves that the ability 
to acquire the culture is missing from the 
race than the absence of higher education 
in the individual proves his mental incapacity to receive such training. 
Of course, his original assumption of a 
"pure" Negro race is as nonsensical as that 
of a "pure" white race would be. 
We have received two pamphlets from oppressed peoples which we recommend to all 
our readers: Lajpat Rai, an East Indian, 
has published "An Open Letter" to Lloyd 
George (Huebsch, New York, twenty-five 
cents) in which he says: 
No Indian can speak the WHOLE 
TRUTH while in India. The criminal laws 
of your Government—your Penal and Criminal Codes, Seditious Meetings and Conspiracy Acts, and Press Laws, your tribunals presided over by your own people unaided by jurors—effectively gag his mouth. 
Mrs. Hannah Sheehy Skeffington has published "Democracy in Ireland Since 1913," 
in which she says: 
And when peace comes, Ireland, with the 
other small nations, will stand at the doors 
of The Hague conference, and will claim 
her rights from the community of nations. 
Shall peace bring freedom to Belgium and 
Poland, perhaps to Finland and Bohemia, 
and not to Ireland? Must Irish freedom 
be gained in blood, or will the comity of 
nations, led by the United States, shame 
a weakened England into putting into practice at home the principles which are so 
loudly trumpeted for the benefit of Germany? 
We have received the following pamphlets: "The Chelonia," a scientific study of 
turtles, etc., by Dr. H. M. Leon, published 
by La Societe Internationale De Philologie, 
etc.; a "Discours, prononce par M. William 
H. Hunt," our colored consul to St. Etienne 
in France and published by the University 
of France; J. H. Robinson has issued an 
Arizona Cook Book at one dollar, which is 
full of recipes. 
THE TURNING OF THE TIDE 
THERE can scarcely be a doubt that 
after fifty-four years of oppression, 
which at times became almost unbearable, 
the tide against the Negro in the United 
States has been turned, and that from now 
on we may expect to see the walls of prejudice gradually crumble before the onslaught 
of common sense and racial progress. Anyone who doubts this should read the comments of southern white papers on the 
draft. They are so extraordinary and from 
papers of so many shades of opinion that 
77 78 THE CRISIS 
we append a number without comment: 
It is the marvel of the South, as it ought 
to be the admiration of the whole United 
States, that when the colored man in the 
hard stages of the war, through which we 
are beginning to pass, is being put to the 
test, he is measuring up to the full valuation of a citizen and a patriot. There has 
been nothing wanting about him. In every 
activity to which the mind of the country 
has been directed since it was committed 
by its great President to war, the Negro 
has fulfilled his obligation. There has not 
only been a total absence of resistance, but 
there has been, rather, a hearty response to 
every appeal of the government, a thorough fitting-in with every enterprise that 
had of necessity to be founded, first of all, 
upon a spirit of patriotism. These multiplied diversities need not be enumerated. 
What the colored man has done is made 
all the more glittering by what he has refused to do. His efforts and activities speak 
in terms of eloquence that become the despair of those who seek to portray them.— 
Charlotte, N. C, News. 
The Negroes have met the first test admirably. Both the drafted men and the 
Negro leaders of South Carolina have 
earned the commendation of them which is 
being freely voiced by white citizens everywhere. The leaders have realized, as it was 
hoped they would, that in a way their race 
is on trial. Evidently, they are determined 
that it shall acquit itself well.— Charleston, 
S. C, News and Courier. 
It is not necessary to go further than 
Latin America to look for examples of capable Negro officers. There is no doubt 
about the courage of American Negroes as 
soldiers. There will be no doubt about the 
capacity of the Negro candidates who have 
won commissions in the Officers' Reserve 
Camp at Des Moines. Officered by men of 
their own race, the Negroes will experience 
an increase of pride. They will exhibit a 
spirit of rivalry and increased ambition to 
make a creditable showing in battle.— 
Louisville, Ky., Courier-Journal. 
This is a great experiment that the government has been making, and up to now 
there has been no cause for regret. Let us 
all, white and black, keep it that way.— 
Columbia, S. C, Record. 
And if these things are taken into full 
consideration, and the proper spirit of tolerance and the proper decorum is manifested by both whites and Negroes, each 
race deporting itself according to the principles of reason, justice and moderation, 
Camp Gordon will turn out a complement 
of as fine colored troops as ever stood in 
uniform, and of which the South and the 
entire nation will be proud.— Atlanta, Ga., 
Constitution. 
It is the rank, not the individual, who is 
saluted. The military regulations are plain 
on this point, and we of the South, however 
hard it comes to us, must see to it that our 
spirit is that of America and the National 
Army in every particular. The Negroes are 
soldiers like the white men, ready to face 
the same conditions and perils and ready 
to pour out their blood as freely as if they 
were white. If General John B. Castleman, 
as he says, can cheerfully salute a Negro 
soldier, then any son of a Confederate can 
do the same.— Louisville, Ky., Times. 
The Negro in the South is more fortunate than his brother in the North; but the 
problem of participation in the affairs of 
government is not settled satisfactorily to 
them. They are paying our debt, the 
world's debt, with their blood. They are 
equal in military service, and the day is 
coming when they will work themselves 
into a position to demand and receive equal 
suffrage. When they do, the Negro problem will then have been settled. Those 
who go to war willingly have done much 
to win the first mile-stone in that journey. 
—Thomasville, Ga., Times-Enterprise. 
Note, if you please, the astonishing turn 
given the argument by this last paper. The 
Greensboro, N. C, Daily News mentions 
this same matter: 
The Negro is taxed. Now he has been 
called upon to fight for his country. In the 
future, will it be possible under the unwritten law, or such laws as the Grandfather Clause, to impose upon the Negro 
the duties and responsibilities of citizenship, and deny to him the privileges of citizenship? If he is told that he must come 
forward in the performance of a common 
duty, will it be possible to tell him in the 
future that whereas he must register for 
a possible casualty list, he cannot register 
for the voting list? 
The Vicksburg, Miss., Herald adds this 
noteworthy, even if negative, testimony: 
The Herald looks with no favor upon 
drafting southern Negroes at all, believing 
they should be exempt in toto because they 
do not equally "share in the benefits of government." To say they do is to take issue 
with the palpable truth. "Taxation without representation," the war cry of the Revolutionary War against Great Britain, was 
not half so plain a wrong as requiring military service from a class that is denied 
suffrage, and which lives under such discriminations of inferiority as the "Jim 
Crow" law and inferior school equipments 
and service. We hope we are not mistaken 
in the faith that under reflection upon these 
facts, there will be "an overwhelming sentiment" opposed to the Bilbo-Noel politically 
inspired plan—as we see it—for a military 
draft race equality. 
In its logic, drafting Negroes as soldiers 
is a gross travesty and contradiction of the 
color line creed. Negro volunteers, for fitting assignment in service, might consistently be encouraged, but not conscription. 
And we look upon the fact that there have THE LOOKING GLASS 79 
been no protests against conscription on the 
ground we state as most creditable to the 
Negroes. When the war closed, all the 
Northern States had their suffrage restricted to whites, and a main argument in 
getting the votes of northern congressmen 
for the Fifteenth Amendment was that 
some hundreds of thousands of Negroes had 
served in the northern armies. 
After the war, the race problem will still 
abide. In justice, how could Mississippi 
hold to her 1890 settlement of the suffrage 
question, if her white citizens favored conscription of her black people for war? That 
the logic of arms bearing is as we state, is 
testified to by the following from the Laurel Leader: "One of the measures which 
Governor Bilbo will place before the special session of the Mississippi legislature, 
soon to be convened, will be an amendment 
to the State's election laws extending the 
ballot to the soldiers and sailors who have 
been called to the colors. The amendment 
should be enacted without a dissenting vote. 
If there is any man on earth who is entitled 
to a voice in the affairs of his country, it is 
the man who is willing to fight his country's battles." 
In the face of this new note, we can afford to forget the tactless talk of Brigadier-General Chamberlain at Fort Des 
Moines. A report, which comes to us, 
quotes him as saying: 
Negro soldiers must do their duty and 
not worry their brains about laws and customs, no matter how unjust they may seem. 
The General was not silent on the government's unwillingness to speak in behalf of 
democracy at home. On the contrary, he 
was strangely loud. There was no dodging 
of the question we have asked often and in 
vain: "What is the government going to 
do?" The government, the General assured 
us, has no time to bother with race troubles. 
It has no time to bother with such things, 
nor has it any intentions of attempting to 
remedy existing racial grievances. The 
country is engaged in a great war. The 
best thing to do is to bear and forget. 
A fitting climax to this is Vardaman's 
annual yawp in the Vicksburg, Miss., 
Evening Post: 
If all the Negro soldiers that have been 
conscripted could be sent to France and 
kept there, it would be a God-send to America. But they will not be kept there. After 
the war, they will come home with their untutored minds inflated with military airs 
and impressed with the fact that since they 
had offered their lives in the defense of the 
Nation's flag, it will be but a short step 
to the conclusion that it is a freeman's duty 
to give his life in defense of his political 
rights. Let him become obsessed with the 
idea of his importance, and unrestrained by 
military discipline and regulations, it is my 
judgment that the Houston, Texas, incident 
will be a trivial affair compared with the 
magnitude of the problems which the white 
men of the South will be called upon to 
solve. 
Not only is the South beginning to think 
straight on the military aspect of this problem, but other matters are coming to the 
fore. 
The Arkansas Gazette, Little Rock, says: 
When five leaders of the Negro race in 
Arkansas stepped forward on the stage of 
the Palace Theater and, through Scipio A. 
Jones, handed to Secretary of the Treasury 
McAdoo a check for $50,000 as the Liberty 
loan subscription of the Mosaic Templars of 
America, whose headquarters are in Little 
Rock, they took part in an incident that will 
attract attention over all the United States. 
Not only did they make a $50,000 subscription, but they told Secretary McAdoo: "If 
you need $100,000 more, you will get it." 
The Muskogee, Okla., Times-Democrat 
writes: 
The Negroes attending the National Baptist Convention and the Negro fair in Muskogee are an intelligent body of men and 
women. They are more keenly alive to 
current events than any convention that 
ever assembled in Muskogee, if the number 
reading newspapers is an index. Since 
these meetings have been in progress in 
Muskogee the street sales of the TimesDemocrat have more than doubled. Yesterday the sales were 1,300 above normal. 
There was no particular, overshadowing 
news story that would cause an increased 
sale. It was simply the Negroes buying 
papers in order to keep posted on current 
events. 
A time ago, there was a convention in 
Muskogee at which there was a registered 
attendance of 2,200 school teachers. While 
that convention was in progress, the street 
sales of the newspapers did not increase 
200 a day. 
There have been big conventions in Muskogee— political, industrial, commercial, and 
educational—but never has there been a 
convention during which those in attendance 
bought so many papers as the Negroes have 
bought during the past few days. 
The editor of The Southern Woman's 
Magazine writes: 
We have dealt fairly and squarely with 
the individual Negro only. We have been 
remiss in both philanthropy and business, 
when it comes to his people as a whole. We 
have not made it worth their while to stay 
with us. We are being vigorously reminded 
that they should be better taught, better 
housed, better fed, better paid. 
The Macon, Ga., Daily Telegraph says: 
A white man who cannot retain his own 
sense of Caucasian dignity and difference, 
when his eye falls on an African riding in 80 THE CRISIS 
an automobile, doesn't deserve, nor can he 
appreciate and uphold the superior traits 
and plane of the white man. He hasn't 
enough gray matter inside his peanut head, 
nor enough native sense in his natural instincts to be worthy of that which elevates 
his own race, and the representative element of his own race dare not tolerate his 
giving forth to any form of Caucasian expression or Caucasian activity in matters 
pertaining to race relation. 
Dr. W. C. Scroggs of the Louisiana State 
University says in a pamphlet on mob violence : 
Not only is lynching NO PREVENTIVE 
OF CRIMES AGAINST WOMEN, but statistics prove that ONLY ONE TIME IN 
FOUR ARE SUCH CRIMES THE CAUSE 
OF LYNCHING. In 1915, only sixteen per 
cent of the persons lynched were charged 
with crimes against womanhood. 
The "University Commission on Southern 
Race Questions" has sent out its annual 
"Open Letter" to the South, much firmer 
of tone and less apologetic than usual: 
The South cannot compete on a financial 
basis with other sections of the country for 
the labor of the Negro, but the South can 
easily keep her Negroes against all allurements, if she will give them a larger measure of those things that human beings hold 
dearer than material goods. Generosity begets gratitude, and gratitude grips and 
holds men more powerfully than hooks of 
steel. It is axiomatic that fair dealing, 
sympathy, patience, tolerance, and other 
human virtues benefit those who exercise 
them even more than the beneficiaries of 
them. It pays to be just and kind, both 
spiritually and materially. Surely the 
South has nothing to lose and much to gain 
by adopting an attitude like that indicated 
above. 
Northern papers have been especially 
fine in their comments on the Negro soldier: 
Let the Negro soldier and selective alone 
and he will come through, as he always has 
come through, a staunch and brave defender of the flag. — Times-Star, Cincinnati, 
Ohio. 
Men of their race are treated as equals 
in the armies of Great Britain and France, 
as they deserve to be. To countenance anything less than this in the Army of the 
United States, would be to surrender not 
only discipline but Americanism. — The 
World, New York. 
In some sections, when calls were made 
for volunteers, five times the number asked 
crowded the enlistment places. These facts 
form a chapter in the history of the American Negro worthy of being preserved for 
reference when his social and industrial 
status is discussed as a national problem. 
—Christian Science Monitor, Boston, Mass. 
They came to the call not of the country 
but of their country. If the war lasts, 
America will owe to her Negroes not what 
she owed in '63, reparation, but a debt for 
service, which she will not forget nor seek 
to evade.— Herald, Chicago, Ill. 
It is an unquestioned fact that the American Negro has suffered many wrongs, since 
he gained his freedom—and the North is 
responsible for some of them—but the best 
way for the race to achieve that respect 
which is its due is by fighting the good 
fight with courage and valor. No race 
which helps to wind the world for safety, 
as against German aggression, is going to 
be deprived of its just rights.— The Bulletin, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
The Negroes of this country who go to 
France to fight, or who replace workingmen who go as soldiers, will demand, and 
justly so, full American rights. The 
United States cannot stand before the 
world as the champion of freedom and 
democracy and continue to burn men alive 
or lynch them without fair trial. The National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People calls upon this country to 
"clear her conscience before she can fight 
for the world's good," by abolishing lynching and ceasing all oppression of Negroes. 
—Leslie's Weekly, New York City. 
The commissioning of 684 colored aspirants for officers' positions, all of them graduates of the "colored Plattsburgh" at Fort 
Des Moines, is at once the wisest and most 
just action towards the colored people the 
Wilson administration has taken since it 
first assumed office. — Evening Post, New 
York City. 
There are many motives back of these 
abstracts and we are not expecting the millennium tomorrow, but certainly it has been 
brought measurably nearer in the last few 
weeks. 
NEGRO ART 
MORE and more attention is being paid 
to the development of Negro art. 
Hiram K. Moderwell writes in the New Republic: 
The Negro has, in short, reproduced on 
our continent the whole creative process 
which brought forth the Russian, German 
and English folk-music. This communal 
process, in which the group absorbs and 
welds the spontaneous individual contributions, parallels that of conscious composition, but with two points of difference—that 
the creative contributions come from many 
individuals instead of from one, and that the 
process of criticism and selection is instinctive instead of deliberate. It is true that 
the Negro found his musical materials 
(scales, cadences, melodic formulae and the 
like) supplied to him ready made in the 
missionaries' hymn tunes. But this civilized 
music did not satisfy, much less absorb, his 
musical creativeness. It merely permitted THE LOOKING GLASS 81 
him to begin at a stage several centuries 
beyond the primitive genesis of music. 
From the hymn tunes he took the major 
scale and the elements of musical structure. 
But his instinct, his native African impulse, 
remained naive and creative. He learned 
no melody which he did not alter and few 
which he did not improve. In that most 
communal of all rituals, the "shout," the 
gospel melodies were torn to bits by the 
Negro religious emotionalism, and from it 
they emerged—not all, but many—re-created 
in rhythm, scale and feeling. The droning 
hymn-tunes had become rhythmic and vigorous. Their pale sentimentalism had become transformed in the mould of primitive scales and vitalized in the honest sensualism of the dance. Their Italianate 
melodies had been made to conform to the 
rhythmic genius of the English language, 
with a fidelity that has not often been 
matched in the history of English composition. 
Rosalie M. Jonas, writing in the Art 
World on "Slighted Material," says: 
They say in the South: to know the Negro you must have been "raised" with him. 
This is not true of the unprogressive exmaster and the slowly progressing ex-slave. 
For, as the freedman seeks to raise himself 
to the common level of American citizenship, 
the barrier of race prejudice is built more 
and more jealously between them. But Nature is a keen humorist, and in that South 
where conditions are practically unchanged, 
through the subtle influences of climate or 
companionship or what not, she has molded 
her tanned and black children of both races 
into a kinship closer than most of them realize or some of them would acknowledge. 
In this sense, to know the Negro you 
must have been "raised" with him, lived 
beside him through the receptive days of 
childhood, under the same fervid sun, in the 
same colorful southern atmosphere. One 
might go even further and say: to know 
the South you must have been "raised" with 
the Negro. For while the little white child 
sits listening dumbly to its countless songbirds, insensitive to the appeal of his garrulous little "brothers" of the field and forest, the little "nigger" at his side mimics 
the mocking bird, translates for him the 
language of the coon, the 'possum, the fox, 
the horse, the cow, the chickens with a sense 
of simple human fellowship and a sympathetic humor which even La Fontaine and 
later Rostand, Kipling and our own gentle 
Joel Chandler Harris give us but artificially 
by comparison. For none of these have 
gone—perhaps none of our "superior" race 
can ever go—as simply, as directly, so with 
"the heart of a little child" to Nature. And 
of all the aliens grafted on the South from 
France, Spain and Ireland, everywhere, the 
Negro is the one exotic whose roots, so 
fiercely wrenched from their native soil, 
have taken firmest hold. 
Enslaved by man, the Southern land 
adopted him with tenderness and warmth. 
And he grew so close to her that he became 
her spokesman, her interpreter. And those 
of us on whom she looked more coldly, for 
our sins, have had to get our inspiration 
through her "colored" medium, to whom we 
turned instinctively—but in our own crass 
ignorance, despised. We only saw his 
"funny" side—God help us! Or at most 
patted him on the head and told sentimental 
tales of his affection and fidelity and our 
tolerant appreciation of these qualities, that 
were well within the limits of our own narrow prejudices. With smut upon our vacant 
faces, vulgar horse-play and tuneless "coonsongs" we have made pretense to represent 
the Minstrel of the South—the only real 
Minstrel this noise-deafened country has 
ever known! And because we had neither 
humanity enough to give him fair play for 
the full development of his native genius, 
nor culture enough to see him as the most 
inspiring artistic "material" that ever 
spendthrift dullards have wasted—Art herself, now, to shame us, is holding out her 
hand to him and thrusting us aside. 
From over-seas and in the words of one 
of the world's great writers came the intelligent recognition of that exquisite prosepoem, "The Souls of Black Folk," by W. E. 
B. Du Bois. . . . "It is the greatest 
piece of literature—perhaps the only piece 
of literature published in this generation, in 
America," was the verdict. And now another well-known genius—a woman this 
time and herself an inspired Minstrel, coming to us recently from France, saw at 
once the Negro's artistic value and in politely concealed amazement exclaimed at 
our blindness: "But all you have to give the 
world in Art that is new—that is American 
—it is your Nigair!" 
One may imagine the howl of pained 
egotism and derision that would greet such 
words here. "What! The Nigger artistic!" cries the outraged Southerner. "I 
don't know what you mean. He's nuthin' 
but a joke." And so, even with all treasure 
George Cable has dug up for us and a few 
others have sighted, the greater part of the 
picturesque and dramatic "material" of that 
"old South" that awaits revival by the new 
spirit of intellectual democracy lies still unseen around us. 
"The Negro poetic?" we can hear some 
of our brave Free-Versifiers exclaim scornfully, "why, he's rhythmical, tuneful—Impossible!" And then, if the devil move 
them, they will rush off and "do him up" 
in brutal discords that show artlessly the 
artless savage in themselves. "The Coon 
dramatic?" will howl the Movie audience, 
with a hearty bray. And the lady from 
Hackensack who sings "The End of a Perfect Day" so touchingly cannot be convinced 
that (musically) he could ever reach that 
height. As for the box-holder at the Metropolitan, he can't see him at all, for the crash 
and confusion of the "new" music. . . . 
and of such is the kingdom of Art in 
America! Shadows of Light 
ID A GWATHME Y ANDERSO N 
A Leading Actress in the Recent Movement Toward Establishing a Negro Dramati c Center 
in New York City. Mrs. Anderson Wa s Born in Virginia, and Ha s Played the Leading Role s 
in "Within the Law, " "Under Cover," "Trilby," "Kick-In," "The Lion and the Mouse," et c 
82 A GIFT TO TH E NATION : WILLIA M B. GOULD OF DEDHAM , MASS. , A VETERA N OF TH E CIVI L WAR , AN D HI S SI X SONS, INCLUD -
IN G THRE E FIRST LIEUTENANTS , ONE MAJO R IN TH E RESERVE , AN D TW O PRIVATE S 
83 84 
MAR Y AN D MARTH A 
"And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: 
"But one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her." The Horizon 
MUSIC AND ART 
SO popular has Mr. H. T. Burleigh's arrangement of the Negro Folk-song, 
"Deep River," become that a number of 
transcriptions have been written from his 
setting. One for string quartet, played by 
the Zoellner quartet this season, has been 
made by A. Walter Kramer, while another, 
for organ, has been ably done by the gifted 
concert organist, Richard Keys Biggs. The 
last transcription of the "Spiritual" is by 
the noted violinist, Mischa Elman, who will 
play it on all of his concert programs this 
season. 
Mr. Burleigh's place as one of the foremost composers of art-song in the music 
world of today is secure. He continues, 
however, to add to his long list of fine songs 
that are so rapidly featured upon the programs of famous singers. 
At the same time, his folk-song settings 
are an achievement that is of great historic as well as musical value. Ten of the 
finer "Spirituals" have been lately published by Ricordi and Company. Musical 
America says: "They are one and all little 
masterpieces, settings by one of our time's 
most gifted song-composers of melodies 
which he penetrates as probably no other 
living composer. We can only say 'Bravo,' 
again, Mr. Burleigh." 
Mr. Henry Hadley's Symphony No. 4, 
"North, South, East, and West," was heard 
for the first time in New York when played 
by the Philharmonic Society on October 26. 
The second movement, The South, is full 
of Negro character. 
A Negro dialect song, "Plantation Love 
Song," by Deems Taylor, is inscribed to 
and sung by Marguerite Dunlap, who 
makes a specialty of dialect songs. 
Mr. H. A. Delmore, tenor, who is studying voice in Boston, Mass., gave a concert 
in Steinert Hall on October 25. Mr. Delmore possesses a voice of excellent quality 
and with study he will go far. He also 
possesses the creative gift and has a number of manuscript songs to his credit. 
Mr. Charles Harris, who has been a 
student of piano in Boston, Mass., for a 
number of years, has accepted a position 
to teach at Walden University, Nashville, 
Tenn. 
Mrs. Harriet Gibbs Marshall, President 
of the Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression, has added two 
excellent musicians to the faculty this season: Miss Estelle Pinkney, who received the 
degree of Mus. B. last year from Oberlin 
College of Music, possesses a beautiful soprano voice, and was a successful singer in 
recitals at Oberlin; Miss Revella Hughes, 
who is to teach piano, graduated from Howard University last June. She was a former 
student of Oberlin Conservatory of Music 
and is an excellent musician. 
The Martin-Smith Music School, in New 
York City, of which Mr. D. I. Martin is 
director, is conducting a series of educational recitals. 
A striking exhibition of pictures by 
Negro artists, including some by children, 
has been held at the Coady Art Galleries 
in New York City under the recently organized American Circle of Negro War 
Relief. 
Critical music directors have claimed that 
the band of the Fifteenth Colored Infantry, 
N. Y. N. G., under Lieut. J. R. Europe, is 
the best army band in the United States. 
THE WAR 
THE Eighth Illinois Colored Infantry 
has been ordered to Camp Logan, 
Houston, Tex. 
Six hundred and seventy-eight colored 
men at the Seventeenth Provisional Officers 
Training Camp at Fort Des Moines, Iowa, 
received commissions as follows: 160 Captains, 320 First Lieutenants, and 198 Second 
Lieutenants. 
Two colored companies of militia, one in 
Jersey City and one in Atlantic City, N. J., 
have been formed through Governor Edge. 
Army orders authorize the immediate organization of twenty-four labor companies 
"by voluntary enrollment of conscripted 
colored men after their mobilization," or "by 
voluntary enlistment of Negroes." 
Colored drafted soldiers have been distributed in the cantonments as follows: To 
Camp Devens, 600; Camp Upton, 800; Camp 
Dix, 4,500; Camp Meade, 6,100; Camp Lee, 
6,300; Camp Jackson, 5,900; Camp Gordon, 
9,000; Camp Pike, 9,600; Camp Custer, 600; 
Camp Grant, 7,200; Camp Taylor, 3,000; 
Camp Dodge, 6,600; Camp Funston, 8,300; 
Camp Travis, 6,500; and Camp Lewis, 400, 
making a total of 83,600. 
85 86 THE CRISIS 
MEETINGS 
THE forty-seventh session of the Southwest Georgia Baptist Association was 
held at Americus Institute. The collection 
amounted to $3,123. 
The Old Eastern Baptist Association held 
its fifty-third annual session at Farmville, 
N. C. in October. There were sixty out of 
sixty-seven churches represented and fourteen hundred dollars was raised for education. 
The Laymen's Missionary Movement of 
the United States and Canada convened 
in Charlotte, N. C, November 4-7 at the 
City Auditorium. 
The Improved Order of Shepherds and 
Daughters of Bethlehem met in Fredericksburg, Va., and reported an increase of 1,265 
members for the year. Mr. J. Thomas 
Hewin, of Richmond, was elected Grand 
Presiding Shepherd. 
A State Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs has been organized in Spokane, 
Wash., with Mrs. John Mapps, of Spokane, 
as president. 
The Tri-State Farmers' Association—Arkansas, Mississippi, and Texas—has held its 
first meeting at Memphis, Tenn. Colonel 
R. C. Simmons was the speaker. A parade 
of one hundred automobiles preceded the 
session. 
The Virginia Conference of the A. M. E. 
Church has held its Fifth Educational Congress. Bishop J. A. Johnson presided. The 
membership of this branch is 12,612. 
The Woman's Convention Auxiliary to 
the National Baptist Convention has met 
at Muskogee, Okla.. and reported the raising of $23,956 during the year. 
RIOTS 
TH E examination of 156 Negro soldiers 
of the Twenty-fourth Infantry for 
rioting in Houston, Tex., has been completed 
and a review of the mass of testimony has 
been begun. Thirteen of the soldiers have 
been released to rejoin their regiment, as 
no evidence could be found against them. 
Governor Cox, in Ohio, has honored the 
requisition of the East St. Louis authorities 
and returned Dr. Leroy N. Bundy, a colored 
dentist, accused of instigating the rioting. 
EDUCATION 
IN Bibb and Macon Counties, Ga., 6,418 
white pupils enrolled in the public 
schools and 3,465 colored pupils, showing an 
increase in the white enrollment and a decrease in the colored enrollment. 
The report of schools in Greenville 
County, S. C, for last year shows that $78,-
436.71 was spent in salaries for white 
teachers and $6,198.05 for colored teachers. 
The average number of pupils to each of 
the schools was 122 white and 103 colored; 
the average number of pupils to each teacher was 40 white and 67 colored. There were 
347 white teachers and 90 Negro teachers. 
The reorganization of the State Board 
of Education in Maryland includes Mr. J. 
W. Huffington, supervisor, to study the 
needs and condition of the colored schools 
and advise with officials and teachers. 
The Central Negro High School in 
Shreveport, La., has been completed at a 
cost of $34,000. Three hundred students 
have been enrolled. 
Morgan College in Baltimore, Md., will 
celebrate its fiftieth anniversary November 
26-2S. An effort will be made to raise ten 
thousand dollars. 
Plans are being made for a girls' dormitory building at the School for Colored 
Youth, Bordentown, N. J., to cost twenty 
thousand dollars. 
At Meharry Medical College, Nashville, 
Tenn., 172 medical and 132 dental students 
have registered. The Department of 
Pharmacy has been opened and there is a 
nurse training section. 
Courses in typewriting and shorthand for 
the Booker T. Washington Colored High 
School in Norfolk, Va., have been approved 
by its school board. 
The training school for Negro teachers, 
provided by the State Legislature, will be 
located at the Bible and Manual Training 
Institute in Albany, Ga. This city offered 
equipment to the value of $65,000. 
The Board of Education in the District 
of Columbia has put the colored night 
schools under the charge of Dr. W. S. Montgomery, Director of Special Classes. 
Negroes in Elizabeth City, N. C, have 
been authorized to nominate members for 
a proposed colored auxiliary to the Board 
of Education. 
Howard University has added to its faculty: Messrs. F. J. Gregory, to conduct 
classes in argumentation and public speaking; L. D. Turner, Harvard A. M. '16, 
instructor in English; J. W. Jackson and 
E. C. Williams, assistants in German, and 
Miss A. L. McCary, instructor in the academy. The college has enrolled 309 students, 
fifty-four less than last year. THE HORIZON 87 
The Board of Education of Savannah, 
Ga., has authorized the establishment of the 
Ninth Grade at Cuyler Street School, which 
means the beginning of a junior high school 
for Negroes. 
On October 15, the enrollment for the 
present session of Tuskegee Institute was 
1,284 students, 647 boys and 537 girls. The 
endowment of the institution is $2,312,149, 
an increase of $286,758. 
The Colored Branch of the Public Library 
in Little Rock, Ark., since May 19, 1917, 
has circulated 2,108 volumes and had an 
attendance of 2,828 persons. It has a 
membership of 375. 
By a court decree, Avery College, established in 1849, goes out of existence, and the 
money will be divided between Avery Mission and Wilberforce University. The University will get about $27,000. 
INDUSTRY 
THE People's Savings Bank and Trust 
Company in Nashville, Tenn., reports 
resources of $80,855.49 and liabilities of 
$12,758.69. 
Negroes of Mississippi have organized a 
banking union at Houlka, to encourage 
larger production and conservation on 
Negro farms. To remain a member, each 
person must increase his bank balance every 
year. 
The Kimball Hotel in Springfield, Mass., 
because of a strike of its white employees, 
is now employing sixty colored men. 
It is stated that the Negro migration 
from the South has resulted in a fifteen 
per cent decrease in this year's crop of 
naval stores, turpentine, pitch, etc. 
Thirty-five colored girls have been employed as unskilled workers in the Federal 
Glass Company at South Columbus, Ohio. 
More than 150 cotton pickers from Texas 
have migrated to El Centro, Cal., where 
they are employed by the Timken Ranch 
Company. Efforts are being made for them 
to establish permanent residence. 
Cotton pickers in Louisiana, particularly 
in the Monroe section, are being paid $1.50 
per hundred pounds, nearly three times the 
usual rate. 
The Commercial Exchange has been incorporated in Washington, D. C, with offices 
at 1216 You street, Northwest. 
The State Federation of Labor in convention at Joliet, Ill., resolved to urge the 
organization of all Negro workers in the 
country. 
The Columbia Rope Works at Auburn, 
N. Y., employ forty colored women and 
thirty-five colored men. 
A haberdashery and clothing store is opcrating in Columbia, S. C. Mr. L. B. Woods 
is proprietor. 
One hundred Negro brakemen on the 
St. Louis, Brownsville and Mexico Railroad have gone on strike, demanding increased wages. They are not affiliated with 
any union. 
The United States Government is in 
need of competent stenographers and typists. Salaries range from one thousand to 
twelve hundred dollars per year. 
Colored women are replacing men in the 
Santa Fe Railroad roundhouse at Emporia, 
Kan., and receiving the same wages that 
the men received. 
The Iten Biscuit Company, Oklahoma 
City, Okla., is employing forty-two colored 
women. 
The Union Mutual Association in Mobile, 
Ala., during nineteen years has issued 641,-
268 policies and paid to policyholders and 
workers $1,900,000. Dr. C. F. Johnson is 
general manager and secretary. 
Two colored girls, the Misses Maude 
Black and Hattie Milleits, have been employed as elevator operators at the New 
Plaza Hotel, St. Louis, Mo. 
Twenty colored women are employed as 
railroad car washers in yards in West Philadelphia, Pa. 
Three white girls in the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Washington, D. C, 
who struck because of the employment of 
colored girls, have been suspended. 
In New York City, eighty-five firms are 
employing colored women, including dressmaking and millinery establishments and 
establishments making underwear, embroidery, corsets, buttons, feathers, flowers, dolls, 
and novelties. 
The National Baptist Publishing Board 
of the unincorporated convention reports 
total expenditures of $2,613,455 during the 
last twenty-one years. It has circulated 
in the last year 7,266,570 copies of its various publications. 
One hundred and fifty colored women 
constitute the regular night shift of car 
washers and renovators for the Yellow 
Taxi-cab Company in Chicago, Ill. 
The Atlanta Colored Savings Bank has 
increased its deposits from $74,000 in 1913 
to $104,000 in 1916. 88 THE CRISIS 
Mr. F. A. Stokes, a colored real estate 
man in Spokane, Wash., has arranged with 
leading capitalists of the United States for 
fifty thousand dollars cash for the opening 
up of farms and homesteads for Negroes. 
Each family will be provided with fifty 
acres of land and a home, live stock and 
farm implements. 
Five hundred colored union freight handlers in New Orleans, La., are on strike, 
making a total of twenty-six hundred strikers at this port. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
SILENT Protest Parades have been held 
by Negroes in Providence, R. I., and 
Newark, N. J. 
Mayor Mendenhall in Kansas City, Kan., 
has appointed three colored patrolmen. 
The Wilson Colored Hospital has been 
opened in Memphis, Tenn., with accommodation for seventy-five patients. Dr. J. T. 
Wilson is head of the institution. Over 
one hundred physicians attended the opening exercises. 
The New York City Woman Suffrage 
Party contributed ten thousand dollars for 
the Young Men's Christian Association unit 
of colored troops at Camp Upton, Yaphank. 
L. I. 
Major J. E. Lawther, of Dallas, Tex., 
has appointed a committee of ten colored 
men to represent the colored citizens on 
the Welfare Board. Dr. R. T. Hamilton is 
chairman. 
A committee of colored citizens in Chicago, Ill., enforced the Jackson law, by having withdrawn a poster advertising a play 
which read: ''Bartley Campbell, Dealer in 
Niggers and Mules." 
The Afro-American Page of the American Press Association, founded in 1909 by 
Mr. N. B. Dodson, a colored man, has been 
suspended, due to the sale of the news 
features of the American Press Association 
to the Western Newspaper Union. 
Because of the segregation ordinance in 
Baltimore, Md., the Colored Branch of the 
Young Men's Christian Association has had 
to abandon its site at McCulloh and Dolphin 
Streets. Property on Druid Hill Avenue 
has been secured and a four-story modern 
Y. M. C. A. building will be erected at a 
cost of $100,000. Mr. J. W. Hughes is 
President of the Board of Directors and Mr. 
S. S. Booker is General Secretary. The 
branch has a membership of over five hundred. 
In Company B, Twenty-fifth Infantry, 
there are thirty-two expert crack shots, 
thirty-seven sharpshooters, and twentyseven marksmen. 
The second celebration of Negro Literature Week will be held in Philadelphia, Pa., 
December 17. 
The Commonwealth Fellowship Club has 
been organized in St. Louis, Mo., for the 
eight hundred colored men employed by 
the Commonwealth Steel Company of Granite City. A building has been leased by the 
company as a recreation center. 
Houghton Mifflin Company, publishers, 
of Boston, Mass., have issued a school edition of "Up From Slavery," by the late 
Mr. B. T. Washington, and are making efforts to place this book in white and colored 
schools throughout the country. 
Negroes have won their case before the 
Louisiana Railroad Commission for better 
accommodations for Negro travelers. 
Miss Thelma Adams, a colored girl in 
Westmont, N. J., who was refused admittance to a public school, has since won her 
case of segregation. 
Twenty-six Negro Suffragists in New 
York City watched at the polls during registration week. 
A segregation order instituted at the Orpheum Theater in Helena, Mont., has been 
annulled. 
The Delaware State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs donated $132.28 to the 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Fund, instead of two dollars as was reported in THE 
CRISIS. 
The American Cast Iron Pipe Company 
of Birmingham, Ala., has installed for its 
colored and white employees moving picture 
shows, educational classes, and shower 
baths. During twelve months 166,477 
shower baths were taken by the colored 
workers. 
Lincoln Institute, Jefferson City, Mo., 
carried off first prizes at the Missouri State 
Fair in tailoring, wood turning, blacksmithing, and carpentry. Among their competitors were five white industrial schools. 
Large numbers of colored physicians and 
dentists are being received in the Medical 
Reserve Corps of the new draft army. They 
are usually commissioned as First or Second 
Lieutenants. 
The San Francisco Labor Council has endorsed a strong resolution on the disfranchisement of the Negro and lynching. THE HORIZON 89 
The two colored branches of the Louisville Free Public Library have sixteen thousand books in the library and reports that 
these were borrowed during the last year 
by sixty-four thousand people. Since the 
opening of these libraries, the circulation 
has been over 800,000. Nearly five hundred 
meetings have been held in the libraries 
during that time. 
Agents have visited 1,481 white and 629 
colored families in the District of Coumbia. 
They found that thirty-eight per cent had 
incomes of less than nine hundred dollars 
per year and sixty-one per cent less than 
twelve hundred dollars. 
Some two thousand colored people have 
been added to the one thousand already in 
Hartford, Conn. They are finding plenty 
of work but poor housing. Efforts are being 
made to improve their living condition. 
Miss Jane A. Delano, Chairman of the 
National Committee on Red Cross Nursing 
Service, writes us that the Red Cross is 
ready to enroll colored nurses whenever the 
opportunity arises to organize a Base Hospital Unit. They will be assigned to duty 
the same as the other nurses. Colored 
nurses are invited to enroll. 
The assessed value of property owned 
by the Negroes of Georgia has increased 
from $5,764,293 in 1880 to $12,322,003 in 
1890; $14,118,720 in 1900; $32,223,985 in 
1910; and $38,234,523 in 1916. 
At Heathsville, Va., colored workers have 
refused to work on the farms of men implicated in a lynching and have left the 
county in large numbers. 
In Chicago, Ill., South Park Avenue 
Methodist Episcopal Church, valued at 
$115,000, has been leased to the colored St. 
Luke's Methodist Episcopal Church. 
The Rev. Mr. C. S. Brown, of Winton, 
N. C, sends us an appeal for help for the 
religious work of the colored Baptists in 
Haiti. He wishes to build a great industrial school and help develop the resources 
of the island. 
PERSONAL 
MR. JOHN MARTIN, a colored man of 
Calixio, Cal., has patented a gun 
which can be fired by electricity some miles 
away. The War Department is testing it 
for its value in military use. 
Mr. Benjamin Willoughby, a colored 
farmer in Pitt County, N. C, who cannot 
write his name, is said to be worth ninety 
thousand dollars. He has raised twelve 
children and owns one thousand acres. 
Dr. S. M. Beckford, a recent graduate of 
Boston University, has been appointed Professor of Anatomy at Shaw University. 
The Rev. Mr. Anson Phelps Stokes, Secretary of Yale University, has declined the 
principalship of Hampton Institute, to succeed the late Dr. Frissell. 
Dr. F. C. Caffey has been appointed Inspector of Colored Schools in Montgomery, 
Ala. 
Mr. James Davis, hoseman in Company 
11, is the second colored man appointed to 
the Fire Department in Philadelphia, Pa. 
Wheeler W. Carter is the first colored 
boy to be a member of the Auburn, N. Y., 
High School Football Team. 
Mr. E. R. Smith-Green, a colored man 
employed at the Canadian Car and Foundry 
Company, Kingsland, N. J., has patented a 
"mechanism for cleaning shell fillers." 
Mr. A. C. Howard, a colored man in 
Brooklyn, N. Y., has been awarded a contract to furnish shoe polish to the United 
States Army. His exhibits won first prizes 
at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and at the 
Jamestown Exposition in 1907. 
Mr. Duncan Hill, a Negro citizen of 
Monroe, La., is dead. He once served as a 
member of the Louisiana State Legislature. 
Miss Lillian Garnet, of Philadelphia, Pa., 
and a student of McCall School, won over 
six white competitors in a piano contest 
and has been given charge of the assembly 
music for the school during the term. 
The School Board of Norfolk, Va., has 
appointed a colored man, Dr. S. C. Coppage, 
in charge of the Colored Dental Clinic. 
Miss Weeks and Mrs. Elizabeth Johnson, 
colored trained nurses, have also been appointed to the schools. 
Columbus Hunt, a member of the Twenty-fifth Infantry, who was dishonorably discharged twelve years ago by Theodore 
Roosevelt, in connection with the Brownsville affray, has been reinstated in his regiment and paid four thousand dollars, twelve 
years' back salary. There are twelve of his 
comrades missing for whom the same reward is waiting. 
Mr. L. L. Whaley, in Boston, Mass., has 
been appointed to the Quartermaster's Depot of the United States Army as stenographer-clerk. 
Chaplain G. W. Prioleau, of the Twentyfifth Infantry, was promoted to the grade 
of Major, August 9, 1917. 90 THE CRISIS 
Mr. E. S. Harvey, a Negro farmer in 
Kansas, is President of the Douglas County 
Farmers' Institute, of which almost the 
entire membership is white. 
Sergeant Ward Conley, the only Negro 
soldier among six thousand on the Canadian 
border, has been ordered to Camp Borden 
as military instructor. 
Dr. N. W. Harris, of Norfolk, Va., has 
been appointed by the Civil Service Commission as anesthetist at Freedmen's Hospital, Washington, D. C, at a salary of 
twelve hundred dollars. 
Mr. C. Z. Clark, in Indianapolis, Ind., has 
been appointed Page to the Superior Court. 
He is said to be the first colored man chosen 
for this position in Indiana. 
Alpheus Hunton, son of the late Mr. W. 
A. Hunton, won a medal for the best essay 
on the Liberty Bond over six hundred fellow students in the first year of the Brooklyn, N. Y., High School. 
Dr. W. B. Crittenden, Dean of Livingstone College, Salisbury, N. C, has resigned. He served as a member of the faculty for seventeen years. 
Prof. M. S. Davage has been elected to 
succeed the late Dr. R. S. Lovinggood as 
president of Samuel Huston College, Austin, 
Tex. 
The late Mr. Bernard Clark, of Spaulding, Neb., bequeathed sixteen hundred dollars to Rt. Rev. Monsignor J . E. Burke for 
use in Negro mission work. 
Professor J . R. Hawkins, of Washington, 
D. C, has been appointed assistant to Food 
Administrator Hoover. Mr. Hawkins is 
financial secretary of the A. M. E. Church. 
The late Mr. Isaac N. Seligman bequeathed one thousand dollars each to the 
following colored institutions: Tuskegee Institute, Hampton Institute, the National 
League on Urban Conditions Among Negroes, and the Fort Valley, Ga., High and 
Industrial School. 
Prof. L. B. Moore, Dean of the Teachers' 
College, Howard University, is the first colored man to be elected a member of the 
Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association, which controls forty 
educational institutions in the South. 
Mr. Davis Sparks, an orderly in the 
Colon Hospital, Canal Zone, received a silver medal from the United States War Department for rescuing a patient from 
drowning. 
Miss Elizabeth Talbert, of Wilberforce, 
won a gold medal at a prohibition contest 
in Xenia, Ohio. 
Messrs. J. H. Booker and T. L. Masterson have been letter carriers in Louisville, 
Ky., for twenty-five years. 
A reunion of members of the Gould family has taken place at Bridgeton, N. J. Six 
of them are entering their seventieth year, 
namely: Margaret Steward Gould, William 
Steward, Chaplain, T. G. Steward, Stephen 
Smith Steward, and Mary Steward Gould. 
Mr. Henry Ellis, of Fort Smith, Ark., is 
attracting attention by his painting. He 
has had no training, but has taken prizes 
at fairs during the last three years. 
Miss G. O. Wills is Assistant Art Editor 
for the class 1917-18 at the University of 
Minnesota, School of Agriculture. 
Mr. Bryant Peebles, an ex-slave seventyseven years old, living in Barlow Bend, Ala., 
owns four thousand acres of land, which 
he recently refused to sell for $100,000, 
even though he is illiterate. He has eighty 
head of horses and mules, one hundred head 
of cattle, and a gin and grist mill. 
An article on the rise of Mme. Walker 
and her beauty parlors has been published 
in the Kansas City Star and copied in the 
Literary Digest. 
Clara Burns, a colored woman, died in 
the county jail at Waco, Tex. She was insane and an epileptic. She was put in jail 
when sixteen years of age and kept there 
ten years, accused of no crime, but simply 
because there was no other place to put her. 
The Houston Post says: "Since neither 
State nor society would look after the unfortunate girl, the only thing left was to 
give her the same treatment that was accorded murderers and thieves. While discussing the case Monday, Sheriff Fleming 
remarked with a sad expression on his 
face. 'This is some country we swiped from 
the Indians.' " 
FOREIGN 
THE Congress of the Church of England, 
held at Southampton, discussed the 
Negro problem. Sir Sidney Oliver, Governor of Jamaica from 1907-1912, said that 
no solution of the color question was possible, except by a resolute disclaimer of the 
color line and the race differentiation 
theory. 
The death of Mr. Alexander Dixon, a 
member of the City Council for seven years, 
is reported from Kingston, Jamaica. He was 
sixty-five years old. THE HORIZON 91 
Mr. S. C. Burk, a colored police magistrate in Kingston, Jamaica, is a lieutenant 
in the English Army and is now serving in 
Flanders. 
In Panama, the new building of the Colon 
Federal Labor Union was dedicated in the 
presence of seven thousand people and the 
President of the Republic. Most of those 
who took part were colored. 
Dr. P. McD. Milliard, a graduate of Howard University, has been appointed official 
medical inspector to the Republic of Panama. 
The Honorable James L. Curtis, United 
States Minister to Liberia, died recently. 
GHETTO. 
COLORED women visitors to the galleries of the United States Senate are 
not permitted to sit with white women, but 
must occupy seats in the galleries where 
white and colored men sit. 
Masked men were used as a means to 
frighten colored children from a Chicago 
public school. 
One thousand pier workers of the Clyde 
and Mallory Steamship lines, in New York 
City, struck because of the employment of 
colored laborers. 
Dr. C. M. Carstensen, pastor of a white 
church in Riverdale, N. Y., has been forced 
to resign his place, because he allowed colored children from a nearby orphan asylum 
to attend the services. 
A petition has been presented to the Governor and Legislature in Atlanta, Ga., for 
the repeal of the law disbanding the colored 
volunteer militia. 
Miss Grace Lealtad has been dismissed 
by the superintendent of Hill School in St. 
Paul, Minn., because of a petition signed by 
parents objecting to Negro teachers. 
Colored students of the Wendell Phillips 
High School in Chicago, Ill., are discriminated against and efforts for their segregation are under way. 
Russell Dale, a white man in Chicago, 
Ill., said to Mr. Arthur Eugenes, a colored 
chauffeur: "Say, nigger, do you want to 
drive me home?" Whereupon the colored 
man shot at Mr. Dale. Dale protested: "I 
meant no insult. I have had a colored boy 
with me for twenty-five years. I often call 
him nigger." The chauffeur shot again and 
instantly killed the white man. 
The managers of the Temple and the 
Grand Theatres in Hamilton, Can., have 
openly declared that they will not permit 
Negroes to sit in the orchestra or balcony 
of their theatres. A local lawyer states 
that nothing can be done against this discrimination. 
A Special Committee of the Northern 
and Southern Branches of the Methodist 
Church, which met recently at Travers City, 
Mich., heard the report of a sub-committee 
which voted in favor of a separate general 
conference for Negro members. A minority 
of committee advocated an independent 
church for the Negro. 
CRIME. 
GOV. BICKETT has ordered the Raleigh, 
N. C, home guard to protect Earl 
Neville, a Negro charged with criminal assault, from being lynched. Two attempts 
at lynching have been prevented. 
The Grand Jury has written a verdict 
"no bills" against fifteen men in Goose 
Creek, Tex., arrested in connection with 
the lynching of Bert Smith, a Negro. 
In Byron, Ga., white night riders have 
started beating colored autoists. 
The steel floor of a baggage coach caused 
the death of twenty Negroes in a wooden 
"Jim Crow" coach in a collision at Kellyville, Okla. 
Negro citizens of Boston, Mass., are contesting the extradition of John Johnson of 
Charleston, W. Va., for trial, insisting that 
a Negro charged with an offence against a 
white girl would be lynched without trial. 
In St. John Parish, La., Judge Middleton 
has dismissed one Grand Jury and called 
another for the trial of several prominent 
citizens in connection with an alleged lynching. 
Three white men are dead at La Pine, 
Ala.— Oliver Enger, W. L. Griffith, and Hub 
Cannon—as a result of a battle for the possession of a Negro charged with holding up 
a white man. 
Fred Johnson was killed by a mob in 
New Orleans, La., for the theft of a mesh 
bag from a white woman. 
In Danville, Va., October 12, Walter 
Clark was lynched by a mob. Clark had 
shot a colored woman in the arm. Officers 
tried to arrest him, but he refused them 
admittance without a warrant. They forcibly entered the house. He killed one policeman, shot six other persons, and finally 
emerged half dead from the house which 
the mob set on fire. He was killed by hundreds of bullets, and a colored undertaker 
in the crowd was severely beaten. 92 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Increasing the Standard States of America 
Completes Your Life-Line 
An Emblem of Interstate Significance 
In these States STANDAR D LIF E employs more than six Thes e States have been selected for 
thousand people, Ha s issued more than five million Beneficial Invasion, 
dollars insurance. Ha s invested more than a hundred — 
thousand dollars. 
Durin g 1918 this Compan y will apply to the Insuranc e Commissioners o f Sout h 
Carolina, Nort h Carolina, Virginia , West Virginia , Maryland , Ne w Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio , Indiana, Michiga n and Illinois. 
T o enter these states ou r greatest need is an adequate Agenc y Force . 
T o avoid disturbing the satisfactory distribution o f its present staff, the Compan y 
desires to obtain the service s o f Hig h Class Men , wh o will becom e agents in ou r 
present territory with a prospec t o f becomin g proficient in ou r method s o f business, 
so that they may be sent into the newl y opene d territory as Agenc y Directors. 
No t less than 18 Supervising Officials with as man y Clerks and man y loca l agents 
will be required to completel y effect this expansion . 
Insuranc e experienc e is not essential to entering this work . If yo u hav e intelligence, 
tenacity o f purpos e and a goo d reputation the Compan y will pay yo u well whil e yo u 
are learning. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
20 0 Auburn Avenue ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 93 
Nearly 45,000 copies of The CRISIS are 
going to states, territories and foreign 
countries, as shown in the margins of 
this page. 
HELP US 
DOUBL E 
THE FIGURES 
The World War is the opportunity of 
the Darker Races and The CRISIS 
should be read by millions. 
HOW YOU CAN HELP 
1. Show your CRISIS to friends and ask 
them to give you One Dollar for a 
year's subscription. 
2 . Write to us for agent's terms. 
3 . Recommend to us live, wide-awake 
agents, who will devote a portion or 
all of their time canvassing for subscriptions or selling single copies. 
They can earn from $ 2 to $ 5 per day. 
4 . Organize a CRISIS club of five or 
more new yearly subscribers and get 
your own subscription free. 
5 . Ask your Church, Society or Club to 
help us put The CRISIS in the hands 
of the Negro soldiers. We will explain details if you write us. 
The CRISIS, a monthly magazine, is the 
organ of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. As 
such it fights for our rights without compromise. Constructive as well as critical, 
beautiful in picture and make-up, written 
in the King's English, it is a succinct and 
accurate Record of the Darker Races. 
Address: The CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Alabama 
418 
Alaska 
34 
Arizona 
195 
Arkansas 
979 
California 
1514 
Canal Zone 
778 
Colorado 
453 
Connecticut 
643 
Delaware 
234 
District of Columbia 
1184 
Florida 
1113 
Georgia 
1644 
Hawaiian Ter. 
458 
Idaho 
29 
Illinois 
2463 
Indiana 
818 
Iowa 
298 
Kansas 
736 
Kentucky 
664 
Louisiana 
1419 
Maine 
40 
Maryland 
749 
Massachusetts 
1901 
Michigan 
825 
Minnesota 
368 
Mississippi 
439 
Missouri 
1066 
Montana 
168 
Nebraska 
167 
Nevada 
16 
New Hampshir e 
16 
Ne w Jersey 
1810 
Ne w Mexico 
177 
New York 
3256 
North Carolina 
1507 
North Dakota 
19 
Ohio 
2450 
Oklahoma 
641 
Oregon 
86 
Pennsylvania 
4635 
Rhode Island 
186 
South Carolina 
1443 
South Dakota 
7 
Tennessee 
853 
Texas 
1954 
Utah 
104 
Vermont 
7 
Virginia 
2285 
Washington 
274 
West Virginia 
581 
Wisconsin 
72 
Wyomin g 
61 
Philippine Is. 
44 
Porto Rico 
125 
Virgin Islands 
183 
Foreign 
374 
Mention TH E CRISIS 94 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, Inc. 
Sells Insurance That Protects 
ui:iiniiiin;iiiNjiiiiEriiiihr>iiiiMiiMitiniitiiiiiiniiiiirni)iiiiiiiinji:iiNniiiit]iiifMiiiiiiri]iiPETiiiiiiuiiiiiJjiiiiPi<!MiiiiMiiiiiiiiiitriiiiiiiTi!iiiiiiiiB 
Insuranc e that covers the whol e hel d o f life's emergencie s in on e policy : 
Sickness, Acciden t an d Death , an d perpetua l in payments fo r disabilities. 
O f all investments that o f insuranc e is the safest, becaus e it pay s at the 
crucia l moment—i t is no t subjec t t o the mone y marke t o r the rise an d fall 
o f stock s and bonds ; bu t pay s promptl y upo n the deat h o f eac h policy ­
holder. 
The n wh y no t selec t the best that is t o b e had—a polic y that pay s ever y 
wee k wit h Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va., Inc. ? Als o ownin g an d operatin g 
the Va . Beneficia l & Insuranc e Co. , Inc. , at Norfolk , Va . 
Rea d a fe w testimonials from the thousand s that are o n file at hom e 
office in Richmond , Va . 
DREW $217.50 SICK BENEFITS and $500.00 DEATH CLAIM 
Richmond , Va. , July 2, 1017. 
T o Who m It May Concern : 
This is t o certif y that m y wife , Mrs. Leli a V . James, 1104 Chaffin Street, 
wa s a membe r o f Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va. , Inc. , fo r six and; one-half 
years. Durin g this time , she wa s sick o n severa l occasion s an d wheneve r 
she reporte d he r illness t o the Society , she receive d he r sic k due s promptly . 
He r last illness extende d fro m the latter part o f November , 1916, t o June , 
1917. Th e Societ y sent he r mone y t o he r bedsid e eac h week , fro m Decem ­
be r 6, 1916, t o June 6, 1917, an d at he r deat h pai d ove r t o m e the Deat h 
Claim o f $500.00. 
I tak e pleasur e in recommendin g the Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va. , Inc. , 
to anyon e wh o wants a sure polic y o f protectio n all throug h life. 
Respectfull y yours, 
GEORG E JAMES , Husband . 
CLARENC E JAMES , Witness. 
$500.00 DR. THOS . A. STEVENS' DEATH CLAIM 
1007 Sixt h St., Lynchburg , Va . 
Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va. , Inc. , Februar y 10, 1917. 
Richmond , Va . 
Gentlemen : 
Kindl y accep t m y sincer e thanks fo r you r chec k o f $500.00 in full pay ­
men t o f death claim o f m y husband , Dr. Thoma s A . Stevens, wh o die d Feb ­
ruary 6, 1917. Th e abov e name d chec k wa s delivere d t o m e Thursday , Feb ­
ruary 8, 1917, b y you r superintendent , Mr. R. D . Burton . 
I shall alway s spea k in the highest terms o f you r company , an d pra y 
God's blessing s upo n the work . 
Respectfully , 
MRS . THOMA S A . STEVENS . 
Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Virginia , Inc . 
HOME OFFICE: 527 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va. 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINST SICKNESS, ACCIDENT AND DEATH. 
A. D. PRICE, President. THOS. M. CRUMP, Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN, Asst. Secretary. 
Mentio n THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 95 
TH E FOU R BES T BOOK S 
O F POETRY , B Y NEGR O AUTHOR S 
Fift y Year s an d Othe r Poem s 
B Y JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
WIT H A N INTRODUCTIO N B Y BRANDE R MATTHEW S 
TH E TITLE poem appeared in the New Yor k Times on the fiftieth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation, and immediately attracted national attention. It occasioned an editorial 
in the Times on the next day, from which editorial the following is quoted: 
"A white man, if highly endowed with sympathy for the Negroes and if 
sincerely appreciative of the obstacles they have encountered and the progress 
they haye made in the half century since emancipation, might have written exactly as did Mr. Johnson—he might, that is, had he also been endowed with Mr. 
Johnson's elevation of sentiment, his power of creative imagination, and his 
thorough knowledge that for the production of strong emotional effects simple 
language is the best." 
"It is a striking thing."—Theodore Roosevelt. 
"There is a feeling in it and rhythm and dignity. I am glad to have read it." 
—Elihu Root. 
"I have read the thrilling verses entitled 'Fifty Years' and cannot forbear 
expressing my delight in them. They have all the swing and rhythm of some 
of Kipling's most stirring imperialistic verses and arc not marred, as many of 
his are, by a grossly materialistic philosophy."—Elbridge L. Adams. 
1 2 mo. Beautifully bound in boards, paper sides, silk cloth 
back, stamped in gold, deckle edges. Price $1.25 . 
Also a special Limited Autographed Edition of 11 0 copies 
printed on genuine Japan Vellum, of which 10 0 are for sale at 
$5.0 0 a copy. Only a very few of these copies are now obtainable. 
From the Heart of a Folk The Heart of a Woma n 
and other Poems and other Poems 
By Waverley Turner Carmicael. By Georgia Douglas Johnson. 
A first book by a hitherto unknown A book of clear musical poems that reach 
writer whose work the leading critics say
 1 the heart. William Stanley Braithwaite 
rivals that of Dunbar. Price $1.00. has written the introduction. Price $1.25. 
The Message of the Trees 
An Anthology of Leaves and Branches. Selected and arranged by Maud Cuney Hare, 
with a Foreword by William Stanley Braithwaite. 8vo. special cloth, gold stamping and 
end papers. Price $2.00. 
No object in nature is better loved than a tree and with its fine typography, beautiful binding and attractive end papers this makes an excellent gift boot 
TH E COR N HIL L COMPANY , Publisher s 
6 9 CORNHILL , BOSTON , MASS . 
O R THROUG H TH E CRISIS , 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention THE CRISIS 96 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE CRISIS CALENDAR FOR 1918 
WE ARE issuing for 1918 a Calendar 
of "Types of American Negroes." It 
will have a cover and twelve leaves 
containing thirteen pictures of various types 
of colored people in the United States. 
With each picture will go a suitable quotation from the 
Creole poet, Leon Laviaux. The cover will be in 
colors. The calendars will be clear and legible and the 
whole done in the best CRISIS style. The price is 
twenty-five cents and the edition is limited. Ready 
December 1. Order early. 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :: ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
_ A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. -Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
The 
Disgrace of Democracy 
A n 
Open Letter to President Wilson 
By 
KELLY MILLER 
Professo r Kell y Mille r ha s writte n 
a remarkabl e ope n lette r t o Presiden t 
Wilson. — N. Y . Evenin g Post. 
A constructiv e proposa l fo r sup ­
pressio n o f lynchin g an d rac e riots.— 
Th e Springfiel d Republican. 
A ver y fair, temperat e an d stron g 
lette r o n a most importan t matter.— 
Senato r Joh n Wesle y Jones. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
10c. the Copy 
Terms to Agents: 
5C. per copy on orders over 10. 
Address: Kelly Miller, 
Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 97 
JUS T FRO M TH E PRES S 
"SOLVING THE PROBLEM" 
Lectures of the Famous Negro Orator, the 
late Rev. Dr. M . C. B. Mason, author of 
the "Gospel Message," etc. 
The eight lectures in this volume include 
"Africa in America and Africa Beyond the 
Seas," with its wonderful peroration or 
apostrophe to Africa which is almost without an equal in the English language. 
"NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO" 
"HEREDITY OR SOUR GRAPES" 
"THE SECOND EMANCIPATION" 
Mr . Alfred Flude, manager of the Chautauqua Association, Chicago, in the introduction writes; "The volume needs no comment; 
it speaks for itself." 
$1.25 postpaid 
BU Y YOU R COP Y NO W 
TH E PLATFOR M PUBLISHIN G CO . 
205 E. 50th Street CHICAGO , ILL. 
LIFE AND TIMES OF 
BISHOP HENRY M. TURNER 
1834—1915 . 
J | By Rev. M . M . Ponton, D.D. 
! | BEST SELLING NEGRO BOOK EVER PUBN LISHED. ORDERS ENOUGH TO EXHAUST 
IF FIRST EDITION BEFORE IT WAS OFF THE 
H PRESS. AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE. 
1 1 PRICE ONE DOLLAR. 
| | A. B. CALDWELL PUB. CO. 
[ 1 Atlanta :: Georgia 
AGENT S WANTE D TO SELL GREAT EPIC POEM TO 
HON . FREDERIC K DOUGLAS S 
Historical and Epigramatic. Absorbing in interest; 
Inspiring in effect; Epic in subject and replete with 
incident. 
One Hundred and Eight Verses—Illustrated. 
De Luxe Edition $1.00. Writ e for terms. 
Enclose a 3c stamp. 
By Dr. M. A. Majors, 4714 State St., Chicago, Ill. 
WANTED—CARRIAG E BLACKSMITH. 
FIRST-CLASS MAN. STEADY EMPLOYMENT 
AT GOOD WAGES FOR MAN WHO CAN DELIVER. C . R . PATTERSON & SONS, GREENFIELD, OHIO. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 200 Pages, 36 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical; 1. bull Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Uouk, Hound in Pull 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Puce, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOHN W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann St. Washington. D. C 
$2 0 T O $3 0 PE R WEE K 
being made selling our new book "Progress and 
Achievements of the Colored People" by Prof. 
Kelly Miller, showing the wonderful doings and 
new opportunities of our race. Low prices, many 
pictures, lightning; seller. Ask for terms, write 
quick. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 523 9th Street. WASHINGTON, D. C. 
At Last We Have It! 
The housewife's friend is the Arizona 
Cook Book, by James H. Robinson. 
The most helpful cook book and a beautiful 
souvenir picture of the Phoenix Indian School 
will be mailed on receipt of $1.00 to any 
place in the United States. 
Address JAMES H. ROBINSON , Indian 
School, Phoenix, Ariz. 
THE DE VAN 
253 West 137th Street, 
Ne w Yor k City 
Telephone, Audubon 6527. 
Beautifully lighted, steam heated dining parlors and sleeping rooms. Convenient to all 
surface, elevated and subway lines. A strictly 
first-class place for first-class patrons. 
CHARLE S DE VAN , Proprietor 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 Sout h Park Avenue , Chicago , Ill. 
TEACHER S A LIVE agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1408 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
THE BON TON WAITER—All the newest ideas which the best European and 
American Head Waiters know about Serving and Waiting. Price $2.00 . 
THE BON TON TAILOR—All the newest ideas which the best Tailors know 
about Tailoring, Dyeing, Cleaning and Pressing. Price $2.00 . 
By DALLA S GURLE Y 
Twenty years catered to "New York's Four Hundred" 
436 Lenox Avenue New Yor k City 
Mention THE CRISIS 98 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Mme. BRIDGES' SCHOOL 
French Dressmaking , Ladies 1 Tailoring an d 
Millinery. Special Course s in Designing , 
Copying, Draping , Making , Trimming , Fin ­
ishing, Cuttin g an d Fitting. 
A PRIVAT E BOARDIN G SCHOO L FO R SPECIA L TRAINING . Individual Instruction. 
Write for Catalog. 4221 OAKENWAL D AVENUE , CHICAGO , ILLINOI S 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
BUST S O F 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.50 each. The 4 busts for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
TH E ISAA C HATHAWA Y AR T COMPAN Y 
718 S. HICKOR Y ST., PIN E BLUFF , ARK . 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr . BELL, 470 9 Stat e St. , Chicago. Ill. 
THE system you 
will alway s use 
after the first trial. 
Learn to grow and 
beautify the hair the 
Derm o way . 
19 East 43rd St. 
Chicag o Illinois 
Dermo College Co. Makes you an expert 
Chicago Mentio n TH E CRISI S Mme. C. J. Walker's Preparation s for the h
Supreme in reputation 
SOLD EVERYWHERE IN U. S. A. 
You Will Eventually Use 
MME. WALKER'S 
TREATMENT AND PREPARATIONS 
WH Y NOT NOW ? 
LELIA COLLEGE AND WALKER HAIR PARLOR 
Main Office: 640 North West St., Indianapolis, Ind. 
Eastern Branch: 110 W. 136th St., New York City 
OR YOUR NEAREST WALKER DRESSER 
99 
MENTION THE CRISIS 
The Crisis Adve100 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Transformations, Switches, Puffs, Plaits, Bangs, Coronet Braids, that 
can be combed the same as your own hair. Human hair for sale by 
ounce or pound. Hair Nets. 
Thes e illustrations sho w onl y a fe w o f ou r style s o f perfec t fitting 
natura l hair wigs. The y canno t b e detecte d fro m you r ow n hair. The y 
ca n b e washe d and combed . 
W E CARR Y TH E 
LARGES T STOC K IN 
ELECTRI C COMB S 
A REAL HAIR GROWER FOUND AT LAST 
MME . BAUM' S WELL-KNOW N 
HAI R SUCCES S 
PE R JA R 35c & 50c 
Mme . Baum's Col d Cream, for 
Cleansing the Skin 50C 
HAIRDRESSERS ' TOOLS, WEAVIN G FRAMES , 
HACKLERS , MOUNTIN G MACHINES , 
CARDS , BLOCKS 
MME . WALKER' S TOILET PREPARATION S 
Mme. Baum's Famous Shampoo for Cleansing the Hair. 
Per box 
Mme. Baum's 
Powder. 
Per box 
Creole Face 
50C 
35C 
MME. BAUM'S HAIR EMPORIUM, Inc. 
48 6 EIGHTH AVE. Bet. 34th & 35th Sts., (Upstairs) NEW YORK 
One Minute's Wal k Fro m Pennsylvani a Depo t 
Mail orders sent to any part of the U. S. or B. W. I. Send 2c stamp for our 
beautiful new 1918 Illustrated Catalog. 
BUY YOUR HOLIDAY GOODS IN 
REA L HUMA N HAI R NO W 
Hand-Made Natural Hair Wigs 
Mention T H E C RISI S 
Coronet Braid all around the head THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 101 
BEAUTY AND WOMEN ARE ONE 
Obtain beaut y o r keep it b y use of ou r 
New Beaut y (Night) Cream. Other s use 
mineral oils. Ou r Night Cream contains 
vegetabl e and animal oils, mor e beneficial, 
mor e readily absorbed by the skin. Mar ­
velous results follow its use. Cleanses, 
soothes, and heals. Delightfull y perfumed. 
75 cents per jar. 
FLORESSENC E MFG. CO., INC. , 1919 BROADWAY , 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Above all Red Rose Products pearly teeth 
smooth faces 
youthful skins 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R TH E 
SUPERIOR HAIR PREPARATION 
On e of the World's Finest 
$1.10 for 6 weeks' treatmen t SYSTEM TAUGHT BY MAIL 
Mme . J. E. DENSMOR E 
4321 Forestville Avenue CHICAGO , ILLINOI S 
WANTED 
Ever y reade r o f THE CRISIS to send 
fo r a free trial sample o f 
PHYLLI S HAI R DRESSING 
AN D GROWE R 
and literature on the care and treatment o f the hair and scalp. 
W e wish to prov e to you r ow n satisfaction that yo u can really mak e you r 
hair grow long, glossy and luxurious— 
and free from dandruff. Se e ho w easy 
it is to make you r hair loo k lustrous 
and live—and to keep you r scalp clean 
and healthy. 
M . J. MILLE R 
6t h an d Joh n Sts. Cincinnati , O . 
W e are lookin g for a reliable, energeti c and 
intelligent agent in each locality. Exclusiv e 
territory. Please say if yo u are interested 
in our agenc y whe n writing for sample. 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M Introducin g 
LLYRA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
A Guarantee d Foo d Preparatio n for 
th e Hair. Pric e 50 cents pe r box . 
Agents Wanted. System taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E . Slaughter Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS . MO . 
W e GIV E it t o YO U 
Take this fine Made-toMeasure Suit and don't 
pay us one cent for it. 
We want you to get one of our highclass suite, absolutely Free, so you, 
can show it to your friends. It will 
be a big advertisement for us. 
If you have a little spare time, 
you can easily make from 
$35 to $50 extra every week 
and besides that be the bestdressed man in your town. It's an 
opportunity you cannot afford to 
overlook. Don't delay a minute, 
Write for this Big Offer at Once 
Drop us a line or send us your name 
on a postal card and we will send 
you absolutely Free, our wonderful 
style book, containing dozens of earn 
pies and fashion plates to choose from. 
Write Now. Everything sent Free 
and postage prepaid. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 981, CHICAGO 
duality 
and Fit 
Guaranteed 
A "Womanly " Wa y 
T o Remov e Hair 
El Rado sanitary 
Washe s the hai r off b y dissolving it. 
Wome n fairl y revel in the comfor t an d 
cleanliness of hair-fre e underarms. 
Afte r using El-Rad o chiffon sleeve s 
can be wor n without any dress shields. 
Entirely harmless. Money-back guarantee. 
At all toilet counters. 50c and $1. 00 
If you prefer, we will fill your order by 
mail if you write enclosing stamps or coin, 
MME. LELIA W. ROBINSON 110 W. 136th Street. NEW YORK 
Mention T H E C RISI S 102 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Ther e can be no 
better gift than a 
colore d doll to a colored child. Our 
dolls are beautiful. 
The y are jointe d and 
can be adjusted to 
an y position. Nine ­
teen inch doll with 
natural hair, undressed, $2.00 prepaid. Sixteen inch 
doll dressed in the 
latest style. $1.75. Fourteen Inch boy doll dressed. 
$1.00. All of our goods 
are shipped prepaid. Send 
10c, extra for postage. 
50c. extra on Canadian 
orders. All orders given 
prompt attention. Terms 
strictly cash. 
GADSDE N DOLL CO. 
Room 439. 
30 Church St., 
New Yor k City. 19 Inch Hair Doll 
Your Husband, Father, Brother, 
Sweetheart or Soldier Boy 
Will Appreciate 
more than anything else a box of 
Mitchelson's Havana Specials CIGARS 
Ge t him a box . H e will enjo y them. 
Thes e cigars are the regula r six-inc h 
Perfect o shap e possessin g a fragran t 
blen d o f mil d and mello w Havan a 
Tobacco s an d are sent postpai d t o 
any address. Bo x o f 50 for $4.00. 
MITCHELSON'S HOUSE OF TOBACCOS 
433 Leno x Avenue , Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephones: {central 104-W Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohis 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building. Rooms 603 and 604 
Office 'Phone. 3297 Mulberry .._„,,_ „ . 
Residence Phone. 5277-M Market NEWARK , N. J 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
818 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 80 2 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
2 1 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Telephone Colorado 7314 
MRS . G . WEATHERTO N 
National Employment Agency 
All Kinds of Domestic Help Furnished 
Reliable Colored Help a Specialty 
811 S. Fair Oaks Avenue, Pasadena, Cal. 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Lenox Ave., New Yor k 
Statement o f the Ownership , Management, Circulation, etc . required by the Ac t o f Congress o f Aug ­
ust 24, 1012. o f TH E CRISIS , published monthl y 
at 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York , N. Y. , fo r Octobe r 
1, 1917. 
Stat e o f Ne w Yor k 
Count y o f Ne w Yor k ( ss-
Befo r e me , a Notar y Publi c in and for the State 
and Count y aforesaid, personally appeared Augustu s 
Granvill e Dill, who , having been dul y swor n according to law, depose s and says that he is the Business 
Manage r o f TH E CRISIS , and that the followin g 
is, in the best o f his knowledg e and belief, a true 
statement of the ownership , management, etc , of 
the aforesaid publication for the date shown in the 
abov e caption, required by the Ac t o f August 24, 
1912. embodie d in section 443, Posta l Laws and 
Regulations: Publisher: Th e Nationa l Associatio n 
for the Advancemen t o f Colore d People , 70 Fifth 
Avenue , Ne w Yor k City. Editor: W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Managin g Editor: \Y . E. Burghardt DuBois. 70 
Fifth Avenue . Ne w Yor k City. Business Manager: 
Augustu s Granvill e Dill. 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
City. Owners: Th e National Association for the 
Advancemen t o f Colore d People , a corporatio n with 
no stock. Moorfiel d Story, President; Ro y Nash, 
Secretary : Oswald Garrison Villard . Treasurer: 
James Weldo n Johnson , Field Secretary : Joel E, 
Spingarn, Chairman Boar d of Directors: \Y. E. R. 
DuBois, Directo r o f Publications and Research. 
Know n bondholders, mortgagee s and other security 
holders holdin g 1 per cent or mor e o f total amoun t 
o f bonds, mortgage s or othe r securities: None . 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager. 
Swor n to and subscribed befor e me this 28th day 
o f September, 1017. C. A . INGALLS. Notar y Public . 
(M y commissio n expire s 30th March , 1919.) 
Notar y Publi c Richmon d County , No . 19 
Notar y Publi c Ne w Yor k County , No . 7 
FEET 
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS. BUNIONS. INGROWN NAILS, and ALL 
other AILMENTS of the FEET. 
DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
CHIROPODIS T 
Registered in the States of New York and New Jersey. 
Telephone 12S4 Audubon. 167 West 136th St.. New York City. 
AGENTRobinsoSn $60 Folding Bath Tub WEEKL . Big seller. CostY s 
little, no plumbing, little water. Weight 15 
pounds, folds into small roll. Full length baths, 
far better than tin tubs. Guaranteed 10 years. $10 
a day easily made. Write for free tub offer. 
ROBINSON CABINET MFG CO 4759 Factories Bldg., Toledo, Ohio 
Telephone Greeley 421 4 Established 191 1 
B R ANIC' S 
New Yor k an d Brooklyn Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WES T 35th STREE T 
ANDREW J. BRANIC Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS Christma s Gift s 
WHA T is a better or more enduring gilt 
than a book? Twelve books of course. 
Twelve copies of TH E CRISIS filled with 
inspiration, information and beauty, coming 
each month to remind your friend of you. 
W e have a Christmas Card which we furnish to you free to announce this gift. 
Then, there are other books. 
W e can furnish you any book published 
about Negroes and their problems. 
W e can furnish you any book published 
about anything. 
Write us of your wants. 
Reference books, school books, books for 
children, books for grown-ups, picture books, 
histories and poetry. 
W e sell at the lowest publisher's prices a
save you all the bother of shopping. 
Write us and write early. 
Th e CRISIS , 7 0 Fift h Ave. , Ne w Yor k Advertising 
There are twelv e millio n Negroes in the United States. 
They spend a thousan d millio n dollars every year. 
TH E CRISIS reaches mor e Negroes with intelligenc e 
an d mone y than an y periodica l in the world . 
If you have anythin g to sell which these people wan t 
advertise it in TH E CRISIS. 
Remember that if our rate s seem hig h it is because our 
servic e is exceptional . If you want testimonials 
to this, Write us. 
Circulation — 47,500 
Beaut y fo r Wome n 
CLEAR, SMOOTH SKIN 
—PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
Famous Deluxe Beauty Book, illustrated 
and complete. Sent to you postpaid free 
of charge. Tells all about the Kashmir 
Wa y and describes the wonderful methods 
which hundreds of women are using to get 
A Kashmir Girl pretty skin and hair. You can do the same. 
5 or 1 0 minutes a day caring for your skin and hair the Kashmir 
Wa y will bring wonderful results. You Won't Know Yourself in a 
few days. 
WRIT E TODA Y DON' T SEND AN Y MONE Y 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO. , Dept. K 
4709 State Street Chicago, Ill. 
Mentio n THE CRISIS 