Christmas, 1920 
The Crisis 
ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY DO YOU KNOW 
that the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
sent James Wcldo n Johnson, its Acting Secretary, to Haiti last 
spring to investigate and report on conditions there under American 
occupation— 
that his articles in The Nation and TH E CRISIS told for the first time of 
the murder, rapine and exploitation of the Haitians by Americans— 
that the shocking of the American nation and government into making 
an investigation which will lead to the eventual (and probably immediate) ending of the horrible regime in Haiti is directly due to 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People's 
expose— 
that the eyes of the civilized world have been directed to the treatment 
of colored people in Haiti and in America by the United States government? 
No one can tell what the final results will be. Certain it is that there will be 
immediate and far-reaching changes. 
That is what 
The NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for 
The ADVANCEMENT of COLORED PEOPLE can and will do with your support. Every new member, every new branch means 
greater power to light unceasingly for a square deal for colored people in America 
and elsewhere. 
AR E YO U A MEMBER ? 
HAV E YO U A BRANC H IN YOU R CITY ? 
If not, write today to 
The National Association for 
The Advancement of Colored People 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
for information. 
National Officers Executive Officers 
President MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y Chairman of the Beard 
Vice-Presidents JAME S WEL D O N JOHNSON ' 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMK E Acting Secretary 
REV . JOHN 1IAYNE S HOLME S WALTE R F. WHIT E 
Assistant Secretary BISHO P JOH N HURS T J. E. SPINGAR X ARTHU R "R. SPIXGAR N Treasu ret OSWALT ) GARRISO N VILLAR D DR. W . E. P,. DLI BOIS , Director of Publications 
and Research 
WILLIA M PICKENS . Associate Field Secretary TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO B TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE . NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOI8 ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 21-No. 2 DECEMBER, 1920 Whole No. 122 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. "DARK WOMANHOOD UNREDEEMED." After the painting by 
J. H. Caines. 
THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN, NORWAY 59 
RUINS OF CHRISTOPHE'S PALACE, HAITI 63 
MEN OF THE MONTH 77 
ARTICLES 
THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN 57 
MARCUS GARVEY. W. E. B. Du BoU 58 
THE HOUSING CRISIS IN NEW YORK CITY. Victor R. Daly 61 
THREE BOOKS 62 
JOSEPH AND MARY COME TO BETHLEHEM. Translated from an old 
French chanson by Jessie Fauset. Decorated 72-73 
THREE POEMS. Charles Bertram Johnson 75 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 53 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 65 
THE LOOKING GLASS 69 
MEN OF THE MONTH 75 
THE HORIZON 78 
THE JANUARY CRISIS 
Th e January CRISI S will conclude ihe article on Marcus Garvey. There will be an excellent 
short story and articles on community houses. 
Our 1921 Calendar cf Xegro authors is a remarkable document. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at Ne w York, Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of March 3, 1879. So THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY Lincoln University 
Ranked in Class 1 
among colleges for colored students MANUAL TRAINING & by the American Medical Association 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL College and Theological Seminary 
opened Sept. 21 , 1920 FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. J. Address: 
President, Joh n B . Rendall , D.D . A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, Lincoln University, 
thorough instruction, wholesome sur­ Chester County, Pa. 
roundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and The Cheyney Training School 
trades for boys, including auto re­ for Teachers 
pairing. Cheyney , Pa . Courses in domestic science and do­ Made in 1920 an accredited State Normal School, mestic art for girls. offering in addition to the regular Normal course 
A new trades building, thoroughly of two years professional three year courses in Home 
equipped. Economics and Manual Training. A diploma from 
any of these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach New girls' dormitory thoroughly and in^ the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
modernly equipped. High School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Terms reasonable. Board and Tuition $153.00 
Fall term opened September, 1920. 1st Semester, Septembe r 13, 1920 
Fo r information address 2nd Semester, January 26, 1921 
For further pailiculars and catalog, write— W. R. VALENTINE, Principal LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal, 
CHEYNEY , PA. 
Mention T H E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School mid College. Special emphasis, 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta* Ga . 
^liJttllllUJUllUIIIUJJUtlllUitlOlllla^UJUIUllJJIIIIllllJUIIIUJIIJiUILIIiUUIIJIJiLlllllitMllllllIllllllJilUliailllJItttlJJJTn^ 
I KNOXVILLE COLLEGE I Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Noted tor Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, 
Nurs e Training and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories, Expenses very reasonable. 
Began September IS, 1920. 
For catalog and other information address § 
PRESIDENT J. KELLY GIFFEN 
KnoulUe, Tenn. 1 
iiTTTiruijiiiiimiiiiiiiimfriTniiniiiniHiiFiiiiiFniirmimttnnuTiiiiiiiirniii 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1920 ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $100,000 administration building with modem 
chapel and gymnasium under construction. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S OF STUD Y 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd Year^' High School Courses, with Certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
• Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medical Course 
51st year nf nine months opened September 22. 1920. 
$16.00 per month pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
&fjt Jflortba Agricultural 
anb ifflecfjamcal College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State baring for Its object 
Collegiate. Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and 
Hospital Work. , 
Normal, Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary 
training class. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C. H . Parrish 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE. N. C. Blddle University, ei-eratrii index the sasslces or 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has (our Department*—High School, Arts ud Sciences Theological 
and Industrial, The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement, for entrance to the first Tear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offer* two courses 
uf study, the Classical and the Scientific m the 
scientific, German )• substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Claes 1* 
16 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely Cngllsh. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. axe reqmlretl 
tu take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
Fsr further information, tddrttt 
President H. L. MtCreray, 
Charlotte, N . C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta. Ga. 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September, 1920. 
For further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 52 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman' ! Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of Ne w York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL An Episcopal boarding school for girls, nnder the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHAEGE . 6138 Gerraantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia. Pa. 
Both of Us Lose, Young Man 
If you fail to study the superior advantages North Carolina 
offers you through The Agricultural and Technical College 
for securing good, practical and 
technical training. 
Four Strong Departments: 
Agricultural Academic 
Mechanical Teacher-Training 
Night School for those who 
desire to work in the day. 
Fall Term began, September 1,1920 
Address: 
JAS. B. DUDLEY, President 
A. &T . College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leader s 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood . 
Fo r further information address 
F . A. SUMNER, President 
MUSIC TEACHER 
WANTED— A well trained and experienced 
teacher of pianoforte and voice for a Christian school. Must be devoted to her work 
and a good example for young women. 
Address—SECONDAR Y SCHOOL , c/o TH E 
CRISIS. 
Couple would like to adopt 
a baby girl 14 to 16 months 
old. 
Write 
Box 194, Ridgewood, N. J. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. For further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
Special CRISIS Offer Five paid-up yearly subscriptions to tlie 
CRISI S sent in at one time will entitle the 
sender to a year's subscription tree. This offer 
holds good until midnight of December 31, 
1920. 
Mention T n E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 21. No. 2 DECEMBER, 1920 Whole No. 122 
Opinion
PONTIUS PILAT
of W. E. B. Dubois
E 
PONTIUS PILATE, Federal 
Governor of Mississippi, sat 
in the Judgment seat at 
Jackson. Befor e him 
stretched a table of shining gold and 
the morning sun sang through the 
eastern windows. It lighted the 
faces of the Chief Priest and the Elders as they bent eagerly toward him, 
and twisted itching hands. 
He was lingering a pile of silver 
money which seemed to have been 
tossed or thrown upon the table before him. 
"This-er-Iscariot fellow," he began 
in a low, inquiring voice, while his 
eyes sought the haunting shadows of 
the long, crimson curtains at his back. 
A bishop interrupted him: a tall 
and mighty bishop cassocked, ringed, 
and jewelled: 
"Just a case of uneasy conscience 
—a worthless fellow—we shall give 
this to foreign missions, shall we not, 
and seek Souls for the Kingdom?" 
And he gathered up and counted out 
thirty pieces— "and now to the main 
matter." 
"I don't see how I can pardon this 
Barabbas," said the Governor,— 
speaking with sudden vehemence. 
"He is a criminal and a drunkard— 
he has killed men before and—" 
"Now, now, Governor!" interrupted the Judge, "Jack Barabbas is not 
so bad—quarrelsome, to be sure, 
when in liquor, and quick to defend 
his honor as every white man should 
be. Moreover—hark f" 
Something floated in by the window. It was a low, but monstrous 
sound and in it lay anger and blood. 
"See, Governor? Hear that? The 
Saturday crowds are in town and 
Jack is a prime favorite—you know 
they're none too well disposed toward 
you and the Government since this 
new usurpation of federal power." 
"That's just it," answered the Governor angrily, straightening in his 
chair and flashing challenging 
glances right and left: "Lawlessness 
has brought Mississippi to this pass 
and yet you want me not only to par ­
don a notorious criminal, but also to 
condemn an innocent man." 
"Innocent?" cried several voices, 
but the great voice of the Bishop outdrowned them all. 
"You do not understand," he said 
ominously, thrusting forward his 
great bulk and towering over the nervous frame of the Governor. The 
Governor stiffened but did not quail. 
"You are northern born—you live far 
from our problem—our fearful Problem. Remember, Sir, in Mississippi 
there is one Crime of Crimes, one 
beside which all crimes fade to innocence—Murder, Arson, Rape, Theft— 
all are nothing beside the crime of 
Race Equality. Sir, this man, whom 
we have brought before you, not only 
preaches openly the equality of all 
men, but (and the Bishop shuddered) 
practices it!" 
And then the flying words of all the 
eager, angry councilors raised and 
swept across the golden board and up 
the crimson curtains and down the 
open, sun-flushed windows: 
"Do you know what he wants?"— 
"He wants equality for Everybody— 
everybody, mind you"—"Turks, Jews, 
Niggers, Dagoes, Chinks, Japs"— 
53 54 THE CRISIS 
"everybody"—"talking, sleeping, kissing, marrying"—"the damned scoundrel !"—"and do you know why he 
wants it?"—"He's nothing but a—" 
—"He's a Bolshevist—a Red Revolutionist"—"He is going to overthrow 
all government—" 
And then in a shriek—"He claims 
to be God and King." 
Slowly, Pilate arose. 
"Bring him in," he said. 
They swung the crimson curtains 
back and there in the shadows stood 
the Christ. 
Pontius Pilate shuddered. "Art 
thou King?" he whispered. 
And the answer came calm and 
clear, "Yes! " 
The cry of the mob below shivered 
to a shriek, while the Chief Priest 
and the Elders stood in a silence that 
was ominous. 
Pilate turned. 
"I find no fault in this man," he 
said doggedly, as his hands trembled. 
"He blasphemed against the White 
Race," hissed the Bishop. 
But Pilate continued: "You have 
brought this man before me as a dangerous agitator. I have examined 
him before you and have found no 
fault in him. I will therefore fine him 
and let him go." 
But the council cried in one voice. 
"Away with Christ—and pardon 
Barabbas!" 
"I'll pardon Barabbas if you insist 
—but Christ—" 
Again the groan of the mob rose 
and flooded in at the window, breaking the sunshine. 
Pilate stirred uneasily—"I won't 
punish him," he said testily. "I know 
no law." 
"Sir, we know our unwritten law. 
The crowd below—" 
"I'll have no violence," cried Pilate. 
"It was just this lynching business 
that led the federal government to 
interfere in Mississippi—" 
• "Your Excellency, consider a moment," interrupted the States Attorney. "You incur no responsibility. 
You simply deliver this man into our 
hands; and by your pardon of Barabbas the crowd will be mollified and—" 
"And what?" asked the Governor. 
"Well, there will be less likelihood 
of violence." 
Pilate arose agitated. "I'll have 
nothing to do with it," he said. "I 
wash my hands of the whole thing." 
The councilors bowed and turned 
to the door. The shout of the mob 
rose and rent the courtyard and the 
sunlight died: 
—Lynch him! Lynch th e 
damned—! 
For a moment Pilate hesitated with 
clenched hands and riven face. Then 
slowly he left the chamber. 
It was late afternoon and Pilate 
stood in the clean, cool bathroom, 
washing his hands. His wife hurried 
in. 
"Pontius," she said hesitatingly, 
"have nothing to do with that just 
man—for I have suffered—" 
"There, there! It's all right," he 
said, chucking her under the chin. 
"Don't meddle in politics." They both 
started, for they heard the mad music 
of myriad feet, the laughter, screaming and cursing of men, and the shrill 
babble of women's voices; and then 
over the height of the hills rolled the 
far-off echo of that world-worn cry: 
"My God, my God! Why has Thou 
forsaken me!" 
THE UNREAL CAMPAIGN -
in
 NEVER have the American people endured such a Presidential campaign. It is true that 
in no campaign are the great 
issues always distinct and clear and 
the alignments definite and understandable. But surely in no campaign 
ha? there ever been such a lack of 
ali iment and such deliberate smearf e of issues. One may, as one is constituted, regard voting as a test of 
conscience and principle or as a practical make-shift. In the first, the land 
may easily go to the dogs while the 
Dreamer walks his high and isolated OPINION 55 
path. In the other case, we may too 
easily forget our dreams. 
But both sorts of Voters on November 2, 1920, were in maddening 
puzzlement. The League of Nations? 
There was no real difference between 
the parties; between Johnson and 
Wilson there was a world of argument ; but Taft and Holt, Hoover and 
Cox? It was all a matter of punctuation and style. No man then could vote 
either the Republican or the Democratic ticket because he favored or opposed the League. And outside the 
League, What? Imperialism, labor and 
wage, the power of capital, the marketing of farm products, the building 
of homes, the training of children, the 
ownership of land, the freedom of 
suffrage—in these and all else the major parties were mere fog or reaction. 
Indeed the only real, stinging, fighting 
questions in the whole campaign were 
President Wilson and the Negro. 
The Family Tree 
The allegation was that the President-elect had a black man somewhere among his remote ancestors. 
Can you conceive how real a fury this 
query roused? How else could it be 
with our deliberate cultivation of race 
hate and with Pat Harrison of Mississippi heading one of the Speakers' 
Bureaus ? 
Suppose President Harding is colored—What of it? He would be but 
one of hundreds of distinguished 
Americans who served their country 
well from the day of Alexander Hamilton to that of Lew Wallace. Nefertari and Amenhotep, Candace and 
Terence, Askia and Tamuramaro, 
Browning and Lafcadio Hearn—how 
many of the world's heroes have 
shared the black blood of Africa! It 
is an ancient and noble lineage; as 
high and deserving as that of any race 
on earth, until Ethiopia was raped 
and murdered and despoiled by 
Europe. God knows that all of us— 
black, white, red and yellow, are low 
enough in ancestry and service, but 
"Pure White America" excels most 
lands in being able to boast an ancestry which includes.far more jails, asylums and gutters and far fewer palaces than most nations. Is this her 
shame or glory? And which was 
worse: the shrieking whispers of the 
Democrats, or the vociferous denials 
of the Republicans of the taint! Taint, 
forsooth! what could taint America? 
Ohio, once the home of freedom, led 
in Anti-Negro propaganda, egged on 
by Cox and the new white southern 
immigration. "Timely warnings" to 
white folk were distributed by the 
hundred thousand declaring, "Ohioans 
should remember that the time has 
come when we must handle this problem in somewhat the same way as the 
South is handling it!" As a result 
many of the colored candidates for the 
legislature were defeated, but more 
were elected than ever before and 
many friends like Governor Davis, 
formerly Mayor of Cleveland, triumphed. 
Third Parties 
The third parties have made a singularly spiritless campaign. As residual legatees of all protest and unrest they did almost nothing to answer 
the searching query of desperate 
strivers for light. Not the ultimate 
dogma of Marxian socialism or the 
undigested hodge-podge of FarmerLaborers sufficed. Men asked and 
were not answered: What is the next 
step and how does it lead to a definite, 
clearmarked way? The great mass of 
laboring people, the thrifty, hardworking farmers and small capitalists, lacked dismally here that leadership which through the great Labor 
party of England and the right wing 
Socialists of Italy are hewing, waveringly but stubbornly, a real path, 
leaving on the one side intransigeant 
communism and on the other, organized and reactionary theft. Not so 
America. We, the burden-bearers, 
could not even agree to disagree and 
delivered the masses bound into the 56 THE CRISIS 
hands of the Phillistines. 
And the' Black Man. He had no 
chance. He was less than free and 
more than a slave. He was a machine 
—an automatic registration mark for 
the Republican party. He could not 
be otherwise. From the day Woodrow Wilson shamelessly betrayed his 
black supporters of 1912 to the day 
when the flippant Cox of Ohio built 
his Ohio campaign on the cheapest 
brand of "nigger"-hatred, the black 
American had but one political choice 
or mission: to defeat the South-ridden 
Democratic party. He could not even 
think of taking an off-shot at the Millenium by voting Socialist or Farmer 
Labor—he must defeat the Democrats. 
And he did his bit. 
And so the great farce ends. The 
People have spoken—and said nothing. 
THE A. M. E. CHURCH 
0 0 little has been said of the 
extraordinary accomplishment of the Department of 
Finance of the A. M. E. 
Church during the last quadrennium. 
For the first time in the history of 
the church there has been collected 
in "dollar money" over a million dollars during a quadrennium. The 
Financial Secretary who accomplished 
this is John Russell Hawkins, of 
North Carolina. The "dollar money" 
is a sort of federal tax upon individual members for the support of the 
general connection and its increase 
since its entablishment has been as 
follows: 
1S72—187 0 $95,55 4 1S9G—190 0 $400,07 4 
1876— 188 0 99.92 5 1900-190 1 703.41 1 
1880—^188 4 1G9 .3S 9 1904—190S. ' 605,49 4 
1884 —1SS S 199,51 4 190S — 191 2 790,OS S 
1888— 1S9 2 313.34 1 1912—191 0 S50.21 1 
1892—189 6 351.91 2 1910—192 0 1 ,033.07 9 
Thus from 1872-1920 the church 
has collected $5,758,625 for general 
expenses, not including money raised 
for local purposes, salaries for presiding elders and pastors and special 
monies raised for mission work, 
church extension and in education 
rallies. This is a record of which any 
organization should be proud. 
AND NOW LIBERIA 
HE Wilson Plan of assisting 
Liberia has been finally revealed in detail. Its terms, 
which include a loan of five 
million dollars, are found to be disastrously rigid. Worley, a white Virginian, as General Receiver, is the 
one prominent figure and would be 
the real ruler of Liberia under this 
plan, together with his band of white 
pensioners. He and our Secretary of 
Legation, Bundy, sought to force the 
plan through, but President King 
called an extra session of the Legislature to consider amendments. While 
the Legislature was in session a cablegram was received from the United 
States, saying that no amendments 
to the Plan would be accepted and 
that the Plan must be signed as submitted by them, "or the friendly interest which has heretofore existed 
would become lessened." 
The Liberians, however, refused to 
be frightened and are preparing to 
eend another commission to America, 
now that the election is over, to discuss some reasonable changes in the 
proposed financial arrangements. 
COOPERATION 
HE second annual cooperative convention met in Cincinnati, November 11-14; 
the "All American Farmer 
Labor Cooperative Commission" has 
been organized with headquarters in 
Washington, D. C, and Frederic C. 
Howe is executive secretary; in New 
York the Socialist Rand School is 
giving courses on cooperation and answering questions by correspondence. 
Thus the movement grows. Shall 
American Negroes lag behind! INTERNATIONA L COUNCI L 57 
M C SWINE Y 
HE veriest coward may die 
for a cause in the frenzy ot 
battle with court martial and 
disgrace behind him and 
naming medals in front. A brave 
man may rush to his death at sudden 
call in time of peace. But the bravest 
of the brave is he who without hurt 
or hate simply lies still and for the 
sake of Right dies by inches through 
endless days. No cause with such 
martyrs can ever die. 
MARTYR S 
HREE years ago December 
11, at 7:17 in the morning, 
thirteen American Negro 
soldiers were murdered on 
the scaffold by the American government to satisfy the bloodlust of Texas 
on account of the Houston riot. This 
was bad enough; but in addition to 
this there are today languishing in 
the United States Penitentiary at 
Leavenworth, Kan., 56 colored men 
sentenced to life imprisonment and 5 
men sentenced to imprisonment for 
15 years, all for the same alleged offence. This shameful injustice is a 
trumpet call to every American Negro 
and we should never rest until these 
men are pardoned and freed,— 
"Lord, these are Thine who pay the 
price 
For what a freeman's soul is 
worth,— 
Whose madness is their sacrifice 
That what they love may live on 
earth! 
Lord these are Thine!" 
THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN 
The International Council of Women 
meets every five years. This year it 
met in Christiania, Norway, and for the first 
time had an accredited Negro delegate, Mrs. 
Mary B. Talbert of Buffalo N. Y., and her 
alternate, Dr. Mary F. Waring of Chicago. 
The race has been represented unofficially 
twice before,—by Miss Hallie Q. Brown who 
addressed the London meeting in 1899 and 
by Mrs. Mary Church Terrell who spoke at 
the Berlin meeting in 1904. 
The delegates, including Mrs. Talbert and 
her daughter and Dr. Waring, traveled in a 
party via Italy, Switzerland, France, Belgium, Denmark, Norway and Scotland. 
There were five southern-born white women 
in the party: Mrs. Alexander Watkins of 
Miuter City, Miss.; Mrs. James Riley of 
Charlotte, N. C , former vice-president of 
the L'eneral Federation of Women's Clubs; 
Mrs. O. J. Chandler of Harrodsburg, Ky.; 
Mrs. Heisey of Great Falls, Mont.; and Mrs. 
Marsh of Wyoming. These women together 
with Mrs. Howard Gould during the whole 
78 days of the journey made the life of the. 
colored delegates as uncomfortable as possible. Mrs. Gould began the campaign on 
shipboard by repeating in a loud voice various tales of the systematic importation of 
southern colored women into the North for 
voting purposes. Repeated efforts were 
made to segregate the colored women in 
Italy and Switzerland. At the American 
Y. W. C. A. in Paris, where the party arrived late in the morning after an all night 
ride, all the white delegates were welcomed 
and accommodated while the colored delegates were even refused breakfast. At Antwerp, Mrs. Riley went to the proprietor of 
the hotel and demanded segregation of the 
colored guests, which he refused. Mrs. Watkins left the party at Brussels to avoid further contact. , 
In Birmingham, England, at the Queen's 
Hotel, Mrs. Heisey and Mrs. Riley refused 
seats at the table where Mrs. Talbert and 
her daughter were sitting and left the 
dining-room. At Copenhagen, Denmark, 
they were entertained at the American Consul. -Mrs. Gould, Mrs. Chandler and Mrs. 
Marsh, of Wyoming, refused to attend because the colored women were there. 
At the meeting of the council the colored 
women received every courtesy from the 
foreign delegates and from the American 
officials, Mrs. Phillip North Moore and Mrs. 
Joseph C. Merriman. During this time Mrs. 
Talbert published four articles on our race 58 TH E CRISIS 
problem in two leading Christiania papers. 
On the return there were several social 
functions of such importance that the Southerners were compelled to endure in silence 
the presence of the colored delegates. For 
instance, all the delegates were entertained 
by the King and Queen of Norway. All the 
Southerners were present. Lady Aberdeen, 
president of the Council, entertained the 
delegates and alternates at breakfast. Mrs. 
Riley was placed opposite Dr. Waring and 
did not leave the table. At Hadow House, 
Aberdeen, Scotland, on the way back, Lady 
Aberdeen entertained _ the whole American 
party. At her request Mrs. Talbert sat at 
her right and the representative of the Jewish women, Mrs. Nathan Harris, at her left. 
All the Southerners were present. Mrs. 
Riley sat at the right of Lord Aberdeen and 
Mrs. Merriman. conductor of the party, on 
the left. They were entertained at Edinburgh, Scotland, by the Common Council. 
All were present. 
And so the eventful journey ended with 
the colored women quietly and with dignity 
standing at their guns and the southern 
white women furious at the "social equality!" 
MARCUS GARVEY 
W. E. B. Du Bois 
MARCUS GARVEY was born at St. 
Ann's Bay, Jamaica, about 1885. He 
was educated at the public school and then 
for a short time attended the Church of 
England Grammar School, although he was 
a Roman Catholic by religion. On leaving 
school he learned the printing trade and 
followed it for many years. In Costa Rica 
he was associated with Marclam Taylor in 
publishing the Blue field's Messenger. Later 
he was on the staff of La Nation. He then 
returned to Jamaica and worked as a printer, being foreman of the printing department of P. Benjamin's Manufacturing Company of Kingston. Later he visited Europe 
and spent some time in England and France 
and while abroad conceived his scheme of 
organizing the Negro Improvement Society. 
This society was launched August 1, 1914. 
in Jamaica, with these general objects 
among others: 
"To establish a Universal Confraternity 
among the race"; "to promote the spirit 
of race pride and love"; "to administer to 
and assist the needy"; "to strengthen the 
imperialism of independent African States"; 
"to conduct a world-wide commercial and 
industrial intercourse". 
His first practical object was to be the 
establishment of a farm school. Meetings 
were held and the Roman Catholic Bishop, 
the Mayor of Kingston, and many others 
addressed them. Nevertheless the project 
did not succeed and Mr. Garvey was soon in 
financial difficulties. He therefore practically abandoned the Jamaica field and 
came to the United States. In the United 
States his movement for many years languished until at last with the increased 
migration from the West Indies during the 
war he succeeded in establishing a strong 
nucleus in the Harlem district of New York 
City. 
His program now enlarged and changed 
somewhat in emphasis. He began especially 
to emphasize the commercial development 
of the Negroes and as an islander familiar 
with the necessities of ship traffic he 
planned the "Black Star Line". The public 
for a long time regarded this as simply a 
scheme of exploitation, when they were 
startled by hearing that Garvey had bought 
a ship. This boat was a former coasting 
vessel, 32 years old, but it was put into 
commission with a black crew and a black 
captain and was announced as the first of a 
fleet of vessels which would trade between 
the colored peoples of America, the West 
Indies and Africa. With this beginning, 
the popularity and reputation of Mr. Garvey and his association increased quickly. 
In addition to the Yarmouth he is said to 
have purchased two small boats, the Shadyside, a small excursion steamer which made 
daily excursions up the Hudson, and a 
yacht which was designed to cruise among 
the West Indies and collect cargo in some 
central spot for the Yarmouth. He had 
first announced the Black Star Line as a 
Five Million Dollar corporation, but in February, 1920, he announced that it was going 
to be a Ten Million Dollar corporation with 
shares selling at Five Dollars. To this he 
added in a few months the Negro Factories 
Corporation capitalized at One Million Dollars with two hundred thousand one dollar PAKTIAL VIEW OF A SESSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN, CHRIST1ANIA, 
NORWAY; LADY ABERDEEN PRESIDING. (The arrow showB Mrs. Talbert.) 
59 6o TH E CRISIS 
shares, and finally he announced the subscription of Five Million Dollars to free 
Liberia and Haiti from debt. 
Early in 1920 he called a convention of 
Negroes to meet in New York City from the 
1st to the 31st of August, "to outline a 
constructive plan and program for the uplifting of the Negroes and the redemption of 
Africa". He also took title to three apartment houses to be used as offices and purchased the foundation of an unfinished Baptist church which he covered over and used 
for meetings, calling it "Liberty Hall". In 
August, 1920, his convention met with representatives from various parts of the United 
States, several of the West India Islands 
and the Canal Zone and a few from Africa. 
The convention carried out its plan of a 
month's meetings and culminated with a 
mass meeting which filled Madison Square 
Garden. Finally the convention adopted a 
"Declaration of Independence" with 66 articles, a universal anthem and colors,—red, 
black and green—and elected Mr. Garvey as 
"His Excellency, the Provisional President 
of Africa", together with a number of 
various other leaders from the various 
parts of the Negro world. This in brief is 
the history of the Garvey movement. 
The question comes (1) Is it an honest, 
sincere movement? (2) Are its industrial 
and commercial projects business like and 
effective? (3) Are its general objects 
plausible and capable of being carried out? 
The central and dynamic force of the 
movement is Garvey. He has with singular 
success capitalized and made vocal the great 
and long suffering grievances and spirit of 
protest among the West Indian peasantry. 
Hitherto the black peasantry of the West 
Indies has been almost leaderless. Its natural leaders, both mulatto and black, have 
crossed the color line and practically obliterated social distinction, and to some extent economic distinction, between them and' 
the white English world on the Islands. This 
has left a peasantry with only the rudiments of education and with almost no 
economic chances, grovelling at the bottom. 
Their distress and needs gave Garvey his 
vision. 
It is a little difficult to characterize the 
man Garvey. He has been charged with 
dishonesty and graft, but he seems to me 
essentially an honest and sincere man with 
a tremendous vision, great dynamic force, 
stubborn determination and unselfish desire 
to serve; but also he has very serious defects of temperament and training: he is 
dictatorial, domineering', '"Sordinately vain 
and very suspicious. He cannot get on with 
his fellow-workers. His entourage has continually changed.1
 He has had endless law 
suits and some cases of fisticuffs with his 
subordinates and has even divorced the 
young wife whom he married with great 
fanfare of trumpets about a year ago. All 
these things militate against him and his 
reputation. Nevertheless I have not found 
the slightest proof that his objects were not 
sincere or that he was consciously diverting 
money to his own uses. The great difficulty 
with him is that he has absolutely no business sense, no flair for real organization and 
his general objects are so shot through with 
bombast and exaggeration that it is difficult to pin them down for careful examination. 
On the other hand, Garvey is an extraordinary leader of men. Thousands of people 
believe in him. He is able to stir them 
with singular eloquence and the general run 
of his thought is of a high plane. He has 
become to thousands of people a sort of 
religion. He allows and encourages all 
sorts of personal adulation, even printing 
in his paper the addresses of some of the 
delegates who hailed him as "His Majesty". 
He dons on state occasion, a costume consisting of an academic cap and gown 
flounced in red and green! 
Of Garvey's curious credulity and suspicions one example will suffice: In March,­
1919, he held a large mass meeting at Palace Casino which was presided ever by 
Chandler Owen and addressed by himself 
?nd Phillip Randolph. Here he collected 
$204 in contributions on the plea that while 
in France, W. E. B. DuBois had interfered 
with the work of his "High Commissioner" 
by "defeating" his articles in the French 
press and "repudiating" his statements as 
to lynching and injustice in America! The 
truth was that Mr. DuBois never saw or 
heard of his "High Commissioner", never 
denied his nor anyone's statements of the 
wretched American conditions, did everything possible to arouse rather than quiet 
the French press and would have been delighted to welcome and co-operate with any 
colored fellow-worker. 
1
 Of the 15 names of his fellow officers in 1914 not a single one appears in 1918; of the 18 names of officers published in 1918 only 6 survive in 1919; among the small list of principal officers published in 1920 I do not find a single name mentioned in 1919. 
(To be concluded in January) THE HOUSING CRISIS IN NEW YORK CITY 
mm VICTOR R. DALY 
MUC H has been said of late concerning 
the acute shortage of dwelling houses 
in New York City. A great deal of time 
and space has been devoted to elaborating 
on the resultant suffering and privation 
that always follow in the wake of a shortage 
of any commodity. The Metropolitan press, 
welfare organizations, housing commissions, 
reconstruction committees and scores of 
like agencies, however, have been so taken 
up with the problems of white people that 
very little time has been found to devote 
to housing relief among Negroes. As is 
usually the case, then, unless the Negro 
himself takes the initiative and attempts to 
work out his own salvation by bringing his 
case to the direct attention of those who are 
in position to help him, he will find himself 
suffering from housing troubles long after 
the ills of others have been cured. 
In a recent survey of the housing conditions in the Negro section of Harlem, the 
New York Urban League has disclosed some facts that have provoked a great deal of attention to 
the question of Negro housing in 
the city. This survey shows that 
a housing situation exists in upper 
Harlem which is a menace not only 
to the lives and health of the people who reside in that particular 
section, but to the entire city of 
New York. The harder this fact 
can be driven home to the "powers 
that be," the quicker will be the 
relief extended to this community. 
The simple fact that the Negro 
cannot live anywhere that he may 
desire, by virtue of the policy of 
segregation, places his housing 
problem in a class by itself. As a 
result of segregation, there is an 
artificial restriction of the already 
too limited supply of dwelling 
houses. This accounts for the fact 
that Negroes are paying comparatively higher rents than other racial groups in New York City. 
The present average monthly rentals for the most modern apartments is about $12.50 per room. 
Even in the oldest cold-water flats 
in the most congested parts of Harlem the 
rentals average $9.50 per room. 
The population of Harlem has increased 
approximately from 55,000 in 1913 to 
150,000 today. During this time the actual 
housing facilities, although they have extended greatly, have by no means kept 
pace with the tremendous growth of the 
population, especially during the period following the war. So great is the congestion 
that 5,000 new-law apartment houses could 
be utilized tomorrow if they were available. 
A few specific cases will serve to show 
to what extent consideration of health and 
sanitation has been discarded in the mad 
search after shelter. In one instance we 
found a family of five, including three children, 5, 3 and 2 years old, occupying one 
room of a five-room flat in which there 
were altogether 16 people living. On an 
average, there are 14 families living in 
every 8 family apartment house, and 17 
NEGRO POPULATION (AUG-^1913) . 58 NEGRO POPULATION INCREASE..(AUG.I9I3 -to 
•
 1 AU G ipao) 
XSd MIXED POPULATION 
C ± WHITE POPULATION 
- 3 VACAN T LOT S 
E^ l FACTORIE S 
gncf WAREHOUSES. 
— r-»oc[HtfsLQKOl 
• 0EE0 LHtyH] 
•ED DEO DED 
]'D=D 033 LED 
DISTRIBUTIO N oP NEGR O POPULATIO N o/> HARLE M 
6l 62 TH E CRISIS 
families occupying 10 family houses. In 
one extreme case we found 33 families occupying a 16 family house. 
With conditions like these it is no wonder 
that such trivial questions as health, sanitation and morals have long since been 
thrown to the winds. We found that the 
infant mortality among Negro babies is 
three times that of any other section of the city. As we expected, the 
spread of contagious diseases has steadily 
increased; 16 per cent of Negro deaths in 
1914 were from tuberculosis, while in 1919 
tuberculosis accounted for 22 per cent of 
Negro deaths. Every week 13 Negroes die 
in New York City of tuberculosis. 
It is claimed that the solution of the general housing problem in New York City lies 
in the building of new houses. "Stimulate 
building!" is the cry of the hour. As far 
as Harlem is concerned this program offers small chance of direct relief unless 
municipal housing is adopted. Present day 
costs of building and construction, coupled 
with the scarcity of credit and mortgages, 
prevent Negroes themselves from erecting 
dwelling houses for their own use. Unfortunately, white investors have become imbued with the erroneous idea that apartment house construction for Negroes is an 
unprofitable business. Consequently the 
hope of relief by the method of new building 
by private capital is out of the question. 
For a generation Negroes have been living 
on the left-over housing of white tenants 
who have moved into other districts. If 
any immediate help is to come to Harlem 
it will have to be in this same manner. 
When houses can be secured for the white 
families now Jiving on the outskirts of the 
colored section, these families will move 
away. The landlord, confronted with the 
problem of keeping his apartments occupied, will be glad to welcome colored tenancy. 
Within the past 18 months Negroes have 
been investing heavily in real property in 
Harlem. Scores of apartment houses occupied by white families have been purchased 
by colored investors who have been replacing the white tenants by colored people. 
The courts have generally assisted these 
new landlords. Of recent months such procedure has been absolutely the only relief 
to the overcrowded colored section. Now 
even this is stopped. The recent anti-landlord legislation just passed by the Legislature of the State will react, unconsciously, 
to the detriment of the colored people. At 
present everybody is rejoicing over the fact 
that the new law makes it impossible for 
the landlord to dispossess a tenant except 
for one of the three following reasons: 
(1) actual non-payment of rent, (2) personal use of the premises for the landlord, 
(3) demolition of the building. Under 
these restrictions, how could a colored investor be able to get white families out of 
a house that he desires to use for colored 
tenants? 
Only by the personal volition of the white 
tenants themselves. . This is not likely. 
Consequently there is scant hope for any 
immediate relief of the housing congestion 
in Harlem. The intent of the law was 
good, doubtless, but for the Negro, it closed 
the only open door of relief. 
THREE BOOKS 
The Negro Faces America. By Herbert 
J. Seligmann. Harper and Brothers, New 
York. 
Rachel. By Angelina W. Grimke. The 
Cornhill Company, Boston. 
Children of the Mist. By George Madden 
Martin. D. Appleton and Company, New 
York. 
problem in the United States. There are 
a thousand problems with which race is 
more or less connected, frequently deliberately connected for an ulterior motive, in 
the absence of organic connection between 
race distinctions and the subject at issue." 
With this statement as his thesis Mr. 
Seligmann proceeds to point the connection 
between economic considerations and race 
relations which has prevailed in this counA FIRST step in an attempt upon the try ever since the Civil War. Just before 
*• hates, distrusts and preconceptions the Chicago race riot, for instance, a clash 
clustered about race is to separate and ex­ arose between the interests of two real 
amine them. There is, in fact, no race KUINS OF CHRISTOPHE'S PALACE, SANS SOUCI, HAITI 64 TH E CRISIS 
estate factions rather than between the 
two races. In the actual riot, the causes 
lay (1) in the entrance of migrating southern Negroes into white residential districts; 
(2) in hostility between union whites and 
non-union Negroes in the stockyards; (3) 
in political enmity engendered by the fact 
that a certain city administration won its 
election through the Negro vote. A careful survey of conditions in other cities 
where riots occurred shows the same type 
of causes. 
Mr. Seligmann points out that liberty and 
life have to be fought for almost daily by 
every Negro,—"the patience and determination and courage which go into the struggle 
are values that no nation can afford to 
spurn." Miss Sarah N. Cleghorn has said 
something like this last, but Mr. Seligmann 
is alone, I believe, in defining the white 
Southerner's penchant for colored woman. 
He works it out on a Freudian basis which 
assumes "that the choice of the mate is 
influenced by the characters impressed upo.i 
the infant male as belonging to his mother." 
Many Southerners receive their first impressions from their colored nurses. The inference is obvious. We find here too an 
idea since carried out by Professor R. T. 
Kerlin—"A white American desirous of a 
critical insight into the society in which he 
flatters himself he lives could not do better 
than read carefully a number of race-conscious newspapers published for and by Negroes of the United States." 
There are many valuable suggestions for 
intensive study on the part of the white 
student of race issues. Thus the author 
finds what all Negroes know, that the South 
was the real victor in the Civil War, that 
the vote became a class distinction only 
when the Negro became a candidate for it, 
that no real scientific data can be deduced 
from the measurement of the intelligence of 
Negro and white school children until racial characters can be isolated from the 
effect of social environment and that colored Americans have at last learned the 
necessity for organization and self-defense. 
Altogether The Negro Faces America is a 
book showing thought and research and 
calling for still more thought and research. 
RACHEL is a play as terrible, as searching and as strong as anything produced 
by the continental European dramatists,— 
including the Scandinavian. Indeed one must 
think of Ibsen, for the action progresses 
from one depth of sad dreariness to another. 
As a bit of writing, Miss Grimke has as 
usual turned cut a fine piece of work; as 
a bit of propaganda it leaves something to 
be desired. Undoubtedly a better effect 
would be gained by having the humiliation 
of the colored children acted rather than 
related. One lesson the play certainly 
teaches: Rachel, her mother and Tom have 
all let their troubles make them morbid, 
whereas John Strong is quite normal. Shall 
we not learn to look on color "as a state of 
mind" as Miss Ovington's Hertha puts it, 
—something mutable and transitory? 
FIGHT stories written simply and sympathetically by George Madden Martin 
give a new concept of the Children of the 
Mist who live in Mississippi, Louisiana, 
Florida, the rice fields of the Carolinas and 
the backwoods of Kentucky. These are 
people emerging from the fogs of slavery 
and gazing through a glass darkly on a 
freedom promised, but as "yet denied". Mrs. 
Martin has let the characters in the main 
speak for themselves so the reader must be 
touched and thrilled and saddened according 
to his own dictates. "The Sleeping Sickness" is the best story of the group, though 
almost all are good. But in this one Mrs. 
Martin aside from using a plot unique and 
yet inevitable, lets fall one or two gems 
"It ain't de law foh my boy I'm afraid uv, 
Mr. Tom," Angey explained to the white 
man. "En' it ain't de thought uv de law 
whut is mekin' de boy look ez yo' kin see 
he duz. It's de fear uv de lack uv de laiv 
wi' both uv us." And later Angey, splendid 
soul, says to the white woman whose son 
she might have saved, "Lemme learn yo' 
some'n', Miss Janie. Wu'k foh de goodwill uv de colored folks in case de time 
come w'en yo' gwine ter need it; it ain't no 
harder wu'k dan wu'kin' for dere ill-will." 
Mrs. Martin shows an almost uncanny 
realization of the distrust and its ramifications which colored people are inevitably 
bound to have of their white neighbors. Thus 
the inimitable Angey makes no" complaint of 
having vainly trusted her grandson to the 
sheriff. But she remarks: "When yo' gits 
yo' hand in a lion's mouth, pat him en rub 
him till yo' git it out, but don't yo' put it 
in any mo. . . . Puttin' it anudder way, I 
might say thet a mouse ought to be a fus'­
rate han' to keep away f'om cat-tracks." 
J. F . National • Ass ociaiion - for • (he • • ­
Advancement o/^ Colored-People. 
FUND S NEEDE D T O FIGH T ARKANSA S 
CASE S 
AL L readers of TH E CRISIS and members 
of the Association know of the long, 
difficult and as yet undecided fight that the 
Association is making to save the lives of 
12 Negroes sentenced to death in Arkansas 
and the freedom of 67 men sentenced to Ions 
prison terms for the alleged "massacre" 
in Phillips County, Ark., in October, 1919. 
As announced in the November issue of 
the Branch Bulletin, Colonel George W. 
Murphy, who has been serving as chief 
counsel of the Association in the defense of 
79 men and who was most vigilant and determined in his efforts to save the lives of 
these men, died on October 11. The cases 
of the 12 men sentenced to death, were first 
appealed to the Phillips County Circuit 
Court, where motions for new trials were 
denied. They were then appealed to the 
Supreme Court of the State of Arkansas 
where the verdict of the Phillips County 
Circuit Court in six of the cases was reversed and the cases remanded for new trial 
and in the six remaining cases the verdict 
of death was affirmed. The first six cases 
on being re-tried, were re-sentenced to death 
by the Phillips County Court. In the meantime in the latter six cases a motion was 
filed in the Federal Court of the Eastern 
District of Arkansas for trial there on a 
writ of certiorari. 
Similar action was taken in the remain 
ing six cases upon the men being re-sentenced to death. On October 11 the Supreme Court of the United States refused a 
motion to carry the cases directly from the 
Arkansas State Supreme Court to the 
United States Supreme Court, an effort 
made by Colonel Murphy to carry the cases 
immediately to the highest tribunal of the 
country. This decision was rendered on the 
same day that Colonel Murphy died. The 
cases will now have to be fought in the 
Federal Courts in Arkansas and if the 
Association should meet defeat there the, 
cases will then go to the Court of Appeals 
of the Federal Courts. If there an unfavorable verdict is rendered then the cases 
will go to the United States Supreme Court. 
Immediately following the trouble in 
Arkansas, the Association had little difficulty 
in raising funds. To date it has expended 
over $6,000 in the defense. It is obligated 
at present to pay within a few weeks an 
additional $5,000. That sum must be raised 
within a short time if the lives of the men 
in Arkansas are to be saved. The Association is therefore making an appeal to every 
person who wishes to see justice done in the 
cases of these men to contribute immediately in as large measure as possible to the 
Defense Fund. It makes this appeal to all 
persons whether they contributed to the 
original fund or not. Action must be taken 
HAITIAN ARTICLES IN PAMPHLET FORM 
The four article.? by James Weldon Johnson which appeared in The Nation, to­
•* gether with official documents secured by Mr. Johnson in Haiti last spring, 
and which have caused so great an upheaval in the United States during the past 
three months, have been combined and published in pamphlet form. The price is 
twenty-five cents a copy, which can be obtained by writing to the National Office* 
There is only a limited supply on hand. Persons desiring copies should write atl 
once for them. The investigation and the report thereon form one of the most 
damning indictments of imperialism ever published and should be included in the 
library of every person who wishes to read and keep a record of what has been done 
in the Negro republic of Haiti by the United States government and the National City 
Bank of New York. 
65 66 TH E
immediately as the Association is dependent 
upon its friends and supporters to aid it in 
this critical period. The men are guilty of 
no crime save that of protesting in a legal 
and legitimate fashion against vicious economic exploitation. The fight must be made 
to prevent their being legally lynched. 
VICTOR Y IN ROBER T L. HIL L CAS E 
ROBERT L. HILL, the alleged leader of 
-*-*-the "massacre" in Phillips County, Ark., 
in 1919, has been entirely absolved of all 
blame by the Attorney-General of the 
United States and both Federal charges 
against him dismissed. Thus victoriously 
ends one of the most dramatic legal battles 
in the United States since pre-Civil War 
days, when fugitive slaves sought asylum 
in northern states from oppressions in the 
South. The Federal Government has gone 
on record as recognizing that a Negro accused of a crime against a white man in a 
southern state cannot receive a fair and 
unbiased trial. 
A brief history of the rapidly developing 
chain of events in this case will be of interest. On January 22 Mr. Hill was arrested in Topeka, Kansas, and Governor 
Brough asked for his extradition. The N. A. 
A. C. P. immediately asked Senator Arthur 
Capper, a member of our National Board 
of Directors who was familiar with the facts 
in the case, to wire Governor Allen of Kansas, asking him not to grant the extradition 
of Hill until the Association was able to 
present the facts. Senator Capper also 
wired to Hugh T. Fisher, County Attorney 
of Shawnee County, Kansas, asking him to 
act as chief counsel for Hill. Through Senator Capper's aid Governor Allen and Mr. 
Fisher acted promptly. Had this not been 
done, there would have been but slight 
chance of Hill escaping a return to Arkansas and possible lynching. Thus the aid of 
two white members of the Association 
meant the saving of the life of a colored 
man. 
On January 27 the hearing on the extradition proceedings was held before Governor Allen. In spite of the protest of Attorney-General Arbuckle, a continuance was 
granted to permit the securing of sworn 
testimony showing that Hill was not tt,e 
leader of the insurrection. 
Finally, on March 23, after several hearings and the presentation of much evidence, 
Governor Allen decided, first, that Hill was 
 CRISIS 
not guilty of the crime charged and, second, 
that if Hill was returned to Arkansas his 
life would not be safe. He thereupon refused extradition. 
The State of Arkansas then attempted to 
secure Hill's extradition through the State 
Courts of Kansas. Upon this proving unavailing they attempted to use the Federal 
Courts. The first charge against Hill was 
that he had "impersonated a Federal officer." Finding that they would not be able 
to substantiate such a charge, the Arkansas 
authorities shifted ground to a new charge 
of "conspiring with one V. E. Powell to impersonate a Federal officer." Judge Pollock 
of the Federal Court of Kansas set April 
8 for a hearing on the Federal indictment. 
In the meantime, Walter F. White, of tha 
National Office, was sent to Washington, 
where he held a conference with Assistant 
Attorney-General William C. Herron and 
presented evidence to show, first, that the 
State of Arkansas was attempting to use 
the Federal Courts solely to get Hill back 
within the jurisdiction of the State Courts 
and, second, that since Mr. U. S. Bratton, a 
white attorney of Little Rock, who had 
prosecuted a number of white planters for 
robbing Negro share croppers, had be<m 
driven from the state under threats of death 
it was doubly dangerous for Hill, a colored 
man, to be carried back to that state. As a 
result of this interview the Federal Attorney at Washington ordered the United States 
Attorney at Little Rock to forward to 
Washington all evidence in the Hill case 
for examination. 
Later, upon the hearing held before Judge 
Pollock, a provisional extradition was granted to the State of Arkansas providing that 
Hill should be carried back to Arkansas to 
be tried upon the Federal charge in the Federal Courts, and that if Hill was convicted 
upon the Federal charge, that he was to 
be returned safely by the Arkansas authorities to the Federal Court in Kansas. The 
Arkansas authorities refused to accept such 
extradition papers and Judge Pollock released Hill under a $2,000 bond for a hearing at the October term of Court at Leavenworth, Kansas. 
On October 2 Mr. White was again sent 
to Washington for a conference with the 
Department of Justice. The Department 
had given the United States Attorney at 
Little Rock the opportunity of saving his 
face by allowing him to voluntarily dismiss N. A . A . C. P. 67 
the two charges against Hill. This he 
refused to do, whereupon the Attorney-General ordered both cases in the Federal 
Court against Hill to be dismissed. 
Thus ends one of the most dramatic legal 
fights the Association has ever undertaken 
and one which is undoubtedly to have a most 
far-reaching effect. Special credit is due 
Mr. Fisher, who, in spite of a very large 
law practice and his official duties as County 
Attorney, fought unceasingly for Mr. Hill's 
release and who refused not only to accept 
a fee, but would not even allow the National Office to reimburse him for personal 
expenditures made in connection with the 
case. 
Much credit is also due Messrs. James H. 
Guy, Elisha Scott and A. M. Thomas, colored attorneys of Topeka, who loyally supported and aided Mr. Fisher. 
DELINQUENT BRANCHES 
JIM-CROWISM, disfranchisement, segregation and lynching are still with us. 
We must continue the fight against the color 
line. We need the moral support of every 
colored citizen, but we cannot pay the lawyers' bills or the expense of a Haitian investigation with moral support. It takes 
money as well as enthusiasm to do anything 
worth while. 
To meet our various expenses we are depending upon the branches. Since the fundamental purpose of the Association is the 
"Advancement of Colored People," colored 
people ought to support it to the best of 
their ability. Some branches are doing their 
full share, others are doing less, and still 
others are doing nothing. Simply to keep a 
branch on record costs the Association annually $9.30. The National Office apportioned 
among the various branches, according to the 
colored population of the community, the 
amount necessary to insure the carrying out 
of Jhe program for 1920. This was published in TH E CRISIS for August. We are 
quite confident that these amounts were not 
impossible sums if the officers and the executive committees took their work and the responsibility connected with it* seriously. It 
may be that some of them are much too busy 
to give adequate time to the Association. 
If so, it is only fair to the branches that 
they yield their places to others. 
The National Office does not want to drop 
any branches but it does not feel that it can 
carry for another year those branches which 
are doing no active work and giving no financial support. 
Below is a list of those branches from 
whom no word has been received since January 1, 1920. This list is published in order 
COLORED REFT/GEES AFTER A SOUTHERN FIRE 68 TH E
to give the officers and members of these 
branches an opportunity to revive them and 
to prevent the revocation of their charters. 
Charters of delinquent branches will be revoked at the January meeting of the Board 
of Directors unless some report is received 
from them prior to that date. If the officers 
of these branches will take no action, we are 
inviting the members to write to the National Office if they wish to keep their branch 
alive. 
ALABAMA NORTH CAROLINA 
Klocton Fayettevill e 
Ensley Lexingto n 
ARIZONA Raleig h 
Bisbe e Wilmingto n 
Tucso n WinstonSale m 
ARKANSAS OHIO 
Edmondscm Miam i Count y 
Jonesbor o Zaneavill e 
Pin e Bluff OKLAHOMA 
CONNECTICUT McAleste r 
Stamfor d Muskoge e 
FLORIDA OREGON 
Palatka Portlan d 
St . Augustin e PENNSYLVANIA 
Tamp a Carlisl e 
GEORGIA Ilarrisbur g 
Alban y West Cheste r 
Columbu s Yor k 
Dubli n SOUTH CAROLINA 
Hawkinsvill c Beaufor t 
Maco n TEXAS 
Savanna h Austi n 
Thomasvill e Bailey ville 
Valdosta Ben Jiley 
Waycross Fort Wort h 
IDAHO Gonzale s 
Bois e Greenvill e 
ILLINOIS Hearn e 
Eva n st o n Hig h ban * 
Jolie t Legget t 
Madiso n Marli n 
Maywoo d Marshal l 
Quinc y Mu m ford 
INDIANA Ora n ge 
Sout h Ben d Palestin e 
Segui n 
Earlingto n 
KENTUCKY Silsbe e 
Owensbor o Templ e 
Paduca h Wac o 
Waelde r 
Ba y Cit y 
MICHIGAN Whartort 
Sagina w VIRGINIA 
Charlottesvill e MISSOURI Louis a Count y Springfiel d WEST VIRGINIA NE W JERSEY Blucfiel d Paterso n Morgantovv n 
NE W MEXICO CANADA 
Albuquerqu e Windso r 
ANNUAL MEETING 
r TH E Annual Meeting of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People will be held in the East Room 
of the Sage Foundation, 130 East Twentysecond Street, New Yor k City, on the afternoon of Monday, January 3, at two o'clock. 
There will be reports from officers and 
branches and the nominations for Directors 
will be voted upon. 
 CRISI S 
NOMINATIN G COMMITTE E 
THE Nominating Committee for members 
of the Board o f Directors o f the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People reports these nominees for 
terms expiring December 31 , 1923 : 
Dr. J. Max Barber, Philadelphia. 
Prof. George W. Cook, Washington, D. C. 
Mr. Harry E. Davis, Cleveland. 
Mr. A . H . Grimke, Washington, D. C. 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Dr. V. Morton Jones, New York. 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York. 
Mr. J. E. Spingarn, New York. 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston. 
Mr. William English Walling, New York. 
The Nominating Committee: 
HARRY H . PACE, Chairman. 
ROBERT R . CHURCH, 
CHARLES H. STUDIN. 
TH E NE W SECRETAR Y 
A T the December meeting of the Board of 
Directors, James Weldon Johnson, Acting Secretary of the N. A. A. C. P., was 
elected Secretary. 
Mr. Johnson was born in Jacksonville, 
Fla., in 1871. He was educated at Atlanta 
and Columbia Universities, and has acted as 
United States Consul in Venezuela and 
Nicaragua. He joined the National Association as Field Secretary in 1917. He is a 
well-known author and poet. 
JAMES WELDON JOHNSON The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
THE time draws near the birth of Christ; 
The moon is hid, the night is still • 
A single church below the hill 
Is pealing, folded in the mist. x 
Ring out false pride in place and blood, 
The civic slander and the spite; 
Ring in the love of truth and right, 
Ring in the common love of good. 
Tennyson: In Memoriam. 
* * * 
John H. Harris writes us concerning his 
forthcoming book, Africa—Slave or Free? 
This is now about to be published in the 
United States by Messrs. Dutton. I prepared this little book with the single object 
of giving a bird's-eye view of Afric a and the 
African today — economically, politically, 
ethically, religiously. The book" has been 
warmly received here [London-], and is being 
widely adopted by students and organizations, as a text-book, and I can safely say 
that no one can peruse this book without 
having at their fingers' ends the A B C of 
the African situation. I know there is no 
such book on the market anywhere. 
* * * 
The New Yor k CaU says: 
Darkwater, W . E. B. DuBois' intense 
and moving study of the position of the 
darker races in the modern world, is soon to 
appear in a French translation. The publishers, Harcourt, Brace & Howe, announce 
that a third printing of the book has been 
found necessary here. 
* * * 
A n Englishman, Captain W. D. Downes, 
M. C , has written With the Nigerians in 
German East Africa. (Methuen, London.) 
The Spectator says: 
Captain Downes writes throughout as one 
who felt it an honor to go through this campaign with the W . A. F. F., as one "who 
suffered and laughed, fought and trekked, 
worked and rested, starved and fed with 
this gallant band of black volunteers from 
Nigeria, fo r it must be remembered that 
every Nigerian soldier that went to German 
East Afric a volunteered his services for 
that campaign. I am sure that if those pioneers of Nigeria, Glover and Freeman, could 
have seen the regiment, of which they were 
the founders, at Mahiwa, they would have 
seen something of which they would have 
been justly proud. .. . I hope that 
when my readers have read this account, 
poorly told as it is by an amateur writer, 
they will in future respect the fighting black 
man of Africa, for he has at least proved 
himself a man. We in England owe our 
Negro brother-subject a great debt of gratitude for all he has done for our beloved Empire. Many a native of Nigeria has trekked 
his last trek and fought his lasc fight far 
away from his own land for the sake of that 
Empire which has given him freedom, justice 
and all that makes life worth living. Ruskin once said that war was an injustice of 
the ignoblest kind at once to God and Man, 
which must be stemmed for the sake of them 
both. This story has been written for the 
express purpose of letting the outside world 
know how nobly the West African soldier 
has helped to stem this tide of injustice to 
civilization." 
The narrative abounds in acts of heroism 
performed by Nigerian soldiers, in remaining with wounded officers under heavy fire 
or shielding them with their own bodies. Of 
Sergeant-Major Belo Akure, the hero of a 
dozen fights, Captain Downes says: 
"I can honestly state I have never seen a 
braver man. His one idea is that his officers 
must on no account run into unnecessary 
danger; on no account will he let an officer 
go in front of him on a road. An y cover 
that is handy must be reserved to conceal 
the officers, even if he himself must lie down 
in the open. I have seen him deliberately 
get in front of a European so that if any 
one should be hit it would be himself." 
* * * 
Important periodical literature on the Negro during the current year: 
America's Ireland—Haiti, Santo Domingo. 
Nation, February 21, '20. 
Negro Problem in South Africa. Nation, 
March 13, '20. 
Prince of Abyssinia Makes History. W. 
A. Anderson. Travel, March, '20. 
Problem
April* '20. 
 of Egypt. Review of Reviews, 
Politics vs. Progress in South Africa. C. 
Dawborn. Living Age, June 19, '20. 
Our Debt to Negro Sculpture. Literary 
Digest, July 17, '20. 
Ar e We Going to Ac t Justly in Africa ? 
S. Olivier. Contemporary Review, August, 
'20. 
Self-Determining Haiti. James Weldon 
Johnson. Nation, August 28, '20. 
THREE INDIANS 
MUNSEY' S MAGAZIN E speaks of three 
Indians, particularly of Bal Gangadar 
Tilak: 
Probably no two men have been more influential in modern India than G. K. Gokhale 
69 70 TH E
and B. G. Tilak. In spirit and method these 
two Indian leaders represent opposite types 
—the one a distinguished statesman and orator, the other having neither eloquence nor 
instinct for public affairs, but wielding great 
influence through his two newspapers published at Poona, the Mahratta, in English, 
and the Kesari, in Mahrati. Tilak's stormy 
career has just come to an end, to the great 
grief of nationalist India. He had extraordinary personal gifts and the power of 
inspiring fanatical devotion, and for forty 
years he has been at the head of the nationalist movement. In India his name is one 
with which to work magic or terror. He 
was either adored or passionately opposed. 
Bal Gangadar Tilak was sixty-five years 
of age when he died. He was a Mahratta 
by race, a Brahman by caste, a lawyer by 
profession, and a journalist by choice. When 
yet a young man, he was prosecuted by the 
government for defaming a native ruler, the 
Diwan of Kolhapur, whom he accused of 
cruelty. He served his sentence of a hundred days in prison, and came out resolved 
to free his country from bureaucracy. The 
nationalist movement that he started in the 
early eighties at Poona was the foundation 
of the Young India party, which swept the 
whole peninsula. Yea r after year found him 
in difficulties with the government. Finally, 
in 1907, the extremists, of whom he was Lhe 
leader, broke up the National Congress at 
Surat, bombs were hurled in Bombay, and 
Tilak was again arrested. 
His long-drawn out trial before a Parsee 
judge and jury was a sensation. Tilak conducted his own defense, and his address to 
the court lasted six days. He was convicted 
and sentenced to six years' imprisonment in 
the fortress at Mandalay, from which he 
was released only a few weeks before the 
outbreak of the great war. Visitors to London last year, during the debates on the bill 
which has made radical changes in the government of India, might have seen him, a 
conspicuous figure wearing the magenta 
turban of his race, at every session of the 
House of Commons and in the committeeroom of the House of Lords, where he appeared as a delegate of the National Congress of India. 
Sanskrit students who knew Bal Gangadar 
Tilak hold that; if his life had not been 
devoted to politics, he would have been in 
the front rank of orientalists. He is the 
author of a curious, widely discussed book, 
"The Arctic Home of the Vedas, " written 
during his prison terms, and designed to 
prove by astronomical and other evidence 
that the great Aryan migration began from 
a region within the Arctic circle. 
The third Indian is a physiologist: 
An Indian scientist, Professor Jagadis C. 
Bose, is one of the most talked-of physiologists of Europe. Nearly twenty years ago 
he read a paper in London, before the Royal 
Society, showing that tin could be tired and 
iron could suffer from an affection corre­
 CRISI S 
sponding to tetanus in human beings. When 
he went on to assert that plants could give 
response to electric impulse, members of the 
society declared that electric response as described in the paper was absolutely impossible. Bose took up the challenge, and within 
a year had proved his point to the satisfaction of the Royal Society itself. 
Bose's great success in this line of research is the result of his marvelous skill 
in the construction of micro-apparatus for 
detecting the smallest movements in plants. 
Several years ago he perfected a mechanism 
that magnified one hundred thousand times, 
enabling him to record growth at the rata 
of a hundred-thousandth part of an inch per 
second. "Man is never satisfied," said Bose, 
and now he has succeeded in constructing 
an apparatus that magnifies a million times. 
To realize what this means, the professor 
points out that if the snail's pace could be 
so magnified, it would race forty times 
around the earth in twenty-four hours. In 
this apparatus the slightest movement upsets a very delicately balanced magnetic system, with a mirror deflecting a ray of light 
to the extremity of an arc of any desired 
magnitude. 
EDUCATION IN SOUTH 
CAROLINA 
IN Greenville, S. C., one Dave Traxler 
urges the citizens not to refuse Federal 
educational aid (as provided fo r under the 
Smith-Hughes law) in the fear that Uncle 
Sam will insist on the attendance of white 
and black at the same schools, or the employment of Negro teachers, for white pupils. He has proof positive not only that 
such will not be the case, but that colored 
citizens will not even secure their share of 
such an appropriation. Take, for instance, 
this interesting letter appearing in the 
Greenville Piedmont: 
LAURENS, S. C. 
Hon. D. B. Traxler, Greenville, S. C.: 
Dear Sir— 
I shall gladly give you the facts referred 
to in your inquiry some days ago. I shall 
itemize these facts separately: 
Total expenditures
school
 for white 
$143,482.70 
Total expenditures
school
 for Negro 
 14,057.00 
Total number white teachers . . 171 
Total number Negro teachers.. 80 
Total number of white schools. 71 
Total number of Negro schools. 74 
Total white enrollment 5,907 
Total Negro enrollment 6,180 
The teaching of Vocational Agriculture 
under the Smith-Hughes Law has been satisfactory at Gray Court and at Laurens in 
this county. 
Under this law the Federal Government TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 71 
pays one-half of the salary; the State onefourth and the local community the other. 
In the plan here at Laurens the communities of Prospect, Copeland, Trinity Ridge 
and Laurens received the full time of a 
teacher and a community worker for the 
sum of $440.00. The same was the case at 
Gray Court-Owings where the service of a 
full-time teacher was received for one-fourth 
of his salary, the national government and 
state government paying the other threefourths. 
Very truly, 
R. T. WILSON. 
Superintendent of Education, Laurens County, South Carolina. 
* * * 
Another letter reads: 
GREENVILLE, S. C , August 16, 1920. 
Mr. D. B. Traxler, Greenville, S. C: 
My Dear Sir— 
Under the terms of the Smith-Hughes act, 
passed by Congress in 1917, there has been 
spent in Greenville county during the last 
school year, ending July 1, 1920, the sum of 
$3,265.00, which amount was appropriated 
by the Federal government for the teaching 
of agriculture and other subjects in the several schools so aided. None of the money 
so contributed was used for the teaching of 
Negroes or was used to hire Negro teachers, and the spending of the funds so appropriated was left absolutely in the hands of 
the State authorities. 
With kind regards and good wishes, I am, 
Yours very truly, 
M. C. BARTON, 
Superintendent of Education, County of 
Greenville, S. C. 
CREOLES 
MAU D CUNE Y HAR E writes in the 
; * Musical Observer: 
The history of the Creole folk-song of 
America is interwoven with the history of 
the southwest section of the country and 
particularly that of the State of Louisiana. 
In August, 1779, in the wa r of American 
Independence, a little army of 1,430 men 
composed of Creoles, two companies of which 
were free men of color, and 160 Indians, 
marched under Galvez to defend themselves 
against the British. For 16 years Louisiana, which had been founded by French 
immigrants under Iberville, had been a 
Spanish possession—a gift of King Louis 
X V to his Spanish cousin, Charles III of 
Spain. "* 
In 1791, Negroes of Santo Domingo rose 
in rebellion and a few refugees found their 
wa y to Louisiana. Skilled in sugar-making, 
they revived this prosperous industry which 
had long remained dormant, although sugarcane had been introduced 40 years previous 
by the Jesuits o f St. Domingo. 
Eight years later (a period to which the 
folk-songs often refer), Napoleon's soldiers 
threatened the West Indies. A large number 
of whites and mulatto refugees with their 
slaves had escaped in the St. Domingan insurrection and fled to Cuba. They were now 
by the wa r between France and Spain, again 
forced to become exiles, and within three 
summer months of 1809, over five thousand 
persons, white, free mulattoes, and black 
slaves, came to New Orleans from Cuba. 
They continued to emigrate from Cuba, 
Guadeloupe and other French West Indies, 
until about ten thousand persons, two thousand of whom were free people of color, 
took refuge in New Orleans. 
By 1788 the Louisiana province contained 
1,701 free men and 21,465 slaves amidst the 
French and Spanish settlers. The Carmelite 
Convent played its part in these early days, 
as an educational centre. Here attended 
both white and free colored children; many 
of the latter class had wealthy parents who 
paid a high price for their tuition. Children of the wealthy were sent to Paris to 
complete their education. In fact, says an 
old Creole neighbor and friend of my grandmother, Mons. Victor, who came to New Orleans from Martinique in 1847, "Many of the 
women and children did not know whether 
they were Creoles or white, nor could the 
whites themselves tell who was white and 
who was Creole, so generally was the population mixed, while the city was largely 
French in manners and life." 
The town of St. Martinsville on the Bayou 
Teche, was nicknamed "Le petit Paris," and 
here it was that King Louis Phillipe (when 
Duke of Orleans) was entertained. 
"The streets, banquetts, we should say, 
were bright with color, the nights filled with 
song and laughter. Through the scene the 
people of color add the spice of color in the 
life; they add the zest of romance." With 
the French spirit greatly predominating, 
from this mingling of races sprang the Creole, and in this environment, the Creole song. 
Wh o are the Creoles? The word itself is 
used in Europe as well as in the French 
West Indies and in the South-West section 
of this country. "Creole" as used to denote 
race is a term that is continually being misunderstood and warmly argued. The word 
"Creole" is from the Spanish "Criollo" and 
the French verb "creer" to create—a created 
race. 
Of the Spanish Creoles, Calderon in 
"Latin America " says, the three races, Iberian, Indian and African, united by blood, 
from the population of Spanish America, 
while Arthur R. Gray in "The New World " 
says, the European established in America 
becomes a Creole; his is a new race, the 
final product of secular unions. If all the 
races of the new world were finally to unite, 
the Creole would be the real American. 
(Continued on page 74) joseph and mary come to bethlehem 
AT last we've reached the town where in a bygone year 
Prince David saw the light,—that king without a peer. 
"Take courage, Mary mine; beside yon climbing spire 
Nestles a little inn, 'tis there we shall retire." 
The watchman in the tower 
Cries, "Seven is now the hour." 
"Ah ! sir, within your house may we not shelter find— 
Some little quiet nook? For heaven's sake be kind! " 
"You r plea is all in vain; you two must further fare ; 
My house is filled with folk; seek lodgings otherwhere." 
The watchman in the tower 
Calls, "Seven is still the hour." 
"We'll seek another place; see that house opposite, 
All bright with light and cheer,—'tis there we'll sup and sit." 
"Joseph, your arm! Dear God! I find myself so weak . 
I cannot travel more, or other -lodgings seek." 
The watchman in the tower 
Warns, "Eight is now the hour." 
"Ho ! Host of the Three Crowns, tell me, you must have room 
Some little hole for two. We'll not mind dust or gloom! " 
"I take but noble folk who pay a handsome meed. 
Begone you beggars! Go! I hate your lowly breed! " 
"Ah ! sir, upon my knees, for great Jehovah's sake, 
I pray you scorn us not; we have so much at stake!" 
"Away , poor carpenter, some other shelter find, 
My house was never meant for people of your kind!" 
The watchman in the tower 
Sighs, "Nine is now the hour." 
"Ah ! Madame auburn-haired, for God's sake give to me 
Some shelter, some retreat within your hostelry!" 
"Wh y I've no bed myself; tonight all comfortless 
Upon a bed of straw, I'll shiver in distress!" 
"Oh, Madame! " Mary begs in tears and on her knees, 
"Yo u realize my plight: compassion, if you please!" 
I 
7 2 translated by jessie 
Fauset 
"Yes, Mother-soon-to-be, your plight is very clear; 
You r time is imminent—it must not happen here." 
The watchman in the tower 
Moans, "Ten is now the hour." 
"A t least until I find some shelter, some retreat, 
You'll let her linger here, upon that vacant seat?" 
"O f course she may, poor child. 'Tis plain she needs to rest. 
Quick, try the White Horse Inn or else the Magpie's Nest." 
"Yo u chattering, foolish wife! " a shrill voice cries in scorn, 
"You'll linger at the door till night turns into morn? " 
"Hush, that's my husband! Go ! We'll have to separate! 
Farewell, farewell, good folk; God's mercy be your fate! " 
One wails within the tower— 
"Eleven is the hour now. " 
Poor Joseph in despair and utterly unable 
To find a lodging fit, espies a little stable. 
Within this lowly home, as prophesied Isaiah, 
The little Christ is born, the Lord, the world's Messiah. 
The watchman in the tower 
Chants, "Midnight is the hour." 
Noel! Noel! Noel! 
Chimes out each happy bell. 
Bring frankincense and myrrh! 
Play pipe and dulcimer! 
Ring bells with silvery voice! 
The Christ is born, rejoice! 
The Christ, so long foretold 
By prophets new and old, 
The Christ for whom we've yearned, 
To us at last hath turned. 
Play pipe! Play dulcimer! 
All things that ever were 
The happy chorus swell,— —An old French Chanson rendered 
Noel! Noel! Noel! by Yvette Guilbert. 
73 74 TH E
AFRICANS, ASIATICS AND 
ANGLO-SAXONS 
THE Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society presents the case of the 
expropriation of the Mashona and Matabele 
territory in Africa : 
The cardinal fact of the land situation was 
that the ownership of the entire lands of 
Southern Rhodesia was declared by the 
Chartered Company to be vested in them as 
a commercial asset, that is to say, that the 
lands practically belonged not to the native 
inhabitants but to private persons in this 
country who happened to be shareholders in 
the company. This contention carried with 
it the logical sequence that the natives of 
these territories had (and have) lost all 
ownership rights to their lands—that no 
single Mashona or Matabele owned or owns, 
either by tribal or individual right, the 
ground on which his hut is erected, the 
gardens he tills, or what every student of 
Afric a knows, or should know, is dearer 
and more sacred to him even than to the 
European, the burial grounds of his family. 
It cannot be too clearly understood that the 
expropriation of the land ownership rights 
of the 800,000 natives of Southern Rhodesia 
is absolute in degree, and applies to every 
native from the family of Lobengula to 
every private individual in the territory— 
not a vestige of native ownership remains. 
* * * 
Here is the much vaunted British justice: 
The total costs incidental to the native 
case have been about £7,000, which sum the 
Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society advanced for the natives. The Chartered Company refuses, and the British Government, though it can do so, will not insist 
upon the application of the resolution of the 
Legislative Council to the costs of the native 
case. This attitude obviously implies that 
the Mashona and Matabele people are not 
to be deemed part of the "inhabitants and 
people" of Southern Rhodesia—except, of 
course, for purposes of taxation! 
* * * 
Japan has no notion of sitting quiet under 
American racial distinction. An Associate 
Press dispatch tells us: 
The Japanese Government, as a result of 
yesterday's meeting of the Cabinet, will, in 
the first place, vigorously pursue the negotiations concerning American anti-Japanese 
legislation, and, in the second place, will 
push firmly the question of racial equality 
in the League of Nations conferences, according to the Hochi Shimbun today. These 
decisions will be considered further at today's meeting of the Diplomatic Advisory 
Council, the newspaper says. 
A graduate of Columbia University, New 
York, M. Osako, who followed Representative Kodama, attributed the anti-Japanese 
sentiment in the United States to racial differences. He declared that the whites were 
 CRISI S 
oppressing the colored races, backed b y the 
power and influence of cvilization. Japan 
was the only country strongly opposing 
white oppression, M. Osako asserted, and 
therefore had incurred the hatred of the 
Americans. 
In his address to the Provincial Governors 
yesterday, Premier Har a said the situation 
of the world never was more- strained than 
at present. Hitherto, he declared, Japan's 
problems had been confined to the Orient, 
but international competition had arisen, resulting in a marked increase in Japan's responsibility to the world and the expansion 
of her national expenditure. 
BLACK JEWS 
DR. JACQUE S FAITLOVITCH , of Geneva, tells of the existence of black 
Jews in Abyssinia. He writes in the American Jewish Year Book: 
In Abyssinia, in the vast empire o f the 
Negus, exist Jews called "Falashas." Their 
skin of a light black color and the regular 
and finely cut features which characterize 
them speak of a non-African race. Their 
name "Falasha," a surname given to them 
by the natives, signifying exiled immigrants, 
proves that they are strangers who came 
from abroad to establish themselves in Ethiopia. They called themselves Beta Israel 
("The House of Israel"), and with great 
pride state that they are the offspring of the 
stock of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Certainly no historical documents exist in writing, but theirl oral traditions, faithfully 
transmitted from father to son, sustain 
their claim as Jews. They maintain 
even to this day, as they have maintained 
throughout the centuries in this remote corner of the Dark Continent, the assertion of 
descent from our ancestors, and this sincere 
claim, next to their religious hope, is their 
most cherished heirloom. Whe n evils befall 
them, it constitutes their strength and their 
consolation. They always show themselves 
worthy sons of our people, and in the past 
they have many times demonstrated that 
they possess the characteristics of our race, 
the vivifying force of the existence of Israel. 
This quality distinguishes them from their 
compatriots, all of whom. Christians, Muslims and Pagans, bear witness to the relationship of the Falashas to the Jewish race 
and religion. 
Amon g the Falashas there exist no differences of religion nor any distinction of class. 
All profess the same faith, practise the same 
customs, and live on a basis of equality. 
The priests and the Dabteras [learned men] 
follow trades, and work like everybody else 
to provide for their needs. Only in the 
matter of headgear are they distinguished 
from the others; they wea r turbans of white 
cloth, while the other Falashas, like all 
Abyssinians, g o bare-headed b y day and by 
night, indoors as well as out of doors. 
Their occupation, originally that o f mili­ME N O F TH E MONT H 75 
tary mercenary service under the different 
sovereigns, and later trade on the banks of 
the Nile and on the littoral of the Red Sea, 
is mainly agriculture and manual labor. 
They are in their country almost the only 
people who are able to follow, with any skill, 
the trades which are practiced in Abyssinia, 
and thanks to their skill they are on good 
terms with their non-Jewish compatriots. 
Abyssinia needs the Falashas who furnish 
the articles indispensable for the maintenance of the country. 
PUBLICITY AS USUAL 
The publicity methods of the Washington, D. C , Post with regard to Negroes 
speak for themselves: 
SNATCHE S GIRL'S PURS E 
Unidentified Negro Takes $16.50 From Telephone Operator 
Helen Barnes, 17 years old, living on 
Sligo Mill road, near Blair road northeast, 
reported to the police last night that she had 
a pocketbook containing $16.50 and some 
car tokens snatched by an unidentified Negro 
as she was crossing a lot near Blair road 
and Rittenhouse road on her way home. 
Miss Barnes is a telephone operator, and 
told the police last night that she has noticed 
a Negro loitering about several times. The 
case was investigated by policemen from the 
Tenth Precinct and Detectives Thompson 
and Embrey, of headquarters. 
* * * 
But the retraction carefully refrains from 
stating the truth until the very end of the 
paragraph so that he who runs may not 
read: 
Helen M. Barnes, 17 years old, who reported to the police of the Tenth Precinct 
last Saturday night that she had been attacked by a Negro and robbed of a purse 
containing $16.50, signed a statement at police headquarters yesterday to the effect that 
she had not been robbed of any money or 
attacked by a Negro. 
THREE POEMS 
CHARLES BERTRAM JOHNSON 
SHADOWS 
WHEREVER turn I will or may, 
• * They fall across my. onward way; 
But what I yield not heart to see, 
I know can never master me. 
II 
RACE DREAMS 
THE chance here to be nobler men— 
Filled with the conscious breath of 
God— 
Whether free in the city's din, 
Or delving wisely in the sod. 
III 
SNOW 
All day the clouds 
*• Grow cold and fall, 
And soft the white fleece shrouds 
Field, hill and wall; 
And now I know 
Wh y comes the snow: 
The bare black places lie 
Too near the sky. 
Men of the month 
DR. E. M. BRAWLE Y has retired from 
the pulpit at White Rock Baptist 
Church, Durham, N. C , after 8 years' 
service. During this period the debt on the 
church has been reduced from $20,000 to 
$7,000, all current expenses have been met 
and a parsonage has been purchased. The 
congregation presented Dr. Brawley with a 
silver loving cup. 
Dr. Brawley was horn in 1851 at Charleston, S. C. He was the first student in the 
school of theology at Howard University. 
In 1875 he was graduated from Bucknell 
University. Dr. Brawley has organized 76 TH E CRISI S 
Baptist churches, Sunday schools and conventions throughout the South and is the 
author of a "Commentary on Mark" , a textbook on Evangelism, a number of tracts 
and pamphlets, and editor of The Evangel, 
a monthly pamphlet. He was president of 
Selma University for 4 years and in 1908 
founded Morris College at Sumter, S. C. 
The well-known Benjamin G. Brawley, the 
author and historian, is his son. 
AT Trinidad, B. W. I., Emanuel Mzumbo 
Lazare has been appointed as the first 
Negro member of the Legislative Council 
by Lord Milner, to succeed Norman Lamont. The Hon. Mr. Lazare was born at 
New Town, Port of Spain, Trinidad, on December 24, 1864. In 1891 he married Virginia Noelize Swoard, who recently died. 
Mr. Lazare was the first Negro to pass the 
examination of the Law Society, Inc., of 
England; in 1888 he succeeded in having 
the Governor, Sir William Robinson, declare a public holiday in celebration of the 
jubilee of Negro emancipation; as a Lieutenant, in 1897, he was one of the officers 
of the military contingent at the Diamond 
Jubilee celebration of Queen Victoria. He 
serves on the Ground Provisions Committee 
and is a member of the Agricultural Society of Trinidad and Tobago, an advisory 
member of the Trinidad Workingmen's Association and the only Negro member of 
the Board of Agriculture; sketches of his 
life with photographs have appeared in The 
Graphic, The Sketch, Black and White, and 
Army and Navy, all popular English papers. 
The Grenada says of Mr. Lazare: "He 
stands up in his manhood as a full blooded 
Negro with no apology for his existence." 
T TURNE R LAYTO N was born in 
•* • Washington, D. C , where he attended 
the public schools and Howard University. 
He is the son of the late Professor John T. 
Layton, from whom he received most of 
his musical training. For the popular song 
field Mr. Layton has written "Sweet Emalina My Gal", "Sweet and Pretty", "Everybody's Crazy 'Bout the Doggone Blues", 
"Good-Bye Alexander", "Cute Little Wig ­
glin' Dance", "Afte r You'r e Gone" ; he has 
written restricted songs for such vaudeville headliners as Bert Williams, Nor a 
Bayes, Eddie Leonard, Stella Mayhew, 
Blanche Ring, Emma Carus, Al Jolson, 
Eddie Cantor, Eva Tanguay, Va n and 
Schenk and Belle Baker. 
Mr. Layton has as his collaborator Mr. 
Henry S. Creamer. Mr. Creamer was born 
in Richmond, Va., June 21, 1879, the son 
of the Rev. Henry Creamer. He attended 
the public and high schools of New York 
City. Fo r many years he was an instructor 
and demonstrator of stage dancing, the first 
dramatic critic for the Amsterdam News, 
and a founder of the Clef Club. Amon g 
Mr. Creamer's works are the lyrics for 
"To o Much Isaacs", "Dand y Dixie Minstrels", the late Ernest Hogan's "Oysterman", S. H. Dudley's "Smart Set", Roger 
and Creamer's "Old Man's Boy" , and the 
following songs: "Dea r Old Moonlight". 
"Wh y Do Yo u Wait for Tomorrow" , "Dearest Memories", "I've Got the Finest Man", 
"Droo p Dem Eyes" , "Cle f Club Chant", 
"Twenty Years" , "I'm Wild Abou t Moonshine" and "Show Me How. " 
The complete musical score of Mr. and 
Mrs. Coburn's Broadway production, "Three 
Showers", which played in New Yor k City 
at the Harris Theatre, wa s written by 
Messrs. Layton and Creamer, who also have 
succeeded in having over thirty compositions recorded with the Victor, Columbia 
and Emerson phonograph companies. 
JOSHUA HENR Y JONES , JR., the son of 
Bishop J. H. Jones of the A . M. E. 
Church, was born at Orangeburg, S. C , 
November 22, 1876. While in Central High 
School, at Columbus, he contributed verse 
to the Ohio Sunday State Journal and to 
the high school paper, of which he was a 
founder. In his senior year he won the 
prize for the class song for which there 
were 135 contestants. He attended Ohio 
State and Yale Universities and was graduated from Brown University in 1903. He 
secured a position with the Providence 
News as sports editor and after three years, 
was made head of the Labor Department of 
the paper and later founded the Union Advocate, a weekly publication devoted to 
union news. He has served as head of the 
sports department of the Worceste r Evening 
Post; assistant city and news editor oi the 
Lawrence Sun-American; city editor of the 
Boston Daily Advertiser with a staff of 
from 25 to 30 men; and a membe r of the 
editorial staff o f the Boston Post. 
Mr. Jones has published through the 
Stratford Company, Boston, a volume of 
poems, "Th e Heart o f the World" , a book 
of elegant style, noble thought and deep 
sentiment. J. TURNER LAYTON
JOSHUA H. JONES, JE.
BE. E. M. BRAWLE Y 
 HENRY S. CREAMER 
 EMANUEL M, LAZARE 
77 The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G - ALLISO N 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
' I ""HE St. Louis Post Dispatch, a white 
daily, has reproduced in its rotogravure 
section a bust of the late Mme. C. J. Walker made by E. C. Gaither, a Negro sculptor. 
C George W. Lattimore, colored proprietor 
of the American Southern Syncopated Orchestra and Singers, has leased Philharmonic Hall in London, England, for 2 
years at a rental of $50,000 per year. 
C Ground has been broken for the Douglass Theatre in Baltimore; it will be erected 
by the Quality Amusement Corporation at 
a cost of $400,000. 
C J. W. F. Leman, Director of the Steel 
Pier Orchestra at Atlantic City, N. J... has 
consented to engage for the next season 
Edward Stello, a Negro soloist. This will 
be the first appearance of a colored soloist 
on the Steel Pier. 
(I The H. W. Gray Company has published 
Mr. Paul C. Bolin's "Communion Service 
in G". This work is dedicated to St. Phillip's Protestant Episcopal Church of New 
Yor k City, of which Mr. Bolin is organist 
and choirmaster. 
C An active branch of the National Association of Negro Musicians is the Indianapolis Music Promoters' Club, of which Ella V. 
Thomas, pianist, is president and Adelaide 
Thornton, Supervisor of Music in the Colored Schools, is secretary. The club has 
instituted a monthly Community Program, 
a series of three artists' recitals and the 
maintenance of a piano quartette. 
d Marie Ford of Los Angeles, CaL, has 
accepted the position of Director of Music 
at Lincoln Institute, Jefferson City, Mo. 
(I Mme. E. Azalia Hackley has given her 
second folk-song festival in Detroit. On 
the program were compositions by Burleigh, Cook, Dett, Johnson and Diton. 
Among the artists were Cleota Collins, Bertha Hansbury and L. D. Collins. Ralph 
Holmes says in the Detroit Journal: "There 
is no reason why every season should not 
see a concert by the pick of the local colored singers that would pack the largest 
auditorium in the city with music lovers 
of all races and colors. " 
C The Dudley-Murray United Theatre 
Corporation has been organized at Washington, D. C , with an authorized capital 
of $500,000. It will erect The Douglass 
Theatre at 1333-41 Yo u Street, N. W., on 
a lot 117 by 145 feet. 
G A collection of six Creole folk-songs arranged by Maud Cuney Hare is to be published by Carl Fischer, New York . Philip 
Hale says in the New Music Review: "One 
awaits eagerly the book of Creole songs 
that Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare is editing. 
Mrs. Hare, by birth and early environment, 
" is well qualified to edit and annotate these 
songs." 
G West Virginia Collegiate Institute has 
presented Kemper Harreld in a violin recital; Mrs. Clarice J. Michaels wa s accompanist. 
C Hazel Harrison, pianist, has begun her 
fall concert tour with a piano recital in 
Detroit, Mich. 
C A Community Service Orchestra of 60 
members has been organized in Chicago by 
Charles Elgar. 
G A t Orchestra Hall, Chicago, James A. 
Mundy has presented soloists and a chorus 
in concert. Mary E. Jones was the soprano soloist and Cleo Dickerson the pianist. 
G Marie Peck Johnson, T. Theodore Taylor and George Johnson—known as The 
Johnson-Taylor-Johnson Trio, are touring 
the East and South in concert. Mrs. Johnson is the soprano soloist, Mr. Taylor the 
pianist and Mr. Johnson the tenor. 
G The Williams Singers have appeared in 
a two-day concert in Louisville, Ky.~ 
EDUCATIO N 
IOTA CHAPTER , a graduate chapter of 
the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, has been 
organized in Atlantic City, N. J.. George 
E. Brice is basileus. 
78 TH E HORIZO N 79 
C. Francis C. Sumner, Ph. D., Clark University '20, has been appointed Professor 
of Psychology and Philosophy at Wilberforce University. 
C. Emily C. Charlton o f Brooklyn, N. Y „ 
has been graduated from First Institute of 
Podiatry as an honor student; she has 
passed, the State Board of Medical Examiners. 
C. A t the last session of the Mississippi 
Legislature the Board of Supervisors of 
Sunflower County had a special law passed 
allowing them to levy a 1 mill tax for Delta 
Industrial Institute, Inc., instead of the 
annual appropriation of $2,000; the new 
law gives the school an income of $22,500 
a year. William F. Reden, a graduate of 
the State University of Iowa, is principal. 
C One hundred colored students have entered Ohio State University for the present 
semester; they are distributed in all departments. 
G. The Democratic school board at Wilmington, Del., dismissed Mrs. Alice DunbarNelson, a teacher of English in Howard 
High School, because she attended a political meeting in the home of Senator Harding against the wishes of her principal, Ray 
Wo o ten. 
C During the past 10 years the number of 
white school children in South Carolina has 
risen from 156,051 to 226,065, an increase 
of 70,014; the number of colored school 
children during this period increased from 
184,364 to 251,980, an increase of 67,616. 
(L The State of Kentucky has fixed a minimum wage of $75 a month for school teachers, white and colored.. 
C A t the colored Wendell Phillips High 
School, Chicago, a course of study in Negro 
history and literature has been installed 
with Willis N. Huggins as instructor. 
G. A n institute on venereal disease control 
and social hygiene will be held in Washington, D. C , November 22-December 4, and 
an All-Americ a conference, December 
6-11. Information as to courses, etc., will 
be gladly furnished b y the United States 
Public Health Service, Washington, D. C. 
C. A t Howard University, Dwight O. W . 
Holmes has been elected Dean of the 
Teachers' College, succeeding Mr. L. B. 
Moore ; Dudley D. Woodward, Dean of the 
Senior College, succeeding Carter G. Wood ­
son; Dr. St. Elmo Brady is head of the 
Department of Chemistry and O. C. Thornton, instructor in the School of Finance; 
Dr. W . E. Morrison, a graduate of Tufts 
College, is football coach. 
d In Texas 113 colored high schools report 
an enrollment of 30,000; 34 have 4-year 
courses; 37 have 3-year courses; 19 have 
2-year courses; 23 have one-year courses; 
62 of the schools have libraries, with 15,000 
volumes. 
G A Department of Commerce has been 
opened at Clark University under Prof. 
George Griswold, a graduate o f Albion College. The course requires 2 years and is 
open to high school graduates who wish to 
become stenographers, accountants, secretaries and business managers. 
C Carnegie Hall has been dedicated at Morgan College, Baltimore. Its cost is $95,000. 
The late Mr. Carnegie gave $50,000 of this 
sum. 
(I Fannie Cobb Carter, for 9 years a member of the faculty of West Virginia Collegiate Institute, has resigned. 
C Fifty Negro students, 35 men and 15 
women, are enrolled at the University of 
Iowa ; at Iowa Agricultural College, 25 Negroes are enrolled, the largest number in 
the history of the school. 
d Dr. Walter B. Jerrick, a graduate of 
Lincoln University '13, and the University 
of Pennsylvania Medical School '18, has 
gone to Scotland to pursue a post-graduate 
course in medicine at the University of 
Edinburgh. 
POLITIC S 
AT Cleveland, Tenn., the Negro nominee 
for Alderman, Dr. T. E. Stevens was 
elected over his white opponent by a 107-76 
vote. While at Jellico, Tenn., Dr. Stevens 
served as a member of the city Board of 
Health. 
C. John C. Hawkins, a Negro in New Yor k 
City, has been elected to the Assembly for 
his third term on the Republican ticket. 
C In St. Louis, Mo., 18,000 Negro men and 
12,378 Negro women registered, a total of 
30,378. In 1910 the Negro population was 
44,541; it is now approximately 90,000. 
(I Mrs. Mary Seymour, a colored woman 
at Hartford, Conn., was a candidate for 
Congress on the Farmer-Labor ticket. 
C The following Negroes were elected members of the Legislature: Walthall M. Moore, 
Republican, St. Louis, Mo.; and Dr. W. G. 
Alexander, Republican, Orange, N. J. 
MEETING S 
A PUBLIC reception has been tendered 
to Bishops Robert E. Jones and Matthew W. Clair at the Academy o f Music, 80 TH E CRISI S 
Philadelphia. Bishops Jones and Clair are 
the first Negroes to attain the rank of 
bishops in the Methodist Episcopal Church. 
There have been several colored Missionary 
Bishops. 
C Hattie B. Marble, 
Doctor of Pharmacy at 
Yazoo City, Miss., has 
been elected for her 
second term as First 
Vice - President of the 
colored National Medical Association, which 
has 2,000 members. 
MISS MARBLE Miss Marble is the only 
woman who has presided at a meeting of the organization. 
C. The 17th annual conference of the 
Rhode Island Union of Colored Women's 
Clubs has convened at Union Congregational 
Church, Newport. Mrs. J. J, Robinson was 
elected president; Miss Mary Jackson and 
Mrs. Henrietta Armstrong were elected 
first and second honorary presidents. 
(I The 26th annual meeting of the AfroAmerican Presbyterian Council has been 
held at Capital Street Church, Harrisburg, 
Pa., of which the Rev. B. M. War d is 
pastor. The Rev. L. F. Ellerson of 13th 
Avenue Church, Newark, N. J., was elected 
president, succeeding the Rev. C. B. Allen 
of Pittsburg. 
d The National Beauty Hair Cultun'sts 
League has held its first annual convention 
at Philadelphia. Mme. Estelle of New 
Yor k is president. 
INDUSTR Y 
A T Chapel Hill, N. C , the Progressive 
Manufacturing Company has been organized with an authorized capital stock of 
$50,000. The Rev. L. H. Hackney is president of the board of directors. 
d The entire stock of the colored First 
Standard Bank, Louisville, Ky., representing a capital and surplus of $110,000, has 
been sold in less than 5 months. 
(I Mr. J. T . Jackson, a real estate broker 
at Germantown, Pa., recently handled $84,­
000 worth of business in one week. 
(I Amon g achievements of Negroes at 
Columbus, Ohio, are the purchase of a $50,­
000 theatre and a $40,000 hospital. 
(I Tidewater Bank and Trust Company, 
Norfolk, Va., reports a paid-in capital stock 
of $100,000; surplus fund and undivided 
profits, $21,647; furniture and fixtures, 
$16,705; cash in vault and due from banks, 
$137,003; deposits, $437,178. 
(L The Mechanics and Farmers' Bank at 
Durham, N. C , reports $17,038 cash in 
vault; furniture and fixtures, $3,017; real 
estate, $537; capital stock paid in, $45,097; 
deposits (savings) $96,283; deposits (subject to check) $148,757. 
C A strike of 11,000 mine workers in Alabama has been in progress 6 months. John 
L. Lewis, International President of the 
United Mine Workers of America , has 
telegraphed to President Wilson urging that 
the Department of Justice institute legal 
proceedings to compel observance of the 
principle of collective bargaining and the 
protection of the civil rights. Many of the 
miners are colored. 
C. The Modern Savings and Trust Company has been organized at Pittsburgh, Pa., 
with a subscribed capital stock of $125,000. 
(I The Commercial Bank and Trust Company has been opened at Richmond, Va., as 
a $250,000 enterprise. Mr. Joseph Matthews is director and Mr. T. C. Erwin, 
president. 
(I Allie Williams, a Negro at Sioux City, 
Iowa, raises guinea pigs for the medical 
profession. He receives orders throughout 
the country. 
TH E CHURC H 
IN a membership drive at First Congregational Church, Augusta, Ga., Mrs. S. S. 
Johnson reported 154 new members in 60 
days. The Rev. C. S. Ledbetter is pastor. 
([ El''° r W . H. Green reports 6000 colored 
members o f the Seventh Day Adventist 
Church; during 1918-19 they raised $400,­
000. Elder Green is secretary o f the North 
American Negro Department with headquarters at Detroit, Mich, 
il Mt. Zion M. E. Church at Georgetown, 
D. C., has celebrated its 104th anniversary. 
The Rev. Albert Mitchell is pastor. 
CRIM E 
THE following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Greenville, Ala., Oct. 14—Select Reid, 
shot; wounding foreman. 
Fremont, N. C , October 19—Norman 
Artis; peeping into woman's room while 
hired by the husband to do detective work. 
C Mr. P. H. Robinson o f Jacksonville, Fla., 
informs us that TH E CRISIS' record of the 
lynching of Hosey Poole at Pensacola, Fla., 
August 13, is an error; that Hosey killed 
his brother, was arrested, tried and convicted of first degree murder and hanged. TH E HORIZO N 8i 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
ALICE WAR D SMIT H has been ap­
•* *• pointed a policewoman at Washington, 
D. C. Miss Smith is a colored graduate of 
the University of Washington, Seattle; she 
has served as headworker for Lincoln 
House, Glen Cove, L. I., and a special 
worker for the Henry Street Settlement in 
New York. 
C W . L. Houston, a Negro at Fort Scott, 
Kan., has been retained as attorney for the 
Order of Railroad Station Agents, a white 
organization. He is the first colored attorney to appear before the Interstate 
Commerce Commission. 
C In the competitive examination for 
nurses in the Department of Health, New 
Yor k City, Miss Lavenia Moore headed the 
list of 100 applicants. The Misses Margaret Harris and Nellie Mosely were also 
successful competitors. 
G Mayme D. Turner at Philadelphia has 
been appointed Assistant Inspector of 
Housing and Sanitation in the Bureau of 
Health at a salary o f $1300 per year. Miss 
Turner with an average of 80% stood first 
on the list of 7 candidates, including 5 men, 
and is the first colored woman appointee. 
C Since 1910 Mississippi's population of 
1,789,182 has been decreased by 7,932 or 4%. 
This is attributed to the migration of Negroes. 
G J.Williams Clifford, formerly a Lieutenant 
of the 367th Infantry, 92nd Division A. E. 
F., has resigned his position as Special 
Representative of colored soldiers and sailors in the Bureau of Wa r Risk Insurance, 
"because o f continual limitations of my 
official duties by prejudiced southern white 
superiors." 
C Markers Carter, after 20 years' active 
service, has been transferred from Chief 
Gunner's Mate, U. S. N , to the Fleet Naval 
Reserve. The captain in commending Mr. 
Carter, who is a Negro, said: "You r record shows that you have committed no offense against law and discipline or failed 
to perform any duty assigned in a most 
efficient manner." 
G A t Pine Bluff, Ark., 500 Negroes have 
been made homeless as a result of a fire. 
The damage is estimated at $300,000. 
G The Bar at Fort Smith, Ark., has admitted its first Negro lawyer, in the person 
of Attorney Edward D. Dobbins. 
G A t Cleveland League Park, Ohio, Harry 
J. Walker, a Negro, was Official Announcer 
for the World Series baseball games. 
G Robert S. Lockett is the first Negro in 
New Yor k to be appointed a mounted patrolman. 
G William E. Parsons, a Negro at Santa 
Fe., N. M., won second place in a statewide 
subscription contest for the Daily Neiv 
Mexican, a white paper, and was awarded a 
$1,200 Overland touring car. 
G Catherine B. Allen, daughter of Mr. and 
Mrs. W. F. Trotman of Brooklyn, N. Y., 
is the first colored woman to be appointed 
Assistant Librarian in the New York Public Library. Miss Allen received her library 
training at Howard University and has 
been assistant librarian at Tuskegee Institute. 
G Mrs. Powhatan Bagnall, a colored woman of Boston, Mass., has been appointed 
Field Worke r for the United States interdepartmental Social Hygiene Board. 
G From January 14-July 20 the Citizens' 
Defense Fund of Little Rock, Ark., raised 
$10,426 to defend the 12 Negroes convicted 
in connection with the riot at Elaine. Of 
this sum $6,100 has been spent in attorney 
fees and the remainder in cost and attendant expenses. This money was in addition to the expenditures of the N. A. A. C. P. 
Mr. J. G. Thornton is chairman of the commission. 
G Mr. Sol T. Plaatje, author of "Native 
Life in South Africa " and editor of a newspaper, has sailed for Montreal, Canada, in 
connection with the work of the World 
Brotherhood Congress; he will visit the 
United States. 
C Members of the Sulgrave Institute have 
visited Hampton Institute as a part of their 
itinerary arranged in celebration of the 
first American Legislative Assembly, which 
was held at Jamestown, in July, 1619. Lord 
Rathcreedan, the spokesman, paid warm 
tribute to Hampton. 
G Secretary Daniels has appointed a Court 
of Inquiry to investigate in Haiti charges 
made in connection with the American Occupation. 
C The Negro Commission of Missouri appointed by Governor Gardner for the betterment of industrial, educational, housing, 
home life, health and living conditions, has 
offices in the State Capital. Mr. R. S. 
Cobb is secretary of the Commission. 
G Twenty colored women have been called 
from various parts of the country to attend 
the third Extension Training Course for 
colored Y . W. C. A. secretaries. 82 TH E
G A t St. Louis, Mo., two colored city detectives, Addison Logan and William 
Crockett, have been awarded bronze medals 
tor honorable service. 
C The following awards have been made in 
the N. A. A. C. P. lynching essay contest: 
First prize, $50—Arthur Williams of Lincoln University; second prize, $30—Lorimer 
Milton of Brown University; third prize, 
$20—Donald B. Goodloe of Howard University. 
PERSONA L 
THE marriage is announced of Miss Eva 
V. Clay, teacher of child hygiene for 
the Board of Health at Newark, N. J., to 
Mr. George H. Faulk, State Superintendent 
of the American Workmen's Insurance 
Company of Washington, D. C. Miss Clay 
served as a Red Cross nurse at Camp Grant, 
111., and is a graduate of Freedmen's Hospital. 
d Mr. and Mrs. Joseph M. Abbott of 
Spout Springs, Appomattox County, Va., 
have been married 45 years; they are the 
parents of 15 children. 
MR. AND MRS. JOSEPH M. ABBOTT 
G Mrs. Anna Pitts Clifton at Atlanta, Ga., 
has given birth to her 24th child; 8 of the 
children are alive. Mrs. Clifton is 54 years 
of age and her husband, Charles Clifton, 
57. 
C Dr. J. Hee'.ey Barber, a graduate of 
Meharry Medical College, is dead at Atlanta, Ga., where he had practised for the 
past 14 years. 
C The remains of the late Sergeant Peter 
Defour who died at Brest, as a member of 
the Medical Detachment A. E. F., has arrived at Trinidad, B. W. I., his home, where 
a military burial was held, 
d Mrs. Anna Tubman at Philadelphia, Pa., 
is the mother of 18 living children. Mrs. 
Tubman, who is 43 years of age, has been 
married 29 years. 
 CRISI S 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
SIXTY-SEVE N organizations,representing 
29 of the largest cities, were represented 
at the National Urban League's Annual 
Conference held in Newark, October 20-23. 
Urban League executives from 25 cities were 
in attendance. The reports indicate: Permanent general improvement in health among 
Negroes; that the industrial position of the 
Negro worker while serious on account of 
increased migration from Europe and slowing up in certain industries shows no cause 
for alarm as concerns the Negro ; that racial 
co-operation which developed during the war 
is on the increase; that southern Negroes 
are steadily coming northward, 
d The Industrial Department of the New 
Jersey Urban League placed last month a 
gang of colored workmen under their own 
foreman with the Standard Oil Company at 
Rahway, N. J. 
d The New Yor k Urban League provided 
convalescence and fresh air outings for 305 
persons last summer. The pre-natal clinic 
opened in Harlem in July has advised in 
876 cases of expectant mothers. The League 
was instrumental in securing to colored 
dining car employees a wage increase as allotted to other railroad employees by the U. 
S. Wag e and Adjustment Board. New openings for employment were made with the 
United Chemical Company and the Schlesinger To y Factory. 
d The Cleveland organization's report for 
the fiscal year ending October 1, shows the 
placing of six personnel workers in plants 
and the employment of eight colored foremen 
who had been trained in the school for foremen inaugurated by William Conners, Executive Secretary. In co-operation with the 
Cuyahoga Farm Bureau and the Farm Department of the city, Negroes are being 
placed on farms as workers, tenants and 
owners. Surplus labor is being distributed 
in nearby towns. Four thousand workers 
were placed with 992 in skilled positions. 
The Department of Economics shows 2,162 
families visited and 164 new bank accounts 
opened. 
d The League during the past nine years 
has made 64,452 placements of Negro workers in positions not before held by them, 
d Frayser T. Lane, of the Chicago Urban 
League, and Assistant Director of the Community Service, has been appointed Executive Secretary of the newly organized Kansas City Urban League. TH E CRISI S 83 
CI Maurice Moss, 1920 Fellow of the National Urban League at the New York School 
of Social Work , has been appointed Director 
of the Frederick Douglass Boys' Club of To ­
ledo, Ohio. 
0 Fellowships for the year 1920-1921 have 
been granted by the National Urban League 
to William A . Daniels at the Graduate School 
of Social Administration, Chicago University; Ruth W . Howard at the School for Social Workers, Boston, Mass.; and Phila A. 
McGillery at the Pennsylvania School of Social Service, Philadelphia. 
FOREIG N 
THE Conference of Africans from British 
dependencies has met and sent a deputation to London. Resolutions passed by 
the conference are: "Tha t this conference 
views with great disfavor the propaganda of 
the Empire Resources Development Committee with respect to the British West African Colonies, and is strongly of the opinion 
that the natural resources of the British 
West African dependencies are not for the 
exploitation of concessionaries under State 
control." Other resolutions passed dealt 
with the palm kernels export duty, which 
the conference pledged itself to endeavor to 
repeal; with judicial reforms, particularly 
deploring the modifications in British West 
Afric a of the right to trial by jury, and 
protesting against the denial o f the right 
to representation by Counsel in the Provincial Courts; with the flogging of women, 
which the conference wholly condemned as 
a barbarous practice for any offence whatever. 
(I The Building Workers' International 
Union in East London, South Africa, has 
opposed the introduction of a rate of 1 shilling 3 pence for colored workers and 1 shilling 9 pence for white workers, and demanded a flat rate of 1 shilling 6 pence for all 
workers. 
C Lord Sinha, Indian Under-Secretary for 
India, has resigned at London, England, 
and been succeeded by the white Earl of 
Lytton. Lord Sinha and other Indian leaders insisted upon the appointment of Secretary Montagne as Viceroy o f India because 
of his firm stand in condemning the Amritsar massacre and other repressive measures 
in India; the appointment was refused. 
C A law dated March 17, 1920, provides 
for the organization in Paris in 1925 of an 
Interallied Colonial Exposition and for the 
building of a permanent colonial museum. 
 ADVERTISE R 
PARENTS 
and 
TEACHERS 
Is it a CHRISTMAS Gift to Your 
Children ? Then why not a Year's 
Subscription to 
THE BROWNIES'BOOK 
A monthly magazine designed especially for our children which attempts to bring to them : 
/. The best in pictures and stories 
of Negro life. 
2. The life and deeds of famous 
men and women of the Negro 
race. 
J. The current events of the world 
told in beautiful language which 
children can understand. 
THE BROWNIES' BOOK has appeared monthly since the January, 1920, 
issue. Its circulation is still less than 
5,000 copies per month. In order to keep 
the magazine at its present high standard—as wc are determined to do—we 
must have at once 12,000 subscribers. 
Won't you help us now to reach that 
figure? 
If each person reading this page will 
send us just one paid-up yearly subscription to THE BROWNIES' BOOK 
—or tzvo subscriptions if you prefer—
the future of the magazine is secure. 
SPECIAL OFFER: Five paid-up 
vearly subscriptions to the BROWNIES ' 
BOOK sent in at one time will entitle 
the sender to a year's subscription free. 
This offer holds good until midnight of 
December 31, 1920. 
15 Cents per copy $1.50 per year 
Agents Wanted Subscribers Wanted 
Sample copies sent on request. 
DuBois and Dill, Publishers 
2 West 13th St. 
NEW YORK , N. Y. 84 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro GirU, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNE, - - Principal. 
30-DAY SYSTEM Positions Secured 
DERRIC K 
BUSINES S SCHOO L The School of Results The Only One of Its Kind 
SHORTHAND TOUCH TYPEWRITING 
BOOK-KEEPING OFFICE TRAINING 
W e are now in OU R OW N NE W 
BUILDING . 
Spacious class room* equipped with 
every modern office device. 
Derrick Students learn quickly and 
earn while they are learning. 
ENROLL IMMEDIATELY 
TO INSURE Class PLACEMENT 
COMFORTABLE DORMITORIES FOR YOUNG WOMEN 
Write for Catalog 14—Full information of Fall Term. 
1514 PINE ST., PHILADELPHIA, PA. M. J. DERRICK, Prin. & Mgr. 
The Stenographers' Institute Shorthand. Typewriting, 
Bookkeeping. Commercial Law 
Edward T. Duncan. Pres.. 1227 S. 17th St., Phila, Pa. 
A MONE Y GETTE R because It Is A CROW D GETTER . 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
Th e Slabtow n Conventio n 
A n entertainment In one act; full of wit 
%nd good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Nigh t PRICE , 50c 
MISS NANNI E H. BURROUGHS , Author 
Lincoln Heights, Washington. D. r. 
GENUINE $12.00 IMPORTED C^fi O 
VELOU R HA T 0= 
Delivered 
Free 
BECOMINGT O YOUN G 
AN D OL D 
Write quick this amazing bar­ gain. Only limited lot. Wonderful qual­ " 'mpurtedveloor, rd-breakinff cat 
Just send address and size for this SEN D N O MONE Y wonderfu l 
ported genuine black veloor hat. Beautiful fedora style. Flex­ ible brim. Can be turned up or down . Made o f the finest qual­ ity, very silky, imported black velour. Fine wide grosgrain black silk ribbon band. Genuine leather, non-soilable sweat band. A hat von can wear, season after season, for years. Don't Send a Penny—Pay only S6.S9 C. O. D. We pny delivery charjres. We Guarantee to refund your money immediately, if you Can match it for less than 312.00. Save Money—Writ e Today before this astounding offer is withdrawn. He sure to give size. 
BERNARD-HEWITT & COMPANY 
DEPT H 044 900 W. VAN BUREN ST., CHICAGO, ILL. 
Atlant a U niversit y 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately Addreas 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY n ATLANTA GA 
TW O GREA T BOOK S fo r $2.5 0 NO LIBRARY COMPLETE WITHOUT THEM 
(1) The History of the Negro Race and Negro Soldiers In the 
Spanish-American War, Dating Back to Egypt and the Pharoas—4U0 pages, 60 illustrations. (Retails alone for $1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina State Board of Education. 
(2) The Pictorial History of the Negro in the Great World 
War, giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of battle scenes by Colonel Haywood of the Fighting Fif­ teenth New York, Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph Tyler and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think, only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESSi E. A. JOHNSON, 17 Wemt 132nd Street, New York, N.Y. 
Mention T H E Cu m THE 85 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
1920 
The Southern Aid Society of 
Va., Inc., has striven during 
1920, as always heretofore, to 
render to its policyholders a 
superior service during sickness, accidents and the dark 
hour of death. As a result of 
its efforts to keep faith with the 
people, the society has done a 
larger and more satisfactory 
business during 1920 than ever 
before. 
Therefore at this joyous season of the year we first give 
thanks to Him from whom Cometh all good things; then to the 
good people who have so willingly and consistently entrusted to our care and keeping the 
sacred duty of protecting their 
firesides in the time of sickness, 
accidents and death; and last, 
but not least, to that band of 
ever faithful co-workers—our officers, superintendents, agents 
and clerks—for their loyal devotion to the interests of both 
the policyholders and the Society. 
The success of 1920 inspires and prepares us for bigger 
and better service during 1921. 
If you live in Virginia—you should have the superior protection provided only by the unmatched policy of the 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. Home Office: 520 N. Second Street RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies Throughout the State 
OFFICERS AN D EOAR D OF DIRECTORS 
A. D. PRICE, Pres. B. A. CEPHAS, 3rd ViccEDW. STEWART , 1st A. WASHINGTO N Pres. 
Vice-Pres. W. E. BAKER, Treas. C. N. JACKSON 
B. L. JORDAN, Sec. JAS. T. CARTER, 2nd W. E. RANDOLP H W. A. JORDAN, Asst. 
Sec. 
Vice-Pres. & Atty. 
Mention T H E C RISIS . 86 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
soothing the after-smart of sha
N~ 
Madam C.J. Walkers 
Witch Hazel Jelly 
<fl A sharp razor and good lather are not enough 
to prevent a tingling smartness after the 
morning shave. 
«]j An application of Madam Walker's Witch 
Hazel Jelly soothes the skin, prevents chap and 
assures comfort after shaving. 
35 centi of Agents and Druggists 
Made by the Mme.C. J.Walker Mfe. Co. 
640NorthWest St.. Indianapolis. Ind 
Mention T H E C RISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 87 
The R. G. Doggett Amusement Corporation, Inc. will present 
The Bramhall Players and a superb cast of black and white players in 
"JUSTICE " 
A Drama of Race, Love and Law 
IN THREE ACTS 
and 
"THE FATHER'S SONS" 
A Peace of Killing 
Both by BUTLER DAVENPORT 
at the 
LAFAYETTE THEATRE 
7th Avenue, between 131st and 132c! Streets, New York, N. Y. 
THE WEEK OF NOVEMBER 29 
"Justice" is a big, powerful, virile drama of tolerance toward the 
individual, appealing to every lover of humanity. 
"Uncle Tom's Cabin" went far to free the Negro's body from bondage; "Justice" will go far to liberate the white man's mind from 
prejudice. 
"I think, my friends, you are guilty of a great wrong against God 
and humanity. This Negro question is still to be settled." These 
words are as true today as when spoken by John Brown—and this 
drama of "Justice" shows the way to solve this problem of the color 
line. 
:-: Comment s :-: 
"Justice" is a great play. It is ten years ahead of its time.—Lee 
Shubert, Manager. 
"Justice" is the most panoramic play I have heard. It seemed as 
if I saw the people as you read it. It is five years ahead of its time.— 
Henry Miller, Actor-Manager and Co-Star with Blanche Bates in "The 
Famous Mrs. Fair." 
"Justice" is a great play. It should be played at once, but won't 
be in the condition our theatre is in today.—Emma Goldman, AuthorLecturer. 
The Corporation has arranged also to present Mr. Davenport in 
readings from "Justice" and other plays for Clubs and Literary Societies. 
For information regarding the above attractions, address— 
R. G. DOGGET T 
302 West 137th Street New York, N. Y. 
MENTION T H E C RISIS . 88 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MISS MADELINE ALLISON 
SHOPPER r^r^r ; • Would you not like to do your Christmas shopping in New York City? 
Miss Allison is a colored business woman, horn in New York and thoroughly familiar with its 
shops. If you will write her of your wants, she will send you descriptions and prices by return mail. 
Meantime, here are a few suggestions: 
Stationery- Assorted colors, white, pink, blue, lavender; 
high grade linen finished stock; ribbon tied; 
46 envelopes, 24 sheets of paper and 24 correspondence cards . . . 8Q cents per box and 
up. White linen cloth finished paper; _ 84 
sheets of paper and 84 envelopes; ribbon tied. 
$4.68 per box. 
FOUNTAIN PENS 
Made of pure para rubber; 14 karat solid gold diamond point pen; full chased 
barrel, 88 cents each and up. 
Sterling Silver filigree pen; the silver is inlaid over the vulcanite; space is reserved on barrel for engraving name of owner, $6,17 each. 
WATC H FOBS 
Attractive silk watch fob with gold plated charm, 60 cents each and up. 
All metal fob 14 karat gold plated, braided links witb C1AST> gUir^-nont which 
holds chain in position; ornamented 
with buckle and charm that can be , 
engraved, $2.54 each. 
Toilet and Manicure Sets 3 piece French ivory toilet set in hinged case, sateen 
lined; contains hand mirror with 4J^ inch beveled 
glass, flat back hair brush with 9 rows of bristles 
and a dressing comb. $7,47 per set and up. 
7 piece combination toilet set of grained ivory in 
lined cabinet; contains nail file, cuticle pusher, 3 
inch handle dressing comb, hair brush. 9 rows of 
bristles, mirror with ll
A inch beveled glass, nail 
buffer, glass salve jar. $6.96 per set and up. 
Gold plated eutt links Cuff Links with stone settings; 
finely embosse d 
strong post, lever Hand Bags ends. 56 cents per Chiffon velvet hand bags pair and up. Solid 
gold cuff links, set with silk chenille taswith diamonds; good, sel; silver polish frame; heavy weight; Roman finish. $5.00 per silver chain handle, fanpair. Combination set cy liuingr extra inside 
—gold plated scarf frame pocket; hanging pin and sleeve button 
set, stone settings, mirror; colors — navy, 
64 cents per set and taupe arid brown. $3.32 up. each and up. 
MIS S MADELIN E ALLISO N 
Room 622, 70 Fifth Avenue NEW YORK , N. Y . (Refers by permission to the Editor of the Crisis.) 
Mention TH E CBISIB. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 89 
MUSIC IN THE HOME 
PUTS SUNSHIN E IN THE HEART 
Standard Songs Which Should be in Every Repertoire 
THE ROUGH , ROCKY ROA D ("MBBiTO 
Bv W. C. HANDY 
A beautiful spiritual with a heart-throb in every note, with a new arrangement "by one of America's 
foremost composers. PRICE 40c. 
THINKING OF THEE A LITTLE SONG 
Hy HARRY II. PACE PRICE 20c. For little tots and school children. 
PRICE 30c. A ballad par-excellent. Just what the name implies. 
PICKANINN Y ROSE PRICE 30c. A wonderfully melodious mother croon. A Lullaby. The sweetest song on Broadway. 
AFRO-AMERICAN HYMN SPHINX 
By li\ C. HANDY flv J. BERN I BARBOUR A soul-stirring, martial hymn of beauty. Special PRICE 30c. An Egyptian,. Intermezzo. Prices in lots to Choirs and Schools. 
WE CAN SUPPLY YOU WITH ALL THE 
LATES T SHEE T MUSI C 
WHY DID YOU MAKE A PLAYTHING OF ME? 
By J. BERN1 BARBOUR 
PRICE 15c. A "Good Bye " appeal of a lover. Beautiful lyrics and wonderful music. A masterpiece of musical composition. 
LONG GONE ST. LOUIS BLUES PRICE 15c. Another 'Casey Jones" or "Steam­ PRICE 30c. Sung by Marion Harris on Colum­ boat Bill". Sung by Marion Harris on Columbia bia Record. It's great. Record. 
THAT THING CALLED LOVE PRICE 30c. Sung by Mamie Smith on Okeh Record. The first colored girl to make a record of a popular song, and it's a wonderful record. 
Two Great Columbia Records by 
BEALE ST. BLUES BERT WILLIAMS PRICE 30c. Always a favorite. On all Player "IT'S YOUR MOVE NOW" u„d Rolls and Phonograph Records. "O DEATH, WHERE IS THY STING V' 
THINK OF ME LITTLE DADDY By MISS ALUl.i'<TA WHITMAN 
PRICE 15c. A soni; brimful of life. Recorded by Sweatman's Orchestra on Columbia Record. 
OUR MUSIC IS OX ALL PHONOGRAPH RECORDS AND PLAYER ROLLS 
We ran fill vour orders for Player Rolls. 
Our music mav be had wherever sheet music is sold, and at the music counters of Woo'.worth, 
Kress, Kresge. McCrory. Metropolitan and National Stores, or direct from the Publishers. 
N. B.—If it is Sheet Music vou want we ran supply you. If we don't publish it we will get it tor you. 
PAC E & HANDY MUSI C CO. , Inc. ' PACE h HANDY BUILDING) 
232 W. 46th Street Dept. C New York, N, Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 90 
Cleota J. Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
''Judging from the appearance of a large number of 
music lovers, her sweet lyric 
voice held them spellbound. 
She was applauded again and 
again after each number."— 
Boston Chronicle. 
Address: 
15 6 HAMILTO N AVENUE , 
COLUMBUS , OHI O 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningiide 
174 W. 136th Street New York, N. Y. 
JOSEPHINE A. JUNIUS 
CONTRALTO "Miss Junius is the possessor of a Contralto 
voice, lovely in quality, which she uses artistically."—Oscar Saenger. 
Address 
74 W. 142d ST. NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Clarence Cameron White 
Violinist 
Recitals, Concerts, Instruction 
Studio : 
616 Columbus Avenue Boston, Mass. 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON Graduate of Institute of Musical Art Organist-Director of Music of St. Marks M. E. Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. Harmony taught from beginning to com­ pletion. Private or correspondence. Geothius system. Studio: 250 W. 138th St., New York, N. Y. Telephone Morningside 1708. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW SEASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Churc h Societie s 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. JOS. L. JONES, Pr... 
N. E. Car. 8th and Plum Su., Cineioniti, Obi* 
Mention T H E
 ADVERTISER 
LUC DORSINVILLE & CO. MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS 
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
PORT AU PRINCE, HAITI 
EXPORT: IMPORT: 
COFFEE FLOUR COCOA SOAP CASTOR BEANS HARDWARE LIGNUM VITAE 
MAHOGANY DRY GOODS 
LOG WOO D COTTON FABRICS 
COTTON FURNITURE 
COCOANUT PAINTS 
Colored American business men desiring to transact business between Haiti and the United States 
of America, are cordially invited to communicate with us. 
WANTED WANTED Live Agents At Once To Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hardwood floors and hundreds of other things 
that have a varnished surface. Makes them 
look like new. Agents can make $50.00 to 
$75.00 per week selling Dudley's Polish to 
furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile 
stores, paint stores and grocery stores. 
Special Offer: For 90 days we will ship to 
all new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's 
Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this 
special offer at once. 
Dudley & Porter Manufacturing Co. 
11S South Main St., Muskogee, Okla. 
Tmlephonm, Baring T7$4 
ISADOR E MARTIN 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgage* 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 6487 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P BENJAMIN ATTOBNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
LIVE IN CALIFORNI A 
Colored People, Attention! 
$50.00 cash will start you owning a home in 
Southern California. No Jim-Crowism—no 
separate schools—an opportunity to live as a 
man. Write today for FREE INFORMATION. 
BOOKERTEE INVESTMENT CO. 
1718 W. Jefferson St., Los Angeles, Cal. 
Alf^T €\\\tf*HL Snapupthisprofitsmoshing Zr^f* M bargai n now. SEN D N O ™ O N « « 3uBt your name, address, size and color. We will send you delivery charges paid. 6 pairs of tneewellest heavy weight brown or blaok genuine duc-web mens' silk socks, worth $1.00 eaoh. 
SEN D NO MONE Y 
|
Yo Pair n pay
s S3.1 o!9 Sil on k Sock arrival,s deliver — Guar y chat-pe . $6 Valu a paid, e Don't wait. Goa t t FOOTS today. Limited quantity left. Only 6- ...lir pain a to a customer. Money cheer-, fully refunded if you can match them for S6. 
BERNARD, HEWITT & CO. 
Dept . L 344 CHICAGO 
 CRISIS. 91 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LOT OFFE R EVER MADE ! 
Excellent Lots, Developed Under New Plan, with Fruit Trees Planted on them, in 
Beautiful ORCHARDVILLE 
FOR ON VERY 
ONLY $56 EASY TERMS 
PEOPLE FROM ALL OVER THE COUNTRY ARE SECURING THESE LOTS AND THE DE­ MAND FOR THEM IS INCREASING B Y LEAPS AND BOUNDS. If you want any you must ACT QUICKLY: 
Orchardville is located in a high grade fruit 
growing region and is to be developed into a 
BEAUTIFUL FRUIT CITY. Each lot will have 
FIVE HIGH GRADE FRUIT TREES PLANTED ON IT, also a beautiful shade tree, which 
will be cultivated and taken care of by us for 
FOUR YEARS WITHOUT EXTRA COST TO 
YOU. When the fruit trees come into commercial bearing they should earn you EXCELLENT 
YEARLY RETURNS ON YOUR INVESTMENT WITHOU T AN Y EFFORT ON YOUR 
PART. 
The lots are sized 3 0 x 14 4 feet, and have plenty of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, 
shed, etc., besides the room taken up by the fruit trees. 
EACH LOT IS GUARANTEED TO BE HIGH AND DRY UNDER A MONEY-BACK GUAR­ ANTEE, and the title to the property is absolutely clear. 
The price of the lots is only $56, as stated above, and the terms are only $3.00 a month. Smaller terms when more than one lot is purchased. NO INTEREST. 
We have a beautiful booklet that gives all the 
particulars of this offer, and that explains how 
to secure your lots. Send for one TODAY. 
Simply write your name and address on the cou­ pon attached below and mail it to us RIGHT AWAY. The number of lots is LIMITED and they are GOING FAST, which makes it a case of FIRST COME—FIRST SERVED. 
Arenson Realty Development Corporation 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL. 
~~7 ~ I •
I
 Arenso n Realt y
 Chicago , 111 ,
 Developmen t Corp .
 Date 192 1 I 
J Gentlemen:— I a m intereste d i n you r Orchardvill e offe r an d woul d lik e t o receiv e on e o f I 
I you r booklet s withou t obligatio n t o me . | 
I Nome Address ] 
! . 7o« m State. I 
I CRI-12-20 
Mentio n THE CRISIS. Q 2 THE CRISIS
HOLIDA Y SUGGESTION S 
The 1921 CRISIS Calendar will be in keeping with our high standards 
of past years, It will contain excerpts from 
the works of foremost Negro authors—an 
artistic and valuable reminder 
"As the Days of the Year Go By " 
Price 50 Cents Ready December 15 
SPECIAL OFFER 
A copy of the 1921 CRISIS Calendar will he sent free to any person sending us AT ONE TIME three (3) paid-up yearly sub­ scriptions to the CRISIS on or beforo Decem­ ber, 24, 1920. 
SEVEN GIFT BOOKS (Postage Extra) 
Souls ot Black Folk. (W. E. B. DuBois) $1.50 History of the Negro. <B. G. Brawley) 2.00 Darkwater. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 The Shadow. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 The Negro Faces America. (Herbert J. Selig­ mann) 1.75 Poems of Paul Laurence Dunbar 2.50 The Negro. (W. E. B. DuBois) 90 
Address 
The CRISI S 70 Fifth Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Phonograph Records oi our Foremost Artists An Appreciated Christmas Gift "Go Down Moses," sung "by Harry T. Bur­ leigh; "Villianelle," sung by Florence Cole- Talbert; "Cradle Song," played by Clarence C. White, $1.25 each and 25c for mailing, packing and insurance, Also a record of the Atlanta speech by Booker T. Washington, $1.50 each and 25c. for mailing, etc. 
BROOME SPECIAL PHONOGRAPH RECORDS 
23 Clayton Ave., Medford, Mass. 
Another set of rro'i'd' coming out next month, 
unite for circular. 
R A T I O N A L L I V I N G 
Editor: BENZION LIBER, M.D., D.P.H. 
11e:i11h Conservation—Social Hygiene—In ­ dustrial Hygiene—Personal and Intimate Hy ­ giene—Child Hygiene—Plain, Drugless Treat­ ment of Disease—Birth Control—Al l Truths from all Medical Schools—Fighting Dishon­ esty in the Healing Professions—Answers to Subscribers' Question's—Art—Freedom in the Bringing U p of Children—Vegetarianism - Fighting Superstition. Rational Living is an independent illustrated month­ ly devoted to the teaching of rational methods of liv­ ing, an educational guide for manual and mental 
workers. It is not sensational. It lias in view the plain, ordinary people, and 'not the extra-oratnarj­ athlete. It is scientific, but popular. It saves you money. 
Th e Decembe r Issu e o f Rationa l Livin g I s Ou t 
It contains^ among many other articles: Dr. Marie Stopes, of England, on Birth Control; Influenza; Labor and Industrial Hygiene ; Women in the Textile Industry ; Food and the Child. Th e Januar y issue will contain a large number of 
interesting and educational articles. Her e are but a few: Fighting Disease in Soviet Russia; Fxercise, Good and Bad: Water as a Remedy; Labor and 
Health; Stammering; the Breakfast; Pictures b> 
Renoir and Va n Gogh. 40 cents a copy. $4 a year in U . S. value. Cor­ responding rates for shorter periods. N o free sam­ ple copies. Address CI Hamilton Place, New1
 York , N . Y . 
ADVERTISER 
S atrmcnt of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, etc., required by the Art of Congn ss uf August U4. .912, nf (ho CRISIS, published monthly at 70 F.ftli Avenue, New York, N. Y., for October 1. 1920. 
State of New York 
Luunty of New York 
Before me, a Notary Publie in and for the State and county aforesaid, personally appeared Augustus •^lanville Dill, who, having been d..ly sworn accord­ .ng to law, deposes and says that lie is the Business .Manager of the CRISIS and tllii, the following is, to the best of h s knowledge and behef, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in he above caption, lequ.red by the Act, of August 24, 1912, embodied In section 443, Postal Laws and Regulations: 
Publisher: The Nat'onal Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
N. Y. 
Editor: W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
Managing Editor: W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth 
Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
Business Manager: Augustus Granville Dill, 70 Fifth 
Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
Owners: The National Assoc'ation for the Advance­ ment of Colored People, a corporation with no stoc't; membership over 90,000. 
Moorfield Storey, President, 
.Tames Weldon Johnson, Acting Secretary. 
Joel E. Spingam, Treasurer. 
Mary White Ovington. Chairman Board of Directors. 
Known bondholders, mortgagees and other security 
holders owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total 
amount of bonds, mortgages or other securities: None. 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL. 
Business Manager. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 29th day of 
September, 1920. 
FRANK M. TURNER, Notary Public, Queens County No. 754. Certificate filed in New York County No. 164. New, York Register No. 2122. (My commission expires March 30, 1922.) 
For the most valuable books 
dealing with the Negro Problem 
Address The CRISIS 
Send No Money! 
Q f Ol)l y fill 5 ° r * ™ finest quality, beautiful patterns -Sent !n ^i,So3 "^f ^ regular$3.60 madras dress shirts,$7.O0value inVst nnnfiPv ° J? on jy madvance, payable C. O. D. ikade of the Til l riral! n™i°T Madras, very durable, very dressy, cut t fr
o, Eof lulls finer/ r^Xff^h
Sle\,coa.-. ;t
a S^- ' ^nc h turn back l e
trin«X * |55, S d K , B<?<*hed.finestworkmanship. In latest stri 3
 ,< fas tS ehaX-round Sizll ft ftS." "S? ? lac k «*» » <»> "^te j^Kruuna. sizes 1144 to 17*5. State size and color preferred. e
" 6 Guarante e !2, r, elr" W" ; "one r In foil. If yon can match these SendnoMonev.juatyournam? #n"»h«r« for Jess than 13.60 each, a
° d " hiD 0,lcecharges crewiS: 1Pay 2n"/K69 on SSit^? "I ^ J .» ' . <Mi»«T 
ERNAR E
O 4 9 .P..S04 B ?i Hw . W^!??, ^ 
Mention T h e C risis . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MAD E to MEASUR E 
EXPRES S OR POSTAG E PREPAI D 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $15.00. 
WE'R E OU T T O BEA T 
HIG H TAILORIN G PRICE S 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
mak e you a suit for $15.00, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
sav e 50 % on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save
5
9to$J5 
This suit for $15.00 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell C « n L ft..tf'.l CDC C A 
you about them. We would rather you did |J| g odUiPl O UUlTIT Mit t not send us any money until we send our ° ~ 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FREE our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept . 60 1 CHICAG O 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 5 
THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 04 
OU R LATES T CATALO G WIL L B E 
MAILE D T O YO U UPO N REQUES T W e are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAI R GOOD S who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME . BAUM. by the most skillful artists in the 
a trade. 
e s 
Try Mme. Baum's Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made < x of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using h
< them* 
o 
e 
ib 
u 
H 
S 
AGENTS
Agcnls and Dealer; Co.. 97 South St.. 
W e
Mme. Baum's Bob 
gives the appear­ ance of wearing the hair bobbed, but makes cutting un­ necessary. M ad o of strictly Supremo Quality human hair, with natural MAI L ORDE R HOUS E 
Wanted . Fre e Catalog . 
Jamaica , N . Y . 
waves, sewed on Velvet Ribbon, fitted with three tuck Combs to hold secure. In all shades. Price. $5.50. 80
 EARN S>75 00 A WEEK Selling uiir Enlarged Photo Me­ dallions, Photo Cuff Button photo Lockets, Photo Watcl Charms, Photo Breast Pins, Photo Clocks aiu 
•opy from a n y Photograph and Return Your Original Photo. Ageti s" Enlargeti Sample s *25c. Pictures and Pos Negr o Books. cnts. mm Cards . Proiup i ship i Bethel Art 
SEND NO MONEY Write quick for this amazing sock bargain. Only limited lot. Men's fine quality black or gray wool socks. Full seamless, double sole, toe and heel. Guaranteed wear-proof. 
6 PAIR OF GUARANTEED < $1.00 WOOL SOCKS « Guaranteed Six Months 
SEND NO MONEY— write quick. Socks sent delivery charges paid. Pay$3on arrival, nomore. Money back not more than pleased. Give size, color, 
BERNARD, HEWITT 8 CO. Dept. X 044 Chicago 
Agent s $8 5 Weekl y 
Get a Robinson Folding Bath Tub FREE Big sellor. Cost little, no plumbing. Weight 16 pounds, foIdsJntoHmall roll. Kull lenirth baths, fur better than tin tuba. Guaranteed 10 years. $16b> J20 a day oasily made. Writ e quick f"i>rnpociul offer. Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. , 15 Factorie s Dldg., Toledo , O 
WANTE D 
Agents for THE CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
H 
PI carry the largest selection of Hair­ •* 
dressers' Tools and Accessories. O 
X 
o 
r MME . BAUM' S o
> 
Our Factory is Locate d at 
 FOURTH AVE. NEW YORK , N. V . 
When writing, mention this paper. 
SendNoMoney!
Two wonderfu lea l $4.00 shirts for only $5.25. & fwlf^r ™ $2.75. Everybody wearing these semi- dress Gray Flannel Shirts for business, work and sport. 
Cadillac Broadcloth Flannel Shirts 
Two $4.00 Shirts for Only $5.25 
K,?nl°w%e """"fy Cadillac Brnndolnth Gray Flannel, Bht
 i. )n e '" rl? en ,,,.V,L ?^SV?! P"''ket. '»oed sleeve« mid t tcms Cu t E x , r a F u c
l™, SSfsK"i? S"., - " - <" « F">n t Stylo. K™*'' 11 ? thru-ont. Snftturndown collar with an teen 'hStalnSSSSS?;. .T h
„S,0 i
,gn, y
 ?, h™nk . Try to mntch these BMrta in any store at $4.00. Ye t wo offer you two for only $5.25. 
Send No Monev Wril ° *•*•»• SMrt. >n b « «t $6 ^5 on nrriiml n „ . n e"k. trane.portaii..n prepaid. Pay only a t withi the 2 2 "T • ?!"ncy on 
b
i"' . °™ « ' f not moVo than pleased with tho wonderful value. Bo auro to n-ivo neck-band size. BERNARD-HEWITT S CO. 90 0 w . Van Bursa St.. CHICAGO 
Mention Th e C risis. 
0 THE CRISIS 95 
Patti's XttiaS Suggestions Send $2.50 and postage for 
A PERFECTLY MARVELOUS SKIN TOILETTES 
Or $2.25 for Patti's Columbi a Recor d 
Bleaching, Vanishing and Cold Cream. Also "La Traviata" Powder, 
68 cents each. "Patti's Special" Perfume, $1.25 an ounce. 
Send 10c postage for mailing one article. 2c each additional. 
$5.00 for 6 Toilettes and Patti's Beauty Secrets 
BIG MONEY FOR AGENTS WRITE QUICK ! ! 
Send All Money Orders to 
A. A. BROWN, Manager, PATTI BEAUTY EMPORIUM 
Phone Kenwood 9538 4723 St. Lawrence Ave., Apt 3, CHICAGO , ILL . 
Send HIGH GRADE MICHIGAN FARM No Money Snap this bargain up right now before it is too FOR SALE late. Only limited quantity. Amazing underwear Contains 160 acres, 2 good houses, large bargain. Greatest offer ever made. Two Guaranteed $ 4 Each, Wool Unlonsuits, $5.75 . barn, other outhuildings, and located on 
Sav e big: money on your underwear. Send line road, right at railroad station, in 
postcard or letter today — this very minute, for the famous fruit belt. Only 1 mile from 
these2 beautiful perfect fitting heavy weight gray Orchardvillc. 80 acres cleared, balance elasticrib unionsuits. Full cut. Seams reinforced pasture and timber. Good colored neigh­
 *°
and overcast. Send No Money—pay only $5.75 
on arrival, no more; we pay delivery charges. bors. This is a real bargain at $8,500. 
refun d vou r Worth $12,000. First payment $4,000, We Guarantee long time on balance. To see this farm 
, W WMMIMM»» V money if you can is to want it. 
match these 2 wonderful wool unionsuits for Send for particulars. Other good farms also. 
$8.00. Order this amazing bargain this minute Small or large. Tell us what vou want. Adbefore it is too late. Just give name, address dress PAUL P. ARENSON, 10 S. La Salle 
and breast measure. St., Chicago, 111. 
Dept BERNARD-HEWIT . V 044 900 WT. Van Buren, Chicago & COMPANY 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
The moat wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, Ashing, hunting T 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
Thi s illustration wild flowers and wild berries T 
shows Parten front Do you want a place to go wbere you can build up Half Wig. Price $6.75 your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do yoj enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, /
progressive people of the day—people who do things? * 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to /
have a part in one of the most progressive move- * 
This Uuutrat'o merit* of the time? Surely 1 y 
shows "A" wig 
Natural Hair Wigs Then you will be Interested In. and want to J* 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewlld, jf
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- ­
Made according to your measurement, cure a beautiful lot for only 135.tt each: / 
Direct from the Manufacturer Price SI2.50. 
9
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your either wavy or crimpy hair. Can be payments are completed the lot will bt / 
combed and dressed, and cannot be de­ transferred to you by an absolute ' 
warranty deed with abstract show- J > tected from a person's own head of Inn clear title. 
hair. I also make Transformations, / Goo d live energetic Switches, Puffs, and other articles. agents wanted 
Large assortment of hair nets, pincers 
and hairdressers' supplies. Idle wild Resort 
Write fnr free catalog. Company 
ALEX 1110 Hartford Bldg MARKS So. Dearborn Si. , 
662-C 8th Ave., at 42d St., New York, N. Y. Chicag., D. / > tf 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 96 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
NATIONA L CAPITA L COD E O F ETIQUETT E 
Combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PART i 
A Book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, 
instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored Society 
leaders on the street; at the Theatre; at Church; 
in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls. Parties, Weddings, Dinners, &c , &c. The illustrations are so 
perfect and natural that the well bred, correctly 
clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any 
and all occasions; correct dress for men and 
women; suggestions in colors and materials for the 
ladies; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, &c , for both sexes. 
What to serve your guests at breakfast, lunch or 
dinner. 
How to converse intelligently; how to know when 
to talk and when to remain silent; how to make 
friends and gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member 
of society or the most humble. 
STORIES 
PART 2 
A wonderful collection of Short Stories for Young and Old. Stories that 
will hold your attention from start to 
finish. By the most famous colored 
writer of Short Stories in America. 
Stories of Adventure Stories of Pluck Stories of Bravery Stories of Success Stories of School Days Stories of Great Men 
Stories for Father, Mother or the Children. Funny Stories; Stories that will 
bring the tears to your eyes; Stories 
once started must be finished before 
laying aside the book. Handsomely illustrated—pictures that seem to live 
throughout the story. Illustrating Table Manners 
A Book you will want 
Must have in your home Agent s Wante d 
A most excellent Christmas Gift We are looking for 1000 hustlers, men 
Over fifty pages of pleasing pictures taken and women. Our offer will pay vou posifrom best photographs. A BIG BOOK, tively $4 to $9 per day. One agent made 
containing over 400 pages. The people $21 the first day. Such an opporare much pleased with this new publica­ tunity comes but once in a lifetime. 
tion and are sending thousands of orders AGENTS ' SAMPL E showing specimen 
to us. Order today. We send by insured pages and the pictures and covers of book, 
parcel post; return your money if not will be mailed to you for 25 cents. It 
perfectly satisfied. Price ONL Y $2.50. represents exactly the complete book. 
Write todav. Send 25 cents for agents' outfit to-dav. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO. No . 523 9th STREET, 
WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Let us send you a suit 
Made to your measure, payable after 
received, with the clear understanding that if 
the fit is not perfect, or if you are not satisfied 
in every way; if you are not convinced that 
you have received a fine, high-grade, stylish, 
splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your 
measure and have saved at least $15.00 to 
$20.00, you are not under the slightest 
obligation to keep it. Don't hesitate or 
feel timid, simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. You are not out one penny. 
Any money you may have paid us 
is refunded at once. 
SEND NO MONEY— just your 
name. and address for FRE E 
samples and latest styles, beautiful 
NEW samplebook all sent FREE 
— if you answer now. 
All Wool Suits $25.00 
SAMPLES FREE 
Any man, young or old, interested 
in saving money, who wants to 
dress well and not feel extravagant, is invited to answer at once and get our free 
book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply mail 
the coupon, or write letter or postal today, just say, "Send me your samples" and 
get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have a big NEW 
agency deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FREE 
SAMPLES and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Write today. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO.* Dept. 1083. CHICAGO, ILL. -TEAR OUT HERE—MAIL TODAYFREE SAMPLE BOOK COUPON 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Company , 
Dept. 10S3 . Chicago. 111. 
Gentlemen: Please send me your complete big book of Samples & Styles showing your all-wool 
suits as low as $25.00, and Agents big new money-making deal. Everything free and postpaid. 
Name 
Address ANNOUNCING A NEW POLICY 
Nile For 
Queen Hair 
Prepara­ and 
tions Skin 
"The Kashmir Way" 
AN UNUSUAL OPPORTUNITY 
For wide-awake people in every community to become 
shareholders in a successful business. TH E KASHMI R 
CHEMICA L CO. has developed one of the most progressive 
manufacturing enterprises of its kind among- the Race and 
offers to investors an opportunity to become a part of a going 
growing concern, whose conservative management, high class 
products and widespread advertising have stamped it a leader 
in its line. 
We offer to share the big profits made yearly with investors because we want to expand our business into every 
town and city and to have there interested friends wh o will 
find it profitable to boost our preparations, take an interest 
in our affairs and help their money to double itself. If you 
want to be a part of a live-wire, money-making organization. 
"Write today for full information to Nile Queen Corporation, care of 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO . 3423 INDIANA AVE. CHICAGO, ILL. 