TEN CENTS A COPY 
1913 
CHRISTMAS Do You Like THE CRISIS? 
Are you willing to help in our campaign for a circulation of 50,000 ? 
Christmas 
Greetings of 
THECRISIS 
which will come to you 
monthly during the new 
year as a gift from 
If so, send for one or more of these beautiful 
Xmas cards, printed in three colors on cards with 
gilded and beveled edges, together with envelopes. 
Sent free for the asking. 
THE CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NEW YORK TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, AT 26 VESEY STREET, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manager 
Contents for December, 1913 
PICTURES 
COVER PICTURE: Madonna and the Child. 
Copyright photograph from life by W. L. Brockman. (Orders taken by T H E CRISIS) 
"MAMMY'S LI'L BABY BOY." Page 
Photograph from life by Grace Moseley 67 
THE NATIONAL EMANCIPATION EXPOSITION: THE TEMPLE 
OF BEAUTY IN THE GREAT COURT OF FREEDOM 78 
THE HISTORICAL PAGEANT OF THE NEGRO RACE: FORTY 
MAIDENS DANCE BEFORE THE ENTHRONED PHARAOH 
RA, THE NEGRO 79 
ARTICLES 
THE MAN THEY DIDN'T KNOW. A Story. By James D. Corrothers. 
Part 1 85 
CHILDREN OF THE SUN. A Poem. By Fenton Johnson 91 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 59 
MEN OF THE MONTH 65 
OPINION 68 
EDITORIAL 80 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE 88 
THE BURDEN 92 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 5 6 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully LOCATED in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses OF STUDY include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
GRADUATES of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
ALL parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
PRESIDEN T EDWAR D T . WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
BEAUTIFUL SITUATION. HEALTHFUL LOCATION . 
TH E BES T MORA L AN D SPIRITUAL ENVIRONMEN T 
A SPLENDI D INTELLECTUAL ATMOSPHERE . 
NOTE D FOR HONES T AN D THOROUG H WORK . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
FALL TER M BEGA N SEPTEMBER , 1913 . 
For information address 
PRESIDEN T R . W . MCGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the govern, 
ments of North Carolina and of 
the United States. Open all the 
year round. For males only. 
Winter term begins December 1, 
1913. Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities 
for Negro youth. Night school 
for indigent but ambitious young 
men. For catalog or further 
information, address 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A . & M . COLLEGE GREENSBORO, N . C . 
"In the Heart of the Healthy Hills" 
Th e Agricultura l an d 
Mechanica l Colleg e 
NORMAL , ALABAM A 
Makes a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out their own salvation. It gives breadwinners a chance to go to 
school and so puts a first-class English education and 
A trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose. 
Board, lodging and washing cost $ 9 per month. 
An entrance fee of $10 covers medicine, hospital 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the first Monday in October and 
closes the last Thursday in May. 
WALTE R S . BUCHANAN , PRESIDEN T 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards AND 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving A 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of thi 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new building's and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , PRESIDEN T 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
A N EPISCOPA L BOARDIN G AN D DA Y SCHOOL 
FOR GIRLS, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SISTERS 
OF ST. MARY . ADDRESS : 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
61 1 N . 43 D ST . W . PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
BISHOP COLLEGE, MARSHALL. TEX. 
MAINTAINS COLLEGE, ACADEMIC, THEOLOGICAL, MUSICAL, NORMAL, 
GRAMMAR AND INDUSTRIAL DEPARTMENTS. OFFERS THE MOST adVANCED COURSES AND IS THE BEAT-EQUIPPED SCHOOL FOR NEGROES In 
THE SOUTHWEST FOR INFORMATION ADDRESS 
C. H. MAXSON, PRESIDENT 
CARNEGI E COLLEGE-HOM E STUD Y 
"60 PAGE BULLETIN FREE" 
COURSES BY MAIL 
GRAM MAR SCHOOL AGRICULTURAL 
HIGH SCHOOL POULTRY 
NORMA DOMESTIC SCIENCE 
PROFESSIONA CIVIL SERVICE 
PENMANSHIP ENGINEERING 
TYPE-WRITING DRAWING 
SHORT-HAND ENGLISH 
BOOK-KEEPING LANGUAGE 
LAW REAL ESTATE 
REDUCED rates OF tuition to first 
APPLICANTS. FOR "FREE BULLETIN" 
AND "SPECIAL Scholarship," APPLY 
CARNEG1 E COLLEG E 
Pres GALBREATH No. 19D St., ROGERS. Ohio. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 5 7 
'The Art o f Printing 
A S EXEMPLIFIE D I N OU R WOR K EMBODIES TH E FOLLOWIN G POINTS O F MERIT : 
1. Stationery 
2. Form 
(a) Neat 
(b) Attractive 
(c) Quality 
(a) Polite 
(b) Business 
(c) Social 
(a) Artistic 
3. Workmanship -{ (b) Correct 
(c) Prompt 
W E PRIN T TH E CRISI S 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6667 NE W YOR K 
191 4 
Crisi s Calenda r 
Contains four leaves, neatly 
tied and ready for hanging, 
each leaf bearing a CRISI S 
picture. 
Let each day remind you of 
TH E CRISI S and its creed. 
Price 25 cents 
TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audita Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August. 
BOX 25 , WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
WILBERFORCE, O. 
The UNDERWOOD 
TYPEWRITER 
HA S N O RIVAL S IN 
SPEED and 
ACCURACY 
IT HOLDS ALL WORLD' S RECORDS IN OPE N COMPETITION . 
"TH E MACHIN E YO U WIL L EVENTUALLY BUY " 
UNDERWOO D TYPEWRITE R CO . 
INCORPORATED 
UNDERWOO D BUILDIN G NE W YOR K 
Branches in all principal cities. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 58 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
in Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position When 
Practising, Position When Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tlnsley: 
"I take great pleasure In commending your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing AND Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to A simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN. C. S. P.. 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. T.: "A very practical little 
book Is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' by Pedro T. 
Tlnsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, I1L: "Accordingly his 
'Practical METHOD of Singing' is A most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
cannot fall to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPED HIM GREATLY 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: PEDRO T. TINSLET 
6448 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
ARCHITECTS 
TAND Y & FOSTER 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New YOR K 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H. HENR Y HARRIS 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
WILLIA M L. BELL 
Architect 
138^ Auburn Avenue - - - Atlanta, Ga. 
CONCER T SOLOIST 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
For terms write 32 West 131st Street, 
New York City 
MME. FANNIE BELLE D E KNIGHT 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio: 231 W. 134th St. New York City 
WHA T THE WORLD IS SAYING ABOUT 
A 
Little 
Dreaming 
By 
FENTON 
JOHNSON 
Who is acclaimed by prominent critic: . 
authors and the international press as the foremost 
romantic poet and one of the greatest writers of 
African strain. 
"Praiseworthy in the ways of imagination, mysticism and romance."—Chicago "Daily News." 
Josephine Turck Baker, editor of "Correct English," says: "When the young poet brought his 
verses to me I felt that a new singer had come 
among us, singing of love, of passion, of joy and 
sorrow, sounding the depths and climbing the 
heights. In the brighter passages there exists the 
deft touch of the born artist, while in the deeper 
moments he makes sentient the emotions of the 
soul—a soul that has lived and suffered." 
Published by Peterson Company, Chicago. Vellum 
de luxe edition, 75 cents, net, illustrated. 
Now running in its second edition. 
Agents wanted in colleges, towns and cities. 
Address: 
CENTRAL DISTRIBUTION STATION 
3522 State Street Suite 5 Chicago, 111. 
LEARN TO REA D MUSIC AT SIGHT 
FOR $1.0 0 
V 1 I 
ANYONE IN THE "BRASS BAND" OR "STRINGED ORCHESTRA" MAY 
LEARN IN A FEW HOURS TO MASTER THE INSTRUMENT HE LOVES WITH 
OUR "SIGHT READER" AND "SIGHT READER POSITIONS." 
$1 (CASH). ADDRESS 
WILLIAM D. SMITH 
1636 Clarion Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
Statement of the Ownership, Management etc , 
OF THE CRISIS, published monthly at 26 Vesev 
Street, New York, required by the act of August 
24, 1912.
 6 
Editor: W. E. Burghardt Du Bois, 26 Vesev 
Street, New York City. 
Business Manager: Augustus Granville Dill, 26 
Vesey Street, New York City. 
Publisher: The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, 26 Vesey Street 
New York City. 
Owners: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation with no 
stock. 
Known bondholders, mortgagees and other security 
holders, holding 1 per cent, or more of total amount 
OF bonds, mortgages OR other securities, none. 
A. G. DILL, 
Business Manager, 
before me this first Sworn to and subscribed 
day of October, 1913. 
[Seal] 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
H. ARRINGTON, 
Notary Public, 
County of Queens. TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 7—No. 2 DECEMBER. 1913 Whole No. 38 
*I Carroll Trotty, a colored hotel waiter, 
rescued a white boy from drowning in the 
Thunderbolt River in Savannah recently. 
1 The colored people had three floats in the 
Columbus Day parade in Boston, representing the Crispus Attucks incident, the attack 
on Fort Wagner and the part played by 
colored women in the Civil War. One of 
the prizes awarded for the best portrayal 
of an historical feature was won by the 
Crispus Attucks float. 
•I Judge Kananagh, of the Illinois Supreme 
Court, made a strong plea for justice 
toward the Negro in a speech delivered before the Irish Fellowship Club in Chicago. 
He advocated the appointment of a national 
commission to inquire into the existing discriminations against the Negro. 
^ Colored girls employed as waitresses in 
Gimbel's department store, in New York 
City, who were discharged some time ago, 
have been reinstated. 
•I Among the three heroes of the "Volturno" 
disaster who stand out above the rest was 
S. J. Rudder, a colored fireman who stuck 
to his post, reviving the confidence of the 
other firemen, and finally jumped into the 
sea, late in the night. 
•I Recently hotels at St. Louis, Baltimore, 
Albany, N. Y., Lake George and other 
places have dismissed white waiters for colored ones. 
§ Tamina, Tex., with a population of white 
and colored, has a colored postmistress. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
MISS MAR Y VID A CLARK , assistant 
A
 secretary o f the children's department of the State Charities Aid Association, 
28 9 Fourth Avenue, Room 82 , New York, 
wants to send a charming little colored girl 
o f 3 , pictured here, to Darlington, S. C , 
to a clergyman and his wife, who have 
agreed to adopt her. These good people became interested in the little girl through Miss 
Clark's story which appeared in THE CRISIS 
for January, 1913. Will any readers of 
THE CRISIS who expect to be traveling 
South soon, and who would be willing to 
take the little girl to her new home, kindly 
communicate with Miss Clark? It would 
be necessary to take the child to the nearest 
large city where she could be met. 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 6 0 TH E CRISIS 
<I Miss Clotee Scott, a young colored 
woman, has opened up a settlement house 
for Negroes in Hyde Park, a suburb of 
Chicago. 
1$ The large Kaufman department store in 
Pittsburgh, Pa., has installed colored elevator men in the place of white ones. 
«I John D. Rockefeller has subscribed $2,500 
to the National League on Urban Conditions, located in New York City, provided 
the league raises the additional $13,500 of 
the budget of $16,000. 
<I On the last day of the fall meeting of the 
Douglass Park Racing Association in Louisville, Ky., Clubs, a horse owned by a colored 
man and ridden by a colored jockey, Disunion, ran two miles in within two-fifths of 
a second of the world's record and won the 
cup race. 
1 The Negroes of Kansas City, Mo., are 
attempting to raise $30,000 for a colored 
hospital, as the colored people of that city 
have few hospital facilities. Recently the 
Kansas City colored people raised $30,000 
for a Y. M. C. A. 
^ A certain man whose name is not given 
has written to the editor of the New York Globe offering the use of a number of large 
houses in New Jersey, about an hour's ride 
from New York, to be used as a social 
settlement for Negroes. 
H At a recent baby show held in Fall 
River, Mass., the first prize was won by a 
one-year-old colored baby, the only colored 
entrant in the contest. 
*I A National Tennis Association was recently organized in Baltimore by colored 
delegates representing that city, Washington and Philadelphia. All cities in which 
there are tennis clubs will be invited to join 
the association. Dr. Henry Freeman, of 
Washington, is president and Mr. Adams, 
of Philadelphia, secretary-treasurer of the 
association. 
*I Colored women in Birmingham, Ala., 
have formed an anti-tuberculosis club. 
There are absolutely no provisions made for 
colored people at the Birmingham tuberculosis camp. 
^ Miss Minnie D. Woodard, a graduate of 
the nurse-training department of Meharry 
Medical College, is the first colored girl 
who has received a certificate of registration 
MISS M. D. WOODARD. 
as a trained nurse issued by authority of 
the State board of nurse examiners of 
Tennessee. This certificate was obtained 
through the efforts of the Nashville Negro 
board of trade, which took the matter up 
almost two years ago. Even after the board 
had won its ease there were objections from 
the white nurses in the State. 
EDUCATION. 
' I ' THE American Colonization Society has 
A
 paid over to Liberia $60,000 for the 
education of the children of the Negro republic. This was the gift of Caroline 
Donovan, bequeathed twenty-seven years 
ago, but legally involved up to this time. 
^ Eight Southern States were represented 
in the second annual meeting of the 
Association of Negro Industrial and 
Secondary Schools held at 26 Vesey Street. 
The association adopted a constitution and 
plans. 
•I Both in Savannah and Atlanta, Ga., thousands of colored school children have been 
turned away from the schools because there 
is no room for them. In Atlanta some of 
the largest grades are in the damp, dark 
basements. A new school has been promised 
Savannah next year, which will alleviate 
conditions somewhat. 
<I A building valued at $9,500 has been 
purchased for the Chicago Colored Religious 
Seminary. This school has been in existence for more than a year, but up to this ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 6 1 
time has held its sessions in Olivet Church, 
Chicago. 
<I The Negroes of Greenville, S. C , are 
making an effort to raise money for the 
improvement of their school facilities. 
<J The board of education of Washington, 
D. C., has asked Congress for an appropriation of $500,000 for a new colored high 
school. 
^ Southern University, formerly at New 
Orleans, but now at Iberia, La., established 
some time back in the 70's, has, in the 
person of Mr. J. S. Clark, its first colored 
president. 
*I Sayer Business College, in Pasadena. 
Cal., has opened its doors to a colored student for the first time, in the person of 
Miss Margie L. Danley. 
*I The board of education of Washington, 
D. C., has sent a request to Howard University asking the university to establish extension courses leading to the first degree in arts 
and sciences for the public-school teachers.. 
1 In Maseru, the chief town of Basutoland, 
South Africa, there are 250 schools for 
Negroes, with a total attendance of 12,175. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
"XT ? WHE N Miss Kitty Cheatham gave her 
song recital in the Royal Academic 
High School for Music, at the invitation of 
the University of Berlin, she concluded the 
first part of her program with Negro 
numbers—a Paul Laurence Dunbar excerpt 
and some specially requested Negro songs. 
Mme. Lillian Nordica and the artists of 
her party, Paul Dufault, Franklin Holding 
and Romayne Simmons, with whom she appeared in concerts at the Hawaiian Opera 
House this summer, were guests of exQueen Liliuokalani, at her home in Honolulu. Hawaiian airs were played by a 
string quartet. 
<J On October 15 a concert was given in 
Boston by the Samuel Taylor Choral 
Society, Mr. Samuel Stewart, director. The 
chorus, which was organized by Forrest 
Whitaker, was assisted by Mr. Gerald Taylor, baritone, of St. Louis; Mrs. Florence 
Cole-Talbert, soprano, of Los Angeles; Mr. 
Le Ro y Godman, tenor, of Columbus, O., 
and Mr. Stewart, organist. The accompanists were Miss Edith Quann, Mr. Lionel 
Jones and Mr. Cleveland Lemons. 
<1 Among the novelties heard at the Peterboro music festival, Petcrboro, N. H., under 
the direction of Mrs. MacDowell, was the 
Negro rhapsody by Henry F. Gilbert, who 
has before shown his interest in the Negro 
idiom. This rhapsody, which is said to 
have distinct musical value and to be 
superior to his "comedy" overture (based 
on Negro themes), both in texture of musical ideas and quality of workmanship, was 
performed for the first time last June at 
Norfolk, Conn. 
<I R. N. Dett, a colored Canadian, who is 
teaching music at Hampton Institute, is a 
composer of note. Especially notable are 
two suites characteristic of Negro life: "In 
the Bottoms" and "Magnolias." 
<I Clarence Cameron White, with Mrs. 
M. P. Merrill and Miss M. E. Smith, vocalists, and the piano players, gave a very 
successful recital at Chicago in October. 
•I A. P. Razafkeriefo, a colored youth of 
New York, is a composer of merit though 
little known. One of his songs, "Baltimore," is being sung by a Broadway star 
in the "Passing Show of 1913." 
^ Miss Ira Aldrieh, daughter of the celebrated tragedian of the same name, is becoming known as a composer in England 
under the nom de plume of Montague Ring. 
Miss Aldrich's "Three African Dances" were 
favorites at their majesties' ball at Buckingham Palace July 23, and her "Have You ' 
Forgotten 1" waltz is becoming the usual 
thing in theatre orchestras and at public 
and private dances. 
PERSONAL. 
MRS. SARA H FIELDS , of 246 Carroll 
1 1 Street, North Side, Pittsburgh, Pa., 
widow of Hugh Fields, in order to secure 
her husband's pension, needs the affidavits 
o f two witnesses to his first wife's burial. 
The first Mrs. Fields died twenty-two years 
ago at Millsboro, Va. Mrs. Fields is in 
urgent need of this pension. Will readers 
of T H E CRISIS help her to secure the 
evidence she needs? 
^ Prof. Earl Finch, a prominent young 
colored educator, who for the past few 
years has been dean of the college department in Wilberforce University, is dead. 62 TH E CRISIS 
Whe n Professor Finc h took his master's 
degree i n Chicago Universit y it is said that 
he stood the second highest of anyone who 
had ever studied i n the university. 
<1 Robert H . Holmes, who was appointed 
a policeman, is the second colored appointee 
i n Manhattan. H e has taken up his duties 
i n the 28th precinct. 
•I Mrs. Agne s Smallwood. the well-known 
singer of Washington. D . C , died there 
October 7. 
MEETINGS. 
THE Kentuck y State Teachers' Associa -
tion held its annual session i n Louisville from November 12 to 14. The colored 
schools were closed on these days. 
The Afro-America n Council of Presbyterian Churches held its twentieth annual 
session i n Baltimor e last month. 
TH E CHURCH. 
THER E was a special meeting of the 
Episcopa l convention, which was held 
i n New Yor k last month, to discuss the 
welfare of the Negro. The most important 
issue discussed was the appointin g of colored bishops over each diocese having colored members. A s usual, no decision was 
reached, and the question wil l be brought 
up again at the next general meeting three 
years hence. The music at this meeting 
was furnished by six vested Negro choirs, 
ranging from small boys to youn g men. 
A t the national council of Congregational 
churches, which met i n Kansa s City , Mo. , 
the last of October, a resolution was passed 
appealing to President Wilso n to use his 
good offices against the ''humiliation, oppression and segregation of Negro employees 
under the government at Washington , D . C. " 
q The Hous e of St. Michae l and Al l 
Angels i n Philadelphia , i n charge of the 
Sisters of Saint Margaret, an order belongin g to the Episcopa l Church, is perhaps the 
only institution of its kin d i n the Unite d 
States. It is a home fo r young colored 
cripples, where they are given surgical care 
and such schooling as their physica l condition allows. These children either pay or 
not, according to the circumstances of those 
sending them, and the school is supported 
by donations. 
COURTS. 
J
UDG E E . T. WADE , of the Branc h 
Municipa l Court of Chicago, dismissed 
the ease brought against the proprieto r of 
the Monarc h Theatre fo r discriminatin g 
against a colored man, Robert Anderson , 
and his wife . 
O n petition of some colored citizens the 
Pennsylvani a Supreme Court has granted 
to Frederic k Brown , a colored ma n who is 
charged wit h murderin g a white man, J . T. 
Durst, seven years ago i n South Carolina , 
an appea l from the decision of Judge 
Ferguso n dismissing his wri t of habeas 
corpus i n resisting extradition to South 
Carolina . It is said that Cole Blease has 
expressed himself as being willin g to lead 
a mob to lync h Brow n i f he returns to his 
State. 
Q Whe n George W . Boyles, a colored man 
accused of murder, was acquitted i n the 
Quarter Sessions Court No . 1, i n Philadelphia , Assistant Distric t Attorne y Rogers 
was very angr y and asked Judg e McMichea l 
to order the jur y from the box. The judge 
di d as he was asked, remindin g the second 
jur y that was called that they had a duty 
to perform toward the commonwealth. The 
decision i n the case of the colored man 
stood. 
The Supreme Court of Mississipp i has 
rendered a decision upholdin g a statute of 
that State which requires interstate railroads whose trains pass through the State 
to maintain separate accommodations for 
white and colored passengers. This decision 
was the result of a suit fo r damages 
brought by a white woman who had been 
compelled to remain i n a Pullma n coach i n 
which there were three colored men. The 
jur y awarded the woman a verdict of 
$15,000. 
1 B y a new law barkeepers i n Pensacola, 
Fla. , who have separate counters fo r white 
and colored people must buy two licenses. 
<J Anni e Ellis, a colored woman of Macon , 
Ga., was awarded a verdict of $4,747 for 
the death of her husband, who was kille d by 
a live electric wire . This is said to be the 
largest verdict ever given a colored person 
for personal injuries. The damages asked 
were $10,000. 
<I Miss Ma y Hicks, a colored actress, went 
into Joel's Broadwa y restaurant, i n Ne w ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 6 3 
York, with several white actresses, and the 
proprietor refused to serve her. When the 
matter was carried into court Joel was lined 
$100 by Judge Nathan Oppenheimer. 
THE GHETTO. 
' I ' THI S is the law recently passed by the 
•"• legislature of Florida and signed by 
Governor Trammel, viz.: 
Chapter 6490, laws o f Florida, act 1913. 
An act prohibiting white persons from 
teaching Negroes in Negro schools, and prohibiting Negro teachers from teaching white 
children in white schools in the State of 
Florida, and providing for the penalty 
therefor. 
Be it enacted by the legislature of the 
State of Florida: 
Section 1. From and after the passage 
of this act it shall be unlawful in this 
State for white teachers to teach Negroes 
in Negro schools, and for Negro teachers 
to teach in white schools. 
Sec. 2. An y person or persons violating 
the provisions of this act shall be punished 
by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment in the county jail, not exceeding six 
months. 
See. 3. This act shall take effect upon 
and after its passage and approval by the 
governor. 
Approved June 7, 1913. 
^ Dr. Marcus Wheatland, a well-known colored physician of Newport, R. I., has been 
denied a renewal of his membership in the 
Vanderbilt Young Men's Christian Association of that city. The same organization has 
refunded the membership fees of another 
colored member, asking him to resign. 
<I At the eleventh annual national convention of the rural-mail carriers of Evansville, Ind., it was decided that Negro delegates should not be allowed to attend the 
national conventions. 
*I A colored girl was prevented from taking 
an examination in the Polytechnic High 
School in Los Angeles recently by the 
mysterious disappearance of her typewriter 
until the examination was over. Another 
colored girl was prevented in the same way 
from taking a county examination at the 
courthouse. 
<$ The formal organization of a North 
Carolina commission on rural race problems 
has been completed. It is the opinion of 
the members that "some steps should be 
taken to enable white communities to protect themselves from the evils of what is at 
present held to be the result of the wholly 
unregulated presence of white and colored 
farms in the same neighborhood." 
*J One member of the Oakland Center, of 
the California Civic League, has resigned 
and a general dissension is threatened because there were present at a lunch given 
by this club five women from the Colored 
Women's Alameda County Center. 
•J The Birmingham (Ala.) segregation bill 
has been declared unconstitutional. 
*I The indignation of the white public-school 
children of Newport, O., and of their parents was aroused because these children 
attended a stereoptican lecture at which colored children were also auditors. The 
superintendent stated that this was the 
result of a mistake and that hereafter colored children would be given lectures when 
no white children were present. 
*I Anderson, S. C , has passed a segregation 
ordinance. 
1 The Kansas University football team is 
complaining and attempting to refuse to 
play with Nebraska because there is a colored man on Nebraska's team. So fax 
Nebraska has refused to change the team. 
^ A bill is now before the legislature of 
North Carolina which, if enacted, will provide for the separation of white and colored 
people in all the towns of that State. 
•3 A private home for Negro children, operated by Mrs. Eldridge in Morgan Park, 
Baltimore, has been closed by the health 
authorities. The purpose of this move was 
undoubtedly to discourage NegToes from 
moving into this section of the city. 
<I Five colored postal clerks were dismissed 
in St. Louis October 16. This is said to be 
the beginning of the "Negro elimination" by 
the new postmaster. 
1 In Omaha, Neb., the high-school band is 
composed of white and colored boys. The 
white members, following the precedent 
which is being established everywhere, struck 
and refused to play with the colored boys. 
The school board and faculty gave the 
recreants a certain time to return in or 
else be expelled. The white boys returned 
and took their places in the band with the 
colored boys. 64 TH E CRISIS 
SI Five colored postal clerks in Georgia 
are said to have been dismissed without 
trial. 
SI Because substation No. 126 of the Brooklyn (N. Y. ) postoffice had two colored 
carriers whom the people are said to have 
complained about, the station has been 
discontinued. The station was in charge of 
a Southern Democrat, H. P. Hill. 
SI Two policemen and three plain-clothes men 
are stationed near the house of Charles 
Shipley, a colored resident of 708 Madison 
Avenue, Baltimore. Shipley has received 
threatening letters signed: "Committee of 
Decent White Citizens Against Negro Invasion." One of the letters said that dynamite 
would be used by a member of the "Black 
Hand" society. 
SI The colored people of Baltimore are preparing to fight segregation. At the last 
report they had raised $230 and were waiting for the Court of Appeals to give its 
detailed opinions before taking any definite 
steps. 
SI The white residents of Baltimore County 
are now clamoring for the same segregation 
ordinance as has been passed for the city. 
SI Representative John J. Rogers, from 
Massachusetts, has asked the House to investigate the alleged segregation of Negroes 
in the government employ. 
SI It is said that there is a movement on 
foot to assign white officers to the colored 
regiment of infantry in New York. 
SI W . L. Delaney, the new collector of customs in Ke y West, Fla., has discharged the 
colored officeholders under him by either 
discontinuing or abolishing the offices which 
they held. 
SI Frederick Anderson, a colored farmer, 
who lives near Richardson, Tex., was arrested by a constable and told that he was 
accused of two crimes and had better plead 
guilty to one, so as to be released from the 
other. What these crimes were was not 
specified. Anderson was fined $25 after 
three days' detention in jail, but says that 
he was not taken into a courtroom or before 
a justice of the peace. While he was imprisoned eight bales of cotton and fifteen 
loads of hay were taken from his farm. 
The case has been taken before the grand 
jury. 
CRIME. 
' • ' THE following lynchings have occurred 
during the past month: 
SI At Hazlehurst, Miss., Wilson Evans, a 
young colored man, charged with attacking 
a white girl. 
SI At Ocala, Fla., an unknown Negro 
found hanging from a tree. No other facts 
are known. 
SI At Monroe, La., Warren Eaton, accused 
of making an insulting remark to a white 
woman. 
SI At Madison, La., a Negro accused of 
assaulting a white girl. 
SI One Negro was killed in a race riot in 
Joliet, 111., caused by the attempts of a Negro 
to free a colored woman who was in prison. 
SI Charles Myers, who is in prison in Jonesboro, Ark., under a death sentence, may be 
freed. The prosecuting witness, Malissa 
Johns, now says that Myers did not attack 
her, but that her injuries were caused by a 
fall, and the other witnesses also admit 
false testimony. 
SI George Still, a white watchman on Mayo's 
bridge, Richmond, Va., who was charged 
with the murder of George Washington, an 
aged colored man, by a blow, has been 
acquitted. 
SI Henry Williams, a colored man, was 
killed by two white officers in Laurenburg, 
N. C., in a fray between the three men. 
SI J. M. Wilker shot and mortally wounded 
a Negro in Memphis, who brushed up 
against him on the sidewalk. 
SI Four men have been charged with night 
riding and posting threatening letters to 
Negroes in the vicinity of Jonesboro, Ark. 
SI A n unknown white man, with his face 
blackened like a Negro, robbed a woman in 
Tennessee, leaving her senseless. It happened in this case that some of the burnt 
cork rubbed off, giving the police a clue 
and preventing the lynching o f an innocent Negro. 
SI The colored, citizens of El Centro, Cal., 
threaten to withdraw their patronage from 
a "Jim Crow" school established in the redlight district of that city. This school is 
carried on in violation of the law, and 
Negroes cannot be forced to send their 
children there. FLORIDA BUSINESS MEN. 
/~\CALA , Fla., has 3,000 colored inhabitants, and there are 12,000 others 
in the surrounding county. This has offered 
a chance for industrial co-operation. There 
is a thriving sea-island cotton factory, considerable exporting of moss and velvet 
beans, while colored men have numerous 
stores and are supporting professional men. 
Recently the Metropolitan Realty and Investment Company has been organized and 
has erected a $20,000 building. In this a 
bank with a capital of $25,000 has been 
located. The president of the company, 
George Giles, is a large holder of real 
estate. The vice-president, Joseph L. Wiley, 
is the founder of Fessenden Academy, and 
the cashier, F. P. Gadson, is the owner of 
the largest dry-goods and notion store 
owned by a colored man in the United 
States. Other directors are Dr. Williams, 
a well-to-do physician, Messrs. A. S. Richardson, D. W . Goodwin, Charles Stewart, 
J. S. LaRoche, N. T. Brown and S. H. 
Hadley. 
A PHYSICIAN. 
-T\R . EDWAR D DUNN BROW N was 
born in Newbern, N. C , May 27, 
1877, and died this spring in Chicago. He 
was educated at the University of PennBANK OF THE METROPOLITAN REALTY AND INVESTMENT CO., OCALA, PLA, 66 TH E 
THE LATE DR. E. D. BROWN. 
sylvania, and took his doctor's degree from 
Harvard. He settled in Ohiea'go and became an ambulance surgeon of the city 
health department, but was compelled to 
resign on account of color prejudice. 
From that time he practised in the city 
and was well thought of by his fellows and 
the public. 
B 
A SUCCESSFUL CLERGYMAN. 
T P H E Rev. John Albert Williams was 
A
 born in London, Ont., February 28. 
1866. He was educated in the public 
schools of Canada and Detroit, Mich., and 
received his theological training at tne Seabury Divinity School, graduating in 1899, 
and taking up his work as deacon in St. 
Barnabas' Church. Omaha. Neb. 
Eventually he became priest of the 
Church of St. Philip the Deacon, of Omaha. 
Neb., and has remained there ever since. 
In 1892 he was elected assistant secretary 
of the diocese of Nebraska and has served 
continuously in that office. In 1906 he was 
appointed historiographer of the diocese. 
In 1910 he was made one of the bishop's 
examining chaplains; in 1909 he was associate editor of The Crozier, of which 
Bishop Williams was editor-in-chief. Finally, in 1912. Mr. Williams was made 
CRISIS 
REV. JOHN A. WILLIAMS. 
editor-in-chief of this official organ of the 
diocese. 
He was married to Miss L. W . Gamble 
in 1901 and they have three children. 
Under ordinary circumstances and in an 
ordinary country one would end this biography here, simply noting that a wellequipped man has become editor of an 
influential paper. But in America to-day 
we must call attention to two facts: First, 
that a colored man can edit a paper: and 
secondly, that no matter what a colored man 
can do he so seldom gets a chance to try 
that where he does it is worth a column in 
the newspaper. How wretched a situation, 
and how pitiable a cause that needs such 
weapons! The one damning thing in race 
prejudice is the deeds it feels itself compelled to do in the name of humanity. 
Moreover, what goes as a matter of 
course in this case might lead to riots and 
lynching in others. Suppose the bishop o f 
this diocese had been a coward and afraid 
of race prejudice? Or suppose Mr. 
Williams had shirked- his task and chance 
for fear of offending some prejudiced white 
brother? But why suppose? Let us rather 
thank God that now and then things go right 
even in America. "MAMMY'S LI'L BABY BOY." It would seem to be 
MR. WOODROW WILSON, J- 1 J 
dimly dawning upon 
the consciousness of the President of the 
United States and his distinguished advisers 
that the 10,000,000 colored people of this 
country cannot be wholly ignored and that 
a policy which hurts them has at least to 
be explained. Many persons seek to show 
that Wilson's anti-Negro policy is a mistake 
of the head and not of the heart. 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, in a speech 
in Baltimore, said: 
"I have known the present President of 
the United States personally for approximately twenty years and I take this opportunity to say that although I have complete 
respect for the sincerity of his motives and 
believe that at heart he really desires to do 
something big and fine for the colored 
people, yet in this segregation matter. I feel 
him to be wholly wrong. 
"His philosophy is wrong, his democracy 
greatly at fault. He has given us beautiful 
and worthy sentiments in his book called 
'The New Freedom.' But nowhere do we 
find any indication that his democracy is 
not limited, both by the sex line and the 
color line. He is far behind the times in 
his steadfast opposition to woman's 
suffrage.". 
The New York Evening Post has this 
editorial comment: 
"The whole undertaking to separate the 
races at Washington was gratuitous, with 
the result that the Wilson administration 
finds itself between two fires and certain to 
alienate the colored voters in the Middle 
Western pivotal States, while Wilson himself appears to have been faithless to his 
pre-election promise to stand 'for everything 
by which I could assist in advancing the 
interest of that race in the United States.' 
W e do not doubt that Mr. Wilson meant 
those words when he uttered them, or that 
he still means to be President o f the whole 
country, and not merely the representative 
of its white citizens. But the terrible fact 
is there that, without protest from him, the 
hateful spirit of caste has been introduced 
into the departments to a degree never 
known before, though attempted previously, 
and that this does not help, but gravely 
injures, the race. Perhaps later on the 
President may see his way clear to some 
statesmanlike measure which may relieve 
the race tension and inure to the benefit of 
the nation's colored wards. But it will have 
to be prompt and far reaching' to offset the 
mischief and injustice already done." 
The New Haven Register declares that 
Mr. Wilson "is a President with ideals, and 
an apparent desire to deal fairly with all 
sorts and conditions of men in the nation 
over which he presides. His success in 
accomplishing this is erratic. Occasionally 
it amounts to a marked failure. Of nothing 
is this more conspicuously true than in his 
dealing with the Negro officeholding prob^ 
lem. Mr. Roosevelt erred on the side of 
protesting too much friendship for the 
Negro, and apparently lacking in real regard for him. Mr. Taft made few profesr 
sions of this sort, but seems to have treated 
the Negro as fairly as any President in 
recent years. Mr. Wilson started unfortunately by permitting Secretary Bryan to 
make the needless mistakes of replacing a 
Negro with a white man in the position of 
minister to Hayti, a position held, and most 
fittingly, by Negroes for years. He did not 
make the matter any better by losing the 
opportunity which long precedent gave him 
of filling the position of Register o f the 
Treasury with a Negro. 
"But the most stupid and un-American 
blunder was this building a fence between 
white and Negro employees in the Federal 
departments, poetically called 'segregation.' 
Opinion OPINION 69 
There was no need of it. The only demand 
for it was from a few persons with foolish 
prejudices. The President might have disregarded them, as other Presidents have 
done. He has, by the action which he has 
permitted, done irreparable injury to the 
spirit of race harmony. For in spite of 
pessimism and ignorant prejudice, right 
handling will soften the lines of race prejudice, in time. The whites, more than the 
Negroes, need right educating in this, and 
the President has contributed to error. It 
is unfortunate, for he is a man of justice 
at heart. He seems to have been led either 
by his own prejudice or that of others, into 
a serious mistake for which he cannot, however, escape the responsibility." 
Senator Moses E. Clapp, speaking in 
Boston, said: 
"When men educated, cultured, refined, 
who possess capabilities to do things, are 
humiliated and struck a blow like this, they 
are putting back on the black man the 
bloody shackles which four years of bloody 
warfare struck from his ankles. 
"The American people might just as well 
know to-night as not. It is not the question 
of the Negro but that of the progress of 
our great nation. The moment you have thoroughly forced into the consciousness of the 
black or white man that there can be no 
progress, you have laid the foundation for 
class distinction. It is the very keynote of 
it all." 
m 
BALTIMORE. For the third time 
New York Evening Post, "Baltimore has passed a segregation ordinance. 
The first two were thrown out by the State 
courts when taken to them by protesting 
colored people. It now looks as if the 
matter would have to be adjudicated by the 
United States courts, for the ordinance of 
yesterday was drawn in accordance with the 
advice of the Court of Appeals, given when 
it declared the second one unconstitutional. 
This was a rather unusual procedure, and 
showed clearly where the sympathies of the 
court lay. In its essence the ordinance provides that no Negro shall move into a block 
which has a majority of white residents, and 
no white person shall buy or rent in a block 
if the majority of residents are black. It 
remains to be seen whether the Supreme 
Court of the United States will find such a 
restriction consistent with the guarantees of 
the Federal Constitution. Economically, this 
legislation puts iron bands on the real-estate 
development of Baltimore, and will, we believe, prove irksome to whites and blacks 
alike. It is utterly absurd in this day and 
generation to return to the ghetto of the 
middle ages, abandoned by Europe long ago, 
and it cannot now be tolerated in a community which calls itself democratic. It is 
contrary to every modern ideal and aspiration. Why, if it is successful, should similar legislation not be undertaken against 
Jews or Slavs or Italians or any other 
group in our cities?" 
The full opinion of the Maryland Court 
of Appeals on the former segregation act 
has been handed down. It says among 
other things: 
"If then the legislature could pass a 
statute, under the police power of the State, 
providing for the segregation of the races, 
as we think it could, there would seem to be 
no doubt that the mayor and city council of 
Baltimore can pass a valid ordinance having 
the same end in view. It is true, however, 
that some distinction is made between statutes passed by the legislature and ordinances passed by the municipality under the 
police power, as the court must undoubtedly 
take into consideration reasonableness of the 
ordinances and determine whether any of 
these are so unreasonable or oppressive that 
the legislature did not intend to empower 
the municipality to enact them as they 
stand." . 
It then goes on to discuss various difficulties in drawing up a proper ordinance 
and finally says: 
"W e do not understand why, in section 3, 
the exception was limited to domestic servants or just how comprehensive that term 
was intended to be. 
"It would be difficult to include caretaker, 
chauffeur or janitor in the term 'domestic 
servants,' but as the validity of the ordinance is not thereby affected we will not 
discuss that further. 
"As the case before us does not involve 
the provisions of sections 6, 7, 8 and 9 we 
will not discuss them separately, or pass 
upon the validity vol non of such provisions 
as the delegation, of power attempted by 
sections 6 and 7 to property owners, etc., 
but for the reasons stated we will affirm the 
judgment." 70 TH E CRISIS 
Mr. Charles J. Bonaparte continues, in the 
Baltimore Evening Sun, his attacks on the 
segregation movement. He says in one 
article: 
"Those who would have the Negro inhabitants of Baltimore compelled to live in 
dark, dirty alleys and narrow, unhealthy 
courts, and who, in general, long to keep 
them, as far as possible, poor, ignorant, 
vicious, criminal and diseased and a menace 
to the health, morals and order of the entire 
community, these people are not necessarily 
and consciously wicked; they are simply 
about four centuries behind their time. They 
feel toward a Negro very much as a subject 
of Ferdinand or Isabella might be expected 
to feel toward a Jew or a Moor. A distinguished cardinal, prominent in the papal 
government, has been (in all probability, 
very unjustly) often called 'medieval 
minded'; this description fits this first class 
of 'segregators" to a T. The character of 
their mental processes is illustrated with 
almost startling vividness in one of the letters sent to this paper. The author of this 
communication says: 
" 'Anyone who would advocate the mixture of the white and colored people, in so 
far as their living, willingly, side by side, is 
concerned, is, in my opinion, little skilled 
in the nature or history of mankind. Mr. 
Bonaparte knows well enough that there 
never was, nor is, nor ever will there be a 
time when white people, as a whole, will content themselves with having as their nextdoor neighbors fellow creatures who possess 
Ethiopian blood." 
"It is of no great consequence that this 
high authority evidently supposed 'Ethiopian' 
and 'Negro' to have the same meaning, and 
we need not dwell on his apparent belief 
that the race prejudices fostered by peculiar 
features of our national history are shared 
by white people all over the world; but is 
it quite consistent with sanity to suggest 
that a 'mixture of the white and colored 
people, in so far as their living willingly 
side by side is concerned," is unheard of and 
is incredible? Precisely such a 'mixture' 
has existed in Baltimore ever since Baltimore has existed itself and exists to-day in 
scores of localities throughout the city. 
Moreover, in all parts of the South, Negroes 
were for generations employed in all the 
most intimate relations of life by all the 
most prominent and influential white people; 
Negroes nursed their children, their aged, 
their sick, cooked and served their food, 
cleaned and eared for their homes and ministered to their personal comfort in every 
way possible." 
The San Francisco Chronicle preens itself 
on the superiority of California race prejudice from the Baltimore variety: 
"In Baltimore a colored family, not 
alleged to be other than respectable, moved 
into a house on a street which the whites 
apparently desired to reserve to themselves, 
and were bombarded with stones and bricks 
for three hours by white men and boys. 
"That such a performance could go on for 
three hours without being stopped shows 
just what kind of a police force they keep 
in Baltimore. 
"To get even, however, the Negroes assembled a great crowd of their own and began 
a retaliator\ - bombardment o f the houses of 
the neighboring white people. 
"Baltimore must be a fine city to live in. 
"And thereupon the authorities could 
think of nothing else to do but to pass what 
they call a 'segregation ordinance,' prescribing what blocks may be inhabited by 
Negroes and which must be reserved for the 
occupation of whites. Such an ordinance, 
of course, can have no legal validity, but 
public opinion may cause it to be respected. 
"If the street where these outrages took 
place was occupied exclusively by whites, 
and especially if it is a prominent residence 
street, one may concede that, knowing the 
feeling, the colored family was unwise to 
move in there, but they were within their 
legal rights, and a respectable Negro family 
is perhaps more to be respected than a 
white family of the same grade, for the 
Negro family has more to contend with. 
"There is this to be said about San 
Francisco that never in its history have acts 
of mob violence been committed against 
Negroes, Chinese, Japanese, Hindoos or 
other alien races which go to make up our 
cosmopolitan population. Individual cases 
of aggression have, of course, occurred, but 
they have been dealt with precisely as we 
deal with breakers of the peace among 
whites. 
"And yet there is the same racial antagonism which exists elsewhere. There is in 
the white race an inherent antagonism to 
social intercourse with those of other races. 
It does not extend to the educated and cul-OPINION 71 
tured classes of the alien races, but among 
the masses it persists. 
"But there are no race hatreds here. The 
Negro or Asiatic is safe from mob violence 
because there is no mob feeling. Persons 
o f any race may live anywhere in this city, 
without fear of attack and with the full 
assurance of the same protection that is extended to our own people. The neighbors 
on a fine residence street would probably 
unanimously object to having a colored 
family move in, but the family would not 
be disturbed. And what in this respect is 
true of San Francisco is true of California. 
"An d yet San Francisco is imagined at 
the East to be a hotbed of race proscription 
in its most virulent form. The fact is that 
in this respect it is the most decent city in 
the country." 
TILLMAN AND 
BLEASE. 
"When it comes to pass that 
Senator Ben. Tillman denounces a man as a demagogue in unmeasured terms one feels like 
rubbing his eyes to know if he is awake. 
Senator Tillman has a history in the line 
of demagogy which is rather striking. When 
he came to the Senate eighteen years ago 
with his famous 'pitchfork' he was looked 
upon with about as much interest as if he 
had been the wild man from Borneo. He 
lived up to his local reputation as a man 
who could say bitter things, who could denounce everyone and everything not to his 
liking in language which reeked with vitriol 
and smelled of sulphur. 
"But now Governor Blease, of South 
Carolina, represents the latest word—and 
we wish it were the last—in demagogy and 
makes Tillman seem like a reactionary. In 
the last few days the latter has paid his 
respects to the occupant of the chair he 
once filled in language which is picturesque 
and denunciatory, but which still fails to 
paint the whole picture. It may be said 
that Tillman tried his best to be a demagogue in his day, but that Blease has him 
beat a mile—to use the vernacular—on his 
own ground. 
"After all, the fundamental difference between the two men is that Tillman is a man 
of education and not nearly so bad as he 
tried to make himself out, while it is impossible for anyone to be quite such a man as 
Blease would have us think that he is. It 
does not speak well for South-Carolina that 
her present claim to notoriety hangs on the 
rival vituperation of her senior Senator and 
her governor. When one thinks of the 
Laurences, the Pinckneys, the Hammonds, 
Calhouns, Butlers and Hamptons it must 
be admitted that, officially speaking, South 
Carolina has suffered a decline. If this be 
punishment for her sins it may be just 
retribution, but it is a little hard on the 
rest of the country."—Philadelphia Inquirer. 
MOB LAW. 
The Chattanooga News has this 
editorial: 
"In Mississippi, Thursday, a Negro was 
lynched. There is a serious doubt if he was 
guilty of the crime of which the mob accused him. In South Carolina recently a 
jury acquitted Will Fair, a Negro, who had 
been accused of the usual crime which 
lynchings follow. Fair, at the time of the 
excitement following the story of a woman 
that she had been assaulted, was saved from 
a mob which sought to lynch him only 
through a brave stand by the officials. It 
later developed that the woman's story was 
only the result of her fevered delirium. The 
only excuse the mob had to suspect that 
Fair had committed a crime was that he 
happened to pass the house at the time the 
woman was delirious from a spell of 
sickness. 
"The mob clamored for the speedy conviction of the Negro, after its futile efforts 
to lynch him. The jury knew the Negro 
to be innocent, yet there was the shadow 
of the mob, which threatened to influence 
their verdict. Knowing the Negro innocent, the jury hesitated over the verdict 
for twenty hours. The tremendous lesson 
taught in the proving of the innocence of 
the Negro after the mob had almost succeeded in lynching him was hardly greater 
than that taught by the hesitation of the 
jury—their evident fear of declaring the 
Negro innocent in the face of the mob. 
Are even the courts of justice cowed by the 
blind fury of irresponsible and unthinking 
mobs? 
"The mob sentiment exerted such an influence over the trial of Will Fair that 
South Carolina has been stirred to a great 
revolt against mob violence. 'The acquittal 
of Fair should serve to put an end forever 
to lynch law in the State,' is the view taken 
bv the Columbia Record. But what of 7 2 TH E CRISI S 
other States which have not followed the 
trial o f Fair intently? What of the Mississippi mob which lynched the Negro whose 
guilt was doubtful? If he had not been 
lynched would the mob shadow have influenced the trial? 
"Lynch law has always been a blot upon 
the South. When the tentacles of the octopus of mob rule begin to spread out and 
grasp our courts, to intimidate our officers 
of justice, it is time for all citizens to lend 
their aid to the stamping out of this 
barbarism." 
Prof. Ryntaro Nagai, writing in the 
Japan magazine on "The White Peril," 
says: 
"Our American friends who talk more 
about freedom and equality than most other 
nations have nevertheless many hard things 
said of them by their own citizens in regard 
to their treatment of the Indians and the 
Negroes. At any rate it would be difficult 
to parallel in any country in the East such 
savagery as the lynching and burning of 
Negroes. According to the census of 1909 
the Negroes of twelve Southern States made 
up 40 per cent, of the population; yet out 
of $32,000,000 spent in common school education in these States only $4,000,000 went 
to the education of the colored people, less 
than 12 1/2 per cent, of the total. Nor are 
conditions better in India, if we are to 
believe the accounts given by the English 
themselves of the treatment of the natives 
there." 
Dr. Frances Hoggan, of London, England, 
in the Individualist, quotes the following 
passage from one of her former lectures: 
"All other wrongs of the present day pale 
before that depth of savagery, the lynching 
of Negroes. It is appalling in its revolting 
horror when one reflects that it is the crime 
of a nation which claims to lead the world. 
No analogous development of brutality and 
lust of cruelty have taken place in our 
times in any nation calling itself civilized, 
if we except Russia's barbarous treatment 
of political prisoners and her Jewish pogroms or mob massacres. 
"There have been attempts to extenuate 
this crime by asserting that it is only 
assaults on women that are thus avenged; 
but, unfortunately, this is not borne out by 
fact, and perfectly innocent victims are 
frequently offered up to the mad fury of 
the mob. And even were the sufferers 
guilty of the most atrocious of crimes, there 
is little chance that they would escape conviction and punishment at the hands of the 
law, if law were allowed to take its normal 
course. Lynching in a wild, unsettled community may wear a semblance o f justice; 
in a settled, civilized country it is almost 
unthinkable in its savagery and barbarism. 
It lets loose the tiger in man which it has 
taken so many ages to control, and it sinks 
the human below the brute. Wha t is all our 
civilization, what are all our courts and 
legal procedure worth if we feel constrained 
to fall back at last on the most primitive 
mob law, and, what is worse, defend it? 
Fo r my own part, I have often, on reading 
reports of the lynching of Negroes, felt 
ashamed of being a white woman, so deeply 
did the racial disgrace sink into my soul. 
More humiliating and degrading to the 
lyncher than the lynched, this modern crime 
must be uprooted, and saner methods of 
dealing with crime followed, unless we are 
prepared to retrograde indefinitely into a 
very hell of savagery, and to lose every 
attribute of the divine in man." 
. . . B 
education .
 Florid a ha s
 clandestinely enacted a law for driving white 
teachers out of colored mission schools. The 
Northwestern Christian Advocate says: 
"Some weeks ago the Northwestern gave a 
fairly comprehensive report of the cruel and 
inhuman enactment of the Florida legislature in prohibiting whites from teaching 
Negroes, the penalty being imprisonment in 
ease the law was not observed. That this 
startling bit of legislation escaped the alertness of the religious press generally is 
somewhat strange, since by it Florida has 
gone the limit of race prejudice and hate. 
"The Michigan Christian Advocate reviews the situation in a recent issue and 
concludes that the only thing for our 
freedmen's aid teachers to do is to retire 
from the field and leave their colored pupils 
to their fate; that to resist the law would 
be unlawful and would set a bad example 
before the Negro himself. 
"The Northwestern originally advocated, 
and still insists, the only course to pursue 
is to stand by the colored schools and continue to teach. The law was enacted in the 
bitterness of race hate; it is altogether 
counter to the spirit of our people, and is OPINION 73 
a violation of the constitutional rights of 
9,000,000 citizens. Words can scarcely be 
summoned to properly characterize the act, 
and the only way it can be brought to a 
definite head is to carry the matter to the 
courts—the Supreme Court if necessary— 
where the rights of these citizens can be 
clearly understood. 
"It is with the same spirit that the 
'passive resisters,' including some of the 
bravest and foremost ministers of England, 
have served time in jail for the cause of 
educational justice, that we suggest that 
our white teachers stand by their post in 
this hour of persecution. One prominent 
Methodist who has spent years in Florida 
remarked recently that no greater boon 
could come to him than the opportunity 
to teach the black boys and girls of that 
State in the face of such wicked legislation. 
It is only by such resistance that the law 
can be repealed." 
In New Orleans the colored people have 
been deprived o f their only chance for 
public high-school education by the sale of 
the Southern University. They have appealed for aid from the city, but the city 
evidently thinks with this writer in the 
New Orleans States: 
" I see it has been suggested that the city 
buy the property of the Southern University for a Negro high school. I am not 
informed as to the law on the subject of 
providing higher education for the Negro 
race, but I am opposed to Negro literary 
education altogether, much less higher literary schools for that race. When the Negro 
is taught book learning it disqualifies him 
for the work for which he is naturally 
adapted—manual labor. 
"When we educate the Negro we unfit 
him for usefulness. Now I am not prejudiced. I used to be enthusiastic on the 
subject of educating everybody, Negro and 
all. That was when I was much younger 
than now. Observations extending over a 
period o f more than twenty years have 
caused me to change my mind on this subject. The Negro is specially adapted to 
physical activities, and in that sphere alone 
will he serve himself and his country to 
the best advantage. OBSERVER." 
This well illustrates the attitude of the 
great mass of the middle-class white 
Southerners. 
A correspondent of Life brings us more 
light concerning conditions in Alabama: 
"By the way; it may interest you to know 
that there is not only being waged in the 
State a campaign to do away with the leasing of prisoners—virtually the selling of 
them into slavery—but also one, even more 
important, for an amendment to the constitution which will permit counties and 
school districts to spend more than a certain 
fixed sum for the education of their 
children. 
"It may be hard for some folks to believe 
that the makers of a State constitution 
would ever have thought it necessary to 
protect the people against too much education, but they did it in this State. And 
that fact goes far to explain a great many 
of our shortcomings." 
THE CHURCH. 
A writer in the New York 
Independent declares: 
"It is my deliberate judgment that if the 
advancement of the American Negro, financial, educational, industrial and moral, in 
his forty-odd years of effort as a freeman, 
and the advancement in the ideals for him 
among those who call themselves Christians, 
could stand before us revealed as they must 
be measured in God's sight, the Christian 
church of America would stand convicted 
o f a degree of prejudice, inhumanity and 
cowardice for which no consideration of its 
great achievements in other directions can 
ever atone." 
This seems to be fully borne out by the 
disgraceful exhibition of race prejudice at 
the recent general convention of the Episcopal Church in New York City. With the 
audience composed largely of educated and 
well-to-do colored people two Southern 
bishops gave talks that were insulting. 
Familiar untruths were repeated; namely, 
that the Fifteenth Amendment was the cause 
of the Negroes' condition, that the whites had 
spent $165,000,000 on the Negroes' education, that the Negroes' great need is "moral 
training." 
The yearly congress of the church of 
England had a symposium on "The Kingdom of God and the Races." Lord Selborne said that if a civilized people were 
ruling a native race their duty was to confer on the native race good government in 
the fullest sense of the word and, above all, 
government which gave every opportunity 74 TH E CRISIS 
of development on its own line (applause). 
The white man must understand that he was 
to treat the native with ful l justice, and no 
artificial barrier should be put i n the way 
of the native development. H e must be 
given his constitutional opportunities of 
voicing his grievance. "D o not think. " 
added Lor d Selborne. "that the native is fit 
for the franchise. On the whole he is 
wholly unfit for the exercise of the vote. 
They are adult children—but it is a farce 
and hypocrisy to pretend that the white 
man i n democratic government represents 
the black. H e cannot, and does not. The 
problem, therefore, is a difficult one." The 
problem of education presented an intense 
difficulty. Education should not be forced 
on people who did not want it, but adequate 
facilities should be given to those who did. 
and while not advocating the intermingling 
of the races, his lordship said no artificial 
barrier should be placed i n the way of the 
native risin g to the height which his intellect and character would enable him to rise. 
Though the ordinary native was unfitted for 
the vote, men did emerge who were fitted 
for it. Ho w could they give that privilege ? 
H e did not favor a technical test, adding 
that a man of 30, who had shown he was 
livin g a civilized life, should be given the 
privilege of the civilized man (applause). 
It was of the utmost importance that every 
group of natives existing should have a 
constitutional opportunity of stating their 
grievances and wants i n public. They 
should have the right at intervals of meeting the ministers for native affairs, and i n 
the presence of the press stating their wants 
(applause). It was essential that when the 
natives met the ministers the press should 
he present (applause). 
Sir Sidney Olivier, former governor of 
Jamaica , said : 
"The question in practical politics was: 
Ar e we to discriminate i n legislation on the 
ground of backwardness or on the ground 
of the race? He believed that Negrophobi a 
in race prejudice was i n mixed communities 
the most active source of danger. The 
civilization and morality of the Jamaic a 
Negro were not high, but he was on a 
markedly different level from his grandfather, the plantation slave, and his greatgrandfather, the Africa n savage. Negroes 
were now the equal of the white men i n 
fields of human function i n which a hundred years ago slave owners woul d have 
confidently alleged the Negro to be incapabl e 
of equality. The vast transplantation o f 
the Negro, the intercourse of white and 
black, had, i n fact, brought advance i n 
humanity to the colored people. Hi s study 
and comparison of conditions i n the Unite d 
States and i n the West Indies had brought 
him to the belief that no solution of the 
America n color difficulties woul d be found 
except by resolutely disclaimin g the color 
line and race differentiation theory.' ' 
E . D . Morrel l declared that a shudder of 
new emotions was passing through those 
hundreds of millions of colored men from 
the plains of Hindusta n to the swamps and 
forests of West Africa . Strange tremors, 
vague ambitions and passions were stirrin g 
them as they had never before been stirred. 
The old unquestioned and unquestioning 
acquiescence i n the ascendancy of the white 
man over the colored man as part and 
parcel of the natura l order of thing's was 
disappearing where it had not already disappeared. The white man had made, and 
was making, unwittingly , and but half 
consciously, its return impossible. The day 
was rapidl y approaching, i f it had not already dawned, when we could no longer base 
the stability of our rule i n the ultimate 
resort wholly upon our superiority in 
material power. There was no use i n disguising from ourselves that the slave spirit 
is not dead i n Western Europe , and that the 
need of fighting it whenever or wherever it 
reared its head was vital to the mora l and 
material interests of civilization . 
The Rev. J . H . Ritson . of the Britis h and 
Foreig n Bibl e Society, says of the church 
i n South Africa : 
"Tha t south of the Zambesi there are at 
least six blacks to every white, whil e i n 
Nata l the proportio n is eleven to one. The 
blacks are increasing more rapidl y than the 
whites, and i n Nata l wil l double themselves 
i n thirty-seven years. There are only a 
million native Christians and the six millions 
of black heathen constitute a growin g peril. 
These blacks are seeking education and pro ­
gressing by leaps and bounds—a spirit of 
individualism is takin g the place of that 
tribalism which has been a restraint i n the 
past. 'No one ought to withhold facilities 
for education—no one can ultimately with ­
hold them," said Mr . Ritson . The idea of 
the South Afric a Native College was eon-OPINION 75 
ceived seven years ago in the Cape Province. An appeal was made for £50,000, 
and large European contributions were 
promised if the natives raised one-half of 
the amount, and the whole sum required 
was secured. The property has already been 
bought near Lovedale, but this is hardly 
accessible, it is thought, for the Transvaal 
natives. Efforts have been made to secure 
assistance from the Union government, but 
at present without success." 
m 
THE JIM THE NEW YORK Evening Post 
CROW" CAR HAS AN editorial on the 
"Jim Crow" ear which we 
quote in part: 
"One of the most enlightened students of 
race relationships, here and elsewhere, Sir 
Sydney Olivier, for five years governor of 
Jamaica, spoke yesterday before the Church 
of England Congress on the dangers to the 
United States from race discriminations. If 
they are adhered to, so the cabled report 
runs, he feels that there will be danger of 
civil war and rebellion. If this is to be 
avoided, he says, 'statesmen and citizens' must 
'face in the contrary direction.' It is not a 
theorist who speaks, but a trained colonial 
administrator, who has governed an island 
containing but 15,605 whites among 793,382 
blacks. Moreover, Sir Sydney Olivier has 
traveled in our Southern States for the express purpose of studying our race relations 
at close range, and in more than one paper 
has deprecated much that he found there, 
dwelling notably upon the absence of such an 
admirable black constabulary as keeps the 
peace in Jamaica, and upon the many rasping 
discriminations which bear down so heavily 
on the American of color. As a result he 
has written that 'the color line is not a 
rational line, the logic neither of words nor 
facts will uphold it.' 
''If we should be asked what is the discrimination in the South, not known in 
Jamaica, which to-day is most unjust to the 
colored people in their daily life, we should 
be tempted to say the 'Jim Crow' car. For 
every time the colored man would travel the 
badge of inferiority is placed upon him, 
unless he is one of the few who, like Booker 
Washington, can obtain accommodation in a 
Pullman car. The enlightened white 
Southerner is gradually beginning to realize 
what this means; Dr. James H. Dillard, of 
the Jeanes Fund and Slater Fund, is, for 
instance, cited as declaring: 'If I were a 
colored man the "Jim Crow" cars alone 
would drive me out of the South'—and it is 
indubitable that this institution is driving 
Negroes out of the South and keeping them 
out. Thus, there are hundreds of colored 
people in Washington alone who will not go 
into Virginia because they will not enter the 
separate coach. But the 'Jim Crow' car 
policy is not for the moment the greatest 
grievance. In the South there is no escape 
from it, and it is accepted by the Negroes 
there as something that has come to stay for 
a long time, though eventually it must go if 
the principles of Christianity are lived up to. 
Hut aside from its injustice and discrimination, the actual conditions of travel in the 
car itself are so unbearable as to call forth 
the bitterest complaints, which go unheeded 
because the Negro has no vote and the 
superior race is too superior to listen to 
fault-finding from blacks. * * * 
"W e are aware, of course, that the mere 
proposal to abolish the 'Jim Crow' car at 
present provokes a storm of anger, just as 
we know that the presence in white cars of 
the lowest element of the Negroes does mean 
hardship for refined white passengers, precisely as refined colored passengers suffer 
from overbearing white boors who enter 
their coach. But is there no way out? Js 
there not any constructive suggestion to 
offer? W e have one which, it seems to us, is 
at least worth discussing. It is the adoption 
of the foreign system of cars of varying 
classes and rates of fare. W e practically 
have two classes now, the Pullman and the 
'day coach.' In Europe they have 'unwashed' 
peasants to deal with, but they are almost 
never found in the first or second-class 
carriages. They pay third and fourth-class 
rates and receive decent and clean accommodations. Is it impossible to adapt this system 
to our Southern railroads? It would do 
away with discrimination, while the presence 
in every class of white men with votes would 
prevent the existing intolerable violation of 
law. At least, as Sir Sydney says of the 
whole question, a solution along this line 
would be traveling the only road which leads 
to civil peace." 
m 
DEMOCRACY AND THE CHICAGO Tribune and 
DISCRIMINATION. the Greenville (S. C.) 
News are debatin g 
democracy. "Rare discrimination is foreign 76 TH E CRISIS 
to the great mass of intelligent Americans," 
says the Tribune. "The race prejudice 
fostered by the proprietors of certain hotels 
and restaurants is fostered for business 
reasons only. It is done to please a comparatively small class. While there are signs 
of increase in discrimination against the 
Negro in the North here and there, these do 
not indicate a tendency. Race prejudice cannot gain headway against the stream of 
intelligence or overcome the fusion of our 
common life." 
To this the News replies and incidentally 
gives up "practical" democracy: 
"This is a strange utterance to the South. 
The chief thing wrong with the ne w expressed is that it is wrong in its conclusions 
as to the antidote for prejudice during the 
present day. Does the Tribune want race 
amalgamation? If not, why begin on a basis 
of no discrimination? Prejudice, per se, is 
of course inimical, but the best way to keep 
down such prejudice is to keep the races as 
distinct and separate as possible. Such a 
course is better for the NegTO and better for 
the white man. This is not a day of 'nigger 
hating,' but is a day when men take a sane 
view of a great and unsolved problem, and 
then conclude that it is best to keep the races 
separate as far as possible. Prejudice invariably follows a contact of the races on 
any but a business basis. Theoretically, of 
course, this is not pure democracy, but in 
this day pure democracy will work only in 
theory and not in practice." 
Two New Orleans papers thus view the 
new civil-rights bill in New York. The 
Times-Democrat says: 
"As the former statute was evaded or 
ignored whenever and wherever the proprietors of hotels, restaurants, theatres and other 
establishments affected saw fit to draw the 
color line, we may be reasonably confident 
of the latter's ability to get around the new 
one. Doubtless it will produce no end of 
litigation at the beginning—helping to line 
the pockets of a certain class of lawyers at 
the Negro equality-seekers' expense. But the 
statute's unpopularity, plus the ingenuity of 
the business men who believe in the color line, 
ought to make its enforcement extremely 
difficult, if not impossible. Not only so, butthe ambitious Negroes' last case is likely to 
be worse than their first from their own viewpoint. Their attempts to enforce racial social 
equality have stimulated race hatreds and 
produced friction throughout the Northern 
States. The intolerable conditions at which 
they aim are not to be established by legislative fiat, either. Every new undertaking o f 
the sort is bound, we believe, to quicken race 
antipathies in the North and so to hasten the 
correct national adjustment of race relations 
by means of a color line rigidly drawn." 
The Picayune says: 
"That this law expresses the wishes and 
feelings of the people of the State of New 
York is plain or it would not have been 
enacted, and, although there are many people 
in the Empire State who do not favor it, they 
are in a minority and are not represented in 
the public affairs of the State. Hereafter 
visitors to the metropolis from the Southern 
States are likely to encounter, more or less 
frequently, unpleasant incidents, but as they 
will only be the result of circumstances which 
they cannot prevent, it will be well to accept 
them with the best grace possible." 
m 
Fo r gymnastics in reasonSOME SOUTHER N j i. 
ing commend us to the 
Logic- editor o f the Macon Telegraph. He believes in democracy and he is 
preaching the right of suffrage, but the 
eternal black man pops up here and there 
and plays sad havoc with his arguments. 
Listen to this, for instance: 
"If the object of government is the protection of the weak, as we are told by all 
the sages and sociologists, then to make that 
protection full, and as complete as possible, 
the weak should be permitted to have a 
voice at least at the polls." 
Sounds good, doesn't it? One could 
hardly ask anything better. Now read this: 
"The right of franchise, for instance, is a 
normal human right among men. To cheat 
men of that right intimidation is sometimes 
resorted to, but more often indirect devices 
are employed. In America—in a white 
man's country—a white man has the same 
right to vote that he has to live. The 'six 
months before' requirement for poll taxes, 
the 'Australian ballot' system and other 
devices are aimed at the poor and illiterate 
white man." 
After that cold plunge ascend to Heaven 
with this fine flourish: 
"Let us adhere to the fundamentals of 
the laws of the Creator. He made all men 
for equal opportunity and equal happiness OPINION 77 
The fall of man rather upset things, but the 
original principles and designs are the same 
so far as men in freedom can be drawn in 
line with them. With the fall came craft, 
and craft is about the worst of evils, 
because it is for the most part hidden. A 
hidden or interior evil (o f the mind and 
thought and intention) is hard to eradicate 
by the individual in himself, and harder to 
fend against by another because of its very 
character. 
"Innately, therefore, men are, and ought 
to be, equal; at least when you look above 
the criminal classes, the human averages 
pretty well." 
Now descend into hell: 
"Let us preface by saying that under our 
law all white men who have qualified by 
registering are entitled to vote, and no device ought to be permitted which will cheat 
them out of that right. It ought to be 
made easy and not hard for an honest man 
to vote his convictions." 
Finally, after dizzily recovering your balance, read this good old Southern stuff: 
"The women o f the Southern suffragette 
leagues are acting on the supposition that 
the Negro women, like the Negro men at 
present, can be virtually denied the ballot. 
They forget that the present situation as 
regards the Negro men required fifty years 
to be worked out; that it is at best but 
temporary, and that the more 'progressive' 
we become the more difficult will be the 
task of maintaining the existing status. 
They forget that the popular trend is continually and more and more away from 
independent State action, and that already 
we are threatened with the abolition of 
State lines in national elections. 
"When the ballot is conferred on women 
by an amendment to the Federal Constitution the number of the disfranchised 
Negroes in the South will be doubled. 
When the cry of that doubled element of 
the disfranchised reaches the women of the 
North and West, who are in the saddle for 
the 'rights' of their sex, no ingenuity on the 
part of Southern man or woman can possibly invent a scheme whereby the present 
status can be successfully maintained. Fo r 
the South's problem there will then be no 
solution." 
Wherefore we beg to conclude that the 
editor o f the Macon Telegraph is certainly 
some logician. 
THE NEGRO
 TH E NE W YOR K EVENING JOURNAL SAYS: 
IN EGYPT. 
The giggling shopgirls whose 
life of misery is still a joke to them— 
blessed youth!—should interest you deeply. 
And the Negro, too, with a tired black face, 
resting for the next day's slavery—slavery 
on a wage basis, but slavery all the same. 
Possibly you despise his thick lips. But 
those lips are carved on every sphinx in 
Egypt's sand, and if you could go back far 
enough you would find the ancestors of that 
Negro, before the days of the Pharaohs, 
laying the foundations of your religion and 
locating the stars in heaven. At that time 
your forbears were gibbering cave savages, 
sharpening bones and gnawing raw flesh. 
When you see the Negro on the opposite 
seat, the ill-starred one who has gone down 
in the human race, while we have gone up, 
think about him, study him, speculate as to 
his ultimate end—and your own. Don't 
merely say to yourself: 'That's a plain 
Negro,' and go on chewing gum." 
Town Topics says: 
"Well worth a visit is the Negro exposition in commemoration o f the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the emancipation 
proclamation. Specimens of Negro handicrafts, from the time of the ancient Egyptians—whom some Negroes claim as 
ancestors—down to the present, are exhibited, and demonstrate the improvement 
of the race. The exposition has a special 
interest, because the commencement of an 
anti-Negro movement is observable throughout the whole country, and even in Europe, 
where color has hitherto been no barrier. 
During the Civil Wa r the Negroes won the 
high commendation: 'Our colored troops 
fought nobly.' Since the emancipation 
proclamation their conduct, North and 
South, has been most exemplary. Very few 
of them have tried to intrude themselves 
where they were not wanted, and these few 
have been misled by white men, who conspired to use them for political purposes. I 
reason, therefore, that the feeling against 
them is only the survival of an old prejudice, fomented by wicked agitators, which 
can be lived down by their prevailing characteristics of industry and education. The 
Negro exposition is a notable display of 
their achievements." THE NATIONAL EMANCIPATION EXPOSITION IN NEW YORK CITY: THE TEMPLE OF BEAUTY IN THE GREAT COURT OF FREEDOM. 
COPYRIGHT TANDY AND FOSTER 1931 THE HISTORICAL PAGEANT OF THE NEGRO RACE AT THE EMANCIPATION EXPOSITION: FORTY MAIDENS DANCE BEFORE THE ENTHRONED 
PHARAOH RA, THE NEGRO. EDITORIAL 
^3 
f 
f 
THE THREE WISE MEN 
1
 THE comet was blazing down from the sky on the midnight 
before Christmas. Three songs were dying away in the 
East: one from the rich and ornate chapel of the great 
cathedral on the hills beyond 110th Street—a song of beauty 
and exquisite finish but coldly and formally sung. Another, 
a chant from the dim synagogue on the lower East Side— 
heavy with droning and passionate; the last from West 53d 
Street—a minor wail of utter melody. The songs had died away and the 
three priests, looking at the midnight sky, saw the comet at the same 
moment. The priest in the ornate chapel, gowned in his silken vestments, 
paused and stared wonderingly at the star; it seemed drawing near to him 
and guiding him. Almost before he knew it he had thrown a rich fur cloak 
about himself and was whirling downtown in a taxicab, watching the star 
with fascinated gaze. The rabbi on the lower East Side no sooner saw that 
blaze in the heavens than a low cry of joy left his lips and he followed 
swiftly, boarding a passing Grand Street car and changing up Broadway; he 
hung on the footboard to watch unmindful of the gibes at his white beard 
and Jewish gabardine. The old black preacher of 53d Street, with sad and 
wrinkled face, looked at the moving star thoughtfully and walked slowly with 
it. So the three men threaded the maize of the Christmas-mad streets, 
neither looking on the surging crowds nor listening to the shouts of the 
people, but seeing only the star. The "honk, honk" of the priest's taxicab 
warned the black priest scarcely too soon, and he staggered with difficulty 
aside as it whizzed by and made the motorman of the car, which bore the 
Jew, swear at the carelessness of the chauffeur. One flew, the other whirred 
swiftly and the third walked slowly; yet because of their differing ways 
they all came to the steps of the great apartment house at the same moment, 
and they bowed gravely to each other, yet not without curiosity, as each 
ascended the steps. The porter was strangely deferential and they rose 
swiftly to the seventh floor, where a wide hall door flew silently open. 
Within and before the wide log fire of the drawing room sat a woman. 
She was tall and shapely and well gowned. She sat alone. The guests had 
gone an hour since and the last footsteps of the servants were echoing 
f 
<0> 
<0> 
<0> 
1 EDITORIA L 81 
above; yet she sat there weary, still gazing into the mystery of the fire. 
She had seen many Christmas Eves and they were growing all to be alike— 
wretchedly alike. All equally lonely, aimless—almost artificial. She arose 
once and walked to the window, sweeping aside the heavy curtains, and the 
brilliancy of the star blazed in upon her. She looked upon it with a start. 
She remembered how once long, long years ago she had looked upon stars 
and such things as very real and shining fingers of fate. She remembered 
especially on a night like this how some such star had told her future. 
How out of her soul wonderful things were to be born, and she had said 
unto the star: "How shall this be?" And something had answered: "That 
holy thing that shall be born of you shall be called the Son of God." And 
then she had cried in all her maiden faith and mystery: "Behold the handmaiden of the Lord, be it according to thy word." And the angel departed 
from her, and it never came back again. Here she was reaching the portals of 
middle age with no prospects and few ambitions; to live and wait and sleep; 
to work a soulless work, to eat in some great manger like this—that was 
the life that seemed stretching before her endless and without change, until 
the End and the Change of Changing. And yet she had dreamed such 
dreams and fancied such fair destiny! As she thought of these dreams 
to-night a tear gathered and wandered down her face. It was then that she 
became suddenly aware of two men standing on either side of her, and she 
felt, but did not see, a third man, who stood behind. But for the soft voice 
of the first speaker she would have sprung up in alarm, but he was an old 
man and deferential with soft ascetic Jewish face, with white-forked beard 
and gabardine, and he bowed in deep humility as he spoke, saying: 
"Where is He that is born King of the Jews, for we have seen His star 
in the East, and have come to worship Him?" 
The other surpliced figure, who stood upon her right hand, said the same 
thing, only less: 
"Where is He who is born King, for we have seen His star in the East, 
and have come to worship Him?" And scarcely had his voice ceased than 
the strong low rolling of another voice came from behind, saying: 
"Where is He, for we have seen His star in the East, and have come to 
worship Him?" 
She sank back in her chair and smiled. There was evidently some 
mistake, and she said to the Jew courteously: 
"There is no King here." 
"But," said the Jew, eagerly, tremulously, "it is a child we seek, and the 
star has guided us hither; we have brought gifts of gold and frankincense 
and myrrh." Still the woman shook her head. 
"Children are not allowed in these apartments," she said, "and besides, 
I am unwed." 
The face of the Jew grew radiant. 
"The Scriptures say He shall be born of a Virgin," he chanted. But the 
woman smiled bitterly. 
"The children of Virgins are not welcome in the twentieth century, even 
though they be Sons of God!" 
4? 8 2 TH E CRISIS 
<0> "And in a manger," continued the Jew. 
<0> "This is, indeed, a manger," laughed the woman, "but He is not here— <0> 
He is not here—only—cattle feed here." O 
A Then the silk-robed priest on the left interrupted: <0> 
"You do not understand," he said, "it is not a child of the body we <^> 
seek, but of the Word. The Word which was with God and the Word which <A , 
was God. We seek the illuminating truth which shall settle all our wild 
gropings and bring light to this blind world." But the woman laughed even VV 
more bitterly. 
"I was foolish enough once to think," she said, "that out of my brain 
would leap some wondrous illuminating word which should give light and " V 
<^> warmth to the world, but nothing has been born, save here and there an ffi 
<0> epigram and the smartness of a phrase. No, He is not here." 
<^> The surpliced priest drew back with disappointed mien, and then sud-
<0> denly, in the face of priest and Jew, as they turned toward the unseen figure <^> 
A , at her back, she saw the birth of new and wonderful comprehension—Jew <p> 
st . and Gentile sank to their knees—and she heard a soft and mighty voice that gu, 
came up out of the shadows behind her as she bent forward, almost crouch 
ing, and it said: 
0 
s0s> 
"Him whom we seek is child neither of thy body nor of thy brain, but 
of thy heart. Strong Son of God, immortal love. W e seek not the king of 
the world nor the light of the world, but the love of the world, and of all 
men, for all men; and lo! this thou bearest beneath thy heart, O woman of 
mankind. This night it shall be born!" 
Slowly her heart rose and surged within her as she struggled to her 
feet; a wonderful revelation lighted in her whirling brain. She, of all <j? 
women; she, the chosen one—the bride of Almighty God; her lips babbled <0> 
noiselessly searching for that old and saintly hymn: "My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God, my saviour. For he hath ji . 
regarded the low estate of his hand-maiden, for behold! from henceforth 
all generations shall call me blessed." A great new strength gripped her 
limbs. Slowly she arose, and as she rose, the roof rose silently with her— w 
<^> the walls of the vast room widened—the cold wet pavement touched her <J> 
satined feet, and the pale-blue brilliance of the star rained on her coiled hair <0> 
S
and naked shoulders. The shouting, careless, noisy midnight crowds surged gu, 
by and brushed her gown. Slowly she turned herself, with strange new 
gladness in her heart, and the last words of the hymn on her lips: "He 
V hath put down the Mighty from their seats and hath exalted them of low ^ 
< ^ degree; he hath filled the hungry with good things and the rich he hath 4? 
<0> sent empty away." She turned, and lo! before her stood that third figure, <J > 
<0> an old, bent black man, sad faced and pitiful, and yet with brilliant caverned <0> 
eyes and mighty wings that curved to Heaven. And suddenly there was with 
X the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying: 
4> 
Jtj, "Glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace, good will toward A 
<£>
 men ' " ¥ 
t
SELAH! <0> 
I EDITORIA L 83 
FROM A LAYMAN. 
SIR: I am looking forward 
to some comment by you 
in the next number of 
Th e Crisi s in re 
the Episcopal Church 
convention in its dealings toward the Negro. Were it not 
too welt known that that church was the 
bulwark of slavery, and always has been 
the mainstay of prejudice, it might have 
been amazing to behold the hypocrisy 
and bigotry displayed by these "ministers of the Gospel." Evidently the 
Southern bishops could not divorce 
from their minds the Southern maxim: 
"Kee p the Nigger down. " 
Yours truly, 
E. L. CROSS. 
THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH. 
In th e re d blood-guiltiness of the Christian 
church in Americ a 
toward black folk the 
Episcopal Church has 
undoubtedly larger share 
any other group. It was the 
Episcopal Church that for 250 years 
made itself the center and bulwark of 
man stealing and chattel slavery. It 
was the Episcopal Church that deliberately closed its doors in the face of the 
praying slave; it was the Episcopal 
Church that refused after the war to 
educate the freedmen, and is still refusing, and it is only on the rostrum of 
the Episcopal Church that such reactionary heathenism could find welcome 
expression as was uttered by the bishops 
of Georgia and Tennessee at the last 
general convention. 
The setting was characteristic. In the 
Cathedral of St. John the Divine were 
gathered 1,000 persons, three-fourths of 
whom represented the emancipated and 
risen race whom the church for two 
centuries had insulted and spit upon. 
They were quiet, well bred and earnest 
people, long suffering and self-sacrificthan 
ing. They did not complain when the 
obsequious ushers pushed them to the 
rear and carried forward the snobs and 
pretenders—the smug-faced hypocrites 
who are making the Episcopal Church 
in America a hissing in the ears of 
righteous men. 
The dark hundreds sat down quietly 
and listened to—what? To a political 
screed, to lies that sounded deliberate, 
and to a wretched carping bitterness 
which disgraced the anointed prelates 
who thus fumed and cursed God and 
insulted their helpless auditors. 
It is NOT true that the Fifteenth 
Amendment is the cause'of the problems 
arising from the presence of the Negro 
race in America, and no student of 
American history with an ounce of sense 
or honesty would affirm this. As a matter of fact it was only the ballot of 
reconstruction times that kept the freedmen from re-enslavement. 
There is not the slightest evidence 
that the South has spent $165,000,000 
for Negro education, -and yet this venerable lie, started in the senility of the 
late Commissioner Harris, was paraded 
again to salve the conscience of the 
guilty South. 
The Atlanta University conference 
did NOT affirm the unmorality of most 
Negro preachers. It affirmed just the 
opposite, and the bishop of Tennessee 
made statements which sounded like 
deliberate falsification of the facts when 
he twisted a partial quotation out of its 
context to serve his own ends. 
The American Negro does NOT stand 
in unusual need of moral training. It 
is the American white man who needs 
that. The American white man, and 
especially the white man of the South, 
is a thief and a libertine to a greater 
extent than the Negro ever was or ever 
will be, and it is an impudent thing to 
preach regeneration to the helpless victims of slavery and lust and stealing. 
Wh y should the Episcopal Church in 
the day of its dotage thus elaborately 
set the stage to advertise Southern re-84 TH E CRISIS 
actionaries? Wh y should it thrust 
forward Nelson and Gailor and leave 
in the background Dillard, Weatherby, 
Bishop and Peabody? Is not this but 
one of many signs which show that this 
great institution is the church of John 
Pierpont Morgan and not the church of 
Jesus Christ? 
segregationist is the last scream of 
beaten prejudice. After that American 
civilization will be compelled through 
long centuries to tear down the walls 
which they are now building around 
the finest and most gifted single group 
in its polyglot population. 
THE STRENGTH OF SEGREGATION. 
WHE N the American people 
in their carelessness and 
impudence have finally 
succeeded in welding 
10,000,000 America n 
Negroes into one great 
self-conscious and self-acting mass they 
will realize their mistake. 
At present it is still possible to make 
Negroes essentially Americans with 
American ideals and instincts. In another generation, however, at the present rate we will have in this country a 
mass of people of colored blood acting 
together like one great fist for their 
own ends, with secret understanding, 
with pitiless efficiency and with resources for defense which will make 
their freedom incapable of attack from 
without. 
The actual organization of this group 
is progressing by leaps and bounds. It 
needs now but to be knit together into 
one great unity. This can be done—it 
is being done. Those who advise "race 
pride " and "self-reliance" do not realize the Frankenstein which they are 
evoking. The Negro cannot be beaten 
in this line by any present methods. 
The physical intimidation of lynching 
cannot be kept up ; the economic intimidation of exclusion from work cannot, 
with the present organization of Negro 
industry, be kept up after ten years. 
Continual social insult is powerless 
against those who refuse to be insulted. 
After this—what? What can America 
do against a mass of people who move 
through their world but are not of it 
and stand as one unshaken group in 
their battle ? Nothing. The yell of the 
THE EXPOSITION. 
THE New York emancipation exposition which 
took place in New York 
during the last ten days 
in October was perhaps 
the largest single celebration which colored people have had 
in the North. The total attendance was 
over 30,000; the order was perfect; not 
a single arrest was made and there were 
no serious accidents. 
But the exposition was not simply an 
assembling of crowds. It was an organized, logical affair. There were comparatively few exhibits, but each exhibit 
was in its place and meant something, 
and when combined with photographs 
and charts told a continuous and complete story of fifty years unusual progress among colored Americans. To this 
was added a series of entertainments. 
But greatest of all was the historical 
pageant. It became, as it was designed 
to be, a great popular festival with 350 
actors living their parts. Its imagery 
and beauty have been seldom surpassed, 
and Mr. Charles Burroughs and his 
helpers deserve all praise in their 
signal success. 
When one remembers under what extraordinary difficulties the nine commissioners organized this exposition, 
and what a fire of indefensible criticism 
they underwent, the exposition must go 
down in history not simply as the 
greatest of the attempts to celebrate the 
jubilee of freedom up to this time, but 
also as a singularly successful effort in 
honest administration and widespread 
co-operation. | A MA N THE Y DIDN T KNO W 
A STOR Y 
B y JAME S D . CORROTHER S 
(In Two Parts—PART I) 
THE opposition was right. 
President Nefferman had 
blundered. In fact, he had 
not understood the situation at all. Now the people 
realized this. A crisis was 
at hand. Wa r seemed inevitable. An appalled and anxious nation 
looked for a way out—with honor. 
Yet, at the beginning of all this, President Nefferman had laughed, flouting all 
thought of serious possibilities. The chief 
mouthpiece of the opposition, stung to hysteria by the president's bungling, mercilessly 
assailed him, urging his immediate impeachment, and stood not upon the order of its 
flaming and virulent denunciation. Bristling invective, scathing rebuke, scourgings 
and knoutings, it volleyed and showered upon 
him in the fury of its wrath. Perhaps this 
great paper, a veritable "thunderer" among 
its kind, was most dangerous to the interests of the president and his friends when 
it condescended to ridicule, and malignantly 
played the fierce light of its derision upon 
the pitiful man. Again and again it shouted: 
"Nefferman laughed!" 
"Laughed in the face of this black and 
ominous storm, thick-belching from the 
noxious shores of hell! Laughed and could 
not be made to understand the oncoming, 
dreadful thing. He laughed, actually 
laughed! And all the mountebanks, mimes, 
grafters and money bags of his senile administration laughed with him, in unison. 
They had made 'theirs' and were content. 
So doubtless, too, was poor, fat-witted 
Nefferman. He laughed until his own 
private money bags rumbled and burst and 
laughed. This was caught up and echoed 
by the money bags of the protected 'interests.' It became the laugh of millions, as 
if every bag had a golden mouth, and all 
the bags had burst. But from the tormented, seething populace it evoked no 
merriment; awoke no answer; provoked no 
response but malediction. To the anxious, 
fearing people the fearful levity of Nefferman and his friends was as mocking and 
hateful as the bacchanalia of devils who lead 
the doomed to hell, among echoing rocks, 
and beside murmurous rivers of pitch. 
"But it was all very funny to Nefferman. 
His lazy brain reported: All is well. He 
laughed—amid these flashings from Sheol! 
He actually threw back his beefy, Midaseared head; wrinkled his butcher-hued face 
in complacent, Neffermanian smiles; opened 
his big mouth wide, and—laughed! Had it 
not been for a little isthmus at the back of 
his neck the whole top of his head would 
have been an island. 
"Dolt! 
"Already the Orientals, through their 
secret treaties with Mexico, were at the 
beginning of things. The American consulate in Mexico City had been damaged; 
several Americans in Mexico had been imprisoned, tortured and killed; shots, always 
'random shots,' had been fired across the 
border into the United States, wounding 
our citizens and destroying property; 
American soldiers had been hit, and skirmishes were frequent until forbidden by the 
American government. Then began the 
desertions of our Negro soldiers to Mexican 
ranks. There these trained men, of a race 
never before disloyal to their land or flag, 
manned the machine guns for the 'Mexicans,' and sent vindictive volleys crashing 
back into American homes and towns. 
" 'Mere straws!' observed Nefferman, not 
realizing that 'straws' tell which way the 
winds blow. 
"Next came the California 'land law' 
movement, against which Japan formally 
protested to this government—her only 
open move. 86 TH E CRISIS 
"The n came the remarkable 'votes for 
Negroes? justice NOW!' movement of the 
blacks throughout the country. Great mass 
meetings and restless bands of men and 
women, wit h black, agonized faces, marchin g through our cities and from town to 
town. 
"Agai n Nefferman laughed! 
" 'Mer e imitation!' he reassured us. 
'Sambo and Topsy,' he explained, 'tryin g to 
mimi c the Englis h suffragettes. That is— 
all but the "hunger strike. " Ha ! ha ! Sambo 
loves his po'k chops too well fo r that!' 
"Stil l Nefferman laughed! 
"Bu t now 'a change came o'er the spirit 
of his dream.' Ten America n soldiers and 
three citizens were shot on America n soil 
durin g a rai d by Mexica n rebels. Si x of 
those wounded died. The America n government demanded from Mexic o prope r reparation and apology. This the Mexica n 
government seemed reluctant to grant, disclaimin g federal responsibility, and claimin g also that the rebels were assisted by 
America n adventurers and mercenaries. 
Upo n this some America n State troops and 
a few regulars surreptitiously plunged over 
the Mexica n border by night and captured 
the entire rebel band, of necessity shooting 
a few i n the drastic transaction. Al l Mexico 
is flaming white hot over the 'outrage.' 
Wa r may be declared upon us at any 
moment, and united Mexico, backed by her 
cunnin g and powerful ally, wil l bristle to 
the assault. 
"No w Nefferman's levity subsided, and a 
look of determination clouded his Napole ­
onic brow. His pride was aroused. H e 
would end this thing at once, and decisively. 
"Bu t now came the second greater shock: 
The 'peaceful' revolution of Hawaii , voted 
i n by 20,000 Hawaiian-bor n Japanese 
youths, real 'America n citizens,' who had a 
right to vote, and who, together wit h certain renegade whites and a wholesale importation of Negroes, formed a new politica l 
balance of power in the islands, thus assuring the success of their audacious plot. 
It is anticipated that the next move wil l be 
annexation to Japan . A Hawaiia n republic 
can hardly stand alone. American s are 
leaving the islands. 
"The government at Washington , beyond 
furnishin g transports for the departing 
Americans, has done little other than to 
demand that the authority of the Unite d 
States be recognized, as heretofore. It is 
asserted that the Atlanti c fleet ma y be 
ordered to the scene to enforce our demands. Meanwhile , it is rumored that a 
dozen Japanese cruisers are already secreted 
in secluded Hawaiia n waters awaitin g the 
attack of the America n squadron. There 
is, however, no confirmation of this report. 
"Nefferman is not laughin g now! 
"Later: A most disquieting report 
reaches us to the effect that Charle s H . 
Bowden , the America n aviator, soaring 
over the supposedly unfrequented waters of 
the lower Californi a gulf, on Friday , made 
the startling discovery of a secret Japanese 
coaling station situated on a quiet bay. Some 
cruisers of lighter draft were hidin g nearby. 
There appeared to be great activity on board. 
"Ft. Bayard, N. M., Apri l 18.—Nearly 
half a company of Unite d States colored 
troops stationed here deserted to the enemy 
when ordered to prepare for action against 
the Mexicans. Disloyalt y is spreading 
among the Negro troops. Furthe r desertions seem imminent. The yellow peril is 
upon us. Behin d all that has happened 
may now be discerned the hand of the 
plotting East. 
"Chicago, Apri l 19.—At a mass meeting 
held here last night more than 2,000 
Negroes, among whom were some of the 
leading colored people of this city, passed 
resolutions demanding 'votes for Negroes,' 
and 'the immediate cessation of lynching in 
the United States.' The Negroes declared 
they would not bear arms i n the impending 
conflict unless the nationa l government took 
steps for their relief. Simila r meetings 
were held i n Detroit, Cincinnat i and St. 
Louis. The Negroes asserted that meeting's 
of like nature wil l take place soon i n other 
leading cities, especially i n the East and 
Northwest. The leaders of last night's 
meeting were arrested, but the disaffection 
continues to spread. It is a grave and 
alarmin g state of affairs. Severe punishment of the leaders wil l only inflame the 
blacks. Something must be done to wi n the 
Negroes over." 
A tall, athletic, sun-browned man. emergin g from a field of rustlin g corn, received 
a letter from the rura l postman. It was 
noon. The dinner bell at the farmhouse had 
rung, and thither, letter in hand, the man 
started wit h swingin g strides. The letter A MA N THE Y DIDN'T KNO W 87 
had originally been sent to X , Mass. 
After repeated forwarding, it had finally 
reached him in Eastern Pennsylvania. It 
was from the President of the United 
States, and was as follows: 
The REV. GRANT NOBLE, 
Pastor Baptist Church, 
X , Mass. 
REV. SIR: 
In the present crisis, wkich threatens to 
become a national calamity, it is deemed 
advisable for the President to call together 
some of the representative men of your race 
with whom he may take counsel concerning 
the unprecedented attitude which colored 
citizens are assuming toward the national 
government. Your name was suggested by 
a gentleman from Massachusetts as that of 
a sagacious and resourceful man of unusual 
attainments and character. It is to such 
men as yourself that the President turns 
in • this our country's hour of need. No 
other President of the United States has 
had such a problem on his hands. Will you 
not meet with the President in Washington 
on the evening of April 21, at S o'clock? 
The expense of the trip will be met. No 
publication of this matter should be made 
at present. Sincerely yours, 
RODNEY M orris. 
Secretary to President Martin Carlos 
Nefferman. 
Grant Noble decided to go, though it 
might involve for him no small sacrifice. 
In a few words he set forth the matter 
before the good German folk for whom he 
worked, and with whom he and his little 
son enjoyed one of the pleasantest homes 
in which they had found shelter, on their 
gradual journey westward, since his unfortunate losses in Massachusetts. 
"Chess," assented the good farmer, a 
staunch Nefferman man, "dot vill pe alright. 
Go unt dalk mit him all vat he vants. Unt 
der chob, unt der liddle, mudderless poy vill 
pe here alright, ven pack you come." 
That night Grant Noble was in Washington, and, a few minutes after 8, was shown 
into the President's office. Three other colored men, all strangers to him, were already 
waiting. At nearly 9 o'clock another colored man, a bishop of pompous mien, was 
ushered in. Out of fifty who were asked 
to come but five were present. 
{To be concluded in the 
The President, burdened and worn, 
though not precisely upon the minute, came 
promptly, without the slightest hint of 
ceremony, and, arrogating to himself no air 
of Saxon superiority, got immediately to 
business. 
"Gentlemen," he said, "I want your help, 
and your sympathy. I know your race has 
been abused; I know we have lost its confidence. Can it be restored?" 
The prelate, to whom all deferred, spoke 
first—a set speech, and an old one— 
grandiloquent; vain, he threw no light upon 
the subject. Plainly, his sole desire was to 
"show off"—to get advertised. He had not 
the intelligence nor sense to know that he 
had failed. And upon the impenetrable 
face of Nefferman there was no sign. 
One after one, three other Negroes spoke, 
and in their talk that long telegTaph pole 
of a capital letter "I " was indubitably 
apparent. Evidently each thought that he 
could lead his race back to loyalty—and 
whithersoever he chose. 
"Do you not think, gentlemen, that Dr. 
Packer T. Jefferson would be the proper 
leader to carry through any plans upon 
which we might decide?" asked the President. 
It was Grant Noble who answered. 
"There is just one man," he declared, 
"who can prevail with my people now. 
That man is not Dr. Jefferson. They would 
follow Dr. Jefferson through life, to progress and success, but I doubt if Mr. Jefferson himself would presume that he could 
lead them into death. That requires a warrior soul! There is one mighty black man 
whom my people would follow into death. 
That man is Jed Blackburn, the discredited 
Negro boxer. I am aware of bis mistakes 
and of his limitations. I know he is in 
great disfavor. But, if you would win 
back the American Negro, get this man into 
action. He is lion hearted and patriotic." 
"D o you know this man personally?" 
"Yes, slightly." 
"If this plan is decided upon," asked the 
President, "would you be willing to undertake its negotiation?" 
"I think so, sir." 
"And what boon would you offer him— 
what reward ?" 
"Redemption, through the battlefield; a 
patriot's bright glory, perhaps a patriot's 
death, but—REDEMPTION." 
January CRISIS.) NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE 
THE National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
is the new abolition society. It has twenty branches, ranging 
from New York to Washington and from Boston to San Francisco and Tacoma. It has the machinery to fight discrimination, 
and everywhere it is making that fight—against segregation in 
Baltimore and other cities, against segregation in work in the 
United States government departments, against "grandfather " 
laws and "Jim Crow" laws before the Supreme Court of the United States. 
Its branches are holding meetings of protest, its officers and directors are 
volunteering as speakers. 
Its chairman, in spite of the fact that he has been for twenty years a 
friend of Mr. Wilson, and has warmly supported the present administration, 
personally and through his paper has taken a most aggressive stand in denunciation of the undemocratic policy of segregation which is being inaugurated 
in Washington. He has interviewed members of the Cabinet and the President 
himself. He has addressed large meetings of protest in Baltimore and Washington and is now preparing an article for one of the leading magazines. 
The association sent an investigator to visit the departments in Washington where segregation was said to be in force. This report was released 
to the Associated Press and to other news services on November 17, when it 
was also sent to 500 newspapers, fifty religious papers, to magazine editors, to 
members of Congress, to ministers and to many others. Copies may be 
obtained free of charge by applying to the National Association. 
Cases affecting the colored people now before the Supreme Court of the 
United States may decide the legal and political status of the Negro for years 
to come. The National Association is the only organization appearing for the 
colored people in these cases. It has filed a brief in the "grandfather " case 
now before the Supreme Court. This was prepared by the president, Mr. Moorfield Storey, one of the leaders of the American bar, who, with Mr. Harrison 
of Oklahoma, will argue the "Jim Crow " case set for this term. 
The association has just engaged a lawyer to assist the legal committee in 
its work. The association has also engaged a man to watch every bill introduced into the House and Senate in Washington. Discriminating bills have 
been appearing with increasing frequency, and without the careful watching of 
an expert may be railroaded through at any moment. The association is now 
preparing to fight the "Jim Crow " car bill which it is generally understood 
will be introduced in Congress in February. "Jim Crow " cars in Washington 
mean "Jim Crow " cars in Cleveland, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, St. Louis and 
perhaps even in New York and Boston. 
If you want to protest, enroll with us as a new abolitionist in the 
National Association, and do it now. TH E N. A. A. C. P. 89 
BRANCHES . 
BALTIMORE. 
NL Y a mention of the remarkable mass 
meetings recently held in Baltimore 
and Washington was included in the last 
number o f THE CRISIS, since it went to 
press before the meetings had taken place. 
The Bethel African Methodist Episcopal 
Church, where the Baltimore meeting was 
held, was crowded to the doors. Mr. Warner T. McGuinn presided. Resolutions were 
adopted and wired to the President. The 
speakers were Dr. Spingarn, Miss Ovington 
and Mr. Villard. After comparing the unAmerican policy o f race segregation to the 
example set by Russia, Mr. Villard said in 
part: "But the stupidity of raising this 
issue does not stop there. It differs but 
very little from the one which rent the 
Union. The great struggle which convulsed 
the United States was, in its simplest terms, 
nothing else than the attempt of an aristocracy of cotton and land to create two 
classes of human beings in this country—the 
slaves and the free. They were willing to 
sacrifice the Union and everything else to 
this end. Those who in this day and 
generation are seeking to establish two 
classes of citizens—the disfranchised and 
enfranchised—to say that there shall be two 
kinds of government employees—as does 
Mr. McAdoo's Cabinet associate—they are 
on the high road to convulsing anew this 
land of liberty, which will never know 
peace and quiet as long as there are discriminations among its citizens. Upon their 
heads will be the responsibility of forcing 
the issue and not upon ours." 
BOSTON. 
A large and enthusiastic audience attended the mass meeting of protest against 
segregation which was held in the ParkStreet Church on October 20. Mr. Storey 
presided. The speakers included Senator 
Moses E. Clapp, Mr. Albert E. Pillsbury, 
formerly attorney-general of the State, the 
Rev. Samuel H. Crothers, the Rev. Mr. 
Auten, Mr. Rolfe Cobleigh, assistant editor 
o f the Congregationalist, and Mr. Butler R. 
Wilson, secretary o f the branch. Letters 
were received from Governor Poss, Congressman A. P. Gardner and Mr. C. S. 
Bird. Governor Poss wrote: " I have undertaken, as a citizen and as governor, to 
bring this matter to the attention of the 
President, and have asked him to take such 
action as may bring an end to race discrimination in any department of government. It is proper for me to say, however, 
that I can hardly believe that at this late 
day any national administration will reopen 
the question of race discrimination in the 
United States. I therefore cannot believe 
that the reported acts of discrimination are 
a part of a settled policy, and cannot doubt 
that President Wilson will speedily put an 
end to conditions which, as reported to me, 
are unworthy of any free people." 
TACOMA. 
On October 17 a mass meeting of protest 
against segregation was held at Everett by 
the Tacoma branch. Delegates from Seattle 
and Tacoma were present and delivered 
addresses. Judge Bell, of the Superior 
Court of Everett, presided. Other speakers 
were Father Saindon, through whose courtesy the lecture room of the Catholic church 
was placed at the disposal of the meeting; 
Capt. K. K. Beecham, a veteran of the 
Civil Wa r and captain of a Negro regiment, 
and Mrs. Nettie J. Asberry, secretary of the 
Tacoma branch, who explained the aims and 
objects of the National Association. Resolutions read by Mr. Joseph Griffin, secretary 
of the meeting, were forwarded to the President in care of Congressman Falconer. 
TOPEKA. 
An entire evening devoted to the work of 
the National Association was arranged by 
the branch at the recent fair held at Lane 
Chapel. Mrs. Roundtree, secretary of the 
branch, spoke on the origin of the association; Mr. N. Sawyer, on its object; Mr. 
Guy, on the progress it had made, and the 
Rev. Mr. Walker, on the outlook. The 
branch plans to publish a series of short 
articles in the Topeka Daily Capital. These 
will be by white and colored writers of 
prominence, and will aim to explain and 
further the work of the association. 
W ashington . 
Within five blocks of the White House, 
in the Metropolitan African Methodist 
Episcopal Church, on October 27, the most 
remarkable and epoch-making meeting ever 
held in the District of Columbia protested 
against the segregation of colored employees 
in government departments. The crowd has 
been variously estimated at from 8,000 to 90 TH E CRISIS 
10,000 people. The meeting was advertised for 
S o'clock, but shortly after half-past seven 
the detachment of police, detailed to keep 
order, directed that the doors of the church 
be closed. Some idea of the throng can be 
inferred from the fact that when Dr. 
Holmes, one of the speakers, arrived, and 
finally pushed his way through to the iron 
fence surrounding the church, it was necessary to lift him bodily over the fence, so 
that he might reach a side entrance leading 
to the auditorium. Because of the size of 
the crowd the speakers were obliged to deliver their addresses first to the meeting 
within the church and afterward to an 
overflow meeting of over 4.000 outside. 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke. president of 
the branch, presided. Judge Wendell 
Phillips Stafford and ex-Senator Blair 
spoke briefly. The principal addresses were 
made by Dr. Walter H. Brooks, of Washington, Dr. John Haynes Holmes, the noted 
Unitarian minister of Xew York, and Mr. 
Villard. Musical selections were artistically 
given by the Howard University choir. Dr. 
Holmes made a stirring and powerful address. He said, among other thing's, that 
segregation, instead of allaying race prejudice, was really the cause of all the 
friction, and characterized it as the "new 
crucifixion." 
When Mr. Villard arose he received a 
veritable ovation. He prefaced his address 
by reading a letter which he had just received from Mr. McAdoo , Secretary of the 
Treasury, and his personal friend, requesting him not to speak, because in criticising 
Mr. Wilson's administration "he would be 
doing injustice to a just man." Mr. Villard 
said that he had been urged by those in 
high authority to use his influence to keep 
the colored people in "cool and just equipoise." "It is beyond me to influence them 
much in this direction," he said, "but 1 
would not if 1 could. On the contrary. 1 
shall lose no opportunity to preach the doctrine of peaceful rebellion and revolution 
against discrimination of every kind." His 
speech has been given wide publicity in the 
press and much favorable editorial comment. A writer in the Chicago Tribune, in 
speaking of it and of the present administration's "officializing of race prejudice," said: 
"Tt would be more inspiring to read Mr. 
Wilson's declaration that we must prove 
ourselves the Latin-American's friends and 
champions upon terms of equality and 
honor if we were not reminded at the same 
moment by Mr. Villard that Mr. Wilson is 
countenancing race discrimination in his 
own country." 
A collection of about $300 was taken for 
the work of the National Association. After 
the meeting the executive committee of the 
branch appointed a committee of fifty to 
raise funds, and already $1,200 has been 
subscribed, to be paid not later than January 1. This committee has expressed 
itself as favoring an endowment for the 
association. 
Other noteworthy meetings against segregation were held by the Northern California 
branch, by the colored people of New 
Haven, where Mr. George W . Crawford, 
one of the directors of the association, made 
an inspiring speech; and also in Portland. 
Me., where Dr. Mason addressed a large 
audience. 
M 
LEGAL. 
X November 1 the association engaged 
an attorney. Mr. Chapin Brinsmade. 
to assist the legal committee in carrying on its work. Up to this time this 
committee, comprising some of the most 
eminent lawyers in this country, without 
compensation have handled all legal cases 
referred to the association. The work has 
developed so rapidly and has increased so 
in volume and importance that it has become necessary to have a lawyer at national 
headquarters who can devote his entire time 
to this important department under the 
direction of the legal committee. 
Mr. Brinsmade graduated from Harvard 
College with the class of 1907. During his 
senior year. 1906-1907, he was absent from 
the university, teaching at the Gunnery 
School in Washington, Conn., of which his 
father, John C. Brinsmade, is head master. 
In the fall of 1907 he returned to Cambridge to enter the law school from which 
he was graduated in 1910. Since that time 
he has been practising law in Xew York 
City. He was admitted to the Xew York 
bar in 1911. During the years 1911 and 
1912 he has been associated with the law 
firm of Van Wyc k & Mygatt, and later with 
their successors. Wherry & Mygatt. at 40 
Wall Street. 
The chairman of the board of directors 
wishes to express in this way his apprecia-CHILDREN OF TH E SUN 91 
tion of the support and good work of those 
branches which contributed $100 each to 
enable the association to employ an attorney, and of Bishop John Hurst, of Baltimore, who personally gave $100 for this 
purpose. The branches which so generously 
came to the aid of the association are 
Indianapolis, Washington, Baltimore. 
Quincy, Tacoma, Topeka and Detroit. Two 
o f our largest branches, Boston and Chicago, which have always been most generous 
in their contributions to headquarters, were 
not asked to contribute, nor were the 
branches which had just been admitted. 
Especially appreciated was the co-operation 
of Quincy and Tacoma, which at the time 
they made their contributions were our 
smallest branches, numbering not more than 
twenty members each. 
m 
MR. VILLARD : 
After your speech last night I and many 
others are convinced that you must have a 
I. 
WE are children of the sun, 
Rising sun! 
Weaving Southern destiny, 
Waiting for the mighty hour 
When our Shiloh shall appear 
With the flaming sword of right, 
With the steel of brotherhood, 
An d emboss in crimson die 
Liberty.' Fraternity! 
strain of Negro blood, or you would not 
have come here and made the remarks you 
did to incite the Negro to worse crimes than 
have been committed, and the most terrible 
ones they commit against white women. 
We cannot walk on the streets of this city 
now after nightfall, as many of us are 
compelled to do in coming from our work, 
without fear that we may be the next 
victim. 
Take them to New York and let them 
associate with your wives and daughters. 
A crime committed in the North, against 
a white woman by a Negro, receives only a 
few lines notice by your Northern papers, 
but let the same crime be committed in the 
South—the New York papers especially 
have a half column. 
If your blood is tainted, as many here 
believe, you, of course, will be excused only 
on that believe. 
A WASHINGTON WOMAN. 
Washington, October 28, 1913. 
II. 
W e are the star-dust folk, 
Striving folk! 
Sorrow songs have lulled to rest; 
Seething passions wrought through wrongs, 
Led us where the moon rays dip 
In the night of dull despair, 
Showed us where the star gleams shine, 
And the mystic symbols glow— 
Liberty! Fraternity! 
CHILDRE N OF TH E SU N 
FENTO N JOHNSO N 
III. 
W e have come through cloud and mist, 
Mighty men! 
Dusk has kissed our sleep-born eyes, 
Reared for us a mystic throne 
In the splendor of the skies, 
That shall always be for us, 
Children of the Nazarene, 
Children who shall ever sing 
Liberty! Fraternity! AT BUCKEYE LAKE. 
"BUCKEY E LAK E is thirty-three miles 
east of Columbus, O., and round about 
it are many cottages and an amusement park. 
In the park is a dancing hall operated by the 
lessee of the dance grounds. Annually the 
colored Elks of Zanesville, 0., give an outing at the park, to which colored people 
come from all over the State—even from 
"West Virginia. 
The attendance this year ran up to 20,000. 
According to the manager of the park this is 
the largest and best picnic that goes to the 
lake. More money is spent and better order 
is maintained than in any other. This year, 
in the afternoon, the big dance hall was given 
over to the colored people for dancing while 
the white people stood and- sat round about 
and looked on. At night when the white people 
were dancing the colored people came to see 
them dance and to sit in the pavilion, which 
provided almost the only seats on the 
grounds; but policemen had been stationed 
here and would not let them look or sit. 
The members of Parker's Orchestra, which 
had been furnishing the music for the park, 
happened to be colored men and protested 
against this discrimination. Finally, when 
the discrimination was kept up, the orchestra 
refused to play any longer and the dancing 
stopped. The men who thus sacrificed their 
work for a principle were receiving $22 
a week each and had three weeks' work ahead 
of them. They were succeeded by white men 
who soon quit on account of the small pay 
and conditions of work. 
A white correspondent in the Columbus 
Despatch says: 
"SIR : The outing of the colored people at 
Buckeye Lake last Thursday, which was 
marked by such a regrettable catastrophe, 
and late in the evening by certain racial unpleasantness about the dance hall, was 
marked by another thing about several of the 
concessions which I cannot help mentioning. 
"The matter to which I refer was the 
merciless way in which the prices of ordinary 
commodities were boosted on that day, apparently for imposition on the people who 
are seldom favored with holidays at any resort, and who are determined to have a good 
time for once at whatever cost. The chief 
overcharge which I noted was in the price of 
boats, which usually rent for $1 for the first 
hour and 50 cents for every hour thereafter. 
I saw one man charge a Negro $5 for the use 
of a boat for an hour, which was paid 
promptly and without protestation. At the 
main restaurant that strange anomaly at a 
colored picnic was noted o f chicken sandwiches, being the only food of that style 
left late in the afternoon. The reason was 
ample. They charged 25 cents for a poor 
little lonesome piece of fried fowl with an 
unadorned blanket of bread. I saw a Negro 
come away from the stands with three pieces 
of ice, scarcely larger than walnuts, for 
which he was charged 5 cents. So the extortion went on. Even a crook would recognize 
the injustice of this. Fo r one white man I 
was ashamed of the selfishness of my race." 
PROSPEROUS NEGROES. 
J
J. SCOTT and W . Wilkerson, Negro 
• undertakers, convicted in Judge 
Palmer's court of intimidation in collecting a 
debt, were freed of their sentence of two 
years in the penitentiary Monday morning 
by Governor Hooper. In granting the pardon Governor Hoope r stated that in his 
opinion the verdict against the undertakers 
was an "effort to hold up and squeeze two 
colored men who have accumulated some 
means by thrift and energy," and that in his 
opinion the Supreme Court would eventuallv 
have decided in their favor.—Nashville 
Tennessean. 
THE BURDEN TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 93 
THE CRISIS 
= FO R 1 9 1 4= = 
It is our determination to make T H E CRISIS in the New Year 
absolutely indispensable to intelligent folk. 
The news " A LONG THE COLOR L INE" will hereafter be so 
written as to furnish a complete summary of the history of 
colored folk and their struggles. 
No important thought or comment on the Negro problem 
will be omitted from "OPINION." 
Especial effort will be made to increase the number and 
weight of the ARTICLES published, and we expect contributions 
from some of the leading thinkers of the world, white and black. 
W e shall publish some interesting local STUDIES of great Negro 
cities and great Negroes of the past which you should read. 
Our BOOK and MAGAZINE REVIEWS will be more complete, 
lively and critical than heretofore. 
FICTION touching colored people will be given especial prominence, and now and then we shall publish a poem. 
The EDITORIAL policy will be fearless and frank as usual. You 
may not agree with us (and that is your privilege), but you will 
have to admit that we know what we want and are not afraid to 
ask for it. 
Finally, we shall not forget the CHILDREN, their joys and 
sorrows and hopes. 
All this for ON E DOLLAR . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 94 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Christmas Cards 
Do you want a charming 
Christmas car d with a 
pretty colored baby on it ? 
REA D PAG E 5 4 
The Thoma s School oi Beauty Culture 
is owned and controlled by a woman 
who is a college 
graduate an d a 
physician as well 
as a graduate of 
Burnham's School 
of Beauty Culture. 
Madam Mason is 
giving a correspondence course 
whic h includes 
physical culture 
and hygiene. Every 
woman needs to be 
at her best in 
every walk of life. 
Personal appearance is a lever 
which controls her 
destiny. Asid e 
from her own needs 
she is afforded an 
opportunity t o 
learn a profession 
that means a dignified, lucrative business which is in great 
demand. The course covers ten weeks and a 
diploma is granted. Entire fee for course, $10. 
Thomas's Magic Hair Grower, a guaranteed money-back article, a medicine that 
cures dandruff, eczema, bald spots and promotes the natural growth of the hair. 
Price $1. 
Thomas's Cream removes blemishes. Price 
50 cents. Send six cents for Beauty Book. 
Agents wanted. Address 
Mme . Alice H. Thomas-Mason 
3328 STATE STREET CHICAGO, ILL. 
Telephones: Douglas 9456: Automatic 72172 
Rogers Silverware 1 -2 Price 
This $26.50 Handsome 
26 Piece, Combination Set 
of Genuine Rogers Celebrated Silverware 
NO W ONL Y $13.25 
Consists of 6 Teaspoons, 6 Tablespoons, 6 Medium Knives, 6 Medium 
Forks, 1 Butter Knife, 1 Sugar Shell. 
In Plain or French Gray finish, Beautiful Raised Vintage Design. Put up 
in fine Leather case, silk lined. With 
a printed guarantee from Rogers factory 
It is the greatest bargain in High-Grade 
Silverware ever offered. Don'T delay in sending your order as we only LET a limited number go 
at such a low price. Send Post Office OR Express money order or Registered LETTER. 
THE ACME CO., Mfrs.S Jobbers, Eberly Bldg., Dept. L, Columbus, 0. 
the Height of Perfection. ( W e sell Rogers Silverware cheaper than any retail dealer in the world.) 
TH E CRISIS is of value as an advertising medium 
See rates printed on page 97 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 95 
Miss Carita Day announces 
the opening of her new "Parisian Shop," where she has displayed a most complete stock of 
smart ladies' wear. 
Every woman in Chicago is 
cordially invited to call and inspect the very latest creations 
from Paris and New York. 
Miss Day will give her personal attention to every sale, 
thus insuring to her clientele the 
benefit of her artistic taste and 
intimate association with the 
"best-dresse d women of 
America." 
Prices reasonable. Call on 
her, whether you contemplate 
purchasing or not. 
TH E PARISIA N SHOP 
States Theatre Building 
35th and State St., Chicago, Ill. 
MILES M. WEBB 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
I SPECIALIZE IN EVERY PHASE OF ARTISTIC PICTURE MAKING. 
SEND ME YOUR PHOTOS FOR ENLARGEMENT. PRICES REASONABLE 
SATISFACTIO * - • *— N GUARANTEED. « 'Phone 6688 Douglass. 
WEB B 
3519 State Street 
STUDI O 
Chicago, Ill. 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
A year's subscription will be 
given free to anyone sending in 
at one time five paid-up yearly 
subscriptions to TH E CRISIS. 
This offer holds good until midnight, December 31, 1913. 
TH E CRISI S 
One Dollar a Year 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
The Loyal Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
Grand Supreme Governor 
is incorporated under the 
laws of the District of Columbia. Its object is to combine the Negroes of the 
world for their mutual advancement along1
 industrial and commercial lines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment by the Negro of 
his civil and political rights. 
This movement is international in its scope; we have 
lodges not only in the United States but in 
Jamaica, B. W. I.; Colon, Bocas del Toro, Panama (CanalZone) and Costa Rica. It is a dark 
day for the Negro and he must come together. 
Race movements have failed because our people were told that by contributing there to the 
race only would be benefited, but no tangible 
individaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the member pays 35c. per month in the Association and receives $4.00 per week sick benefits and $100 at death. We not only look 
after the race but each individual member as 
well. A big-convention is soon to be held here. 
We want a lodge in every village, hamlet and 
town and a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizers wanted everywhere. For 
full particulars, write 
KNIGHTS OF MALACHITES 
1111 You St. N. W. Washington, D. C. j 
Consult Our List of Suitable Books for 
Holiday Gifts 
TH E CRISI S 
26 Vesey Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 96 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Kelsey's Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price, 50c each. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, 11 desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.60 up. Send lor 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
KELSEY'S 
Telephone, Mornlngside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NEW YORK . 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
Largest Negr o Carriage conc e 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Valu e Unequaled . Sol d on Ji.o o 
Profit Margi n From 
Factory to User 
Writ e fo r price s 
an d othe r styles. 
Sen d for catalogue . 
C. R. PATTERSO N 
&. SONS . 
Greenfield , Ohi o 
n the Unite d States. 
WANTED—ONE MAN OR WOMAN IN EVERY 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Beat paying 
small business on earth. I Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Write for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
STAR T A BUSINES S O F YOU R OW N 
We want live, hustling men and women in every 
village, town and city to start a big successful 
business of their own. Experience not needed; we 
teach you the business. If you have the real 
will power you can have an independent business 
that will pay you from $75 to $100 per month, 
Write to-day before some one in your territory 
gets ahead of you. Just inclose a 2-cent stamp for 
particulars. 
A. BLOUNT & COMPANY 
Washington N. C. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to 
$500 a week. Why can't you ? By our method 
you can start with. $5 and up. We offer you thirty 
live, money-making mail order plans. You can 
make 95 cents profit on every dollar order. We 
furnish circulars, printed matter and place your 
advertising at lowest rates. Send 10 cents for 
complete outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAIL DEALERS WHOLESALE HOUSE 
617 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to 
settle on FREE Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. 
Blackdom 
HAROL D CO 1 H [VI AN 
New Mexico 
DOUGLAS S SPECIALTIES 
Ten dollars and more a day to live agents. 
100% profit. Sells to ever., colored man and 
woman on earth. This is the quickest kind of easy 
money. Send 15 cents in stamps or coin for 50-
cent sample and terms. Money back if not satisfied at first glance. 
DOUGLASS SPECIALTIES COMPANY 
3548 Vernon Avenue - - - Chicago, III. 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum St». 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
COLORED MEN 
WANTE D TO PREPARE AS 
SLEEPING-CAR AND TRAIN 
PORTERS. 
No experience necessary. Posi-
,,,(,„/ tions pay $65 to $100 a month. 
Ml/!/, Steady work. New York roads. 
. malm III Passes and uniforms furnished when 
Mill1 'I'D! Hill) necessary. Write now. 
I. RY. C. I., Dept. 19, Indianapolis, Ind. 
The y are no t imitations of diamond s but a genuin e stone , cu t an d faceted by 
skilled diamon d cutters exactly lik e a diamond . stand filing, fire an d acid tests 
like a diamond . Contains n o glass, paste or foilbacking . It sparkles just like a 
diamon d an d o n accoun t o f their great hardness wil l retain their brillianc y 
forever. To advertise these Santiago Gems w e will fo r a short time sen d you r 
choic e o f the above Solid Gol d rings C.O.D. $5.00 fo r the Ladies with % carat or 
% 10.00 fo r the Gents with 1 1/2 carat Santiago Gems b y mail or express. Give it 
any test yo u desire and if yo u find it is no t all we claim return it at ou r expense . 
Sen d you r exac t size and orde r at onc e as this Specia l Offer is fo r a short time 
only . Diamon d Jewelr y Co. , Dep . 2 6 , 18 9 W. Madison St., Chicago , Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Santiago Gems C.O.D. By express or insured parcel post They look and wear and none but an expTH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 97 
to you for SO cents. This outfit will be sufficient for the entire family and your 
Christmas gift will not be complete without it. This package contains: 
One large 1914 Art Calendar of a 
beautiful colored girl, in colors. 
Ten assorted artistic Post Cards of 
Negro subjects. 
Ten embossed Christmas Cards. 
Ten embossed New Year Cards. 
Three small Christmas Calling Cards. 
Three New Year Calling Cards. 
Three Christmas Seals. 
Three Christmas Tags. 
Price, postpaid, 50-cent money-order 
J. GRIFFITH ART COMPAN Y 
36-38 Beekman Street - - - New York 
James Webb 
Was Jesus a Negro 
with Woolly Hair? 
Webb's books and pictures prove 
it and show it by the Bible. A 
picture, 12x18, of Jesus with 
woolly hair, and His Holy Angels 
at His second coming, and a book 
with Biblical references, extending 
from Genesis to Revelations, proving the fact. All for $1.50 and 
postage prepaid. The book alone 
is worth its price. 
The following are comments upon the same: 
"I beg to say, after hearing Elder Webb on 
the subject, that the blood of the Negro coursed 
through the veins of Jesus and Solomon. I am 
frank to say that I have seldom, if ever, enjoyed 
such an intellectual treat. The position he 
assumed as the subject of his lecture touching the 
Hametic blood and race is difficult and requires a 
practical knowledge of Biblical and historical lore. 
But I am pleased to say that he not only shows 
himself an expert, but the master of the situation, 
and I commend him to the ministry and churches 
of our race of every denomination." 
Truly, 
(Signed) Bishop H. M. TURNER. 
"The evidence submitted by Elder Webb tending to prove 
that the Saviour of mankind was a black man seems to be 
sufficient to put those who oppose the proposition upon their 
proof. Now that the chain of evidence presented by Mr. 
Webb appears so complete, it is strange that none of the 
delvers in the Biblical records have not advanced the sensational proposition before. Not only was Christ a Negro, 
but it seems that Solomon, who has been held up through 
all the ages as the personification of wisdom, had Ethiopian 
blood In his veins, also."—Seattle "Dally Times." 
Price $1.50 for picture and book. Send money 
order or express order to James M. Webb, 3519 
State Street, Chicago, Ill., in the care of the Webb 
Studio. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBLE MEN 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MORE 
than $200 PER MONT H acting as 
AGENTS for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGEE and TAFT, OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FINE PROPOSITIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALTY CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
Crisis Advertising Rates 
Beginning with the January, 1914, 
issue, and continuing until further 
notice, the rates for advertisements in 
THE CRISIS will be as follows: 
15 cents per agate line. No less 
than four lines accepted. 
$2 per inch per single column, 
counting fourteen lines to the inch. 
$45 for back cover. 
$40 for inside cover page, front or 
back. 
$32 per page for other pages. 
These rates are based upon the 
general charge of $1 per page for 
each thousand net circulation. 
Old contracts at the former rates 
will be honored until the date of 
expiration of said contracts. 
TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street - - - New York 
AGENTS WANTED—Everywhere for our 1914 
"What Cheer" Art Calendar, dedicated to our fiftieth 
anniversary of freedom. Write, enclosing 50 cents 
for outfit, terms and territory. VAN DERZEE 
SUPPLY CO., 2151 S. 10th Street, Lincoln, Neb. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work 
Address: 26 Vesey Street, Ne w York 
Mention THE CRISIS. 
Big Bargain Package to complete your Christmas 
gifts. Value $1. It will come 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E CRISI S I S TH E OFFICIA L ORGA N O F 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPL E 
TH E CRISIS was started under the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N 
three years ago after it had called Dr. Du Bois from Atlanta University as Director of Publicity and Research. The NATIONA L 
ASSOCIATIO N still publishes TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS is its mouthpiece. Through it the ASSOCIATIO N speaks each month to 
150,000 readers. From them it now seeks a reply. 
You like TH E CRISIS. Why not join the ASSOCIATIO N which 
it represents? 
The NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N has nearly 2,000 paying 
members, 80 per cent, of whom are colored. It wants 200,000. The 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N represents YOU . It fights YOU R 
battles. 
Are YO U a member? If not, fill out and return this membership blank. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address _ 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Meeting of the Association. 
PLEASE MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOE THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, 26 VESEY STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 99 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Residence 2546 Michigan Office PHONE 
Bell Phone E-2161 Home 68 MAIN 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Notary Public 
117 W. 6TH Street KANSAS CITY, MO. 
FRANKLI N W . WILLIAM S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Notary Public 
REAL Estate Conveyancer 
206 Parrish Street Durham, N. C. 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone, 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan LIFE Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
BROW N S. SMITH 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykea Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORGE W . MITCHELL 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Fort HILL Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOOL STREET Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
Attorneys-at-Law 
2 1 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Phones Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M. 
Residence, New 733-A. 
THOS . E. GREENE, JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
William H. Austin Edmund 0. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTI N & AUSTI N 
St. Paul Building, 220 Broadway, New York 
Suite 7—H, I, J, K 
Telephones: 7400, 5365, 5366 Cortlandt 
B. F. BOOTH 
Attorney-at-Law 
57 N. SECOND STREET - MEMPHIS, TENN. 
LEGAL DIRECTORY—Continued 
m„, „. I Central 104W 
Telephones: main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVIS 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Bldg. Cleveland, O. 
Telephone 5562 Cedar 
R. O. LEE 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Practice in All CourtB 
2" and 26 Union Block, 4th & Cedar, St. Paul. Minn. 
Telephones: 
Office: Main 9168 
Residence: Vermont 1156 
E. BURTON CERUTI 
Lawyer 
600-501-502 Thorpe Building 
Corner Broadway AND Franklin Streets 
Residence: 1540 W. 36th Place Los Angeles, Cal. 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
TELEPHONE 4886 Morningside 
DR. D. W . ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W. Cor. 133d St. and Lenox Ave., New YORK 
Office Honrs: 9 to 12 a. M., 1 to 9 P. m. 
Sundays by Appointment 
'PHONES: RESIDENCE, 515; OFFICE, 612; HOSPITAL. 403. 
DR. J. R. SHEPPARD 
PHYSICIAN AND SURGEON 
CHIEF SURGEON AND SUPERINTENDENT OF SHEPPARD SANITARIUM AND 
NURSE TRAINING SCHOOL. 
MARSHALL TEXAS 
Telephone 4048 Prospect 
JOHN B. MOSELEY 
REAL ESTATE and INSURANCE 
640 Fulton Street Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Telephone Connection 
R. W . FEARIN G 
Electrician 
Contracting, Repairing, Motors, Electric and 
Gas Fixtures 
Electrician recent Emancipation Exposition in 
New York 
85 Marion Street Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNEY DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York, N. Y. 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
Mention TH E CRISIS 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
$60 A WEEK and EXPENSES 
That's the money you can get this year, I mean it. I want County Sales Managers 
quick men or women who believe In the square deal, who will go Into partnership with 
me No capital or experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Full length 
bath In any room. Folds in small roll, handy as an umbrella. I tell you It's great ! 
GREAT Rivals $100 bath room. Now listen! I want YOU to handle your county. 
I'll furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger 
money In a week with me than you ever made in a month before—I KNOW IT1 
TW O SALES A DAY—$30 0 A MONT H 
That's what you get—every month. Needed in every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities for all the people. Take the orders ritrht and left. Quick 
sales Immense profits. Look at these men. Kunkle. Ohio, received $240 first week; 
Mathlas Florida $120 In two days; Corrlgan, New York, $1H in 60 hours; Newton, 
California, $60 in three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. The work Is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It means a business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You cannot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, BO 
can you. Act. then, quick. SEND NO MONEY. Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustle ! 
YOU! 
YES.YOU 
CAN GET IT 
H . S . ROBINSO N 
President 
190 Vance St., Toledo, O. 
DEMONSTRATING 
TUB FREE 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLIN G GOO D HOME S IN CORONA , with all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to Ne w York. Corona is in the 
very center of Greater New York, and in a few months will be reached 
by the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand 
Central Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home with all improvements at a moderate 
cost. W e would be glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New Yor k City, has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all New York for children. For full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L. S. REED & COMPANY 
142 Hunter Avenue - - Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
"An invaluable addition to Lincolniana."—Grand Rapids Herald. 
Lincoln and 
Slavery 
By ALBER T E. PILLSBUR Y 
' 'A strong marshalling of evidence.''—• 
New York Evening Post. 
"Inspiring and timely. * * * Every lover 
of Lincoln will rejoice in the spirit of this 
vigorous and gripning essay.''—Duluth 
Herald. 
"The whole question of Lincoln's attitude 
toward slavery is admirably discussed and 
summed up in this little volume. Those 
who think Lincoln was lenient toward 
slavery should read it."—Chicago News. 
' 'Nowhere else are the essential facts in 
the great drama put into such compact and 
yet such fascinating form." — Boston 
Globe. 
"Those who read it will want to own it." 
—Milwaukee Free Press. 
At all bookstores. 75 cents net. By mail 
82 cents. 
Houghton Mifflin Company 
4 Par k Stree t Boston , Mass . 
Special Offer to 
Crisis Reader s 
If you will send us $1.5 0 and 
a new subscriber to TH E CRISIS 
we will send TH E CRISIS for one 
year and a copy of "Hazel," by 
Mary White Ovington. 
For $2 we will send TH E 
CRISIS for one year and a copy 
of "Norris Wright Cuney," by 
Maud Cuney Hare. 
TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
ADVERTISER 101 
Souvenir Mement o 
Program 
of the National Emancipation 
Exposition recently held in New 
York City. 
Beautifully printed and containing valuable information concerning the Negro American. 
PRICE 1 5 CENT S 
TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address: 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An. aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 14Sd Street New York, N. Y. 
A Book of Exceptional Interest 
to Readers of TH E CRISIS 
LIBERI A 
Descriptive — History — Problems 
By FREDERIC K STAR R 
of the 
University of Chicago 
No other book like it. Buy it. Read it. 
Talk about it. Sent postpaid for $1.1 0 
postal money order. Address 
FREDERIC K STAR R 
554 1 Drexel Avenue - - - Chicago, Ill. 102 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The African Abroad or His Evolution 
in Western Civilization 
By WILLIA M H. FERRIS, A . M . 
Two volumes of 500 pages each, illustrated. $5 a set, plus 30c. postage. 
Published by the Tuttle, Morehouse & Taylor Co., New Haven, Conn. 
PRESS COMMENT S 
FROM THE "SCHOOL JOURNAL,' ' OCTOBER, 1913 
''There come occasionally from the press, books of weight and moment, works of research 
and investigation or of wide reading and of clear thought, treatises from which the world of 
culture never recovers. Such is 'The African Abroad,' distinctly radical in its treatment, 
distinctly revolutionary in its result, and altogether true as a whole in content and in expression. The Afro-American must put on the spiritual clothing of the Anglo-American, must live 
his institutional life, must think and feel accordingly. From Africa came every AfroEuropean race. The Ethiopians and the Negroes are descendants of the same stock as the 
Latins and Teutons, a proposition beyond censure and cavil. As one reads these great pages 
of a faithful investigator and witness one must regret that the author in common decency could 
not include among colored Americans thousands as have 'crossed the line and come white.' Tet 
enough persons remain to prove indisputably that the black Negro and the colored man are 
essentially human, needing only education and opportunity to live upon the same level as 
white men. This is not to say one word in favor of social equality in marriage. In truth \ 
the whole weight of this monumental work rests upon the side of the scale whereon are / 
written these words: 'The colored man, as such, remaining true to whatever amalgamation he/ 
now represents, can become equal sharer with the white man in American liberty.' Such, 
a book tends to develop in Afro-Americans that self-respect which is essential to human worth.' 
The author reveals a charming style and an interesting personality. This admirable work of 
race historical philosophy is of epochal importance and belongs in every library of scholarship 
anywhere in the world.' ' 
FROM THE NEW BEDFORD "STANDARD, " SEPTEMBER 30, 1913 
' 'Six thousand years of history as related to the Negro race and the summing up of 
his careers of a thousand exceptional men of color in many countries of Europe, in Africa, and 
the West Indies, is a plain prosaic statement of the scope of William H. Ferris's two-volume 
book on 'The African Abroad., or His Evolution in Western Civilization, Tracing His Development Under Caucasian Milieu.' If this title, formal and scholarly, suggests a scholarly treatment 
of the subject, really profound and tremendously in earnest, it suggests truly, for it is a 
deep and precise study in all the prospects of importance of the subject. But if the formal 
title suggests any thought of dry reading, there begins the mistake, for Mr. Ferris's book is 
as interesting as romance and as stirring as the most appealing piece of history ever written. 
"Mr. Ferris is pre-eminently fitted for his task. He is recognized by scholars and 
statesmen as a man of unusual intellectual ability measured by standards of scholarship and 
not by race or color. He has taken degrees at Yale and Harvard; and he has since then 
gained the knowledge and experience that have come from travel through twenty States and 
sojourning in over two hundred .cities and towns, looking into the Negro question as it presents itself as a live problem to-day, and from study of the literature of the world on the 
subject of the Negro hack to its beginning.'' 
FROM THE SPRINGFIELD "REPUBLICAN, " OCTOBER 1, 1913 
"And now we have at New Haven a philosophical writer who has profited by a good 
university education, and publishes two volumes of mixed speculation—history and biography— 
extending in its scope from the councils of the Absolute before worlds existed, and thereafter 
from the undifferentiated star-dust through differentiated worlds, down not only to our modern 
days, but beyond; by an excursion into the future we contemplate the burning out of the 
sun, and the consequent starvation of the whole solar system. * * * 
«<* * * In this world's affairs, Mr. Ferris has good testimonials as to his competence 
for writing the story of his race. * * * 
" * * * In history he is well read and pacific; he admires T. R., but not excessively; and 
he states his case in history very forcibly. A few flaws can be found by searching, but hardly 
more than any book in two volumes can show. There is to be a third volume, in which the 
never-ending subject is to be temporarily concluded. * * * 
• <* * * The important thing with the Negro, as with other men, is his religion. On 
that point Mr. Ferris has much to say, and says it well; but perhaps with too little reference 
to the modifying American religion of the colored race here. * * * 
" * * * It will be seen that Mr. Ferris writes easily and fluently. He quotes freelv 
but without much system in his citations; has read immensely and thought sufficiently; flatters 
in his biographies and brief notices; and when his work is completed and indexed, it will be 
of great value.'' 
Address orders to 
W . H. FERRIS, 92 Eaton Street, New Haven, Conn., U. S. A . 
or to the 
TUTTLE , MOREHOUS E & TAYLO R CO. , New Haven, Conn. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. A Life of 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY 
By 
MAU D CUNE Y HAR E 
(His daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was 
one of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like 
to inspire your children with the life of this "Tribune of the 
Black People"? 
8vo; 250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
Published to-day. 
TH E CRISIS PUBLISHING COMPAN Y 
26 Vesey Street ..... . New York 
HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
By MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Author of "Half a Man" 
Price $1.00 net. Postage prepaid, $1.08. For 
sale through our agents and at TH E CRISIS 
office, as well as at leading book stores. 
CRISIS PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y Suitable Gift Books 
P3 P3 PRICE INCLUDE S POSTAG E [Q K 
TH E QUEST OF THE SILVER FLEECE. W . E . B. D U Bois $1.5 0 
HOUSE BEHIND THE CEDARS. Charles W . Chesnutt 1.65 
HAZEL. Mary White Ovington 1.0 8 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . Anonymous 1.40 
TH E TESTING FIRE. Alexander Corkey 1.3 5 
LYRICS OF LOWL Y LIFE. Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.40 
MARROW OF TRADITION. Charles W . Chesnutt 1.6 5 
TH E SPORT OF THE GODS. Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.65 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY . Maud Cuney Hare 1.5 0 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. Lelia Amos Pendleton 1.65 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. W . E . B. D U Bois 1.3 5 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. Kelly Miller 2.1 5 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. B. G. Brawley 1.3 5 
HALF A MAN . Mary White Ovington 1.1 2 
MIN D OF PRIMITIVE MAN . Franz Boas 1.65 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. William Sinclair 1.65 
JOHN BROWN. W . E . B. D U Bois 1.4 5 
RACE PREJUDICE. Jean Finot 3.2 5 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. Booker T . Washington 3.2 5 
FLOWER O' THE PEACH. Percival Gibbon 1.4 5 
TH E COLORED INVENTOR. Henry E . Baker 1 5 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. Julia L. Henderson 2 5 
A ddress 
TH E CRISI S 
Twenty-six Vesey Street ... . New York City 