THE CRISI S 
R ECOR D of TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Four JUNE , 1912 Number Two 
ONE DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y One Thousand Wanted 
A business that is in its infancy; which never can be overdone. 
A business which will give you the immense advantage of 
enormous advertising. It sells at sight. 
The way to make money quickly is to sell an article that is 
in universal demand; which pays a good profit, and can be sold 
rapidly. 
Ever y detail of the work through the successive stages of its manufacture is 
done wit h a scientific accuracy which assures uniform excellence. M y Automati c 
Stropper is a "Lon g Lived " repairless device, and wit h ordinary care it wil l give 
steady and faithfu l service indefinitely. I feel sure that an examination of this 
modern invention wil l quickl y demonstrate the correctness of its stropping method, 
whil e its use at once reveals its superiority from a practica l 
and economical standpoint. 
M y Automatic Stropper is 
undoubtedly the final solution 
of the stropping question which 
heretofore has been a very perplexing one. In the last fifteen 
years, directly and indirectly, I 
have marketed more than a 
quarter millio n razor strops, 
and every one of them has 
been found to be all and more 
than I ever represented it to be. 
Brea k away from that poorly 
paid, overworked class, and take 
your rightfu l station among the 
far-sighted, energetic people of 
this world, who recognize their 
right to a good income as the 
result of the use of their brains, 
rather than by the slavish toil of 
their hands. 
It is after all a simple proposition based upon a law so old 
and a principle so safe that none 
can say it is not true. Since the 
beginning of time men have 
learned the greatest lessons by 
adopting the fruits of the experience of other men. N o great 
undertaking has reached its full 
fruition except it be built upon 
the experience and knowledge 
gained by pioneers who have 
gone before and learned by experimenting the 
way to accomplish any given end. The success 
of my agents emphasizes the vital , golden and 
glowing chance for a profitable business which 
I am placing i n your grasp right now. Writ e 
me immediately for ful l particulars. I wil l ship 
prepaid to any part of the Unite d States or 
Canada one of my Automati c Stroppers, accompanied wit h full instructions, for $1.25. This 
offer is for those who wish to take up the agency 
for this great shaving necessity. Remit b y P. O. 
or express money order, addressed and made 
HUNTE R C. HAYNES payable to 
The Well-known Stropmaker 
HUNTE R C. HAYNE S 
P. O. Box 1083 Dept. A NE W YOR K CITY 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
26 Vesey Street, New York City. 
CONTENT S : 
PAGE 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 59 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 67 
OPINIO N 70 
EDITORIA L 74 
A GROU P O F DELEGATE S T O TH E CHICAG O CONFERENCE . 
Picture 78 
TH E FOURT H ANNUA L CONFERENC E 80 
TH E OBJECT S O F TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
By Oswald Garrison Villard 81 
TH E NATION' S DUTY . By Judge Edward O. Brown 84 
TH E BROTHERHOO D O F MAN . By Abdul Baha 88 
A WOR D FRO M MR . JULIU S ROSENWAL D 89 
TH E CR Y O F TH E MA N THAT' S DOWN . Poem. 
By Norman D. Lippincott 89 
TH E BURDE N 90 
WHA T T O REA D 92 
HISTORI C DAY S I N JUN E 93 
LETTE R BO X * 93 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P. O. at N. Y . City 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN . Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
I. MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W. S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
Subscription: $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Subscriptions 
to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th of the previous month. 56 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LIFE AND WORKS 
PAIL 
LAURENCE 
DUNBAR'S 
b y 
Lida Keck Wiggms 
and Introduction 
by 
W. Dean Howells 
Wha t the late Col. Robt. Ingersoll thought 
of work: 
220 Madison Ave., 
April , 1896, New Yor k City. 
M y Dear Dr . Tobey : 
At last I got the time to read the poems 
of Dunbar . Some of them are really wonderful 
—ful l of poetry and philosophy. I am 
astonished at their depth and subtlety. Dun ­
bar is a thinker. '"The Mystery' ' is a poem 
worthy of the greatest. It is absolutely true 
and proves that its author is a profound and 
thoughtful man. ''Er e Sleep Comes Down to 
Soothe the Wear y Eyes' ' is a wonderful poem; 
the fifth verse is perfect. 
I have only time to say Dunba r is a genius. 
Now what can be done for him? I would like 
to help. 
Thankin g you for the book, I remain, 
Your s always, 
R. G. INGERSOLL . 
Postpaid, $2, $2.75, $3.75. 
J. G. GUILE S 
214A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can . 
Atlanta University 
IS beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta, Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
"and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA , GA . 
PUBLICATION S 
A. M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: What 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T. G. Steward, 
Chaplain U . 8. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LITE . B y Algernon B . Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 75 
cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study in 
Economi c History . B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , Sometime 
Research Fellow in Sociology in the Universit y of 
Pennsylvania. Price , Paper , $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A. M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
681 Pine Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCA L STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course in 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N. Y. : A very practical 
little book is ' 'Tone Placin g and Voic e Development," by Pedro T. Tinsley . A s the preface says: 
"It is for daily practice, based upon artistic principles, including a course in the art of breathing, 
structure of the vocal apparatus, hearing the voice, 
together with a carefully prepared numbe r of vocal 
exercises, forming a comprehensive, progressive and 
self-explained course of voice building. " Written 
by Pedro T. Tinsley, conductor of the Choral Club 
of Chicago, and a man who has had many years' 
experience in teaching voice. It contains some very 
excellent material and vocal exercises, and Should 
be in the hands of all vocal students. Pric e $1. 
Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL. 
or Clayton F . Summy, 220 Wabash Avenue, and 
Lyo n & Healy, Adams & Wabash, Chicago, Ill. 
The 
Quest 
of the 
Silver 
Fleece 
A NOVEL 
by 
W . E . BURGHARD T 
DU BOIS 
Drawing s by 
H . S. D E LA Y 
Her e is a story of the darker worl d 
in the South and in Washington , D . 
C. It is dramatic in style and absorbing in interest and expresses the 
feeling of colored people about themselves and their own problems; at the 
same time it shows how both black 
folk and white are caught in the 
powe r of Kin g Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORE S 
PRIC E $1.3 5 NE T 
A . C. McGLUR G & CO. 
New York Chicago San Francisco 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 57 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for Negro 
Yout h which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Te n 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term begins September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WIlBERFORCE , OHI O 
Mention THE 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1912. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
The largest colored college in the South. 
A new department of sociology and social 
service. A notable equipment in land and 
buildings. Endorsed by the General Education Board. For information address 
GEORGE A. GATES, President 
CRISIS. 58 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
'Our Heroes of Destiny 
Honorables 
Frederick Douglass 
John M Langston 
Blanche K. Bruce 
Paul Laurence Dunbar and 
Booker T . Washington 
A genuine photogravure, 
printed on the finest grade of 
Japan-vellum, 20 x 25 inches in 
size, finished in Vandyke 
brown, embracing the master 
techniques of the engraver's 
and printer's crafts. 
A photogravure is printed 
from a hand-tooled intaglio 
plate, and consists of fine particles of ink standing above the 
surface of the paper sufficiently 
to cast minute shadows. The 
depth of the ink and shadows 
cast by it give a richness to a 
photogravure impression which 
is absolutely unattainable by 
relief or planographic printing 
as done by half-tone, photogelatine, lithographic, or other 
similar processes. A perfect 
photogravure is the acme of the 
engraver's handicraft. 
In publishing this valuable 
edition of these five notable 
men, I have gone to large expense in an endeavor to present 
to my race a rare etching of 
the highest technique possible 
to create. Price ON E DOLLAR . 
Send in your order now to 
C. M . BATTE Y 
ARTIS T and PUBLISHE R 
322 Mott Ave. , N . Y . City 
This illustration is protected by 
copyright. Any infringement will 
be prosecuted. 
"OU R HEROE S O F DESTINY " 
TESTIMONIALS 
Dr . Booker T, Washington, Tuskegee Institute, Ala. , says: 
"I am really surprised, as well as gratified, 
at the fine piece of work you have gotten 
out. I had no idea you were going to get 
up such an artistic production, that is so 
attractive and so creditable." 
The New York Age, New York City, says: 
"Ever y home and classroom should honor 
one of these portraits, and into the mind of 
every child it should be grafted with the lines 
from the immortal poem of Longfellow: 'Lives 
of great men all remind us, we can make 
our lives sublime.' " 
Dr . Yor k Russell, New Yor k City, says: 
"You r artistic production of 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' is unquestionably the master composition which has thus far chronicled the 
advent in perpetuating faithful likenesses of 
our hero-pioneers. Th e other nine series with 
which you propose to follow this will establish 
a precedent that will be of historic value in 
future years for yet unborn generations." 
Rev. Dr . Reverdy C. Ransom, New York 
City, says: 
"You r splendid production of 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' marks the era of perpetuating 
characteristic and faithful likenesses of the 
famous men and women of our own race, to 
be handed down to younger generations, inspiring them with ideals which if carefully nurtured 
in their young lives will in their mature ages 
prove excellent examples of pure and dignified 
manhood and womanhood. 
"No home where there is a child should be 
without a copy of this excellent work, and no 
parent that feels the love and loyalty of higher 
race development should fail to teach the 
children of their homes the meaning of the 
lives of these five men." 
Majo r Charles R. Douglass, Washington, 
D, C , says: 
"Th e likenesses and character blending in 
the selected gravure portraits of the group 
of 'Honorables' are better than any I have 
yet seen; and to those of our race who 
cherish the memories of these men they will 
be eagerly sought." 
Mrs. R. K . Bruce, Washington, D. C , says: 
"I am indeed glad to say that 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' is the most creditable work of 
art that has yet been produced of and for our 
people. Th e life likeness of the entire group 
is exceedingly good. It is a fitting memorial 
worthy to be in every home. 
"If we are to perpetuate the memories of 
our own great men, it must be by keeping 
their portraits ever before our youth, and 
familiarizing them with the true meaning of 
their lives." 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Volume Four JUNE , 1912 Number Tw o 
ALON G 
COLOR LINE 
POLITICAL. 
THER E are i n the Unite d States 
26,999,151 males of voting age. Nin e 
and one-tenth per cent, of these are of Negro 
descent. 
Q I n a speech before the Cit y Club of 
Chicago recently, the effect of Negro disfranchisement i n the South upon the general 
politica l situation was emphasized. Nearl y 
one-third of the members of the national 
nominating conventions come from the 
South, and are elected by undemocratic 
me! hods. It was said that less than 150,000 
voters i n Georgi a and Alabama can 
nullif y the million and a quarter voters in 
a State like Illinois. 
^ Northern Negro voters are pressing for 
elective offices. I n St. Louis a colored man 
is tryin g to get into the city council and 
has some chance because of the factions 
among whites. Willia m R. Page, a colored 
real estate man of Atlanti c City , is in the 
field for election as delegate to the Nationa l 
Republican Convention. 
9 The Atlant a Georgian says: "J . O. 
Cochran, secretary of the county Democratic executive committee, declares to-day 
that a meeting of the subcommittee wil l be 
called at once to consider throwing out the 
vote of a Negro which was cast at the second 
war d voting place i n the primar y Wednesday. It is not known fo r whom the Negro 
voted, but Mr . Cochran says whether he is 
a Democrat or not had nothing to do with 
his right to cast a ballot, as a strictly white 
primar y was being held. " 
<I Abou t 700 colored women of San Fran ­
cisco who are registered voters are formin g 
a Taft Republican League. They are "remembering Brownsville. " 
"<A t a meeting of 250 colored voters of 
New Jersey it was declared that the conference went on record as opposed to the endorsement of any candidate for the Presidency, for United States Senator or Repre ­
sentative in Congress "until they and each 
of them pledge to the colored voters of the 
country and the State representatives pledge 
to the colored voters of this State a plank i n 
(he national platform of his or their party 
against lynching, disfranchisement or any 
law encroaching or violating the sacred 
rights of citizenship, supported by a message from the President and executed by 
an enactment of Congress givin g the Unite d 
States Supreme Court power to enforce all 
rights guaranteed by the said Federa l Con ­
stitution. " 
<I A n anti-Roosevelt meeting has been held 
by the colored citizens of Boston. 
*1 W . C. Matthews, a colored lawyer, has 
been sworn i n as Special Assistant Distric t 
Attorney of Boston. 
*j| The Republican State Committee of Dela ­
ware has one colored member-at-large. A t 
the recent convention a resolution to appoint four colored members was laid on the 
table. 
<J Mrs. James Bennett, of Richmond, Ky. , 
a Southern white woman, said before a 
committee on woman's suffrage of the 60 TH E CRISIS 
Unite d States Senate: "Ou r Revolutionary 
fathers wrote the first article of our Federa l 
Constitution in such a way that it conferred 
upon black men and white and black women 
a legal right to vote fo r members of the 
Unite d States Hous e of Representatives 
along with white men in New Jersey from 
the time that State entered the Union , about 
1779, until 1807, and i n such a way that it 
now confers upon black men and white and 
black women a legal right to vote fo r members of the Unite d States Hous e o f Repre ­
sentatives along with white men i n the 
States of Wyoming , Utah , Idaho, Colorado, 
Washingto n and California , and I think 
that i f our Congressmen wil l now follow 
this example of our Revolutionary fathers 
by recommending the adoption of an amendment of our Federa l Constitution that wil l 
confer upon black men and upon white and 
black women a legal right to vote fo r Unite d 
States Senators along with white men i n 
our State, they wil l elevate themselves in 
the opinion of God and man. " 
On the other hand, agitation for woman's 
suffrage in Arkansa s has brought out the 
race issue and strong opposition to advocatin g the vote for colored women has been 
developed. 
TH E CHURCH. 
THE twenty-fifth general conference of 
the Africa n Methodist Episcopa l 
Church convened i n Alle n Chapel, Kansa s 
City , Ma y 6. 700 delegates were present 
and the Righ t Reverend Henr y M . Turner, 
senior bishop, presided. The Episcopa l 
address by Bisho p C. S. Smith noted that 
durin g the quadrennial four bishops and 
two general officers had died. The address 
recommended among other things that the 
salaries of general officers be increased from 
$1,350 to $1,500 a year; that the centennial 
of the church be celebrated in 1916 and a 
centennial fund instituted, and that four 
new bishops be elected. 
<J The twenty-fourth general conference of 
the Africa n Zion Churc h convened i n Charlotte, N . C , Ma y 1. There were 500 delegates in attendance. The Righ t Reverend J. 
W . Hood , senior bishop, presided. Two new 
bishops may be elected. Durin g the past 
four years more than a half millio n dollars 
has been raised for the church. 
<J A t the general conference o f the Methodist Episcopa l Church , held in Minneapolis, 
the question of the election of colored 
bishops was precipitated very early i n the 
conference. The Reverend Willia m J . 
Lucas, a colored Mississippian , gained the 
floor and said : "W e need Episcopa l support 
i n the fa r South. I doubt i f any 325,000 
white Methodists anywhere have as little 
help from the Episcopa l board. W e are 
told that we have our Episcopa l residence 
in New Orleans, and that we have to be 
contented. W e were, but we ain't. W e 
make no threats, we make no demands. W e 
believe that the heart of our white brothers 
of this church beats right fo r us. I n four 
years we have not had thirty days of Episcopal residence. I f this keeps up we wil l 
have to look our blue-eyed white brothers in 
the face and ask fo r fair play. " A special 
commission on the subject was appointed. 
^ The America n Bishops' Home Mission 
Society expended $132,000 on Negro education in the last year and $6,000,000 i n the 
last fifty years. 
The colored Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church has been admitted to the Council 
of the Reformed Churches o f America . 
<I The Plymout h Congregational Church of 
Charleston, S. C , has a fourteen-room 
parsonage and owns property valued at 
$20,000 in a fine residence part of the city. 
I n a recent rall y $1,185 was raised, and 
the church was cleared of all indebtedness. 
Gas heaters have been put in and electric 
lights are soon to be installed. Rev. A . L. 
DeMon d is the pastor. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE last census figures show that Negro 
illiteracy has decreased as follows: 
1870—79.9%' 
1880—70%' 
1890—57.1% 
1900—44.4% 
1910—30.5% 
<I The present illiteracy of colored people 
i n the Unite d States is shown by the 
followin g figures: 
NEGR O POPULATIO N 10 YEAR S O F AG E AN D 
OVER , 1910. 
Illiterate. 
Pe r 
Tota l Numbe r cent. 
Continental Unite d States 7,318,502 2,228,087 80.4 
South Atlanti c 2,986,936 969,432 82.5 
East South Centra l . . 1,960,898 681,507 34.8 
West South Central . . 1,460,705 483,022 88.1 
The efforts of certain States to stop 
Negro education are shown by the following ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 61 
figures which give the per cent, of Negro 
illiteracy : 
Louisian a 48.4% 
Florid a 40.1 % 
South Carolin a 38.7% 
Georgi a 36.5% 
Mississipp i 35.6% 
Texas, on the other hand, with its faire r 
treatment of colored children shows 24.6% 
of illiteracy, and the Distric t of Columbi a 
13.5%. 
< J The assessed valuation of property 
returned for taxation by Negroes i n 
Georgia, i n 1911, is $34,022,379, as compared to $32,234,037 i n 1910. The year's 
gain was $1,788,342. 
The 1911 tax digests show that 119,871 
Negroes pai d poll taxes, and that 4,685 
defaulted. 
Negroes o f that State own 1,639,919 acres 
of improved land, with an assessment valuation of $10,358,653. Their city and town 
property is taxed at $9,615,604; stocks and 
bonds, $1,700; money and solvent debts, 
$237,214; merchandise, $240,444; household 
and kitchen furniture, $3,249,203; watches, 
silver plate and jewelry, $41,970; horses, 
mules, hogs, sheep, cattle, etc., $7,931,264; 
plantations- and mechanical tools, $1,648,-
897; value of all other property, $377,479. 
Colored people of Louisian a and Mississipp i and Arkansa s are suffering severely 
from the flood. O f the 100,000 reported to 
be homeless, 90,00 are colored. 
<J Governor Blease, the present governor of 
South Carolina , who is of the same il k as 
Tillman , Vardaman , Davis and Hok e 
Smit h has been defeated for renomination 
i n the primar y election. 
*I. The colored people of Richmond , Va. , 
have begun a campaign to raise $30,000 fo r 
a hospital. 
< J Nashvill e is establishing a colored librar y 
and the libraria n of the Savannah colored 
branch writes us that the city council has 
provided $1,200 a year toward a Carnegie 
librar y i f the colored people wil l buy a 
suitable site. 
9 The first colored master electrician has 
qualified i n Nashville , Tenn. 
^ The various movements fo r civic improve ­
ments are noted this month. I n Savannah, 
Ga. , and i n Nashville , Tenn., the colored 
people are askin g fo r better sanitary conditions. I n Ne w Orleans they want the 
degrading social clubs closed up and, a law 
against concubinage. I n Chattanooga, 
Tenn., a high death rate of the colored 
people is leading them to ask for investigation. 
Q The movement fo r the protection of 
colored girls i n New Yor k Cit y is growing. 
One of the speakers at a recent meeting said : 
''Prejudice has so blinded the management 
of our protective institutions as to make 
it impossible for a colored girl to receive 
any consideration. Whil e I know many of 
these institutions are private, sectarian, or 
supported by various organizations, I fail to 
see the difference between a white crimina l 
and a colored one, between a white delinquent girl and a colored one. Eve n the State 
institutions seem inadequate to the emergency where colored girls are concerned. I 
think the time has come when the women 
of our race should take the initiative i n 
the matter of erecting a home fo r such 
girls. Man y of these unfortunates are 
worth saving, while the rest of them, who 
are a millstone around the necks of selfrespecting citizens, should be kept by force 
off our streets and thoroughfares." 
Governor Harmo n has appointed a colored 
physician, Dr . Phili p N . Johnson, as first 
lieutenant of the medical corps i n the Ohio 
Nationa l Guard . 
^ President Taft, while i n Savannah, visited 
the Colored State Industria l College, o f 
which R . R. Wrigh t is president. H e also 
met the mayor o f the colored town o f 
Burroughs. 
•I A Japanese has been elected to membership i n the New Yor k Cotton Exchange. 
*J A Southern Sociological Congress has 
met i n Nashvill e and carried out a program which was announced as follows: 
"The Southern Sociological Congress is a 
challenge to the white race to prove its 
superior civilization by a greater degree of 
kindness and justice to an inferior race. 
Is it not high time Southerners were 
seriously studying the followin g subjects?" 
"Needs of the Negro That the South Must 
Meet, " Dr . J . H . Dillard , President Jeanes 
Boar d and Secretary o f Slater Board , New 
Orleans, La . 
"The Negro and Crime, " Judge W . H . 
Thomas, Montgomery, Ala . 
"Th e Negro and Publi c Health, " Dr . 
Seale Harris, Secretary Southern Medica l 
Association, Mobile , Ala . 62 TH E CRISIS 
"The . Contagion That Know s N o Colo r 
Line, " Rev. Joh n Little , Louisville , Ky . 
"The Negro and the Ne w South, " Dr . W . 
D . Weatherford, Student Secretary International Committee of the Y . M . C. A. , 
Nashville , Tenn. 
*I Amon g 400 families who were represented 
at a farmers' conference at For t Valley , 
Ga. , the followin g facts were gleaned: The 
families averaged seven children each. 
Fifteen per cent, were land owners averagin g 145 acres each. Fifty-two per cent, 
were renters averaging 87 1/2 acres each, 
for which they paid an average of 
$252.50 per annum. Twenty-seven per cent, 
were croppers—"workin g on halves." Si x 
per cent, were wage hands. O f the 35,120 
acres under cultivation by land owners, 
renters and share croppers there were 18,-
680 acres i n cotton; 10,200 acres i n corn ; 
5,400 acres i n peas; 440 acres i n potatoes; 
340 acres i n oats; 200 acres i n wheat. 
1 The seventh annual meet of the Interscholastic Athleti c Association took place 
on the campus of Howar d Universit y on 
Decoration Day . 
The late Benjami n Guggenheim, who 
went down wit h the "Titanic, " left a 
bequest of $5,000 to the Colored Orphan 
Asylum , New Yor k City . 
EDUCATION. 
THE following letter has been received 
by the editor of TH E CRISIS from the 
students of the Universit y of South 
Carolina : 
Sir : A marked copy of your paper, 
TH E CRISIS, was received by the libraria n 
of the Universit y of South Carolina , i n 
which yo u paralleled an article written by 
yourself on the Freedmen's Burea u with an 
article on the same subject by Mr . Coli n 
W . Covington, of this university. The 
matter has been dealt with by the honor 
committee of the student body and that 
committee feels that you are due a statement of its findings. 
A t the end of the essay as published i n 
the State, and as submitted for competition i n the contest, Mr . Covington added a 
bibliography i n which credit was given to 
the article i n the Atlantic Monthly. This 
fact, together wit h attendant circumstances 
which were carefully looked into but need 
not be set out here, the committee accepted 
as evidence of the fact that there was no 
flagrant effort to deceive. The committee 
therefore di d not deal wit h Mr . Covington 
i n a summary manner, although it di d not 
hold him blameless. The medal was surrendered by Mr . Covington upon the statement of the committee that his wor k di d not 
warrant the award. 
Yours truly, 
ALLA N JOHNSTONE , JR. , 
Fo r the committee. 
A colored boy, Macolm C . Banks, o f 
Boston, was not only elected captain of his 
militar y company i n the publi c schools, but 
also lieutenant-colonel of the 3d regiment 
of the Boston School cadets. 
<I The Pen n School of St. Helena's Island, 
S. C , the oldest school fo r Negroes i n the 
South, has celebrated its fiftieth anniversary. 
<$ Meharr y Medica l College has had its 
annual commencement, and graduates 114 
physicians, dentists, pharmacists and 
trained nurses. 
<I The Howar d Universit y Medica l School 
is a regular member of the Association of 
Medica l Schools and is not classed i n the 
"Ji m Crow " annex mentioned i n TH E CRISIS 
some months ago. 
<i The forty-fourth anniversary of Hampto n 
Institute has been celebrated. There were 
forty graduates of the academic department. 
^ The faculty of the new Tennessee A . and 
I. State Norma l School for Colored Students 
has been selected. Amon g those chosen are 
three graduates of Atlant a University, 
three graduates of Fisk , one graduate of 
Hampton , one graduate of Howar d and 
two graduates of Northern Universities. 
<I Bedford, Va. , has 1,400 white people and 
1,100 colored people. The State has a uniform examination fo r all teachers, but i n 
Bedfor d the white high school, which runs 
nine months i n a year, trains white teachers 
for this examination. There is no colored 
high school, and consequently it is practically impossible for colored people to 
qualify as first-grade teachers. The school 
board is plannin g a $30,000 school building 
for the whites, while the cost of the colored 
school building, includin g ground, was 
$4,500. 
• Dr. D . K . Pearsons has recently died. H e 
gave millions to higher education among 
the whites, but nothing to colored colleges. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 63 
MUSIC AND ART. 
A REMARKABL E concert was given i n 
Carnegie Hall , New York , by the new 
Musi c School Settlement. The critic of the 
New Yor k Press said : "I f the orchestra of 
the Cle f Club, a large body of Negro 
players, under the direction of James 
Reese Europe , had not occupied the whole 
stage of Carnegie Hal l last night the concert given there for the benefit and under 
the auspices of the Musi c School Settlement fo r Colored People would have drawn 
an even larger audience than that which 
greeted the great Hebrew cantor, Sirota , on 
his first appearance here. The immense 
auditorium was packed to its very limit 
wit h folk both white and black, and outside on the sidewalk and i n the lobby a mob 
clamored in vain for admission. 
"Whit e folk, of whom there was a large 
percentage i n the crowd, enjoyed the 
experience quite as much as the Negroes. 
Amon g them were many musicians by profession. To hear that multitude of music 
makers, manipulating banjos, mandolins, 
guitars, violins, 'cellos, double basses and 
pianos, with extraordinary rhythmica l precision and contagious swing, to listen to the 
voices of those spirited players minglin g i n 
robust harmony wit h the big, resonant body 
of instrumental sound, was indeed a novel 
and origina l sensation. N o wonder the 
crowd burst into tumultuous applause after 
the liltin g Negro melody, 'Swing , 'long 
chillun, swing 'long de lane,' written by Wil l 
Mario n Cook, leader of the Cle f Clu b 
Chorus. 
<J Mr . Willia m E . Scott, a colored graduate 
of the Indianapolis publi c schools, has had 
some of his paintings accepted fo r the sprin g 
exhibit of the Paris Salon. Scott studied i n 
the Chicago Ar t Studio for three years, and 
is now i n the studio of the great colored 
artist, Tanner. 
<J I n Englan d the Musica l Society o f 
Horsham, the Lavende r Hil l Chora l Society 
of Wadswort h and the Chora l Unio n of 
Birmingham have lately presented a number 
of earlier works of S. Coleridge-Taylor, 
includin g "Th e Blin d Gir l of Castel 
Guille " and the "Bon-bon Suite. " The 
audiences were large and enthusiastic. Mr . 
Coleridge-Taylor's new cantata, " A Tale of 
Ol d Japan, " is being performed throughout 
Englan d wit h great success. 
The Londo n Musical Times says: "Mr . 
Coleridge-Taylor's ' A Tale of Ol d Japan ' 
is a beautiful work which fully ^sustains 
the composer's reputation. H e has attained 
an even surer touch of constructive thought, 
emotion and expression. The orchestral 
part is inventive and resourceful. The 
cantata given by the Festiva l Chora l 
Society at Birmingham, under the composer's direction, secured for Mr . ColeridgeTaylo r a veritable triumph. " The reviewers 
add : "His part writin g is always grateful 
and i n his orchestration he seems more than 
ever to have embodied some fascinating 
touches of local color which is always a 
characteristic of his art. A t the close of 
the concert Mr . Coleridge-Taylor was the 
recipient of an ovation. " 
Mr . Harr y T. Burleigh , baritone and 
composer, of New York , was the soloist at 
the concert given Apri l 24 by the Amphio n 
Club, o f Melrose, Mass. A n interesting 
number on the program was Mr . Burleigh's 
setting of Kipling's "Mothe r o' Mine, " 
which was sung by the club. 
<I On Apri l 1 at Washington, D . C , at the 
fourth of a series of artists' recitals given 
by the Washington Conservatory o f Music , 
was heard Miss Nelli e Moore , pianist, of 
New York , assisted by Mr . Feli x Weir, 
violinist. Miss Moor e received her musical 
education at the New Yor k College of Musi c 
and is a pupi l of Leopold Wolfsohn . 
Miss Hele n Eugeni a Hagan , pianist, Miss 
.Jessie Estelle Muse , soprano, and Mr . 
Rolan d W . Hayes, tenor, assisted by Mrs. 
Gabrielle Lewis Pelham, accompanist, gave 
much pleasure when they were heard i n 
concert on Apri l 12 at Washington, D . C. 
They presented a long and interesting program, comprising numbers from Liszt, 
Chopin , MacDowell, Burleigh , Mendelssohn 
and Puccini. Miss Haga n and Miss Mus e 
are students of the Yal e Conservatory of 
Musi c at New Haven . 
^ On Apri l 17, before a large and enthusiastic audience, a concert was given i n 
Steinert Hall , Boston, Mass., by Mr . Rolan d 
W . Hayes, the admired young tenor, Mr . 
Wm . H . Richardson, baritone, Mr . Clarence 
Cameron White , violinist, and Mr . Charles 
J. Harris, pianist. Mr . Hayes, a former 
member of the Fis k Universit y Quartet, 
came to Boston a year ago, when his 
remarkably fine tenor voice won for him 
the opportunity for further study under one 
of Boston's most noted vocalists. 64 TH E CRISIS 
Mr . Richardson is a well-known church 
and concert singer of Boston and has had 
the advantage of study under the best 
private teachers. H e possesses a fine voice 
of beautiful quality which he uses with 
freedom and skill . 
PEESONAL. 
THE Carnegie Her o Fun d Commission 
has awarded Natha n Dunca n a gold 
medal and $2,000 for heroism. Dunca n 
worked for hours forty feet below the 
surface of the earth to rescue a man who 
had been buried alive by the caving i n of a 
well. 
^ Lockett, a Negro fireman on the Georgi a 
Midlan d Railway , rescued a child from 
death the other day by divin g from his 
engine and throwing her off the track. 
<I Miss Laur a Jones, a colored girl of 
Mobile , with a torn skirt flagged an inbound 
passenger train and prevented it from 
runnin g into a dangerous washout. 
*J Emanue l Jackson, a wealthy colored man 
of Pittsburgh, is dead. H e conducted a livery 
and undertaking business. 
<I Jerr y Buckner, the first colored policeman of Parkersburg, W . Va. , is dead. 
<$ Walte r F . Giles, former physical-culture 
instructor of Fis k Universit y and of the 
public schools of Baltimore , is now i n charge 
of physica l culture i n the public schools of 
St. Louis. 
«I The Reverend C. T. Walke r is about to 
build an institutional church for colored 
people i n Augusta , Ga . 
TH E GHETTO. 
A MAJORIT Y of Southern cities achieve 
separation of white and Negro passengers i n street cars by assigning them to 
different seats, or by the use of movable 
screen partitions. Montgomery, Ala. , stands 
alone i n unqualifiedly requiring separate 
cars fo r whites and Negroes. Nort h Caro ­
lin a forbids white and Negro passengers 
occupying contiguous seats on the same 
bench. Virgini a prohibits their sitting side 
by side unless all other seats are filled. I n 
a number of cities the white passengers must 
enter and leave the car by a different platform than that used by the Negroes. Prac ­
tically without exception the white patrons 
are given the front of the car and the 
Negroes the rear. 
It is generally found that conductors have 
police power to eject or arrest wilfull y disobedient or refractory passengers, and i n 
some few cities policemen on the cars are 
required to take cognizance o f any viola ­
tions of the law. Penalties upon the conductors for failur e to observe the laws 
vary from $1 i n Montgomer y to $500 i n 
Jacksonville , or imprisonment from one to 
ninety days. 
<J Efforts to bar colored residents are 
reported i n sections of Washingto n and i n 
St. Louis. Fro m St. Louis it is reported 
that the first Negro moved to Cook Avenue 
lately, takin g possession of 4004 Cook 
Avenue . That night the house was bombarded wit h stones and several windows 
were broken. Whe n the police were summoned they arrested Robert Watson , a 
Negro, who was patrollin g the street, on the 
charge of carryin g concealed weapons.' H e 
soon was released. The house at 4000 Cook 
Avenue has also been bought by a colored 
woman, Mrs. Ma y Crawford , wife of a 
Pullma n porter, and 4008 Cook Avenue has 
been bought by Mrs. Sadie Lyle , another 
colored woman, whose husband is a barber 
at Jefferson Avenue and Pin e Street. These 
have not yet moved in . 
COURTS. 
THE question of the right of the 
colored Knights of Pythia s to keep 
their name has been argued before the 
Supreme Court of the Unite d States, Alto n 
B . Parke r of New Yor k representing the 
Negroes. 
The disfranchisement cases i n Oklahoma, 
where two election supervisors were convicted of conspiracy i n preventing Negroes 
from voting for a Congressman, came up i n 
the Court of Appeals i n St. Louis, Ma y 
22d. 
<J Joh n Mingo , a colored man who was 
carryin g a hatchet which he had been using 
i n his work, was pursued through the 
streets of Ne w Yor k by a mob last fall. 
H e met a policeman and the policeman 
deliberately shot him and charged him with 
felonious assault. Whe n the case came up 
recently Ming o was acquitted, and the 
Vigilanc e Committee o f the Nationa l 
Association fo r the Advancement of Colored 
Peopl e is bringin g charges against the 
policeman. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 65 
<I Lynn , the Arkansa s farme r who killed 
three Negroes recently, was tried and the 
jur y failed to agree upon a verdict. Lyn n 
asked to be admitted to bail, but this was 
denied by the lower court. H e is now 
appealing to the Supreme Court of the 
State. 
fl A t Peoria , Ill., a Greek who refused to 
serve soda water to a colored man was fined 
$25. 
<I A t Birmingham, Ala. , Charles Burden , 
a colored man, was charged with assault 
with intent to murde r two years ago. The 
jur y found him guilt y and sentenced him 
to fifteen years i n the penitentiary. His 
case was taken to the Supreme Court, was 
reversed on a technicality, and on the 
second tria l he was fined $1 and released. 
<I I n St. Louis a colored man was convicted for stealing a purse last December and 
was sentenced to five years i n the penitentiary. Hi s story, however, made a strong 
impression on the judge ; his case was 
investigated and finally the verdict o f the 
jur y was set aside and he was dismissed. 
* J A woman lawye r charged i n a Ne w Yor k 
court that colored people are discriminated 
against on the jur y lists and demanded that 
her colored client have his race represented 
on the jury . 
< J A t Macon , Ga. , a colored man has filed 
suit fo r damages against the local ice and 
coal company. H e charges that he was 
threatened wit h illega l arrest and then 
forced to pa y $2 a week to the company 
out o f his wages. H e pai d $60 and then 
sued the company. 
9 The judge of a municipa l court at 
Gary , Ind., has decided that Negroes can be 
debarred from poolrooms. 
CRIME. 
AFTE R an expenditure of $10,106.30 
by the county of Chester, the persons 
accused of lynchin g Zach. Walke r on 
August 13, 1911, have all been set free. 
Si x men were acquitted last fall. Then the 
commonwealth sought a change of venue, 
which -was denied. Anothe r man was 
recently acquitted and the State thereupon 
asked fo r the acquittal o f the other five 
accused men. Judge Butle r made a scathin g address from the bench i n which he 
deplored the condition o f the publi c min d 
i n Chester County. H e regarded the outcome of the tria l as a publi c calamity to 
law and order i n the State. ' 
•] The followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
A t Shreveport, La. , Tom Mile s was 
lynched for "sending an insulting note" to 
a white girl . H e had been tried by the court, 
released and then killed by a mob. It is 
rumored that a companion, S. McIntyre , 
was also lynched, but his body has not been 
found. 
A t Yellowpine , La. , a colored boy of 
19 was whipped fo r writin g "several 
letters to ladies i n a suggestive manner. " 
H e was ordered to leave town, but refused 
and was lynched. Anothe r report was that 
the insults were sent over the telephone. 
A t Jackson, Ga. , Henr y Etheridge was 
lynched for being active i n securing recruits 
for a colony to Africa . 
A t Greenville, Miss., an unknown Negr o 
was lynched i n a cemetery for an alleged 
attack upon a white woman. Two policemen were shot durin g the melee. 
A t Columbus, Miss., George Edd , a field 
hand, wounded a woman planter and her son 
with a shotgun. H e was lynched twentyfour hours later. 
A t Monroe , La. , trouble attributed "to 
the surliness and impudence of Negro flood 
refugees" led to a lynching. A press report 
continues: "Yesterday several Negroes were 
playin g a slot machine i n a store at Delh i 
when an officer stepped up and put a 
penny i n the machine. Wit h an oath, a 
Negro is alleged to have stepped up and 
tried to put the officer out, declaring 'I'se 
playin g dat machine.' Afte r the white man 
had given the Negro a good beating the 
latter is said to have threatened violence to 
white people i n Delhi. Durin g the night a 
crowd gathered, caught the Negro and1 
lynched him. " Late r a regiment o f whit e 
militi a was sent to the spot. 
<I A t Fort Smith, Ark. , the grand jury , 
who have been investigating the lynchin g o f 
Sanford Lewis, returned indictments against 
twenty-three persons. 
< J Mobs are threatening lynchings i n Val -
dosta, Ga., and i n Humboldt, Tenn. I n the 
latter place, after a Negro had been nearly 
killed, it was found that he was the wron g 
man. 
<I The colored people of Hempstead, Tex., 
have offered a reward of $500 for persons 
assaulting a Negro family. 66 TH E CRISIS 
<i Two youn g white men i n Reidsville , Ga. , 
are charged wit h killin g a colored man, and 
a white man at Tifton , Ga. , is held for the 
murder of a colored man. 
*1 A typica l case is reported from Ho t 
Springs, Ark . George Brown , a colored 
waiter, found a white business man i n company wit h his young daughter. H e was 
prevented from killin g the man by an officer. 
H e threatened, it is said, to kil l the officer. 
A t any rate, the officer shot and killed him. 
^ Thirteen men are under indictment at 
Walnu t Ridge , Ark. , for dynamitin g Negro 
homes and tryin g to drive out Negro 
workingmen. 
^ Colored men have been shot by officers 
i n Richmond , Va. , Thomasville, N . C , 
Rock y Mount, N . C , and Louisville , Ky . 
<I A fifteen-year-old colored boy has been 
sentenced to five years in State's prison for 
stealing at Jacksonville, Fla . 
<I Maie r Schwartz, the young white boy 
who wilfull y murdered an old Negro hack 
driver in Natchez, Miss., last December, was proven guilty and sentenced to 
serve the rest of his natural lif e i n the 
penitentiary by Judge Brown , i n whose 
court he was tried. The judge said the 
verdict wil l show the law-abiding citizens of 
Adams County that they can get protection 
i n the courts. 
*I Al l but two of the rioters who a year or 
more ago kille d a score of Negroes at 
Palestine, Tex., now have their freedom. 
It is hardly probable that these two wil l 
ever be brought to trial. The only satisfaction i n the matter is that it has cost most 
of these ric h men a large part of their 
fortunes to escape punishment. 
FOREIGN. 
SIR WALTE R EGERTON , who has 
been governor of the amalgamated 
territories of Northern and Southern Nigeri a 
longer than any of his predecessors, has 
been retired. Hi s successor, the new 
governor-general, is Sir Frederick Lugard , 
who was at one time high commissioner 
of Northern Nigeri a and was transferred 
from Hon g Kong , China , to his new post. 
H e and his estimable wife, who is the 
author of a valuable work on Nigeria , are 
well liked by native Africans. 
<I Lad y Egerton is greatly interested i n 
Dr. Sapara's Midwifer y Trainin g School, 
at Lagos, and before leaving the colony for 
Englan d called a conference of women at 
Government Hous e for the purpose of discussing, i n conjunction wit h a few Euro ­
pean ladies, ways and means of preventing 
the great loss of lif e i n childbirth and the 
high rate of infant mortality. It is the 
intention of the government to establish a 
maternity home i n Lagos, wit h a Europea n 
matron, who wil l also be available for 
trainin g natives as nurses and midwives. 
<I Educatio n among the natives i n South 
Afric a is hampered by interference of the 
whites, according to the report of Bisho p 
J . Albert Johnson. 
"The twelve millio n natives are completely 
under the control of one millio n Europeans, " 
the report stated. "Anythin g which tends 
to development of these ignorant peoples 
is looked on wit h suspicion by those i n control. N o institution is allowed to exist without a Europea n head. This handicaps 
advancement of the people. Native educators are needed." 
TH E BAPTIST SUNDAY-SCHOOL 
CONGRESS. 
ONE of the interesting meetings of the 
year is the colored Baptist Sunday 
School Congress. The first session of this 
congress was held i n Nashville , Tenn., i n 
1900 and brought together an enthusiastic 
attendance from various States. I n 1907 at 
New Orleans there was a still larger attendance, and i n 1908 at Jacksonville , Fla. , 
many of the Sunday-school experts of the 
Unite d States were present and spoke. The 
next year the congress met at Atlant a and 
last year at Meridian , Miss. This year the 
congress wil l meet at Tuskegee, Ala. , June 
5 to 10. It is a sort of school of methods, 
five days being given to actual Sundayschool work. N o motions are made and 
no debates indulged in . A t the Meridia n 
meeting of the congress the superintendent's 
department registered 400 members from 
twenty-six States, and there were more than 
900 Sunday schools enrolled. The organization was founded b y Dr . R . H . Boyd , who 
is at the head of the publishing department 
of the colored Baptists, and his son, Mr . 
Henr y A . Boyd , is secretary. Reduced fares 
from all over the Unite d States wil l be 
made for this summer's meeting, and a large 
attendance is expected. ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
MAR Y HOWARD JACKSON. 
A BUS T o f the Rev . F . J . Grimke , now 
being exhibited i n the Veerhoff Ar t 
Galleries at Washington , is the work of 
MRS . MAR Y HOWAR D JACKSO N 
Mrs. Mar y Howar d Jackson, wife of the 
head of the department of mathematics i n 
the M Street Hig h School. The bust has 
' been praised by Washingto n art critics as 
"well constructed and skilfull y modeled," 
and is another example of the talent the 
artist has already shown i n a dozen or more 
pieces of sculpture. 
Bor n i n Philadelphia , Mrs. * Jackson 
studied at Professor J . Liberty-Tadd's art 
school and later, having won a scholarship, 
at the Pennsylvani a Academy of Fin e Arts. 
There she worked under Chase, Gerafly and 
Boyle ; Professor Boyl e especially was a 
source of great inspiration as well as of 
practical help. Mrs. Jackson thinks her 
best work is perhaps represented by her 
busts of the Rev. H . M . Joseph, Senator 
Hoa r and Dr. W . E . B . D u Bois. She is 
now engaged on a study of Mr . W . H . 
Lewis, which wil l probably be exhibited in 
New York . 
JAMES REESE EUROPE. 
JAME S REES E EUROP E was born in 
Mobile , Ala. , Februar y 22, 1881. H e 
descended from a musical family. Bot h his 
paternal and maternal ancestors, as fa r back 
MRS . JACKSON' S BUS T O F TH E REV . 
F . J . GRIMK E 68 TH E CRISIS 
JAME S REES E EUROP E 
as is ascertainable by the most diligent research, were musicians. 
Whe n he was a child his parents migrated 
from Mobil e to Washington, D. C , where he 
was placed under the tutelage of Enric o 
Hurlei , assistant director of the Unite d 
States Marin e Band , as a student of the 
violin . A t the age of 14 young 
Europ e entered a contest i n the national 
capital i n music writing, and while he won 
only the second prize the first priz e was 
awarded to his sister, Miss Mar y Europe , of 
whom Coleridge-Taylor said : "She is a 
genius of dazzling brilliancy. " 
Mr . Europ e devoted years of study to 
the theory and instrumentation of music 
wit h such well-known tutors as Han s Hanke , 
of the Leipzi g Conservatory of Music , Mel ­
vill e Charlton and Henr y C. Burleigh . Hi s 
natura l talent has been thoroughly trained. 
It is as a musical director and composer 
that Mr . Europ e is best known i n the 
country. H e toured the country as musical 
director for the Cole & Johnson and 
Williams & Walke r companies, but recently 
he has devoted his time exclusively to writin g instrumental numbers. Chie f among 
his successes are his marches which are 
most inspiring . The New Yor k Tribune, 
commenting upon them, said that "Al l i n all 
they are well worthy of the pen of JohnPhili p Sousa. " 
One of Mr . Europe's distinguishing 
characteristics is his genius for organization. H e is the founder and first president 
of the famous Cle f Clu b and the organizer 
of the Cle f Clu b Symphon y Orchestra, "one 
of the most remarkable orchestras i n the 
world, " as the Evening Post criti c called it. 
Full y to appreciate the worth of James 
Reese Europ e to the Negro musicians of 
New Yor k City , one would have to know 
how the Negro entertainers i n cafes, hotels, 
at banquets, etc., were regarded before 
the organization of the Cle f Club , and how 
they have been regarded since. Before, they 
were prey to scheming head waiters and 
booking agents, now they are performers 
whose salaries and hours are fixed by 
contract. 
WILLIA M H. TYERS. 
WILLIA M H . TYER S was born i n 
Petersburg, Va. , in 1870, but his 
parents moved to Ne w Yor k City . Whil e 
a boy Tyers showed a remarkable genius 
for composition, and at the age of 17 
WILLIA M H . TYER S ME N O F TH E MONT H 69 
bad composed quite a number of polkas, 
waltzes and so forth. I n 1890 he toured 
Europe , as libraria n i n a musical company, 
and while i n Germany he studied instrumentation under Gaspari. Ill-health compelled 
him to return to America , and since then he 
has devoted his entire time to composing, 
writin g and arrangin g music. H e has held 
positions as musical arranger i n a number 
o f the leading music-publishing houses of 
New York , and is said to be the best-trained 
musical arranger of his race. H e has been 
i n popula r demand for years by some of the 
leading stars i n many of the musical productions, to arrange their music. "Trocha " 
(a Cuba n dance) was the first composition that made real fame fo r Tyers; it was 
played by the leading bands and orchestras 
of the country ; since then he has written 
quite a number of other characteristic dances 
like the Danc e Philippine , L a Mariposa , L a 
Coqucla , Maor i and Panama . Mr . Tyers 
is assistant conductor of the Cle f Club, and 
the New Yor k Evening Post said of his 
latest composition as played at the recent 
Carnegie Hal l concert: "Wer e the name of 
Strauss appended to the Tout, a Vous waltz, 
by Tyers it would be one of the most popu ­
la r waltzes i n the worl d to-day." 
FIFT Y YEAR S OF SERVICE. 
THE Rev. John Thomas Jenifer, who 
was recently retired by the Baltimor e 
A . M . E. Conference after fifty years of 
service, is one o f the most interesting figures i n the Negro Church. H e has combined 
great spiritualit y wit h genuine executive 
ability, and made a remarkable record 
wherever he was sent. H e was born a slave 
i n Marylan d i n 1835. I n 1859 he escaped 
and went to Now Bedford , Mass., where he 
worked to give himself an education. I n 
1862 the former slave, having a strong wish 
to enter the ministry, applied for, and 
received, license to preach. Before long he 
was sent to Californi a and made one of the 
first class of Negro deacons consecrated by 
a Negro bishop on the Pacific Coast. Comin g East again, he entered Wilberforc e Uni ­
versity. "I n 1870," says Mr . Jenifer, " I 
was graduated from the first class of theologica l students (so fa r as I know) from a 
Negro college who were handed diplomas 
b y a Negro president." 
Mr . Jenife r went South, then to New 
England , then to Washingto n and BaltiREV . JOH N THOMA S JENIFE R 
more. There is, indeed, hardly any part of 
the country i n which he has not worked. " I 
have traveled about 250,000 miles," he says, 
"been i n every State of the Unio n except 
six, gone through Canada and Centra l 
America , preached more than 6,000 sermons, 
and gathered in , with many souls, about 
$250,000 i n property and cash. I am sorry 
I could not do more." 
E3 
The colored people of South Afric a have 
sustained great loss i n the death o f D . J . 
Lenders, vice-president of the Africa n 
Politica l Organization. Mr . Lenders had 
taken an active part i n every movement to 
uplift the colored people. 
H e was one of the three colored delegates 
who went over to Englan d two years ago 
to protest against the "Colo r Clause " in the 
Ac t of Union . But, besides this enormous 
sacrifice, he had, by his persistent protests 
against injustice, by his fearless advocacy 
fo r full politica l and civil rights to all, and 
by his unselfish and whole-hearted devotion 
to our cause, placed the colored people under 
a lasting obligation to him. PRAISE FROM TH E 
CHICAGO PRESS. 
Part of the phenomenal 
success of the Chicago 
Conference must be attributed to the sympathy of the newspapers. 
Nearl y every daily published i n the city 
gave our association editorial commendation. W e give a few words from our many 
clippings. 
The Tribune has a thoughtful editorial 
on what it calls the chief of our national 
problems. "Wakeful , inquiring , energetic 
as we are with respect to all other pressing 
questions i n our national experiment, as to 
this problem we of the Nort h are indifferent. W e do not realize that it is a grave 
national problem. W e like to dismiss it as 
a sectional affair which we may safely and 
wisely leave to a section to settle. 
"This fallacy is serious. W e tried to leave 
the slavery question to the South. It would 
not, it could not be. Neither can we shirk 
a part in dealing with this present phase of 
the same question. 
"The first step toward participation i n 
the solution is acquaintance with conditions, 
and it is highly desirable that the associations concerned with efforts to study and 
aid the Negro should meet occasionally i n 
the Nort h for public discussion." 
The Record-Herald also takes the view 
that what is most needed is a better knowledge of the facts. It expressed gratification 
at the forceful array of them presented at 
the conference and at the great progress 
the colored man was makin g i n spite of 
prejudice. 
"T o impress the great publi c wit h these 
facts is to combat blind prejudice i n the 
most effective way possible. A t the same 
time there is plenty of work ahead for the 
white friends of humanity, righteousness and 
brotherhood. Lynching s must be fought 
and punished; the civil rights of the black 
man must be vigorously enforced; the drawin g of the color line in educational institutions must be resisted." 
The Evening Post, like the Tribune, calls 
the Negro problem the most serious facing 
the America n people and one to which the 
country is singularly indifferent. "W e have 
watched the spread of disfranchisement, of 
various types of discrimination measures 
and of even the complete breakdown of our 
legal machinery where it touched the colored 
man without appreciating the significance 
for ourselves of what we saw. Catchwords 
like 'leave it to the South where it belongs' 
have taken the place of any real thinking, 
i n fact have closed our minds to the need 
of any real thinking. " 
Then, referring to the Nationa l Associa ­
tion, the Post points out that it is not a 
"missionary enterprise" but is "concerned 
with clearing the illega l and un-American 
and oppressive obstacles from the path of 
the race that is tryin g to rise, " and concludes by urgin g the people of Chicago to 
attend the meetings, "hear some of the best 
minds in both races i n the sincere and 
earnest discussion of this problem. " 
The Daily News thinks that only good can 
come of "this educational movement which 
seeks to correct the underlyin g conditions 
of which lynchings, race riots, Ji m Crow 
cars, and injurious discriminations of many 
sorts are the outward and visible manifestations. "It ought to be plain, " the News 
continues, "that the expressed antagonism 
i n a civilized country toward the colored 
man is a denial of civilization and that as 
long as this antagonism continues civiliza ­
tion itself must suffer from its own blindness." 
COATESVILLE S 
DISGRACE. 
The final failure of 
Chester County to convict anybody for complicit y i n the Coatesville lynchin g has been 
the subject of much press comment. The 
Allentown (Pa.) News says significantly: 
"This complete miscarriage of law and 
order i n a community that has been noted, OPINIO N 71 
as a whole, fo r the average of its intelligence and publi c spirit, is not less remarkable i n the history of Pennsylvani a than the 
horrible event which Chester County justifies, or at least condones; and there is a 
deep meaning behind it in the relation today of the white race and the black race to 
each other i n the United States." 
The New Yor k Evening Post takes the 
same view : "Whe n the Distric t Attorney 
had finally wrun g a few confessions from 
some of the mob," it says, " a handful out 
of the hundreds, and had succeeded i n getting twelve men indicted, he could get no 
jur y to listen to his evidence. 'There is a 
deep-seated purpose on the part of the people of Chester County not to convict a white 
man for the murder of a Negro,' said 
Deputy Attorney-Genera l Cunningham i n 
his application, which was refused, for a 
change of venue." 
The New Yor k Evening Sun remarks that 
"when public opinion i n Pennsylvani a is at 
such an ebb, the whole country must be 
shocked by the facts and apprehensive of 
the consequences," while the Tennessean 
American, published i n Nashville , deploring 
the result, adds: "A t the moment we cannot recall a single instance where any man 
accused of participatin g i n a lynchin g has 
been made to suffer legal penalty, save i n 
the case of some of those who murdered a 
law and order detective i n Ohio a year or 
more ago." This detective, it wil l be remembered, was white. 
Wher e must the blame for the failure be 
put ? The Brookly n Eagle thinks it is 
divided. "I f Governor Tener had proclaimed 
martial law, directed the wholesale arrests 
of suspected persons, removed the lukewarm 
prosecutor, and used the power that lies 
i n his office, the disgrace would have been 
impossible. Bu t this does not 'let out' the 
local authorities or the local jury . Al l are 
responsible. The commonwealth as a whole 
is responsible." The Pittsburgh Dispatch 
blames Coatesville only. "Whil e we are 
chagrined at this exhibition of savagery and 
lawnessness withi n the borders of our commonwealth, " it observes, "it is so manifestly 
out of keeping with' the spirit of Pennsylvani a that we can disown it. " The GazetteTimes, of the same city, does not agree to 
this. "I f Chester could be left to itself," 
it says, "i n the discredit. attaching to its 
shame it would merit all the ignominy that 
could be heaped upon it, but unfortunately 
the whole State will suffer in repute for the 
vicious influence exercised by perniciously 
active leaders in a community from which 
bolter things were expected." 
The Philadelphi a Inquirer, going into the 
psychology of the matter, suggests the motive that may have led to the acquittal. 
"There wil l be a disposition to assume that 
the jurors by the stand they took showed 
themselves in sympathy with the accused and 
condoned the crime they were charged with 
having committed. This may to some extent be true, but it is not the whole truth. 
It may be suspected that the jurors were 
actuated by motives much more complicated and less censurable than these. They 
probably felt that, inasmuch as it was im ­
practicable to punish all who were participants i n the Walke r lynching, it was not 
fair or right to single out and punish the 
few who had been brought before them, and 
so they strained their consciences to 
let them go." 
TH E LESSON OF WE HAVE RECEIVED FROM 
TH E "TITANIC . " M r George Poster Pea -
body an editoria l 
clipped from that excellent journal, the Chicago Public, and with it the followin g letter: 
"Ma y I request your careful reading of 
the enclosed editorial, 'The Lesson of the 
Titani c Disaster,' which seems to me to be 
worth reprintin g i n every paper. I am 
most earnestly desirous that your constituency shall have an opportunity to read it 
and I beg to state my most earnest hope 
that it may commend itself to you as worthy 
of reprinting in full at as early a date as 
convenient." 
W e cannot reproduce quite all the editoria l which Mr . Peabody so justly commends, but we are glad to give our readers 
the greater part of it, for it is precisely to 
arouse the imagination of the indifferent 
that TH E CRISIS exists. The Public says that 
the outburst of indignation at a tragedy 
that could have been averted is quite natural 
and is useful i n so fa r as it may prevent 
the repetition of such a horror, but it thinks 
the disaster cannot be laid altogether to 
greed. 
"Though greed may have played a part, " 
continues the Public, "along wit h many 
another impulse, it could have been only on 
the surface. Greed does not run deep. This 
was proved by the truest of tests at the 
climax of the tragedy. A t that supreme 72 TH E CRISIS 
moment when human souls were on tria l the 
appea l to brotherhood was intuitive and 
overwhelming. Kiser's inspirin g verse 
gives us the picture : 
Christian and Jew and humble and high, 
Master and servant, they stood at last 
Bound by a glorious brotherly tie. 
"At last! Bu t wh y only at last? Wa s the 
spirit of brotherhood absent before? Ha d 
greed crowded it out? Ha d consciousness 
of race or class made it insensible to every 
emotion but fear of death? This cannot 
be. Fea r of death could not awaken a sense 
of brotherhood, fear of death could not 
make wa y fo r a democratic spirit to rise 
supreme—not i f that sense, not i f this spirit, 
were less powerful among human passions 
than selfishness. No ; not selfishness but 
democracy is the power that moves mankin d 
at every crisis. Ye t there is an unhapp y 
significance, unintended, it may be, but true, 
i n Kiser's words— 'at last.' Is it only 'at 
last,' then, only when Death duels wit h 
Life , that the brotherly tie becomes the tie 
that binds, the democratic instinct the in ­
stinct that triumphs ? 
"It may seem so. Dail y tragedies to 
which the 'Titanic ' disaster is by comparison 
a trifling incident make it seem so. These 
tragedies are due to the laws under which 
we live ; they are the frightful price that 
all have to pa y fo r the luxur y of some; but 
as to them, where is the brotherly inspira ­
tion to drive away greed, where the democratic instinct to dethrone the instinct of 
self-love? Wel l may the question be asked, 
and hard enough may the finding of the 
answer be. 
"It cannot be from any lack of the democratic instinct that beneficiaries o f privilege 
are selfishly indifferent to the heartsickening 
perennial tragedies of our industria l life . 
Not very different can any of them be from 
those of their own class who went down 
wit h the 'Titanic ' I f they are careless of 
the awful industria l tragedies, or cold toward 
them, it must he because their democracy is 
not awakened. On that doomed vessel, 
along with their brethren of all classes there, 
those children of privilege, face to face wit h 
the tragic, were as democratic and as brave 
as any. Wha t they lack is not democracy 
but imagination. 
"Le t the privileged see the industria l 
tragedies they thrive upon, make them realize the tragical cost of their selfish luxury , 
and their ic y greed wil l melt i n the heat of 
their democracy. Rea l as their selfishness 
is, trul y as it helps to make poverty and 
crime, it is no more basic or controlling with 
their class than wit h any other. Le t their 
imaginations be fired, an d they wil l feel 
their brotherhood and think of its responsibilities. " 
fS 
The Egyptia n writer, 
NEGROES OF DUSE Mohammed, i n an 
GENIUS. article published in 
T. P.'s London Magazine, goes at some length 
into the history of various colored men in 
Europ e and Americ a who have distinguished 
themselves as writers and musicians: 
"It is rather a remarkable fact that three 
men of Ethiopia n blood— Poushki n i n Russia , 
Duma s i n Franc e and Coleridge-Taylor i n 
England—shoul d have added lustre, through 
their names, to the art of the countries that 
gave them birth. An d what is true of Europ e 
is still more remarkable i n the land of the 
dollars. Dvora k once said that the Americans had no nationa l music except that 
emanating from Negro melodies, and that it 
was to the Negro that the American s would 
have to look for creative wor k i n that 
direction. 
"Quit e recently Puccini , on his return to 
Europ e after producin g 'The Gir l of the 
Golden West' i n New York , although not 
going so fa r as Dvorak , also averred that the 
only music the American s possessed was the 
Negro melodies. 
"Alexande r Sergeievich Poushkin , born 
i n 1799 of a noble Russia n family, on the 
paterna l side had an Ethiopia n grandfather, 
Alexande r Duma s the elder, born 1802, was 
descended from an Africa n grandmother 
from Hait i and a Frenc h nobleman. Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor, born i n Londo n i n 1875, 
is the son of a West Africa n doctor and an 
Englis h mother, and there is i n Americ a 
Wil l Mario n Cook, wit h both maternal and 
paternal Africa n forbears. 
"Duma s di d fo r Frenc h fiction what Sir 
Walte r Scott accomplished i n Englis h literature, but while Scott's style is ponderous 
and for the most part tedious, like the tread 
of a lumbering elephant, Dumas' style is 
light and airy, like the gambol of a gazelle. 
"Poushki n not only gave dignity to Russian poetry, but his prose works, which 
include such novels as 'The Captain's OPINIO N 73 
Daughter' and 'Dubnovski,' and his 'History of the Pugatcheff Insurrection' —fo r 
which he received 20,000 rubles i n 1883— 
gave Russia n prose a literary perfection. 
"Samue l Coleridge-Taylor's genius may be 
said to have asserted itself when, as a boy 
o f six, Mr . Joseph Beckwit h discovered 
him i n Waddo n New Road , Croydon , 
'holding a very small-sized violi n i n one 
hand and playin g at marbles wit h the other.' 
'Hiawatha ' was produced when ColeridgeTaylo r was 23. H e has been recently elected 
principa l professor of musical composition 
at the Guildhall School of Music , London . 
Fo r five years he has been, and still is, conductor of the Hande l Society o f London . 
"Pau l Laurence Dunbar, the pure-blooded 
Ethiopia n poet, may be termed the Burn s 
of the Negro race. Willia m Dean Howells, 
i n his introduction to Dunbar's 'Lyric s of 
Lowl y Life, ' says: 'Wha t struck me i n 
.reading Mr . Dunbar's poetry was that, however gifted his race had proved itself i n 
music, i n oratory, i n several of the other 
arts, here was the first instance of an Ameri ­
can Negro who had evinced innate distinction i n literature.' 
"A s long as the Ethiopia n race shall 
continue to produce Coleridge-Taylors, Dun -
bars, Booke r T. Washingtons, D u Boises, 
Blydens, Mario n Cooks and others who have 
made an impression upon their age, whether 
i n law, letters, music or the sister arts, so 
long wil l there be hope for the social, materia l and politica l advancement of the 
Ethiopia n race." 
B 
"Bu t i f proo f positive of a soul i n the 
Negro people should be demanded," says 
Walte r Damrosch i n the Southern Workman, 
"i t can be given, fo r they have brought over 
from Afric a and developed i n this country, 
even under all the unfavorable conditions 
of slavery, a music so wonderful, so beautiful , and yet so strange, that like the gypsy 
music o f Hungary , it is at once the admira ­
tion and despair of educated musicians of 
our race. Uniqu e and inimitable, it is the 
only music o f this country, except that of 
the Indians, which can claim to be folk 
music. I n it the Negroes pour out their 
joys and their sorrows i n naive but wonderfull y movin g fashion; and i n the face of 
such testimony of emotional and esthetical 
beauty, who dare deny them wide r future 
possibilities i n the great work of liberation 
of min d and soul which is now going on? " 
"The Telegraph," says the Maco n pape r 
of that name, "has more than once cited 
facts to show that while a large class of 
Southern whites are suffering for the lack of 
compulsory education laws, the Negroes do 
not appear to be i n need of any such spur, 
the eagerness of the latter to take advantage of all the educational advantages withi n 
reach being displayed on every hand. The 
results of the conditions indicated a couple 
of generations hence, provided that meanwhile larger funds for publi c schools are not 
appropriated and compulsory education 
laws are not enacted, promise to be such as 
all intelligent Southern whites must shudder 
to contemplate." 
The Charlotte (N . C.) Observer says: 
"The statement made by Joe Garibaldi, 
who has had general oversight of the 
sanitary improvements that have been made 
i n the city durin g the past several months, 
that the colored citizen is more amenable to 
the law than the white, is significant. Mr . 
Garibald i says that when the law is explained to the colored citizen ownin g his 
home, he goes more immediately to the task 
of obeying the law than the average white 
citizen owning his home." 
d Politic s take up some space i n the colored 
press, although the causes of the various 
candidates are not often argued at length. 
The Oklahoma Safeguard sums u p the situation pretty well : 
"W e are continually being asked the 
question by those who are interested: "Where 
is the Negro and how does he stand?' W e 
frequently give this answer: The Negro is 
not standing i n this campaign. H e is now 
looking out fo r a place to light and- he is 
not very particula r what limb he lights 
upon. W e are tired of voting so much for 
the other fellow and getting nothing fo r 
ourselves." 
W e have not the pleasure of knowin g the 
Mr . Frase r referred to below, but we cannot forbear setting before our readers this 
account of his adventures as set forth i n a 
Hampto n Institute press notice: "Mr . 
Frase r contracted the dreaded 'sleeping sickness' while i n Uganda , Africa , but recovered 
his health, contrary to the hopes and expectations o f those who know about the 
death-dealing malady. " , MEMBERS. 
H E fourth annual conference, the most successful 
ever held, has passed 
into history. It remains 
for you, reader, to complete its work. Rall y 
round the organization; joi n yourself 
and secure other members. Make the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People the strongest 
and the best fighter i n Americ a for the 
rights of man. Le t us come to the 
fifth conference next spring with 2,500 
paying members. 
TRIUMPH. 
E T the eagle scream! 
Americ a is redeemed at 
Coatesville. "Some people talk of punishing the 
heroic mob, and the 
governor of Pennsylvania seems to be real provoked. W e 
hasten to assure our readers that nothing wil l be done. There may be a few 
formal arrests, but the men wil l be 
promptly released by the mob sitting as 
jury—perhaps even as judge. Americ a 
knows her true heroes." 
This we said some nine months ago 
when the crucifixion at Coatesville was 
new i n its horror.. Some of our readers 
took us roundly to task at the time, but 
to-day we can proudly announce the 
fulfilment of our prophecy: The last 
lyncher is acquitted and the best traditions of Anglo-Saxon civilization are 
safe. 
, Le t the eagle scream! 
EDUCATION. 
ONSIDE R this argument: 
Educatio n is the training of men for life. The 
best training is experience, but if we depended 
entirely upon this each 
generation would begin where the last 
began and civilization could not 
advance. 
We must then depend largely on oral 
and written tradition and on such bits 
of typica l experience as we can arrange 
for the child's guidance to life. 
Mor e than that, children must be 
trained i n the technique of earning a 
livin g and doing their part of' the 
world's work. 
'Bu t no training i n technique must 
forget that the object of education is the 
chil d and not the things he makes. 
Moreover, a training simply i n technique wil l not do because general intelligence is needed for any trade, and the 
technique of trades changes. 
Indeed, by the careful training of intelligence and ability, civilization is 
continually getting ri d of the hardest 
and most exhausting toil, and giving it 
over to machines, leaving human beings 
freer for higher pursuits and selfdevelopment. . 
Hence, colored people i n educating 
their children should be careful: 
First : To conserve and select ability, 
giving to their best minds higher college 
'training. 
Second: They should endeavor to 
give all their children the largest possible amount of general training and in ­
telligence before • teaching them the 
EDITORIA L EDITORIA L 75 
technique of a particular trade, remembering that the object of all true education is not to make men carpenters, but 
to make carpenters men. 
Is not this reasoning sound? Could 
you imagine an educator of any experience who would take material exception 
to it? Woul d you call it revolutionary 
or i n the nature of a "personal " 
attack ? 
Certainly not. 
Ye t this very argument, with illustrations and emphasis delivered to some 
seven hundred apparently well-pleased 
folk i n Indianapolis, has had the most 
astounding results. The Indianapolis 
Star i n a leading editorial denounced 
it as "dangerous! " 
A leading white philanthropist of 
abolition forbears considered it not only 
"misleading " and "mischievous " but a 
covert and damaging personal attack! 
The supervisor of the colored schools 
of Indianapolis wrote to express regret 
that the lecture had seemed to attack 
his school curriculum and ideals, and 
the assistant superintendent of schools 
i n the Distric t of Columbi a hastens to 
give advice! 
Ye t where is the flaw i n the 
argument? 
There is no flaw, but there are serious 
flaws i n the thinking of some of these 
critics. 
The first flaw is the naive assumption 
that the paraphernalia of a school shows 
the education it is imparting. If some 
people see a Greek book and a cap and 
gown, they conclude that the boy between them is receiving higher education. Bu t is he? That depends. If 
other people see a hammer, a saw and 
. a cook book, they conclude that the boy 
who uses them is being trained i n in ­
telligence, ability and the earning of a 
living . Bu t is he? That depends. 
Whe n the proud principa l of a school 
shows workshop and kitchen, table and 
pie, one may be interested, but one is 
no more convinced than when another 
shows an array of Greek roots and 
rounded phrases. One must merely remark : The end of education is neither 
the table nor the phrase—it is the boy; 
what kin d of boys are you training 
here? Ar e they boys quickened i n intelligence, with some knowledge of the 
world they live in? Ar e they trained in 
such ways as to discover their true bent 
and ability, and to be intelligently 
guided to the choice of a life work? 
Then your system is right. Otherwise 
it is wrong, and not all the gingham 
dresses i n Indiana wil l justify it. 
The second flaw is the more or less 
conscious determination of certain folk 
to use the America n public-school system 
for the production of laborers who wil l 
do the work they want done. To them 
Indianapolis exists for the sake of its 
factories and not the factories for the 
sake of Indianapolis. They want dinners, chairs and motor cars, and they 
want them cheap; therefore use the 
public schools to train servants, carpenters and mechanics. It does not occur 
to them to think of workingmen as existing for their own sakes. Wha t with 
impudent maids, and half-trained workingmen, they are tired of democracy; 
they want caste; a place for everybody 
and everybody i n his father's place with 
themselves on top, and "Niggers " at the 
bottom where they belong. To such folk 
the problem of education is strikingly 
simple. To teach the masses to work; 
show them how to do things; increase 
their output; give • them intelligence, of 
course; but this as a means, not as an 
end, and be careful of too much of it. 
Of course, if a meteoric genius bursts 
his birth's invidious bar, let him escape, 
but keep up the bars, and as most men 
are fools, treat them and train them as 
such. 
It was such darkened counsels as these 
that brought the Frenc h Revolution. It 
is such mad logic as this that is at the 
bottom of the social unrest to-day. 
The lecturer came to Indianapolis not 
to criticise, but to warn—not to attack, 
but to make straight the way of the 
Lord . He is no despiser of common 
humble toil ; Go d forbid! He and his 76 TH E CRISI S 
fathers before him have worked wit h 
their hands at the lowliest occupations 
an d he honors any honest toilers at any 
task; but he makes no mistake here. It 
is the toilers that he honors, not the task 
—the man and not the Thing . The 
Thin g may or may not be honorable— 
the man always is. 
Ye t the despising of men is growing 
and the caste spirit is rampant i n the 
land ; it is layin g hold of the public 
schools and it has the colored public 
schools by the throat, North, East, South 
and West. Beware of it, my brothers 
and dark sisters; educate your children. 
Give them the broadest and highest education possible; train them to the limit 
of their ability, if you work your hands 
to the bone i n doing it. See that your 
chil d gets, not the highest task, but the 
task best fitted to his ability, whether it 
be digging dirt or painting landscapes; 
remembering that our recognition as 
common folk by the worl d depends on 
the number of men of ability we produce—not great geniuses, but efficient 
thinkers and doers i n all lines. Never 
forget that if we ever compel the world's 
respect, it wil l be by virtue of our heads 
and not our heels. 
SUFFERING SUFFRAGETTES . 
H E woman suffragists are 
wincing a bit under the 
plai n speaking of TH E 
CRISIS. President Ann a 
Shaw writes us: 
"Ther e is not i n the 
Nationa l Association any discrimination 
against colored people. If they do not 
belong to us it is merely because they 
have not organized and have not made 
application for membership. Man y 
times we have had colored women on 
our program and as delegates, and I, 
personally, would be only too glad to 
welcome them as long as I am president 
of the Nationa l Association. 
"A t the State convention i n Ithaca a 
few days ago, when I was conducting 
the question box, I was asked what I di d 
i n Louisvill e i n regard to admitting 
women of Negro blood to the convention 
and my reply was: ' I di d nothing i n 
regard to admitting women of Negro 
blood to the convention. Ou r association does not recognize either Negro 
blood or white blood; what we stand for 
is the demand for equal politica l rights 
for women wit h men, and we know no 
distinction of race.' Ou r whole contention is for justice to women, white and 
colored, and I do not think it wil l be 
possible ever to change the platform of 
the Nationa l Association i n this respect.'' 
The corresponding secretary has 
heard vague rumors i n Ohio and says: 
" A somewhat indefinite report has 
reached me that there is being circulated 
a statement to the effect that the committee on resolutions of the Nationa l 
America n Woma n Suffrage Association, 
at the last annua l convention held i n 
Louisville , Ky. , 'snowed under' a 
resolution condemning disfranchisement of colored people i n the South. 
A s I remember the circumstance that 
probably gave rise to this misleading 
report it was as follows: I n the hurr y 
of the last meeting of the resolutions 
committee, which was composed of one 
member from each State, only a part of 
the committee being present, several 
resolutions on various subjects were presented, one being about as the above 
recites. I do not recall that it read 
'colored people,' though it may have 
been meant to apply to them. No one 
objected i n any way to its provisions, 
but one or two mentioned conditions i n 
other parts of the Unite d States which 
were against the free use of the ballot 
and said that the resolution was not 
broad enough. There was not time to 
discuss it fully, so this one and some 
other resolutions were not acted upon at 
all. Those who proposed any of the 
resolutions not acted upon by our committee had the opportunity and full liberty to present them from the floor, so 
that our committee di d not feel that it 
was 'snowing under' that resolution, 
or any other, which it had not had time EDITORIA L 77 
to revise to make comprehensive enough 
to include all similar abridgments of 
rights guaranteed by the Constitution 
of the Unite d States. 
"Th e ballotless women, I can assure 
you, who attended that convention are 
workin g for, and urgin g with all their 
ability, strength and talents, the guarantee of civi l and politica l rights for 
all citizens of the Unite d States 
entitled to them. " 
Al l this is pleasant and encouraging, 
but does it present the facts i n the case 
exactly? Earl y i n August Miss Marth a 
Gruening sought a chance to have a 
colored delegate introduce the following 
resolution at the Louisvill e convention 
and speak on the floor: 
"Resolved, that the women who are 
tryin g to lift themselves out of the class 
of the disfranchised, the class of the 
insane and criminal, express their sympathy wit h the black men and women 
who are fighting the same battle and 
recognize that it is as unjust and as 
undemocratic to disfranchise human 
beings on the ground of color as on 
the ground of sex. " 
President Ann a Shaw refused absolutely to invite the colored lady suggested and said over her signature several weeks before the convention: 
" I must oppose the presentation of 
that resolution at our national convention. I do not feel that we should go into 
a Southern State to hold our national 
convention and then introduce any subject which we know beforehand wil l do 
nothing but create discord and inharmony i n the convention. The resolution 
which yo u proposed to introduce would 
do more to harm the success of our convention i n Louisvill e than all the other 
things that we do would do good. I 
am i n favor of colored people voting, 
but white women have no enemy i n the 
world who does more to defeat our 
.amendments, when submitted, than colored men, and unti l women are recognized and permitted to vote, I am 
opposed to introducing into our women 
suffrage convention a resolution i n behalf of men who, if our resolution were 
carried, would go straight to the polls 
and defeat us every time. " 
We have already shown that the statement that colored men oppose woman 
suffrage is false, and we have only to 
add that every effort was made to keep 
this resolution from being presented; 
and when it finally appeared it was 
incontinently sidetracked i n committee. 
W e are not surprised that under the circumstances the information of the corresponding secretary is "somewhat 
indefinite.' ' 
DECENCY. 
Y a vote of 203 against 
133, the German Reichstag has declared that 
marriages between Germans and native women 
i n the colonies are legal. 
This is a triumph of sheer decency. 
It does not compel any German to marr y 
a black or a brown woman. If Germans 
do not want a mixed mulatto progeny 
they may let the native woman alone. 
The law simply says that a marriage i n 
fact is a marriage i n law; that the virtue 
of a colored woman i n the German 
colonies is to receive legal protection. 
The simplest and barest demand of 
even half-civilized justice was not 
easily carried. It took the strength of 
Socialists and Catholics, fighting against 
the strongholds of German culture—the 
liberals and the aristocracy. Here were 
found the upholders of the dirtiest blot 
of modern white contact with backward 
races—the blot which makes the white 
Christian Churc h of the South to-day 
the strongest upholder of the system 
which denies all protection i n law and 
custom to the helpless black girl before 
the lust of the white man. MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
President of the Association 
JAN E ADDAM S 
Honorar y Chairma n of Chicago Committee 
of Arrangements 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Chairma n of Boar d of Director s 
Photo by Peter P. Jones, Chicago 
TH E FOURT H ANNUA L CONFERENC E O F TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIA 
A Group of Delegate s on the Terrac e of Hul l House . I n the group are Miss Jane Addams, Judg 
P
 Miss Mar y W . Ovington , Mr. Alli O N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E A T CHICAG O 
rown, Bisho p Lee , Mrs. Julius Rosenwald , Dr. Bentley, Dr. I. M . Rubinow, Miss Ann a Jones 
, Mr . S. Lain g William s and others. "The FOURT H ANNUA L CONFERENC E 
OF 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
THE Fourt h Annua l Conference of the 
Nationa l Association fo r the Advance ­
ment of Colored People at Chicago, Apri l 
28-30, was one of the most significant meetings ever held i n defense of the rights of 
colored Americans, and the greatest of our 
annual conferences. 
I n point of numbers, previous meetings 
were fa r outdone. A thousand persons came 
to the opening meeting at Sina i Temple 
through a wil d storm which the presiding 
officer, Jane Addams, rightly described as a 
"deluge." A t every other meeting, except 
the executive mornin g session, the seven 
hundred seats i n Hande l Hal l were filled 
and the doors had to be closed to keep 
others out. 
The speeches reached a high level o f 
earnestness and not a false note was struck. 
There was a spirit of broad kindliness with 
no touch of personal rancor, and- yet we 
were not given a lukewarm mess of flat 
platitudes. Mr . Villar d set the pace wit h a 
straightforward unswerving statement of 
the aims of this association, and the fundamental points on which it differed from the 
party of silence and compromise. The 
note thus struck was courageously echoed 
and distinctly stated by Judge Brow n on the 
one hand and Charles Edwar d Russell on the 
other i n two of the strongest speeches ever 
delivered at our conferences. 
Two other speeches, those of Mr . Rubinow 
and Mr . D u Bois, gave the conference an 
unusual grasp of facts wit h pictures of 
the actual color line and a parallelism 
between the Russian peasant and Jew on the 
one hand and the colored America n on the 
other. 
There were scattered throughout the session speeches of widely different character 
from those mentioned: The amusing and 
keenly epigrammatic oratory of Pickens, the 
calm sweet universalism o f Abdu l Bah a and 
the interesting statement of Dr . Kealing . 
The 'last night presented a scene which 
one would travel fa r to see. A Jewish rabbi 
presided; on the platform were Mrs. 
Emmon s Blain e and Mrs. Cyru s McCormick , 
her mother; among the speakers were three 
strikin g personalities: the president of the 
Illinois Miners' Labo r Union ; a Southern 
white man ; the head of a colored settlement; 
and a cultivated colored woman who i n 
quiet tones told of the dynamitin g o f her 
own home. A s opening and climax to this 
remarkable gathering came a speech of 
Abdu l Bah a and a farewell from Juliu s 
Rosenwald. Small wonder that a thousand 
disappointed people were unable to get even 
standing room i n the hall. 
Man y strikin g personalities were seen and 
felt i n the gatherings; first of all Jane 
Addams— calm, sweet and so absolutely 
fearless when she sees the right—and her 
co-worker, Miss Lathrop , who is to head the 
new Nationa l Children's Bureau ; the venerable Bisho p Lee was an interested listener 
and presiding officer, and Miss Nerney, the 
new executive secretary who comes to us 
June 1, had her first experience i n a conference of this sort. Muc h of the social life 
of the conference centered at Hul l House, 
where two luncheons and a large reception 
were given. 
Ever y one who attended the conference 
expressed pleasure and gratitude at the work 
of the local committee and especially at the 
publicity work of Mr . Hallinan , the excellent 
secretarial work of Mr . Allinso n and Dr. 
Bentley's invaluable co-operation. To such 
a meeting the letter of the governor of 
Illinois was a fitting greeting: " I am sure 
that a well-organized association such as 
yours cannot fail to be o f great service, not 
only to the race whose interests it is your 
special concern to promote and protect, but 
to society at large whose aims and purposes 
are essentially the same as their own. " 
W e are able to give some of the admirable 
addresses i n this issue of TH E CRISIS, while 
others which we are obliged to omit now, 
for lack of space, we hope to give our 
readers at a future date. The Objects of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
By OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD . Chairman of the Executive Committee 
H E objects of the Nationa l 
Association fo r the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People may be put into a 
single sentence: This society exists i n order to 
combat the spirit of persecution and prejudice which confronts the 
colored people of this land, and to assure to 
them every right, privilege and opportunity 
to which every citizen of the Unite d States 
is entitled. That it exists at all is i n itself 
an indictment of our America n democracy. 
Fo r it asks no favors, no privileges, no 
special advantages or benefits for those disadvantaged ones, whose fathers and mothers 
but fifty years ago to-day were still being 
sold upon the auction block as so much live 
stock. It does not, o f course, ask that financia l reparation be made to them for what 
their race suffered under the monstrous aggregation of wrongdoing which went by the 
name of slavery; the colored people themselves never demanded any such damages i n 
the courts of law, or of publi c opinion. It 
does not even ask special indulgence for 
any of their shortcomings or beg fo r them 
unusual economic and educational opportunities because of their disadvantages and 
the frightful inheritance of vice and ignorance which was the chief bequest of slavery. 
It merely asks equality of opportunity, 
equality at the ballot box, equality i n the 
courts of the land. 
Surely this is a simple enough platform— 
a reasonable enough demand. Theoretically, 
all but those most imbued with race prejudice grant the justness of our contentions. 
Theoretically, everybody i n this country 
throws his cap i n the air each day and 
asserts that all men are born free and equal 
and fit to govern themselves. An d yet there 
are many persons interested i n the welfare 
of the Negro who look with suspicion upon 
our simple platform and hold aloof from 
our work, for there are two schools of 
thought even among those who feel that the 
Negro is at all times grievously wronged and 
at times shockingly maltreated. The difference between the two schools is chiefly 
one of method. There are, for instance, 
those prominent i n the educational work 
among the Negroes of the South, both white 
and black, who feel that it is a mistake to 
dwell upon injuries and wrongs, outrages 
and persecution, because, i n their belief, the 
SOM E O F TH E DELEGATE S 82 TH E CRISIS 
cure can only come through the slow education of all the people, and wit h the lapse 
of an indefinite amount of time. It does 
not worr y them that durin g the past decades 
no effective protest was made against disfranchisement ; one State after another has 
deprived the black man o f his vote and discriminated against him i n a hundred different ways. They believed, at the time, like 
many an honest Southerner, that the disfranchisement laws were blessings i n disguise because, first, they would incite the 
Negro to educate himself and his children 
that he might qualify as a voter, so fa r as 
the educational test is concerned; and, secondly, that wit h the removal of the Negro 
from politics he would find himself free to 
develop materially and socially; i n fact, 
along every other line save the politica l one. 
They are not daunted to-day by the fact 
that their forecasts have proved incorrect, 
that the Negro is still i n politics i n the 
South, that his way upwar d from slavery 
is barred by many a barrier, and hindered 
by many a needless obstacle—by prejudice, 
by the caste feeling, by the malicious spirit 
of persecution, which, i n some instances of 
late, finds its satiation only i n burnin g 
women alive. Stil l the cry wit h them is 
"Time and patience." This association they 
deem too radical. Lik e the old abolition 
societies, this is believed to be a mischief 
maker, because it is willin g i n season and 
out of season to lay unpleasant facts before 
the public. Its organ of opinion, TH E 
CRISIS, is not always optimistic, but usually 
pessimistic, i f that adjective covers properl y 
its monthly chronicle of crimes against the 
race and against the law, the mocking of the 
courts, the passing of segregation ordinances 
that would make ghettos in each one of our 
Southern cities, and other reactionary happenings of the same kind . Wit h these reformers the cry is, to paraphrase the Frenc h 
philosopher: "Patience, patience—it is the 
most beautiful thing i n the world. " They 
are silent i n the face of all this wrongdoing 
unless at times and places where it is safe 
to speak out against the growin g lynchin g 
habit. They look wit h ill-concealed uneasiness upon those who would make each single wrongdoing as a fire bell i n the night to 
alarm the conscience of the people. Their 
duty as they see it is to serve, but not to 
protect; to sit silent i f need be i n the presence of sin, with their eyes fixed only upon 
the numerous and encouraging signs that 
this republi c wil l i n the long ru n not tolerate injustice against a class or race among 
its citizens. 
Fo r this opinion, honestly held, particularl y when advocated by those i n the educational field, one can have the fullest respect i f it is consistently adhered to, but 
that is not the policy of this association. 
It is not content to sit idl y by and see 
wron g done, even though certain at heart 
that i n the lon g ru n righteousness wil l prevail, that the mills of the gods grin d exceedingly fine, however slowly. Whil e seein g nothing i n the history of the last one 
hundred years, but a steady progress toward 
true democracy; reading this i n the story of 
all Europe , of England , of France , Germany and Italy, and latterly even i n Turke y 
and Persia, Japa n and China , as well as i n 
the development of the woman suffrage 
movement i n this country and abroad and 
i n the rise o f the progressive movement i n 
the Unite d States and its purpose to strike 
at special privilege, the members of the association still feel as much entitled to point 
out our national wrongdoing and to strike 
at intrenched privilege as the Abolitionists 
felt at liberty to assail every citadel garrisoned by slaveholders or their sympathizers. Ours, too, is a battle for democracy, pure and undefiled. It is not for 
us to compromise, however much others 
may feel the necessity of doing so. It is 
not for us to withhold our scorn and in ­
dignation when we see colored men and 
women outraged, robbed, maimed or burned 
i n Pennsylvani a or i n Illinois, i n Mississipp i 
or in Georgia. On the contrary, it is our 
duty to speak out that everyone may know 
and hear. 
Observing the situation carefully, what do 
the members of this association behold i n 
the country at large? Tha t abstract justice appeals to us all is plain . The nation 
boasts of this as it does of that alleged 
equality of opportunity by whic h the humblest rai l splitter of them all may rise to 
the Whit e House . Then it makes a prompt 
exception to the rule and says that the 
colored man may rise, not according to his 
industry, or his merit, or his talents, but 
only so fa r as his white fellows wil l let him. 
H e may not live in the Whit e House ; he 
may not even take a meal there. Thus 
abstract justice loses considerable of its 
abstractness, and those of the white skin 
who sit in judgment upo n the Negro are as ADDRES S O F MR. O. G. VILLAR D 83 
much outraged by the idea that he may 
know a little bit better what he needs and 
what is good for him than anybody else, 
-as were the lords of Englan d i n 1775 upset 
by the theory that the Colonists of Americ a 
were the best judges of what made for their 
happiness and welfare. W e hear on all sides 
i n this year of our lor d 1912 much to the 
effect that the people shall rule ; that direct 
government is what we need to cure all our 
politica l ills; that the people may be trusted 
with complete control of legislation and of 
the executive offices of city and State as 
well as of the judiciary—bu t not the colored man. Fo r his benefit the country 
waves aside every one of these doctrines 
so warml y espoused and connives at the 
Negro's disfranchisement by the hundred 
thousand on the ground that it is for his 
own good. The violation of the Constitution which this procedure involves affects 
them not at all. The magic powers with 
which the initiative, referendum and recall 
have been endowed are, it appears, potent 
only when these devices of government are 
availed of by white men ; they cease to 
operate fo r the communal advantage i f 
colored men vote and desire to evoke their 
aid. 
Agai n we learn that the affectionate term 
"God's Country, " applied by so many to our 
land, is interchangeable wit h "Whit e Man's 
Country, " and that this term is again synonymous wit h trickery and wrongdoing; yes, 
even wholesale murder and a denial of the 
courts of justice, i f necessary, to black men 
—o n all which proceeding the God , who 
owns this country, looks down, it is confidently asserted, with complete satisfaction. 
Thus, the color line does more than to set 
apart the sheep and the goals among us; 
more even than to throw out of gear this 
new politica l machinery upon which so 
many of our fellow citizens base their hope 
of a future democracy. Fundamenta l politica l actions and principles go by the 
board when it is asserted that they appl y 
only i n a community i n which the whites 
are i n a comfortable majority. The law of 
gravitation remains unchanged under all circumstances, so does the multiplication table 
when those who con it are black; but when 
a community largely Negroid begins to 
chant the sacred fundamental truths that 
government rests only on the consent of 
the governed; that, as Lincol n put it—"N o 
man is good enough to govern another without that other's consent"—then we learn that 
these truisms upon which our whole structure of government rests are truisms only 
when they appl y to men of white blood. 
It is just as i f we declared that the teachings of Christianity itself appl y only to the 
white man, and cease to be effective or 
binding or to provide a sound chart of life 
for those inhabitants of this universe who 
have a drop of Negro blood i n their veins. 
That is what the slogan of "Whit e Man's 
Country " means, the givin g the lie to every 
political principle , to every democratic belief, to every article of America n faith, to 
every tenet of religion. Should we not be 
A SOCIA L GATHERIN G O F TH E DELEGATE S 84 TH E CRISIS 
wickedly recreant to those principle s and 
doctrines i f there were not some Americans 
ready to band together to declare wit h all 
the strength that comes wit h union i n an 
unselfish cause, that our treatment of the 
colored people of to-day tarnishes the country's good name, mocks and flouts our republican institutions and makes a hypocrite 
of the nation for which we are ready to 
give our lives? 
It was three years ago that the need became so clear as to brin g this organization 
into being. Three years ago marked the 
centennial of the birth of Abraham Lincoln , 
surely the most fitting time of all to found 
such an undertaking. Fro m small beginnings it has grown rapidly . Its organ of 
public opinion, TH E CRISIS, reaches more 
than 22,000 readers. Branches have been 
organized i n Boston, Chicago, Baltimore , 
Washingto n and Ne w York , an d there is a 
host of applications fo r branches elsewhere 
on file i n our main office. Meetings have 
been held i n great numbers. The association's centenary celebrations of Sumner, 
Phillip s and Harrie t Beecher Stowe have 
done not a little to keep alive the spirit of 
the abolition times. The wor k of legal 
redress is going on apace; there is being 
undertaken at the present time a careful in ­
vestigation of one of the most terrible of 
lynchings, one of more than one hundred 
which took place durin g the year 1911. I n 
every direction the effort is being made to 
obtain the truth about the progress of the 
colored people, and to put the facts i n their 
case before the public . 
TH E NATION S DUT Y 
A n address delivered at the conference in Chicago by the Honorable EDWAR D O. BROWN . 
Justice of the Appellate Court. First District of the State of Illinois 
A M glad to express my 
hearty and enthusiastic 
sympathy wit h the purposes of this association, 
of which, from its organization, I have been proud 
to be a member. 
It is not with any benevolent, charitable or 
condescending spirit that we of the white 
race are or should be i n this movement. The 
Negro citizens of the Unite d States are not 
asking charitable assistance from us. They 
are asking our aid as a matter of right, of 
our own self-respect—the aid which every 
high-minded man, who is unwarped i n his 
thought by some conventional prejudice, of 
whatever race or creed or complexion he may 
be, instinctively wishes to give to anyone 
whom he sees hurt or oppressed by a 
stronger force unjustly used. It is a duty 
every America n of the white race owes to 
himself and to his white fellow citizens quite 
as much as he does to the Negro to see to 
it, so far as he is able, that the color of a 
man's ski n shall not subject him to insult, 
oppression and injustice i n a country boastin g of its democracy, its liberty and the 
politica l equality of its citizens. The people 
of the Unite d States, more than any other 
people of the earth, should recognize the 
obligation to prevent racia l partisanship and 
prejudice from controlling or influencing 
our conduct toward the Negro. Ye t • a 
dominant portion of our fellow citizens 
to-day go beyond the people of any other 
country i n the worl d i n unjust discrimination against him, not only i n politica l matters, but also i n business, i n education and 
i n all the activities of civic, community and 
social life . 
I say that we of the Unite d States are 
most clearly bound to avoid and. when it ADDRES S O F JUDG E E . O. BROW N 85 
shows itself, to repress the manifestations of 
this spirit of injustice and oppression, because our fathers at least, i f not we ourselves, were participants i n the national 
crime which gave it birth. N o one to-day, 
unless it be some dreaming reactionary, 
whose thoughts and lif e are altogether with 
the past, and who is without influence on a 
society wit h which he is out of touch, ventures to defend chattel slavery; but it is 
because our fathers and grandfathers were 
obliged i n deference to their own conscience 
to attempt to justif y the chattel slavery of 
Negroes by holding and teaching themselves 
and others to believe that Negroes were in ­
ferior beings, unfit to be trusted to govern 
or even to care fo r themselves, that we, 
their descendants o f the present day, to such 
a great extent persist, now that chattel slavery is dead and its justification abandoned, 
i n treating them still as such inferior beings, 
i n defiance of the evident fact that the 
Negro, i n each class of his own society, can 
and does govern and care for himself equally 
as well as the white man of the correspondin g class. 
Whe n the impressions of the Civi l Wa r 
were fresh upon us, at the time I became a 
citizen and a voter, a great majority of the 
people of the Nort h at least felt the responsibilit y which had been imposed upon them. 
W e had fought a great wa r to preserve the 
Federa l Union . Althoug h this wa r was not 
begun wit h the purpose nor even the hope 
o f abolishing slavery, it became evident long 
before the end that it was the antipathy to 
slavery on the part of the masses of the 
Norther n people that supplied that moral 
motive and enthusiasm which supported the 
Federa l Government to its final victory. This 
is questioned, I know. It is merely my own 
belief that I am stating, and it is not necessary to the main thought that I would put 
before you ; namely, the mora l obligation we 
of the Norther n part of our common country 
are under now, as much as we were immediately after the Civi l War , to stand fo r justice to the Negro. For, whether necessarily 
or not, the Federa l Government and we of 
the Nort h di d tur n that war, long before its 
close, into a wa r having for its inevitable end 
the abolition o f slavery. Then we accepted 
everywhere we could get it the assistance 
of the Negroes, to whom we professed we 
were bringin g liberty and advancement. W e 
used their free men of the Nort h fo r soldiers; 
their freedmen of the South fo r scouts, for 
fort builders, fo r foragers and commissaries. 
The Negroes of the South were largely the 
eyes and ears of our armies i n the field. 
W e were successful. W e took no end of 
glory to ourselves for the redemption and 
emancipation of a race. W e were full of 
mora l fervor for the education, the elevation 
and the advancement of the Negro. 
Whe n the Southern planters, stripped of 
position and fortune and, as they thought, 
of most that had made life worth the livin g 
to them, were not unnaturally found entirely unable to understand the new relations 
into which they had been thrown with their 
former slaves, and began, by legal codes 
framed for that purpose, to reinstitute a 
peonage or serfdom for the blacks which 
should keep them i n the tutelage and guardianship under which their former owners 
said they could alone live and prosper, we 
of the Nort h were at a white heat of indignation. Neve r was there more politica l rage 
than i n the so-called reconstruction times, 
and the great majority of the citizens of the 
Nort h declared i n effect by their votes, not 
once but many times durin g those days, that 
the nation was under a mora l duress to protect its wards from injustice, from oppression, and from the deadly injur y of social 
and politica l ostracism. Civil-rights bills, 
national and State, were passed. Militar y 
force i n times of peace was unsparingly 
used. Constitutional precedents and constitutional arguments were swept away because 
the people rightl y and justly held that nations, like men, were bound by fundamental 
principles of honor, and that we could not 
take the responsibility of setting men free, 
severing them from the care for their purely 
material and physica l welfare which the selfinterests of their owners had led to, and 
accepting their efficient aid i n carryin g the 
burden of a great national task, and then 
abandon them to the control of men who had 
never entertained an idea that they could 
occupy any position not of inferiority and 
subjection. 
Bu t this view led to further action. W e 
gave to the newly enfranchised the suffrage. 
W e made great efforts to provide for their 
education. W e raised i n the mind of many 
a colored youth thoughts and aspirations to 
which he would have been a stranger had it 
not been fo r the line of action taken by the 
dominant part of the country at that time. 
W e would not tolerate politica l oppression 
nor social oppression of these, our wards, we 86 TH E CRISIS 
said. They had stood by us; we were bound 
to stand by them, to put it on no higher 
plane. Bu t there was a higher plane. W e 
had taken them from the physical, mora l 
and intellectual guardianship of their masters and owners. W e had undertaken to 
make of them free men and citizens of our 
common country, and by all common principles of honorable action, and by the fundamental idea of our politica l system, we were 
bound to see that they were given, so far 
as law and community usage went, equal 
opportunities with every other free man and 
citizen to make of themselves the best that 
Go d had rendered possible. 
Now, when a State or a civic community 
has once undertaken a duty like that, there 
is no way fo r it i n honor to retreat or 
withdraw. 
Ever y step i n education or social advancement we opened to these people made any 
political inequality, any social injustice, any 
ostracism, any oppression or insult, more 
bitter to them than it had ever been before. 
Fo r a Southern State to hold free Negroes 
before the wa r under the restrictions and 
inequalities which there bound them was 
hard and brutal enough. Bu t for Massa ­
chusetts, for example, before the war, to 
have attempted to place upon her respected 
citizens of the Africa n race the same restrictions, after they had been for years 
treated as entitled to equality of opportunity, of education and of politica l rights, 
would have been a much more stupendous 
crime, against which the natural sense of 
justice i n civilized men everywhere would 
have revolted. 
Bu t what has happened? The Negroes 
have certainly come fairl y up i n all the 
things dependent on their own exertions, i n 
all things where they have been allowed to 
control their own actions and have been 
given a chance to avail themselves of equal 
opportunities, to what could i n reason have 
been expected of a race of which the great 
majority had been i n bondage, prohibited 
by law from education and from any of the 
individua l enterprises by which men in a 
competing state of society rise to success 
and distinction. They have become i n one 
generation planters, business men, professional men, teachers, bankers, artists, musicians and authors. They have reared 
theatres and established schools and colleges 
of their own ; they have built churches, hospitals and orphan asylums of their own. 
The Unite d States census returns have shown 
to what a wonderful extent, i n the midst of 
conditions which I am about to mention and 
deplore, the colored people of this country, 
especially i n the South, have made a story 
of upwar d striving, o f progress and of 
advancement. 
Bu t I say again, every advance that the 
Negro has made has rendered the more brutal 
and cruel, the meaner and more dishonorable 
acts of discrimination and insult against him. 
H e feels them all the more ; he resents them 
all the more, and he is justified in doing so. 
An d we see around us a reaction, a mora l 
lowering of the standards of honor i n our 
treatment of the Negro. Fo r the last quarter of the century at least that lowering has 
been going on from bad to worse quite as 
much i n the North , i n our own communities, 
as i n the South. Segregation in schools, 
segregation in churches, segregation i n theatres, segregation i n business and professional 
associations, i n traveling conveyances—a 
segregation which means an utterly unjustifiable and illegal ostracism, bad as it is, is 
but the least of the outrages under which the 
Negro race has been suffering i n this 
country. 
B y what seems to me the most deplorably 
growin g popula r prejudice, and one without 
cause save the inherent vulgarity of those 
who foster it, we are practically attempting 
to shut out the Negroes from all but a few 
occupations, denying them thus even the 
opportunity to show whether or not they are 
our inferiors. 
George Bernar d Shaw, i n one of his in ­
imitable passages of humorous sarcasm, 
speaks of the sweet reasonableness of the 
Yankees who first preventing Negroes from 
followin g any occupation but that of the 
bootblack or the waiter, then proclaim as 
evidence of the intellectual inferiorit y of the 
Negroes, that they are only bootblacks or 
waiters. 
One of our municipa l court judges the 
other day publicl y alluded i n terms of praise 
to the honest lives that the Negroes of 
Chicago lead i n the face of hardships and 
temptations, declaring that in times when 
work was scarce they suffered more than 
any other class, being absolutely barred from 
many kinds of employment open to white 
workers. 
Despite this attempt at restriction, cruel, 
injurious and ineffably mean as it is, the 
native ability and genius of many a colored ADDRES S O F JUDG E E . O. BROW N 87 
man has shown forth conspicuously, as I 
have said, i n every high department of business and intellectual activity. 
Bu t this constant, continuous and studied 
erection of worst and meanest of caste systems, one based on nothing but a man's 
racia l complexion (for there are neither 
religious nor politica l differences of opinion 
to reckon with), keeps even these exceptional 
men i n a lifelong feeling of injur y and 
injustice. 
D o we not owe it to ourselves, as well 
as to them, to agitate, to educate, and, i f 
we must, to legislate, and to enforce the 
legislation, until we shall shake off the benumbing influence of this reaction against 
the ideals of human liberty and human 
brotherhood of fifty years ago"? Fo r one, I 
should feel unworthy of the Massachusetts 
ancestry from which I sprang i f 1 could 
brin g myself to indifference on this subject. 
Bu t what of the darker side of this picture 
—the outrages which go beyond ostracism 
or insult or restriction, to the most fiendish 
of murders? What , as a judge of the third 
commonwealth of the Unite d States, can I 
say to my Englis h friends and relatives who 
ask me i f it is true that i n this State a few 
brief years ago racia l prejudice ran lawless 
riot i n the streets of its capital, near the 
very tomb of the great emancipator, and 
murdered Negroes, and that no one has been 
punished? 
That they may ask it is clear enough. 
Whe n that later crime at Coatesville, i n 
Pennsylvania , which I shudder i n speaking 
of, was detailed i n the public prints, the 
Philadelphi a Record said, with aptness and 
truth (I quote from this month's issue of 
TH E CRISIS, which yo u doubtless all have 
seen): 
"I n the Londo n clubs and publi c houses 
men are talkin g this week about America n 
savagery. Wonderin g Chinese in Shanghai 
and Pekin g are asking i f this is the Americ a 
which they have accepted as their special 
mentor. India , quick to draw historic parallels, is pointin g out that i n the days of the 
Moguls there was never a brutality like this 
one from the part of Americ a called Coatesville. Turke y lifts her bloody hands i n selfexculpation—there was never anything i n an 
Armenia n massacre to equal this. Fiv e continents and the islands of the sea are pointin g fingers of scorn at this country because 
of the black deed of one wil d night in a 
Pennsylvani a borough." 
W e have been told that i n the last twentyfive years 2,500 Negroes have been lynched 
i n this country, and i n only a minority of 
the cases has there been even an allegation 
of the crime that is put forward as offering 
the only excuse for this monstrous lawlessness. 
Bu t as the murders have increased i n 
number and i n barbarity, so they have 
created less and less comment and indignant 
protest; and senators of the United States 
and governors of States defend them! 
This at least I can say to my foreign 
friends—this at least I shall say—that personally I have never refused and never wil l 
refuse, as a minister of the law, as a citizen, 
as a man, to do or say the little that I can 
in aid of any movement and i n the expression of any protest which is made against 
those cryin g meannesses, wrongs and crimes. 
No r am I hopeless. The pendulum must 
swing back. A s Governor Altgel d once 
finely expressed it : "Things wil l right themselves! The pendulum swings one way and 
then another, but the steady pull of gravitation is toward the center of the earth. 
Wron g may seem to triumph. Righ t may 
seem to be defeated. Bu t the gravitation 
of eternal justice is toward the throne of 
God! " 
But the duty of us all is plain—as plain 
now as it was to the abolitionists of the 
anti-war time. It is to speak out, freely and 
boldly. W e need to remember the words 
of Joh n Stuart Mill : 
"It appears to me that when prejudices 
persist obstinately it is the fault of nobody 
so much as of those who make a point of 
proclaiming them insuperable as an excuse 
for never joinin g i n an attempt to remove 
them. 
"An y prejudice whatever wil l be insurmountable i f those who do not share it themselves truckle to it and flatter it and accept it 
as a law of nature." The BROTHERHOO D O F MA N 
A n address delivered at the Chicago Conference by ABDU L BAH A of Persia 
O D has stated i n the Bible , 
the Ol d Testament: "W e 
have created man i n our 
own image and likeness." 
This statement indicates 
the fact that man i n 
some particula r is of the 
image and likeness of God. This man who 
has been called the image and likeness of 
God : Le t us find out just where and how 
he is the image and likeness of the Lord , 
and what is the standard or criterion 
whereby he can be measured. 
I f a man should possess wealth, can we 
call him an image and likeness of God ? 
O r is human honor the criterion whereby 
he can be called the image of God ? O r can 
we appl y a color test as a criterion, and 
say such and such a one is colored wit h a 
certain hue and he therefore is the image 
of God ? Ca n we say, for example, a man 
who is green i n hue is an image of God ? 
Or can we make another distinction, saying 
that one who is white is any more an image 
of God ? Is simpl y the white color a 
criterion whereby man is to be judged? 
An d shall we make a sweeping statement 
like that? O r is it reasonable for us to 
choose the dark color ? Supposin g we say a 
colored man is after all the image and like ­
ness, just because of his color, or the redskinned man, shall he be the image and 
likeness of God ? O r shall we declare the 
yellow race to be a creation and therefore 
an image and likeness of God ? Henc e we 
come to the conclusion that colors are of 
no importance. 
Colors are accidental i n nature. That 
which is essential is the humanitarian aspect. An d that is the manifestation of 
Divin e Virtue s and that is the Mercifu l Be ­
stowals. That is the Eterna l Life . That is 
the Baptism through the Hol y Spirit. 
Therefore let it be known that color is of 
no importance'. Man , who is the image and 
likeness of God , who is the Manifestation 
of the Bestowals o f God , he is acceptable 
at the threshold o f Go d whatever be his 
color. Le t him be blue i n color, or white, 
or green, or brown, that matters not! Ma n 
is not to be pronounced man simpl y because of bodily attributes. Ma n is to be 
judged according to his intelligence and to 
his spirit. Because he is to be judged according to spirit and intelligence, therefore, 
let that be the only criterion. Tha t is the 
image of God . 
A s regards yo u here i n this country, there 
is a point of importance, namely, patriotism. 
That is common to both. An d from the 
standpoint of language, yo u share that, both 
of yo u speak one tongue. An d yo u have 
i n common the same civilization. An d now, 
wit h these numerous points of partnership 
or contact and the one point of difference, 
which is of the least importance, that of 
color, are yo u going to allow this least of 
differences, namely, that of color, to separate you ? 
Fro m the standpoint of the body, you 
have that i n common. Al l the five senses 
and tangible properties of man yo u share. 
A s regards intelligence, yo u are both endowed therewith. Patriotism is common to 
both. Fro m the standpoint of language 
there is a point of contact. You r civiliza ­
tion is one and the same. Fro m the standpoint of religion yo u are one and the same. 
One point of distinction, and that is color. 
Is it meet, is it becoming, wit h all the points 
of contact, fo r this least point of distinction 
or difference should there be any separation 
or difference? Indeed, not! Go d is not 
pleased, nor is any intelligent man pleased, 
nor is any reasonable man willin g to have 
any difference because of that. 
His Holiness, Baha'o'llah, has proclaimed 
to the worl d the Oneness of the worl d of 
humanity. H e has caused the various nations and divergent sects an d creeds to unite, 
and he has declared that the difference in 
color i n the human kingdom is simila r to 
the differences of the flowers, the variegated 
flowers i n a garden. I f yo u enter a garden 
yo u wil l see yellow flowers, white flowers, 
dark, variegated flowers, the red flower, for 
example, i n the utmost o f delicacy and 
beauty, radiant, and each one through difference lends a charm to the other. This 
difference i n the human kingdom is similar 
to that. An d now were yo u to be ushered 
into a garden where all the flowers were 
to be o f the same hue or color, how 
monotonous! A WOR D FRO M MR . JULIU S ROSENWAL D 89 
Therefore, he has said that the various 
colors o f human kind , one is white, one is 
black, one is yellow, one is red—this sort 
o f difference lends a harmony of color and 
beauty to the whole. Therefore, all must 
associate wit h one another, even as flowers 
consort harmoniously together i n a given 
garden. 
m 
A WORD FRO M MR. JULIUS ROSENWALD. 
MR. CHAIRMAN , ladies and gentlemen: 
Muc h against my wil l I allowed myself to be introduced, but I am going to 
say just one word : W e have heard a good 
deal to-night about the struggles and the 
hardships and the abuses that the colored 
people of the Nort h and the South have to 
suffer, but there is one thing that has im ­
pressed itself upon me since this organization or this conference has started i n 
Chicago, and a few days before, and 
that is the fact that the newspapers o f this 
city have been most outspoken i n their 
liberality and demand that the colored 
people have their rights and be given better 
treatment. I f anythin g can be more promisin g than the editorials that have appeared i n 
the leading Chicago papers I wouldn't know 
what it could be. The Tribune, the 
Record-Herald and the other papers have 
simpl y outdone themselves i n their liberality 
and demand for the rights of the colored 
man, and to my notion there oughtn't to be 
anything but optimism. That is the only 
word 1 want to speak, and I believe it : 
while there is a great struggle, and the 
courts, as has been said here to-night, do 
not give the colored man an equal show and 
do discriminate against him, I want to 
say to you that lots and lots of us people 
suffer from the same cause. An y number 
of immigrants i n this country are discriminated against i n the courts, and while 
you are interested i n you r phase of the 
discrimination, yet i n the work that I am 
engaged i n among others it is simpl y shamefu l the treatment that the immigrant receives at the hands of our courts, and I only 
mention this so that you do not feel that 
the discrimination is entirely against the 
colored man ; it is also against others, and 
I am tremendously pleased that there is so 
much occasion for optimism. Good-night. 
TH E CR Y OF TH E MA N THAT' S DOW N 
OH! Whit e Man ! Now the world is thine, alone; 
W e til l you r land, and care for what has grown ; 
W e raise you r children, and neglect our own ; 
W e work, and thou dost reap what we have sown. 
Oh ! Whit e Man ! Think'st our time is but delayed, 
An d centuries of servitude's not made 
Al l cowards of us, suffering, afraid? 
Thou'rt right! Thou has a debt which must be paid . 
Oh ! Whit e Man ! I n the land from which we came, 
W e braved the storm, and sought the fiercest game; 
Then were we men, and worthy of the name, 
And , underneath, our race is still the same. 
Oh ! Whit e Man ! Thou hast, daily, greater need 
O f all we do, which thee and us does feed; 
Eas y the task, i f thou wilt let us read ; 
Give us but knowledge, and ask greater deed. 
Oh ! Whit e Man ! Give us not unheeding ears; 
Ou r cries unheard, 'til l after many years; 
'Twil l be a time o f shattered hopes and fears; 
A sombre cycle, filled with blood and tears. 
NORMA N D . LIPPINCOTT. 
( A white man of Asheville , N . C.) THE BURDE N 
DAISY BELL' S STORY. 
THE Montgomery (Ala.) Times one 
day in Februar y contained the followin g item: "Dais y Bell, a Negress, was arraigned i n the recorder's court Tuesday 
afternoon on a charge of assault and battery 
upon the person of Bertha Graham, also a 
Negress. A fine of $100 and costs and an 
additional sentence of six months on the 
street gang was assessed against the 
woman. " 
A common enough item and uninteresting 
enough at the first glance. However, when 
James Edwar d McCal l writes in Sparks, a 
colored magazine published in Birmingham, 
the plain story of Dais y Bel l and her chance 
in the world, the dull police court item expands to a far-reaching and only too typica l 
tragedy. 
Dais y Bell is not yet quite 18. He r 
mother is an honest woman who has worked 
as a cook almost all her life . A s a child 
Daisy ran the streets and tumbled up as 
best she could, for her mother hardly ever 
had time to care for her. She has had four 
years' intermittent schooling in all. 
She has a naturally violent temper, which 
she has never been taught to control either 
WHIT E HIG H SCHOOL , BIRMINGHAM , ALA . 
Value of building, grounds and equipment $200,168.64. Whit e school population, 1910, 19,810. TH E BURDE N 91 
at home or i n school—both places being i n 
the nature of legends to her—and she used 
sometimes to fight in the streets. A t 16 she 
was arrested and sent to the chain gang for 
this. She served a year and six months. 
Afte r she came home a child was born, the 
father being one of the white convict guards. 
Mr . McCal l says great care is taken to keep 
colored women and colored men convicts 
apart, but the colored women have no protection from the guards. Whil e Daisy Bel l 
is serving her second sentence her sickly 
baby is wailin g i n the shanty of a poor 
woman who is so busy tryin g to earn food 
that she can no more care for it than 
Daisy's mother could care for her, and the 
famil y history seems likely to proceed in 
the same vicious circle. 
Ye t Dais y Bell , aged 18, untaught, 
neglected, outraged, has had no worse fate 
than befalls thousands of unhappy colored 
girls under the ''protection" of the white 
man's laws and "superior civilization. " 
REFORM IN BIRMINGHAM. 
WE have received an interesting pamphlet on the work that is being done 
in Birmingham, Ala. , to protect children 
brought before the courts either for some 
offense or because of imprope r guardianship. 
There is an excellent boys' club, a camp 
where sports are encouraged and the boys 
are surrounded by healthy influences. Evi ­
dently, earnest and successful work is being' 
done—for white children. It would seem 
from the report that the number of colored 
children brought before the court is rather 
larger than the number of white, but apparently they are left to reform themselves as 
best they may, with the exception of the 
few who can be sent to Moun t Meigs, the 
reformatory started by the colored women's 
clubs of Alabama . 
Wh y do the colored children of Birming ­
ham throng the courts and jails? ' Because 
only 5,240 seats are provided i n the Negro 
schools for 19,726 colored children, and 
because of school accommodations like this: 
COLORE D HIG H SCHOOL , BIRMINGHAM , ALA . 
Value of building, grounds and equipment $1,050. Colored school population, 1910, 19,726. Conducted by JESSIE FAUSE T 
A Negro Explorer at the North Pole. B y 
Matthew Henson. Frederick A . Stokes Co., 
New York. 
This book has a simplicit y and directness that makes it very appealing. The 
author knows his facts so well and states 
them so succinctly that it is hard to lay the 
story down until it is finished. An d when 
the end is reached one experiences a rare 
satisfaction; for not many true stories of 
adventure end so triumphantly. To start 
for the Nort h Pol e and to reach it—that 
is an achievement worthy of consideration! 
But a very great deal of hardship and sufferin g had to be overcome before the grand 
consummation could be obtained. Al l this 
Mr . Henson tells without effort and without 
the use of flowery language. An d yet he has 
a noticeably correct feeling for the prope r 
word and phrase. The book has some 
pathos, too—not overdone—and a certain 
dramatic quality, as seen i n the chapter 
entitled "The Pole. " 
The photographs, seven i n number, are 
very interesting and are, some of them, 
reproductions of Mr . Henson's own work. 
It is a book well worth reading. 
m 
Biography of George Thomas Downing. . B y 
S. A . M . Washington. 
Althoug h Mr . Downin g lived fo r the 
better part of a century, from 1819 to 
1903, one cannot help wondering how, with 
even all those years, he found time to engage 
i n so many activities. H e showed early i n 
life the stuff of which he was made. 
Whe n a mere la d of 14 he contrived to 
induce some other boys to refrain from 
celebrating the Fourt h of July , because the 
Declaration o f Independence was to the 
America n Negro " a perfect mockery. " Fro m 
this time on he became active i n the antislavery cause. H e was an agent of the 
Underground Railroad , an active member 
of the Anti-Slaver y Society and one of the 
committee of thirteen organized at the time 
Yor k and took a conspicuous part i n the 
of the Fugitiv e Slave Law . H e took steps 
to abolish the property qualification placed 
upon colored people by the State of New 
first anniversary meeting of Joh n Brown's 
death, i n Tremont Temple. When , later 
on, he took charge of the Hous e Refectory, 
i n Washington, he became the intimate, and 
i n some cases the confidant of the leading 
statesmen of both parties, and he was consulted almost dail y on matters o f legislation. The place of such a character is one 
not easily filled. One thinks "he was a man, 
take him fo r all i n all. Whe n comes there 
such another?" 
• m 
The Terrible Meek, a Play. B y Charles Rann 
Kennedy. Harper & Bros., New York . 
The wor d "awful " i n its true sense seems 
the most fitting adjective for describing this 
drama. It is a little one-act pla y for three 
voices, to be played i n darkness. That is 
what enthralls one so—the darkness, the 
strange unaccountable sounds and noises, the 
frightful mysteriousness of everything. An d 
the disembodied voices—the peasant 
woman's, the soldier's wit h its cockney 
accent, the captain's, decisive as an army 
man's should be, but stressed with emotion. 
The three voices talk, and the horror 
grows as the listener catches the story's 
dim outline. The peasant woman's son 
has been done to death, it would seem, 
hastened out of lif e by the law for 
some indefinable fault. The captain 
has received orders from some one 
higher up, and the soldier has taken an 
active part i n bringin g about the poor 
unfortunate's end. No w that it is all over, 
the soldier and his captain are discussing 
the painfu l affair. They speak more like 
equals than as officer and man. The soldier 
WHA T T O REA D WHA T T O REA D 93 
tells with sudden, horrid pathos how the 
doomed man's clothes were divided up, and 
how he (the soldier) got his boots: "Yes, 
'e don't want them no more ; not quite my 
fit, but they'll do to tek home for a keepsake—that is, i f we ever do get 'ome aht 
of this 'ere stinkin ' 'ole. M y little 
missis'll think a lot o f them boots." 
One shudders at the gross commonplaceness, and wonders what is so vaguely 
familiar. It is as though some far-off, diml y 
visualized conjecture had suddenly stalked, 
alive and actual, into our midst. Presently 
an unearthly splendor fills the place. It is 
seen to be the top of a bleak, stony hill 
with little grass on it. One stares bewildered. Suddenly one knows. Fo r the 
woman is garbed i n Eastern robes, the captain is a Roman centurion and the soldier 
is a Roma n legionary. An d above them 
tower three gaunt crosses, whereon hang 
three men, dead, and gibbeted like thieves! 
HISTORIC DAYS IN JUNE 
1. President Tyle r sent a message to 
Congress dealing with the suppression of 
the slave trade, 1841. 
2. Geo. W . Smalley, anti-slavery journalist, born, 1833. 
3. Unite d States recognized Hayt i and 
Liberi a as members of the family of nations, 1862. 
5. First chapter of "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " 
published, 1854. 
7. Pennsylvani a passed first act to prevent importation of slaves, 1712. 
8. The Florid a Conference of the A . M . 
E . Churc h organized, 1867. 
9. Bisho p James Varick , first bishop of 
the A . M . E . Zio n Church, died, 1827. 
10. Richar d Allen , who with others had 
been treated with indignities i n a Methodist 
Church , while listening to prayers, issued 
his "Declaration of Independence," 1794. 
H e became later the first bishop of the 
Africa n M . E . Church. 
11. Florid a ratified the Fifteenth 
Amendment. 
13. Resolution proposing Fourteenth 
Amendment submitted to the States, 1866. 
14. Harrie t Beecher Stowe born, 1811. 
15. Henr y 0 . Flipper, first Negro cadet 
graduated from the West Poin t Militar y 
Academy, 1877. 
16. Dessalines became emperor of Hayti , 
1804. 
17. Peter Salem killed Majo r Pitcair n 
at the battle of Bunke r Hill , 1775. 
18. Battle of Poison Springs, 1864. 
20. The Colony of Georgi a refused to 
admit slavery, 1739. 
21. James Varic k elected first bishop of 
the A . M . E . Zion Church, 1821. 
22. Lor d Mansfield delivered the opinion 
i n the Somerset case, wherein it was decided that a slave became free by coming 
into England , 1772. 
23. Danie l H . Chamberlain, reconstruction governor of South Carolina , born, 1835. 
24. Henr y War d Beecher, anti-slavery 
preacher, born, 1813. 
26. Virgini a proclaimed revised constitution, 1902. 
27. Pau l Laurence Dunba r born, 1872. 
28. Fugitiv e slave laws repealed, 1864. 
29. Virgini a blamed the Kin g of Eng ­
land fo r the slave trade to the Colonies, 
1776. 
30. San Domingo annexation rejected, 
1870. L . M . HERSHAW . 
LETTE R BO X 
NOW what we are tryin g to get at. W e 
want to know whether there is going 
to be any better times i n the South for we 
poor Negroes or not. Her e i n Texas the 
officers or any other white man can knock 
the Negroes and kic k them about, and kil l a 
few of them i f they want to, and nothing is 
said or done about it, and these officers wil l 
arrest a Negro and put the handcuffs on him 
and take him on to the jail , and, after havin g him under lock and key, they wil l pul l 
out their six-shooters and beat the poor 94 TH E CRISIS 
Negro until he is as bloody as a stabbed 
hog, and they tell every Negro that sees 
them commit these horrible crimes i f we tell 
it on them they wil l mob every Negro and 
burn them together from three days old u p 
to one thousand years old. I n the spring ­
time these officers go all around to every 
Negro's house i n town, as far around as they 
can reach, to see who is workin g and who is 
not, and we have not the power and privilege to protect our wives and daughters and 
sons and ourselves, and we have to be thankfu l to keep from getting arrested for nothing, and yet the half has never been told. 
Wha t we want yo u to please be sure and do 
—we want yo u to copy from this letter and 
send it in to the President at once, and be 
sure to see that he gets it, so he wil l know 
that we are petitioning to him for aid and 
protection. W e have sent i n petitions to the 
governor about these horrible crimes, but 
it has never done any good. 
Dea r Sir : 
Permit me to say a word i n praise of your 
cover design by R . L . Brow n for this month. 
I have been i n the magazine business both 
here and abroad for many years, and I have 
never seen a more attractive cover. It stood 
out conspicuously on all the news stands, 
and seemed to exercise much "drawin g 
power." W . B . NORTHROP. 
Yo u wil l please send my CRISIS i n the 
name of my daughter. She is not quite a 
year old yet, but I want to begin early in 
interesting her i n race pride and race journals. A . L . WEAVER . 
Chicago, Ill. 
m 
The masses of white folk still do not know 
the meaning of Christianity. It is my aim 
to get TH E CRISIS to the attention of as 
many persons as my pocketbook and tact 
wil l allow. I belong to "the pale-faced 
world wit h the stringy heads," and I believe 
that the time wil l come when our children's 
children wil l look wit h profoun d disgust, as 
many of us already do, upon this inhuman 
race prejudice. I f the disgust wil l not be 
caused by shame, pure and simple, it wil l be 
forced upon them because of respect for the 
Negro. Nothin g is more commanding of 
respect than to hear a people, bound by a 
love caused by a common affliction, say each 
of the rest "my people," as I hear them say 
here i n St. Paul . LUC Y L . UHL , 
St. Paul , Minn . 
m 
Thank you, too, for TH E CRISIS; I find it 
most interesting, and inspiring , and sad, 
too, i n its solemn truths. Bu t surely the 
spirit of its work must tell for good, and 
for great good, to the pathetic race it would 
help most, and to that other race which is 
so unjust, and therefore needs help, too. 
BRAN D WHITLOCK , 
Mayor's Office, Toledo, Ohio. 
Mothe r and I deliberately dropped our 
work and sat down and read and read till 
we have exhausted the contents, and applauded i n very many instances, especially 
i n reading "Alon g the Colo r Line, " "Educa ­
tional " and "Art " notes. W e glory i n the 
editorial on the protection of the Negro 
home. ALID A GRAY , 
Brookland , D . C. 
I had hoped to confine the reading of 
TH E CRISIS to our older students—it is 
valuable for them and the teachers—but the 
younger members of the school—sixth and 
seventh grade students—have taken hold of 
it. They do not appreciate it, and are only 
using its sad and tragic side as matters of 
sensational gossip. Fo r that reason I must 
ask to have TH E CRISIS discontinued from 
the Marc h number. 
Ver y trul y yours, 
GRAC E MOSELEY , 
Libraria n St. Augustine's School, 
Raleigh, N . C . 
Th e July CRISI S will be the " Education Number." It will contain special 
news of colored colleges, with pictures, as well as articles of timely interest. 
Th e August CRISI S will be "Vacation Number." W e want fascinating 
fiction about colored folk. W e shall be glad to pay for it. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 95 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES: Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street. New York. Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911 
OFFICER S 
National President—Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R. Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Director of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois, New York . 
Secretary—Miss Mar y W. Ovlngton, Brooklyn, 
N . Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Marth a Gruening, 
New York . 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in 
Class paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 
per year. 
Class 4. Contributing Members, paying 
$10, $5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 
per year. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
Members paying $5 or more will receive TH E CRISIS on signifying their wish 
that $1 of their dues be devoted to that purpose. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 20 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
MEMBERSHIP 
50 O 
565,MAY15,191 2 
JOIN US CLOC K 
100 0 
OUR 
200 0 
1500 96 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The 
National Religious Training 
School and Chautauqua 
extends a cordial greeting to the ministers of all denominations 
to be the guests of the School for one week, beginning July 
6, 1912, for the purpose of discussing the following and 
kindred questions: 
Wha t is the moral condition of the people in your community? 
Is crime on the increase? If not, what was the cause of its 
reduction? 
What is the sanitary condition? Wha t effort, if any, has 
been made to improve the sanitary condition? 
Is the death rate increasing? 
T o what extent do you co-operate with the Civic Improvement 
Leagues? 
Has settlement work been conducted to any extent in your 
community, and with what results? 
What has been the effect of Temperance Organizations, and 
have you co-operated with them? 
T o what extent has the work of the Y . M . C. A . and 
Y . W . C. A . been effective in your community? D o 
you approve them? 
What is the general fitness of the city and country school 
teacher? 
Wha t has been the attitude of the day-school teacher toward 
the Church and Sunday School? 
Wha t is the real religious condition of your people? Revivals, 
how conducted? 
Al l ministers who intend attending this Conference should 
make it known at an early date, addressing the President, so 
that reservation can be made for them. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua of the National 
Religious Training School will open July 3, 1912, and 
continue for six weeks. The most complete and most up-todate Summer School for the Colored Race in the United 
States. For particulars and terms address 
President JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
DURHAM , N . C . 
Mention THE Crisis. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 97 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
HELP WANTE D 
AREN' T YO U TIRE D O F WORKIN G A T "so much 
per '' piling up profits for somebody else ? Would 
you consider a proposition of going in business for 
yourself without any investment but your time and 
talents? If so write and get our proposition. 
Young and old can make money with our proposition. 
TH E NELSO N SUPPL Y CO. , Harrisburg , Pa . 
'Phone : Harlem , 6370 
Middlesex' Employment Agency 
Offers you the benefit of its experience, gained by 
years of actual conduct of business and the prestige 
that comes from a large clientele of satisfied 
patrons. 
Ou r rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standard high. Mai l orders solicited. 
2229 Fift h Avenue, near 136th Street, 
New York . 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated. 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Lenox Avenue New Yor k 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools: secures 
employment for teachers. Blank s and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
PATENTS 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
66 John Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and ' Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technica l Translations. 
Telephone 343 Joh n Room 604 
MUSIC 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowsky 
Teache r of Piano, Theory. Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
INSURANC E 
Telephone 1393 Wort h 
E . O. BUSSIN G 
Fire, Life, Plate Glass and Casualty 
Insurance 
320 BROADWA Y New York City 
•Suite 728 
AGENTS WANTE D 
Folding BATH TUB 
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water. 
• Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. Full length baths, far b
AGENT S WANTE D for the moat rapid-selling Negro 
sheet pictures on earth; every man and woman 
will buy on sight—no talking—the pictures sell 
themselves. Writ e to-day for free sample and 
circulars. 
CRESCEN T NOVELT Y CO. ' 
423 E . KIN G ST. BEDFOR D CITY , VA . 
AGENT S make big money selling our Negro pictures, size 16 x 20. "Jesus Died for Both, " 
"Clingin g to the Cross, " "Protecting Angel, " 
"Booke r T . Washington, " "Heavenward, " " A 
Mother's Joy, " "Inspiration, " "Mama , I Love 
You, " "Jac k Johnson. " Catalog free. Peoples 
Portrait Co., 710 W . Madison St., Dept. C, 
Chicago, Ill. 
B E INDEPENDENT— I f yo u are ambitious and energetic I can help yo u establish 
a profitable business of your own. I am 
a manufacturer of human hair and can supply yo u with high-grade goods. 50 to 100 
per cent profit. Writ e 
C. S. STARK S 
54 Oakwood Avenue Orange, N. J. 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
POST CARD S 
Twelve Beautiful Post Cards for 10 Cents 
Consist of Love , Birthday, Motto , Comi c 
and floral designs. Al l different. Send 10 
cents in silver and receive twelve most 
beautiful Post Cards ever sold. 
CRESCEN T NOVELT Y CO. , 
423 E . King Street Bedford City, Va. 
Mention TH E Crisis. 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. We have 
for sale a number of large farms already i n cultivation, good houses and barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
Cit y property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. Fo r any investment in Texas property, write T . B . Madiso n Real 
Estat e Company, 2415 El m Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
F
O E SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Can sell you a 
house for $50, $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Far m land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. An y of these are in good locations. 
Writ e for further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estat e 
121 8 1/2 Mt. Verno n Ave . Columbus . Ohi o 
MOVING 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
Formerl y Manage r Virgini a Transfe r Company 
459 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V . B . A . 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertaker s and Embalmer s 
Notary Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chapel Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York , N . Y . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
SCHOOLS 
MAYERS ' INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
BOARDIN G AN D DA Y SCHOO L 
Fo r the industrial, literary, moral and religious 
training of the Negro youth. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fo r particulars address 
FLOR A E . MAYERS , Principa l 
606 Payne Street, Knoxville , Tenn. 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 135th and 136th Streets 
Rea l Hom e Cooking ; Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-Made Rolls Served Ho t 
BOOKS 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
James F . Morton, Jr. , A.M. , Autho r and Publisher . 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on ' 'The Bu g 
bear of Social Equality,' ' which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N. Y . 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Afro-American 
Correspondence 
School 
Offers a full Norma l Preparator y Course, consisting of thorough reviews in Arithmetic , 
Grammar , Geography, History , Physiology, 
Reading, Spelling, Penmanship, Drawing , 
Civi l Government and Theor y and Ar t of 
Teaching. . Just the thing to prepare you for, 
a teacher's examination. Address 
Afro-American Correspondence School 
2808 St. An n Street New Orleans, La . 
^M^BMHHllllllllllllllllllMHilllll M 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 99 
KELSEY'S 
Human Hair Goods and 
Hair Preparations 
Hav e stood the test for years. Al l 
the latest styles in Braids, Transformations, Puffs, Toupees, Wigs, etc., 
carefully matched to a sample of your 
hair, and beautifully made. Onl y the 
best hair used in manufacturing. 
KELSEY' S Hair Growe r and Dressing, made of the purest Hai r and 
Scalp foods, relieves the Scalp of all 
of the many diseases for whic h it is 
subject, causing the Hair to become 
soft and healthy, and POSITIVEL Y 
prevents its falling out. 
Puffs, Braids and Transformations, 
$1 up. 
Hair Grower and Dressing, $1. 
Send sample of hair for price quotation. 
S. A . & A . C . KELSE Y 
328 Lenox Avenue Ne w Yor k Cit y 
NATURAL HUMAN HAIR 
Perfect Matching of 
Samples Guaranteed 
W e specialize in matching samples of human 
hair. D o not wear black hair if your hair is 
gray or brown, or curly hair, if your hair is 
straight or waved. We are importers and 
manufacturers of real human hair. Ou r 
workers are all women who understand the 
wants and wishes of women in this line of 
merchandise. Mm e C. R. Ward , whose reputation for high-grade work is well established 
in New Jersey, is superintendent of our manufacturing department. 
Quality and workmanship are in every piece 
we send out. Note our prices: Transformations, $5 to $15; wigs, $10 to $50; small puffs, 
$1 to $5; clusters of puffs, $3 to $8; pompadours and switches, $3 to $12. These prices 
are for high-class goods. W e also buy and 
make up combings. 
Dr . Hayne's Olive Oi l Pomade preserves 
the hair, clears the scalp of dandruff and 
beautifies the hair ; 50 cents per jar. Dr . 
Hayne's Massage and Complexion Creams clear 
the skin of blemishes and make beautiful complexions; 50 cents a set. Discounts to agents 
and dealers. 
SUMMERSETT , STAR K & CO . 
Importers and Manufacturers 
P. O. Box 343. Montclair, N. J. 
PATTERNS ! PATTERNS ! ! 
Exclusiv e creations of Madame M . Beck, the wellknow n Dressmake r and Designer. 
Begin next month. 
Mention T H 
Odessa Millinery 
41 W. 135th Street New York 
Started as the first; still leading 
in all advanced Parisian Millinery. 
Telephone 624 Harlem 
Telephone 3253 Harle m 
CARPE T GLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture ; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R 
SPECIALT Y 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cor a Va n Schoick is conducting a sale and 
exhibit of unusual interest at the WHIT E ROS E 
MISSION , 217 East 86th Street, New York . 
Ther e is on sale hand-painted china and pillow 
tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive for 
gifts and interior decorations. 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
White Rose Working Girls' Home 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Hom e 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
E CRISIS . 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
The regular correspondence machines, 
Models No. 4 and No. 5, are the same in 
all respects except Model No. 5 has four 
extra keys for fractions and special characters. The UNDERWOO D is the most 
popular correspondence typewriter in the 
world. Its sales exceed those of any other 
machine. 
"Th e Machine You Will 
Eventually Buy." 
Underwood Typewriter Co. 
INCORPORATE D 
Underwoo d Buildin g Ne w Yor k 
P A MPHLET S 
Published by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. Africa n Civilization : B y M . D . Maclean. Pric e 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
By Burt G. Wilder. Pric e 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: B y Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Pric e 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: B y Briga ­
dier-Genera l Burt, U . S. A . Pric e 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Pric e 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: B y 
Adelene Moffat. Price 2 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Ten Year s with Dr . D . C Whit e 
Telephone 7189 Morningside 
DR. JAME S A. BANK S 
DENTIS T 
204 WES T 133d STREET , NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crow n and Bridg e Wor k a Specialty 
Pure Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administere d 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k Cit y 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Unio n Block, Fourt h and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul,' Minn . 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probat e Matter s a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Office: Room 50.2, Eberl y Block, Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Syke s Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 101 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing , Beauty Culture, Hai r Makin g and Chiropody scientifically taught. Da y and night sessions. Instructions given to pupils in 
their own homes if desired. Diploma s awarded. Send for booklet-directory of recently 
graduated students. 
Make You r Spare Moments 
Profitable 
<| The continued growth of TH E CRISI S necessitates the extension of 
our field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish 
sub-agencies and look after renewals. 
€J If you can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
in your city, we can make you a proposition that will interest you. The 
work is dignified- as well as profitable. 
ADDRES S BUSINES S MANAGER ; 
TH E CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
Too , Too t Too , Too ! Too , To o 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
Fo r particulars write G . W . BLAND , H . S. P. 
GOO D COMMISSIO N PAI D T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOI N NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
110 1/2 Colfax Ave. , South Bend, Ind. 102 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
B y 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapter I. Ho w the colored people wo n their civil and politica l rights. 
Chapters II. and III. Th e Negr o tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living , wit h a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . Th e colored woman , her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivi d description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapter VIII . Th e Negr o in politics in Ne w York . 
Chapter IX . Th e author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Department of The Crisis, 26 Vese y St., N . Y . 
YOU R LOCA L PRINTE R 
may be able to do your ordinary printing, but your business and 
personal stationery, wedding invitations, calling cards, pamphlets, etc., 
require that particular attention which our experience and facilities 
afford you. 
A s first-class printers in New Yor k City, we are subject to the 
most exacting demands, since new designs and type formations must be 
constantly originated to satisfy a large clientele of most discriminating 
patrons. 
W e refer you to Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; ive print TH E CRISIS. 
Write for samples and special quotations. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS . An Epoch-making Event 
A n event has transpire d i n the Sout h whic h promise s great thing s for that 
section an d for the entir e nation. 
• Sutto n E . Griggs, the autho r of seven widel y read books, has brough t to ligh t 
an array of facts and has unfolde d a line of reasonin g i n his latest wor k that is 
quietly transformin g the though t life of the white s of the Sout h o n the' race 
question. Th e book, "Wisdom's Call, " has i n it the possibilitie s of a peaceful 
revolution . 
Bisho p I. B . Scott of the M . E . Churc h says: " I believe it wil l change 
condition s i n the Sout h if it is read b y any considerabl e numbe r of the leaders 
of that section. " 
Dr . J. G . Merrill , ex-president of Fis k University , says: "I have hear d so 
muc h of 'Wisdom's Call. ' I wis h a cop y of the book ; send it to me. " 
Hon . Noa h W . Cooper, one of Tennessee's most widel y know n whit e lawyers, 
says: "It is full of the finest philosophy , choicest rhetori c an d Christia n ideas. 
Rev . Mr . Grigg s is manifestl y a great thinker, a genius an d a statesman. " 
Th e chief of polic e of Bartow , Fla. , says: "Tha t boo k has changed m y views 
o n the rac e question. I see that we whit e peopl e have got to change our treatmen t of the Negroes. " 
Thes e are but sample s of thousands of testimonials that we are receiving . 
Yo u do yourself an d the cause of humanit y an injustic e whe n yo u neglec t or 
delay to send for "Wisdom's Call. " Th e pric e is onl y SO cents. Ad d S cents 
fo r postage . 
Sen d to the 
ORION PUBLISHING COMPANY 
East Station, Nashville, Tenn. 
The TESTIN G FIRE 
By ALEXANDE R CORKE Y 
Autho r of "Th e Victor y of Alla n Rutledge " 
Is the Sanest Story Eve r Written on the Race Problem 
It is the first story ever written on the race 
question, by a white man, that is not antagonistic 
to the colored race. 
EVER Y FREEDMA N SHOUL D REA D I T 
Through its pages runs a sweet romance, but 
it is more than a love story. It is a novel of 
uplift, accomplishment and promise. 
N o One Interested in the Rac e Question Should Miss It 
Pric e $1.25 Net ; Postage 10 Cents Extr a 
The H . K . FL Y COMPANY , Publishers 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of TH E CRISIS, 
26 Vesey Street, New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . A HORNLESS 
TALKING MACHINE for $15.22 
Th e one incomparabl e Musica l Instrumen t at 
this price , $15.00, in whic h the flawless tone 
has been pronounce d by conservativ e musica l 
critic s as bein g the equal of man y of the higherprice d machines. I n no othe r perio d durin g 
the histor y of soun d recordin g and repro ­
ductio n have advance s in the art been so revo ­
lutionary . Thre e years ago this matchless 
machin e woul d have been cheap at $50.00. It 
has a powerfu l noiseless sprin g moto r and can 
be woun d whil e running . It plays either teninc h or twelve-inc h records of any make , has 
convenient adjustment of speed, a cabinet of 
clear graine d oak and weigh s onl y 17 pounds. 
If yo u wan t to hear the famous Bert Williams 
sin g the songs that made hi m famous, own one of these machine s 
an d send to us for records. If yo u wan t a Columbi a Dis c 
Graphophon e or Grafonol a rangin g i n pric e from $17.50 to 
$200.00, that reproduc e living , breathin g records of the golde n 
voice s of the world 's greatest singers—Nordica , Cavalieri , Mar y 
Garden , Bispham , Campanari an d a hundre d others—writ e to 
us for catalo g of the Columbi a Doubl e Dis c Records. Fi t an y 
machine . Musi c on bot h sides. Fro m 65 cents up. 
SHIPPAR-NOWELL CO. 
Box 25, Station J 
NE W YORK CITY Mr. Bert A. Williams 
This magnificent hotel, replete with every modern improvement, claims distinction for its 
location; direct Southern exposure. Superlative in construction, appointments, service 
and refined patronage. Endorsed by leading representative citizens. 
Concerts daily by the Abyssinia orchestra. Garage, bathhouses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. Literature and information mailed upon 
request. 
E . W . DALE , Cape May, N . J., Owner and Proprietor 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 