NOVEMBER 
TEN CENTS PER COPY ONE DOLLAR PER YEAR 
The CRISIS 
1918 3 
President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMKfi 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOHX' E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
JOH N R. SHILLADY , Secretary 
Executive Officers 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON , Acting Chairman of Board. 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR . W . E. B. DU BOIS , Director of Publications and Research 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . Field Secretary 
WALTE R F. WHITE , Assistant Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATIO N FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
Buffalo 
MAR Y B. TALBER T 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washington 
PROF. GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONES 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
St, Louis 
HON . CHARLE S NAGE L 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
MAJO R J. E. SPINGAR N 
CAPT . ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR . JOH N G UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
Never before in the history of the country have the Colored People participated 
so fully in the nation's Responsibilities and Burdens, and never before has there 
been such an opportunity to secure through United and Rightful Effort full 
citizenship and equal opportunity for the Colored People of America. 
The NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE has during the war demonstrated its usefulness to the Nation and the Race. Present and future issues make it imperative that there be 
a comprehensive and intelligent organization that can voice the sentiments and 
desires of Colored Americans. 
Help to strengthen the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE to perform this work. 
We are now 40,000 strong. We ought to be 400,000 strong. 
Write for information about organizing a branch in your community. 
Date , 1918 . 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD , Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year 
in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 
with the stipulation that one dollar of any amount remitted herewith in 
excess of one dollar is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Street 
City and State. 
IKblAKfi UNIVERSITY OBBJIB* EIGHT H ANNIVERSAR Y NUMBE R 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NEW YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E. BURCHARD T DU BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol . 17—No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1918 Whol e No . 97 
PICTURE S 
Pag e 
COVER . "A T BAY. " Reproduce d fro m a paintin g mad e fo r TH E CRISI S 
b y Willia m Edwar d Scott . 
BROADSIDE . Frederic k Douglas s an d others, 186 3 1 1 
TH E COLORE D WOMA N I N INDUSTR Y 13,1 5 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 28 , 3 0 
ARTICLE S 
TH E COLORE D WOMA N I N INDUSTRY . Mar y E . Jackso n 1 2 
MORNIN G LIGHT . A Poem . Mar y Effi e Le e 1 7 
FINANCE S O F TH E N.A.A.C.P . Joh n R . Shillad y 1 8 
RE D CHANT . A Poem . Alfre d Kremybor g 3 1 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINIO N 7 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 2 2 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 2 8 
TH E HORIZO N 3 2 
TH E CHRISTMA S CRISI S 
A lovely cover in four colors by William Edward Scott: "The Flight into Egypt;" A Christmas 
story and Christmas cheer. Remember our Tercentenary Calendar for 1919. 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN* SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be chanced as often as desired. 
In ordering a change nf address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must he accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2. 1910, at the tost office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENT S ALREAD Y ESTABLISHE D 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training of Colored Youth in the South. 
TH E FAL L TER M OPENE D OCTOBE R 1 , 1918 . 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
The Students' Army Training 
Corps, at the Agricultural 
and Technical College 
begin s Octobe r 15th , 1918 
ALL COLORED MEN FROM 1 8 TO 2 1 YEARS 
OF AGE WHO HAVE A PUBLIC SCHOOL 
EDUCATION OR ITS EQUIVALENT SHOULD 
ENROLL IN THE STUDENTS' ARM Y TRAINING CORPS. BOARD, LODGING, TUITION 
AND CLOTHES ARE FURNISHED AND ONE 
DOLLAR A DAY PAID BY THE UNITED 
STATES GOVERNMENT. ARM Y OFFICERS 
WILL BE SELECTED FROM AMONG THE 
MEN WHO ENROLL IN THE STUDENTS' 
ARM Y TRAINING CORPS. 
TH E MILITARY TRAINING WILL BE SUPPLEMENTED BY STRONG COURSES IN 
SANITATION, MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, 
AND ENGLISH. 
For further information Write today to 
JAS . B . DUDLEY , PRESIDEN T 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
FOR REASONABLY MATURE STUDENTS 
WHO HAVE A GOOD SECONDARY 
SCHOOL PREPARATION, AND WHO DESIRE TO BECOM E TEACHERS, COURSES 
ARE OFFERED DURING THE REGULAR 
TERM IN ACADEMI C WORK, DOMESTIC 
SCIENCE, DOMESTIC ART, PHYSICAL 
TRAINING, ELEMENTARY SCHOOL METH ­
ODS, WOOD AND METAL WORKING, 
AND AGRICULTURE. BOARD ROO M AND 
LAUNDRY PRIVILEGES FOR THE YEAR, 
$125 . FALL TERM BEGAN WEDNES ­
DAY, SEPTEMBE R 18 , 1918 . 
Mention THE CUSIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlant a Universit y 
I * beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Oa. 
li e oourisi of study luclude Hig h School, Normal 
School and Collage, with manual training and domestic science. Amon g the teaoheri are graduate ! 
of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellealey. Fortynine years of successful work have been completed, 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universally susoessful, 
For further Information address 
PRESIDENT EDWAR D T . WAR E 
ATLANTAj GA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The 
Best Hora l and Spiritual Environment, A Splendid 
Intellectual Atmosphere . Noted for Honest and 
Thorough Work , 
Offers full courses In the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September IS, 1918. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA 
OFFERS LONG AND SHORT COURSES IN 
MECHANIC ARTS, IN HOME ECONOMICS 
IN AGRICULTURE, IN EDUCATION AND IN 
SCIENCE. 
For Citaiot AUtut 
NATHAN B . YOUNG, Preiident 
P. O. DRAWER 524 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUDY 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical—Two yea. a above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A . B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened October 2, 1918. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for firk. 
under the direction OF the Sisters of St Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia. Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(FORMERLY ATLANTA BAPTIST COLLEGE) 
ATLANTA , G A 
COLLEGE, ACADEMY, DIVINITY SCHOOL 
AN INSTITUTION FAMOUS WITHIN RECENT YEARS 
FOR ITS EMPHASIS ON ALL SIDES OF MANLY DEVELOPMENT—THE ONLY INSTITUTION IN THE FAR SOUTH 
DEVOTED SOLELY TO THE EDUCATION OF NEGRO 
YOUNG MEN. 
GRADUATES GIVEN HIGH RANKING BY GREATEST 
NORTHERN UNIVERSITIES. DEBATING, Y . M . G A. , 
ATHLETICS, ALL LIVE FEATURES. 
FOR INFORMATION ADDRESS 
JOH N HOPE , PRESIDENT 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
RECOGNIZED AS A COLLEGE OF THE FIRST CLASS 
by TEXA S AND LOUISIANA STATE BOARDS OF 
EDUCATION. HARVARD, YALE AND COLUMBIA 
REPRESENTED ON ITS FACULTY; STUDENTS GATHERED FROM TEN DIFFERENT STATES. 
STRONGEST MUSIC DEPARTMENT IN THE WEST 
M W. DOGAN, President 
FIS K UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
FOUNDED 1866 
THOROUGH LITERARY, SCIENTIFIC, EDUCATIONAL, 
MUSICAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCE COURSES. PIONEER 
IN NEGRO MUSIC. SPECIAL STUDY IN NEGRO LIFE. 
IDEAL AND SANITARY BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS. 
WELL-EQUIPPED SCIENCE BUILDING. 
CHRISTIAN HOME LIFE. 
HIGH STANDARD OF INDEPENDENT MANHOOD AND 
FFOMANHOOD. FOR LITERATURE, ETC., WRITE ® 
FAYETT E AVER Y MCKENZIE . PRESIDENT 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sanr 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Loeation central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Nor 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nnrs. 
Training. Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began October 1, 1918. 
t further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, Pr.eicUnt 
1IU W J. I. mini, ITaalrmaa Trusts* Basra. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY , N . C . 
A Religious Co-Edocalional School with i 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modem Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Cimriti of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session opening Octoher, 1918. 
rw ri.fr/iff Information Aidren 
D. C. SUGGS, President or 
J. E. Aggrey , Registrar. 
Wilberforce University 
WILBERFORCE, OHI O 
{Established 18S6) 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science 
and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Government for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' 
Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. 
Courses of Study—College (Scientific, Classical and Educational) ; Normal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theological (Regular and English); Academy 
—Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 
gymnasium just completed. 
School opened September 17th. For 
information address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, 
President. 
Mention 
BIDDL E UNIVERSIT Y 
CHARLOTTE, N. C. 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific. German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
Far further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte. N. C. 
J. BRICK AGRICULTURAL , INDUSTRIA L 
AN D NORMA L SCHOO L 
BRICKS . Edgecombe County, N. C. 
{On A. C. L. R. R.) 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic Art, 
Agriculture, Wor k in Wood , Iron and Mechanical 
Drawing. Piano and Vocal Music, Night School. 
A Two Yea r Teacher-Training Course 
Is Open To High School Graduates. 
Teachers and officers, 22; enrollment, 315— 
boarders, 212. Cottages and buildings, 23. School 
farm, 1129 }•< acres. Strong athletic, literary and 
Christian associations. School term 33 weeks. 
Environment fine. Telephone and telegraph Enfield, N. C. For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN , Principal, BRICKS , N. C. 
TH E SLATE R INDUSTRIA L AN D 
STAT E NORMA L SCHOO L 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexea 
WINSTON-SALEM , N, C. 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
In Academic Subjects, 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. -Graduates receive the Teacher's Certificate. 
Il l Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
For further information communicat e with 
S. G. ATKINS, Principal 
SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL, 
Winston-Salem. N. C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of Ne w York. Students 
from six different ttatei. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana. Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 3 8 TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 17-No . 1 NOVEMBER, 1918 Whol e No . 97 
Opinion 
W. E. B. Dubois 
THE ENLARGED CRISIS 
INCE the last issue of Th e 
Crisis, the National Wa r Industries Board has notified 
all publishers that on account 
of the severe stringency in the supply 
o f print paper, magazines can use 
next year only ninety per cent of the 
amount o f paper used last year. To 
enlarge Th e Crisis under these conditions would mean the cutting of our 
circulation from over 80,000 to less 
than 54,000 copies. As this is inadvisable, we must, with great regret, 
postpone our enlargement until further notice. There will, therefore, be 
no change in the size or price of Th e 
Crisis until the present paper stringency has passed. 
FLAMING ARROWS 
was a tremendous speech that 
Woodro w Wilson made in New 
Yor k City, September 27, 
1918. On one point alone was 
its meaning vague to us of the darker 
world, wh o listened with bated breath. 
Listen to these words: 
"Shall the military power of any nation 
or group of nations be suffered to determine 
the fortunea of peoples over whom they 
have no right to rule, except the right of 
force? 
"Shall strong nations be free to wrong 
nations and make them subject to their 
purpose and interest? 
"Shall peoples be ruled and dominated, 
even in their own internal affairs, by arbitrary and irresponsible force, or by their 
own will and choice? 
"Shall there be a common standard of 
right and privilege for all peoples and nations, or shall the strong do as they will 
and the weak suffer without redress?" 
Is it possible that these flaming arrows were not aimed at the Vardamans in Mississippi as well as at Huns 
in Europe ? Is it thinkable that President Wilson did not have clearly in 
mind Kamerun as well as Servia? It 
is neither possible nor thinkable if 
English is English and Justice is Justice, and with this true, Mr. Wilson's 
speech is one of the half dozen significant utterances of human history. 
THE S.A. T. C. 
N September 19, PL M. Hughes, 
Regional Educational Director of "the Students' Army 
Training Corps, suggested 
that no colored students be received 
into the training classes of white colleges, on the ground that it was "contrary to army regulations for white 
and colored to be housed in the same 
barracks." 
On September 23, colored students 
at Ohio State University and elsewhere wer e ordered to fall out of 
ranks and go to colored schools. 
On September 24, the N. A. A. C. P. 
telegraphed Hughes and the Wa r Department, at Washington. 
On September 27, Hughes wired the 
N. A. A. C. P.: "Following telegram 
just received from Washington relative to Negro students—'Negroes may 
be admitted when usual custom of instruction.' Information sent today to 
colleges o f Ohio and West Virginia. " 
Selah! 8 THE CRISIS 
SOLDIERS 
SLOWL Y but surely the effort of 
the Government to satisfy 
just Negro public opinion 
increases: The registration 
card for the selective draft omits the 
inexcusable discrimination attached to 
the first registration; a colored correspondent has been sent to the front 
by the Public Information Bureau; 
a loan to Liberia has been announced; 
Haiti and Liberia wer e prominently 
featured among the Allies during Liberty Loan weeks; colored colleges 
have been designated as official military training schools, and there will 
be a colored man on the Wa r Service 
Commission soon to g o abroad. 
There still remains a number of 
matters which we are hopeful that 
the Government will soon notice : 
First, is the wasteful practice of inducting numbers of trained and experienced colored physicians into the 
army as privates; and, secondly, there 
are the points so ably brought out by 
the Thirkield Committee and published elsewhere in this issue. They 
have to do chiefly with the military 
training of service battalions, the appointment of mor e colored commissioned and non-commissioned officers, 
and the question of illiteracy. 
Meantime, the Negro race can take 
peculiar pride, not only in its unfaltering loyalty, but in the recognition 
that its troops are gaining abroad. 
The 349th Field Artillery Regiment, composed of colored men, on its 
departure from a French city received 
the following letter from the Mayor: 
"From the very day of its arrival, your 
regiment by its behavior and its military 
appearance, excited the admiration of us 
all. Of the sojourn of yourself and your 
colored soldiers amongst us, we will keep 
the best memory and remember your regiment as a picked one. From the beginning 
a real brotherhood was established between 
your soldiers and our people who are glad 
to welcome the gallant Allies of our France. 
Having learned to know them, the whole 
population holds them in great esteem and 
we all join in saying the best of them. I 
hope that the white troops replacing your 
regiment will give us equal satisfaction, but 
whatever their attitude may be, they cannot surpass your 349TH Field Artillery." 
It is natural to remembe r that Captain Ro y Nash, formerly secretary o f 
the N. A . A . C. P., is with this regiment, together with a numbe r o f colored officers. 
THE COLORED VOTER 
HIS is the month o f elections. 
The colored people have long 
had the habit of considering 
that the so-called "off-year " 
in elections is o f little importance , 
and that the important thing is the 
Presidential election. N o greater 
mistake could well be made . One 
might almost say that in norma l 
times it makes no difference wh o is 
President of the United States, but it 
makes every difference to every single 
American wh o is his Alderman, wh o 
is Mayor, wh o is his membe r o f the 
Legislature, and his Governor, and 
above all, wh o is his Congressman. 
Let every colored man and woma n 
wh o can vote see to it that they know 
the records of the persons wh o are 
candidates fo r these local offices and 
that they vote for no man wh o is 
not demonstrably and unequivocally 
loyal to the Government and loyal to 
the rights of America n citizens o f 
Negr o descent. Fo r instance: the 
Second Congressional District o f Ne w 
York , covering the large Negr o pop ­
ulations 'of Flushing and Jamaica, is 
represented in Congress b y Charles 
Pope Caldwell. Mr. Caldwell wa s 
born in Texas. Whe n a delegation o f 
colored women , including the wido w 
of a forme r United States Senator, 
the wif e o f a United States Consul in 
France, and the wif e o f a Municipal 
Judge, asked for a hearing befor e a 
congressional committee in orde r to 
urge the appointment of Negr o officers in the army, this man Caldwell "contemptuously threw down OPINION 
their cards, which he had been holding in his hand, and emphatically said 
he would never vote for a colored man 
to be an officer; whereupon he angrily turned upon his heel and strode 
away." It does not make an iota of 
difference what party Caldwell represents, he must be defeated. 
On the other hand, in New York 
State colored voters have to choose 
between Whitman and Smith. Both 
of them have excellent records so far 
as the colored people are concerned, 
and a choice calls for thoughtful consideration along lines outside of racial matters. 
ILETTERS 
A YOUN G southern white woman writes us: 
"Several influential women of 
the South of my acquaintance 
have decided to write the President concerning the things we hope to see 
won for the Negro in our national government in the near future. ' This, we feel, 
may do something in creating through Mr. 
Wilson's influence the state of affairs 
we hope to see. Would you mind outlining for me the questions that most need to 
have attention given?" 
To which TH E CRISI S has replied: 
"1 . Disfranchisement of educated Negroes in the South. 
"2. The 'Jim-Crow' car system by which 
we are compelled to pay first-class 
fares for third-class accommodations, and usually denial of Pullman car accommodations. 
"3. The neglect of Negro education, including inadequate school facilities 
and lack of adequate attention to 
high schools and colleges. 
"4. The double standard of justice in 
the courts, and especially lynch 
law. 
"5. The denial of industrial opportunity 
and the double standard of wages. 
"6. The lack of protection for colored 
women, girls and children. 
"7. The neglect of sanitation and public 
health measures, physical and 
moral, particularly in Negro residential sections. 
"We trust that you may be able to get 
a strong statement from southern white 
women in opposition to some or all of these 
grievances." 
It will be a glad day for America 
when southern white women recognize their clear duty toward the Negro. 
A RINGING CALL TO DUTY 
THE speech of Moorfield Storey, 
our honored president, before the Wisconsin Bar Association was a ringing call 
to duty. It has been printed in a 
thirty-page pamphlet by the N. A. A. 
C . P. to sell at ten cents, with large 
reductions to agents. It closes with 
these mighty words: 
"The men in the communities where 
lynchings occur, who are silent, must confess either that they approve the crimes 
or are too cowardly or too selfish to make 
a public protest. The ruffians are essentially weak—they are cowards, or they would 
not treat as they do their helpless victims. 
Public opinion, the strongest force in any 
country, once aroused and expressed would 
stop these outrages. There is no man in 
this country, North or South, in Massachusetts and Wisconsin as well as in Louisiana or Mississippi, who is not bound to 
help rouse this public opinion. If we are 
silent, we also must admit that we are 
cowardly or indifferent, or that we approve. Either attitude should be impossible. Let us speak out and keep speaking 
out until our condemnation is felt by every 
community, and the men who now commit 
these hideous barbarities learn from what 
"ve say that this country cannot tolerate 
them 
"With cheerful readiness and loyalty 
they [the Negroes] have come forward at 
our call. They have been met with jeers 
from many quarters, with insults, with the 
suggestion from high officers that they 
should not exercise their legal rights for 
fear of exciting unjust race prejudice, with 
proposals that they should serve as laborers and not as soldiers, but notwithstanding all these things they have never failed 
or faltered 
"We owe it to them—we owe it to ourselves—that, while they are giving their 
lives abroad to make the world safe for 
democracy, we should do our part to make 
this country safe for their kindred at home, 
or, to quote a better phrase, we should 
'make America safe for Americans.'" 
CO-OPERATION 
THE first convention of American co-operators was held in 
Springfield, 111., September 
25 to 27. This is one of many 
significant results of the war. In 
Russia, the leader, Tschaikovsky, 
notes "with satisfaction the multiplication and expansion during recent 
years of the co-operative societies." 10 
\ 
THE CRISIS 
In France, Charles Gide tells us that 
"although the wa r is covering the 
world with ruin, it is nevertheless giving an amazing emphasis to the cooperative movement. " 
Wha t is this thing which may be 
the greatest result of the wa r ? Whatever it is, it is worth study. The 
Negr o Co-operative Guild proposes to 
spend the year 1919 in encouraging 
as many American Negroe s as possible to study modern consumers' co ­
operation. If you are interested, 
writ e us immediately. 
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR 
"0 n e conference 
in the Detroit dispute alread y has 
been held and in a 
few days the leaders 
of the men will be 
called to the interurban offices again 
in the hope that they 
wil l modify their 
position indorsed by 
the International 
Union, which they 
outlined at the first 
session as follows: 
'No further employment of Negroes. 
No objection to the 
hiring of women providing the company 
does not attempt to 
interfere wit h the 
presen t seniority 
rules, which permit 
employees to select 
runs in order determined by length of 
service.' " 
Detroit Free Press. 
"G. W. Millner, a 
Negro, who represented about 1,000 
other workers of his 
own race at the recent A. F. of L. convention, believes that 
the condition of Negro labor has profited greatly of late, 
principally through 
the aid of the American Federation of 
Labor. There were 
three other. Negro 
delegates to the convention and thei r 
presence showed conclusively tha t the 
color line is no longer drawn in labor's 
ranks." 
Division of Publicity, U. S . Department of Labor. 
PATRIOTISM 
CURIOUS, indeed, has been the 
transformation in the souls 
of most Americans during 
this war. Before the wa r 
nobody loved America . The very 
phrase seemed maudlin and unintelligent. We loved Justice and Freedom ; 
we sought reform and uplift in politics, health protection; a nobler art, 
less class dislike, no race hatred; and 
we hoped for universal education ; but 
our country? W e scarcely had a 
country—we willed a whol e world . 
An d yet, beneath all this, logically 
we did love our country because w e 
deemed it capable o f realizing our 
dreams and inspiring the greater 
world. Else one would n o longer have 
dreamed or worke d here. W e would 
have sought a Land o f Promise . But 
did America n Socialists emigrat e to 
Germany ? No , German Socialists 
came to America , and worke d and 
believed that here the injustices o f 
private wealth could best and most 
quickly be remedied. Russian Re ­
volutionists found here n o Utopia, 
but at least a sanctuary and hope 
which they could not find in Russia. Did Negroe s leave Americ a 
for Mexico, or the West Indies, or 
Africa ? No , they became insulted at 
the mer e suggestion. Despite horrible wrongs, they believed it eventually 
possible to realize here in Americ a 
all their highest hopes and aspirations. So with every man wh o has 
toiled in this land fo r higher and better things—even those wh o longed fo r 
the Peace of God, which in these 
heavy days passeth understanding— 
all loved and loved passionately not 
America , but wha t Americ a migh t be 
—the Real America , as w e sometimes 
said. 
Men wor k and fight and sweat fo r 
a dream only because they believe it 
possible. Ar e the dreams of Americ a 
less possible now that w e fight fo r 
common decency in international affairs than before when w e strove fo r 
highest things within the nation? If 
leaving the arena of the heart and intellect, we are forced to contend like 
very beasts, is the fighting any less 
necessary? Rather is the call of duty 
infinitely higher when with gun and 
knife and clenched hand, we are compelled to strive not simply fo r the 
higher life, but for life itself. On 
some such foundation is building the 
new Patriotism in Americ a and in 
the World. OPINION 
men of color 
T o Arms! T o Arms! 
NOW OR NEVER 
BROADSID E ISSUE D IN 1863 
Reproduced by permission from the Collection of Col. John Page Nicholson. 
11 
'NOW OR NEVER!" 
BLAC K 
men of 
Amer ­
ica , if 
today Frederick 
Douglass and E. 
D. Bassett , 
Stephen Smith 
and O. V. Catto 
and James Needham arose from 
the dead and 
spoke to you, 
would you listen ? If the y 
said, "T o arms! 
T o arms! Now 
or Never" ! in 
the great battle 
fo r World Liberty, would you 
heed? Woul d 
you hasten to 
"silenc e the 
tongue of calumny, of prejudice and hate" 
and summo n 
every ounce of 
Negr o "Valor 
an d Heroism" 
to beat back the 
menace of the 
Hun ? Fifty -
eight years ag o 
Frederick Douglass and his fellows appealed to 
your father s 
and grandfathers — to me n 
whos e grievances wer e to ours 
as Nigh t to 
Dawn. They responded a n d 
wo n their freedom on the field 
o f battle. Arc 
Free Men Less 
Brav e Than 
Slaves ? 
Men of color, 
brothers and fathers, we appeal 
to you ! 
THREE YEARS' SERVICE! 
battles of liberty and the union 
fail now or our race IS DOOME
SILENCE THE TONGUE OF CALUMNY 
VALOR AND heroism 
PORT HUDSON AND MlLLikens BEND. 
ARE FREEMEN LESS BRAVE THAN SLAVES 
our last opportunity h
mm OF COLOR BROTHERS AND FATHERS! 
We APPEAL TO YOU! THE COLORED WOMAN IN INDUSTRY 
MARY E. JACKSON 
JUST as colored 
men are going 
into the Army, so 
colored women are 
being recruited into 
industry. Thousands 
and thousands of 
eager boys have gone 
to France; we all 
know about them. Few of us realize 
that at the same time an army of women is 
entering mills, factories and all other 
branches of industry. 
I undertook an industrial survey of these 
women for the National Board of the Young 
Women's Christian Association. I investigated the increasing numbers employed, the 
kinds of work, wages, working conditions, 
what has been done, and what more can be 
done to raise the efficiency of the workers. 
At the same time I began in each city the 
organization of industrial women into clubs. 
A great alteration has come in manufacturing sections like Philadelphia, Baltimore, Cleveland, St. Louis, Louisville, Detroit and Chicago. The shifting of so many 
thousands of Negro laborers and their 
families from the South during the past two 
years, has brought a large supply of women's labor into these districts, where it is 
much needed. The matter is well summed 
up in a letter from Rachel S. Gallagher, 
Director of the City Free Labor Exchange, 
Cleveland, Ohio, written in the spring: 
"If you had asked me two years ago about 
the colored girls as wage earners, in Cleveland, I would have told you that they could 
be found in housework, as laundresses and 
cleaning women, as maids, in a few cases in 
banks and offices, and there were a few 
employed by a cigar box manufacturing 
concern. 
"Today, however, when I started to list 
the firms where they were employed, I 
found that they-had entered nearly every 
field of women's work, and some work where 
women had not previously been employed. 
To be sure, at times in small numbers, but 
they have made an entrance. 
"We find them on power sewing machines, 
making caps, waists, bags and mops; we 
find them doing pressing and various hand 
operations in these same shops. They are 
employed in knitting factories as winders, 
in a number of laundries on mangles of 
every type, and in sorting and marking. 
They are in paper box factories doing both 
hand and machine work, in button factories 
on the button machines, in packing houses 
packing meat, in railroad yards wiping and 
cleaning engines, and doing sorting in railroad shops. They are found in cigar factories stripping and packing, and in an 
elect: ical supply manufacturing plant doing 
hard work. One of our workers recently 
found two colored girls on a knotting machine in a bed spring factory, putting the 
knots in the wire springs." 
In Louisville, probably between two and 
three thousand women are employed in 
laundries, preserving companies and factories, manufacturing overalls, feathers, 
wool, chairs and tobacco. It is in the tobacco factory that Louisville finds its acute 
industrial conditions. 
Sometimes large numbers of women are 
employed and sometimes only a few. For 
instance, in Kansas City, 542 women are 
employed in packing plants. In St. Louis, 
nut factories have about 2,000, while two 
bag factories employ about 120. In most 
places they come in slowly. In Philadelphia, 
a pantaloon factory has two girls pulling 
bastings, a petticoat factory numbers three 
colored women out of twenty women; a 
dress factory, two Out of twelve; a waist 
maker, five out of fifty; a hosiery mill, five 
out of thirty-two. Whether they enter in 
large numbers or singly, it is sure that they 
are in industry to stay, and their working 
conditions have become of vital importance, 
not only to them but to the nation at large. 
The Ohio letter mentions only a few of the 
lines of work in which we find women newly 
employed. They are in both the skilled and 
unskilled trades. This comes out clearly 
in a report from Pittsburgh, where two 
different factories are especially mentioned. 
A garment factory making raincoats for 
the Government has had about twenty girls. 
They are careful to employ the better educated type of girl, but they work on a separate floor and do not mingle with the white 
girls who are prejudiced against them. 
12 THE COLORED WOMAN IN INDUSTRY 13 
A Colored girl of Detroit working on a Punch Press at $4.60 per Day. 
Wages and conditions, however, are exactly About fifty of the seventy-five girls they 
the same for both. The work is machine employ are colored. The other girls are 
sewing and sticking with glue. The other foreign, evidently low grade labor. The 
company, which uses untrained labor, has work is picking and sorting rags, papers, 
employed colored girls for three years, bottles, etc. Wages and conditions are the 14 THE CRISIS 
same for both races. They work together 
and apparently there is no antagonism on 
either side. 
The change brought about by war conditions is in many cases spectacular. Women 
are working in the tobacco fields in Connecticut; Indiana reports them in glass 
works; in Ohio, they are found on the night 
shifts of glass works; cotton chopping and 
harvesting claim them in Texas; they have 
gone into the pottery works in Virginia; 
wood-working plants and lumber yards have 
called for their help in Tennessee, while in 
St. Louis, where the special investigation 
has been carried further than in the other 
places, they dip tile in roofing plants, shovel 
rock into wagons in clay yards, truck brick 
and load scrap iron; on railroads they are 
utilized as section hands and engine wipers. 
So great a change as this deserves close 
attention in the matter of wages and of 
working conditions. 
Wages among women are unstandardized. 
There are several reasons for this: In the 
first place, the labor of colored' women is 
almost entirely unorganized. The attitude 
of the unions toward them is evasive. Of 
the six labor secretaries with whom I talked 
last December, in New York City, only one 
set up any objection to colored members. 
The others agreed that the colored woman 
was not only welcome to the unions but that 
she must be made to see the mutual advantage of her joining. But the fact remains 
that there is practically no colored membership. In the 30,000 members of the 
Ladies' Waist and Dressmakers, only about 
one hundred are colored, although the 
needle trades stand first among those which 
the colored women are now entering so 
rapidly. 
A significant and encouraging incident, 
however, was reported from Philadelphia, 
in the early summer. A strike was called 
by this union in an establishment where 
colored girls were being paid one cent, for 
which white girls had been paid three cents. 
The colored girls promptly joined the strike 
and the union and the pay was raised. 
Again, at this period much of the colored 
labor is unskilled, and unskilled labor is 
helpless in the matter of wages unless organized. Then, too, in many of the industries the women are beginners and, therefore, unable to rleal with the situation intelligently. Added to this is the general 
assumption that women should be grateful 
to be paid anything at ALL AND that their 
wages have no relation to their standard of 
living. Piled on top of all of these disadvantages is the fact that the women belong to the Negro race. Some people have 
actually said that the standards of Negro 
life are so much lower than those of the 
white that the colored woman does not need 
as high a rate of wage. 
The most encouraging case that I have 
come across was in a Detroit factory, where 
we found one colored girl making as much 
as $4.50 a day working at a punch press. 
In startling contrast to this is the small 
amount paid for unskilled work. In nutshelling factories, where the women pick 
out the meats after the shells have been 
cracked by machinery, a woman makes from 
$6.00 to $7.00 a week. She is paid ten 
cents a pound for whole meats and five cents 
a pound for broken meats. Although it is 
possible for a woman to make as much as 
$12.00 a week, this seldom happens. 
In another big factory the women's wage 
was until recently only $6.00 a week. When 
I was lecturing to a group of business women of that city, I mentioned the very 
low pay of this factory. By good fortune 
the welfare worker, a white woman, who 
has an equal interest in the welfare of the 
colored workers, was present. She took 
the matter up with the manager of the' 
factory and the $1.00 a week raise was 
announced. 
The pay for heavy unskilled work, formerly performed by men, is higher than the 
rate paid for what has been known as women's work, although unusually lower than 
the amount which men received for the 
same work. The following figures illustrate 
this: 
W 'ages Work 
Dippin g in glaze an d 
stacking . . „ 9 hr. da y at 25c, hr. 
Clipping impuritie s fro m 
clay shovelin g and $2.on to $2.50 (Men's 
wheelin g rock , vag e $ 3 00/ ) 
Shovelin g clav. truckin g 
brick, etc $8.S© to $2.75. 
reedin g brick to furnace , 
rolling clay halls 9 lir. day at 30c hr 
Loadin g scrap iro n 9 hr. da y at 30c.' hi. 
Bonu s o f S pe r cent a 
-week if no t absent 
One must not rely upon the given rate 
because it is so nibbled away by absences, 
perhaps because of the unhealthy nature 
of the work, by fines, and various othe:-
methods. In many cases the workers them-Colored Wome n of St. Louis working in Lumbe r Yards 
selves do not realize how much less th?y 
receive than the regular rate. 
The serious part of this matter is that 
woman ase undercutting men in wages. 
TfolB has the effect of lowering wages all 
over the country. Of course, women have 
always done this. Every possible precaution must be taken to avoid it. A protest 
has been sent in one state to the DirectorGeneral of Railroads, pointing out that women were being employed in freight yards 
and round-houses for twenty-two cents an 
hour, while men were paid thirty cents an 
hour for the same work. 16 THE CRISIS 
The working conditions vary as much as 
the wages. When large numbers of colored girls are employed, they usually work 
in rooms separate from those of the white 
girls. When there are any hazards or disadvantages, it is the colored woman who is 
subjected to them. Conditions depend absolutely upon the attitude of the firm. Some 
old, well-established companies provide 
equally well for all women. One firm which 
I found in the West, under the guidance of 
an expert welfare worker, has provided for 
white and colored women alike: lunch 
rooms, shower baths, a circulating library 
and dressing rooms with steel lockers. 
The tobacco factories all through the 
South have very bad conditions. I was 
once shown a coat room as if it were a remarkable concession on the part of the management. As a rule the women sit at their 
work stripping the tobacco while they eat 
their luncheon to eke out their meagre 
pay. The same factory which raised the 
wages, although it has at present most unhygienic conditions, is about to put up a 
new building in which the colored women 
are to have the same good accommodations 
that are provided for the white workers. 
A letter from a small Kansas city presents a situation which must be occurring 
in many places: 
"We have about fifteen colored girls working at our Santa Fe Railroad Round-House 
wiping engines. The hours are from seven 
until five and the wages two dollars and 
forty-seven and a half cents a day. These 
are the only women working in the shops. 
They are forced to walk almost two miles 
in their greasy overalls to their rooming 
places as a colored person cannot rent a 
house near the shops. Their own people 
are too poor to board them so they are 
forced to prepare their own meal when they 
get home, wash their clothes and prepare 
their lunch for the morrow. 
"We plan, if possible, to rent a small 
house in that vicinity where the girls may 
change their clothes and rest." 
All working conditions have a direct 
bearing upon the amount of work turned 
out. For instance, I noticed one day on the 
street car a colored girl whose stained hands 
indicated that she was working In dye. Sh« 
told me that fifty girls were taking men's 
places dyeing furs. They lifted the pelts 
from the hot vats and hung them up. During the hot weather this work was almost 
intolerable. The employer had promised 
$10.00 a week, but he did not give it. He 
soon shifted the newcomer on to piece work. 
If she stayed long enough, she might be able 
to make from $15.00 to $18.00 a week; 
but no one could stand it longer than one 
or two weeks. The result was a huge labor 
turnover. Of course, the bad conditions 
were responsible for this, but the employer 
said it was because colored labor was unstable. 
The altering of the bad phases of employment depends in the end upon the progress 
of education. We must educate the public, 
the employers and the girls themselves. It 
is especially important that leaders among 
colored people—like ministers, club leaders, 
teachers, social workers—thoroughly inform 
themselves on this matter, which is of more 
than momentary importance. Last summer 
the Young Women's Christian Association 
had this far-reaching vision, realizing that 
such work was both a war measure and a 
preparation for after the war. Now is an 
especially good time to present the matter 
to the general public in the proper light, 
because it is now to the national advantage 
to give the Negro a square deal. 
Employers must be won to employ colored 
girls. Sometimes we are able to obtain from 
a Chamber of Commerce a list of manufacturers who might be willing to take on 
colored help. The accomplishment of one 
worker shows how much can be accomplished 
by patience, ability, tact and persistence. 
She opened fifteen factories, including cigar 
factories, packing and novelty companies, 
clothing companies, knitting mills, trunk 
factories, a foundry, a toy factory, an undergarment manufactory and a fur factory, 
and placed 346 women in them. 
Individual girls can accomplish much if 
they go about it the right way. A girl 
walked into a wholesale drug company in 
a southern city and asked for work. She 
was taken on as an experiment. A few 
days later she brought six friends with 
her. They all made good. By the time the 
Y. W. C. A. investigator got around to that 
store, twenty were working there and the 
superintendent promised to take thirty-five 
more to fill capsules and label bottles. Tho 
best of all was that he bore witness to the 
girls' good work by saying: MORNING LIGHT 17 
"Show the colored girl what you want 
done, and she does it quicker and better 
than the white girl." 
All this effort, of course, is of no value 
unless the girls give satisfaction. We must 
educate them both to individual effort and 
to group effort. Girls come to me constantly 
for interviews about their industrial future. 
It is natural that they should become discouraged. When a girl has been refused positions time and again, she may not have the 
persistence to apply at the very time that 
she would be accepted. We found, for instance, a graduate of a normal school mending bags at $6.00 a week. She needed our 
encouragement and assistance to get into 
a position in which she could use her ability. 
In one city we found in three office buildings twenty-six high school girls who were 
r.nswering telephones and dusting, at. an 
average wage of $5.00 a week without any 
lope of further advancement. Girls like 
liese must be encouraged to further effort. 
The one' greatest barrier of all lies in their 
own minds. Before outside obstacles may 
be overcome, we must convince the girl of 
the possibility of success. 
The group education is equally important. 
The colored girl has never before been 
held responsible to other girls and to the 
community. She is now in a new relation 
toward her country. She must come to see 
that she is no longer "different;" she must 
learn to look upon herself as a part of a 
unit. The future of all girls rests partly 
upon the accomplishment of the individual 
girl. 
The supervision of colored factory girls 
by colored forewomen is of the utmost importance. The girls are more efficient and 
have more interest in their work because 
the forewoman herself is interested in what 
they accomplish. I found this strikingly 
illustrated in one factory where one room 
full of girls was under the charge of a white 
forewoman while the second was under the 
charge of a colored woman. In the first 
room, a happy-go-lucky atmosphere prevailed ; in the second :.oom, the girls were 
quiet and industrious. The forewoman had 
pride in her room. She set a certain standard for girls to live up to. 
The Young Women's Christian Association is organizing clubs among the workers 
of all factories as rapidly as possible. These 
clubs offer constructive, continuous recreation which is linked up to the community 
needs. Organization is, after all, the solution of industrial problems, and every possible method of achieving it must be utilized. 
MORNING LIGHT 
(The Dew-drier) 
MARY EFFIE LEE 
7
T is a custom in some parts of Africa for travelers into the jungles to send before 
them in the early morning little African boys called "Dew-driers" to brush with 
their bodies the dew from the high grasses—and be, perchance, the first to meet the leopard's or hyena's challenge—and so open the road. "Human Brooms," Dan Crawford 
Calls them. 
Brother to the firefly— 
'For as the firefly lights the night 
So lights he the morning— 
Bathed in the dank dews as he goes forth 
Through heavy menace and mystery 
Of half-waking tropic dawns, 
Behold a little black boy, a naked black boy, 
Sweeping aside with his slight frame 
Night's pregnant tears, 
And making a morning path to the light 
For the tropic traveler! 
Bathed in the blood of battle, 
Treading toward a new morning, 
May not his race—its body long bared to 
the world's disdain, 
Its face schooled to smile for a light to 
come— 
May not his race, even as the dew-boy leads, 
Bear onward the world toward a new daydawn 
When t'" ;ance, forgiveness, 
Such as reigned in the heart of One 
Whose heart was gold, 
Shall shape the earth for that fresh dawning 
After the dews of blood? FINANCES OF TH E N. A. A. C. P. 
JOH N R . SHILLADY , Secretary 
A CO-OPERATIVE ENTERPRISE 
T
H E Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People is a cooperative enterprise. Unlik e man y organizations devoted to the improvement of conditions among the grea t mass of the people 
i n whose interests it is conducted, the Association receives its income, not so much 
from the large contributions of the well-todo, as from the combined smalle r givings 
of the multitude . This does not mean that 
the Associatio n has no large givers among 
its clientele of supporters but tha t the great 
bulk of its support comes from the many. 
No r does it mean tha t the Associatio n is 
not i n need, nor i n receipt, of some contributions of relatively large amounts. A 
few of its cherished supporters contribute 
as much as $1,000 annually. These givers 
of large amounts have always been, and 
still are, so few that they ma y be counted 
on the fingers of one hand. In fact, only 
fourteen contributions of $100 and over 
have been made by individuals durin g the 
first nine months of 1918. Durin g the same 
period, net receipts from branc h memberships totalled $18,790; from "members at 
large. " a classification whic h includes all 
contributors other than branch members, 
$5,450*: and from all other sources, 
$702.** 
On October 1, 1918, the Associatio n had 
a tota l membership of 39,639 distributed 
among 142 branches and 1,217 "members at 
large. " These branches are located i n 38 
states of the Unite d States and i n the Cana l 
Zone, Philippin e Islands and Canada , each 
of the latte r three areas havin g one small 
branch. 
Fifty-eigh t of the branches, wit h 16,163 
members, are i n the 16 Southern States and 
the Distric t of Columbia . The Distric t of 
Columbi a Branc h (6,800 members) is the 
largest branch i n the Association, followed 
by Boston (2,580 members) as the second 
largest. The annua l membership fee pai d 
by the branc h members is from one dolla r 
upwards. The numbe r payin g more tha n 
one dolla r is small, so tha t the grea t bul k 
of branch memberships ma y be regarde d as 
furnishin g an availabl e gross income of 
one dolla r pe r member annually . But , of 
this one dollar, fifty cents is retained b y the 
branc h for its purel y loca l needs. Th e na ­
tiona l work , therefore, is financed, so fa r as 
branc h memberships are concerned, from 
the fund obtained by remittance s of fifty 
cents pe r branc h member from branc h treasurers. The exception to be made to this 
statement of the Association's income from 
branch memberships, is tha t a goodly number of branc h members, although a small 
percentage of the total, are included amon g 
those who pa y more than one dollar. 
It wil l at once be obvious tha t unless the 
cost of collection is small, the expense attached to securing these fifty cent memberships wil l be an alarmin g percentage of 
tota l receipts. A s a matte r of fact, the cost 
of collection is reduced to a minimu m b y the 
fact that the collection of membership fees 
is made by the branches almost withou t cost 
to the Nationa l Office by the devoted and 
unpaid labors of branc h officers. 
EXPENDITURES FOR 1918 
The Association's expenditure s from its 
genera l fund fo r the first nine months of 
1918 amounted i n the aggregate to $16,675. 
Additiona l expenditures fo r anti-lynchin g 
wor k totalled $3,192 and fo r other specia l 
purposes, $71. The forme r of these expenditures wa s made from the anti-lynchin g 
fund, the latte r from the MacLea n Memo ­
ria l Fund . 
The expenditures fo r printin g and distributin g TH E CRISI S are not included i n 
the above totals for the reason tha t the 
Association's official orga n since January , 
1918, has been self-supporting, no longe r 
depending upon assistance from the genera l funds of the Associatio n fo r an y part 
of its support. One dolla r of each membership fee or contribution of two dollars 
or more, is applied to TH E CRISI S account 
* Includes $676.69 contributed by the District of 
Columbia Branch. 
** These contributions were to the Association's 
General Fund. In addition the Association has certain special funds none of which amounts in the aggregate to more than $200 except the Anti-Lynching 
Fund to which contributions were received during 
the same period to the amount of $1,050. 
18 FINANCES OF THE N. A. A. C. JF\ 10 
as a separate and distinct subscription item. 
All other expenditures for Association 
work, whether for printing or publicity, or 
for whatever purpose, are included in the 
totals given above. To readers of THE 
CRISIS the general purpose and work of 
the Association will be sufficiently well 
known to make extended explanation unnecessary. Nevertheless, we direct attention to certain specific items of expenditure 
for purposes to which we shall allude more 
at length in succeeding paragraphs under 
the heading, "Budget for 1919." 
ANTI-LYNCHING WORK 
The Association's anti-lynching work is 
supported from the proceeds of a special 
fund amounting at its inception to approximately $10,000. This fund was started 
through the generous offer of Mr. Francis 
G. Peabody of Boston, made in 1316, to contribute $1,000, provided $10,000 could be 
raised for the purpose within a specified 
period. President Storey immediately added 
another $1,000. With other contributions 
from both races and with the whole-hearted 
efforts of the branches, the amount was 
completed in October, 1916. The use of this 
fund has enabled the Association to investigate at first hand some of the more atrocious 
lynchings of recent years and to publish 
the facts as found by the investigator, without bias and without coloring. During the 
present year lynchings have been investigated at Estill Springs, Tenn., at Fayetteville, Ga., and in Brooks and Lowndes Counties, Ga. From this fund, also, appropriations have been made to the East St. Louis 
Riot funds and to a southern enterprise, intended to work, through the establishment 
of better race relations, toward the prevention of lynching. Because of the peculiar 
condition of prejudice in that region, the 
Association's aid was given anonymously. 
Since the present secretary has been responsible for the executive direction of the 
Association's affairs, the practice has been 
followed of inquiring of the Governor of the 
state in which a lynching has occurred, what 
steps had been taken or were contemplated 
by the authorities to apprehend the members of lynching mobs whose actions so disgraced the state by such open flouting of 
the established agencies of law and order. 
In a number of cases appeal was made to 
the leading chambers of commerce of the 
offending states to join in urging the Governor and local authorities to take action 
to vindicate the law. In each case publicity 
was given to the Association's inquiry and 
protest through press "stories" furnished 
to the press services and the daily papers. 
Some research work, aside from investigation of specific cases, has been done in 
order that the Association might have as 
complete records of lynchings as possible. 
Among other things, the files of the leading 
newspapers of the country for a period of 
years have been read and the facts concerning lynchings therein reported have been 
tabulated. On occasion, special memoranda 
have been prepared and submitted to the 
President, to the executive committee of the 
American Bar Association, to the Attorney 
General of the United States and for similar purposes. 
BUDGET FOR 1919 
For 1919, the Association needs a net income of at least $50,000. Heretofore the 
annual income has not reached one-half of 
this amount, except for the present year. 
Fifty thousand dollars is set as the minimum amount to be reached in 1919, not because this amount is regarded as adequate 
for all purposes, but because it is attainable 
with reasonably determined efforts to secure it. The estimated amounts included 
in the proposed 1919 budget of $50,000 are: 
For the administrative work of the National Office, approximately $15,000; for 
educational and publicity work, some $10,-
000; for legal and legislative work, $7,000; 
for field work (branch organization and 
special investigation), $12,000; and for general office expense, some $6,000. 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE WORK OF THE 
NATIONAL OFFICE 
Under this heading is included the general directive and supervisory work of the 
secretary and his administrative assistants. 
An important department of the Association's activities is that of stimulating and 
supervising the work of the branches, now 
numbering 142. Beginning in November, the 
acting Chairman of the Board, Miss Mary 
White Ovington, will devote her full time, 
without compensation, to the newly created 
Department of Branch Affairs of which she 
will be the head. This department will keep 20 THE CRISIS 
up a constant contact, through the Branch 
Bulletin and through correspondence, with 
the branches. The Association possesses in 
the branches an agency for furthering the 
advancement of colored people along the 
lines of the Association's program, which 
is unique. Many national organizations 
would consider it justifiable to spend relatively large sums of money in the development of local co-operation and support. The 
N. A. A. C. P., organized as it is along the 
most democratic lines, has an opportunity 
through the branches to develop and hold 
a nation-wide organization of the forces 
which, properly co-ordinated and acting in 
unison, can be depended upon to insure in 
an increasing degree substantial constructive achievements in the nation at large and 
in the local communities. 
The importance of developing the general 
contact of the branches with the National 
Office is emphasized by the remarkable 
growth of the Association within the last 
six months from a membership of less than 
10,000 to 40,000. 
In the September and October issues of 
the Branch Bulletin a practical fall and 
winter program has been outlined for the 
work of the branches. Concrete and definite 
methods of linking up more closely with the 
National Office have been suggested. These 
include the reporting promptly of branch 
activities to the National Office; immediate 
attention to requests from the National Office for co-operation on definite matters; 
suggestions for the conduct of meetings and 
the subjects to be considered at regular and 
special meetings; the dissemination among 
the branches of a knowledge of the National 
Office's educational and publicity work and 
of special pamphlet literature; and more 
particularly, an outline of a "Forum Plan" 
for the study and presentation of specific 
problems relating' to the welfare of colored 
people and having to do with their relation 
to their fellow citizens and to the nation at 
large. Six specific subjects have been suggested for monthly meetings. In connection 
with the subjects suggested carefully prepared bibliographies of a practical character have been planned. The subjects outlined for the branches to take up are: 
Knowing Your Own Community (A 
study of local conditions with particular reference to colored people). 
Music and the Negro. 
The Negro and Labor. 
The Negro Soldier (Including the relation of the Negro to the war and 
war activities). 
The Status of Women (Including the 
social, economic and political aspects 
of the subject). 
The Negro in Literature and Art. 
EDUCATIONAL AND PUBLICITY 
WORK 
The increased income contemplated by a 
$50,000 budget for 1919, will enable the 
Association to add to its staff a Publicity 
Secretary and a Research Secretary. One 
of the most remarkable anomalies of American life, even in northern communities, is 
the almost complete lack of contact between 
the white and colored elements of the population. Astounding as it might seem, it is 
nevertheless true that a highly intelligent 
and well read white citizen might pass his 
whole life in a typical American community, 
whether North or South, with only the most 
superficial knowledge of what is going on 
among his fellow Americans of darker skin. 
In a democracy all progress depends upon 
public opinion. It is fatal to the best interests of democratic development to allow 
the interests and legitimate aspirations of 
nearly 12,000,000 colored Americans to be 
hindered by a lack of knowledge on the 
part of the white citizens of affairs in the 
colored world. Educational and publicity 
work, therefore, is of the utmost importance. 
The Association at present has a news 
service by which press stories are released 
to white and colored papers. The more 
wide-spread distribution of informative 
pamphlet literature would be of great value 
to the cause of colored people. One trained 
publicity man, giving his whole time to developing our educational and publicity work, 
would add immensely to its success. The 
kind of publicity which the Association regards as most important is the dissemination of information and not mere preaching 
and propaganda, however valuable these 
two latter may be. 
A research worker could search out and 
assemble available data concerning the multiform activities of colored people—their 
really valuable part in the great war; their 
contributions to the industrial life; the conditions under which they live; the political FINANCES OF THE N. A. A. C P. 21 
and economic disabilities from which they 
suffer and which, until redressed, impede 
the progress of democracy. Both the research worker and the publicity worker 
could make more effective our anti-lynching 
campaign. 
LEGAL AND LEGISLATIVE WORK 
The Association needs to supplement the 
volunteer services of busy members of its 
Board with the full-time services of a 
trained lawyer and with a special department which could attend to its legal and 
court work, Congressional work at Washington and, where needed, legislative work 
in the several state legislatures. It is often 
desirable and important to the success of 
the Association's program to initiate court 
action. This has often been impossible for 
lack of trained legal service available in 
the National Office and because funds were 
not immediately in hand. 
The right of colored people to vote and 
to "equal accommodations" in railroad 
travel must be fought for in the courts as 
well as on the platform and in the printed 
page. President Storey's segregation victory of last year in the Supreme Court was 
one of the notable achievement of the last 
fifty years. While such victories are not 
to be expected every year, lesser successes 
are worth striving for. 
FIELD WORK 
A larger fund for field work would enable the Association to add to its staff for 
this purpose. At present there is one Field 
Secretary. In addition to the organization, 
supervision and stimulation of branch organizations by visits from the National 
Office, a very largely increased number of 
branches could be organized if help were 
available. 
A second important part of the Association's field work which has been but little developed is that of field investigations. 
These could include a study of school and 
educational facilities in various states, particularly in the South; an investigation of 
court and legal procedure in states and 
communities largely inhabited by colored 
people, their treatment by the police and 
by local authorities generally, etc.; a study 
of railroad and travel conditions and discriminations; a study of Negro migration, 
its extent, cause and effect; and studies of 
community life as affecting colored people 
insofar as not otherwise covered by existing organizations. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF A FINANCIAL 
SURPLUS 
The new school of economics has made 
familiar the doctrine that social progress 
depends upon an economic surplus. Where 
human beings have only enough economic 
goods to fulfill the immediate needs of their 
creature comforts, social progress along 
higher lines is impossible. Organizations 
and great causes are subject to like limitations. An additional $5,000, for example, 
in an association's budget may enable it to 
perform services altogether out of proportion to the increase in its finances. The 
reason, of course, is obvious—that a certain 
amount of money is necessary.to keep the 
machine going, to feed it and lubricate it, 
so to speak. It is only when—to use the 
analogy of the economist—an economic surplus has been attained that rapid progress 
is possible. Heretofore the Association has 
largely been without this economic surplus. 
The attempt to secure the $50,000 budget 
is an endeavor to give the Association a 
surplus of funds, beyond the barest needs 
of administration, which may be devoted 
to the purposes previously outlined and to 
the general progress of the movement. With 
a substantial income the Association will 
be able within five years to carry forward 
its program more rapidly than it could in 
twenty-five years on an income sufficient 
to maintain only a skeleton organization. 
The Association appeals to the public of 
both races for help in attaining its 1919 
budget of $50,000. Its Anti-Lynching Fund, 
for example, ought to be increased to allow an annual expenditure of from $10,000 
to $15,000. It needs generous givers who 
can afford to give in amounts of $100, $500, 
$1,000 and upwards; but more than these 
large contributions, it needs the regular 
support of people now accustomed to giving one dollar only who can, without stinting themselves, increase their annual contributions to five, ten, or twenty-five dollars. 
Certainly, among colored people there are 
thousands who can afford to become five or 
ten dollar members. 
Readers of this statement who desire to 
help us secure a budget of $50,000 for 1919, 
may send their contributions to Oswald 
Garrison Villard, Treasurer, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, THE LOOKING GLASS 
LITERATURE 
clAUD E MACKAY in Pearson's: 
Think ye I am not fiend and savage too? 
Think ye I could not arm me with a gun 
And shoot down ten of you for every one 
Of my black brothers murdered, burnt by 
you? 
Be not deceived, for every deed ye do 
I could match—outmatch: am I not 
Afric's son, 
Black of that black land where black deeds 
are done? 
But the Almighty from the darkness drew 
My soul and said: Even thou shalt be a 
light 
Awhile to burn on the benighted earth, 
Thy dusky face I set among the white 
For thee to prove thyself of highest worth; 
Before the world is swallowed up in night, 
To show thy little lamp; go forth, go forth! 
* * * 
Mr. MacKay is a black man, a native of 
Jamaica, B. W. I., who has been living in 
this country for six years. During the first 
year of his stay he wrote the poem quoted 
above and others in like vein, notably, "The 
Conqueror," "Is It Worth While?" and 
"Harlem Shadows." His touch is very sure 
and vigorous, yet delicate. In particular, he 
excels in the interpretation of life in Harlem. Its artistic possibilities, often overlaid and at best usually but half-glimpsed, 
are plainly discernible to this poet's eye. 
In a striking account of his life in Pearson's 
he tells of first impressions in a land famed 
for democracy: 
It was the first time I had ever come face 
to face with such manifest, implacable hate 
of my race, and my feelings were indescribable. I had heard of prejudice in America, 
but never dreamed of it being so intensely 
bitter; for at home there is also prejudice 
of the English sort, subtle and dignified, 
rooted in class distinction—color and race 
being hardly taken into account ... . At 
first I was horrified, my spirit revolted 
against the ignoble cruelty and blindness 
of it all. Then I soon found myself hating 
in return; but this feeling couldn't last long 
for to hate is to be miserable. 
Looking about me with bigger and clearer 
eyes, I saw that this cruelty in different 
ways was going on all over the world. 
Whites were exploiting and oppressing 
whites even as they exploited and oppressed 
the yellows and blacks. And the oppressed, 
groaning under the lash, evinced the same 
despicable hate and harshness towards their 
weaker fellows. I ceased to think of people and things in the mass—why should I 
fight with mad dogs only to be bitten and 
probably transformed into a mad dog myself? I turned to the individual soul, the 
spiritual leaders, for comfort and consolation. I felt and still feel that one must seek 
for the noblest and best in the individual 
life only. Each soul must save itself. 
We have received the "Album de Guayama, 1918," by Luis F. Dessus, showing 
how in this city of southern Porto 
Rico, the color line is unknown in business 
and social life. Lectures on "Race Relations" at Fisk University have been issued 
in a pamphlet of eighty pages. The Journal 
of the National Medical Association of colored physicians appears quarterly with 
forty pages. The July number of the Journal of Negro History has a hundred-page 
history of "Slavery in Kentucky." R. W. 
Coleman has issued the sixth edition of his 
excellent "Business Directory of Colored 
Baltimore," with illustrations. Two recent 
leaflets issued by the N. A. A. C. P. are 
President Wilson's words on Lynching and 
James W. Johnson's "Changing Status of 
Negro Labor." 
Leslie Pinckney Hill finds the launching 
of Hog Island's first battleship, the Quistconck, highly symbolic. He writes of this 
in the Philadelphia, Pa., Public Ledger, in 
a poem which says in part: 
We launch more than a ship today, 
We hear more than our chieftain's word. 
The earth, the air, the watery way 
Are thronged with millions who are stirred 
To will that this good ship shall be 
The herald of a thousand more. 
And these shall follow in her wake 
In ever quickening degrees, 
Until the endless line shall make 
That bridge of ships across the seas, 
At whose far end the hosts of God 
Shall stand with all the power of earth, 
To raise up justice from the sod 
And give to freedom her new birth. 
22 THE LOOKING GLASS 23 
THE WELFARE OF NEGRO 
TROOPS 
THE Christian Advocate prints the following- significant article: 
If America is to have an army of 12,000,-
000 men, at least 1,000,000 will be Negroes. 
Already the number of colored soldiers exceeds 100,000, many of whom have rendered 
such notable service as to receive mention 
in the official reports not only of American 
commanders, but of the Germans as well. 
The racial discriminations which so largely 
prevail in civil life have reappeared in the 
camps, resulting in criticism and irritation 
on the part of the "race-conscious" Negroes 
who feel that the army should at least live 
up to the principles of human equality which 
are inscribed on its banners. 
Bishop W. P. Thirkield, of New OrleanS, 
has prepared a report on the Welfare of 
Negro Troops, which seeks to discover the 
grounds of irritation, and to suggest remedies for evils whose very existence is a reproach to the United States, and whose 
continuance menaces the strength of the nation's effort to deliver its united power 
against the German. The report represents 
the work of a committee of the General War 
Time Commission of the Federal Council 
of the Churches of Christ. It presents four 
subjects to the attention of the War Department. 
1. In the combatant regiments of Negroes 
the morale is high, the relation between 
white officers and colored men is good, and 
the effect of military training upon the men 
is conducive to wholesome results in civil 
life after the war. In non-combatant units, 
however, the situation appears to be far 
from satisfactory. The failure to give military training to service battalions and stevedore regiments has stood in the way of 
their attaining to the feeling both of selfrespect and full loyalty that characterize the 
combatant units. Further, many of the 
white officers in the non-combatant units 
have carried over into the army old traditions and prejudices acquired in connection 
with managing gangs of Negroes on 
plantations, turpentine farms or construction of public works, and have not had, 
therefore, toward the men under them the 
attitude of sympathetic interest that officers 
take toward fighting men. The fact that in 
the majority of cases the non-commissioned 
officers in the service battalions and stevedore regiments have also been whites, who 
have taken a condescending attitude toward 
the Negroes, has intensified a feeling of discontent. The inevitable result has been to 
make it more difficult to sustain among the 
colored people as a whole an adequate recognition of our democratic ideals in the war 
and the largest devotion to our cause. 
2. Information has come that in certain 
draft boards an unfair and discriminating 
attitude has been taken toward Negroes, resulting in inducting into the army large 
numbers, who, if white, would have been 
exempted in accordance with the provisions 
of the draft law. To what extent such 
irregularities prevail it is impossible to say 
without further investigation, but certain 
it is that thoughtful Negroes are convinced 
that this is very frequently the case. 
3. Although the number of illiterates 
among the Negro troops is exceedingly large, 
little provision is made for instruction. A 
military order requires all non-English 
speaking people in our army to be taught, 
but because even the most illiterate Negroes 
can understand orders of command it has 
not been deemed necessary to provide for 
their instruction. Such instruction would, 
however, be of great value not only in increasing the usefulness of the Negro in 
civilian life afterward but also in securing a finer morale during the war through 
his enhanced recognition of our concern for 
his welfare and his appreciation of our national ideals. 
4. In the case of Negro regiments, particularly non-combatant units, little or no 
systematic provision has been made for organized athletics, and consequently the colored soldiers have been deprived of the 
valuable training that comes therefrom, and 
which is generally more needed by colored 
soldiers than by white. 
* * * 
The committee offers sympathetic and 
feasible suggestions: 
(1) That a small commission of prominent 
Negroes proceed overseas to examine and 
report conditions to the government; (2) 
that alleged draft board discriminations be 
investigated and eliminated; (3) that all 
colored battalions have military training; 
(4) that white officers for colored units be 
selected with a view to their sympathetic 
interest in their men; (5) that new service 
units have Negro non-commissioned officers; 
(6) that qualified Negroes be trained for 
officers in larger numbers; and (7) that directors of athletics be provided for all camps 
of colored troops. 
The War Department has many vast undertakings under its direction, and its brilliant work along many lines is heartily appreciated. It has had few tasks beset with 
more perplexities than those which relate 
to the military employment of Negro citizens^ These findings of Bishop Thirkield's 
committee deserve Secretary Baker's most 
serious consideration. They are not the 
captious criticisms of political opponents, or 
the expression of racial self-assertiveness. 
They are based upon the principles of human 
equality which lie at the basis of America's 
participation in the War for Freedom. 24 THE CRISIS 
RACE SUPERIORITY 
THE old question as to which race is 
superior has been done away with by 
the present conflict. In its place has crept 
a new doubt as to the superiority of any 
race. The Independent says: 
One of the issues of the war is race 
prejudice. The Germans have this trait 
in so marked a degree that it ought to 
Share the growing unpopularity which now 
accumulates around things distinctively German, whether good, bad or indifferent. Ever 
since the Germans took from Frenchmen 
like Gobineau, Englishmen like Houston 
Chamberlain, and Slavs like Treitschke, the 
legend that the world's civilization was the 
creation of a single race—the Teutonic— 
they have been unendurable. The bulk of 
German books on history, politics and sociology for the last few decades have been 
devoted to the elaboration of this great Teutonic myth. Slavs were barbarians, Latin 
nations were decadent, Celts were futile, the 
yellow races were "monkeys," black men 
were not human, Jews were enemies of the 
state; only the Teuton was tall, blond, handsome, virile, virtuous, reverent, honorable, 
practical, idealistic, scientific, thrifty, continent, just, brave, self-respecting, and capable of self-government. The fact that 
many Frenchmen, Russians and Irishmen 
had all these qualities and that some Germans had none of them (not even the 
blondness) did not prevent the Pan-Germans from identifying the imaginary "Teuton" with the German nation. 
The moral of this pitiful collapse of German humor and common sense before the 
mirage of Teutonism should keep us from 
similar follies. Let our enemies have a 
monopoly of racial egotism. 
* * * 
But the war raises the question of race 
prejudice also in a broader form; not merely 
the claims of the Teutonic super-race but the 
claims of the "white race" itself to eternal 
and inevitable superiority. Germany has no 
doubt on the matter. Inferior as are the 
non-Teutonic peoples of Europe in German 
eyes, they take rank above the "native" races 
of Asia and Africa to such a degree that 
slavery or the sword is the just wage of 
the latter. Note the German fury at the 
Allies for seeking the aid of Japan and for 
employing African troops on European battlefields. Remember the day when the 
Kaiser preached against the "yellow peril" 
in the spirit of yellow journalism. Read 
any good book or article on Germany's system of rule in her overseas colonies. It is 
true that private plantation owners in Belgian and Portuguese Africa, and even in a 
few parts of French Africa, have been excessively cruel to the native laborers in 
their employ. But nowhere have the officials 
of a government been so systematically oppressive as in German Africa. The atrocities in the Belgian Congo were the work of 
a soulless capitalism. The atrocities in German Southwest Africa were the work of 
bureaucrats inspired by racial arrogance 
and measureless contempt of those whom 
they ruled. If the preacher of race hate 
from the Mississippi valley or the Pacific 
Coast were to migrate to the banks of the 
Elbe, he would not only relieve us of his 
presence, but would find an appreciative 
audience and a true "spiritual home." Race 
prejudice is pro-Germanism. 
If the hideous example of racial arrogance afforded by Germany does not suffice 
to cure us of our prejudices, there is another fact which should make us reflect. 
Who are the Allies? At least five nations 
among them—China, Japan, Siam, Liberia 
and Haiti—have no white population worth 
mentioning. An absolute majority of the 
people of the British Empire live in India; 
"white" men certainly, but also "natives" 
and non-Europeans. France and its colonies, if taken as a whole, contain nearly 
as much black as white, and French IndoChina contributes numerous yellow men to 
swell the total. Italy, Belgium, Portugal, 
Brazil, Cuba and others of the Allies have 
many non-white subjects and citizens. The 
United States, with its ten million Negroes 
and mixed-bloods, its Indian tribes, its Pacific colonies, cannot claim to be a racial 
unity. If we sum together all the people 
who are fighting against Germany, it seems 
probable that at least three out of four 
of them are "natives"; that is, people not 
descended from the races of Europe. Of 
course, the white race is the most largely 
represented on the actual battle line, but, 
since an army is only the delegate of a 
people, we should learn to think of the war 
as a league of all the races of mankind 
against the common foe of all humanity. 
THE ANTHONY SUFFRAGE 
BILL 
THE Pittsburgh, Pa.. Leader says: 
If the country were informed in a joint 
pledge from every Southern State, county 
and town that the people down there had 
forever foresworn against their favorite outdoor pastime of lynching Negroes, the surprise could not be keener than in the vote 
submitting the question of woman suffrage 
to the voters of Louisiana by the lower 
house of the legislature. The astonishment 
is not diminished by the supplementary assurance that the senate will pass the resolution for referendum by a vote even more 
decisive than that given in the house. 
Of course, this is only the skirmish—the 
real battle is to be fought at the polls, but 
the change in view is so radical that once 
its importance is grasped the mind ia prepared for anything. The South, and the 
extreme South in particular, has been the THE LOOKING GLASS 25 
stronghold of opposition to equal franchise 
and the basis, of course, was in the old sectional race animosity. To allow the Negro 
man a vote is bad enough, according to the 
southern view, but to give the ballot to the 
Negro woman is a step beyond endurance, 
which no genuine Southerner would even 
think of taking. 
Now that the move has been made, no 
one will be rash enough to say what may not 
happen next. If the South can give up its 
prejudice against equality in the political 
franchise, why may not the rational mind 
not hope that some time—possibly in a 
future not distant—we may be informed 
that the South has likewise abandoned its 
traditional point of view on lynching? 
Strange things are happening and advances 
in political and social positions in the South 
is not the least of them. 
* * * 
The attitude of congress exasperates the 
Los Angeles, Cal., Times: 
The suffrage bill has been temporarily 
defeated in Congress and the national enfranchisement of women indefinitely delayed. 
The southern senators said they couldn't 
stand for the Negro vote. Too bad about 
the southern senators! Because they don't 
want the Negroes to vote, the white women 
of many states are also excluded. And as 
for Negroes—well, according to all reports, 
the Negro regiments make life most unpleasant for the Hun every time they get 
within distance. Negroes have proven themselves in all of America's wars to be good 
soldiers; and in sending men out to fight 
for the safety of a nation, is it fair to 
refuse them and their families the right 
to participate in the political affairs of that 
country? 
* * * 
J. K. L. writes in the Philadelphia, Pa., 
Press: 
Recently Mississippi's senior senator, John 
Sharpe Williams, proposed an amendment 
to the Anthony Suffrage Bill to the effect 
that only white women should be permitted 
to vote. Such an undemocratic measure belongs to the same class as the Prussian 
junkers' three-class system. It is certainly 
out of place just now, when so-called Democrats are shouting the loudest about making the world safe for democracy. 
* * * 
The New York Evening Post says: 
Mr. Wilson is a very tenacious gentleman, 
who seldom admits that he is beaten, and 
he may be expected to go on working for 
the amendment until its reconsideration is 
forced. It is plain that he will have to go 
against a mountainous prejudice on the part 
of some southern senators. It is not so 
much a sex prejudice as it is a race prejudice. This came out in its full offensiveness in the speech of Senator Williams recently, who announced that he would be 
willing to vote for the amendment if it 
was made to apply to white women only! 
Well, the certain thing is that white women 
would refuse to accept it on those terms. 
The reform they seek is in the name of 
democracy, and they could not in the act 
repudiate the democratic principle. 
THE NEGRO MEASURES UP 
HARRISON RHODES writes at length 
»•*• in the October Metropolitan of the 
all-around value of the Negro in war times. 
He says: 
Testimony must come straight from the 
front. And happily it is possible to reproduce here parts of a letter to Mr. Emmett Scott from a commanding officer of 
one of the first Negro regiments to see active service in France. Himself a white 
man, he speaks for us all with authority. 
I have two battalions in the trenches. 
The three rotate. Our boys have had their 
baptism of fire. They have patrolled No 
Man's Land. They have gone on raids and 
one of my lieutenants has been cited for a 
decoration. Of course, it is still in the experimental stage, but two questions of the 
gravest importance to our Country and to 
the Negro race have, in my opinion, been 
answered. 
First: How will American Negro soldiers, 
including commissioned officers (of whom I 
still have five), get along in service with 
French soldiers and officers—as, for instance, a Negro regiment of infantry serving in a French combat division? 
Second: Will the American Negro stand 
up under the terrible shell fire of this war 
as he has always stood under rifle fire and 
thus prove his superiority spiritually and 
intellectually to all the black men of Africa 
and Asia, who have failed under these conditions and whose use must be limited to 
attack or for shock troops? 
* * * 
The program I enclose gives you an idea 
of the way I've cultivated friendship between my boys and the poilus. You should 
have seen the 500 soldiers, French and mine, 
all mixed up together cheering and laughing at the show while the Boche shells (box 
car size) went screaming over our heads. 
Now, on the second question, perhaps I 
am premature. But both my two battalions 
which have gone in have been under shell 
fire, serious and prolonged once, and the 
boys just laughed and cuddled into their 
shelters and read old newspapers. It was 
getting very warm around the rolling 
kitchen. The cooks went along about their 
business in absolute unconcern until the 
alarmed French soldiers ran to them and 
told them to beat it. One of the cooks 
said, "Oh, that's all right, boss. They ain't 
hurting us none." They are positively the / 
/ 
most stoical and mysterious men I've ever 
known. Nothing surprises them. And we 
now have expert opinion. 'Ihe French officers say they are entirely different from 
their own African troops and the Indian 
troops of the British, who are so excitable 
under shell lire. Of course, I have explained that my boys are public school boys, 
wise in their day and generation, no caste 
prejudice, accustomed to the terrible noises 
of subway, elevated and street traffic of 
New York City (which would drive any 
desert man or Himalaya mountaineer mad) 
and are all Christians. 
There is more pleasant talk, a mention 
of Jim Europe, and of the fact that they 
loyally call their village "Bakersville." 
And, finally, a cheerful statement that they 
will "plant the hobnailed boots of the 
heavy Ethiopian foot in the Kaiser's face 
all right." Does anyone much doubt that 
such soldiers will? Is it not a newer, better world where all America's children can 
so gaily, passionately fight for her? And 
if we fight for Liberty and win it, shall we 
be sparing of it to any soldier boys when 
peace shall come? 
* * * 
To this comes a word from General Pershing himself in the Baltimore Sun: 
General Pershing paid a fine compliment 
to American Negro troops in France in addressing 6,000 colored stevedores at a base 
port recently. 
"When this expedition was first started," 
he said, "the question was asked, 'Do you 
want any colored men over there?' and I 
said, 'Yes, of course, I want colored men. 
Aren't they American citizens? Can't they 
do as much in the line of fighting and as 
much work as anv other American citizen?' " 
The General said he was reared in a 
town where three-fourths of the people 
were colored; he was proud to say he was 
reared by a colored mammy and equally 
proud to say he commanded a colored troop 
during the Spanish War, and that "they 
did splendid work then and they are doing 
splendid work now!" 
"I used to wrestle with a colored boy 
named Dave Robertson," said Pershing, 
speaking of his boyhood days, "and Dave 
used to throw me as often as I threw him." 
The General was cheered enthusiastically 
by the colored regiment and by the other 
service of supply men he addressed on his 
tour. The cheers were loudest when he 
promised to give the men at the bases "a 
chance at the boche" up at the front. 
"I expect to come back here," he said, 
"and organize a few volunteer units, and 
give you guns and let you go up to the 
front and try your hand at it." 
NEW NEGROES 
E old order of Negro is changing, giving place to the new. Mr. Bolton 
Smith, of Memphis, Tenn., writing in the 
Public, tells of this in an article which combines the realization of the injustice meted 
out to the Negro with astonishment at his 
resentment. Mr. Smith begins with an account of a colored exhorter in Harlem. He 
says: 
The speaker stood on a stepladder at a 
street corner in a Negro quarter in New 
York. He was almost white, had good features and had evidently received a fair education. He used good English and spoke 
calmly and deliberately. He advised Negroes to trade only with Negroes. Rich 
Negroes added to the importance of the 
race and would give lucrative employment 
to educated Negroes, so that Negro college 
men might hope to become something better 
than bellboys in downtown hotels. "If this 
is German propaganda," he explained, "I 
hope to hear more of it. We are asking no 
more than our right.'' I quote from memory—the sense rather than the words. 
Mr. Smith thinks that "the sullen attitude 
and more imperative demand for better 
treatment" on the part of southern Negroes 
may be traceable to German influence, but, 
on the whole, he inclines to the belief that 
the change is from within. He predicts serious consequences: 
We of the South have made light of German propaganda among the Negroes, for 
we have thought of it as intended to promote a general insurrection against the 
Government of the United States, which the 
Negro considers his only friend. But before the war is won, we may discover there 
are other methods by which American 
power can be lessened—methods within easy 
reach of the Negro, as well as of every 
other subject race—methods which in secrecy and sullenness lead, unintentionally 
perhaps but none the less inevitably, to 
open clashes, as in East St. Louis. Unless 
we speedily awaken to the situation, this 
example will be followed in dozens of other 
places before this war is over, and widespread sabotage among Negro workers in 
mine and workshop can be expected to follow. 
* * * 
Several incidents are cited to show the 
Negro's change in attitude: 
A house servant said to a boy friend ofmine: "When they lynched a German in 
Illinois, the Cabinet had a four-hour meeting about it, but no Cabinet ever had a 
four-minute meeting about the lynchin<>- of 
hundreds of Negroes." A Negro chauffeur 
npH 
•Zd THE CRISIS THE LOOKING GLASS 27 
went without supper at an aviation camp 
to which he had taken some Y. M. C . A. 
performers, because the sutler outside the 
gate when asked to sell him a sandwich 
answered gruffly: "Yes, I'll hand it to you 
through the window. You can't come in 
here." The man said to me: "I told him I 
had not expected to eat it in there, but I 
didn't like to feel I wasn't good enough to 
go inside his shack to buy it." I have 
known this Negro man for yeai-s and am 
sure this feeling—or the will to show it— 
is of recent growth, and the fact that he 
went supperless for its gratification shows 
it is held with some tenacity. 
* * * 
Still more significant are the following 
incidents, indicating a growing determination on the part of the Negro to claim 
his rights at any cost. 
The Tennessee law requires whites to be 
seated in street cars from the front backward.—Negroes from the back forward. 
The Negroes observe this law fairly well, 
partly, no doubt, thanks to the attitude of 
the white conductor. 
Not long ago in a Tennessee city the 
newspapers reported the following: A Negro woman coming into a car in which 
Negroes were standing, although there 
were vacant seats forward, passed through 
the standing Negroes, by the seated whites, 
and took a seat in the front of the car. 
Such a thing had never happened before. 
The motorman was about to strike her with 
his heavy metal switch bar when a Negro 
man interfered. He was killed in the fray 
—presumably by one of the white passengers, so far unidentified. 
Notwithstanding this, I had the following experience a few weeks later in the 
same city. When I entered the car, it was 
almost full of Negroes, the white people 
occupying only three of the front cross 
seats. The extreme front seats running 
parallel with the car being unoccupied, I 
should have sat there—but I do not care 
for those seats, and so I occupied the cross 
seat second from the front, the first and 
third cross seats being already occupied by 
white people. Presently the white people 
in the seat behind me got out, and this seat 
was occupied by Negroes, and before I had 
realized it a rather venerable Negro couple 
finding no vacant seats back of me had 
passed my seat and were seated on the 
empty parallel seats to which I have referred, and ahead of the white people. I 
could see the old man did not relish what 
he was doing but was being shamed into 
it by the old woman. With visions of a 
violent altercation, if not worse, I was at 
their side in an instant telling them to 
take my seat. The old man moved at once, 
but even then the old woman followed reluctantly, clearly showing that what she 
wanted was not a seat but a scene. Here 
we have two such evidences of a changed 
attitude on the part of the Negro in one 
city within a few weeks—and there may 
have been others not reported in the papers, because, like the one in which I took 
part, it was not followed by any serious 
consequences. 
* * H* 
The Negro's new radicalism is due to the 
northern Negro press—of which Mr. Smith 
thinks none too highly—and to the country's 
indeterminate policy toward lynching. The 
writer overlooks completely the spiritual significance in this revulsion of feeling and 
seems to think if lynching is stopped, even 
the "more radical Negroes" will improve! 
He concludes: 
The failure of the conservative friends 
of the Negro to announce any policy or to 
organize for his protection leaves such an 
organization as the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People and 
such newspapers as TH E CRISIS and the 
Chicago Defender in well nigh complete 
possession of the field, and the incidents to 
which I have referred are, I believe, in 
large measure the result. When will we 
awaken to the importance of a definite policy and proper organization to carry it out? 
The national policy, North and South, 
with reference to the Negro has been a 
hand to mouth one. The result of it all is 
an attitude of thwarted ambition and 
growing sullenness even in the North, 
where the Negro is supposed to be better off. 
* * * 
The Atlanta Journal, a white paper, 
says: 
"Here is an example the white people of 
Atlanta may well take note of," said Forrest Adair, Chairman of the Atlanta Liberty Loan Campaign, in announcing Wednesday a subscription of $50,000 from the 
Standard Life Insurance Company on Auburn Avenue. "That is the biggest subscription we have yet received, as far as 
the amount in relation to the capacity of 
the purchaser is concerned. In addition to 
the $50,000, H. E. Perry and H. H. Pace, 
officials of the company, took $1,000 a piece, 
and employees $3,550, making a total of 
$55,550." 
"It is a hard saying, but it may well 
be that America needed the war to get rid 
to some extent of the impurities of class 
distinction, of racial bigotry and separateness, of urban provincialism and sectional 
selfishness, and to give us the new America, 
with a better appreciation of our mutual 
dependence, of the necessity of co-operation, 
and of the worth of character, regardless 
of race or color or sex or fortune." 
CHARLES E. HUGHES, 
in the Journal of the 
American Bar Association. men of the month 
THE LATE KENNETH LEWIS 
W/"E present this month notices of four 
™ * men—a soldier, a minister, a detective and a preacher of the Word. Curious 
combination, you will say, and so it is; and 
yet perhaps the very juxtiposition of these 
varying types pictures the day and civilization which presents them—a day of war in 
field and social work; a day when, for our 
souls' balance, we must hold up the mirror 
of moral light and see our good, our bad 
and our crime. 
First comes the boy who died the herodeath, with thousands of others. Just a 
private soldier was Kenneth Lewis, of the 
District of Columbia, but a clean, fine young 
man of only eighteen years—a volunteer in 
the First Separate Battalion. His Captain 
wrote to the bereaved Mother: 
I desire to express my sympathy to you 
in your hour of sacrifice. 
Kenneth Lewis was particularly near and 
dear to me, for he was my orderly in Camp 
Stuart, and on our voyage to France. I 
choose him here in "the line" as one of the 
twelve best men in my detachment of fortysix. He lived up to my expectations in every 
way and conducted himself as a good, clean 
man and a soldier. Though sorely wounded, he displayed true American grit to me 
and to his nurses in the hospital. 
In recognition of his devotion, courage and 
sacrifice, the French Army granted him the 
Medal Militaire, a high honor. 
Not only as his Commanding Officer, but 
as his friend, permit me to extend my condolences in your sorrow and to assure you 
that he gave up his life like a man, for 
honor and his country. 
"Selig der den Er, 
"In Sieges-gldnze findet!" 
What can his country do for such sacrifice? It can make itself as clean and unselfish as he,—and it was this vision that 
animated all the seventy-five years of the 
life of Jenkin Lloyd Jones. He was a landsman of Lloyd George, brought to Wisconsin 
by his humble parents in his infancy. He 
fought as a private in the Civil War, then 
studied theology and became a Unitarian 
Minister. But he was not merely a minister—he was a flaming fount of inspiration 
THE LATE JENKIN LLOYD JONES 
28 MEN OF THE MONTH 29 
DR. ERNEST LYON 
and a dynamic social force. It was he who 
made a shrine of Lincoln's birthplace, who 
founded a great human institutional church 
and summer school, who inspired the 
World's Congress of Religions and the Illinois State Conference of Charities. Is it 
necessary to add that he never let pass an 
opportunity for protesting against the 
wrongs of the American Negro? He died 
September 12, and lies buried at Hillside. 
"And was it not high honor, 
"The kill-side for a pall, 
"To lie in state while angels wait 
"With stars for tapers tall!" 
For such fighters in War and Peace we 
need the Home Guard to keep the home fires 
burning. The various State Councils of 
Defense have used the work of colored citizens, but none more effectively than that of 
Maryland. This is due largely to Ernest 
Lyon. Dr. Lyon was born in British Honduras, in 1860. He was educated at New 
Orleans, and entered the ministry of the 
M. E. Church. From 1903-1911, he was 
United States Minister to Liberia, and 
he IS now Liberian Consul to the United 
States and pastor of John Wesley Church, 
BALTIMORE. The colored division of the 
MARYLAND Council of Defense, of which Dr. 
Lyon Is Chairman, IS responsible for much 
of the splendid work done by colored Maryland during the war. 
In. the three Liberty Loan Campaigns the 
colored people of the state subscribed $2,-
000,000; to the Red Cross and the General 
War Fund they have given $65,000; they 
have put into Thrift and United States War 
Savings Stamps $100,000. The Woman's 
Division of the Council has made and distributed to the enlisted men, not only of 
Maryland, but of other states, 2,000 sweaters, wristlets, socks, etc., and in addition 
1,500 comfort Kits; it has contributed 
through its affiliated organizations for musical instruments, pianos, recreation, etc., 
$1,500. The Council has held and addressed 
150 public meetings and sent out since 
January 5,000 pieces of literature. Long 
before the Federal Government had provided for the recreation of the colored soldiers at Camp Meade, the colored Council 
had perfected plans for their recreation and 
moral supervision through the good offices 
of the ministers of the city, their patriotic 
followers and the presidents of clubs and 
benevolent organizations, who placed at 
E. H. HOLMES 30 THE CRISIS 
FOUR SERVANT S OF TH E GOVERNMEN T 
RALP H W . TYLE R DR. 0. V. ROMA N 
Official Wa r Correspondent Surgeon-General's Office 
DR. J. L. JOHNSON 
Minister to Liberia 
DR . G. E. HAYNE S 
Department of Labor RED CHANT 31 
their disposal their lecture rooms and club 
houses for the use and comfort of the soldiers. 
Under its various departments, labor 
problems, home economics, conservation of 
food supplies and fuel, legal aspects of registrants, etc., have been considered and 
looked after. The work done and the interest conserved have won for this Division 
the praise and commendation of both Governor Harrington and the Executive Committee, through General Waters, its Chairman. 
The Division has just closed what has become a part of Maryland's history, a State 
Wide Farmers' Exhibition and Conference. 
It brought together a great concourse of 
colored people and many white persons. The 
Governors of New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia and West Virginia sent 
prominent colored men to represent their 
respective states. Governor Harrington, of 
Maryland, opened the conference Monday, 
September 16, 1918, with an address which 
has been widely circulated and favorably 
commented upon. The press has been unanimous in acknowledging that the event was 
not only one of the most creditable, but one 
of the most profitable in the history of the 
colored people of the state. 
Finally, we come to one who is a fighter 
on another front—a front just as vital, just 
as important as the Others, but one from 
which we shrink and which we hardly understand. Mr. E. H. Holmes was born in 
Vicksburg, Miss., forty-six years ago. Today he is Superintendent of Identification in 
the Washington State Penitentiary. The 
position is one of great responsibility and 
trust—the prison records, matters relating 
to identification of criminals, foreign exchanges, and all correspondence of this department are personally supervised by him. 
He received his appointment at the hands 
of Ernest Lister, Democratic Governor of 
the State of Washington. 
So here then are: the colored detector of 
crime in the far West, the colored leader of 
civic war work, the dead white maker of 
ideals, and the Negro war hero. Of such is 
America. 
RED CHANT 
ALFRED KREYMBORG 
' I ,HERE are veins in my body, Fenton 
Johnson— 
veins that sway and dance because of blood 
that is red. 
There are veins in your body, Fenton Johnson— 
veins that sway and dance because of blood 
that is red. 
Let a master prick me with his pin— 
the bubble of blood shows red. 
Let a master prick you with his pin— 
the bubble of blood shows red. 
Let a woman love me, 
let a woman love you— 
the blood that rises is red. 
Let my gray eye turn to yours, 
let your brown eye turn to mine— 
the blood behind them is red. 
Let my skin wrinkle to a grin, 
let your skin wrinkle to a grin— 
red blood inspired the wrinkles. 
Let me think of a spirit, 
let you think of a spirit— 
the bodies that nourished the thought are 
red. 
Let me think of loving you, 
let you think of loving me— 
the hearts that nourished the thought are 
red. 
Let me say it as well—why shouldn't I?— 
let you say it as well—why shouldn't you?— 
the tongues that say it are red. 
Let me sing you a song—is it foolish?— 
let you sing me a song—is it foolish?— 
songs and singers are red. 
Let us go arm in arm down State Street— 
let them cry, the easily horrified: 
"Gods of my fathers, 
look at the white man chumming with the 
black man!" 
Let us nudge each other, you, and I— 
without humility, without defiance: 
"We are red"— 
let us answer, not answer! VINCENT 
SAVNDERS 
MUSIC AND ART 
B
ERTHA CHAMBERS, of Lynchburg, 
Va., who has been attending the Columbia University Summer School of Music, 
was asked to teach the class of forty students a Negro melody. She taught ''Listen 
to the Lambs," by R. Nathaniel Dett, and 
was highly commended. 
G Sylvia E. Lyons, a fourteen year old 
colored girl, of Boston, Mass., and piano pupil of Mrs. Ancrum Forster, won a first 
prize in the September Etude for an essay 
on "Muisc and Patriotism." 
C A collection of traditional Negro songs, 
"Old Melodies of the South," memorized by 
Mary Gillen and harmonized by Oliver Chalifous, has been published. 
G Kemper Herreld, violinist, has been heard 
in a series of recitals during the month of 
September. At the concerts given at Wilberforce University, Clarksburg and 
Charleston, W. Va., Mr. Herreld featured 
"An African Lament," composed by Colonel 
Charles Young. x 
C The September number of Musical America publishes a picture of the New York 
colored Regimental Band in Europe, viewed 
by General Pershing, who speaks appreciatively of the joy the music of this band 
has given. 
G All-native programs were planned for 
the sixty-first annual Worcester Music Festival. At the fourth concert, Emma Roberts, the well known American contralto, 
sang a group of selections, including "I stood 
on de Ribber," by H. T. Burleigh. 
G During September, the Dunbar Community Centre gave an entertainment for 
the soldiers at Dunbar High School, Washington. An event of the gathering was the 
singing of Mme. Miura, the Japanese prima 
donna, who not only sang arias from the 
operas, but joined with Mrs. Newton D. 
Baker, wife of the Secretary of War, in the 
choruses of the folk-songs sung by the colored children and students. Mrs. Baker 
gave an address, and also sang for the 
soldiers. 
C Colonel Franklin A. Denison, of the 
370th Infantry, American Expeditionary 
Forces, formerly the 8th Illinois, has returned to Chicago on sick leave. He was 
attacked with acute rheumatism before his 
regiment sailed. 
G Twenty wounded Negro soldiers, headed 
by 100 Home Defense Guards, paraded in 
Philadelphia, Pa., to aid the Mercy Hospital 
Fund. 
C The New York Clef Club, under the musical direction of Will Marion Cook, will 
tour New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Washington, Virginia, Illinois and New Jersey 
during November, with the aim of fostering 
the development and exploitation of the best 
Afro-American music. 
C Ethel Richardson, the only colored competitor among five, won the year's scholarship to the Institute of Musical Art in New 
York City. 
THE WAR 
S
INCE August 21, the colored divisions 
of troops, both the 92d and 93d, have 
pushed forward 12,000 yards on the enemy's 
line. One division of colored troops advanced 600 yards without a single loss. 
When they began their attack on the towns 
of Sandemont and Recourt, they ran the 
Huns from their trenches and captured both 
towns and several villages on the other side 
of Recourt. It was then that a command 
was given them to halt or retire to receive 
rations and rest, but not a man obeyed the 
command until they had driven the enemy 
out of sight. Monday, August 26, both colored divisions almost annihilated four fresh 
divisions of German reserve troops who had 
been sent into the enemy's line to drive back 
those "Black Americans" in their attack on 
the town of Bertincourt, but the town was 
soon taken by the Negro troops, who captured 800 Hun prisoners. 
C Major J. E. Spingarn, formerly Chairman of the Board of Directors of the N. A. 
A. C. P., and lately of the General Staff at 
32 
the horizon THE HORIZON 33 
Washington, has arrived in France, and is 
with the 161st Infantry. 
C A new Hostess House for colored soldiers has been opened at Camp Sherman, 
Chillicothe, Ohio, with Dr. Amanda V. Gray, 
a colored physician of Washington, D. C, 
on the staff. 
At Louisville, Ky., schools for the colored soldiers have been held in twenty-seven 
barracks with an attendance of 2,314 during a single week. A colored secretary is 
in charge of this work. 
C A white Lieutenant in a letter says: "At 
several times during the day at intervals my 
attention was attracted by one of my colored soldiers, who kept firing at some object 
in the enemy trenches that seemed invisible 
to everybody else. Very shortly afterwards, 
we captured the enemy's first line trenches. 
I noticed a pile of dead Germans at a certain point in the front trench. It was the 
exact spot at which the Negro soldier from 
Alabama had aimed twenty-one shots. He 
thought he had been firing at one man, but 
instead he had put a rifle ball through the 
skulls of twenty-one Germans." 
C Sergeant Robert Terry, of the First Separate Company of Baltimore, and Sergeant 
Charles Hughes, of the First Separate Battalion of Washington, D. C, have been presented the Croix de Guerre for bravery. 
C Corporal Isaac Valley, of Gerard, Kans., 
who has won the Distinguished Service 
Cross, served three years in the 24th Infantry. A private in attempting to throw 
a grenade dropped it in the trench in the 
midst of his comrades. Corporal Valley had 
no time to pick it up and throw it out. He, 
therefore, put his foot on it and shoved it 
into the mud. The grenade exploded and 
tore off part of his foot. His only comment 
as he was carried back was, "I saved the 
others even if it did get me." When General Pershing heard of the incident, he 
awarded the ribbon, which is the ambition 
of every fighting man. 
(I French colonies in Africa and Asia have 
furnished the Motherland since the war began with 918,000 men, of whom 680,000 have 
been combatants and the remainder, workers. 
(I More than 500 people attended the dedication of a bronze tablet and a Service 
Flag, containing 484 stars, at the colored 
Y. M. C. A., in Cincinnati, Ohio, 
Mr. and Mrs. Daniel Ferguson, a colored 
family of Institute, W. Va., have three sons 
in the U. S. Army: one, a captain; another, 
a machine gun insti'uctor at Camp Hancock, Ga., and a third with the U. S. Army 
in France. 
C American Negro troops are engaged with 
the forces clearing the Argonne Forest, 
northwest of Verdun. 
(I A rest house designed chiefly for soldiers 
and sailors has been erected on the Columbus Avenue Playground, Boston, Mass. It 
was chiefly promoted by knitting classes organized by Mrs. B. R. Wilson, with Mrs. R. 
J. Jeffrey as secretary. 
C The following are some of the Negro 
troopers who have been decorated with the 
Croix de Guerre for conspicuous gallantry in 
the war in France: Sergeants Daniel W. 
Lewis, William Butler, Charles Rick, Robert Collins; Corporal Fletcher Battles; 
Privates Gilbert Johnson, Lionel Rogers, 
George Chapman, Samuel Jackson, Arthur 
Simpson, Morris Link, Marshall Scott and 
George E. Hannible. 
C Helen E. Hagan, the widely known colored pianist, of New Haven, Conn., who won 
the Samuel Sanford Foreign Fellowship 
from the Yale University Conservatory of 
Music, has been selected by the Y. M. C. A. 
to play for the boys in France. 
C John W. Ovletrie, a colored man with the 
Y. M. C. A. in France, from Alabama, has 
been appointed an army chaplain with the 
rank of First Lieutenant. 
C Dr. C. E. Yancey has been appointed 
dentist in the Base Hospital of the Explosive Plant at Nitro, W. Va. He is a Howard '15 dental graduate. 
C Julius Hart, the colored chauffeur for 
Dr. W. L. Bullard, Columbus, Ga., has invented three aerial bombs. Two have already been accepted by the Government, one 
of them at a price of $15,000; the price for 
the other two has not yet been announced. 
The bombs shoot in different directions,-—• 
one, fifty times before the chief explosion 
comes; another, sixty times; and a third, 
1,000 times before the final discharge. 
C There is a total of 400,000 Negro soldiers under arms, of whom 100,000 are in 
France. 
C In the recent clash with Mexico, the 
first American military unit to cross the 
line was a troop of colored cavalry from 34 THE CRISIS 
the Famous Tenth, under command of Captain Hungerford, who was shot dead at the 
head of his troops. 
G Three hundred and twenty out of 450 
colored students taking the forty-seven day 
military training at Howard University 
have been awarded certificates. 
C Lieutenant Lawrence O'Riley, of Boston, Mass., is the third in his family to receive a commission in the U. S. Army. His 
father and brother are now in France with 
the "Buffaloes" and he is a recent graduate from Camp Pike, assigned to Camp 
Sherman, Chillicothe, Ohio. 
C The War Department has designated the 
following colored institutions as special 
places of education for units of the S. A. 
T. C.: Howard, Lincoln, Fisk, Meharry, Atlanta, Morehouse, Virginia Union, Wilberforce, Wiley and Bishop. 
G In Portsmouth, Va., the colored Mutual 
Savings Bank has been designated as a U. 
S. Government depository on account of its 
record in the Liberty Loan campaigns. In 
the first loan, 12 persons subscribed $2,000; 
in the second, 464 persons subscribed for 
$25,000; and in the third, 925 subscribed 
for $102,000. 
d Five white Y. M. C. A. secretaries employed by the National War Work Council 
of the United States at the colored building 
at Camp McArthur, Waco, Tex., have been 
replaced by colored secretaries. 
C From the Reserve Officers' Training 
Camp at Fort Des Moines, Iowa, 639 colored men were commissioned. Since then 
160 others have been commissioned from 
various camps and recently there have been 
added 107 officers from Camp Pike and 33 
from Camp Taylor. This makes a total of 
939 officers from the training schools beside those in the Medical Reserve Corps. 
Colored men are now being received in the 
Veterinary Corps. There are 41 colored 
chaplains. 
G A cablegram from the British East African Expeditionary Force announces the 
deaths of Fred D. Ballou and Robert Pritchett, National War Work Secretaries for 
the Soldiers of Africa. Ballou was a graduate of Knoxville College, and Pritchett, of 
Lincoln University. 
INDUSTRY 
THE Chevrolet Motor Company, of Flint, 
Mich., employs four colored foremen: 
Harry Nelson, Thomas Kelly, Lovell Roueland and S. J. Smith. 
O The Labor Service Board of the U. S. 
Government has disapproved of the labor 
card system which Birmingham and other 
southern cities have tried to introduce for 
Negro labor. 
C Factories at Hickory, N. C., are giving 
employment to 150 colored laborers. The 
Hickory Hosiery Company has installed machinery in a building owned by Mr. S. A. 
Brown, a well-to-do colored citizen. This 
hosiery mill is operated exclusively by Negroes and gives employment to fifty colored 
women. 
C Isaac Bernard, a colored tenant of the 
G. E. Rivers' Plantation at Yazoo City, 
Miss., delivered a bale of cotton at market 
which brought him $273, said to be the highest price ever paid for any grade of cotton. 
C Wesley Thomas and H. A. Bowley have 
been given positions in the Electrical Department of the Erie Railroad in Jersey 
City, N. J. They will serve as storage battery men under Edward Crabb, colored foreman, who has a record of fifteen years' service with this company. 
G Among the new industries in which colored women are being employed in New Jersey are the following: Cigar making, fur 
dyeing, awning making, shirt making, handkerchief making, helpers on knitted sweaters, making celluloid novelties, helpers on 
aprons and towels, pasting and liningtrunks, packing suitcase handles, garment 
making, busheling and thread cutting on 
soldiers' garments, helpers in laundries, 
toys and dolls, buttons, feathers, fur cutting, 
candy making, picking fowls and pasting 
labels in packing houses. 
G A colored man, C. B. Burnet, has been 
appointed by the Fiscal Court to investigate and report on the unemployment of 
Negroes in Louisville and Jefferson County, 
Ky. His salary is $125 per month, of which 
the county will pay one-third and the Federal Government, two-thirds. 
G Booker T. Washington, Jr., son of the 
noted colored educator, has accepted the position of Claims Adjuster, representing the 
9,000 Negro employees at the U. S. Gov-THE HORIZON 35 
ernment air nitrate plant, at Mussel Shoals, 
Ala. 
EDUCATION 
TUSKEGEE INSTITUTE opened its 
thirty-eighth annual session September 10. More than 1,500 students have been 
enrolled this year, and the first day's enrollment was one of the largest in the history of the school. 
C Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Malone, colored, of 
St. Louis, Mo., recently contributed $1,200 
to Tuskegee Institute. 
C The Hickory, N. C, School Commissioners have erected a brick building, costing 
$4,500, for colored youth. The eighth and 
ninth grades have been added to the graded 
course of study. 
C Geneva Daniels, a colored girl of Bloomington, 111., has won in a competitive examination the George Washington Scholarship, providing $300 a year for four years 
at any college in the country. Miss Daniels 
graduated from the Normal High School 
with the class of 1918, and will, in October, enter Chicago University. 
C The Rosenwald School House BuildingFund reports that up to July 1, 1918, 450 
school houses had been built in eleven 
Southern States at a cost of $665,555. Of 
this Mr. Rosenwald gave $186,477, the colored people $194,480, with the balance from 
public school funds. 
C The American Rolling Mill Company at 
Middletown, Ohio, has built the Booker T. 
Washington School for colored children at 
Bon Veue, costing $60,000, and turned it 
over to the city. Three colored teachers 
and 114 pupils have been enrolled. 
C There are fifty-six colored teachers in the 
Public Schools of Cleveland, Ohio, teaching mostly white pupils. 
MEETINGS 
ONE thousand Negro residents of Ohio 
and Western Pennsylvania cities participated in a patriotic demonstration at 
Youngstown, featured by a parade and a 
mass meeting, with addresses by Negro orators. 
C The Equal Rights League held a four 
days' session in Chicago, with ninety delegates, and adopted resolutions asking for 
representation of the Negro at the Peace 
Conference. The Rev. Mr. E. W. Moore 
was elected president. 
C The Unincorporated National Baptist 
Convention met at Little Rock, Ark. There 
were 2,500 delegates, representing thirtyeight state conventions. The Governor 
made an address at one of the meetings. 
C Six thousand Negro Baptists attended 
the thirty-eighth annual session of the National Baptist Convention at the Coliseum 
in St. Louis, Mo., and endorsed the war 
policy of President Wilson. E. C. Morris, 
the president, said: "A black face is a badge 
of loyalty." Roscoe Conkling Simmons was 
among the speakers. 
C Ten thousand Negroes gathered in Hadley Park, Nashville, Tenn., and celebrated 
Labor Day. A. N. Johnson, President of 
the Negro Board of Trade, presided, and 
Judge J. Madison Wells delivered an address. 
C Two meetings have recently been held in 
New York City, each claiming to be the 
Biennial Session of the Movable Committee 
of the Grand United Order of Odd Fellows. 
E. H. Morris, of Chicago, was continued as 
Grandmaster by one body and J. S. Noel, 
of Charleston, W. Va., was elected by the 
other. This probably means a law suit by 
a fraternal order with some 300,000 members. 
C An invitation has been sent out for a preliminary dinner and conference to consider 
a "solemn memorial on the Tercentenary of 
the Transplanting of the Negro Race to the 
United States." A general invitation to 
three' hundred prominent colored men and 
women throughout the nation will soon be 
issued. 
C A labor Efficiency rally was held in Mobile, Ala. Governor Henderson, of Alabama, and Governor Bilbo, of Mississippi, 
were among the speakers, and a specially 
trained choir of 500 Negro voices sang. 
C Two thousand people in Columbus, Ohio, 
took part in the celebration of the fifty-sixth 
anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation at Memorial Hall, under the auspices 
of the Knights of Pythias. 
C Negroes of the Central West held their 
annual Camp Meeting, September 8, at Lexington, Ky. A reproduction of the parable 
of the Prodigal Son was witnessed by several thousand colored and white people. 36 th e Crisis 
THE CHURCH 
THE First Baptist Church of Charlotte, 
N. C, has been completed at a cost of 
$43,000 and the last mortgages burned. The 
Rev. Mr. P. S. Lewis is pastor. 
C Eleven thousand dollars has been raised 
through a drive to clear the indebtedness 
of the People's Baptist Church, Boston, 
Mass. The Rev. Dr. D. S. Klugh is pastor. 
0 Among three or four colored men who 
are studying for the Roman Catholic priesthood is Norman A. DuKette, of Dubuque 
College, Iowa. 
C The three Negro Methodist Churches are 
still considering the proposition of merging 
under the name of the United Methodist 
Episcopal Church. A committee of three 
bishops, three ministers and three laymen 
from each of the three churches has been 
appointed. They formulated twelve articles 
of agreement. The C. M. E. Church has 
accepted the articles, but the other general 
conferences do not meet until 1920. The 
membership of the three bodies, according 
to the census, is 1,056,447, but they claim 
1,440,168 members. 
POLITICS 
JM. WEIL, in St. Louis, Mo., is the first 
• Negro in many years to be elected a 
member of the Republican State Committee. 
(I Six colored men in Chicago, 111., were 
nominated on the Republican ticket: George 
W. Ellis, for Judge of the Municipal Court; 
S. B. Turner, for the Legislature from the 
First District; Adelbert H. Roberts and 
Warren Douglass, for the Legislature from 
the Third District; Colonel J. H. Johnson 
and Charles Griffin, for County Commissioners. 
C A movement for endowing qualified 
women with the vote has been started by a 
member of the Legislature and enthusiastically taken up by women and men of Jamaica, B. W. I. 
C Mrs. W. L. Presto, a colored woman of 
Seattle, Wash., was a candidate for State 
Senator in a recent primary. 
PERSONAL 
DR. JAMES C. FOWLER, a Negro graduate of the University of Pittsburgh, 
has been appointed one of the city health 
physicians by Mayor E. V. Babcock. 
C The State Board of Health has employed 
Dr. S. B. Ennis, a Negro physician of Troy, 
Ala., to take charge of educational work 
among the Negroes of the state in the crusade that has been launched against social 
diseases. 
(I Dr. E. A. White, former President of 
Walden College, has been elected Field Secretary of the Freedman's Aid Society at 
Cincinnati, Ohio, to do special work in the 
centenary campaign. 
C Dr. D. A. Bethea, of Terre Hatue, Ind., 
has been appointed Medical Inspector of 
Schools, and a member of the Board of Directors of the Anti-Tuberculosis Society. 
This is the first time that such honors have 
come to a colored man in that city. 
(I Emma Griffin, of the widely known 
colored vaudeville team of Griffin Sisters, 
is dead at Chicago, 111. 
C Mrs. Ida Hudson is 
connected with the firm 
of Hudson & Butler, 
Undertakers, at Oakland, Cal., specializing 
in funeral directing. 
She has completed a 
Post-course in floral 
decorating under Professor Wagner of New York. 
C. R. V. Green, having served five years 
as Deputy Registering Clerk in East San 
Diego, Cal., has been appointed Deputy 
City Marshal. 
C Blanche A. Perkins has been taken into 
the service of the U. S. Department of Agriculture as Supervising Agent of Home Economics Work for the State of Louisiana. 
She has five colored agents under her. 
(L Mrs. Powhatan Bagnall has been elected Director of the Harriet Tubman Home 
for Working Girls at Boston, Mass. 
(L Dr. George W. Adams, for ten years 
cashier of the Mechanics and Farmers Bank 
of Durham, N. C, is dead. 
G James Admire, a colored policeman of 
Indianapolis, Ind., for eighteen years, is 
dead at the age of sixty. 
C Dr. Peter Murray has been appointed 
Assistant Chief Surgeon at Freedman's 
Hospital, Washington, D. C, succeeding Dr.. 
Simeon Carson, who has resigned. Dr. Mur 
ray is a medical graduate of Howard. THE HORIZON 37 
0 The Reverend Mr. 
II. H. Summers was 
born at Hagerstown, 
Md. He was principal 
of the Hygienic Grammar School, Steelton, 
Pa.,' seventeen years. 
He received his A. B. 
degree from Howard University in 1910, and 
his B. D. from Oberlin Theological Seminary in 1913. He is stationed in Franklin, 
Pa., as pastor of Bethel A. M. E. Church. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
CITIZENS and packing interests have 
pledged $200,000 for a three years' 
program of social uplift among colored people in East St. Louis, 111. This includes coordination of all existing agencies, community centers, day nurseries and physical and 
educational classes. 
ft On August 31, the Broad Ax, a colored 
weekly of Chicago, 111., celebrated its twenty-third birthday. 
G The Provident Hospital, Chicago, 111., has 
opened a new department, a post-graduate 
course. 
C The colored hospital at Garrison and 
Lawton Avenues, St. Louis, Mo., has been 
purchased by the city for $62,500. 
ft At the annual meet of the National A. 
A. U. championships held in Chicago, 111., 
Robert E . Johnson, of Camp Upton, N. Y., 
won the five mile run in the junior events. 
ft Black's Blue Book, a business directory 
of Chicago, 111., has been issued. 
ft Colored employees at the Washington, 
D. C, Navy Yard raised among themselves 
$1,000 for Camp Pleasant, a camp for poor 
colored children, of which Mrs. Laura Bruce 
Glenn is superintendent. 
ft A young colored woman of Porto Rico, 
who understands Spanish and English, 
wishes a position in the United States. She 
may be addressed in care of TH E CRISIS. 
ft Justice Frank J. O'Brien, in Sacramento, 
Cal., has awarded a judgment of $50 to the 
Rev. Mr. Harvey, a colored man, against 
W. L. Begelow, who refused him service in 
his restaurant. 
ft So well did Company C perform its 
duties in the recent rioting in Philadelphia, 
Pa., that Colonel William B. Mills has issued an order to uniform and equip three 
more colored companies. 
FOREIGN 
T HENRY CARR, who for many years has 
••• been Inspector of Schools in the Gold 
Coast Protectorate, W. Africa, has been 
appointed Provincial Commissioner of that 
colony. 
ft Jacob Silvanus Bruce-Vanderpuye, Barrister-at-Law, has been made Gyasie Meiatse 
to one of the native chiefs of Accra, W. 
Africa, a position of great importance. 
C In Johannesburg, the Mineworkers' 
Union has expressed itself against the removal of the color bar, saying that the 
Union would object to the Government running mines with colored labor, including colored men with natives. They were fighting 
for a white South Africa. 
GHETTO 
CARL J. MURPHY, Editor of the Afro-
~
i
 . American, Baltimore, Md., was 
charged with "disorderly conduct," arrested and fined $26.45 for refusing to be "JimCrowed" on a train in the W. B. & A. Station, scheduled for Washington. A case has 
been started against the railroad company. 
C At the Hog Island Shipyards, where colored riveters made championship records, 
continued effort is being made to keep Negroes from working as mechanics and to use 
them as common laborers. 
It is charged that in the Canal Zone 
wages for Negro workers remain the same 
as in 1912, with additions of $5 per month 
and one cent an hour. White workers have 
had their salaries raised 35%. Negroes 
must pay rent from their wages, while the 
white workers get rent, fuel and light free. 
C Street car motormen and conductors in 
Pittsburgh, Pa., refused higher wages, when 
the Railway Company agreed to give them a 
raise, providing they accept the employment 
of colored men as motormen. 
ft The Supreme Court of Georgia has handed down a decision restraining for all time 
Negro Shriners from using the name, insignia or regalia of the Shriners. 
C The following lynching has taken place 
since our last record: 
Waycross, Ga., September 24, Sandy 
Reeves, hanged for alleged assault on a 
white girl. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MEN AND WOMEN TRAINED IN AGRICULTURE 
WILL BE IN GREAT DEMAND AFTER THE WAR 
"Plans for providing the 
returned soldier with land 
are rapidly taking shape. 
*' * * Let us not think of 
the individual returned soldier exiled to a tongue of 
green land between the 
stony breasts of western 
mountains * * * but of organic communities of one 
or two hundred farms with 
competent agricultural advisers to brace up the technique of those who are 
willing to learn."—The New 
Republic. 
Secretary Lane is urging that plans and 
surveys and studies be instituted now so that 
when demobilization begins, farms and homes 
mav be offered to the returned soldiers on the 
L'nder the Smith-Hughes Vocational Education Act, the Government is already training Teachers, Agriculturalists and Mechanics 
whose services will be in great demand after 
the war to help these soldiers and rural inhabitants adjust themselves to the problems 
of reconstruction. 
Tuskegee Institute offers the Smith-Hughes Course in: 
Teacher-Training Agriculture Mechanics Home Economics 
Splendid opportunities for young men and women of purpose, and an exceptional 
chance for young men who have been placed in deferred classes or exempted. 
You may enroll NOW. 
Address, R. R. MOTON, Principal, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 
1888 1918 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Thirty-First Session 
OPENE D SEPTEMBE R 24, 1918 
COURSES 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State High 
School Certificate which will 
admit to Standard Normal 
Schools and Colleges 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
EXTENSIVE TRADE COURSES 
ENROLLMENT 1917-1918 , 49 6 
Athletic Training. Football, Baseball, Tennis, Etc. 
FULL COURSE IN MILITARY TRAINING 
For Catalog and Further information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D. D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
The Alcorn A.& M. Colege 
Alcorn, Mississippi 
State A. & M . College for Negroes 
Departments: Academic, Agricultural 
and Mechanical; Strong Faculty, 
healthful location; terms reasonable. 
For catalog of information address, 
L. J. ROWAN, President, 
Alcorn, Mississippi. 
Th e CRISI S Cal endar 
fo r 191 9 is t o b e a 
TERCENTENAR Y CALENDAR 
Illustrated with faces of interesting babies 
Price 25 cents 
Ready December 1. 1918. 
N o Christmas gift will brin g mor e chee r to 
you r friend thi n a year's subscription to the 
CRISIS . An d we have a pretty car d to announce the gift. Subscriptio n $1.00 per year. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue Ne w Yor k City 
Mention Ti l Ciiiii. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MARY McLEOD BETHUNE, - - Principal. 
BEREA N MANUA L TRAININ G 
AN D INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
South College Ave. and N. 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October i, 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age, sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object. 
Efficiency ou r aim . 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Ave. Phila., Pa. 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs" Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full njormation. 
Day and Evening Classes 
FALL TERM BEGAN SEPTEMBER 3, 1918 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help You Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wllberforce , 0. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th ST., PHILA., PA. 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping 
Our students recently appointed at the Navy 
Yard, Arsenal, and Post Office as stenographers and clerks are receiving Big Salaries— 
male and female stenographers are averaging 
$1800 per .year. W e are informed that one 
of our male students is a stenographer in 
France, 
SCHOOL OPENED OCTOBER 15th 
THREE MONTHS COURSE—5 lessons a week. 
Apt students can pass Civil Service Examination at end of course. 
EIGHT MONTHS COURSE—2 lessons a week. 
W e advise students to take this course hecause it gives more time for lesson preparation 
and practice. 
Edward T. Duncan, President 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
All Hacei 
Prepare in the beat school of it. kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 88 
Lenox Avena . and 135th St., New Yor k City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
FiU W . Mottley, President 
Porto Rican Young Ladydesires a position as 
SPANISH-ENGLISH STENOGRAPHER 
AND BOOKKEEPER 
BEST REFERENCE S 
Address HELENA LOPEZ 
49 Union St., Ponce, Porto Rico. 
My course in Penmanship, Bookkeeping, and Shorthand 
through the mail will prepare you for the position worth 
while. Write for information. 
A. D. Nolley, M. Pen., 519 Michigan Avc.Buffalo, N.Y. 
TEACHERS A lire agency furnishes tho 
connecting medium in a business way between teackers and schools and relieve* 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1411 N«w York AT«S«« Washington. D. C. 
Mention THE Caisig. 40 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Standard Life Insurance Co . 
Headed the Fourth Liberty Loan in Atlanta with a 
$50,000.00 SUBSCRIPTION 
In addition the Company subscribed $5,000 through its Little 
Rock, Ark., office. 
Negro Insurance Company 
Subscribes $50,000.00 
"Here is an example the white people of Atlanta 
may well take note of,-' said Forrest Adair, chairman of the Atlanta Liberty Loan campaign, in announcing Wednesday a subscription of $50,000.0 0 
from the Standard Life Insurance company, a colored company on Auburn Avenue. "That is the biggest subscription we have yet received, as far as the 
amount in relation to the capacity of the purchaser 
is concerned. In addition to the $50,000.00. H. E. 
Perry, H. H. Pace and other officials of the company 
took $1,00 0 apiece, and employees $3,550, making a 
total of $55,550.00."—The Atlanta Journal. 
STANDAR D LIF E I S I N A CLAS S B Y ITSELF . TH E 
ONL Y REGULA R OL D LIN E LEGA L RESERV E LIF E 
INSURANC E COMPAN Y OWNE D AN D OPERATE D B Y 
NEGR O PEOPL E I N TH E WORLD . N O INDUSTRIAL , 
NO R WEEKL Y BUSINES S WRITTEN . 
A POLIC Y I N TH E STANDAR D I S A BAN K AC ­
COUN T SUBJEC T T O CHEC K A T YOU R DEATH . 
LIV E AGENT S WANTE D 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
200 AUBUR N AVE. , ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Mention THE CRISIS, THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Operating for the present only in Virginia, The 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
HOME OFFICE: 
527 NORTH SECOND STREET RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
Is not only paying claims as provided in the policy, to many of our gallant soldier 
boys, but is standing like a stone wall of protection to the thousands of loved ones 
left behind. 
In many instances were it not for the foresight shown by these loving husbands, 
fathers and sons in providing their families with Southern Aid Policies, there would 
be untold suffering in some of the homes of these brave soldier boys 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA.INC. 
By paying promptly sick, accident and death claims to policy holders in the soldiers' homes and purchasing Liberty Bonds, the Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., 
is helping mightily to keep up the morale of our bronze gladiators. 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., is the only insurance organization issuing 
a guaranteed continuous payment policy for sickness and accidents and an undiminished Death Claim after death. 
A Virginia Home without a Southern Aid Society's Policy is not finished. 
JOIN NOW! 
A. D. PRICE, B. L. JORDAN, W. A. JORDAN. 
President Secretary Assistant Secretary 
Mention THE CRISIS. 42 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM , N. CAROLIN A 
The Oldest, Largest and Strongest 
Old Line Legal Reserve Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Abstract from Financial Statement for 1917 Shows: 
• $ 624,794.3 1 
523,915.7 0 
INCOME OVE R DISBURSEMENTS .$ 100,878.6 1 
358.363-9 7 
Liabilities (Including $258,918—Lega l Reserve). • 270,801.5 1 
87,562.4 6 
INSURANCE IN FORCE .$11,157,472.0 0 
$130,000.0 0 DEPOSITED WIT H INSURANCE DEPARTMENTS 
For the Protection of the Policyholders 
Amoun t Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$1,736,504.5 0 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $50 0 to $5,000 . 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILITY CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore , M. D., Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M. Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick, Ass't Sec'y 
Mention Tar Cimi . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 43 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
20 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y u ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion ot equal rights. Startling facts ami crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Helongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 35 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race,'' 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. 
154 Nassau Street 
A. JOHNSO N 
NE W YORK 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 290 Pages, 15 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Hound in Full 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Skelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author, Addreis 
CROMWELL 
Washington. D. C. 
JOHN W. 
1439 Swann St. 
Hale Infirmary and Nurse 
Training School 
328 Lake Street, Montgomery, Alabama . 
Hale Infirmary School of Nursing offers to intelligent young women between the age of eighteen 
and thirty-five a three years' course in the profession of nursing. Students of this school are eligible 
to Alabama examinations for the degree of R. N. 
For further information apply to the superintendent. 
The Whittaker Memorial Hospital 
Training School for Nurses 
Offers a three yea r cours e o f training to wome n who 
wish to enter the nursing profession. Favorabl e applicants must be ove r 18 years of age, o f goo d health, 
of aood moral characte r and must have had two years 
high school training or its equivalent. 
Applicatio n blanks will be sent on request. 
LILLIE A. WYNN, R. N. Superintendent 
Orcutt Avenue and 29th St., Newport News, Va . 
A Rar e Hono r Fo r A Negr o Book 
Single 
Copy 
25c 
By authority of Congress, our book "A Tribute for the Negro 
Soldier," written by J. E. Bruce, (Bruce Grit) has been made 
one of the public records. We are pleased to announce its 
steady sale in all parts of the country and in foreign lands. 
There remains territory for several good agents however. 
Write for terms to 
BRUC E and FRANKLIN , Publishers 
1309 E. 18th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
HONO R TH E BOY S WH O GO ! 
miS IS (HE K0M£ 
OF A <;SOLDIER 
DEFENDING THE 
CAUSE;OF GOD 
HUMANITY AND 
AMERICA 
The National Honor Tablet 
placed on the door of the 
soldier's home is a fittii 
mark of distinction. Tt 
home of every soldier ai 
sailor is entitled to on 
Honor your boy. 
This handsome bronzed door 
(date will last a lifetime 
Size 3^x ;j inches. Sent t( 
any address in America foi 
One Dollar. 
Specify whether for 
soldier or sailor. Order today. 
HONOR SALES CO. 
(11 North 43d St., PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Saves Coal 
Use Arnold Automatic Damper 
This simple device placed in your 
8tove Pi|>o or Furnace Pipe immediately given your house 25% to 33 y 3% 
more heat from tho name quantity of 
fuel—no matter what type of Btove or 
furnace you use. A Proved Succeed 1 
You can easily attach it yourself — 
simple directions on bos. 
NO WASTED FUEL 
Automatic In operation—requires no attention after fire 
•H started. KCCJIB your ITHJH.1 at even temperature. No 
• "••'•IN. .iimi: with w.I of fuel. No untierbeating with 
clan Kern to health, 
„ Its Cost on First Ton of Fuel 
Thousands already in use. Everynwnorabooster. Price $2.50 
by parcel post prepaid. Order today, ••i;ii im- whether for Stove 
or Furnace and give size of pipe. Agents wanted. 
ROBINSO N MFG . COMPAN Y 
3 0 Factorie s I51dg:. Dent, 121 Toledo , Ohi o 
Mention The CRISIS. 44 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ALFRED E. SMITH 
AMERICAN 
FO R GOVERNO R 
of the 
STAT E O F NE W YOR K 
The career of Alfred E. Smith, the Democratic candidate for 
Governor of the State of New York, appeals to the imagination of 
all Americans, but particularly does it appeal to the imagination ot 
Colored Americans; for he typifies, perhaps in a larger measure 
than any other man in public life, the ideals which America stands 
for and the wonderful possibilities which even the humblest citizen 
has under her democratic institutions. 
Born in New York City, the great melting pot of the nation, 
and reared in the midst of its polyglot population, without even the 
advantage of a grammar school education, he has risen by sheer 
character and ability to a commanding position among his fellowmen. There can be no greater inspiration for Colored youth in this 
country than the career of this man who, from a bare-foot errand 
boy in Fulton fish market, became a delegate to a Constitutional 
Convention of the Empire State, where he matched brain and wits 
with such men as Elihu Root, George W . Wickersham and AlMention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
phonse T. Clearwater. Particularly at this time when Colored men 
upon the battle-fields of France are gallantly upholding the proudest tradition of their race—bravery upon the field of battle—it is 
inspiring to contemplate the career of this man who has overcome 
handicaps such as Colored Americans are compelled to meet in their 
lives. 
A s the representative of Tammany Hall in the Legislature for 
many years, he achieved a record for constructive and progressive 
legislation unsurpassed by any man. Those reactionary Republicans who are now presuming to criticize him are the very men 
who opposed the great measures which he sponsored. They are 
also the ones who are now dishonestly raising the issue of Tammany 
Hall. If Alfred E. Smith is a true representative of that organization, the great State of New York should be proud of such an organization and such a man, and if he has spoken as the mouthpiece of 
the leader of Tammany Hall, Mr. Charles F. Murphy, then the only 
sentiments which women, children and working people throughout 
the State should cherish toward Mr. Murphy and toward Tammany 
Hall are those of admiration and gratitude. There can be no better 
proof of the fact that Mr. Smith firmly believes in the principles 
which Colored Americans are vitally interested in upholding, than 
the fact that he advocated such measures as the Child Labor Law, 
the Workmen's Compensation Act, Widows' Pension Act, the 
Minimum Wag e Law, and, if more proof be needed, it is to be found 
in the fact that, as Speaker of the Assembly, he was chiefly instrumental in securing the passage of the Negro Regiment Bill, the 
Emancipation Proclamation Bill and the Levy Civil Rights Law, 
and, if still further proof be needed, it is to be found in the fact that 
he is a Tammany Hall man. This is the one political organization 
which has always stood squarely for the principle of equality and 
which makes no distinction between men on account of race, color 
or creed. Its leader, Mr. Murphy, is the best friend of the Colored 
American now in public life. 
A vote for Alfred E. Smith for Governor is a vote to help make 
the world safe for democracy and democracy safe for America. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 46 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
DOLLS-DOLLS 
Beautiful Colored Dolls of Distinction. Red Cross Nurse fully dressed, 
18 inches high, hlack hair, natural color. 
Sent postpaid for $300. 
Our Soldier Boy doll, lull uniform, 
including hat and hoots, 18 inches high. 
Sent prepaid for $2.50. We also have 
Sailor and Cupie dolls in beautiful 
brown colors. All these dolls are fully 
guaranteed to satisfy or money refunded. 
Patriotic pictures of the great war 
showing Xegro officers and soldiers, including colored heroes. Hand to hand 
battle. "The Love Letter" and post 
cards of colored soldiers. The pictures 
are in beautiful water colors, new, just 
off the press. They are without doubt 
the greatest agents' offer of the day as 
they are sold on a money making basis. 
Some are [6x18. some 18x20 inches. 
These are the only pictures on the market today, so far as we know, that show 
the great part the colored women are 
doing in this great war. They are 25c 
a copy. Special prices to agents and 
dealers. Send for a copy and lie the 
first agent in your town. 
OTI S H. GADSDEN 
ROOM 339 
30 CHURC H ST. , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
SUBURBA N HOME S
 VIT H A " ™ ODER " 
improvements on 
electric ca r line connectin g Washington , Baltimore , 
Annapolis and Camp Meade , Aut o road. 30 minutes' ride to city. 
NEA R WASHINGTON . D . C . 
Lets 50 by 150. $270, $10 down . $5 monthly . House s 
built to orde r after $100 or mor e is paid on lot. 
Fertile land, coo d elevation, gardens, chickens, etc. 
Store, school, churches, communit y club. Bookle t free : 
Thos. J. Calloway f I ) 
1403 Ne w York Avenue J live [ AMONG FNEILDS 
Washington, D. C. I there < ° 
I will be through 
your territory 
soon 
Kindl y sav e you r orders 
fo r m e 
W.H. HARLESTON 
Made to measure 
CLOTHE S 
NE W YOR K 
Roland W. Hayes 
Phonograph Records 
130 Boylston St. Boston, Mass. 
Now ready and on sale 
1. Swing Low, Sweet Chariot. . .$1.50 
Negr o Spiritual, by Harr y T. Burleigh . 
2. Vesti La Giubba (Put on Your 
Smock) $2.00 
Arios o from Pagliacci, Orchestra l Accom ­
paniment, Leoncavallo . 
3. Twilight $1.00 
By Katherine A . Glen. 
7. By and By $1.50 
By Harr y T. Burleigh . 
I N PREPARATION, READY ABOUT OCT. 1 
4. Steal Away to Jesus $1.50 
Negr o Spiritual b y J. Rosamon d Johnso n 
Orchestra l Accompaniment . 
5. Una Furtiva Lagrima (A Furtive Tear) $1.50 
Fro m Elisir d' Amore . Orchestra l Accom ­
paniment, Donizetti. 
6. I Hear You Calling Me $1.25 
By Marshall. 
Thes e record s are manufacture d by the Co ­
lumbia Graphophon e Co. , and can be playe d on 
any disc talking machine . 
AGENTS 
BOSTON. Mass.. A. J. Jackson & Co.. 130 Boylstou St. 
BOSTON. Mass., Harold Whitham, 17S1 Washington St. 
BOSTON, Mass., Hicks, Lariey & Eaton, 79S Tremont 
St. 
BOSTON, Mass.. R. A. Dinsmore. 1221 Tremont St. 
ROXBURY. Mass.. James Abraham G. Hinton, S6 
Humboldt Ave. 
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Mrs. G. W. Novell, 10 Beal St., 
Brookline. Mass. 
SPRINGFIELD. Mass., J. W. Adams, 150 Eastern Ave. 
WOBURN. Mass., Edward Caldwell, 3S8 Main St. 
DETROIT, Mich., Miss Grace L. May, 253 Woodland 
Ave. 
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Wm. G. Porter, 36S Margaret 
SI. 
TUSKEGEE. Ala.. Arthur Logan, Tuskegee Institute. 
BIRMINGHAM. Ala.. Miss E. 0. Wyatt. 1319 Avenue II. 
JACKSONVILLE, Fla.. J. M. Robinson. Jr., 1924 
East St. 
CLEVELAND, Ohio. Andrew M. Sissle, 23SS East 
40th St. 
PORTLAND. Ore., Mis. E. D. Cannady, 401 Buchanan Iildg. 
PHILADELPHIA. Pa.. Mrs. Margaret Corbett, 1941 
Bainbridee St. 
KANSAS CITY. Mo., Mervin S. Harris. S45 Everett 
Ave.. Kansas City. Kan. 
OKLAHOMA CITY. Okla., R. S. Jaeobson, 224 East 
2nd SI. 
SAN FRANCISCO. Cal.. Harry O. Johnson, Security 
Savings Bank. 316 Montgomery St 
OAKLAND. Cal.. Mis. A M. Smith. 494 Moss Ave 
CHARLESTON. S. C. E. B. Lawrence. 470 King St 
NORFOLK, Va.. Miss B. C. Smith, S22 Avenue A. 
PITTSBURGH, Pa., Mrs. Chas. H. Trusty, S20 AnaWASHINGTON, D. C. Dr. C. Sumner Wormley, 997 
Florida Ave , N. w 
SPRINGFIELD. III.. Miss Aliee E. Williams. Box 131 
Chatham. Ill 
M A D I SO N VI LLE. Ky., .7. A. Watson, 117 Main St LOUISVILLE, Ky., Mrs. H. W. Jordan 822 W 
Walnut St. LOUISVILLE. Ky.. Columbia PhonograDh Co PROVIDENCE, R. I.. Miss Fiorina M Williams ''97 
Thayer St. 
Reliabl e Agent s wante d i n citie s no t 
represente d i n this list 
Roland W . Hayes, Tenor. Recitals, Concerts, 
Oratorio, Opera, Booking engagements for 
Continental Toilr, Season 1918-1919. For 
terms, dates, etc. please write. 
Mentio n Tn r CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONE S 
Soprano 
Available for Concert* 
Telephone 6393 Morning.ide 
126 W . 134th Street New Yor k City 
FLORENCE-COLE TALBERT 
So piano 
"She has one of the best voices that God has 
given her race."—Los Angeles Times. 
"Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Tal 
bert who beside her natural gift has already reached 
a high plane of professional accuracy."
Devries in Chicago American. 
Engagements accepted for Concerts, Recitals, Oratorio 
659 28th Street, Detroit, Mich . 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIS T 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron Whit e and hi a Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and d 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS 
JOSEPHIN E A . JUNIU S 
CONTRALTO 
"She is the possessor of a Contralto voice, 
lovely in quality, which she uses artistically."— 
O^car Saenger. 
AVAILABL E FOR CONCERTS 
202 W . 140th Street, New York City 
CLEOT A COLLIN S 
LYRI C SOPRANO 
"Miss Collins possesses a voice of wonderful quality 
«hic h she man Ages with . • • i : • .1 • • • 1.1- • ami Bkill. He r 
personal charm ami beauty enhanced the pleasure enjoyed 
from the really rx> t-lleni program presented. The audience 
ft music lovers in attendant'*- were enthusiastic in their 
appreciation of 'h** talented young lady,"—Newark Dally 
Vew * - ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
103 W . 143d St. New York City. 
Something Everybody Needs 
W e are offering three of tht biggest bargains of the day in the line of Christmas 
cards. Do not fail to make your purchass 
through us. You get your cards retail at 
Wholesal e prices. 
W e place in every order cards appropriate 
to send to the Boys at Camp or Abroad. 
No w is the time to order, if you want your 
cards to reach over seas for Christmas. 
Send stamps or money for the spt you desire, Wonderful assortment for 12c. 
Quality sets at 25 and 50 cents. No like 
bargains obtainable anywhere. 
JULIAN R. MILLER, Jr. 
120 1 Spruc e St . Philadelphi a 
100 CALLING CARDS 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at jll 
oeasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Writ* for samples and agenfs terms
The House of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
BUST S O F 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. $1.50 each. The 4 busts 
for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
THE ISAAC HATHAWAY ART CO. 
718 S. HICKORY ST., PINE BLUFF, ARK. 
Mrs. M. Watson Rudd. 
154 West 131st St. 
New York City 
has placed 
upon the maiket her new 
ROSE NINO N NTJFEET POWDER . 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, railroad ami factory employees, dancers and all persons 
who are required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—Writ e for particulars. 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-Class Ser
3427 South Park Avenue . Chicago , 111. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old fast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve racking routine llveB and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The watera of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game Ash of the heat varieties 
D o you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, bunting T 
D o you enjoy roaming through tbe woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries f 
D o you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
D o you ijoy mingling with the active, thinking. / 
progressive people of the day—people who do things T / 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to / 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- . 
ments of the tlme f Surely I / 
Then you will be Interested in, and want to / 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful IdJewlld, / A 
Michigan. If you act at once you can so- / 
cure a beautiful lot for only 124.50 eacri 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. Whe n your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing 
clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted A W i 
/ 
Idlewild Resort / € / 
Company /ff 
1110 Hartford Bid g. /^if..*? -
Chicago, IU. 
Mention T« E CRISIS, 48 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LARGEST MAIL ORDER HOUSE OF 
REAL HUMAN 
HAIR 
Hand-Mad e Natura l Hai r Wig s 
Transformations, Switches, Puffs, 
Plaits, Bangs, Coronet Braids, 
Hair Nets, that can be combed 
the same as your own hair. 
Human hair for sale by ounce or 
pound. Hair nets. 
A Rea l Hai r Growe r 
Found at Last 
Mme. Baum's WellKnown Hair Success 
Per Jar, 35c and 50c. 
Mme. Baum's Cold 
Cream, for Cleansing 
the Skin 50c HAIRDRESSERS ' TOOLS . 
WEAVIN G FRAMES . HACK -
LER S MOUNTIN G MA ­
CHINES , CARDS . BLOCKS . 
35c 
MME . WALKER' S TOILE T PREPARATION S 
Mme. Baum's Famous P A Mme. Baum's 
Shampoo for Cleans- T||P Face Powd f 
ing the Hair; per box, Ww U per box 
Mme . Baum's Hai r Emporium , Inc . 
P. O. Box 145, Penn Terminal Station 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Send three cents for our new catalogue 
- :ion TH F CUISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 49 
• i 
• 
IL-Jli 
1 . 
m 
1*^1! 1 
KASHMIR : 
Special offer Including 
KASHMI R AGENT' S DISPLA Y CASE 
"Write for it today. 
W e want a representative in every town to teach Kashmir Health and Beauty Courses. W e will show you how 
to earn a big salary. 
AGENTS 
MAKE BIG MONEY 
Kashmir Preparations for Hair 
and Skin are the fastest selling articles of their kind on 
the market 
Because: 
They've got the quality 
They are put up in handsome, attractive jars 
They win re-orders. Everyone who uses Kashmi r 
buys again and tells 
other frionds about it. 
W e make our agents such a big 
liberal money making offer. 100% 
KASHMI R CHEMICAL CO . 
Dept. C . 31 2 S. Clark St. 
CHICAGO, ILL. 
Barnett Advertising Service. 
W E AR E NO W GIVIN G TH E COURS E B Y CORRESPONDENC E 
Special price for sixty days only $15.00 , payable $10.0 0 with 
application and $5.0 0 when diploma is granted. Send $1.0 0 
for thirty days' trial treatment. 
W e teach only one person in a 
town, she teaches the rest. Our 
graduated agents are making 
money. 
DERM O COLLEG E CO . 
4118 S. State St. Chicago, III. 
// It Js For your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pr««. 
N . E . COR . 8th & PLU M 
CINCINNAT I OHI O 
Mentio n TH E OlSIS . 50 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FREE'10.00 0 
MADE TO MEASURE 
STYL E BOOK 
You never saw anything like it before. Write 
quick for your copy os the most elaborate and 
expensive Guide to Young Men's stunning 
Styles in tailored - to-measure clothes. It cost us 
$10,000 to publish it. A postal brings it to you. 
GET YOUR SUIT FREE. 
MAKE BIG MONEY 
Send for our Startling' Offer. No experience needed. 
Be our onent and make S10 to 515 daily .ind hove all 
the classy new clothes you want free. \\ pay express 
charges. All extras free. It's eiisy to tike orders vvth 
this magnificent ^tyle Book. Jn^t wriie your name 
an.I address on a postal and MAIL 1* *T ONCE. . 
AMERICAN WOOLEN MILLS CO.. Dept. 1051 Chicago J 
SOMETHING NEW . 
UNDER THE SUN 
lhanceskin Pantsl_ 
"AmancesMn" £S^& ALioiTsSkin 
We Pay Express o r Parcel Po» l Chtrgw 
Made As Yoa Like Them. Anew cloth 
—-beautiful finish and texture.' Can bo worn 
tor dress or work and tho formula for 
weaving "Allianceskia'* ! • oor eiclusivo 
.roperty. Wonderful value. Only $1.00. 
v e make suits t o measure from 513.50 up; 
also overcoats. Just mail us your name 
_ and address and we will send 
Agent s FRE E all our catalogs, with 
Wante d real samples of cloth, illustraAtOfflCO tions. tape line, order blanks, 
etc. Biggest bargains you ever 
saw. Ou r prices save half. Satisfaction guaranteed. See all our references. 
SEND NO MONEY. 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE 
"..548 . Wholesale Tailors. Chicago 
No t $1.00. not even 60c, not one cent cost to you 
under our easy conditions. No extra / 
charge for fancy, swell styles, no extra £ 
charge for extra big, extreme peg-tops, 
pearl buttons, tunnel or fancy belt/f 
loops, no. extra charge for anything, 
all FREE. Before you take another A 
order, before you buy a suit or pants \ _ 
get our samples and new offer. Agents 
of other tailoring houses please wr.te, we 
havea new deal that will open your eyes. 
W e ask every man to answer this, 
every boy in long pants, every man, 
everywhere. No matter where you live 
or what you do, write us a letter or postal 
and say "Send Me Your New Free 
Offer" the big, new different tailoring 
deal.Costenothingand noextra charges. 
Writ e today, this minute. Address^ 
? KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept . 676 Clilcaso . 111. 
Luminous paint makes objects visible in the dark 
by applying same as ordinary paint. Ruminating 
clock dials that tell time in the dark. LuminatingP 
match boxes find your matches in the dark. Send 
25 c for sample. Agents wanted. Writ e for terms. 
Manufactured by 
Bailey & Anderson 
2116 Oakford St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
W e will send 1 pictur e "Trie d an d True " 11x14 ; 
1 pictur e "Tru e Blue, " 10x12 ; bot h in colors and 
ready for framin g and the full set o f Patrioti c post 
cards fo r 40c . 
Live , hustling agents make real mone y on these. 
Writ e quick . 
JULIAN R. MILLER, JR.,
 12p°nilaXtaStpaet' 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insuranc e 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Telephone 
/Central 104-W 
I Main 61 
HARRY E DAVIS 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW NOTARY Pi n Lie 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohl . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSILLOR-AT-LAW 
S18 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORH EY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
T«L UiT Fort HUT Cable Address, Epbeo 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AD O COUNSELLOR-ATLAW 
U School Street Boston, Ma n 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORKEYSAT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Patents secured on easy terms 
^ "Write^for particulars, 
JOS. H. STEWART, Attomey-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave, , N.W. , Washington, D. C. 
Telephon e Greele y 4214 Establishe d 1911 
BRANIC' S 
NEW YORK AND BROOKLYN EXPRESS 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WEST 35th STREET 
ANDREW J. BRAN1C New York City 
^A£PO[S~?60 WftltLY 
Mention THE: CRISIS, 
«MMM ctinrr m c'o i m rutwtot Slav, Isksis,was Inform yourself as to 
TH E EXODU S O F TH E NEGROE S 
By Reading 
Dr. Carter G . Woodson's 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATIO N 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This book is unique in that it is the first and only scientific treatise in this field. It undertakes to explain why the Negroes have migrated, where they have gone and what they have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere Send all orders to the author 
1216 Yo u Street, N . W. Washington, D . C . 
BOOKS BY 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
1. A n Appeal to Conscience (just off the press—MacMillan)... . $ .60 
2. Race Adjustment (publishers' price , $2) 1.50 
3. Out of the Hous e of Bondage (publishers' price , $1.50) 1.25 
4. Th e Thre e Books Listed Abov e (publishers' price , $4.10). . . . 3.00 
5. Th e Disgrace of Democracy 
100,000 copie s alread y distributed , the largest circula ­
tio n of an y singl e self-payin g documen t eve r issue d o n 
the rac e problem—10 c the copy . 
Agents wanted everywhere—Rate to Agents — 5c the copy 
Ad d 10% for postage to all orders. Remittance invariably in advance. 
Address 
KELL Y MILLER , Howard University, Washington, D. C. KASHMIR 
PREPARATIONS 
FO R HAI R AN D SKI N 
Wh y not be 
a 
KASHMI R 
GIRL ? 
It's Eas y t o 
Hav e Clear , 
Smooth Skin 
an d Prett y 
Hai r TH E 
KASHMI R 
WA Y 
She "Just Love s KASHMIR " 
FRE E FRE E 
Writ e fo r ne w editio n famou s Kashmi r Beaut y book . Tell s al l abou t th e Kashmi r 
Wa y an d th e 9 wonderfu l Kashmi r Preparations. Sen d name s an d addresse s o f 25 
o f you r friend s wit h your order an d receive ful l 50c. size Kashmi r Crea m Powde r 
free. (An y shade ) 
Kashmi r Skin Cleanser ) 50 Cents 
Kashmi r Hai r Grower ) Postage 8c. 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO., Dept. K, 312 S. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 
Barnett Advertising Service. 