THE CRISIS 
NEW ORLEANS 
NUMBER 
February 1916 
$1.00 a YEAR 10c a copy 2Jfl PUBLISHER'S CHAT 
A n Explanation Th e greate r part of the January issue of the CRISIS wa s lat e 
entering . the mail s
 becaus e the establishment in which the CRISIS 
is printed wa s destroyed by fire whil e tha t issue wa s on the presses. It wa s necessary therefore to have the whol e issue re-set from cover to cover. At tha t time of the month practically every printing establishment in the cit y capabl e of turning out so large a job as an 
issue of the CRISIS wa s busy wit h its own publications. So that, whil e w e soon found a 
reliable plant to undertake the work, we wer e necessaril y delayed in the completion of 
the same . "We did our best under the circumstance s and the entir e issue wa s mailed by 
the sixth day of the Ne w Year . 
Thanks for your patience. Now, on to the 50,000 circulation! 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B . D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHITE MAN'S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B . G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E . B . D U Bois) 5 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T. Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
Address THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, Ne w York TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducte d by 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE-DILL, Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for February, 1916 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. Photograph From Life. By A. P. Bedou. 
LEADING CITIZENS OF NEW ORLEANS 170 
SOCIETY OF THE HOLY NAME 182 
BARN DANCE OF THE YOUNG MEN'S TWENTY CLUB 183 
NEW COLORED PUBLIC LIBRARY, NEW ORLEANS 188 
NEW ORLEANS UNIVERSITY 189 
COLORED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES 190 
GRAND ARMY LEADERS 191 
ANTI-SEGREGATION HEADQUARTERS, ST. LOUIS, MO 195 
ARTICLES 
COLORED NEW ORLEANS ' By V. P. Thomas 188 
THE COLORED CREOLES OF LOUISIANA By Jose' Clarana 192 
THE "JIM-CROW" CAR. An N. A. A. C. P. Investigation. Part III. 
By T. Montgomery Gregory 195 
THE LYNCHING INDUSTRY 198 
BROTHERS. A Poem By James Weldon Johnson 199 
BROUGHT TO LIGHT By J. T. Crossland 200 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 163 
MEN OF THE MONTH 169 
OPINIONS 172 
EDITORIAL 184 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 194 
THE LETTER BOX 201 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this pace a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired, 
i n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. . 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people arc desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 16c. 
TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. Th e courses of study include Hig h 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-six years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, OA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1915 
F«r information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
THE AGRICULTURAL 
and 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of 
North Carolina 
(Formerly the A. & M. College) 
The 22d annual session began 
September 1, 1915. Board, lodging 
and tuition $8.00 per month. Four 
year courses leading to trade certificates. Four year college courses 
leading to degrees of Bachelor of 
Science in Agriculture and Bachelor 
of Science in Mechanics. 
For catalog or further information 
Address 
President Dudley, A . & T . College 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerl y Atlanta Baptist College ) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negr o 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Musi c Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negr o music. Special study in Negr o life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Learn th e S. T. Taylor Syste m 
of Garment Cutting, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring. 
Millinery and Designing. Prepare yourself to earn 
a large salary. 
Terms reasonable. Write for catalog. 
S. T. TAYLOR SCHOOL AND PATTERN PARLORS 
MRS. MAYBE L B. EVANS , Prin., 
34 N. Garfield Ave., Columbus, 0. 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 161 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negr o race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT I S MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT I S A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negr o community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N . C. 
Th e school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. For teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL, Principal 
Mention THE CRISIS 16-' TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
RECITALS CONCERTS ORATORIO OPER A 
"An unusually good voice. THE natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in THE Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. 
ADDRESS : 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets. Cincinnati. Ohio 
WANTED 
Agent s fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
Your Spring Suit 
FREE" 
Made to Your Measure 
$30 t o $40 -woul d no t 
buy a bette r one , ba t you 
co t it fo r nothing . No t a 
cen t t o pay . Simpl y nea r 
it, tell your friend s wher e 
you go t it, an d mak e 
$10 to
 $15 a Day 
takin g thei r orders. It is 
dead easy. You never saw a nobbier suit or a more stunning pattern,cut in strictly Tango style 3 
months ahead of the times). Your 
choice of 60 patterns and a dozen 
different styles to choose from. 
Drop us a postal card for heavy 
pattern book, inside information 
about styles, self-measuring, 
blanks, etc., etc. Don't wait. 
Everything free—We pay expressage. Get ahead of the other 
fellows—write this Very minute. 
A postal will do it, 
AMERICAN WOOLEN MILLS CO. 
Dept . 25 1 CHICAGO 
Han d Tailore d — 
Class y Linings -
Millionair e Trimmings—Swel l Cut -
Guarantee d Fit. 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teache r o f Theor y an d Pian o 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
O F INTERES T T O VOCALIST S 
Tone-Placing and Voic e Development, With Supplement Co-ordinating with Original Chapters 
Highly recommended a,nd endorsed 
by well known Choral' and Musical 
Societies, Directors, Vocal Teachers 
and Musical Publications, as evidenced by the following extract! 
selected at random from those who 
know: 
Pedro T. Tinsley of Chicago is 
the first of the vocal teachers to 
realize the possibilities of Tone* 
Placing and Vowe l Value s (Study) 
as applied to music, and will soon 
be reaping his reward in the knowledge that he is helping thousands 
to a thorough musical education where he previously 
helped but hundreds. 
TH E MUSI C TRADES . 
I highly endorse your Book Tone-Placing and 
Voice-Development as being in a class by itself. This 
is my fourth order and will be able to use quite a 
number of additional copies very soon. 
G. W. WILLIAMS , B.M.A.. 
1214 Peas e Ave., Houston, Texas. 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours. 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical. 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
from "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
this 'Practical Method of Singing* is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, Ill., or Clavton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
HAVE YOU GOOD PICTURES IN YOUR HOME? 
Now is the time to secure hand painted portraits in oil colors of Dr. B. T. Washington, 
which we are selling at the very low price of $2.00 each. These paintings, the exact likeness 
of the "Wizard of Tuskegee." are giving universal satisfaction and are being hung in the 
highest class homes in the country. 
We also have reproductions of "A Moment of Rest" and *'Still Life, " the two favorite 
paintings of the Lincoln Exposition. These pictures are the sensation of Chicago and are 
being purchased by both colored and whit e people who treasure them as the favorite 
paintings in their "homes. All of these pictures are artistically mounted on a mat about 
10 x 13 inches in size. 
Prices: Booker T. Washington (hand painted) $2.00 
Booker T. Washington (photogravure) 50 
A Moment of Rest or Still Life (hand painted) 2.00 
Photogravure 50c. each 
Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. Best terms to agents. 
W. M. FARROW 
6117 S . Racin e Ave . Chicago , Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 11—No. 4 FEBRUARY, 1916 Whol e No . 64 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE "Black Madonna of Czenstoch-
•"• owa" is a priceless painting owned 
by members of the monastery of the Order of St. Paul the Hermit, which is situated on the outskirts of Czenstochowa, 
Russian Poland. Tradition claims that 
the picture was painted by the Evangelist Luke and it miraculously turned 
dark over night. It has become a shrine 
for over 200.000 yearly pilgrims. 
Jose Yalle-Riestra, the distinguished 
Peruvian composer, who is now visiting 
New York City, is reviving in his compositions the ancient melodies and traditions of the Incas. Of his opera "Ollanta," Musical America says: "Seiior 
Valle-Riestra has built on the Indian folk 
songs and the themes suggest in some 
phases the plaintive strain that permeates 
Gaelic music. In the Indian themes, 
however, the tonic Minor Third predominates. In addition to the folk-music 
of the Incas there is woven through the 
opera the note of Arabic music—legacy 
of the Spanish invasion of South 
America—with something here and 
there of the savage strain which the Negro melodies have given to American 
music. Particularly in the dances of 
"Ollanta" are the chanting Indian motifs emphasized." 
Another work is a legend of Jamaica, 
"The Blush of Me-tah-me," a one-act 
opera. 
At Kitty Cheatham's holiday recitals at 
the Lyceum Theatre, New York, December 27th and January 3rd, old Negro 
songs appeared as usual on her programs. Miss Cheatham has lately consented to a publication of many of her 
recital songs, most of which have been 
sung from manuscript. 
{["Drake's Drum," by S. Coleridge-Taylor, was one of the novelties sung at the 
concert given by the Pittsburgh Male 
Chorus, James Martin, conductor, on the 
10th of December, at Pittsburgh, Pa. 
During the second week in December 
Mrs. Meta Warrick-Fuller gave a talk on 
modeling before a most interested audience of kindergarten teachers of Greater 
Boston, at the Boston Normal School. 
On December 8th, at Washington, D. 
C, Handel's "Messiah" was given by the 
Howard University Choral Society, under the direction of Miss Lula Childers. 
The soloists were Miss Lillian Evans, 
soprano; Miss Marie C. James, contralto ; Mr. Roland W. Hayes, tenor, and 
Mr. William Gustafson, a Swedish 
singer, bass. 
Three Negro jubilee songs arranged 
by Carl R. Diton, "Pilgrim's Song," 
"Little David, Play On Your Harp, " and 
"Ev'ry Time I Feel the Spirit," of which 
Musical America makes special mention, 
appeared on the program of the Choral 
Art Club, of Brooklyn, N. Y., at their 
concert given at the Academy of Music 
on December 20th. 
Of a lecture-recital before the Woman's Whitman Club of five hundred 
members, at their annual guest afternoon, the Whitman (Mass.) Times says: 
"The lecture-recital by Mrs. Maud Cuney 
Hare was on Afro-American music, a 
subject of which she was most fully informed. Mrs. Hare left no phase of the 
subject uncovered. The different types 
of songs were illustrated by selections 
given by Mr. William H. Richardson. He 164 TH E CRISIS 
has a powerful baritone voice and sang 
with much feeling and excellent shading." 
C Coleridge-Taylor's cantata "Kubla 
Khan," was sung by the Boise Choral 
Society, at Boise, Idaho, on December 
6th. 
©On the afternoon of December 5th, 
the Misses Dorothy Rosalind and Cynthia Fuller presented a program of old 
English and Scottish songs at the first of 
a series of concerts at the Music School 
Settlement for Colored People, New 
York City. 
© Mary Garden, the famous opera 
singer, will not be heard in America this 
season owing to recent illness. Miss 
Garden has been engaged in war activities in Paris and is especially interested 
in the African Zouaves on the French 
front, to six of whom she has consented 
to become godmother. 
Miss Helen Hagan, formerly of New 
Haven, Conn., is engaged in concert 
work and recently gave much pleasure 
in a piano recital at Philadelphia, Pa. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
IT is reported that the young Emperor 
of Abyssinia may furnish 200,000 soldiers for the army of the Allies. He has 
resisted the efforts of the German agents. 
A Sunday Afternoon Forum has been 
organized by the colored people in New 
Bern, N . C. 
The Negro lawyers of West Virginia 
met recently and organized The Mountain State Bar Association, J. M . Ellis, 
of Oak Hil l President and T. Giles 
Nutter, of Charleston, Secretary. 
The Pyramid Art Association for the 
study of Negro art has been formed in 
Syracuse, N . Y . Chapters are proposed 
in other cities. 
©Denver, Colo., at the request of the 
colored people, has barred "The Birth of 
a Nation." 
©As a result of a gift of $2.5,000 from 
Andrew Carnegie and an appropriation 
of $8,000 by the City Council, a Negro 
Public Library has been opened in New 
Orleans with 5,000 volumes. 
Colored people at Detroit, Mich., have 
effected an organization which aims to 
care for the homeless children in that 
city. 
©Miss Bessie Simon has inaugurated a 
social settlement center for the colored 
people of Memphis, Tenn., which white 
and colored citizens commend as a sorely needed agency in the community. 
Whittier Center in Philadelphia is do- , 
ing a varied work among the colored 
people of that city. It now operates under the direction of Mrs. Elizabeth W. 
Tyler, the head-worker, a tuberculosis 
clinic which renders service gratis to 
mild cases. 
©Plans are being discussed in Chicago, 
ILL., to buy a building to be used as a 
social center and school for the industrial training of colored children. 
The Provident Rescue Mission for 
Colored Men in Pittsburgh, Pa., is making a campaign for funds necessary for 
the enlargement of the work. 
Miss Mary Curtis has written a book 
about the colored men who have fought 
in the United States Army from the period of the Revolution to the present. 
©Montgomery Bell, who died recently 
in New Mexico, had accumulated a considerable fortune by dealing in sheep and 
cattle mortgages. Prominent white citizens were among his pall-bearers. 
©The football team of the Arkansas 
Baptist College holds the State championship and has been undefeated for 
eight consecutive seasons. 
©Negro voters are beginning to register 
in South Carolina. 
Major A . C. Rosencranz made Christmas presents aggregating $34,000 to 
three colored institutions in Evansville. 
Ind. 
The late Andrew Freedman, a white, 
bachelor of New York, has left the bulk 
of a $7,000,000 estate for the establishment of what is to be known as the "An ­
drew Freedman Home," which will receive aged persons in indigent circumstances without regard to race, sex or 
creed. Mr. Freedman selected twentyfour trustees from various races and religions. 
©The University Commission on Southern Race Questions has held a meeting 
at Durham, N . C. It consists of representatives of white institutions. 
©Mrs. S. R. Givens is speaking among 
colored clubs of the Southwest in the 
interest of a movement to encourage 
history and art among colored people. 
©Mr. William F. Williams is a popular 
colored employee in the Governor's of-ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 
noes at St. Paul, Minn. Mr. Williams' 
services will be retained by the new Governor Burquist, who, by the way. is President of the local branch of the N. A. A. 
C. P. 
41 The National League on Urban Conditions Among; Negroes reports an expenditure of $24,953 f° r
 the y
ea r
 ending 
September 30th, 1915. 
<[At a mass meeting in .Atlanta, Ga., 
colored people raised $8,000 for a Y. M. 
C. A. building. The Governor of the 
State was present. The ground has already been purchased. 
In Miami, Fla., Negro voters helped 
to carry the Prohibition ordinance. 
Colored business men in Atlanta, Ga., 
had an interesting "booster" campaign 
to encourage trade with colored merchants. The prizes offered varied from 
a building lot to a bottle of hair tonic. 
John D. Rockefeller, Jr., has been in 
conference with the grievance mediator 
of the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company and the grievance representative of 
the miners. The latter, Mr. C. A. Mitchell, is a colored man. 
The colored branch of the St. Louis 
Y. M. C. A. has just closed a very successsful campaign led by Dr. J. E. 
Mooreland. The Central Association 
promised $75,000 toward meeting Mr. 
Julius Rosenwald's gift of $25,000, provided the colored people raised $50,000. 
Committees were organized, and the tenday campaign closed with a result that 
more than $6.8.000 had been subscribed by 
the colored people. Mr. David D. Jones is 
the executive secretary, upon whom fell 
a large share of the responsibility. 
In New Orleans there is a new playground just opened for the use of colored children, facing the Thorny Lafon 
Public School, and a colored annex to 
the Charity Hospital for colored women. 
The National Equal Rights League, at 
its eighth annual convention in Philadelphia, issued an address to the country 
calling on all members of the race to use 
their voices, pens, patronage, votes, 
money, and every other resource "for the 
abolition of segregation, disfranchisement, and lynching on the color line." 
More than 125 delegates attended the 
convention from all parts of the country. 
Resolutions lauding the efforts of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and other organizations and individuals working for 
the same cause were passed at the final 
session. 
41 The nineteenth annual meeting of the 
American Negro Academy has been held 
.in Washington, D. C. President A. II. 
Grimke was re-elected. Among the 
questions discussed were, "The Sex 
Question and Race Segregation," "The 
Message of St. Domingo to the Negro 
Race," "Negro Citizenship Prior to the 
Civil War " and "The Constitutional 
Status of the Negro." Many of the papers will be published. 
EDUCATIO N 
ST. CATHERINE' S SCHOOL AND 
^ CONVENT, new Catholic institutions for Negroes, at Germantown, Pa., 
were blessed by Archbishop Prendergast. 
C Principals and teachers in higher colored schools of the State of Virginia recently held their tenth annual conference 
at Virginia Union University. 
The Slater Industrial and State Normal School, at Winston-Salem. N. C., is 
seeking to raise $12,000 for a new building. 
The Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, the 
largest and oldest Greek letter fraternity among colored college men, recently 
held its eighth annual session with the 
Omicron Chapter of the University of 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Spellman Seminary in Atlanta, Ga., 
has been excluded from its share in the 
Rockefeller bequest. Th e will of the late 
Mrs. John D. Rockefeller provided that 
the residuary estate h e divided among 
eight institutions, among which was 
Spellman, but power was given the executors to exclude from sharing in the 
estate any of the institutions. Spellman 
and three other institutions have been 
excluded. No reason is given for this 
action. 
Lappa Alpha Psi, a college fraternity 
composed of colored students and graduates of Northern colleges, recently held 
its annual session in the Chapter I louse 
of Gamma Chapter, at the State University of low a. 
J. R. E. Lee, for sixteen years a teacher at Tuskegee Institute, has succeeded 
G. N. Grisham as principal of the Lincoln High School, Kansas City, Mo. TH E CRISI S 
HAITIAN S WATCHING THE FIRST AMERICAN INVASION 
There are sixteen colored public 
schools in New Orleans, enrolling 8,554 
pupils under 164 teachers. 
Blanche Patterson, a colored girl of 
the Lawrence, Kansas, High School, 
wrote the prize story for the school 
paper. 
The West Virginia Colored Teachers' 
Association held its twenty-third annual 
session at Storer College. It proposes 
to purchase and preserve the old home 
of Booker T. Washington at Maiden. 
Howard University, Washington, D. 
C , enrolled 1,452 students during 1915, 
from thirty-six states and six foreign 
countries, and graduated two hundred 
and five students. The enrollment for 
1914 was 1,463. 
The Maryland Colored State Teachers' Association, of which Mr. D. S. S. 
Goodloe is President, held its annual 
session in Baltimore. Resolutions were 
adopted setting forth the educational 
needs of the colored people of the State. 
ECONOMIC S 
THE Alabama Penny . Prudential 
Savings Bank, at Birmingham, the 
largest and soundest colored bank in the 
United States, is closed. The Montgomery Branch of the Birmingham Bankhas also suspended payment and its affairs are in the hands of the State Banking Department. Slowness of paper and 
continued depression are given as causes. 
There is no hint of dishonesty and the 
bank may resume. The late W. R. Pettiford was founder of the bank. 
The colored Masons of New York 
City are soon to have a new and up-todate Masonic Temple, at 204-206 West 
131st street. 
Colored men in New Jersey are promoting Douglass Park as a golf links and 
pleasure resort near Pleasantville. I. H. 
Nutter and the Rev. H. P. Anderson are 
leading the movement. 
In Yazoo, Miss., whites are trying to 
run off Negro tenants. A letter publicly 
posted says: "We por people cant get 
homes If they would work some whites 
and some blacks we could stand it. We 
go and ask for homes and are turned 
away. We have the poor people and 
the one-horse farmer with us, so you 
had better move. It will be better for 
you Not to show this to your Boss—Be 
shore to warn all that is on the place and 
all that is fixin to move on the place." 
Mr. E. C. Brown and Mr. Andrew F. 
Stevens announce the opening of a colored bank at Broad and Lombard streets, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Ogden Union Station, Utah, is now 
employing Negro red caps in place of 
white men. 
The Pullman Company has annouced 
salary increases amounting to $600,000 
for 1916. Of this sum $500,000 will go 
to conductors and porters and the remainder to various agents. 
166 ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 167 
([Mrs. Ellen Sorrell, widow of the late 
Hiram Sorrell, for many years a waiter 
of Baltimore, Md., has made bequests of 
$10,000 in her will. 
Alexander Toles, a prosperous colored 
undertaker and property owner of Columbus, Ga., died recently. Mr. Toles 
was seventy-eight years old. 
([Howard Wilson, son of a Negro 
farmer, of Sabetha, Kan., grew an 
average of one hundred two and one-half 
bushels of corn on five acres in the Kansas Agricultural College corn growing 
contest last year. His father grew 
eighty-seven bushels of corn to an acre 
on one hundred and twenty-six acres. 
([Si x colored waiters have replaced regular dining car conductors on the Lehigh 
Valley District Commissary Department. 
([Th e Negro Agricultural Fair recently 
held at Jackson. Miss., was unusually 
well attended. The parade took one hour 
and a half to pass a given point. 
PERSONA L 
MR. WILLIA M N. PAGE , manager 
of the Pittsburgh Courier, is dead 
He was for a long time private secretary 
to one of the chief officials of the Carnegie Steel Works. 
([Th e ninth annual meeting of the Surgical Association of the Chicago and 
Northwestern Railway was held at 
Rochester, Minn., December 10th and 
nth . Dr. Daniel H. Williams was the 
only colored surgeon present. 
([Mr. Fleming D. Tucker, cashier of a 
colored savings bank, has been admitted 
to the Georgia Bar at Savannah. 
([Dr. W. Bruce Evans is sueing the 
Washington (D. C.) Board of Education 
for reinstatement as Principal of the 
Armstrong High School. 
([It is alleged in court that the late Mrs. 
Frank Leslie, Baroness de Bazus, was of 
Negro descent. 
([Arthur K. Bruce has been elected 
President of the National Alliance of 
Postal Employees, a colored organization. 
([Mrs. Warren Logan, wife of the 
treasurer of Tuskegee Institute, is dead. 
She was a woman of energy and influence 
and the mother of an interesting family. 
([Rev. U. C. Carrington, of Livingston 
College, won the prize offered by the 
CHURC H 
THE colored New England Baptist 
convention has mailed its thirty 
page report on the state of the country 
to every member of Congress. The Rev. 
W. B. Reed is the author. 
([Mrs. L. B. Fouse was the only colored member of the joint conference of 
the International Sunday School Association in the Sunday School Conference 
which met recently in Chicago, 111. 
Bishop Alexander Walters is the only 
colored member of the executive committee of the Federal Council of the 
Churches of Christ in America, which 
met recently in Columbus, Ohio. 
([Miss Rosalie M. Jonas and the Rev. 
G. H. Simms, the colored pastor of the 
Union Baptist Church in New Yor k City, 
collected $431 as a Christmas Fund. Five 
hundred Negro children received toys, 
clothing and shoes. Christmas dinner 
baskets were distributed among the members of the congregation. 
An appeal for harmony has been made 
to the two factions of the National Baptist Convention of America. A meeting 
will probably be held in Columbia, S. C. 
Homilitic Review for the best original 
sermon outlines. 
([December 23rd wa s the one hundredth 
anniversary of the birth of Harry Highland Garnett, ou r of the greatest of Negro American preachers. He died in 
February, [882, while United States 
Minister to Liberia. 
([Dr. S. D. Redmond, a colored physician, o f Jackson, Miss., invited all the 
poor of the city to dine with him Christma s Day. 
([Professor James M. Gregory died recently in Baltimore, Md., at the age of 
sixty-six. Mr. Gregory was Professor 
of Latin at Howard University for 
twenty-five years and for eighteen years 
head of the colored institution at Bordentown, N. J. An account of his life 
appears in TH E CRISIS for July, 1915. 
([Mr. Ferdinand O. Morton has been appointed to succeed the late Robert N. 
Wood as Chief of the United Colored 
Democracy in New York City. Mr. 
Morton has also been named as Assistant 
Prosecuting Attorney of the city at a salar y of $2,500. 168 TH E CRISI S 
BUSINES S ENTERPRISE S I N NE W 
ORLEAN S 
THE Economy Mutual Aid Association was formed by free colored 
men and Creoles before the war. It holds 
property worth nearly $25,000 and has 
a membership of one hundred and twenty-five. 
The People's Beneficial Life Insurance Company employs one hundred and 
twenty-two girls and men. 
The Unity Industrial Association has 
issued over 80,000 policies, and has an 
annual income of over $75,000. 
The Pythian Temple is one of the finest colored buildings in the world. It 
has a theatre, meeting hall, office rooms, 
banquet hall and lodge rooms. At the 
top there is a roof garden. The building 
is fireproof, built of concrete, brick and 
steel and cost $225,000. 
There are among the colored people 
two theatres, fifteen trade unions, one 
hundred and thirty-six benevolent societies, one hundred and forty-four secret 
societies, one hundred and nineteen barber and hairdressing shops, forty-nine 
contractors and builders, twenty-three 
physicians, one hundred dressmakers, 
fifty-four retail dealers, two hotels, five 
lawyers, twelve upholsterers, twelve restaurants and eight undertakers. 
m 
COUR T 
HEZEKIA H HAMILTON , a colored 
man, of Milwaukee, Wis., has won 
a case against the Ladger Hotel for discrimination. 
The Rev. William H. Williams recovered a verdict of $100 in the County 
Court of Huntington, L. I., against a 
white restaurant proprietor, who refused 
to serve him and a party of friends in 
his restaurant. 
GHETTO 
ORGANIZED protest is being made 
" by colored political leaders against 
the cutting down of the representation 
of the South in the Republican convention. 
Thirteen colored men were killed recently in a collision between Rockledge 
and Sherwood. Tenn., on the Nashville.. 
Chattanooga and St. Louis Railway. 
They were probably in the dangerous 
"Jim-Crow" section. 
White residents of Forsyth County, 
Ga., have started another attempt to 
drive Negroes from Georgia. Residents 
of the county have gone into adjoining 
counties and destroyed $90,000 worth of 
property of farmers who employ Negroes. This is the northern hill region of 
Georgia, between Atlanta and Chattanooga. 
Representative Edwards, of Georgia, 
has introduced again his bill requiring 
the segregation of white and colored people in the Government Departments at 
Washington, D. C. 
Colwyn, a town in Pennsylvania, has 
passed a segregation ordinance which 
compels Negroes and whites to live in 
separate blocks. 
CRIM E 
FOUR Negroes were shot to death 
and two burned alive and several 
white people severely wounded in Early 
County, Ga., December 30th. This county is in the extreme southwestern part 
of Georgia. Trouble arose from the killing of a white man who had whipped a 
Negro boy. Many buildings belonging 
to Negroes have been burned. 
Armed Negroes helped to stop the 
lynching of two of their race at Muskogee, Okla., who were accused of killing 
a policeman. 
Masked white "hill billies" burned the 
town of Little Bushy Island, a colored 
community, near Little Rock, Ark. 
Sam Bland and Willie Stewart were 
lynched near Eastman, Dodge County, 
Ga. They were charged with murdering 
A. M. Batchellor, a white merchant. 
William Pickens, who shot and killed 
John Nichols, white, in a quarrel about 
cotton, was hanged to a telephone pole 
in Forest City, Ark. 
Sheriff D. R. Moreland, white, died 
from wounds received in a pitched battle 
recently fought with Negroes in Worth 
County. Ga. 
Mrs. Cordelia Stevenson, whose son 
was accused of burning a white man's 
barn, was taken from her home, near Columbus. Miss., and hanged by a mob. 
Six white boys in Atlanta, Ga.. tried to 
drive four colored lads out of their section of the city. One colored boy was 
killed by M. Green, a white boy of thirteen. MINISTERS The ministry of New Orleans is taking its place as it 
should at the head of civic and social uplift movements. Robert Elijah Jones, 
editor of the Southwestern Christian Advocate, is perhaps the leading example of 
this. 
Dr. Jones was born in North Carolina 
in 1872 and is a graduate of Bennett and 
Gammon. He served as pastor for several years and in 1897 joined the paper 
which he now edits, becoming editor in 
1904. Dr. Jones has been in the front 
of every big movement by the race in 
New Orleans for the past ten years. 
The Rev. H. H. Dunn, pastor of the 
Central Congregational Church is a 
graduate of Straight and his church is the 
great meeting place for all public movements. He is head of the Colored Educational Alliance and secretary of the 
Christmas Gift Fund along with many 
other useful activities. 
There are, of course, numbers of other 
worthy pastors in New Orleans, like the 
Rev. T. F. Robinson of the First Street 
M. F. Church who is an unusual organizer and a public spirited man. 
THE OLD There are a number of New 
GUARD Orleans colored men whose 
names are household words 
throughout the State and some of whom 
are known throughout the United States. 
The late James F. Lewis was one. .Another is the Honorable Walter L. Cohen, 
who arose from the Custom Service to 
be Registrar of the Land Office at New 
Orleans, where he served for twelve 
years. 
Aristide Dejoie, Sr., is notable as a 
man and as the representative of a large 
family. He is President of the City Negro Business League and a gauger in the 
Internal Revenue Department. One son 
is the best-known colored pharmacist in 
the State, owning a large and popular 
drug store. 
The Hon. C. C. Antoine is a former 
Lieutenant Governor of the State and 
Mr. A. P. Williams is a widely known 
retired teacher. 
BUSINESS S. W. Green, Supreme ChanMEN cellor of the colored Knights 
of Pythias of the United 
States, might appear under several heads, 
but he is especially known for his business ability in organizing the Order and 
in building the notable Pythian Temple 
in New Orleans at a cost of $225,000. 
The Grand Lodge of the State of Louisiana has one hundred and eighty-one 
lodges with a membership of nine thousand. Mr. Green became Supreme Chancellor of the Order in 1908. 
Henry E. Braden is proprietor of the 
Astoria Hotel, in New Orleans, and a 
business man of ability. 
Alexander Paul is a labor leader and 
is also engaged in the real estate and insurance businesses. He organized a regiment of colored immunes during the 
Spanish-American Wa r and was foreman 
of the laborers in the building of the 
Cotton Centennial Exposition. 
PROFESSION - The dean of colored men in 
SIONAL MEN professions in New Orleans 
is James Madison Vance, 
the well-known lawyer. Few colored men 
are better known throughout the United 
States. 
There are a number of physicians led 
by Dr. J. T. Newman, the Dean of the 
Provident Sanitarium for Colored People. 
Dr. J. E. Mullen is another successful 
colored physician. 
Dr. J. E. Willis is one of the bestknown dental surgeons and among the 
first to open a dental office. 
Mr. E. J. LaBranche is a pharmacist 
and compounds twelve thousand prescriptions a year. Seven physicians have 
offices in the building where his drug 
store is located. 
MEN of the MONTH THE LATE COL. JAMES LEWI S 
HON. C. C ANTOINE 
H. E. BRADE N 
DR. R. E. JONES 
HON. W. L. COHEN 
S. W. GREEN 
A. DEJOIE, SR. 
J. MADISON VANCE 
A. P. WILLIAMS 
17o TH E CRISI S ME N O F TH E MONT H 171 
REV. A. LAWLESS REV. H. H. DUNN REV. T. F. ROBINSON 
WOME N Tw o women may be mentioned 
especially. Frances JosephGaudet is the founder of the Colored Industrial Home and School. Her plant is 
valued at $90,000 and in the last thirteen 
years has handled over eight hundred 
children. The school is entirely free from 
debt. 
Mrs. S. W. Green is not simply the 
wife of her hard-working husband, but 
has served as bookkeeper when her husband was a grocer and since 1900 has devoted her time to building up the Knights 
of Pythias with him. She has charge of 
the office when he is traveling and is his 
private secretary. 
Mrs. Geddes is partner in the leading 
colored undertaking firm in New Orleans. When her husband died she took 
his place and carried on his work. 
Mrs. Williams is principal of one of 
the largest colored schools. 
Miss Carter is a well-known soloist. 
GRAND ARMY There is a large and 
MEN" flourishing organization of 
the Grand Army of the 
Republic in New Orleans, arising from 
the fact that several regiments were recruited here during the war. On page 
191 we present the leading officers. 
MRS. GREEN MRS. WILLIAMS MISS C. CARTER MRS. JOSEPH-GAUDET MRS. GEDDES MURDER 
HORACE TRAUBE L writes in the 
Altoona (Pa.) Times: 
" 'A Negro looter was lynched.' 
"Does that mean anything special to 
you? If the news item had read: 'A 
white looter was lynched,' would you 
have regarded it as a good omen? 
"No. You'd have asked: Wh y don't 
they let the law take its course? And 
you'd also have said: If this lynching 
business ain't stopped all our civilization will go to smash. 
"But no one has anything to say no 
matter what happens to a Negro. 
"A Negro is guilty because he's accused. But you mustn't accuse a 
white man even if he's guilty. 
"I read in the papers today that the 
State Department has sent a note to 
Austria objecting to the taking of the 
lives of certain white people in the destruction of the Ancona. But I don't 
believe I'll ever hear from the administration objecting to the lynching of a 
certain Negro at Hopewell. 
"All the doubts are decided against 
the Negro. All the white people are 
given the benefit of every doubt. 
"I've heard you object to Negroes 
whose skin is black but whose heart is 
white. But I've never heard you object to a law whose skin was white but 
whose heart was black. 
"Whe n Booker Washington died a 
cartoonist showed us his tomb covered 
with roses. And he put this phrase under the drawing: 'No color line here.' 
"No color line for the dead. But 
every sort of color line for the living. 
"The only way the Negro can escape 
your hate is by dying. 
"If you're white you can do more or 
less as you please. But if you're black 
or brown or yellow, you're obliged to 
do just as the others please. 
"The Negro looter was lynched. In 
fact, it wasn't proved that he was looting. Somebody said something was 
stolen. He was found in the neighborhood. Th e crowd concluded he was 
guilty and executed him. 
"If the lynched man had been white 
we'd never hear the end of it. But I 
might have said he wouldn't be 
lynched. But when the victim is black 
the record of the atrocity is condoned 
by general consent. 
"It's a pity we couldn't have been 
given a chance to choose our skins before we were born. If we knew we 
were to be born into a world in which 
skins counted for more than souls we'd 
have arranged to arrive with the right 
kind of fur. 
"I remembe r a recent case of rape. 
Two of us were talking about it. 'Who 
did it?' I was asked. 'An Irishman,' I 
said, 'is charged with it.' He shook his 
head. I don't believe he's guilty." 
And in the same talk not five minutes 
later the same man looking over an 
evening paper exclaimed: 'Here's another damned nigger lynched. Served 
him right.' He didn't say of the Negro 
wha t he so promptly said of the Irishman : I don't believe he's guilty.' He 
said : 'Served him right.' 
"Anything that happens to a Negro 
serves him right. Th e Hopewell Negro 
had no right to be a Negro. Being a 
Negro served him right. 
"Being a Negro means being potentially capable of every evil. Being a 
white man means being potentially capable of every good. 
"Some people talk of Jews like other 
people talk of Negroes. Some people 
talk of Italians and Poles like other 
people talk of Chinamen. Some Germans talk of the English and some 
Englishmen talk of the Germans like 
other people talk of Africans and Fejees. But what does it all come from 
and go to? 
"A little shift in your white parents 
and you might have been black. A little shift in your black parents and you 
Opinions OPINION S 173 
might have been white. All the Frenchmen might have been Austrians. All 
the Turks might have been Russians. 
I might have been a monkey in wildest 
Africa. You might have been a man 
eater in the South Pacific. 
"That wonderful might have been. It 
saves some. It damns others. It both 
saves and damns without a reason. 
"I might go to bed tonight white and 
wake up tomorrow morning black. My 
virtues of today would become my 
vices of tomorrow. 
"I might be a white scoundrel and a 
black saint. But that wouldn't help me 
any if I was black or hurt me any if 1 
was white. 
"I've heard Negroes talk of the 
damned Christ-killers and I've heard 
Jews talk of the damned Negroes. 
Each of them forgot the other when remembering himself instead of remembering the other in forgetting himself. 
"The worst exhibit of all is seeing 
the persecuted turn persecutor. 
"But just as every animal has its 
enemy and is an enemy, so is it true 
that so far every man has a persecutor 
and is a persecutor. So every man has 
race hatred and is the victim of race 
hatred. 
"If I had read tha t a white man was 
lynched at Hopewell I'd felt sorry for 
him. But when I read that a black man 
was lynched I felt sorry for myself. 
"Thoma s Paine said that where liberty and justice were not, there was his 
country. 
"I say that that race which is hated is 
the race I love. I say that that race 
which is spat upon is my race. 
"My ancestry is half Jew and half 
Christian. I have known times when 
the Jew in me was ashamed of the 
Christian in me. And I have known 
times when the Christian in me was 
ashamed of the Jew in me. And yet 
for the most part my ancestors have 
learned how to live together in me in 
love. 
"I want the world to learn to live 
with itself in love. Black with white. 
Yellow with red. All with all. 
" 'A Negro looter was lynched.' " 
W e are in fact become a nation of 
murderers. As -the University Commission on Southern Race Questions 
recently said, lynching has become "a 
contagious social disease" and "a habit." The Spectator, an insurance periodical, shows that murder is increasing 
in the United States and that southern 
cities particularly are centers of homicide. Of course we can trust the author of this article, Frederick L. Hoffman, to saddle most of this on the colored folk. But, says the New York 
Livening Post, "how inadequate this 
explanation is may be judged from one 
circumstance. We note that Baltimore 
bad a homicide rate in the decade 1904-
13 of only 4.6—while Boston had 4.8, 
Manhattan and the Bronx 6.1, Cleveland the same, and Chicago 9.3—in 
spite of the very large colored population of the Maryland city. The way in 
which the city is governed, and the 
laws of the State enforced, has fully as 
much to do with the matter as the composition of the population." 
m 
AFRICA 
A MOS T interesting series of reminiscences by an African missionary is being published in the Atlantic 
Monthly. Speaking of a Congo tribe she 
says: 
"The Mpongwe people themselves 
are extraordinary in their grace and 
finish. Wh o can say for how many 
generations they have been in contact 
with the trader; and the American mission was busy among them as many as 
seventy years ago. They are people 
of a fastidious instinct, the nicest sort 
of instinct for true gentility; and there 
is nothing grotesque in their very modified aspect or in the modifications of 
their manner of life. Many of these 
old Christian women have an air of distinction for which one can hardly account—quite the 'grand manner;' and 
the women of the tribe generally are 
graceful with a grace not at all primitive.—a sophisticated, almost a morbid, 
grace 
"The prettiest dress of the Mpongwe 
woman is a cloth drawn up under the 
arms, a scarf on the shoulders, and a 
handkerchief folded over the coiled hair 
in a high stiff fold set well up on the 
head, rather like a child's idea of a 
crown. There is a great fancy lor purples and lavenders set off with shades 174 TH E CRISI S 
of rose and red and a sudden keen note 
of gilt. Wit h black there will be a 
touch of most delicious "bright green. 
A cloth and a scarf worn by a woman 
of beautiful gesture—and a Gabonnaise is always that—have a certain 
mutable charm ; the movements of the 
body, the wind that blows from the 
sea,—these renew and display the folds 
of the garment so that the eye is intrigued." 
He r pictures of the women are particularly beautiful: 
"Anyur e and Awore walk and talk 
together in the moonlight; they talk 
secrets, as they should. Anyure's little 
head is flowerlike; she carries her chin 
high and looks about her with smiling 
eyes. Awore is very dark and, of late, 
womanly; she is pretty too. Tonight 
in the moonlight I see some silver 
beads on her neck; they quite shine. 
Her black dress is figured with gay 
flowers; her hair comes down from 
under her flowered kerchief in close-set, 
stiff little twists 
"You can't think how sweet the women of this country are. We have just 
come out from a nine weeks' quarantine from smallpox, and in all those 
weeks I had no other occupation than 
to go about in the villages and acquire 
affable Ngumba manners. The time 
was happy for me because the women 
began to love me, to be very sweet and 
maternal toward me. It is beautiful to 
see their gentle ways with me, whom 
they take, in spite of every protestation, to be a little girl." 
Of the Africans in general the writer 
says : 
"The African is exceedingly secret; 
his thoughts move under cover. Ther e 
is an obscure sense of mental excitement in any vital intercourse with a 
people so secret. Ther e is besides a 
mental excitement in ministering to 
such a passion fur knowledge. I cannot hope to give you any complete 
sense of how they inarticulately clamor 
about me of an evening. Their very 
silences, when they wait with shining 
eves, are clamorous 
"Probably you must wonder sometimes, as I do often enough (but never 
with any sense of personal stake), as to 
the future of the African peoples. I 
don't know, my dears. I have not an 
idea. They wonde r themselves; they 
have misgivings that haunt and shake 
them. " 
Of the future of the Africans she 
writes : 
"Mr. Nevinson, in the August Harper's, very truly says that the African 
is not known to the white man. He is 
not. I have hardly a fixed conviction 
or an inference as fruit of this year's 
observation, but the missionary comes 
to feel tha t the African is known to 
God. He feels himself to be, he knows 
himself to be, one in an affair of three, 
and God is the third. And he knows 
himself to be necessary to tha t union. 
He is the friend of the Bridegroom. " 
m 
MISCEGENATION 
THOS E who discuss the late principal of Tuskege e and his successor are being hard put to it these days 
to keep their racial balance. They welcome Mr. Moton because he is a fullblooded Negro ; they praise Mr. Washington and explain him because he was 
a mulatto. " I do not understand the 
Americans, " said a distinguished 
French visitor. "The y tell me that 
only mulattoes amount to anything; 
but when I suggest more mulattoes 
they get angry. " 
A writer from Hawaii says of that 
country: 
"The melting process has not as yet 
been sufficiently long-continued to permit conclusions. But it is true that 
the instruments and the materials essential to nature's experiments in racial 
association have for a considerable 
period been present here, and that no 
results distressful to a broad-minded 
observer are as yet apparent. And in 
the present time of universal unrest 
many persons may find satisfaction in 
contemplating the fact tha t in one 
neighborhood many races live without 
undue strife. Th e fact is especially 
significant when it is considered that 
the community embraces such widely 
different peoples as the Hawaiians, the 
Portuguese, the Chinese, the Japanese, 
the Koreans, the Filipinos, the Porto 
Ricans, the Negroes, and various Caucasian nationalities; all of which are OPINION S 175 
represented in considerable numbers 
among the approximately 60,000 residents of Honolulu. " 
The London Athenaeum, reviewing 
the Life and Letters of the late Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor, tells how he was the 
son of a black West African, who graduated in medicine at the University 
College in London. He married an 
English woman, Alice Hare , and 
eventually died in West Africa. 
"The lot of educating her son, therefore, fell upon the mother, whose influence for good was undoubted, and left 
its mark in the boy's uncommon charm 
of manner even to his last days. We 
need not, however, follow the career of 
Coleridge-Taylor in detail. Most who 
are interested know that in composition he was a bright and a shining light 
of the Royal College of Music, and that 
while still a student there he produced 
his masterwork. 
"This last statement we regard as 
significant. Almost from his earliest 
youth Coleridge-Taylor was an apostle 
of color. He took the greatest pride 
in championing his father's race, and 
as he grew, so the idea grew with him, 
with the result that, had he been in a 
position to do so, he would almost certainly have quitted England forever, 
to settle in America, after his one and 
only visit to that country. " 
The Dallas (Texas) Daily TunesHerald has a letter from a white man 
lauding Frederick Douglass: 
"Fred Douglass has been recognized 
for over fifty years by the greatest 
minds of all political parties as the 
greatest Negro that America has ever 
produced—and to our thinking the 
world, unless it might be, Toussaint 
L'Ouverture of Saint Domingo, who 
styled himself the greatest of blacks 
and Napoleon the greatest of whites. 
"Whe n we consider the conditions 
and the environments existing at the 
time of their living Washington's fame 
or greatness will compare with Fred 
Douglass, as will dusk to sunlight on a 
twilight day in June. " 
With the memory of these great 
mulattoe s before the world, we are 
glad that Dr. Stephen S. Wise , of New 
York, has taken the New Statesman of 
London to task for its complacent acceptance of a Negro-hating picture 
play : 
"As an American reader of The 
New Statesman may I be permitted to 
say how deeply disappointing it was to 
read under the caption of 'The Drama ' 
in the issue of October 9th, a review 
of 'The Birth of a Nation' by Desmond 
McCarthy. I am not unmindful of the 
truth that dramatic criticism is not 
under the necessity of dealing with the 
moral problems involved in a play, but 
it would seem to me that any reviewer 
of 'The Birth of a Nation' ought to 
have felt what most fair-minded Americans have come to feel, tha t 'The Birth 
of a Nation' is an indefensible libel 
upon a race, that it is nothing less than 
an indictment of a whole people, the 
more damning because it purports to 
be historical and impartial. 'The Birth 
of a Nation' is not history; it is travesty. It is not realism; it is an abomination save from the viewpoint, perhaps, of sheer spectacular mass-production. 
"We have earnestly striven in this 
and other cities to prevent the appearance of 'The Birth of a Nation' as tending to excite ill-will between the white 
and the black races. W e have succeeded only in some cities, and I am 
ashamed to admit that we were able to 
do nothing more in the city of New 
York than to bring about, through 
Mayoral intervention, the elision of 
some of the most objectionable parts 
of the play. But it was a play that 
called not for modification but for the 
policeman's club. Some of us have 
wondered that the Negroes of New 
York and other cities have been patient 
enough to permit this vile spectacle 
to be presented from day to day without being roused to some act of violence. 
" 'The Birth of a Nation' is the sort 
of thing on the stage which makes such 
appeal to prejudice and partisanship and 
ill-will as to make inevitable a continuance of the state of war now obtaining 
in Europe. Every war in the end results from moral, or shall we say immoral, preparedness, even more imme-I/ 6 TH E CRISI S 
diately than from that physical preparedness which is the expression of 
the other and deeper-seated preparedness." 
The St. Paul Pioneer- Press says editorially : 
"If the Negroes who opposed the 
presentation of 'The Birth of a Nation' 
so strongly felt it incumbent on them 
to offer proof to the public that their 
race has progressed since the period 
covered by the much-discussed film 
play, they would need to seek no farther than Brown S. Smith, the Negro 
attorney whose masterful appeal won 
for them the partial victory which was 
granted by the City Council on 
Wednesday. 
"Though surrounded by several well 
educated, cultured men of his own race 
Mr. Smith towered above them all by 
the force of his unique personality and 
the wonderful eloquence of his address. 
He spoke for nearly an hour to an audience which contained many who opposed his proposals most strongly, but 
he held the absolute attention of every 
listener. As he made his points, 
rounding them out with a touch of 
humor or pathos, or a burst of eloquence, he swayed and converted many 
of his auditors who had entered the 
council chamber with their minds set 
in favor of his opponents. 
"Ther e was more than the appeal of 
one man in his speech. Listening to 
his remarkable flow of words, the impartial hearer was forced to the conclusion that here was the sincere appeal of a race of men and women, with 
the same pride in accomplishment, the 
same depth of feeling, the same earnest desire to progress, that the white 
race possesses." 
All of which goes to make the Rev. 
R. C. Ransom's "New Year's Prophecy" peculiarly opposite : 
"I see dark visioned countenances 
everywhere walking in the paths 
of men erect and unafraid. 
I see unwavering eves look forth from 
ebony faces no longer mantled with 
an age-long grin, 
But with a look of stern determination 
and resolve. 
I see a day of God, and not a day of 
color or of race, 
In which men trace with pardonable 
pride the fading rays of oriental 
sunshine in their veins." 
WASHINGTON 
SOM E striking last words of the late 
^ Booker T. Washingto n are coming to hand. Whe n he knew tha t his 
days were numbered he is reported to 
have said: 
"Don't make any noise about it. If 
my life has stood for anything, I desire 
to have it count for the carrying on of 
the work which I have begun. " 
In his last speech before the American Missionary Association he asked 
for more funds for the higher education 
of the Negro. 
"In order to give the Negro youth in 
the South adequate facilities for obtaining thorough training in normal 
and college courses it will be necessary 
to increase the little more than $4,000,-
000 now being expended annually for 
Negro higher and secondary education 
to $10,000,000 or more. In other words, 
Negro higher and secondary education 
needs about $6,000,000 mor e annually 
than it is now receiving. 
"At the present rate, it is taking not 
a few days or a few years, but a century or more to get Negro education 
on a plane at all similar to that on 
which the education of whites is." 
In an article written for the New 
Republic and published after his death, 
he said : 
"Segregation is ill-advised because 
"1 . It is unjust. 
"2. It invites other unjust measures. 
"3 . It will not be productive of good, 
because practically every thoughtful 
Negro resents its injustice and doubts 
its sincerity. Any race adjustment 
based on injustice finally defeats itself. 
Th e Civil Wa r is the best illustration 
of wha t results where it is attempted 
to make wrong right or seem to be 
right. 
"4 . It is unnecessary. 
"5 . It is inconsistent. The Negro is 
segregated from his white neighbor, 
but white business men are not prevented from doing business in Negro 
neighborhoods. OPINION S 17 7 
"6. Ther e has been no case of segregation of Negroes in the United States 
that has not widened the breach between the two races. Whereve r a form 
of segregation exists it will be found 
that it has been administered in such 
a way as to embitter the Negro and 
harm more or less the moral fibre of 
the white man. That the Negro does 
not express this constant sense of 
wrong is no proof that he does not feel 
it." 
The comment of the Socialists on 
Mr. Washington's death is interesting. 
The New York Call says: 
"The war is fifty years in the past. 
It is over. The wounds have healed. 
It is no longer necessary to lick the 
boots of lynching parties in order to 
be allowed to live. It IS necessary to 
fight that the rights of citizenship, of 
the franchise, of education, of the right 
to live their own lives be given to the 
Negroes. That fight was not Washington's fight. Othe r men are taking 
that fight up. But when Washington 
began his work his task was as great 
as the task of the present day fighters 
for absolute equality of opportunity for 
the Negro. And for the courage, the 
intrepidity, the heroism of that fight 
there is the greatest honor due the 
former illiterate, fatherless slave." 
The Appeal to Reason adds: 
"The career of Booker T. Washington is undoubtedly an inspiring indication of the possibilities of Negro development under favorable conditions. 
But it also reminds us that the salvation of the Negro race is not possible 
through the work of individual benefactors like Washington, or even 
through united racial action which is' 
only a means of intensifying racial 
prejudice, but through united economic 
and political action to secure industrial 
and social freedom and opportunity for 
all men, regardless of race or color." 
The New Republic has this complacent doctrine: 
"A ruling race will never relax its 
grip upon the political powers in response to the moral and intellectual 
striving of a subject race. But a ruling race will countenance attempts on 
the part of the oppressed to increase 
their economic efficiency; partly because the members of the ruling race 
hope to profit thereby and partly because a ruling race affects to despise 
the purely economic field and whatever goes on in it. The subject race 
can elevate itself, through industry 
and thrift, without encountering any 
serious opposition." 
When was there in America even the 
affectation of despising "the purely 
economic field ?" 
Listen to the answer of the Boston 
Globe: 
"More freedom is needed; the 
colored people now want freedom to 
work. They want to be able to secure 
employment where there is work to 
be had. 
"Certain unskilled positions are 
open to them. A woman can find 
openings in domestic service. A man 
can get placed as a porter or on an 
elevator, but if he or she is skilled, if 
the woman has qualified as an expert 
stenographer, if the man has an education which will put him above the 
ranks of the unskilled, both man and 
woman are likely to walk the streets 
of any city vainly, even when' times 
are good. The trouble is not with the 
employers. Generally they are willing 
to have a good worker, no matter of 
what race. The trouble is with the 
other workers. The employer is usually 
quite frank in saying that the line is 
drawn by his employes. 
"The situation is pitiable. The Civil 
Service is the only door open to the 
skilled colored person, and the army 
of applicants for Civil Service positions 
leaves only room enough for a few. 
A new emancipation is needed. The 
colored people need the freedom to 
work. Withou t it, the educated among 
them must either drudge or starve. 
Opportunity can only be open for them 
when those workers, who now deny 
them a chance, change their attitude." 
m 
MOT ON 
THE Montgomery Journal says of 
A
 the Tuskegee Board of Trustees: 
"It is understood that while the majority of the board—those members 
from the South—favored Emme t 178 TH E CRISI S 
Scott, the minority—those from the 
North, those who had not only given 
their moral but substantial support to 
the school and had made its great success possible in the wider field of usefulness to the race—were for Robert 
Maton. 
"The Journal understands, however, 
that although the majority were for 
Emme t Scott, that the majority would 
have felt under the peculiar circumstances, an obligation to the minority 
to have given away and to have allowed Molton to have been named, but 
for Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, who 
took the southern view of the question 
of successor to Booker Washington, 
and tha t was that the principal should 
be a man known to the people here in 
Alabama, that he should command the 
respect and confidence of both races, 
and that he should not be a new and 
untried man. 
"The fact that he was brought from 
another state, and from an institution 
not so popular with the people of the 
South as the Tuskegee Institute, but 
on the contrary one about which there 
have been misgivings, would tend to 
arouse suspicion in this section, which 
it would be necessary for the new principal to outlive ; but in the meantime 
something might happen that would so 
discredit him and the institution that 
it would seriously endanger its future 
usefulness. 
"It is idle to attempt to conceal the 
fact of the existence of a racial prejudice in the South." 
Note in the above the deliberate misspelling of Major Moton's name. 
The Montgomery Advertiser joined 
in this peculiar demand. 
"The Advertiser, in its first editorial, 
said that Tuskegee was the greatest 
institution ever created by the Negro 
race or its representatives; it said then 
that Tuskege e was bigger and it was 
more important to the Negro race than 
Hampton. And it said then that Tuskegee should not be made the tail to 
Hampton's kite. Undoubtedly there 
must be some mutual interests between 
these two institutions, but it would 
hardly be the right thing- to place at 
the head of Tuskegee a Hampton representative and to put him over the 
heads of men of capacity and availability who have labored faithfully and 
well for Tuskegee. " 
The Charlotte (N. C.) Observer says: 
"Th e trustees seemed to have been 
appreciative of Scott's claims, yet it 
was considered the course of wisdom 
to transfer Major Moton from the head 
of Hampton Normal Institute to that of 
Tuskegee. It is to be hoped that time 
will vindicate the wisdom of this action 
and justify the choice of the trustees. 
But if the standard of Tuskegee institute 
is to be maintained and if it is to hold 
the useful place in the field of Negro 
education that was established for it by 
Booker Washington, the friendly sentiment and encouragement of the people 
in whose territory the institution is located must continue to be cultivated as 
it was under Washington." 
Northern papers without exception 
praise Major Moton. Th e New York 
Evening Post says: 
"As it is, there is now every assurance tha t Tuskege e will go on with as 
slight a break in leadership as possible, 
and will be carried on as an educational 
institution in precisely the spirit of 
Booker Washington. If Hampto n can 
now find the right successor to Major 
Moton, it will be further gratifying 
proof of the ability of the colored 
people to develop high and worthy 
leadership." 
The Boston Transcript adds: 
"His long experience and neverceasing study at Hampto n Institut e fit 
him admirably for the exercise of control at an institution all of whose 
teachers are of the colored race, and 
where no white man abides; and if the 
mantle of leadership of his race shall 
indeed fall upon his shoulders with the 
principalship of Tuskegee , it will be 
an advantage that he is a pure-blood 
Negro. No one will ever be able to 
say, in explanation of Moton's success, 
that he 'gets it from the white side.' " 
And even the President of the United 
States writes: 
"I have known something of the 
special work you have been trying to 
do for the people of your race and of OPINION S 179 
the spirit in which you have undertaken it, and 1 believe that your selection as the head of the Tuskegee Institute means the promotion there of the 
best, most practical and most hopeful 
ideas for the development of the Negro 
people." 
At the risk of seeming ungrateful we 
would like to suggest to President Wilson that he find at least one new adjective for use in addressing the Negro 
race. W e have heard that word 
"practical" before. 
NEGLECT 
NOW and then the Episcopal Church 
awakens to the fact that it is doing 
very little to help the colored people. 
The Churchman says: 
"Ther e are 12,000,000 people in our 
whole country of African descent. 
More than three-fourths of these are 
in the South. The work of our Church 
in this section of the population has 
never been adequately stressed, despite 
the fact that the religious environment 
of many of the forebears of the present 
colored population must have been that 
of their masters. Hundreds of colored 
people were communicants of the Episcopal Church in the Colonial period, 
and they continued to be loyal and 
faithful to the Church until the time 
came when racial religious denominations came into existence. The racial 
Churches have achieved a great deal in 
the South. They have built colleges, 
high schools, academies as well as 
church buildings. They have prospered and succeeded, but they have 
isolated the population of African 
descent. The obligations of our 
Church to the colored people are 
convincingly handled in Archdeacon 
Denby's address at the Ninth Annual 
Convocation held in Memphis, Tennessee. The Church, although its work is 
small, holds to the principle of maintaining a close bond between the white 
and colored communicants of the 
diocese. More financial support should 
be given to the colored work of the 
Church. Expressions of good-will and 
sympathy are not enough. Sundayschools must be established wherever 
there is a colored population, and an 
earnest appeal is made for the establishment of parochial schools with 
adequate financial support. By the Social Service Department of the Convocation the need of playgrounds for 
children in Southern cities is especially 
emphasized, and along with it is urged 
most justly the establishment of a 
juvenile court system for colored children." 
A writer in the Columbia (S. C.) 
Statesman complains: 
"Our State gives attention to 
methods, class of work, efficiency of 
teachers, character of teachers and the 
like, in our white schools, but spends 
hundreds of thousands of dollars a year 
on the education of the Negroes. The 
money spent is given as a 'conscience 
fund,' without giving a moment's consideration as to the results or consequences on the character of these 
people. It is too late and but the wail 
of idle dreamers to give consideration 
to 'not educating the Negro.' He is 
and will be educated somehow, rightly 
or wrongly. The money being spent is 
South Carolina's money and it ought 
to be spent judiciously and wisely. I 
have noticed from time to time the lax 
hours spent in numbers of rural Negro 
schools. Tha t there ought to be regulated supervision is so apparent to 
my mind until it needs no argument. 
I am aware that in several towns and 
cities the Negroes have well regulated 
schools with competent teachers. 
Tha t there are some such in the rural 
communities is admitted, but they are 
the exception which proves the rule. 
I believe every right thinking Negro 
who desires the genuine improvement 
of his race will welcome such a supervision." 
Sidney J. Catts, candidate for governor of Florida, is very decided in his 
views as to Negro education. He opposes the appropriation given to the 
colored college at Tallahassee. 
"I am opposed to higher education 
of the Negro in the South," said the 
gubernatorial candidate. "We all 
know there is no room in the South 
for the well educated Negro, no one 
wants a Negro for a lawyer or a doctor 
or a banker." If the Negro knows 180 TH E CRISI S 
enough to read his Bible his education 
is complete, in Mr. Catts' opinion. 
ACCOMPLISHMENT 
MOST Americans know little of 
wha t Negroes have done and care 
less, but now and then their accomplishments get into print. The St. 
Louis Post Despatch says: 
"Tha t Lawton Avenue is Easy Street 
was becomingly demonstrated Monday 
evening when the colored people of 
St. Louis announced subscriptions of 
$08,947.80 to the colored branch of the 
Y. M. C. A. The subscription campaign lasted but 10 days. The subscribers consisted of 3,614 colored 
persons and 10 whites. A similar campaign recently conducted in Chicago 
which has a larger Negro population 
than St. Louis netted less money. 
"Our reference to Easy Street is entirely complimentary. The colored 
people of St. Louis are as industrious 
as they are law-abiding. If the whites 
in St. Louis presented no more problems proportionately this would be the 
metropolis of the Happy Valley of 
Rasselas. Beggars, vagrants and street 
rowdies are rare among St. Louis Negroes. Law-breakers and criminals 
are few. Dependents in public institutions are not many. Mainly the Negroes care for their own sick and impoverished. The most successful 
money campaign ever conducted 
among Negroes adds to the respect 
which they have earned of their white 
neighbors." 
The Louisville Courier Journal says 
of a Negro tenor: 
"Haye s possesses a voice which 
makes the hearer forget all distinctions 
of color or condition, and think only 
of the great tenors of world-wide fame. 
Tt is robust in proportion, but wonderfully sweet in quality, adapting itself 
to the heroic measures of 'Aida' or the 
tender pathos of a ballad. It is but 
natural that some crudities remain in 
Hayes' style, for he is a very young 
man. and is too modest to think his 
musical education finished. In spite of 
these, his interpretations are intelligent, 
and even the most critical amon g his 
hearers recognized the fire of true 
musical inspiration. Th e principal 
numbers of his program were 'Celeste 
Aida' and de Grieux' air from 'Manon,' 
the first sung in Italian, and the latter 
in French, both languages being remarkably rendered. " 
A Chicago paper has this: 
"A. J. McKelway told Mrs. Inez 
Hayne s Gillmore of some of his experiences fighting child labor in the 
South. 
"It has to do with suffrage—with 
Negro suffrage. It happens that the 
children who work in the Georgia mills 
are almost all white. Th e Negroe s are 
paying mor e attention to farming and 
to buying land and so avoid the mill 
towns. Whe n child labor came up for 
discussion in the Georgia Legislature 
a short time ago the members were 
limited to three-minute speeches. A 
Negro legislator arose. 
" 'Mr. Speaker,' he began, 'I am not 
much interested in this, for our Negro 
children don't work in the mills. But 
we've legislated here for the beasts of 
the earth, for the birds of the air, the 
fishes of the sea, and so I'm in favor of 
legislating for the little white children 
of this State.' " 
The Pittsburgh Courier says: 
"We have reliable information that 
among the heroes of the recent Sandusky street fire must be included an 
unknown Negro. This man of black 
skin entered the burning building and 
rescued the screaming girls—all white 
—and without remaining to give his 
name or residence lost himself in the 
crowd and went away. 
"Witnesse s who saw his work declare that he wa s the most modest of 
all. Tha t he went in time and again 
in face of the death trap and brought 
out suffering and gasping girls, while 
other men looked on. This Negro, 
whoever he is, must go down as a hero, 
as white at heart as any who braved 
the dangers of tha t awful conflagration ; he must be reckoned amon g men 
whos e hearts are large enough to forget color or race when humanity is 
suffering. If his name is never learned, 
his work will endure as an example of 
a man with a heart full of love for 
humanity—and the color of his skin OPINIONS 181 
makes no difference with Him who, in 
the finality of things, will give credit 
where credit is due. 
''The daily press failed to mention 
this Negro or his work, and we give it 
mention now as a reminder that 
heroes are not made by newspapers." 
Al l of which leads us to quote the 
Chinese poet, Pai Ta-shun, on 
"Brotherhood:" 
"The One bethought Hi m to make man 
of many-colored dust, 
An d mixed the holy spirit in 
In portions right and just; 
Each had a part of mind and heart 
From One Himself in trust. 
"Thus came the brown and yellow men 
An d black and white and red, 
So different in their outer look, 
Alike in heart and head, 
The self-same earth before their birth, 
The self-same dust when dead." 
MISCELLANEOUS 
"OF the six million South Africans 
only one million have votes, and 
the five millions demand Imperial interference, not to assert a sentimental 
right merely, but to recover the bare 
human right to which every man born 
into the world is entitled, namely, the 
right to occupy and live by tilling the 
land. 
"Of this right the voteless millions 
of His Majesty's black subjects are 
ruthlessly deprived by the South African Parliament, in which they have no 
say. Last year the Union Parliament 
passed the Native Land Act, under 
which natives can neither purchase nor 
lease land. The effect has been that 
numerous farm tenants, whose tenancies expired during the past twelve 
months, have been rendered homeless, 
since the law does not permit them to 
settle anywhere on a farm except as 
servants; and white farmers did not 
hesitate to take advantage of this law 
to exact unpaid labor from the natives. 
"Paul Kruger had a law in the 
Transvaal which debarred Asiatics 
from purchasing, land in his Republic ; 
yet Paul Kruger, in all his alleged 
wickedness, never proposed anything 
half so drastic as to fine a farmer one 
hundred pounds for allowing a landless 
Indian to plough or graze his horse on 
a farm. This General Botha does to 
the aborigines of the country under the 
'protection' of the British flag. 
"The Imperial Government, which 
went to war against Oom Paul to secure justice for whites, tell us they 
cannot interfere to secure justice for 
blacks. 
"It would therefore seem that we enjoyed more protection before we became British subjects, and that now 
that we are under the Union Jack, 
Parliament in our native land, in which 
we have no voice, is at liberty to unjustly tax and enslave us."—Sol T. 
Plaatje in the Brotherhood Journal. 
England. 
"We exend our heartiest congratulations to TH E CRISIS, Dr. W. E. DuBois. 
editor, which has crossed the line of 
self-support. TH E CRISIS is just five, 
years old, and has a circulation of 
35,000 copies, and is now meeting all 
expenses, including the salary of the 
editor, business manager and office 
rent; in fact, every item connected with 
the paper. This is fine. W e do not 
know another paper in the country 
edited by a man of our race that has 
achieved this point of success. There 
are others that are self-supporting, but 
they do not pay anything like a comfortable salary to the editor. We most 
sincerely congratulate Dr. DuBois and 
wish that TH E CRISIS may live long. 
"TH E CRISIS occupies space in one of 
the best buildings in New York City, 
on Fifth Avenue, and has in every way 
a well-appointed office. The paper 
hopes to have a 50,000 circulation by 
the first of April next, and we sincerely 
trust that Dr. DuBois and the staff of 
TH E CRISIS will not be disappointed. 
"If TH E CRISIS has reached the point 
of self-support, why may not the 
Southwestern Christian Advocate with 
its strong constituency? Brethren, it 
is up to us."—Southwestern Christian 
Advocate, New Orleans, La . SOCIETY OF THE HOLY NAME, ST. KATHERINE CATHOLIC CHURCH, NEW ORLEANS BAR N DANCE OF THE YOUNG MEN'S TWENT Y CLUB, NE W ORLEANS 
Photo by Allen J. Woods THA T CAPITA L "N " 
FRO M time to time persons write 
us for a brief statement of the 
reasons for capitalizing' the 
word Negro. 
Th e ordinary rules of capitalization 
enjoin the use of a capital letter for all 
proper nouns, all names of tribes, 
races, sects or organized bodies of men. 
For this reason the word Negr o 
when referring to a race of men has alway s been capitalized until late in the 
Nineteenth Century. Wit h the defense 
of Negr o slavery in those days there 
grew up the custom of using the small 
letter for the word since Negroe s wer e 
looked upon as ''real estate" or as 
moveable property like horses, cows, 
etc. 
At the same time the great increase 
in printing and use of printing machines led to a disuse of capital letters 
in many cases where they had formerly 
been used and a great distaste to reporting to them amon g printers of Eng ­
lish. Consequently the rule books 
used in most printing offices today say 
that capitals shall be used for the 
names of all nations and races "except 
Negro.'"' This has been defended b y 
saying that Negr o is not the name of a 
race but the description of the color of 
a people, being correlative with white, 
yellow, etc. 
This argument is manifestly false. 
Black is the correlative of white and 
Negr o does not describe color since all 
the persons designated as Negroe s are 
by no means black, even in Africa. If, 
therefore, we follow analogy we cannot 
refuse to capitalize Negr o when we 
capitalize Caucasian, Malay, Indian. 
Chinese, etc. No t to capitalize Negro 
under such circumstances is a direct, 
and in these days a more and more 
conscious, insult to at least 150,000,000 
human beings and no person or institution will persist in this insult if they 
realize that these people regard the 
usage as such. 
OL D SARU M 
OLD Sarum wa s an English 
town dating from Roman 
times. From 1295 to 1832 it 
sent tw o members to the English Hous e of Common s despite the 
fact that from the Sixteenth Century 
the village wa s a heap of ruins. Old 
Sarum became a by-wor d for misrepresentative democracy. Let no one 
think that we have outgrown the rank 
injustice of misrepresentation. 
It is difficult to get the figures of 
election returns in the South. Since 
this Association made revelations some 
few years ago, the returns of congressional elections are no longer published 
in the Congressional Record! If, however, we depend upon the World 
Almanac we may gather many lessons. 
Tak e for instance the presidential 
election of 1912 and let us compare 
South Carolina and Massachusetts, 
two hereditary friends. T o choose her 
eighteen electors Massachusetts cast 
488,156 votes; South Carolina cast only 
Editorial EDITORIA L 185 
5
0
.34 8 votes, but for these she sent 
nine electors to the electoral college. 
This means that the South Carolinian 
cast five votes to the New Englander's 
one. 
To this we may add the following 
facts: 
Georgia and New Jersey each had 
5 electors. 
Georgia cast 121,532 votes for hers; 
New Jersey cast 432,534 votes for 
hers. 
Louisiana casting votes had 
10 electors; 
Rhode Island casting 77,624 votes 
had 5 electors. 
• Oregon casting 137,040 votes had 5 
electors. 
Kansas and Mississippi each had 10 
electors; 
Kansas cast 365,444 votes for hers; 
Mississippi cast 64,319 votes for 
hers. 
Alabama and Minnesota each had 12 
electors; 
Alabama cast 117,888 votes for hers; 
Minnesota cast 334,219 votes for 
hers. 
New York cast 1,587,983 votes for 
her 45 electors; 
Georgia (14), South Carolina (9), 
Alabama (12), and Mississippi (10), 
cast 354,087 votes for their 45 electors. 
Congress has just convened with 
the South still in the saddle, still 
leaders on the floor and heading all important committees. Why ? Because 
in the congressional election of 1914 
equal representation under the laws 
was a farce in the South. Let us compare for instance Alabama and Minnesota. Each elected ten members of 
the United States Hous e of Representatives. The votes cast in the elections were as follows: 
ALABAMA. 
Total Vote 
1st district—Grey elected 4,681 
2nd " —Dent elected 7,470 
&rd " —Stegal elected 7,951 
4th " —Blackraor elected 5,441 
5th " — Heflin elected 8,100 
6th " —Olive r elected 10,718 
71I1 " —Hurnctt elected 16,781 
8th " —Almo n elected 6,314 
Qth " —I fuddlcston elected 8,072 
75,528 
(One Congressman at large.) 
MINNESOTA. 
Tota l Vot e 
1st district—Anderso n elected 36,479 
2nd " —Ellswort h elected 34,i8o 
3rd " —Davis elected 36,832 
4th " —Va n Dyke elected 30,786 
5th " —Smit h elected 30,929 
6th " —Lindeberg h elected 32,378 
7th " —Volstead elected 28,815 
8th " —Mille r elected 28,059 
9th " —Steeverso n elected 31,662 
10th " —Sehall elected 32,691 
322,811 
Mississippi and Kansas make an 
even more striking comparison : 
Mississippi. 
1st district —Candle r 5,271 
2nd " —Stephen s 5,169 
3rd " —Humphrey s 2,168 
4th " —Sisson 4,899 
5th " —Witherspoo n 6,952 
6th " —Hamso n 6,620 
7th " —Quin n 3,702 
8th " —Collier 2,404 
37,i85 
Kansas. 
1st district—Anthony 61,127 
2n d " —Taggart 68,133 
3rd " —Campbell 74,395 
4th " —Doolittl e 50,821 
5th " —Helvcrin g 54,981 
6th " —Connelly 58,190 
7th " —Shous e 69,851 
8th " —Ayre s 46,185 
483,683 
It would seem that each Mississippi 
voter (and only white men vote in Mis-186 TH E CRISI S 
sissippi) casts thirteen votes where a 
Kansas voter casts one. W e ask in all 
candor how long is Republican government going to endure under such cir 
cumstances? How long is this, the 
most burning question of American democracy, going to be "let alone" by 
patriotic Americans? 
TH E SLATE R FUN D 
|THE last report of the John F. 
Slater Fund shows that during 
the last thirty-three years this 
bund has distributed $1,625,-
000 among Negro schools. The annual 
appropriations have risen from $16,250 
in 1882-83 to $69,250 in 1915. The appropriation this year was divided 
among sixty-eight schools, five counties and thirteen summer schools. 
Ther e can be no doubt of the great 
good accomplished by this benefaction 
and we are glad to know that a part 
of the Peabody Trust is to be turned 
over to the Slater Board for the rural 
schools of the Negro race. This will 
probably amount to several hundred 
thousand dollars. 
Ther e is, however, one aspect of the 
Slater Fund administration which 
gives us concern. We note that in 1913 
there was an unexpended balance of 
$45,000 and that after the expenses of 
the year 1913-14 had been paid there 
was a balance of over $80,000 carried 
into the new fiscal year. This means 
apparently that half the income for the 
last year was unexpended. It seems 
to us that this is a mistake ; that when 
one considers the tremendous needs of 
the colored race it is too bad to have 
the few agencies working for the race 
not used to their full capacity. 
W e would like especially to call to 
the attention of the Slater Fund the 
need of systematic and scientific study 
of race problems in America. Th e 
Slater Fund has long appropriated a 
very small amount, $2,000, to such 
study. Is not the time ripe now to 
make an annual appropriation of at 
least $25,000 for real study ; to put such 
study on a scientific basis, to make it 
not simply a matter of discussion like 
the Southern Race Commission (where 
no black man can get a hearing), but 
to make it a real, catholic and fair inquiry into the facts of race life and 
race contact ? 
GERMAN Y 
SOMEON E writes to ask what 
the effect on the Negro will be 
if Germany should triumph in 
the present war. W e do not 
lor a moment pretend that the German 
people are ogres and the Allies saints, 
but we confess tha t based on unchallenged records there can be no doubt 
that Germany's attitude toward colored 
races is indefensible. 
Lewis R. Freeman says in the 
World's Work: "In Damaraland between the years 1904 and 1907 as the 
consequence of the killing of a single 
child the Germans wantonly did to 
death 30,000 Hereros, a simple pastoral 
tribe of scant fighting capacity. Never 
since Nero and Attila had there been 
a parallel to Von Trotha's infamous 
order of extermination. 
" 'Within German borders' read the 
proclamation of this Teutoni c barbarian 'every Herero with or without rifle, 
with or without cattle will be shot. I 
will take no more women or children. 
I will drive them back or have them 
fired on.' 
"For several years Germany seemed 
actually to be trying to make Damaraland a 'white man's country' by killing 
the blacks. It has reaped in failure 
the logical harvest of this sowing of 
brutality." EDITORIA L 187 
On the other hand the New York 
Nation has an article that tells us of the 
peculiar affection of the colored races for 
France: 
" The brilliant success of the French 
in handling such soldiers is largely due 
to something entirely wanting t o Germans in their dealings with subordinate 
races. It is something which even the 
Englishman's fair play does not altogether supply. It is the hand-to-hand 
comradeship of officers and men." 
Small wonder that a black and 
wounded Senegalese writes from the 
hospital: "Next spring we blacks will 
give our lives again and show we are 
worthy to fight beside our white 
brothers for the defense of France. If 
I have been able to be somebody in my 
country, it is owing to the lessons of 
my French masters. " 
A LIBRAR Y 
SOME friends of native races 
on both sides of the Atlantic 
I I have proposed that a small 
Lending Library, containing 
authoritative works upon the treatment 
and progress of the Negro race, together 
with books by Negroes, should be established in London, and, with the 
sanction of the Committee of the AntiSlavery and Aborigines Protection Society, the Library will be housed—at 
least for a time—in the offices of that 
society. 
"A commencement is being made at 
once with a grant of books from the 
United States which Dr. DuBois is 
kindly arranging to send, and it is 
hoped tha t the library will be available for use at an early date. 
"Will those who may be able to give 
standard works upon the question 
forward them to : 
The Secretary, 
Anti-Slavery & Aborigines Protection 
Society, London." 
TH E CRISIS asks contributions oi 
books for the above purpose . Volumes 
sent to us, will be acknowledged and 
forwarded. 
"LIE S AGREE D UPON " 
TO many men history is a matter 
of convention and prejudice. 
Current Literature, for instance, succeeds in writing 
two whole pages on "rag-time" without mentioning the Negro race. A 
Connecticut paper makes ColeridgeTaylor an Australian. Hundreds of 
men of Negro blood have had their 
achievements lost to the race because 
the matter oi" their color has been conveniently forgotten since their death. 
In this way one easily sees .what a 
certain E. S. Cox, a "graduate student " 
of Vanderbilt University means when 
he announces jauntily that all human 
culture has risen from white folk; the 
colored races have contributed nothing 
to civilization and when white races 
become mixed with colored blood they 
"decline." It is hardly necessary to 
argue with such a man. One may simply say flatly that the thesis is absolutely false and can only be maintained by claiming as "white " every 
group and every individual that has 
given anything to human culture. 
With this method the Egyptians, the 
Abyssinians, the East Indians and 
three-fourths of the African peoples 
and all of Mediterranean races become 
"white." Such a definition is nonsense. 
Civilization started with colored races 
and colored races and colored men have 
always been among its greatest 
standard bearers, the "graduate student " to the contrary notwithstanding. 188 TH E CRISI S 
NE W COLORE D PUBLI C LIBRARY , NE W ORLEAN S 
COLORED NEW ORLEANS 
By V. P . THOMA S 
NEW ORLEAN S has had colored 
people in it almost from the day 
of its foundation in 1717. A t least 
since 1769, when an English shipload 
of African slaves wa s brought here and 
with it the first visitation of yellow 
fever, there have alway s been colored 
people in New Orleans. But history 
of the colored people of Ne w Orleans 
is generally dated from 1814-15, when 
there had got to be quite a large number of free people of color and there 
were amon g them such notable characters as Hippolyt e Castra and Nicol 
Riquet, men wh o had attained some 
education and wh o wer e counted 
among the patriots of their day. Th e 
fields at Chalmette, wher e the centennary of the Battle of Ne w Orleans wa s 
celebrated only this very year, show a 
number of tablets telling of the positions occupied by battalions of men of 
color wh o took valorous part in the 
decisive contest between the Americans and the British soldiers January 
8th, 1815. Although they had been 
under the lash of race prejudice all the 
time before, these free men of color 
all embraced the idea voiced in the cry 
"Courons vaincre, mes freres, nous 
sommes tons nes du sang Louisianais!" 
and following General Jackson proved 
themselves sons of Louisiana indeed 
by the splendid service they rendered 
their country and their state. 
Th e written history of Ne w Orleans 
which one finds in the hands of the 
children in the schools of the city does 
not include any names of these colored 
men, and but for manuscripts, papers, 
pamphlets and the like saved from 
that day, and traditions of generation 
after generation of the race down to 
the present there woul d be nothing 
upon which the colored people of today 
in this city could prove their title to 
remembrance as worth y citizens. 
Dow n to 1863, the colored people COLORE D NE W ORLEAN S 189 
wh o made history for the race were 
known as "free men of color " and 
Creoles. Many of them had acquired 
much wealth and lived in good homes, 
sending their children off to school in 
France and other European countries. 
Wit h good education and the spirit oi 
liberty, equality and justice filling their 
hearts, those sent off would come back 
in due time and become leaders of their 
race. In the industrial arts, the 
colored Creoles led all others in the 
city of Ne w Orleans and the State of 
Louisiana for years and wer e acknowledged to be the best artisans of 
every kind for the construction of 
buildings and the manufacture of 
articles of trade and commerce. In 
proof of this, there is an abundance 
of evidence in the shape of buildings 
which were the handiwork of colored 
architects, brick masons, carpenters, 
plasterers, and slaters in every section 
of the city of Ne w Orleans. 
Some of the largest and best business 
houses of the "Crescent City " of various kinds at the present time here had 
their origin in the business and commercial enterprises of colored men 
years ago. Whil e the businesses have 
changed hands and the names of business places have also been changed. 
they are nevertheless landmarks, as it 
were, of the enterprises of the 4,000 
families of free people of color in their 
5,000 dwellings in the city and State 
as given in the census of 1850. 
Th e leadership of the free people of 
color continued until about 30 years 
ago, when, like their compatriots of 
the white race, the loss of fortune and 
prestige due to the Civil Wa r retired 
many of them from the front. Th e 
free people of color here lost in proportion as much as the white people 
did by the war. Wit h their retirement 
the leadership of the colored race 
largely fell to the lot of others whose 
work and efforts in various lines this 
number of TH E CRISIS undertakes to 
relate in part. 
Before taking up the colored people 
of today, we may recall the names of 
some of the members of the race who 
became so notable that even the 
strongest prejudices have not been able 
to keep their work and worth out of 
the history of the city—Aristide Mary, 
Thorny Lafon, Dr. L. Roudanez, Paul 
Trevigne, Widow Bernard Convent. 
Victor Sejour, Arthur Esteves, Armand Lanusse, Joanny Questy, Lolo 
Mansion, Decoudreau, Basile Crocker. 
Adolph and Armand Duhart, Eugene 
NE W ORLEAN S UNIVERSIT Y 190 TH E CRISI S 
Warbour g and Daniel Warbourg , 
Alexandre Pickhil, painter, Joseph 
Abeilard, architect, Jules Abeilard, E. 
J. Edmunds, N. Rillieux, inventor of 
vacuum pan centrifugal, Antoine Du -
buclet, Osca r Guimbillotti, doctor, 
Alexandre Chaumette, doctor, Francois Boisdore, Pierre Cazenave , Francois Escofhe, Severin Lataure, Leoni 
Monthieu, the Soulies, the Delassizes, 
the Bores, the St. Amants, the Sincyrs, 
Barjons, Fonvergnes, Beauvers, Brules, 
Castelins, Colastin Rousseau, Savary, 
Populus, and others. 
Toda y New Orleans is a city with a 
TH E PYTHIA N TEMPLE , NE W ORLEAN S 
colored population of nearly one hundred thousand people, men, women and 
children. Th e blood in the veins of 
her colored people is a mixture of the 
blood of every nation, but primarily 
it is African and European. Not more 
than about a third of this colored population is without trace of European or 
other than African blood in their veins, 
and it is a matter of fact that pure 
African people in New Orleans have 
not increased in number in many 
years. . 
This is due first to the discontinuance of the traffic in African slaves and 
later to the intermarriages between 
the mixed bloods and the pure African, 
L A BRANCHE' S DRU G STOR E 
immediately following the proclamation of freedom for the slaves in 1863. 
This colored population with representatives showin g unmistakable evidences of the same qualities possessed 
by the best representatives of the white 
or other races here has not been allowed to feel that it is any improvement on those brought here for servitude during the days of African slave 
trade. Notwithstandin g everything 
that has been done to have the colored 
people believe that they are natural 
hewers of wood and drawers of water, 
fit to do menial service only, and 
nothing else, they have made many 
friends and converted many people to 
the belief that with equal chance and 
opportunity they can fill the places of 
men' amon g men in every calling pursued by their neighbors. 
Th e task of succeeding in spite ot 
ASTORI A HOTEL, NE W ORLEAN S COLORE D NE W ORLEAN S 191 
Charles Moran F. C Antoine B. Taylor F. C. Taylor 
GRAND ARMY LEADERS 
the many difficulties incident to race 
and caste prejudices has been a very 
hard one, but notwithstanding this fact 
there are in the city of New Orleans 
today nearly 2,000 pieces of property 
owned by colored taxpayers. Nearly 
six thousand colored men paid the poll 
tax of one dollar for the year 1914. 
There are a considerable number of 
colored college graduates, men and 
women. There are practicing physicians, sick nurses, dentists, pharmacists, lawyers, ministers of the gospel, 
teachers in the colleges, high schools, 
and common public schools, in music, 
in mechanics, in medicine and 
pharmacy. Ther e are undertakers and 
embalmers, electricians, plumbers, carpenters, building contractors, architects, painters and decorators, plasterers, bricklayers, slaters, blacksmiths, wheelwrights, coopers, cabinet 
makers, grocers, proprietors of shoe 
stores and novelty stores, real estate 
dealers, jitney bu s owners and transfer 
wagon owners; colored men are employed in the federal service, the post 
office, internal revenue department, department of justice, and customs department. There are dairymen, 
butchers, truck gardeners, dealers in 
moss and hides, etc. There are caterers, 
bakers, confectioners, barbers, tailors, 
shoemakers, cigar makers, musicians in 
bands, sail makers and boat builders. 
In this city there are 17 drug stores and 
dispensaries owned and conducted by 
colored people whose stocks are declared to be worth not less than 75 
thousand dollars. In the industrial inC. DUPRE'S DAIR Y FARM 192 TH E CRISI S 
surance business there are two large 
concerns. Ther e are quite a numbe r 
of successful undertakers and embalmers, the Geddes and Moss firm 
being rated among the best equipped 
establishments of the kind—white or 
colored. 
Ther e is no end to the numbe r of 
societies, clubs and the like, beginning 
with L'Economie, a society organized 
by free people of color in 1836, and 
whose hall and fixtures are conservatively estimated to be worth over 
twenty thousand dollars. Th e president of this society for the past twenty 
years has been Hon. "Walter L. Cohen. 
There are at the present time seven 
schools which combine the high school 
and college work: Straight, New 
Orleans, Leland Southern (recently 
opened by the benevolence of Mother 
Katharine Drexel of the Order of the 
Blessed Sacrament), Luther College 
and Guillaume College, whose combined enrollment in 1914 was nearly two 
thousand students. There are 16 public schools for colored children, with 
175 colored teachers and 8,164 pupils, 
the Thorny Lafon with 28 teachers 
and 1,600 pupils being the largest of 
the number. Mrs. Sylvanie F. Williams whose picture is in this number 
has been its successful principal for 
years. As yet the City of New Orleans 
has no public high school for colored 
children, the 8th grade being the limit 
in the public school system for the 
race. Several attempts have been 
made to secure from the school board 
a colored high school but without success. One of the new colored public 
schools proposed is to be named in memory of the late Col. James Lewis. 
Although the city has not allowed 
the race any high schools, or night 
schools, the colored people with the 
aid of missionary associations and 
churches are managing to keep in college a fair proportion of their girls and 
boys who have finished the common 
school course and to see many of them 
graduate in the normal or high school 
department of these sectarian colleges. 
Many of the professional men and civil 
service employees who are making 
their mark are products of these colleges. 
Enough has been said to make clear 
that with all the handicap of expense 
for education, and the handicap of unequal opportunities for advancement in 
other things, the colored people of 
New Orleans can lay a just claim to 
being part and parcel of the race that 
has made such wonderful progress in 
the past fifty years. 
THE COLORED CREOLES OF LOUISIANA 
B y JOS E CLARAN A 
WHAT is a Creole? If I remember rightly George W. Cable, 
the most popular interpreter of Louisiana to the American novel reader, defines this word as the generic name of 
the white Louisianans of Latin stock, 
but generously adds that people of African blood have, with the tacit approval of the whites, assumed the title. 
This definition of Creole is no doubt 
highly satisfactory to a public which 
understands that an American may be 
anything but a Negro ; the descendant 
of African blacks being always just a 
plain denationalized "Negro, " even if 
lie is a white man. As a matte r of fact,-
the French CREOLE , like its Spanish 
cognate, simply means NATIV E and, 
far from having to do only with white 
people and their things, it is the name 
of the patois which the African blacks 
made from the language of their original masters in Louisiana and the 
French West Indies. A Creole, therefore, may be a pure white man, but as 
this class in Louisiana has been largely 
assimilated with the immigrant from 
the North, the task of preserving Creole traditions has been left mainly to 
those members of the French speaking 
Roman Catholic population whose 
color or personal inclination make s it TH E COLORE D CREOLE S O F LOUISIAN A 193 
unnecessary for them to resort to the 
parish records or the courts in order to 
establish their racial identity. 
Amon g the colored Creoles of New 
Orleans are many who might, if they 
chose, follow the example of countless 
others and satisfy the law in Louisiana 
or the public talk elsewhere as to their 
whiteness, but, proud of a history without blemish and hopeful of a future 
worthy of a people conscious of their 
own strength, they prefer to remain one 
of the most unique parts of the cosmopolitan American whole. The products 
of a system of slavery far more humane 
in spirit, though often quite as bestial 
in its application, as was slavery in 
Georgia and Alabama, the Creoles are 
for the most part descended from people who had won their freedom before 
the Louisiana Purchase and recruited 
in considerable numbers from free 
slave-holding people of color who had 
emigrated from Santo Domingo with 
whites who could not remain in the 
empire of black Dessalines. 
These were the people who gave to 
the world Alexandre Duma s and other 
distinguished Frenchmen. For a time 
they found the soil of Louisiana congenial to their development, but they 
were more and more hampered and 
cramped by the increasingly repressive 
laws which, beginning- with the first 
American Governor, Claiborne, from 
Virginia, had at the outbreak of the 
Civil Wa r reached the point of preventing a free person of color from 
walking in the streets without a permit. Nevertheless, these men were 
forced to enroll in the Confederate 
Army, but were happily soon to sacrifice their blood, as did the noble Captain Andre Caillouk at Fort Hudson, 
for a far worthier cause. Two complete regiments and officers for a third 
did they. form, under the command ol 
General Butler, defending the American flag as valiantly, and. as events 
have shown, with as little reward as 
they had received for their services at 
Chalmette in 1814. 
From the defeat of (he English in 
181 4 to the capture of New Orleans by 
General Butler, many of the free colored people of Louisiana had emigrated 
to Mexico and to Haiti. O f those who 
came to New York, a conspicuous example has recently been mentioned in 
the newspapers. Some went to France 
for their education and stayed there, as 
did the late Mme. Lamotte, directress 
of a young ladies' academy at Abbeville, and Edmond Dede, a black who 
for twenty-seven years directed the 
orchestra in the principal theatre in 
Bordeaux. 
Those who remained in Louisiana 
maintained their Societe Economique 
for the better classes, and the Societe des 
Artisans, some of whose members 
found time to compose verse while 
working at their trades or walking in 
the streets by the leav e of the "superior" race. As early as 1832, Mme. 
Bernard Couvent, a pure black probably of African birth, bequeathed an 
estate for the education of orphans in 
an institution which exists today. 
Norbert Rillieux invented the "vacuum 
pan," an invaluable accessory in the 
manufacture of sugar. The brothers 
Lambert composed their music and 
played with Gottschalk in the Theatr e 
d'Orleans. Eugene Warbourg, the 
sculptor, made his busts of local celebrities and executed his bas-reliefs of 
Uncle Tom's Cabin for an English 
duchess. Dr. Roudanez founded his 
daily Tribune. Lafon, Mary, Mercier 
and others did so well in business that 
they were able to devote large sums to 
philanthropic purposes. And the Citizens' Committee, founded in 1890, has 
fought a seemingly hopeless fight 
against every effort to curtail the libertics of people who cannot or d o no t 
want to be "white. " For the spirit of 
the Creole is expressed in the words 
of M. Desdunes in his book "Nos 
Hommes et Notre Histoire ;"* "We believe that it is nobler and more worthy 
to fight at all hazards than to appear 
passive and resigned. Absolute' submission increases the power of the oppressor and casts doubt upon the feeling of the oppressed." 
• Arbour & Dupont, 419 St. Paul Street, Montreal. 
Price one dollar. ANNUA L MEETIN G 
THE Annual Meeting of the Asso-
• ciation was held on Monday, January 3rd , in the Assembly Room of the 
Society for Ethical Culture, New York 
City. The following directors to serve 
three years were elected: 
Mr. Georg e W. Crawford , Ne w Haven ; 
Bishop Joh n Hurst , Baltimore ; Mr. Pau l Ken -
naday, New York ; Mr. Joseph Princ e Loud, 
Boston ; Dr. William A. Sinclair, Philadelphia ; Mr. Arthur " B. Spingarn, Ne w York ; 
Air. Charle s H. Studin, Ne w York ; Miss Lillian D. Wald , Ne w York ; Rev. G. R. Waller, 
Springfield, Mass. ; Mr. Butle r R. Wilson . 
Boston. 
The reports of officers will be printed 
in the March CRISIS. 
ANNUA L CONFERENC E 
THE annual conference has been 
changed from February 12th and 
will be held during the week of February 20th. 
PRIZ E CONTES T 
RETURNS from the Prize Contest 
amounted to almost rive hundred 
dollars. The branches winning prizes 
were Pittsburgh, .Northern California, 
Des Moines and Providence. Pittsburgh rolled up the largest membership, winning the Grand Prize, a 
scholarship of two hundred dollars offered for the year 1916- 17 in any American institution of higher education 
above high school grade to which the 
candidate chosen is eligible, the candidate being a boy or girl selected by the 
successful branch o n the basis of character and scholarship. With its enrollment of six hundred, Pittsburgh 
now; ranks third among our branches, 
although it is one of the youngest 
m 
ST. LOUI S 
THE St. Louis Branch is about to 
file an injunction suit through its 
attorneys, Messrs. Phillips and 
Vaughn, to enjoin the Board of Election Commissioners from holding an 
election on February 29th for the 
segregation of colored people provided 
for by initiative petition. Th e basis of 
the suit will be the contention that the 
constitution of the State of Missouri 
does not allow the people of St. Louis 
to legislate by means of initiative; 
therefore, any ordinance enacted by the 
initiative will be invalid. Tha t the attorneys of the branch are correct in 
their contention is the opinion of some 
of the best legal minds of St. Louis 
who hold with them tha t the initiative 
and referendum provisions in the new 
charter adopted by St. Louis by special 
election in 1914 are invalid and not 
granted the city under the state constitution. Amon g the attorneys who concur in this opinion are former City 
Counselor, Chas. W. Bates, and Messrs. 
Schnurmacher and Judson & Green. 
The Board of Aldermen has held up 
the bill appropriating over $73,000 to 
pay the expenses of the special election 
•to submit the question of segregation 
and has adjourned for two weeks. 
According to the St. Louis Republic, 
Mr. Wayn e F. Wheeling, Secretary of 
the Mutual Welfare Association, the 
organization which is endeavoring to 
segregate colored people, was placed 
under arrest charged with using seven 
hundred dollars of the funds of the organization. 
OFFICER S 
AT the January meeting of the N. A. 
A. C. P. the following officers were 
elected : 
Nationa l President, Mr. Moorfield Storey 
Vice-Presidents: Mr. Oswal d Garrison Villard, Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, Mr. John E. 
Milholland, Mr. Archibal d H. Grimke , MisMar y Whit e Ovington. 
Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors, Dr. J. 
E. Spingarn . 
Directo r of Publications an d Research, Dr. 
W. E. B. DuBois Treasurer, Mr Oswal d Garrison Villard. 
Temporar y Secretary, Miss Mar y Whit e 
Ovington . 
The resignation of Miss May Childs 
Nerney as secretary was received "with 
deep regret. When Miss Nerney joined 
the Association we had four branches and 
three hundred members. At present we 
have sixty-three branches and locals and 
nearly ten thousand members. No small 
part of this increase has been due to Miss 
Nerney's energy and devotion." 
THE "JIM-CROW" CAR 
A N N. A . A . C. P. INVESTIGATION, PART III. 
E y T. MONTGOMER Y GREGOR Y 
W HA T of long-distance travel? 
™ Wha t accommodations are provided colored persons for sleeping and 
dining on these trains in the South.'' 
Ar e there any Pullman accommodations ? Let us see. 
Dr. N and his wife of a southern 
city not far from Washingto n are leaving to attend Dr. B. T. Washington's 
funeral. The doctor telephones to the 
ticket agent for a sleeping-car reservation to Montgomery , Alabama , and is 
informed that it will be reserved for 
him. He reaches the station with his 
wife in time to make the train and presents his dusky face at the agent's window for the tickets. He is told that 
some error has been made, that the 
berths are all taken. A t that moment a 
white man requests a berth and is given 
one, whereupon the doctor insists thai 
his reservations be given him. Th e 
agent grows purple and hisses, "Now , 
look here, you know damn well we 
don't put any niggers to sleep with 
white people down here. Go into the 
TH E "JIM-CROW " CA R 195 196 TH E CRISI S 
colored coach where you belong." And 
so this gentleman and his wife are first 
insulted and then compelled to face a 
long and sleepless journey in a verminbreeding "Jim Crow" ark. This incident may be looked upon as a fairly 
typical experience in any Southern 
city. 
I was leaving New Orleans on my 
return trip North in September. I have 
before me a continuous ride of two 
nights and a day. I went to the office 
of the Queen and Crescent road on 
Camp Street and requested passage to 
Washington. The clerk at first made 
out regular Pullman reservations and 
then just as he was about to hand them 
to me, he asked, "Are these for your 
own use?" I replied that they were, 
whereupon he underwent a series of 
nervous chills which ended in his running to the rear of the office and returning with nothing but the mileage 
book. He was "very sorry," etc. Thu s 
I bunked in the usual "Crow" coach. 
We left New Orleans at 7:30 Monday 
evening, reached Birmingham at 6:30 
in the morning, Chattanooga at 10:35, 
and Washington at 7:30 Wednesday 
morning. The coaches were dirty, uncomfortable and without any decent 
toilet or washing facilities. Several of 
my students happened to board the 
train at Lynchburg and so completely 
disguised was I by layers of coal-dust 
and by a thirty-one hours' growth of 
beard, that they failed to recognize me ! 
I arrived in Washington feeling like 
old Rip Van Winkle, except that he 
had twenty years of sleep and I had 
been without any for two nights and 
a day! 
Of course not the least of my 
wretchedness was due to my enforced 
fast since leaving New Orleans. Like 
my white brother in the Pullman ahead. 
I brought no lunch with me, with the 
result that coca-cola had been mv chief 
diet. The stop-overs at the stations 
were not long enough to procure food 
at the stations if any were provided 
there for Negroes. It is not sufficient 
to say that I could have taken food 
with me or that T should have lived on 
grapes and peanuts for thirty-six 
hours. If I am to have equal accommodations I should be able to secure 
palatable food served in a proper 
manner. It can be flatly stated that 
it is impossible, except in special and 
isolated cases, for Negroes to get dining car privileges south of Washington, and thus their comfort and health 
are jeopardized. 
Ther e was one other incident of this 
trip from New Orleans tha t illustrated 
not only the inconveniences of "Jim 
Crow" travel, but its inhumanity as 
well. At a station in Virginia, about 
mid-night, a group of men and women 
carried a bundled figure into the dirty, 
cold, congested car in which I sat and 
laid their huddled burden upon the 
rear seat. It was a Negro woman in 
a dangerous physical condition being 
carried to a hospital. She required the 
best of attention and should have been 
in the Pullman car; but there she lay 
crumpled upon the seat, a pathetic object lesson of "man's inhumanity to 
man. " 
These are normal instances of longdistance travel in the South. "Niggers " are generally treated like cattle, 
no sleeping or eating accommodations 
being made on the trains for them at 
all. Because I have heard some statements to the contrary, I want to state 
emphatically tha t Negroe s cannot secure Pullman reservations south of 
Washington. This naturally does not 
include persons who can pass for white, 
or who wear heavy veils, or who secure their tickets in round-aboutways. 
It is possible for a particular Negro 
to buy Pullman tickets because of a 
personal relationship with officers of 
the roads. The point is that these are 
all exceptional cases. W e are not considering these conditions from the 
standpoint of the favored few. but of 
the majority of the race. . 
Furthermore , when individual Negroes have been able to secure Pullman accommodations, they have not 
been protected by the officials of the 
roads in their use of them. The press 
is continually publishing accounts of 
cases where members of the race have 
been dragged out of their berths and 
barbarously ousted from the Pullman 
coach. In most, cases it is quite clear TH E "JIM-CROW " CA R 197 
that the action has been incited by the 
white train officials, for the mob is 
usually composed of the occupants of 
the white day-coach, who could only 
know of the Negro's presence in the 
sleeper by word from the conductor or 
other train hands. 
A typical instance of this kind occured to one of our most representative men, Grand Chancellor of the 
Knights of Pythias, S. W. Green, of 
New Orleans. This story is worth 
repeating. He writes: 
"After a hard, arduous labor at the 
Grand Lodge session at Ocala, Fla., 
and holding many sessions all night 
and day, I was very much tired out 
upon my return to Jacksonville, 
Florida, and in order to avoid any appearance of a desire to oppose public 
sentiment, I tried to comply with the 
spirit as well as the letter of the law, 
by paying extra fare for the drawing 
room from Jacksonville to New Orleans, and felt myself secure as being 
entirely separate from the white passengers, without any need of being in 
their presence, as I kept the door 
closed at all times. To my surprise, 
when the train arrived at River Junction, Florida, en route to this city, I 
was informed by the conductor of the 
sleeping car that expressions from 
some of the white persons at the depot 
at River Junction were decidedly 
against my occupying even a drawing 
room in the Pullman car. I then 
readily consented to abandon the 
drawing room and go into the day 
coach in order to avoid trouble. 
"On my arrival at DeFuniak Springs, 
Florida, a large crowd of seemingly irresponsible young white men and boys 
gathered on the outside of the coach 
and were pointing to me while I sat 
in the day coach for colored passengers. 
Just before arriving at Milton, Florida, 
I was informed by some of the train 
crew tha t a mob was being formed for 
the purpose of taking me from the car, 
although I was then in the day coach. 
Upon my arrival at Milton, Florida, 
the crowd discovered me in the day 
coach, and some one claiming to have 
a warrant for my arrest caught hold 
of my hand and I went with him out of 
the coach, and the train pulled out. A 
crowd of about 17 or 18 persons surrounded me, with one large man on 
each side 0f me holding each hand, and 
accompanied me from the depot to th e 
town, where they carried me to th e 
jail and interviewed me. After learning my name, residence, and th e position 1 occupied, and the duties I was 
called on to perform, the crowd seemed 
to become somewhat appeased and I 
was placed in jail by the deputy, Mr. 
Martin. The next morning I was carried before a justice of the peace and 
allowed to plead guilty to a misdemeanor and fined $25.00 and costs 
for violating the 'Jim Crow' law. 
"1 wish to add that for the past five 
years I have travelled to and from 
Jacksonville, Florida, over the same 
road every year, occupying Pullman 
berths or drawing room, and without 
any molestation on the part of any 
person, and have frequently while 
travelling gotten off the train and 
greeted my friends and acquaintances 
and went back to the seat or drawing 
room in the Pullman car. The trouble 
seemed to have started when the train 
conductor inquired as to how I came 
into possession of the ticket for the 
berth and when he was informed, 
stated that he had been in charge of 
the trains over that road for the past 
17 years and had never seen a colored 
person occupy space in the Pullman 
car. It seems that some one among 
the train crew had inflamed public sentiment to such an extent that persons 
in the several towns on the road decided that I should not occupy space 
in the Pullman car. It is a sad 
commentary on the boasted American 
claim of justice and fair-play, that a 
citizen decently clad and complying 
with all the requirements of the law, 
will not be allowed to travel on account of necessity, in a comfortable 
way, when willing to pay for such accommodations as the public transportation companies may afford." 
It is clear then that the general 
treatment accorded to Negroes on the 
"Jim Crow" cars by the subalterns of 
the road is discourteous, rude, and 
humiliating. Such treatment renders 
travel for the girls and women of the 198 TH E CRISIS 
race extremely distasteful and hazardous. It is likewise evident that no provisions whatsoever are made for sleeping accommodations and practically 
none for dining. These reprehensible 
conditions, taken in conjunction with 
the situation as to the "Jim Crow" 
coaches themselves, as pointed out in 
my previous article, cry aloud to 
heaven for relief. They are unnecessary, intolerable, and inhuman. The 
Negro asks for no special favors, he 
only demands the equal accommodations which have been guaranteed him. 
In the following articles the "Jim 
Crow" waiting rooms in the railway 
stations will be considered and the 
legal aspects of the situation presented. 
THE LYNCHING INDUSTRY 
ACCORDIN G to the CRISIS records 
there were ninety-four persons 
lynched in the United States during the 
year 1915, as against seventy-two in 1914. 
Of those lynched fourteen were white 
and eighty were colored. The record of 
Negro lynchings is as follows: 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D I N 1915. 
January, 10. 
E . Smith, Alabama Murde r 
W . Smith, Alabama Murde r 
P. Morris, Georgia Murde r 
D . Barber, Georgia Resisting arrest 
J. Barber, Georgia Resisting arrest 
Miss Eul a Barber, Georgia. . .Resisting arrest 
Miss Ell a Barber, Georgia.. . .Resisting arrest 
E . Johnson, Mississippi Stealing 
H . Dealy, Alabama Woundin g 
D . Hartley, Alabama Burglary 
February, 6. 
W . Reed, Florid a Rape 
A . Hill , Mississippi Murde r 
H . Robinson, Mississippi Murde r 
J. Richards, Florid a Improper note 
B. Grayson, Texas Murde r 
• , Florid a Stealing 
March , 3. 
P. Goodson, N . C Livin g among whites 
Mrs. J. Perry, Nort h Carolina ? 
Chil d of Mrs. Perry, Nort h Carolina ? 
April , 5. 
A . Wells, Georgia Insult 
J.. Green. South Carolina Robbery 
Miss Briley, Arkansas ? 
T. Brooks. Tennessee Murde r 
C. Sheffield, Georgia Theft 
May , 2. 
A . Kinley, Texas Murde r 
J. Hatch, Alabama v ...Assaul t 
June. 15. 
B. Mosby. Mississippi ? 
A . Bell. Kentucky Rape 
J. Green. South Carolina ? 
. Mississippi Note to a girl 
V . Stephens, Georgia Rape 
J. Smith, South Carolina Rape 
S. Thomas, Georgia Murde r 
W . Gordon, Georgia Murde r 
S. Farrar, Georgia Murde r 
A . Green. Georgia Murde r 
Green, Georgia ...Murde r 
E . Palmer, Georgia Murder 
, Mississippi Stealing 
, Mississippi. Entering girl's room 
R. Healy, Arkansa s Murder 
July, 8. 
P. Jackson, Georgia Murder 
W . Fox , Arkansa s Murder 
T. Collins, Louisiana Wounding 
J. Jackson, Georgia Concealing fugitive 
P. Fambrough, Georgia . . .Concealing fugitive 
• , Mississippi Threats 
, Georgia ? 
W . Stanley, Texas Murde r 
August, 10. 
E . Berry, Oklahoma Rape 
: — Fox, Alabama Shooting officer 
H . Russell, Alabama Poisoning mules 
K . Jackson, Alabama Poisoning mules 
E . Russell, Alabama Poisoning mules 
J. Riggins, Georgia Rape 
W . Leach, Florid a Rape 
K . Richmond, Texa s Murder 
J. Richmond, Texa s Murder 
, Louisiana Rape 
September, 4. 
M . Wilson , Tennessee In woman's room 
A . Washington, Oklahoma . Improper proposals 
L . Rudd, Missouri Robbery 
G. Thompson, Florid a Disrespect 
October, i . 
. Mississippi Murder 
November, 2. 
J. Taylor, Mississippi Shooting at Sheriff 
E . Buckner, Kentuck y Robbery 
December, 14. 
W . Patrick, Arkansa s Murder 
Mrs. C. Stephenson, Miss. He r son burned a barn 
• . Virgini a Looting 
S. Bland; Georgia Murde r 
W . Steward, Georgia Murder 
J. Nimrod , Florid a '...Rap e 
,* Georgi a Murder 
• , Georgia Murder 
, Georgia Murde r 
, Georgi a Murde r 
. Georgia. . Murder 
, Georgia Murde r 
, Georgia Murde r 
• , Georgia Murde r 
* In Leesburg and Earl y Co., Ga . BROTHER S 199 
BY STATES . 
Georgi a 29 Tennesse e 2 
Mississippi 11 Kentuck y 2 
Alabama 9 Louisian a 2 
Florid a 6 Oklahoma 2 
Texa s 5 Missouri 1 
Arkansa s 4 Virgini a 1 
Nort h Carolina . . 3 —. 
South Carolina.. . 3 Tota l 8o 
BY ALLEGE D CRIMES . 
Murder 32 
Stealing 9 
Rape and attempte d rape 9 
Resisting arrest 6 
Assault 3 
Imprope r advance s to women 5 
Unknow n 6 
Threats an d insults 3 
Poisonin g mule s 3 
Concealing fugitives 2 
Miscellaneous 2 
Tota l 80 
BY SEX . 
Me n 74 Child 1 
Wome n 5 
METHO D O F TORTURE . 
Hange d 71 Drowne d 1 
Shot 3 Burned a t the stake 5 
WHIT E ME N LYNCHE D IN 1915 . 
Murde r 7 Rape 2 
By Night Riders. 2 Wif e beating 1 
Stealing 2 
COLORE D ME N LYNC H ED BY YEARS , 
1885-1915. 
r88s 78 1902 86 
1886 71 1903 86 
1887 80 1904 83 
1888 95 1905 61 
1889 95 1906 64 
1890 90 1907 60 
1891 121 1908 93 
1892 155 1909 73 
1893 154 1910 65 
1894 134 1911 63 
1895 -. 112 1912 63 
1896 80 1913 79 
1897 122 1914 69 
1898 102 1015 80 
1899 84 
1900 107 Tota l 2,812 
190 1 107 
BROTHERS 
By JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
See ! Ther e he stands; not brave , but with an 
air 
Of sullen stupor. Mar k him well! Is he 
No t mor e like brut e tha n man ? Loo k in his 
eye ! 
N o light is there , none , save the light tha t 
shines 
In the now glaring, an d now shifting orbs 
Of some wild anima l in the hunter's trap. 
Ho w came this beast in huma n shape and 
form ? 
Speak man!—W e call you man because you 
wea r 
His shape—Ho w ar e you thus?' Ar e you not 
from 
Tha t docile, child-like, tender-hearte d race 
Whic h we have known thre e centuries ? No t 
from 
Tha t mor e than faithful rac e which throug h 
thre e wars 
Fe d ou r dea r wives and nurse d ou r helpless 
babes 
Withou t a single breach of trust ? Speak out ? 
I am, an d am not. 
The n who, wh y ar e you ? 
I am a thin g not new, I am as old 
As huma n nature . I am tha t which lurks, 
Ready to spring wheneve r a bar is loosed; 
•The ancient trait which fights incessantly 
Against restraint, balks at the upwar d climb ; 
Th e weight forever seeking to obey 
Th e law of downwar d pull,—and I am mor e : 
Th e bitter fruit am I of planted seed, 
Th e resultant, the inevitable end 
Of evil forces and the powers of wrong . 
Lessons in degradation, taugh t and 
learned, 
Th e memorie s of cruel sights and deeds, 
Th e pent up bitterness, the unspent hat e 
Filtered throug h fifteen generations have 
Sprun g up and found in me sporadi c life. 
In me the muttere d curse of dying men, 
On me the stain of conquered women, and 
Consumin g me the fearful fires of lust, 
Lit long ago by othe r hand s than mine. 
In me the down-crushe d spirit, the hurledback prayers 
Of wretche s now long dead,—their dire bequests,— 
In me the echo of the stifled cry 
Of children for their bartere d mothers' 
breasts. 20 0 TH E CRISI S 
I claim no race, no race claims me ; I am 
No mor e than huma n dregs; degenerate ; 
Th e monstrou s offspring of the monster, Sin ; 
I am—just wha t I am—Th e race tha t fed 
You r wives and nurse d your babes would do 
the same 
To-day, but I— 
Enough , the brut e must die ! 
Quick ! Chain him to tha t oak ! It will resist 
Th e fire much longe r tha n this slende r pine. 
No w brin g the fuel! Pile it 'roun d him ! Wai t 1 
Pil e not so fast or high ! or we shall lose 
Th e agony and terro r in his face. 
An d now the torch ! Good fuel that! the flames 
Alread y leap head-high. Ha ! hea r tha t shriek ! 
An d there's anothe r wilde r than the first. 
Fetc h water! Water ! Pou r a little on 
Th e fire, lest it should bur n too fast. Hol d so ! 
No w let it slowly blaze again. See there ! 
H e squirms, he groans, his eyes bulge wildly 
out, 
M 
Searchin g aroun d in vain appeal for help. 
Anothe r shriek, the last! Watc h ho w the flesh 
Grows crisp and hang s till, turne d to ash, it 
sifts 
Dow n throug h the coils of chain tha t hold 
erec t 
Th e ghastly frame against the bark-scorche d 
tree . 
Stop ! to each ma n no mor e than one 
man's shar e 
You take tha t bone, and you this tooth ; the 
chain 
Let us divide its links; this skull, of course. 
In fair division, to the leade r comes. 
An d no w his fiendish crime ha s been 
avenged ; 
Le t us back to ou r wives and children.— Say, 
Wha t did he mea n by thos e last muttere d 
words, 
"Brothers in spirit, brothers in deed ar e we" ? 
BROUGHT TO LIGHT 
B y J. T. CROSSLAN D 
DURIN G the summer of 1904 I wa s 
sent to Nashville, Tennessee, as 
a mechanical instructor by the firm that 
I wa s employed by. I wa s very glad 
of the chance, as I had never been 
South before, and 1 wanted to learn 
something of how the people really live 
down there. So I spent my time after 
work hours to study the nature of the 
condition in the South between the two 
races, namely, the black and the white. 
I would talk freely with both races to 
try and get wha t I wa s really after. 1 
wa s especially interested in rape 
crimes, which I hoped to get a clear 
insight to, as I could not see how- black 
men could so often put themselves in 
a position to be lynched. 
Well , on one beautiful afternoon in 
August while I wa s lounging around 
looking for wha t I could get hold of, a 
report came that a Negr o had committed rape on Lillian Hays, a white 
girl. Th e news flashed like lightning 
and in a very short time there wa s a 
mob collected of about five hundred 
and a posse with the bloodhounds took 
up the chase for the Negr o wh o had 
committed the crime, whil e a friend of 
mine said to me, "Come along and go, 
for there is goin g to be a coon hunt." 
I, being anxious to see wha t a coon 
hunt wa s like, readily agreed, and we 
wen t to the livery stable and hired a 
pair of saddle horses and fell in line 
with the mob and for miles and miles 
the chase kept up over the hills and 
through the wood s and swamp s until 
near night there the culprit wa s located. He had taken refuge in an old 
barn made of logs down by the hillside. 
Whe n the mob wa s certain that they 
had found the man that they wer e looking for the barn wa s then surrounded 
to make sure that he could not make 
his escape. The n bon-fires wer e made 
and the posses wer e stationed around 
and a few sent inside of the barn to get 
the coon out of his den . No w the 
search wa s on, for the barn wa s full of TH E LETTE R BO X 20 1 
hay, which made the task of locating 
the vagabond very difficult. But this 
mob would not let a little thing like 
hay stand in its way, though their progress was hindered. 
Finally they pounced upon their 
prey, yelping for his life. He was 
brought out bound and made ready to 
be lynched. Then there was a sudden 
halt in the preparation and a hush came 
over the frenzied mob. Ther e was a 
whispering through the crowd and a 
cringing of necks, and the mob that had 
been crying "lynch him" a few seconds 
ago now had ghastly looks on their 
faces. Then the mob began to disperse 
one by one and their captive wa s let 
loose, and he went his way a free and 
unharmed man. A crime had been 
committed and the criminal brought' to 
justice by the mob, but still he was not 
lynched. The reason way that while 
the mob was binding the culprit his 
shirt was torn and it was found out 
that he was a white man with bis face 
and hands blackened, and on further 
examination it was found out that he 
was John Hays, Lillian Hays' own dear 
uncle. Now , my curiosity having been 
satisfied, I then turned to my comrade 
and said, now I see why so many Negroes are accused and lynched for 
crimes in your Southland. Whe n a 
crime is committed you go in search 
of the guilty party, then voir come 
across some scared Negro who has 
been frightened from the coming of the 
mob. Then and there he is caught and 
lynched, and maybe you will say after 
it has been done that he was not the 
guilty man. But in this case the guilty 
man was brought to light. 
THE LETTER BOX 
THE January number of TH E CRISIS 
( from that saddening cover to the 
terrifying picture of the burning of Will 
Stanley), is full of promise for good 
work to be done during the year 1916. 
WILLIAM R. FISHER, 
SWIFTWATER, P.\. 
I read the current issue of TH E CRISIS 
with great interest. I thought that your 
estimate of the late Dr. Booker T. Washington was fair, impartial and judicial. 
You recognized him as a remarkable personality and appreciated the great services which he rendered to his race and 
country. At the same time, you pointed 
out where he erred on the wrong track. 
WILLIAM H. FERRIS, 
HARTFORD, CONN. 
Those were admirable articles on the 
two men Benson and Washington. 
CHARLES F. DOLE, 
JAMAICA PLAIN, MASS. 
When the December number of TH E 
CRISIS came I was much distressed at 
the article on Booker Washington. It 
seemed strange that the editor should 
have accepted such an article. It was evidently written by one who was not capable of appreciating the greatness of Mr. 
Washington's character, and more than 
that, it sounded as though the writer was 
jealous of Mr. Washington's reputation. 
The day I read that article I read the one 
in the OUTLOOK which showed a fairer 
estimate of that remarkable man. 
ALICE S. TINKHAM, 
BOSTON, MASS. 
Do not be discouraged. You have 
touched a chord whose sound and vibration will be beard and be in motion because of its eternal truth long after these 
torn toms of race morality, race industry 
and consequent race commercial value are 
silenced. I fear Mr. Washington dead 
may be more harmful than when living. 
These whites who would see the colored 
man docile and content feel that they 
must redouble their expressions and efforts as pledged to Mr. Washington. 
S. D. BROWN, 
CHICAGO, ILL . 202 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Is Your Insurance Temporary ? 
Whe n you ge t insurance , do you wan t 
protection as a temporar y matte r o r as 
a permanen t arrangement ? In othe r 
words, do you wan t you r insuranc e to 
be all right while you ar e living and 
questionabl e afte r you ar e dead ? I am 
sur e you do not. Fro m the ver y natur e 
of things, a life insuranc e contrac t is 
one which is completed, in most cases, 
after you ar e gone . In getting insurance, therefore , no matte r how large or 
how small the amount, you wan t to feel 
certain now an d continually tha t the 
contrac t will be carrie d out immediately 
and exactly as promised. In view, there ­
fore, of the large amoun t of fraterna l 
insuranc e carried by ou r people a wor d 
along this line is in order. 
No one can deny the immens e amoun t 
of good tha t the secret societies have 
accomplished in the payment of death 
benefits, in the accumulation of funds 
and the stimulation of saving amon g 
ou r people. But the fact nevertheless 
remain s tha t any form of insuranc e 
which is not based on right lines will 
soone r or later come to grief. Th e assessment insuranc e company or the sick 
benefit insuranc e company or the secret 
society endowmen t departmen t ha s an 
average life time of not mor e than 
twenty years and man y have far less. 
Thin k right now of the numbe r of flourishing secret orders and assessment societies tha t you knew, say, ten years ago. 
Ho w man y ar e in existenc e to -day ? 
Might y few. Th e Knights of Honor, 
the Ancient Orde r of Unite d Workmen , 
strongest amon g the whit e orders; the 
Tru e Reformers, th e Masoni c Benefit 
Association of Mississippi, the Od d Fellows of Alabama , giants amon g colored 
organization s in their day, hav e all me t 
the same fate. Their method s wer e the 
same an d their method s wer e all wrong. 
Th e difference betwee n assessmen t insuranc e an d legal reserv e insuranc e 
briefly stated is tha t th e forme r waits 
for death losses to ensue an d then attempts to collect from th e remainin g 
members in orde r to pa y the claim; the 
legal reserv e compan y scientifically compute s its losses in advanc e an d collects 
from every person in advanc e the pr o 
rat a cost of all the deat h losses which 
will occur in an y given year. No w 
which is safer: to collect beforehan d 
and to have the mone y waitin g for the 
claim, or to take a chanc e on collecting 
afterwar d an d to hav e the claim waiting 
for the money ? Thin k it ove r carefully. 
Th e above statemen t answers th e question which you hav e felt, whe n th e life 
insuranc e compan y paid you r claim 
within a few days, whereas, the secret 
society waited "until the end of the 
quarter.' 
Incidentally, the cost of a Standar d Lif e 
legal reserv e policy ma y be a little mor e 
but the safety is 1ooo pe r cent greater. 
W e car, tell you in detail abou t you r individua l case if you send the informatio n 
in the coupon. Ou r $250.00 policy in all 
standar d forms is particularly attractive 
to men wh o wan t only th e protection 
which the secret orde r gives. 
STANDAR D LIF E INSURANC E CO . 
200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Capital Fully Paid - - - $100,000.00 
OVER TWO MILLION INSURANCE IN FORCE 
\ Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
HEMAN E. PERRY, President 
HARRY H. PACE, Secretary 
(C. Feb., 1916) 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
Pleas e \ 
send me \ 
particulars 
about 
insuranc e 
Amoun t $. 
Sex 
Age 
Weight . . . 
Occupation 
Name . . . . 
Address . . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 203 
IMPORTAN T BOOK S B Y NEGROE S 
Nearly a quarter of a century has passed since the Neale house was founded. 
While hundreds of its publications are in active circulation, none are more 
vitally important than its works that relate to the Negro and his problems, which 
constitute a library in themselves. Send for free descriptive catalogues and 
circulars. 
Haiti: He r History and He r Detractors. By J. N. 
LEGER. Published in two editions: one in English 
and the other in French. M. Leger is a man of 
letters and the author of several well-known works. 
He is a man of public affairs, a statesman, who formerly served as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister 
Plenipotentiary from Haiti to the United States. 
Illustrated. $3.2 0 by mail is the price of each 
edition. 
The Nation, New York: "Haiti, at last, has a 
champion who is entitled to be heard; for he speaks 
from fulness of knowledge, and from a position of 
political eminence sends forth no uncertain sound. 
It is not too much to say that the latest book on 
Haiti is also the best that has ever appeared respecting the so-called 'Black Republic.' Minister 
Leger has struck a new note, for, unlike others who 
have written on the subject, he places himself against 
a veritable wall of facts, and not only wards off 
the blows that are aimed at his country, but takes 
the aggressive against her critics." 
The Facta of Reconstruction. By MAJOR JOHN R. 
LYNCH, U . S. A. Fourth thousand. Major Lynch 
was made temporary chairman of the Republican National Convention of 1884, and presided over that 
convention during the whole of the first day and a 
part of the second. He was nominated as temporary 
chairman by Henry Cabot Lodge, and his nomination was seconded by Theodore Roosevelt and George 
William Curtis. After his terra in Congress, Lynch 
served as Fourth Auditor of the Treasury. In this 
his first book, written with extraordinary force and 
with unusual clarity, he boldly justifies Reconstruction. $1.65 by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church. By JOHN H. REED, D.D., K.C. With an 
introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D., LL.D. 
$1.60 by mail. 
Christian Recorder, Philadelphia: "The book is 
filled with splendid idealism, and presents a fine 
argument, which in this day of compromises for the 
present exigencies may not be heeded." 
The Black Man's Burden. By WILLIAM H. HOLTZCLAW. Principal of the Utica Normal and Industrial 
Institute for the Training of Colored Young Men 
and Young Women, Utica, Miss. With an introduction by Booker T. Washington. Illustrated. Third 
thousand. $1.6 0 by mail. 
Boston Herald: "The book will stir the sympathetic emotions of its readers as his story stirred 
Bostonians when he told it here several years ago. 
The story of this devoted young man is of intense 
interest, not only as an account of great accomplishment despite apparently overwhelming obstacles and 
repeated discouragements, but as giving a close view 
of the character of the colored people of the far 
South, their shortcomings, their inherent virtues, 
and their ambitions." 
Redder Blood. By WILLIAM M. A'SIIBY. The Negro 
in America has produced but little imaginative work 
other than poetry, li e has tuld his story by other 
mediums, which seemed to him, perhaps, better^ than 
prose fiction. Mr. Ashby, a Yale man, is a Negro, 
and "Redder Blood" is a novel of his race, and of 
the present time. There are situations in it that 
reach the acme of legitimate dramatic intensity. 
$1.00 by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By GEORGE W . 
ELLIS, K. C , F. R. G. S.; recently, and for eight 
years, Secretary of the United States Legation in 
Liberia; author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology 
of West Africa," "Islam as a Factor in West African 
Culture," "Dynamic Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 
by mail. 
Pittsburgh Sun: "In this thorough study of Negro 
social conditions in Africa lies a revelation for those 
to whom the African Negro has meant only the 
savage. Here is revealed a social system, a religious 
tradition, a craftsmanship, and, most astonishing of 
all, a written language other than primitive. Especially interesting are the maxims and the fables 
translated from the Vai tongue, with their picturesque 
simplicity and ingenious wisdom." 
Rac e Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in America. 
By KELLY MILLER, Dean of the College of Arts and 
Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, Howard 
University. Third edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Dallas News: "The author is a cultured man, a 
forceful and most pleasing writer, interesting from 
the first sentence of the first chapter to the close 
of the book." 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its 
logic is fairly inexorable." 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness 
and skill." 
Out of the Hous e of Bondage. By KELLY MILLER. 
Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Howard 
University. $1.65 by mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. He neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning 
the fallacies with passionless intellectual severity 
from the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced 
demagogues." 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "Those who arc 
interested in the study of the Negro can not ignore 
this volume. With many of its conclusions we can 
by no means agree, but it points in favor of a revised judgment on certain questions connected with 
the position or achievements of his race." 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO.,
 440 Fourth Avenue new York Cityor THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue N
Mention TH E CRISIS 204 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
"TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN " 
An Unusual Novel 
Would you like to read an interesting story of the day when the Negro 
race will lead civilization? Then read 
Th e Whit e Man's Burde n 
By T. SHIRBY HODGE 
Published by th e Gorha m Press, Bosto n 
PRICE $1.00. Postag e 6 cents 
Ca n be ha d a t th e office of 
THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue 
99 
"I have read this book with interest and recommend it to my friends. It 
has a fine lesson in its breast which is voiced in the concluding lines: 'The 
white man's burden is himself.' " W. E. B. DuBois. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during Spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now ! 
MAIL DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Stree< Chicago, Ill. 
TEACHERS Th e ne w efficiency era calls 
1 IJ>lVjIlLni 3 fo r th e modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia.. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Registers, Classifies and Recommends Teachers, 
Supervisors, Matrons and Office Assistants. 
Prompt Recommendations to School Authorities 
regardless of kind or location of position. Anything 
from Kindergarten to University. 
Write us freely. 
B. F. BOWLES, Manager, 
2739 Converse Ave., EAST ST. LOUIS, ILLINOIS 
Rid your hous e of roache s wit h 
"Deli" Roach Powder 
25c . an d $1.00 
BANEKER CHEMICAL CO. 
809 N. Jefferson Ave., 
Agents Wante d 
St. Louis, Mo. 
ADVANC E STYLE S 
FRE E 
Suits 
To Introduc e 
Her e w e go again,breaking all records for new, 
nobby , ahead-of-the-tim e 
styles Be the first in your town 
to wear a suit that is ahead of the 
time. You can do it FREE. To 
introduce these styles quickly 
we will give you a complete suit 
free, and by your wearing it you 
can make 
$50 to $100 a Week 
Drop U9a postal forouradvance 
bonk, select the styles you want 
and the cloth, and get 
Your Suit FREE 
Don't wait. Don't delay. Write 
right away. A postal Will do. We send everything the day your 
request is received. We pay express on everything. Get busy, 
dimply send us a postal with 
your name and address on it. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
Dept. 251 CHICAGO 
3 Months 
Ahead of 
the Times 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 205 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
18 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 11 ATLANTA. GA. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FROM DIXIE-LAND " 
Ten poems by 
Effi e T. Battle , A.M. 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W. Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
Address: Okolon a Industria l School , 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.0 0 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
BOOKS! BOOKS! 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
135 W . 135t h St. , New Yor k Cit y 
WORLD'S FAMOUS NEGRO WRITERS 
Bargains in Rare Books Mail Orders Solicited 
Evans Art 
Pianos and Players 
Factory to You 
and up can be saved by my plan of — 
selling direc t from my factory t o you. I can 
save you from $125 to $250 on an Evans Artist 
Modol Piano or Player. 
Freight Paid The easiest kind of terms,weekly monthly, quarterly or yearly 
payments to suit your convenience. Al l middlemen . Jobbers, dealers and agents profits cut 
out. These are some of the reasons why I can sell 
the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Le t me send you the othe r reasons. 
3 0 DAY S FRE E TRIAL 
We allow all freight charges, let you us e the 
beautiful Evan s Artist Model Piano for thirty 
days free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we will 
take it back without any cost to you—you are the 
sole judge to decide, If you wan t to keep it, you 
may do so on our low factory wholesal e price on 
most convenient terms. 
MUSIC LESSONS WITHOUT COST 
To every custome r w e will giv e a tw o year s 
course of piano instruction free. Ask about our 
insurance plan. Write today. 
STORY & CLARK PIANO CO. 
F. O . EVANS , Gen . Mgr. , Dept. B 3 5 Chicago 
FOOTWEAR FIT TO WEAR —By Mail 
Fred Douglass Sho e for Men 
Phillls Wheatle y Sho e for Wome n 
Write for Catalog Mail Order Department 
FRE D DOUGLAS S SHO E CO. , Newport, R. I. 
Special Offer to advertis e 
our swel l c1othes. The pant s 
are splendidly tailored in newest 
style. Extra big pe g Gaps FREE 
if wanteds Satisfaction guaranteed or your mone y back. 
Big Pay—Easy Work 
Be a "walking : advertise ­
ment" of our elegant, made-tomeasure clothes—It pays BIG . 
Agents! Make $35 to $65 a 
week right in your 
own Town. Part time or full 
time. W e furnish Tailor Book with 
samples and full instructions 
FREE. Writ e us Today . 
THE CHICAGO TAILORS ASS'N. 
Dept. 21 615 So. Franklin St., Chicago 
SOUTHERN COLORED TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Formerly TEXA S COLORE D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1025 Boll Street, DALLAS, TEXAS 
Recommend s teachers to Colleges, Universities, Schoo l Boards and Schoo l Authorities. 
Writ e for information. R. O. GOTHARD , Manage r 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
$125 
Price only $2.25 express 
Made to order 206 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
EVERY AGENT CAN 
GET AN AUTO FREE 
NO CONTEST 
You—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Fre e 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 50 years- the ROBINSON FOLDING 
BATH TUB. Demonstratin g Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella, pelfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years. Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensationa l Sale s Successe s 
Big Entertainer^ i Parlor 
tricks and 
Games, 31 0 Jokes and Riddles, 73 
Toasts, 15 Card Tricks, 4 Comic 
Recitations, 3 Monologues,Checkers, Chess, Dominoes, Fox and 
Geese, 9 Men, Morris. All 10 CENT S POS T PAID . 
J. C. DORN, 709 So. Dearborn Street, Dept. 75. Chicago, Ill. 
A NE W WA Y 
To GetYour Clothes Free 
,A NEW PLAN TO MAKE BIG MONEY 
DURING YOUR SPARE TIME 
-Something- different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
| offer ever made. Lower prices— 
^better clothes—bigger cash profjits—Express paid on everything. 
Double Pay 
FREE clothes and cash profits besides. We don't ask you to use 
.your cas h profits fo r you r 
r own clothes. Ours "is a new and 
better plan. 
An Extra Present with every order. 
Not a prize scheme. Choose what 
you want, work for it and get it besides your Cash Profits. Agent' s 
Complete Outfit FREE , fifty-six 
stylish, real cloth samples-fifty 
Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. Everything FREE . Get into 
the big; money-making class. Just 
put your nam: on a post card and 
mail it to us today. 
I SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept. 172 .Chicago 
100 Visiting cards or 100 of any of the following: 
AV v business cards, envelopes, note, letter or bill 
heads, or 25 sheets of paper and envelopes neatly 
printed to your order for 25 cents postpaid. G. Y. 
MYERS & SON, 1958 52nd Street, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
i . „. /Centra l 104-W 
Telephones: Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Publi c 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counsellor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 School Street , Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUD E E. CURTI S 
Surgeo n Dentis t 
188 W. 135th Street Ne w York City 
J. E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTANT 
Audits Systems 
Business Information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Bo x 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
I
W . T . McKissic k & Co's. 
FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1 , No. 2 and No . 3 
Fo r Scalp , Hai r an d Ski n 
P . O. Bo x 102 , Wilmington , Del . 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, NO capital. 
Tour credit is good if you mean business. But you must be 
ambitions, yon must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO. 
4039 Factories Buildin g TOLEDO, OHIO 
$60 A WEEK AND THIS FREE AUTOMOBILE 
Tub 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s PRINCE HALL 
Preacher, Race Champion, Abolitionist, 
Father of Negro Masonry 
One of the Great Figures in Negro History 
"Th e abolition of slavery ; participation in the governmen t upon 
terms and unde r conditions applicable alike to every othe r class of 
citizens; equality befor e the law ; resistance to every form of 
encroachmen t upon the rights of black men ; the education of 
Negr o children ; the right to be let alone ; the iniquity of public 
insult: such was the platform of this Negr o prophet who was born 
a whol e century before Appomattox. " 
The character and work of this great man have been admirably set forth 
in a new book of vital interest to Masons and laymen. 
The book is 
"Prince Hall and His Followers" 
The author is 
George W. Crawford, 33° 
Grand Maste r of Connecticu t 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 5 0 cents net—By mail 5 6 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
9 4 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY , 3 4 West 33d Street, Ne w York 
Is made up of ne w books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W . T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON. 
Clot h bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r r^rVj , • 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sol d separatel y - - 50c. net 
Postage' extra 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson 
TH E FRENCH REVOLUTION 
By Hilaire Belloc 
ROME By W . Ward e Fowle r 
PROBLEMS O F PHILOSOPHY 
By Bertrand Russell 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L Fisher 
TH E CIVIL WA R 
LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By G. K. Chesterton 
GERMANY O F TODA Y 
By Charle s Towe r 
EURIPIDES AN D HIS AGE 
By Gilbert Murray 
By A. C. Pigou 
By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT 
Order through the publishers or through 
Th e CRISIS, 7 0 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS 