The CRISIS 
Children's Number 
OCTOBER , 1922 FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY Another Lighthouse to Help 
Chart Negro Business into 
The Right Channel. 
The Southern Aid Society's 
New Modern 3 story and 
basement building located 
at 106 and 106A South Ave., 
Petersburg, Va. 
Petersburg's first colored 
bank and its leading professional and business interests now have modern 
quarter s withi n which to 
display thei r talents and 
wares. The Society's District Office is located on 3rd 
floor. 
In addition to providing a superior policy of protection to 
its policyholders— the Society renders a threefold service to 
the race: 
It gives employment to hundreds of young women and 
men—It provides ready cash to its policyholders in times of 
sickness, accident and death—It provides, in the largest cities 
in its field of operation, modern office facilities to the colored 
professional and business interests. It is indeed a Servant of 
the People. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA . 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
J. T. CARTER , Pres, and Gen'l Counsel B. L . JORDAN , Secty. 
W. A. JORDAN , Asst. Secty. THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO E TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINESS MANAGER . 
Vol. 24 No. 6 OCTOBER , 1922 Whole No. 144 
Page 
COVE R 
Photograph of Valdora Turner. 
OPINION 
The Children, Marriage, Birth, Infancy, Childhood, Education, The 
End of It All 247 
TH E YELLO W TREE . A Story. De Reath Byrd Busey 253 
TH E THIRTEENT H BIENNIAL OF TH E N. A. C. W. Illustrated 257 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPL E 261 
BRONZE LEGACY , Effie Lee Newsome; MOTHERHOOD, Georgia Douglas 
Johnson. Poems 265 
A DECAD E OF STUDENT Y. M. C. A. WORK. Illustrated.. C H. Tobias. 265 
SONG FOR A BANJO DANCE. A Poem. Langston Hughes 267 
TH E HORIZON. Illustrated 268 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 273 
TH E CRISIS FOR NOVEMBE R 
Th e Novembe r CRISI S will contain an article on Lero y Bund y and the finances of the Universa l 
Negr o Improvement Association and a study of the business development of the colored people ot 
Columbus, Ohio . 
FIFTEE N CENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by retur n postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office a t Ne w York , New 
York , unde r the Ac t of Marc h 3, 1879. 24 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School 
The Academy 
The School of Arts and Sciences 
The Department of Music 
The Teacher Training Department 
The Divinity School 
The Commercial Department 
The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham. North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training and Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution for the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training fer all 
Student. 
Courut In carpentry, agriculture ai d trades ter baye, 
Including auto repairing. 
Coursée la domestic science and domestic art 1er 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly ai d modernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fer Information address 
W. R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1010-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN, President 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
Joka H. Eandall, D.D., Llnoola ualTWiity, 
Ckactei County, Penna. 
The Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
A Pennsylvani a State Norma l Schoo l offering. In additio n 
to the regula r Norma l Cours e of two years, professional 
three year courses In Hom e Economic s and Sho p Work. A 
diplom a from any o f these courses make s a graduat e 
eligibl e to teach In the publi c schools of Pennsylvania . 
A three-year Hig h Schoo l Cours e Is offered to al l who 
have completed the eighth gramme r grade. 
Next term began September 20 , 1922. 
Fo r further particulars an d catalog , writ e 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal 
Cheyney, Pa . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 345 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located i n the Cit y of Atlanta , 
Ga . Th e courses of study include Hig h School, 
Norma l School and College. Special emphasis 
is lai d upon the trainin g of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a tine record for successful work. 
Fo r further information address 
President Edward T . Ware 
Atlanta , Ga . 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautifu l Situation . Healthfu l Location . 
Best Mora l an d Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers courses in the following departments. College, Normal , Hig h School, 
Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, Nurs e 
Trainin g and Industrial. 
Expense s ver y reasonable. 
Fal l Ter m began Wednesday, Sept. 13, 1922. 
Fo r catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT J. KELL Y G1FFEN 
Knoxville, Tenn. 
Founde d 1870 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautifu l campus. Twelve building s 
wit h new $150,000 administratio n buildin g with modern 
chapel, gymnasium an d laboratorie s ready for use i n 
September. Stron g faculty—Religiou s atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admissio n onl y by application . 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S OF STUD Y 
Junior High School—7th an d 8th Grade s an d 1st an d 
2n d years' Hig h Schoo l Courses, wit h certificate. 
Junior College—3rd an d 4th Yea r Hig h Schoo l wit h 
Freshma n an d Sophomor e years of College work, wit h 
Diploma . 
College—Four years above Hig h School, or two years 
above Junio r College Course, wit h degree of A.B . 
Domesti c Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlca l Course 
54t h year of nine months opened September 20, 1922 . 
$150.00 per yea r pays tuition , hoar d room and laundry . 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING . President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 187». 
The only Institution In the State having for it, object 
Collegiate, Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training far Colored citizens in Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Berrlea, Naraing and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal. Commercial, Mail t Domeftls Science. Missionary 
training elaea. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered 
President C . H . Parrleh 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address. 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVERY MCKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddl e University , operated unde r the suspices of 
the Norther n Presbyterian Church , has four Departments—Hig h School, Arts an d Sciences, Theologica l 
an d Industrial. Th e completion of a Gram m ax Schoo l 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the Hig h School. 
Th e Schoo l of Arts an d Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classica l an d the Scientific . I n the 
scientific, Germa n is substituted for Greek or Latin . 
Th e entrance requirement for the Freshma n Class is 
15 units of Hig h Schoo l work. 
The Theologica l Department offers two coursée, each 
consisting of three years. Th e first is purely English , 
Greek an d Hebrew are taught I n the others. 
A H students i n the Hig h Schoo l Dept. are required 
to take trades i n the Industria l Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MeCrerey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
Th e largest institution of learning i n the South 
owned an d controlled by Negroes. Facult y of specialists, trained i n some of the best universities i n the 
Nort h and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industria l emphasis and positive Christion influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Hig h School, Normal, Commercial, Musical , Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printin g and Tailoring . 
For further information address 
JOHN H . LEWIS. President 
BISHO P J . S. FLIPPER . Chairma n Truste« Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 34 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Howard University 
Washington. D. C. 
Founded b y GENERA L O . O . HOWAR D 
J . STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D. , D.D. , President 
EMMET T J . SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasure r 
COLLEGIAT E AN D PROFESSIONA L SCHOOLS 
REGISTRATIO N 
Autumn Quarter.. Friday, Sept. 29, and Saturday, Sept. 30, 1922 
Winte r Quarter Tuesday, January 2, 1923 
Spring Quarter Saturday, Marc h 17, 1923 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F . D . WILKINSON , Registra r 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y WASHINGTON , D . C . 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1901 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave . & N . 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fal l Term Opening 
Tuesday, October 3rd, 1922. 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Fa . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo n Ge t a Bette r Payin g Position . 
Register NO W Reasonable TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1S67 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood. 
Fo r further information address 
F. A . SUMNER, President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
It offers courses i n the Libera l Arts, Normal , Aca ­
demic and Musica l departments. 
Fo r further information writ e 
SAMUE L A. OWEN , President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND, LA . 
Supported ay Baptist State Woman'! Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Bolton and 
A . B. S . Society of Now York. Student» 
from li x différant states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN , frttidtnt 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopal boarding- school fox girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Vary . Address: TE X 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE, 61SS Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautifu l location, idea l home life , fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten , Primary , Grammar, High , Normal , Vocational . 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospita l a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Sen d for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , - - Principal. 
Mention The Crisis THE CRISIS 
Vol. 24. No. 6 OCTOBER , 1922 Whole No. 144 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. Du Bois 
TH E CHILDREN 
THE Children's Number of The 
CRISIS brings many thoughts. 
We remember, first—in sadness—The BROWNIES ' BOOK , 
which was a monthly children's number but which failed for lack of support—not by fault of the children, 
bless you, no ! They wanted and want 
and need it. But grown-ups are unbelievably stupid ! 
Grown-ups think of little children 
as "cunning," "pretty," "cute" and 
"amusing." The new mother dresses 
them up like living dolls, in ribbons, 
frills and furbelows, and with many a 
"Don't get dirty," "Keep out of the 
mud," "Be careful," "Naughty, 
naughty," she proceeds to impress it 
upon One-year-old that the chief end 
of man is to be an impossible prig. 
Our jails are full of children who once 
were unbelievably cunning. 
Thus with over-dressing and 
"showing off," our children are 
spoiled. This is particularly the case 
with groups like American Negroes 
of the better class who are striving 
to improve their condition and push 
their children up and on. Their very 
anxieties make them either neglect or 
misconceive their children. Looking 
back on their own narrow, sordid, unlovely infancy, they proceed to dose 
their children with endless candy, 
toys and kissings, or, if they themselves were spoiled children of a 
"second generation," they ruin their 
own offspring with unlimited freedom and indulgence. 
It is, indeed, hard to be stern, cold 
and practical with the Flesh of your 
Flesh whom you are rearing for a 
sneering, cruel world. It is hard to 
guide them where you yourself are 
unguided. These are the reasons why 
we spoil our babies. It is a frantic 
prevision of ill as much as thoughtlessness. 
Yet we know that children are the 
only real Progress, the sole Hope, the 
sure Victory over Evil . Properly 
reared and trained and there is no 
Problem or Wrong that we cannot 
withstand. 
MARRIAGE 
AMON G colored people, especially the advancing groups, marriage and birth are still 
slightly improper subjects 
which cannot be discussed with plain 
sense. The world has left us behind 
in this respect and we must needs 
rapidly catch up. 
Here is a man and a woman. The 
natural and righteous cry of their 
bodies calls for marriage to propagate, preserve and improve mankind. 
But there are difficulties. First, as 
to ideals : the man—an educated Negro American of 1922—is himself a 
spoiled child. He has been catered 
to and petted by a mother. Coming 
up with small means, the family 
purse has been drained for his benefit. He has helped in his own support, but his work has brought him 
into contact with the luxury of the 
white rich ; he has seen gluttony and 
tasteless splendor ; futile women gorgeously gowned; royal homes, with 
yachts and automobiles. What does 
he think of marriage? He conceives 
247 248 TH E CRISIS 
of it as a very expensive indulgence, 
and for the enthroning of One Woman—which woman is to be His, and 
of him, and for him? An d that woman must be not simply as someone 
has said, " A cross between a butterfly and a setting hen," but in addition, thinking of his own mother, he 
conceives his wife also as a trained, 
efficient Upper Servant, who can 
cook, serve, wash, clean, market and 
nurse ; she must also be able to dance, 
play the piano, talk on politics and 
literature, entertain with daintiness, 
play tennis and drive an automobile. 
To increase the complication the 
modern young colored woman has her 
own ideas and ideals. Her husband 
must have money and good looks. He 
must be a college graduate, a professional man, or at least a business 
man ; hardly a mechanic, and certainly never a menial servant. He 
must have, ready for delivery on the 
wedding day : a well-furnished home 
in a good neighborhood, a servant or 
a day's worker, a car and a reputation 
that brings his picture to the pages of 
leading colored weeklies. 
The result of all this theory is 
trouble. The best dancers are seldom 
the best cooks, and those who keep 
up with literature have little leisure 
to keep up with bad children. If a 
man's wife is chiefly for exhibition 
and entertainment, she cannot be expected to be an efficient business manager of a home, and mother, nurse 
and teacher of children. And , too, 
young men of marriageable age are 
not apt to be at once handsome, educated, talented, rich and well-known. 
Something must be sacrificed; the 
educated and talented must wait long 
if not always for wealth; the rich 
may come handicapped by a servile 
position and no education; while the 
handsome—well, fools are often handsome. 
Al l these are of course types of a 
small but significant class. Down 
through the mass of laborers and 
servants we meet every human variation ; men too poor, too undisciplined, 
too selfish to marry; women too ignorant, too lonely, too unfortunate to 
marry. 
Thus, practically, marriage must 
be a compromise and if the compromise is based on common sense and 
reasonable effort, it becomes the center of real resurrection and remaking 
of the world. If it fails, then it 
should be dissolved—quietly and decisively in the divorce court. An y 
doctrine of marriage that conceives a 
quarrelling, unhappy, sordid and compulsory union of man, woman and 
children as better than peace and 
work even with poverty, is fundamentally wrong. 
BIRT H 
YESTERDA Y I saw a young 
man and woman and their 
three children. An d I was 
told : Four of their children 
are dead. I said: "That is a crime! 
It is not simply a misfortune—it is a 
deliberate crime which deserves condign punishment." No woman can 
bear seven children in ten years and 
preserve her own health and theirs. 
No man who asks or permits this deserves to be a husband or father. 
Birth control is science and sense 
applied to the bringing of children 
into the world, and of all who need 
it we Negroes are first. We in America are becoming sharply divided into 
the mass who have endless children 
and the class who through long postponement of marriage have few or 
none. The first result is a terrible infant mortality: of every 10,000 colored children born 1,356 die in the 
first year, while only 821 die among 
whites. The second result is the 
senseless putting off of marriage until 
middle life because of the fear that Mar y J . McKinney , 
Hartford , Conn . 
Leon e E . Boyle , 
Baltimore , Md . 
Virgini a R . Spottswood, 
Ne w Haven , Conn , 
Wilfre d B . Bozeman , Jr . 
Pin e Bluff, Ark . 
Kermit McAllister , 
Mobile , Ala . 
Arthu r Ellerson , 
Newark , N . J . 
Lucill e E . Clark , 
Charleston, W . Va . 
Georg e T . Whitten , Jr. , 
Wilmington , Del . 
Princ e L . Edwoods, Jr . 
Manassas, Va . 
Sara h E . Thompson , 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Haze l M . Ayers, 
Boynton , Okla . 
Rober t W . Reagin , 
Selma , Ala . 
Harr y W . Jackson , 
Paterson , N . J . 
Car y B . Lewis, Jr. , 
Chicago , 111. 
Audre y C . Ackerley , 
Springfield, Mass. 
Harr y W . Kingslow , 
Williamson , W . Va . 
249 250 TH E CRISIS 
marriage must necessarily mean 
many children. 
Parents owe their children, first of 
all, health and strength. Few women 
can bear more than two or three children and retain strength for the other 
interests of life. An d there are other 
interests for women as for men and 
only reactionary barbarians deny 
this. Even this small number of 
children should come into the world 
at intervals which will allow for the 
physical, economic and spiritual recovery of the parents. Housework is 
still a desperately hard and exacting 
occupation. It can and should be simplified and lightened by the laundry, 
the bakery, the restaurant, and the 
vacuum cleaner; but with all that it 
remains a job calling for strength, 
time and training. Social intercourse, 
which is largely in the hands of wives, 
is a matter of thought, effort and delicate adjustment. The education of 
children in the home calls for intelligence, study and leisure. To add to 
all this the physical pain and strain 
of child birth is to give a woman as 
much as she can possibly endure once 
in three, four or five years. 
INFANCY 
THER E is much in the theory 
that the infant child is a 
higher vegetable, to be fed, 
aired, cleaned and let alone. 
A t the same time the little miraculous, marvellously unfolding mind 
is there and the home training 
that does not begin at least as late as 
the cradle, is losing precious time. 
Yet of the babies pictured this month 
in our columns, how many are being 
carefully, systematically educated, 
and how many are being regarded as 
negligible playthings whose "education" will begin at five or six? Five 
or six is already too late to learn 
thoroughly a thousand things: the 
value of tears and laughter; regular 
meals and regular sleep; sitting, 
standing, walking; cleanliness, patience and sacrifice; self-assertion 
and love—all these are cradle lessons. 
If they are untaught, how hard, how 
nearly impossible, is the task of the 
public school. How easily a teacher 
could paint a home after following the 
child one day in the kindergarten. 
CHILDHOOD 
OF the meaning of a child there 
are many and singularly different ideas. Some regard a 
child as a bond slave, born to 
obey immediately and without reflection or question ; some regard a child 
as an automaton which absorbs advice and replies with action; some 
look upon a child as an Item of Ex ­
pense until he can work and earn; 
some think of children as a kind of 
personal adornment of the parents, 
bringing them praise for beauty 
when young, for smartness when older, and for high distinction in wealth 
or brains when grown. 
Meantime few people think of the 
child as Itself—as an Individual with 
the right and ability to feel, think and 
act ; a being thirsty to know, curious 
to investigate, eager to experiment. 
Many folk while not knowing or 
dreaming these things at first, discover them later in some tense moment when father and "baby" face 
each other—grim, tense, angry; and 
father says, "Yo u shall not!" and 
baby says, "I will! " The education 
of parents dates usually from some 
such soul-revealing moment. Blockheads who cannot learn usually try 
forthwith to beat the "stubbornness" 
out of the child by blows. If they 
succeed, they kill the spirit of the little man and leave little which the 
world needs. If they fail, they leave 
determination, without love or reverence. 
Others learn. They realize with a 
start: Here is Somebody Else. I 
must inform, I must teach, I must The Morrison Children, 
Charleston, S. C. 
Robert Cobb, Jr., John and Elizabeth, 
Jefferson City, Mo. 
Jennelsie and Austeile Waiden, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Saphronia, Arta and Lucille Thompson, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Nathaniel, Eunice, Helen and Wil 
Ham Walker, Selma, Ala. 
W. L . Waiden, Jr., and Otto V. , 
Jacksonville, Fla. 
Linnie and Ruth Redmond, 
Jackson, Miss. 
William, Joseph and Richard Burton, 
Gary, Ind. 
Eva May and Ernest Brown, Jr., 
Springfield, Ohio 
251 252 THE CRISIS 
persuade, I must direct. But if they 
are honest they soon learn that in a 
duel between two human wills even 
though one is four and the other forty, 
there is information to be imparted 
on both sides; and that youth can 
teach age some things; and that persuasion is a game that two can play ; 
and that Experience, great as it is, is 
not all. Many people begin with trying to teach and persuade and end by 
commanding in anger, "instant" obedience, leaving the child with a tremendous and never-to-be-forgotten 
sense of being wronged and cheated. 
Only God's Few take this dialogue 
between Age and Childhood seriously 
and give to it as much time and 
money and study and thought as they 
give to their clothes and houses and 
horses. An d some give more. 
EDUCATION 
THER E is a widespread feeling 
that a school is a machine. You 
insert a child at 9 a.m. and extract it at 4 p.m., improved 
and standardized with parts of Grade 
IV, first term. In truth, school is a 
desperate duel between new souls and 
old to pass on facts and methods and 
dreams from a dying world to a world 
in birth pains without letting either 
teacher or taught lose for a moment 
faith and interest. It is hard work. 
Often, most often, it is a futile failure. It is never wholly a success without the painstaking help of the parent. 
Yet I know Negroes, thousands of 
them, who never visit the schools 
where their children go; who do not 
know the teachers or what they teach 
or what they are supposed to teach; 
who do not consult the authorities on 
matters of discipline—do not know 
who or what is in control of the 
schools or how much money is needed 
or received. 
Oh, we have our excuses! The 
teachers do not want us around. They 
do not welcome co-operation. Colored patrons especially may invite insult or laughter. Al l true in some 
cases. Yet the best schools and the 
best teachers pray for and welcome 
the continuous and intelligent co-operation of parents. An d the worst 
schools need it and must be made to 
realize their need. 
There has been much recent discussion among Negroes as to the merits 
of mixed and segregated schools. It 
is said that our children are neglected 
in mixed schools. "Let us have our 
own schools. How else can we explain 
the host of colored Hig h School graduates in Washington, and the few in 
Philadelphia?" Easily. In Washington, colored parents are intensely interested in their schools and have for 
years followed and watched and criticized them. In Philadelphia, the colored people have evinced no active 
interest save in colored schools and 
there is no colored High School. 
Save the great principle of democracy and equal opportunity and fight 
segregation by wealth, class or race 
or color, not by yielding to it but by 
watching, visiting and voting in all 
school matters, organizing parents 
and children and bringing every outside aid and influence to co-operate 
with teachers and authorities. 
In the North with mixed schools 
unless colored patrons take intelligent, continuous and organized interest in the schools which their children 
attend, the children will be neglected, 
treated unjustly, discouraged and 
balked of their natural self-expression 
and ambition. Do not allow this. 
Supervise your children's schools. 
In the South unless the patrons 
know and visit the schools and keep 
up continuous, intelligent agitation, 
the teachers will be sycophants, the 
studies designed to make servant 
girls, and the funds stolen by the 
white trustees. TH E YELLO W TRE E 253 
TH E END OF IT AL L 
YES , marriage is sacrifice, child 
bearing is pain, and education 
is eternal vigilance. But the 
end of it all is Progress. Without marriage there can be today no 
properly guarded childhood. In the 
United States 1,256 Negro children 
out of each 10,000 born are illegitimate. Poor, little, innocent waifs, 
homeless and half-cared for. Without child-bearing families there can 
be few future workers and torch-bearers. Without education we grope in 
eternal darkness like cats gayly and 
ignorantly chasing their tails. But 
with children brought with thought 
and foresight into intelligent family 
circles and trained by parents, teachers, friends and society, we have Eternal Progress and Eternal Life. 
Against these, no barriers stand; to 
them no Problem is insoluble. 
PRINC E ARTHU R MOMOLU , 
Monrovia, Liberia 
TH E YELLO W TRE E 
A Story 
DEREAT H BYR D BUSE Y 
PLUM Street is a firm believer i n "signs". 
It is not an ordinary street—not even 
physically, for it begins at Ludlow, stops on 
Clar k where the trolley passes, picks itself 
up a half block south on Clark and rushes 
across the railroad straight uphill to the 
Fai r Grounds. In the early nineties it was 
the thoroughfare for the "'southend", but 
Jasper Hunley, who bought Lester Snyder's 
house at public auction, proved to be a "fair " 
Negro. Then the Exodus! In 1919 Negroes had been in undisputed possession for 
twenty years. 
Lik e the colors of their faces, the houses 
vary. There is Jasper Hunley's big brown 
house with built-in china cabinet and bookcases, hardwood floors and overstuffed furniture. On either side of him in white 
houses live the Reverend Burns and Police 
man Jenkins i n a little less state, with portable furniture sparsely upholstered, and 
carpets. Across the street lives Mother 
Stewart and Reverend Gordon i n plain barefaced houses wit h scarred pine furniture. 
A t the close of the January day, Mar y 
Hunley sat watching at her window for 
Ev a Lou's home-coming from the office. 
Agai n she recalled vividly the June day she 
had sat wit h bed-ridden Mother Stewart 
while Luc y went to market. She had been 
sitting at the second story window feasting 
her eyes upon her hardwon home across 
the street—a bi g house i n a big yard with 
flowers and young trees in spring garb. The 
roses were beginning to open. She had 
smiled contentedly as her eyes lingered on 
each bush and shrub but a puzzled frown 
crossed her brow as she noticed her youngest maple had yellowed. She wondered if 
worms were at its root. 
She turned her eyes to gaze down at the 
Reverend Mr . Gordon, who pulled his broad 
brimmed hat further over his eyes, squared 
himself on his bare board bench i n the 
corner of the yar d and sank into a revery. 
Unpainted palings enclosed the tiny grassless yard about his unpainted weatherstained house, distinguished from its neighbors only by a bright blue screen door. The 
Reverend, tall, broad, his brown face grow, 
ing darker with age, had lived on Plum 
street ever since he had been called from 
the janitorship of the Mecklin Buildin g to 
the pastorate of the St. Luke's Baptist 
Church. He had come to be the oracle of 
the street. 
His dreams were respectfully broken by 
the greetings of returning marketers. Mar y 254 TH E CRISIS 
ALIC E V. STROTHER , 
Latrobe, Pa. 
MARIE , GLADY S and LLOY D THOMAS , 
New Wfflard, Tex. 
ANN A M . BRADLEY , 
Detroit, Mich. 
SAMUE L A . OWEN , JR., 
Nashville, Tenn. 
listened idly until Luc y stopped for a conversation. They spoke of the movies and 
the man there to whom the whole town was 
flocking for advance information on the 
future. Luc y thought his amazing replies 
all a trick. Mr. Gordon concurred. 
"Yet, " he said, "the Law d do give wahnin' of things t'come t'them that believes, 
Miss Lucy. Ah' m not a-tall supstitious but 
when ah gits a sign ah knows it. " 
"Yassuh, " Luc y nodded. 
"Las' yeah," he continued, "ah says to 
Mrs. Reveren' Burns that somebody i n that 
house on the cornuh o' Clar k would die 'fore 
spring come agin. She laffed. In Feb'uary 
the oldest boy died o' consumption. The new 
leaves on d'tree i n d'front yahd turned 
yeller. When a tree does that, Miss Lucy , 
death comes i n the fam'ly fore a yeah is 
gone." 
He paused portentously. Mar y Hunley 
leaned unsteadily closer to the window. He 
spoke solemnly as he pointed his long finger. 
"Tha t tree yonde' i n Jasper Hunley's 
yahd turned yeller las' night. This is June, 
Miss Lucy. The Lawd do give wahnin's to 
them as believes." 
Mar y Hunley never knew how she got 
home. She only knew the Lor d had sent 
her warning. She had always believed in 
signs—and the few times she had ignored 
them they had told truth wit h a vengeance. 
When but a girl a circus fortune-teller 
had drawn a picture of her future husband 
who should brin g money and influence. 
When Jasper Hunley, carpenter, came awooing, his likeness to the picture made the 
match. She never really loved him, but he 
was her Fat e so they married. 
The first year of her marriage she 
dreamed three nights that they had moved 
into a big brown house. When Lester Snyder went bankrupt—Jasper bought the 
house. They moved in and their neighbors 
moved out. Racia l gregariousness was 
stronger than economy, so houses went for 
a song. Enough of them came to Jasper to 
make him potential potentate of Plum 
street. Bu t Jasper was slow, not given to 
show, and contented to be hired. 
Mar y came to realize that he would only 
bring the money. She must make the in ­
fluence. She had received diploma and 
inspiration from one of those Southern 
Missionary Schools for colored youth, and 
she had thoroughly imbibed "money and 
knowledge wil l solve the race problem." In TH E YELLO W TRE E 255 
ten years she had made Jasper a contractor. She read, she joined "culture clubs", 
she spoke to embroidery clubs on suffrage 
when it was a much ridiculed subject, she 
managed Jasper's business, drew up his 
contracts, and still found time to keep 
Ev a Lo u the best dressed child in Plum 
street school. 
On Plum street as i n some other Negro 
communities color of skin is a determining 
factor i n social position. Mar y had cared 
for that. Jasper was fair and she became 
fair. Fro m the days of buttermilk and 
lemon juice to these of scientific "complexion 
beautifier" she kept watch on herself and 
Ev a Lou . When Ev a Lo u came back from 
school i n Washington she was white r and 
more fashionable than ever; the street 
wondered, envied, resented. 
Gradually Mar y grew to feel that the 
glory of her ambition would come through 
her daughter. She centered all her love 
and energies upon Ev a Lou—the promise 
and fulfillment of her life. Occasionally she 
thought Ev a Lo u indiscreet in bringing city 
fashions among small town people, yet she 
trusted her to have learned on her expensive trips what the great world does. Ev a 
Lou and a few kindred spirits who had 
ventured fa r afield—to Chicago and Washington, Boston and New York—ha d established a clique of those who wore Harper's 
Bazaa r clothes unadulterated, smoked cigarettes i n semi-privacy, and played from 
house to house. Plum street's scandalized 
gossip joyfully reported by Luc y she ascribed to envy. Lucy, black and buxom, 
hated Ev a Lou's lithe pallor. Mar y smiled. 
Only those i n high places are envied. 
Tha t June morning as she sat at Mother 
Stewart's window, she had breathed a sigh 
of relief. A t last, she could relax. Jasper 
was a thirty-third degree Mason and Ev a 
Lou was engaged to Sargeant Hawkins of 
Washington. 
Then Gordon's prophecy smashed i n upon 
her soul. Fo r one panic stricken hour she 
was filled wit h terror. Bu t the qualities 
that had fought for her family for twentyfive years came to her rescue. She knew 
the prophecy was of Ev a Lou . An d she who 
had believed implicitly and fearfully set 
out to give that yellow tree the lie. She 
shuddered wit h dread but she would not 
retract. 
"I f I tell Babe," she reasoned, "wor'y wil l 
make her sick. I'll just have to fight it out 
alone." 
T. T. ANNI E THOMPSON , 
New York City 
BERY L E . and EUGEN E C. THORNHILL , JR., 
New Orleans, La . 
THOMA S L . LOWRIE , JR., 
Miami, Fla. 
LOUISE, IDA, CLEMENTIN E and EVELY N 
RICHARDSON , Jefferson City, Mo. 25 6 TH E CRISIS 
January was here now. Never a winter 
before had Ev a Lo u been so plagued with 
good advice and flannels. A t first she had 
listened civilly but unheedingly. Finall y 
she firmly refused both. She wore as many 
as she needed. A s for spats and rubbers— 
"Well , I'll say not. Pumps ah the thing 
this wintuh. An ' what if I do cough! 
Ev'rybody's got a cold this weathuh. Yo u 
have yuhself." 
Dail y tears did not move her. Fea r and 
a hacking cough were breaking the splendid courage of Mary . Plum street, informed 
by Lucy , waited the prophecy's fulfillment 
i n sympathetic certainty. 
Down the street Mar y saw Dr. Dancey's 
car come slowly rolling. She had heard 
him say flu and pneumonia were rampant 
again. Suppose Ev a should get either! She 
could not recover. Tha t yellow tree would 
wi n and life come crashing to her feet. 
"I'l l just have to take care of myself and 
get ri d o' this grip I have—" 
Dr. Dancey was stopping at her door 
and helping Ev a Lo u alight. * 
"O Babe! " Mar y cried as she dragged 
her unwillin g body to the door and snatched 
it open. "Babe, are you sick? Are y'sick? " 
Dr. Dancey tried to quiet her. Ev a Lo u 
had an attack of grip—nothing more. A 
hot bath, hot drink, and long night's sleep 
would set her right. Mar y knew he lied. 
Gri p did not make you look as Babe did. 
Mar y knew for days that the aching limbs 
and throbbing head she had were signs of 
grip. When she asked Babe she said she 
just felt weak. 
Afte r Jasper and Ev a Lo u were asleep, 
Mar y lay i n bed and racked her fevered 
brain for means to thwart the threatening 
evil. Ah—the sure solution 
shone clear before her. He r 
tortured mind felt free and 
calm. A smile of cunning triumph crept over her face. She 
eased out of bed, slipped on her 
flannelette kimono and bedroom 
slippers. She crept i n to look 
at Babe. She stared, then 
stooped and kissed the girl's 
hot lips. Sweet little Babe! 
Mother would save her. She 
raised her head and smiled in 
calm defiance across the sleeping girl at the shrouded figure of the waiting Death Ange l near the window. Not 
yet would it get her ! 
She smiled wit h cunning triumph again 
at the silent figure. Wh y didn't it move? 
She knew. It was sorry. It had come in 
vain. 
Down the back stairs and into Jasper's 
tool room she floated. Al l pain had left 
her. He r thinking was clear and her body 
light as air. A s she bent over the tool box 
she chuckled. She had never felt so certain of success since the day she married 
Jasper. Softly she drew out the bright, 
keen saw. In the kitchen she stopped for 
salt to sprinkle on the ice. She might 
slip. She floated around the house and to 
the youngest maple. Carefully she anointed 
its ice covered trunk and limbs wit h salt. 
Ever y crackle of the melting ice brought 
joy to her heart. Whe n she felt a bare 
wet space on the tree she began sawing— 
haltingly, unrhythmically. Over and over 
she whispered exultantly. 
"The yellow tree lied! The yellow tree 
lied! " 
Once she stopped to wonder wh y she was 
not cold, but she was so light and warm 
it seemed a waste of time. No t even her 
feet were cold. 
The saw was almost through the tree. 
She raised herself to gloat over its fall. 
Bu t it was not a tree. It was that same 
Ange l of Death. The laugh froze i n her 
throat. His face was uncovered and he 
was smiling. He swayed toward her once 
—twice. Suppose he should rush over her 
and get Babe anyway! She laughed now— 
sweet, carefree. She still would win . She 
would hold him—if it were forever. The 
Ange l swayed again and fell 
into her outstretched arms. 
They held each other. 
Earl y i n the morning slow 
moving Jasper found her there 
on the ice wit h the tree over 
her. 
They buried her yesterday. 
Ev a Lou wore white mourning. 
Lucy, voicing the query of 
Plum street, asked Reverend 
Gordon why the yellow tree 
took the wrong one. 
CHARLE S P. WARREN , 
Chicago, 111. TH E 13th BIENNIAL OF TH E N.A.C.W. 
JESSI E FAUSE T 
MY attendance on the thirteenth biennial 
session of the Nationa l Association of 
Colored Women left me tingling, one might 
almost say, bristling, wit h impressions. 
There were so many different angles from 
which to receive them. An d as this was 
my first visit to such a convention and also 
my first trip south of Washington, I was 
peculiarly susceptible. 
Picture a group of women with a nucleus 
of 456 delegates, constantly being enlarged 
by visitors and interested spectators and 
you have the first idea of the convention 
which met during the week of August 6, in 
Richmond, Va . There were literally all 
sorts of colored women there—black, white, 
brown, tall and short, portly and slender. 
Most of them registered a high average of 
intelligence and a striking knowledge of 
parliamentary law. Some represented the 
highest grade of mentality. Al l were alert, 
thoughtful and interested. 
The president of the N . A . C. W . is Miss 
Halli e Q. Brown , of Wilberforce, Ohio. In 
a comprehensive opening address she laid 
special stress on the relation of the N . A . 
C. W . to woman suffrage. "This organization" , she declared, "should be the schoolmistress to teach proper use of the ballot; 
to teach us to study situations and conditions that we may vote wisely for our best 
interests; and that those who have the ballot may help those denied this right; to this 
end we have organized everywhere civic 
clubs to combat indifference, ignorance, and 
exploitation of the Negro woman's vote." 
The evening sessions were thrown open 
to the public at large, and several remarkable and enlightening addresses were delivered. Bu t the real work of the association was done in the days which were filled 
wit h business. The constitution was completely revised and an election of officers 
held. The list of officers follows: President, Miss Halli e Q. Brown, Wilberforce 
University, Ohio ; Vice-President-ats-large, 
Mrs. Mar y McLeod Bethune, Daytona, Fla . ; 
Chairman, Executive Board, Mrs. Sallie W . 
Stewart, Evansville , Ind.; First Recording 
Secretary, Mrs. Jane Porter Barrett, Peake, 
Va. ; Second Recording Secretary, Mrs. W . 
P. B. Williams, Tuskegee, Ala . ; Corresponding Secretary, Mrs. Daisy Lampkin , Pittsburgh, Pa. ; Treasurer, Mrs. C. R. McDowell, 
Hannibal, Mo . 
Of course all this was purely routine business. The purpose of the organization 
showed itself i n the activities of the departmental workers of the N . A . C. W . who by 
demonstration, discussion, lectures, delivery 
of papers presented their special interests 
to the audience. Man y of these departmental 
leaders had secured the services of men 
and women who had made a special study 
of some peculiar activity and who were able 
therefore to speak wit h authority. Thus 
Mrs. Louisa J. Ross, of New Orleans, spoke 
on home hygiene; Mr . Eugene Kinckl e Jones 
of the Nationa l Urban League on organized 
charity; Mr . Forrester B. Washington of 
Detroit on mechanical training for boys and 
girls; Mrs. J. E . Ship, registered Spencer 
corsetiere of Jackson, Miss., on correct posture for health ; Miss Jessie Fauset on the 
development of modern Negro poetry; Mr . 
Montgomery Gregory on the needs of Negro 
scenarios for the theatre. 
The departments whose work was presented were those of needlework, fine arts. 
MISS HALLI E Q. BROW N 
257 25 8 TH E CRISIS 
forestry, social science, associated charities, 
juvenile court, eugenics, home economics, literature, lynching, defense, health and hygiene, neighborhood union, colored business 
women, industry, scholarship, peace and foreign relations, moral standards and citizenship. 
A t evening meetings Mr. James Weldon 
Johnson and Mr . Walte r F . White , of the 
N . A . A . C. P., spoke wit h precision and 
passion on the anti-lynching bill ; Mr . N . D. 
Brascher, editor of the Associated Negro 
Press, discussed "The Press and Publicity 
for Club Workers" ; Mrs Margare t Peck 
Hil l of Baltimore, spoke of the work of the 
W. C. T. U . against the evils of tobacco and 
liquor; Mrs. F . R. Givens, of Louisville, Ky. , 
Mrs. Casely Hayford of Sierr a Leone, and 
Miss Jessie Fauset, spoke on Africa . The 
latter interpreted the meaning of the PanAfrica n Congress; Mrs. Givens recounted 
the experiences gained recently on her six 
months' tour of West Africa ; and Mrs. 
Hayford i n native costume gave her hearers information at first hand about the 
needs of Africa n women. The audience 
responded to her with a generous gift of 
$154 for the school which she plans to start 
on her return to Afric a i n October. 
The political note was again sounded at 
the final evening meeting by Mrs. Dodson 
of Iowa, who represented the Nationa l 
Woman's Republican League, and by Mrs. 
Isabella Kendig-Gill, of the Nationa l Woman's Party, who stressed the economic, 
property and parental rights of women. 
Thus much for the mere outline of the 
convention. Now to impressions, to the 
intangible something which the stranger 
brings away from such a gathering. First, 
Richmond excels i n hospitality. Under the 
leadership of Mrs. Or a Brown Stokes, kindliness, courtesy, helpfulness were lavished 
on the delegates. Most of the meetings 
of the convention were held i n the Ebenezer 
Baptist Church, whose pastor is the Rev. 
Mr. Stokes. A t the opening of the sessions 
the Richmond club women presented a remarkable program, "Richmond Night" , in 
the Cit y Auditorium. Addresses of welcome 
were made by the Mayor, the Secretary of 
the Governor and the Adjutant-General; by 
the State President of Clubs, Mrs. Jane 
Porter Barret; by the President of Religious 
Organizations, Mrs. Margare t R. Johnson, 
and by Mrs. Maggie C. Walker, for the 
Cit y Federation of Clubs; the Richmond 
Choral, under Madam Savella Briggs, and 
the Sabbath Glee Club delighted the vast 
audience with most wonderful choruses of 
classical anthems and spirituals. 
On Thursday, August 10, the entire delegation was feted by the women of the First 
Baptist Church, a singularly beautiful structure. The guests were received in the lecture room of the church which, by the aid 
of palms and flowers, had been converted 
into an attractive reception hall. Mrs. W . 
T. Johnson was chairman of this committee. On Frida y night Mrs. Mar y L . Carte r 
presided at a general reception given at the 
Council of Colored Women's Building . It 
would be hard to decide which of these three 
ceremonies of welcome was the most attractive. Each vied with the other i n brilliance 
and cordiality. 
Secondly, out of the mass of routine and 
speech-making one caught glimpses of the 
immense activities which the N . A . C. W . 
has set in motion. The real reason for 
the revision of the constitution lay i n the 
need for expansion to meet the work of 
these remarkable women who are engaged 
in every conceivable movement destined to 
benefit womanhood and childhood. To be 
concrete, in Alabama and Oklahoma, for 
example, these club women have bought 
farms, put up buildings and have turned 
them into reformatories for. colored delinquents. So successful have they been that 
these states have taken over these institutions. 
Elsewhere they have built old folks' homes 
and orphanages and have opened playgrounds. They have been demonstrators of 
practical methods in dressmaking and housekeeping. They support community centres 
and help maintain their local branches of 
the N . A . C. W . The women of Ohio and 
Kentucky specialize in giving scholarships 
and expend thousands of dollars i n this way 
annually. When the Nationa l Convention 
was held in 1920, at Tuskegee, it instituted 
plans which this biennial completed, for 
the founding of a thousand dollar scholarship in memory of Mr . Washington. 
This year the N . A . C. W . completed the 
redemption of the Frederick Douglass Me ­
morial which consisted in clearing of debt 
the old Douglass homestead at Cedar Hil l 
and in making it an historical shrine. Mrs. 
Mar y B. Talbert of Buffalo is the president 
for life of the Douglass Memoria l and Historical Association and her work i n this 
connection deserves a chapter to itself. DEDICATION OF 'THE DOUGLAS S HOME" 
AUG 12th 1922 
Scurlock, Photo 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION O F COLORE D WOME N DEDICATE S TH E HOM E O F FREDERIC K DOUGLAS S A S A N HISTORIC SHRIN E 260 TH E CRISIS 
The final action of this convention of the 
N . A . C. W . was the appointment of an antilynching delegation representing the 14 pivotal states of the fall campaign, who waited 
on Senator Shortbridge and President Hard ­
ing on Monday, August 14, 1922. A t this 
meeting Miss Brown said i n part: 
In the name of the Nationa l Association 
of Colored Women and i n behalf of all of 
the colored women i n the country, we urge 
the Senate to pass promptly the Dye r Anti -
Lynchin g Bill , which is now before this 
body. We urge it as women because i n the 
last 35 years 83 women have been lynched. 
We urge it as American citizens because i n 
the same period the 1,472 lynchings that 
have taken place shame our country before 
the civilized world. We urge it as voters 
because the Republican party i n its platform (adopted i n Chicago i n 1920) pledged 
itself to take steps to abolish this iniquity. 
President Hardin g made the recommendation to Congress i n his first message to take 
steps "to wipe the stain of barbaric lynching from the banner of a free and orderly 
representative democracy" and the Republican party now i n power can carry out 
these pledges. 
Thirdly, the Nationa l Association of Colored Women has its hand i n all possible activities concerning colored people, from the 
welfare of the smallest dark orphan i n Texas 
to the fate of the Anti-Lynchin g Bil l i n the 
Senate. It is a great and far-reaching organization wit h immense possibilities. It 
has its faults, it is true. A t this convention, 
my first and so my most clearly defined, I 
saw too much bickering, too many personal, 
petty, needless jealousies, too many antagonisms insufficiently veiled, not enough appreciation of the fact that one person or one 
club or one faction cannot have al l the 
honor; that many must help i n order that 
one may rise, and that the glory of the one 
rising is not one whit greater than the glory 
of those who support. There was a great 
deal to discourage, even to dismay, the young 
or new club aspirant. But wit h all this 
there was much more to encourage and in ­
spire. These women have their eyes fixed on 
an ideal—Service to Mankind—and nothing 
can hold them back from it. Already they 
have learned the first principles of co-operation. There was no dissension so prolonged 
or so emphatic that it could not finally yield 
to compromise. The sincerity, the determination, the forthrightness of womanhood 
are in this N . A . C. W . and that quality 
which makes women so much more than men 
realize that the practical good is i n the 
last analysis the thing to be secured. These 
women have proved that they are determined, above all else, to secure it. 
ANTI-LYNCHIN G DELEGATIO N T O PRESIDEN T HARDING , AUGUS T 14, 1922 
(First row, left to right) Mrs. Ida Brown, New Jersey; Miss Mar y B. Jackson, Rhode Island; Mrs. 
Ida W . Barnett, Illinois; Mrs. Mary Parrish, Kentucky; Miss Hallie Q. Brown, Ohio; Mrs. Minnie Scott, 
Ohio; Mrs. Cora Home, New York; Mrs. Estelle Davis, Ohio; Mrs. E . G. Rose, Delaware 
(Second row) Mrs. Lethia Fleming, Ohio; Mrs. Ida Postles, Michigan; Mrs. Pearl Winters, California; 
Mrs. Myrtle F . Cook, Missouri; Mrs. C. Chiles, Kansas; Mrs. Ruth Bennett, Pennsylvania. National Association for the 
Advancement o f Colored People 
TH E DYE R BILL 
WE take two forward steps of deep importance : 
1. The American Bar Association, the 
most influential group of lawyers in the 
land, has endorsed and urged Federal action against lynching. 
2. On Wednesday, August 30, after five 
days' work by the Secretary in Washington, the Steering Committee of the United 
States Senate met and placed the Dyer AntiLynching Bill on the program of legislative 
measures to be brought up at the present 
session. 
One of the means used by the N . A . 
A. C. P. to impress upon the Senate 
the urgent necessity of the immediate passage of the Bil l was the securing of interested persons who would undertake to have 
introduced and passed in the various state 
Republican conventions resolutions endorsing the Dye r Bil l and urging its immediate 
passage by the Senate. Alread y encouragin g results have been reported. 
In Indiana Mr . Gilchrist Stewart of New 
Yor k was instrumental in securing such a 
resolution which said: "W e urge and favor 
the immediate passage by the United States 
Senate of the Dye r Bill , already passed by 
the House of Representatives, making lynching and burning a Federal crime." 
In Colorado Mr . George W . Gross, President of the Denver Branch of the N . A . A . 
C. P., secured the passage of a resolution 
by the Colorado State Republican Convention, whic h stated: "We urge the Senate of 
the United States to pass without delay the 
Dye r Ani-Lynchin g Bill. " 
On August 15, through Mr. T. G Nutter, 
President of the Charleston Branch of the N . 
A . A . C. P., and member of the West Vir ­
gini a State Legislature, a resolution was 
passed by the West Virgini a State Republican Convention declaring: "We urge the 
Congress of the United States to pass, without delay, the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill. " 
Through the efforts of Mr . Harr y E . 
Davis of Cleveland, Congressman Simeon 
D. Fess and others of the Ohio State Republican Convention on August 23 passed a 
resolution urging "immediate passage of the 
Dye r Bill" . 
One of the most encouraging steps was the 
action of the American Ba r Association at 
its meeting in San Francisco on August 10, 
when it urged upon the Congress the passage of a Federal law against lynching. A t 
its meeting in 1921 the America n Ba r Association appointed a Committee on La w En ­
forcement composed of Mr . W . B. Swaney, 
of Chattanooga, Tenn., chairman; ex-Governor Charles S. Whitma n of New York ; 
Mr . Wade H . Ellis of Washington, former 
assistant to the United States Attorney 
General; Judge Marcus Kavanag h of Chicago; and Mr . Charles W . Farnham of St. 
Paul. This committee held hearings at various points, the most important of them being in Washington in March , i n Chicago in 
April , and in New Yor k i n June. 
The N . A . A . C. P. was invited to have 
a representative appear at these hearings 
and Mr . Johnson did appear at Washing 
ton and Chicago. On each of these occasions 
Mr . Johnson presented the facts regarding 
the danger of lynching to the American 
government, the failure of certain states 
to check lynchings or punish lynchers, and 
the urgent necessity of Federal legislation 
It is felt that the strong endorsement of 
Federal anti-lynching legislation by the 
American Ba r Association, composed as il 
is of the most eminent and influential lawyers i n the country, including men like William Howard Taft, Chie f Justice of the 
United States Supreme Court, Charles 
Evans Hughes, Secretary of State; Moorfield Storey and others, was largely due to 
the work of Mr . Johnson. Wit h previous 
endorsements of the Dye r Bil l and of Federal anti-lynching legislation, including the 
Attorney-General of the United States, the 
Judiciary Committees of the House of Rep 
resentatives and the Senate, 19 justices of 
state supreme and superior courts, and many 
other eminent jurists, the legal opinion of 
261 262 THE CRISIS 
the country on the score of the constitutionality of the Dye r Bil l is so overwhelmingly 
favorable that there can be no longer any 
cause for refusal to act on that ground by 
any member of the Senate. 
Another important and encouraging step 
was the statement of President Hardin g to 
the Congress on August 18 when, i n discussing the rai l strike, he confessed the impotence of the government to protect the 
lives of aliens or to take any part in suppressing the disorders incident upon the 
coal strike. Whil e he did not specifically 
mention the Dye r Bil l by name, he urged 
the passage of Federal legislation to end 
mob outlawry. In part, President Hardin g 
i n asking the passage of a bill now pending 
designed to protect aliens i n their treaty 
rights, said: 
The matter has been before Congress on 
many previous occasions. President Tyle r 
in his first annual message advised Congress that inasmuch as "the Government is 
charged with the maintenance of peace and 
the preservation of amicable relations with 
the nations of the earth, it ought to possess 
without question al l the reasonable and 
proper means of maintaining the one and 
preserving the other." 
President Harrison asked for the same 
bestowal of jurisdiction. . . President 
McKinley , dealing wit h a like problem i n 
1899, asked the conferring upon Federal 
courts jurisdiction in that class of international cases where the ultimate responsibility of the Federal Government may be 
involved. President Roosevelt uttered a 
like request to Congress in 1906, and President Taft pointed out the defect i n the present Federal jurisdiction when he made his 
inaugural address in 1909. . . . 
M y renewal of this oft-made recommendation is impelled by a pitiable sense of Federal impotence to deal with the shocking 
crime at Herrin , 111., which so recently 
shamed and horrified the country. . . . 
Ha d it happened i n any other land than 
our own, and the wrat h of righteous justice were not effectively expressed, we 
should have pitied the civilization that would 
tolerate and sorrow for the Government unwillin g or unable to mete out just punishment. . . . 
It is deplorable that there are or can be 
American communities where even there are 
citizens, not to speak of public officials, who 
believe mob warfare is admissable to cure 
any situation. It is terrorizing to know 
that such madness may be directed against 
men merely for choosing to accept lawful 
employment. I wish the Federal Government to be able to put an end to such crimes 
against civilization and punish those who 
sanction them. 
A t the present writin g the Tariff Bill , 
which for four months has been pending 
before the Senate, has been passed. Legislation on the bonus is next to be taken up 
and from all present indications wil l be 
passed within a fortnight. The Anti -
Lynchin g Bil l is to be taken up at the conclusion of the debate on the bonus measure. 
The National Office has recently polled 
the Senate and it is a source of great gratification to the Nationa l Office, and wil l be 
to all friends of the Dye r Bill , to know that 
we already have a definite majority assured 
in the Senate and that the Dye r Bil l is sure 
of passage whenever it is brought to a 
vote. Ever y possible effort is being put forth 
to impress upon the Senate the necessity of 
passing this measure before the November 
elections. Splendid meetings have been held 
throughout the State of Massachusetts 
where Senator Lodge, Republican Leader of 
the Senate, is seeking re-nomination by the 
Republican Party. The most notable of 
these meetings have been held at Springfield, Worcester and New Bedford. The 
Springfield meeting was held at the City 
Auditorium and the principa l speakers were 
Congressman Dyer; Mr . Gillett of Massachusetts, Speaker of the House; and Mr . 
Johnson. Wide newspaper publicity was 
given to this and other meetings and i n addition the facts of the Bil l and the need for 
Federal legislation against lynching have 
been furnished upon numerous occasions to 
every newspaper in the State of Massachusetts. The results have been most encouraging, and sentiment in the State of Massachusetts has been aroused to the point that 
Mr . Lodge has been shown definitely that 
the Dyer Bil l must pass if he wishes to secure the votes of a considerable element of 
voters, both white and colored, who are i n 
favor of the measure. 
It would not be fitting to end this discussion of the steps which have been taken on 
the Dye r Bil l without paying tribute to the 
many organizations, both colored and white, 
which have passed strong resolutions endorsing the bill and the splendid work of 
the colored press which has done so much 
to arouse public sentiment i n favor of the 
measure. 
There appeared on August 21 a despatch 
i n the New Yor k Evening Post stating that 
after passing the Tariff Bil l on August 19, 
the Senate would take up on the 23rd the 
Bonus Bil l and that all indications pointed Joh
n H. Un thank, 
New York City 
Miriam J. Paterson, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Sarah L. Byrd, 
Athens, Ga. 
R. Janniere, 
Erie, Pa. 
Harold Tabbs, 
Chicago, III. 
James Merchant, 
Chicago, 111. 
Thelma Frilot, 
Olizier, La . 
Dorothy V. Clark, 
Washington, D. C. 
Julian W. Dempsey, 
Stamford, Conn. 
Emma T. Sangster, 
Uniontown, Ala. 
Charles W. McNeill, 
Bartow, Fla. 
Herman A. Schwecke, 
St. Augustine, Fla. 
Cecil James, Jr., 
St. Louis, Mo. 
Edith McCritty, 
Liberia, West Africa 
Doretha Branic, 
New York City 
George W. Hodges, 
Rome, Ga. 
263 264 TH E CRISIS 
to the passage of that measure within ten 
days. The same despatch also stated that a 
conference was planned for the week of the 
20th between the President and the leaders 
of both Houses of the Congress to determine on the legislative program for the remainder of the session of Congress. 
The Nationa l Office has realized and maintained from the beginning that the most certain way to secure passage of the Dye r Bil l 
would be to have a vote taken i n the Senate prior to the November elections, while 
Senators seeking re-election would be more 
inclined to heed the wishes of colored voters. 
When the despatch mentioned above was 
read, the Nationa l Office immediately set 
to work. 
First, a telegram which later was given 
to the press, was sent to President Harding. 
It read: 
We have been advised that there is to 
be held this week a conference between the 
leaders of the Senate and the President to 
agree upon the legislative program for the 
remainder of this session. Wit h the Tariff 
Bil l out of the way and an early vote expected on the bonus measure, the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People wit h 423 branches and 100,000 members respectfully urges that you use your 
power and influence towards securing consideration of the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bil l 
immediately after consideration of the 
Bonus Bill . Mob violence and the lynching 
of America n citizens is continuing and urgent public sentiment demands the immediate passage of legislation which wil l give 
the Federal Government authority to end 
mob outrages as pointed out by you i n your 
address to the Congress on August 18. It is 
necessary to protect the lives of aliens 
through Federal authority but is it not 
equally important to say the least, that the 
lives of American citizens be protected from 
mobs as well? 
A t the same time telegrams were sent to 
25 of the largest branches located in strategic political centers advising them of the 
situation and urging that they send telegrams to their Senators, get other organizations and individuals to do the same, and 
to get in touch with all nearby towns and 
have them send such messages, that individual members of the Senate might know 
that it was incumbent upon them to see 
that action was taken on the Dye r Bil l at 
this session of Congress. , 
DEFEA T O F CONGRESSME N 
F0LL0WIN G the declarations made by 
colored voters and by the N . A . A . C. P. 
during the debate in the House of Representatives on the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill , 
determined efforts are being put forth i n a 
number of states to defeat Congressmen 
who voted against the Bill . These statements served notice upon the various Congressmen from states in which the Negro 
vote played an important part and wherever 
Negroes voted, declaring i n unequivocal 
tones that these Congressmen could not expect the support of Negro voters if they 
voted against the Dye r Bill . 
The clearest cut issue is in the State of 
Michigan. Congressman Patrick J. Kelley 
of the Sixth Michigan Congressional District alone of all the Congressmen from that 
state voted against the Dye r Bill . Mr . 
Kelley attempted to justify his action on the 
ground that he had personal doubts as to 
the constitutionality of the measure, although the Attorney-General of the United 
States and the House Judiciary Committtee 
had declared the Bil l constitutional. Mr . 
Kelley is a candidate for the Republican 
senatorial nomination in Michiga n against 
the present incumbent, Senator Charles E . 
Townsend. The Nationa l Office has urged 
upon several occasions, through its 16 
branches i n that state, that Mr . Kelley be 
defeated. Senator Townsend has come out 
unequivocally for the Bil l and is working 
to have it brought to a vote i n the Senate 
at an early date. In taking this action the 
Association emphasized as strongly as possible that colored voters should not consider 
this as a narrow, partisan, political issue, 
but as a clear cut test by which they could 
determine who were the friends of antilynching legislation and the cause of law 
and order above that of the mob. 
Simila r action has been taken in the case 
of Congressman R. Wayne Parker, representing the Nint h Congressional Distric t 
of New Jersey, who also was the sole Congressman from his state to vote against the 
Bill . The Nationa l Office has impressed 
upon its Orange and Newark Branches, 
which are both i n the Nint h Congressional 
District, to exert their utmost efforts to defeat Mr . Parker. A s i n the case of Mr . 
Kelley, the Nationa l Office has emphasized 
that Negroes can no longer blindly follow 
any political party but must vote independently for those candidates who have shown 
by their records that they are opposed to 
mob violence and are willin g to do what 
they can to check it. 
Strong letters were written to Republican STUDEN T Y. M. C. A. WORK 265 
leaders i n the Senate setting forth the urgent necessity of consideration of and vote 
upon the Bil l at this session of the Senate. 
Fo r the information of colored voters, we 
give again the names of those members of 
the House of Representatives who voted 
against the Dye r Bil l when it was passed 
in January. Keep this list before you, circulate it among colored voters and white as 
well, if any of these men come from your 
districts and are seeking re-election at your 
hands! 
Republican Congressmen who voted 
against the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill : 
CALIFORNI A OKLAHOM A 
Henr y E . Barbour Manue l Herric k 
Charles F . Curr y Alic e M . Robertson 
Joh n I. Nola n OREGO N 
DELAWAR E Nichola s J. Sinnott 
Caleb R. Layto n PENNSYLVANI A 
IDAH O Eva n J. Jones 
Burto n L . Frenc h TENNESSE E 
MAIN E Joe Brow n 
Ir a G. Hersey Wynn e F . Clouse 
MASSACHUSETT S VIRGINI A 
Robert Luc e C. Bascomb Slemp 
MICHIGA N WISCONSI N 
Patrick H. Kelle y Willia m H . Staffe d 
NE W JERSE Y 
Richar d Wayn e Parke r 
TH E BRONZE LEGAC Y 
(To a Brown Boy) 
EFFI E LE E NEWSOM E 
'Tis a noble gift to be brown, all brown, 
Lik e the strongest things that make 
up this earth, 
Lik e the mountains grave and grand, 
Even like the very land, 
Eve n like the trunks of trees— 
Eve n oaks, to be like these! 
God builds His strength in bronze. 
To be brown like thrush and lark! 
Lik e the subtle wren so dark! 
Nay , the kin g of beasts wears brown ; 
Eagles are of this same hue. 
I thank God, then, I am brown. 
Brown has mighty things to do. 
MOTHERHOOD 
GEORGIA DOUGLASS JOHNSON 
DON' T knock on my door, little child, 
I cannot let you in ; 
Yo u know not what a world this is, 
Of cruelty and sin. 
Wait i n the still eternity 
Unti l I come to you. 
The world is cruel, cruel, child, 
I cannot let you through. 
Don't knock at my heart, little one, 
I cannot bear the pain 
Of turning deaf ears to your call, 
Time and time again. 
Yo u do not know the monster men 
Inhabiting the earth. 
Be still, be still, my precious child, 
I cannot give you birth. 
A DECAD E OF STUDENT Y. M. G. A. WORK 
C. H . TOBIAS 
TEN years ago William Alpheus Hunton, 
assisted by David D. Jones and the 
writer, conducted the first colored student 
conference of the Youn g Men's Christian 
Associations at King's Mountain, N . C. Of 
course student conferences had been held 
before that time, but they were small weekend gatherings largely inspirational in character because there was little time for a 
serious effort at training. This was the 
first attempt to run a standard ten-day 
conference after the plan of the conference 
for Eastern college students at Northfield, 
Mass. Twenty-nine schools and colleges 
were represented. Since that time the conference has met annually with the exception 
of the year 1914, when a convention of students was held in Atlanta , Ga. 
The purposes of this annual gathering of 
students are: 
1. To bring students of the different 
schools and colleges together i n discussion, council and prayer. 
2. To establish points of contact between 
student delegates and Christian leaders. 266 THE CRISIS 
LEADER S O F FIRST Y . M . C. A . CONFERENC E FO R SOUTHWEST , COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
3. To promote systematic instruction that 
is designed: (a) to bring the delegates 
face to face with the moral and religious 
problems in our schools and in the world 
of affairs; (b) to strengthen their faith 
in the power of Jesus Christ to save in ­
dividuals and the social order; (c) to 
guide them in the choice of a life calling ; and (d) to increase their knowledge 
and efficient use of the principles and 
methods of Christian work employed by 
the Youn g Men's Christian Associations. 
Attendance at the conference has in ­
creased from year to year until it is now 
nearly three times as large as it was i n 
the beginning i n spite of the fact that an 
additional conference has been established 
for the students of the Southwest. 
A s the conference has grown, so the 
local associations have increased its numbers and effectiveness for service, and the 
group of colored associations as a whole 
has gained i n prestige and power wit h 
the national and international movements 
of which it is a part. It may be interesting to point out a few illustrations of this 
growth. 
A t the 1913 session of the World's Student Christian Federation held at Lake Mohonk, N . Y. , there were thirteen colored 
delegates i n attendance. They were i n every 
sense a real part of this great cosmopolitan 
conference. 
The Christian Student Convention held in 
Atlant a in 1914 brought together 880 delegates and leaders from all parts of the 
country to consider the claims of unselfish 
service at home and abroad. Man y men 
A T A RECEN T Y . M . C. A . CONFERENCE , COLEMA N COLLEGE , GIBSLAND , LA . SONG FOR A BANJO DANC E 26 7 
now prominent i n the work of the church 
and affiliated organizations made their lifework decisions i n that convention. It was 
there that Ma x Yergan publicly announced 
his decision to devote his life to Christian 
service, a decision which afterwards led 
him to render war service i n India, Afric a 
and Europe, and led him only recently to 
return to Afric a to initiate Y . M . C. A . 
work among the natives. 
There were approximately 300 Negro representatives at the Student Volunteer Convention held at Des Moines, Iowa, two years 
ago, and this, i n spite of the fact that practically no outlet for missionary enthusiasm 
on the part of Negro volunteers is offered 
by most of the great mission boards. 
Durin g the wa r colored students subscribed more than $64,000 to the Christian 
student relief funds. Because of the interest shown by colored students in relief work, 
the write r was appointed a member of a 
special commission that was sent to Europe 
last summer to make a survey of the relief work in the university centres of Centra l Europe. 
A t the recent session of the World's 
Student Christian Federation i n Peking, 
China , Prof. Willis J. Kin g of Gammon 
Theological Seminary represented the colored students of America . Prof. Kin g has 
been made a member of the Executive Committee of the Federation. 
There are two colored members of the 
Nationa l Student Council, an organization 
consisting of two representatives from the 
field council of each student conference area 
that advise with the International Committee i n shaping policies and programs of 
work among students. Prof. J. W . Barco, of 
Union University, and Mr . Walte r W . 
Goens, of Howar d University, are the colored members of this council. 
Reference has been made to a conference 
for the students of the Southwest. It should 
be said that this conference under the direction of Mr. William C. Craver, secretary 
c f the Southwestern Student Area , has just 
held its first regular session at Gibsland, 
La. , wit h representatives from forty schools 
and colleges. 
A tenth anniversary of the King's Mountain Conference has just been held at which 
time there was a memorial service in honor 
of William A . Hunton, the founder. Also 
due recognition was given to the services 
rendered by David D. Jones, Ma x Yergan, 
Alexander L . Jackson and Mordecai W . 
Johnson, all of whom served as student secretaries during the past ten years and are 
now in other fields of labor. 
In this brief outline of the work of the 
student Y . M . C. A . the references have 
been mainly to outward evidences of progress. Important as these are, they do not 
compare wit h the unseen spiritua l forces 
that from time to time have found expression i n recovered moral balance in the lives 
of men, i n the fixing of ideals, in the discovery of aptitudes leading to life work 
decisions and in many other ways that cannot be recorded. 
SONG FOR A BANJO DANC E 
LANGSTON HUGHES 
SHAK E your brown feet, honey, 
Shake your brown feet, chil', 
Shake your brown feet, honey, 
Shake 'em swift and wil' — 
Get way back, honey, 
Do that low-down step. 
Get on over, darling, 
Now ! Step out 
Wit h your left. 
Shake your brown feet, honey, 
Shake 'em, honey chil'. 
Sun's going down this evening— 
Migh t never rise no mo'. 
The sun's going down this very night— 
Migh t never rise no mo'— 
So dance with swift feet, honey, 
(The banjo's sobbing low), 
Dance with swift feet, honey— 
Migh t never dance no mo'. 
Shake your brown feet, Liza , 
Shake 'em, Liza , chil', 
Shake your brown feet, Liza , 
(The music's soft and wil'). 
Shake your brown feet, Liza , 
(The banjo's sobbing low), 
The sun's going down this very night— 
Migh t never rise no mo'. The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E O . ALLISO N . 
G A Fathe r an d So n Banque t ha s been hel d 
i n Monrovia , Cal. , unde r th e auspice s o f the 
Y . M . C . A . Question s relatin g to the boy's 
responsibilit y t o his father, his churc h an d 
his schoo l wer e discussed . 
• Ther e wer e 5,000 peopl e presen t a t the 
spellin g matc h fo r pupils o f th e publi c 
schools a t Detroit , Mich . O n the stag e wer e 
Georg e Nurse , colored , an d Justin e Pearsall , white , competin g fo r first honors. Whe n 
th e wor d "peace" , th e opposit e o f war , wa s 
give n to Justin e she spelle d the wron g wor d 
twic e an d wa s give n a thir d opportunit y 
to spel l i t correctly . The n Georg e wa s give n 
"Hawaii" . H e bega n wit h capita l "H" , 
the n h e stoppe d an d starte d ove r an d forgo t to use th e capital , bu t he spelled the 
wor d correctly ; however, he wa s disqualifie d 
fo r this an d th e littl e whit e gir l wa s acclaime d champio n amidst grea t applaus e 
fro m the crowd , most o f who m wer e white . 
Ou t o f 140 contestants, 8 colore d pupils 
wer e priz e winners, amon g the m Lucil e 
Nuttall , wit h Georg e Nurs e as champio n 
de facto. 
• Th e Playgroun d Basketbal l Tea m o f 
Hamilto n Gramma r School, Sa n Francisco , 
Cal. , is th e holde r o f 3 cit y championship s 
i n volleybal l an d basketball . Th e players 
ar e Dais y Pera , Assyrian , captain ; Lois 
Williamson , Eas t Indian ; Lois Davis, colore d American ; Henriett a Padilla , Mexi ­
can ; Nett i Drolich , Austrian ; Glady s 
Schultz , whit e American ; Adelin a Yaeger , 
whit e American ; Shiz u Saki , Japanese ; 
Han a Suzuki , Japanese . 
• "Bab y Brother " ha s 7 brothers an d 2 
sisters an d is a n uncle ! Whe n he wa s 5 
weeks ol d he wa s introduce d to the stage 
fo r th e purpos e o f reconcilin g a wif e an d 
a husband . Sinc e the n his pictur e ha s ap ­
peare d i n the movie s an d o n advertisin g 
bulletin s an d slides. H e live s i n Memphis, 
Tenn. , an d is th e so n o f Mr . an d Mrs . Car ­
ter. 
• A t the second annua l Children's Carniva l 
an d Sprin g Festiva l hel d i n Brooklyn , N . 
Y. , th e progra m include d th e minuet , Span ­
ish , Scottish , Russia n an d balle t dance s b y 
pupils o f Mis s Grac e Giles. 
• Th e eight h biennia l conferenc e o f Gran d 
Chapters o f the Orde r of Easter n Sta r ha s 
been hel d i n Washington , D . C . Th e con ­
ferenc e is compose d o f 29 Gran d Chapters 
i n Americ a an d one i n th e Dominio n of 
Canada , an d represents a membershi p o f 
100,000, wit h a half-millio n dollars i n their 
combine d treasuries. A s par t o f its im ­
portan t business the conferenc e passe d a 
resolutio n endorsin g the Dye r Anti-Lynch -
in g Bil l an d urgin g its immediat e passag e 
b y the Senate . Mrs . S. Jo e Brown , of 
POSTER S DISTRIBUTE D B Y CHIL D WELFAR E ASSOCIATION , A T TO FIFT H AVENUE , 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
268 A T TH E FATHE R AN D SON BANQUE T 
LUCIL E NUTTAL L GEORG E NURS E 
PLAYGROUN D BASKETBAL L TEA M 
"BAB Y BROTHER " 
A T TH E CHILDREN' S CARNIVA L 
269 270 TH E CRISIS 
De s Moines, Iowa , wa s elected Internationa l 
Worth y Matron . A t the nex t conference , 
whic h wil l be hel d i n Pittsburg h i n 1924, 
it is expecte d tha t representative s fro m 
Afric a an d the Isles o f th e Se a wil l be i n 
attendance . 
• Int o Afric a ha s been introduce d the bo y 
an d gir l scouts movement . Ou r photograp h 
shows a scout troo p o f nativ e childre n o f 
Sierr a Leon e wh o posed fo r a pictur e befor e 
startin g o n a hike . Th e electe d leaders ar e 
enthrone d i n tru e kin g an d quee n fashion , 
attende d b y the chie f counse l i n sil k hig h 
hat, an d b y members o f their juvenil e court. 
• Th e Henr y Stree t Settlemen t i n New 
Yor k Cit y ha s a branc h know n as Lincol n 
House . Th e activitie s ar e i n charg e of Mis s 
Lillia n D . Wald , a widel y know n whit e socia l worker. 
• Th e Girls ' Wor k Departmen t of the Y . W . 
C. A . i n Dayton , Ohio , ha s hel d a vocationa l 
conference . Amon g feature s considere d i n 
the occupation s presente d wer e the time 
an d expens e fo r training , physica l qualifications, natura l aptitude , salar y an d opportunitie s fo r advancement . 
• Hatti e E . Hammond , a 15-year-ol d colored studen t a t Wile y Hig h School , Terr e 
Haute , Ind. , wrot e th e priz e stor y fo r the 
year. He r subjec t wa s "Th e Lost Strain" . 
Durin g he r schoo l caree r she ha s lost onl y 
one an d one-half day s b y absence , an d he r 
grade s hav e kep t above the average . Mis s 
Hammon d is als o a pianist an d a violinist . 
• Amon g recipients o f the annua l scholarshi p award s to the Joh n Herro n Ar t 
Schoo l i n Indianapolis, is Georg e Willia m 
Guess, a Negr o yout h o f Jefferso n County , 
Indiana . 
• Thoma s M . Dexter, a Negr o i n Mario n 
County , Indiana , ha s been name d to suc ­
ceed the lat e Henr y Abrains, white , as Re ­
publica n candidat e fo r th e legislature . I n 
the primarie s election , Mr . Dexte r lost nominatio n b y 177 votes. I n this count y ther e 
ar e 15,000 Negr o voters. 
• Th e annua l meetin g of the Nationa l Ur ­
ba n Leagu e wil l be hel d i n Pittsburgh , Pa. , 
Octobe r 18-20. 
• Musical America o f Jul y 15 contain s a n 
article , "Texa s Librar y Sheds Ligh t o n 
Earl y Spanis h Music" ; th e Augus t numbe r 
of the Musical Observer publishe s "Afric a 
i n Song" . Bot h article s ar e writte n b y 
Mrs . Mau d Cune y Hare . 
• Iren e Elizabet h Graha m ha s been award ­
ed th e degre e o f Maste r o f Musi c a t the 
Chicag o Musica l College . Mose s Boguslawsk i wa s he r instructo r fo r the piano , 
an d Feli x Borowsk i i n composition . 
• Becaus e o f continue d il l health , Edwar d 
T . War e ha s resigne d the presidenc y of At ­
lant a University . Mr . War e ha s been con ­
nected wit h the schoo l fo r 25 years, serv ­
in g as presiden t fo r 15 years. H e ha s been 
mad e Presiden t Emeritu s an d elected a 
regula r truste e an d presiden t o f th e board . 
Unti l a ne w presiden t is elected Dr . M . W . 
Adam s wil l serv e as actin g president. 
• Willia m Harris , a Negro , playe d first 
violi n wit h the Universit y o f Californi a 
summe r session orchestra . Sasch a Jacobin -
off wa s the conductor, an d severa l work s o f 
Negr o composers wer e rendered . 
• Andre a Raza f an d Hughi e Woolford , tw o 
Negroe s i n Ne w Yor k City , wer e engage d 
b y Hurti g an d Seamo n to writ e the scores 
fo r th e "Socia l Maids" , "Ste p O n It" , th e 
"Greenwic h Villag e Revue " an d th e "Bow ­
er y Burlesque" . 
• Accordin g to th e Metropolita n Lif e In ­
suranc e Company , ther e ha s been consid ­
erabl e improvemen t amon g Negroe s durin g 
th e past decade i n deat h rate s fro m tubercu ­
losis, pneumonia , heart disease , Bright's 
disease, malaria , typhoi d feve r an d pellagra . 
• Lucil e Spenc e ha s receive d the Phi Beta 
Kappa Ke y a t Hunte r College , Ne w York . 
Sh e is a membe r o f th e class o f February , 
'23. 
• A fil m to counterac t the impressio n cre ­
ate d i n Americ a b y Germa n storie s o f the 
"Blac k Horror " o f the Rhin e is i n prepara ­
tio n a t th e Path e Studio , nea r Paris. It 
wil l be sent to America . Genera l Archi -
nard , presiden t of the Committe e fo r Blac k 
Troops, a semi-officia l organization , is i n 
charg e o f the production . 
• A t the 18t h annua l session o f th e Na ­
tiona l Associatio n o f Teachers i n Colore d 
Schools, Dr . Joh n A . Gregg , presiden t o f 
Wilberforc e University , wa s elected president. Sixtee n othe r officers, includin g 7 
women , wer e installed . Th e meetin g nex t 
yea r wil l convene a t Tuskege e Institute . 
• Eugen e Edga r Pag e ha s been discovere d 
i n Sacramento , Cal. , as a poe t an d composer. 
Hi s compositio n "Thinking " wa s sun g re ­
centl y b y Mrs . Fre d O'Neil , wit h Mr . Pag e 
as accompanist . 
• Georg e W . Goodman , of Hartford , Conn. , 
wa s graduate d i n Jun e fro m hig h school 
as class orator. H e playe d i n 3 sports an d 
wa s classed as one of the best half-back s AFRICA N SCOUTS 
PLAY-STREE T IN FRON T O F LINCOL N HOUS E 
A T TH E VOCATIONA L CONFERENC E 
271 272 TH E CRISIS 
George W . Goodman Countee P. Cullen Mary P. Pierre Blanche Emanuel 
i n th e state ; he wa s a membe r o f the all -
stat e interscholasti c eleven fo r 3 years. H e 
wa s also selected to represen t his schoo l i n 
a stat e oratorica l contest an d ou t o f 15 
competitors he wa s one o f 3 priz e winners; 
i n th e annua l Batterso n Priz e Debate , his 
tea m wo n the affirmativ e side o f the question , "Resolved , Tha t the Philippin e Island s 
B e Grante d Thei r Independenc e b y the 
Unite d States" . H e is th e first Negr o 
studen t to be appointe d throug h competitio n 
to th e editoria l boar d o f th e schoo l paper. 
On e o f th e largest boys' club s i n the school, 
averagin g 400 members, ha d Mr . Goodma n 
as its secretary . 
• Counte e P . Culle n is the premie r poet of 
Ne w York' s scor e o f hig h schools. I n 1918 
h e entere d DeWit t Clinto n Hig h Schoo l 
where , durin g his first term , his instructo r 
urge d th e boys to tr y their han d a t writin g 
verse . Culle n trie d an d though t no mor e 
o f it . Late r the teache r left the schoo l an d 
wen t West. A yea r late r Culle n chance d 
upo n a Wester n magazin e i n whic h he rea d 
a n articl e o n poetr y b y his forme r teache r 
and , wha t intereste d hi m most, his poem. 
It wa s the n tha t he decided to writ e poetry . 
Hi s poem " I Hav e a Rendezvou s Wit h Life " 
wa s awarde d first priz e i n a contest hel d 
unde r the auspice s of the Empir e Federa ­
tio n o f Women's Clubs; "I n Memor y of 
Lincoln " capture d second priz e i n the contest conducte d b y th e Sorosis Club . H e demonstrate d his abilit y as a speake r b y win ­
nin g the Dougla s Fairbank s oratorica l con ­
test, an d as a journalist b y workin g his 
wa y to the editorshi p of th e Clinton News, 
th e hig h schoo l weekly . H e was, whil e i n 
Hig h School , a n officer o f th e Inter-Hig h 
Schoo l Poetr y Society , chairma n of th e hel p 
classe s a t DeWitt , leade r o f the Arista, 
vice-presiden t o f th e senio r class, Firs t 
Lieutenan t o f th e Dote y Squa d an d a mem ­
be r o f th e Clinto n Club . H e is no w a fresh ­
ma n a t Ne w Yor k University . 
• Mar y P . Pierr e is a studen t a t the Ne w 
Jerse y Institut e o f Music . Sh e ha s been 
awarde d a diamon d meda l fo r havin g 
passe d examination s an d tests wit h 100 
percent. Mis s Pierr e wa s bor n i n Wash ­
ington , D . C , i n 1905, he r fathe r bein g 
Dr . Samue l M . Pierre . Sh e attende d the 
publi c schoo l an d bega n the stud y o f musi c 
a t the age o f eight, fro m Mis s Teatley ; 
late r fro m Mis s M . Gordon , an d finall y a t 
the Ne w Jerse y Institute . Sh e is study ­
in g piano , orga n an d violi n an d afte r he r 
graduatio n nex t Jun e she wil l undoubtedl y 
become a soloist on eac h o f these instru ­
ments. 
• I n th e poetr y contest conducte d b y Publi c 
Schoo l No . 69, i n Ne w Yor k City , Blanch e 
Emanue l wo n th e five dolla r gol d prize . 
On e o f he r poems wa s publishe d i n th e grad ­
uatio n numbe r o f th e Wadleig h Hig h Schoo l 
magazine . Mis s Emanue l is th e winne r of 
a scholarshi p offered b y the Kappa Gamma 
Kappa sorority . 
• Th e followin g lynching s hav e take n plac e 
sinc e ou r last record : 
Ho t Springs, Ark. , Augus t 1, Gilber t Har ­
ris; fatall y woundin g whit e ma n 
Holton , Ga. , Augus t 1, Joh n Glover ; mur ­
de r 
Swansboro , N . C , Augus t 6, Bayne r 
Blackwell ; ringleade r i n assaul t 
Lambert , Miss. , Augus t 23, Joh n Steelma n ; , assaul t on whit e woma n 
Bossie r Parish , La. , Augus t 30, Thoma s 
Rivers ; assaul t o n whit e woman . THE Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
ROBER T LOUI S STEVENSON , i n a 
"Child's Garden of Verses": 
A chil d shoul d alway s sa y what's true , 
An d do as he is tol d to do ; 
An d behav e mannerl y a t table , 
A t least as fa r as he is able . 
* * * 
W e hav e receive d "Th e Negr o i n Masoni c 
Literature" , a compilatio n b y Harr y A . Wil ­
liamson , Past Deput y Gran d Maste r an d 
Historia n of the Orde r o f Masons. This is 
a uniqu e an d valuabl e piec e of work . 
Th e "Risin g Tempe r of the East" , b y 
Frazie r Hunt , deals wit h the persona l experience s o f the autho r i n Australia , Korea , 
Japan , China , India , Egypt , the Philippines, 
Hait i an d Mexico . Mr . Hunt , afte r describ ­
in g Britis h rul e i n India , turn s to the Phil ­
ippine s whic h he speaks o f as "Ou r Littl e 
India" . Th e Literary Review says: 
Th e book is a valuabl e one, despit e the 
fac t tha t i t omits probabl y the most vita l 
featur e o f th e entir e situation . Mr . Hun t 
is seemingl y surprise d tha t al l these coun ­
trie s shoul d be o n th e poin t o f revolt. Ther e 
is nothin g surprisin g abou t it . Yo u canno t 
hav e a Chines e graduat e fro m a n America n 
colleg e an d the n go bac k to his countr y an d 
bac k to the ric e paddie s withou t talking . 
H e explain s to his fellow s tha t ther e is 
somethin g mor e to lif e tha n livin g i n mu d 
huts an d payin g tribut e to a people the y 
neve r saw. H e arouse s the m to a mor e in ­
telligen t vie w o f life , an d a n infusio n of 
intelligenc e wil l shak e mer e troglodyte s out 
o f thei r letharg y an d set the m going . Mexi ­
ca n peons, Philippin e taos, India n ryots, 
Egyptia n fellaheen, Siberia n peasants, Chi ­
nese coolies, an d Haitia n habitants wil l ai l 
some da y rid e i n automobile s o r do whateve r else connote s twentiet h centur y civili ­
zation . Bu t the y wil l no t overthro w West ­
er n civilizatio n as soon as the y shal l hav e 
arrived . The y cannot. No r wil l the y wis h to. 
The y wil l need us as customers i n the 
worl d trade . 
THE PRESS AND "BACK TO AFRICA" 
NEW YOR K press commen t o n the Gar -
ve y propagand a make s Jnterestin g 
reading , Charle s C . Lawto n write s i n the 
Ne w Yor k Sun: 
I understan d tha t Marcu s Garve y is a 
West Indian a subjec t of Grea t Britain , 
an d i n no wa y empowere d to spea k fo r 12,-
000,000 nativ e bor n Americans. 
T o m y mind , nothin g coul d be mor e tragi c 
tha n an y attemp t to carr y out suc h a plan , 
whic h onl y a theorist coul d conceive . Perhap s those whos e "interest i n th e Negro " 
impels the m to readil y approv e suc h a gi ­
ganti c movemen t hav e neve r stoppe d to 
conside r seriousl y the rea l meanin g o f Mr . 
Garvey's plan . It not onl y involve s the deportation , as i t were , o f 12,000,000 Negroe s 
fro m the Unite d States, bu t also implie s the 
evacuatio n of Afric a b y al l white s wh o no w 
resid e there . 
You r corresponden t also refers to Ameri ­
c a as " a whit e man's country" . Suc h a n 
assertio n ca n be nothin g bu t evidenc e o f a n 
amazin g ignoranc e of America n histor y as 
wel l as o f the Bible . Histor y teache s us 
tha t this countr y rightfull y belong s to the 
Indian , i n whic h event w e hav e just as muc h 
righ t her e as an y one. 
* * * 
Th e Ne w Yor k Call considers th e sloga n 
"America , a whit e man's country " a seriou s 
commentar y o n the prid e an d intelligence^o f 
he r blac k citizens: 
Garvey , accordin g to accounts, accepts 
the K u Klu x Kla n ide a tha t the Unite d 
State s is the wor k o f whit e me n and that 
i t belong s to the whites. A s a matte r o f 
fact, i t belong s to onl y a smal l portio n 
o f whit e owners. Bu t fo r Garve y to concede this poin t to the K u Klu x Kla n is to 
admi t tha t the Negro, despite al l his labors 
fo r 300 years . i n this country , is no t entitle d to an y shar e i n the countr y whic h he 
ha s helpe d to build . Th e Sout h itself rests 
upo n th e sweat, toi l an d agon y o f 300 years 
of Negr o labor. 
Garve y is sai d to concede to the K u Klu x 
Kla n its progra m o f politica l ostracism an d 
economi c suppressio n o f the Negro . H e 
claims nothin g fo r his rac e i n America n 
histor y an d agree s tha t it shoul d eithe r ac ­
cent the K u Klu x America n progra m o r his 
Africa n program . Sta y an d be mudsills or 
ge t out an d go to Africa . 
Thu s tw o fundamentall y antagonisti c 
points o f vie w ar e reconcile d to the satisfactio n o f the tw o partie s concerned . Th e 
questio n is whethe r the grea t mass o f in ­
telligen t Negroe s wil l concede tha t al l their 
labors i n the day s o f slaver y an d th e late r 
perio d o f "freedom " justif y the vie w tha t 
the y ar e no t entitle d to shar e i n th e fruits 
o f America n progress just the same as 
ever y othe r huma n being . Tha t concession, 
i t seems to us, woul d be th e most humiliat ­
in g one tha t Negroe s coul d make . . . . 
273 274 TH E CRISIS 
W e do no t believe tha t an y suc h progra m 
ca n lon g surviv e amon g intelligen t members 
o f th e Negr o race , an d w e ar e certai n tha t 
th e workin g class sectio n o f i t wil l not 
accep t i t i n an y grea t numbers. 
Th e Ne w Yor k Telegraph considers the 
autho r o f the "Africa n Empire " scheme , 
fit subjec t fo r a psychiatrist . It declares: 
Th e individual , blac k o r white , intelli ­
gen t o r dull , wh o eve n suggests cuttin g a 
larg e sectio n o f the eart h u p int o duchie s 
an d foundin g a ne w stat e upo n th e aristo ­
crati c class concept, ma y no t be a dangerou s 
lunatic , bu t he certainl y is i n no sense a 
perso n to be truste d wit h the live s an d fo r 
tune s o f others. 
Afric a is no undiscovere d country . Its 
populatio n alread y is mainl y black , an d 
ther e is n o mor e reaso n wh y th e destin y o f 
the peopl e shoul d be place d i n the hand s of 
me n o f their ow n colo r fro m Americ a o r 
the Wester n Hemispher e tha n ther e is wh y 
they , becaus e o f respec t fo r ancestors, 
shoul d dictat e th e futur e of the cotton-field 
hand s o f the Souther n States. 
Th e growt h o f democrac y is th e most 
notabl e politica l developmen t o f the last 
century ; bu t i t is no t a democrac y tha t Gar ­
ve y purpose s to establis h i n Africa . I t is 
a n empire . W e must , complimen t hi m fo r 
one thing . H e does no t drea m o n a smal l 
scale . Bu t he dreams, an d he dreams a 
drea m tha t neve r ca n come true . 
* * * 
Th e Ne w Yor k Sun declare s sensibly : 
Th e America n Negr o ha s not the slightest 
desir e to go t o Africa. Furthermore , i n 
al l the million s o f squar e mile s i n Afric a 
ther e is toda y no place read y fo r him . . . . 
Neithe r the intelligent , prosperou s colore d residen t o f Harlem , no r th e field work ­
e r o f Mississipp i ha s any serious desir e to 
go "bac k to Africa" . It is no mor e a home 
land to hi m tha n Greenlan d woul d be. H e 
ha s roote d mor e deepl y i n Americ a tha n 
some o f ou r more recent comers fro m Eu ­
rope . Neithe r ca n he be coaxed . Some o f 
his rac e ma y express sympath y wit h th e 
idea , bu t when i t comes to practic e even 
these migh t hesitate . . . . Ther e is 
n o labo r shortag e i n the Congo , no imme ­
diat e room fo r an y twelv e o r fifteen millio n 
immigrants. Eve n a million , i f hastil y 
transporte d thither, woul d mee t wit h the 
initia l hardship s of immigrants everywhere , 
starvatio n and disease . 
* * * 
Th e Sun finishes wit h a commen t o n an d 
a quotatio n fro m a moder n author: 
I n his ne w novel, the her o o f whic h is a 
colore d man , Mr . Irvi n Cob b give s a n accurat e diagnosis o f the case. I n a scene 
wher e th e propose d emigratio n is unde r discussio n a t a Negr o meeting , one o f the 
characters is aske d wh y he is willin g to 
go to Africa , to whic h he replies: 
"Who , me? " say s 'Lisses. "Yo u go t me 
wrong ! I ain' t aimin ' to remov e myself 
nowhars. I is mos' comfor'bl e wha r I is at. 
N o suh , whu t I aims to do is to 'tac h myse'f 
to the collector's office yer e a t home an ' 
handl e the money'dues. " 
* * * 
W e shoul d cal l tha t a remarkabl y ap t 
quotation . 
THE REAL "LAND OF THE 
FREE" 
TAR , MANOL L D E OLIVIER A LIMA , of 
Brazil , i n speakin g of socia l an d racia l 
problems of his countr y showe d indirectl y 
tha t the Sout h America n Republi c wa s 
genuinel y a lan d o f liberty . Th e Bosto n 
Herald reports his speec h a t th e Institut e 
o f Politic s hel d i n Williamstown , Mass. : 
Afte r describin g the earl y settlements o f 
Brazil , Dr . Lim a dwel t o n th e singula r free ­
dom o f the countr y fro m religiou s differences. H e sai d : "Brazi l ha s alway s been a 
most toleran t countr y i n religiou s matters, 
ye t no t a n irreligiou s one. Sh e gav e the 
best proo f o f tha t toleranc e whe n th e churc h 
wa s separate d fro m the stat e a t the down ­
fal l o f the empire . I n orde r to maintai n 
i n activit y suc h orders as th e Benedictines, 
the Hol y See calle d fo r Europea n monks — 
Belgia n an d German—a s the numbe r o f 
Brazilia n novice s wa s practicall y none . 
"Th e peopl e sa w wit h ange r th e patri ­
mon y o f the Benedictine s transferre d to the 
managemen t o f foreig n hands—bu t th e 
courts decide d tha t the transfe r o f propert y 
o n suc h terms wa s perfectl y lega l an d the 
governmen t uphel d the courts against mo b 
riots. Al l hostilit y ceased an d bot h religio n 
an d countr y profite d b y it. " 
* * * 
Ther e is no rac e problem i n Brazil , say s 
Dr . Lima : 
"Owin g to he r economica l condition s as a n 
agricultura l countr y an d to othe r circum ­
stance s an d the tota l lac k o f organizatio n 
o f he r aborigina l elemen t Brazi l ha d to im ­
port Africa n slave s to a greate r exten t tha n 
an y Spanish-America n colony , an d the result wa s tha t he r blac k populatio n wa s 
large r tha n an y othe r i n Sout h America . 
Racia l equalit y di d not, however, become 
absolut e wit h emancipation . Ther e exists 
prejudic e enough , especiall y amon g distin ­
guishe d families, against miscegenation , 
bu t this last is freel y practise d amon g the 
people , i n general , wit h the resul t tha t not 
onl y ther e is no rac e questio n i n Brazil , con ­
flicts o r even controversie s ove r the matte r 
being , so to say, unknown , bu t tha t Negroe s 
ar e rapidl y disappearing , mergin g int o the 
whit e population . 
"N o Negroe s ar e an y longe r importe d an d 
th e whit e populatio n increase s al l the time . 
Befor e the war , the numbe r o f colonists wh o 
lande d i n Brazi l ever y yea r amounte d to Mauric
e T. Lewis, 
Houston, Tex. 
Campbell Children, 
Tuskegee, Ala. 
Thomas Brumfield, Jr., 
Nashville, Tenn. 
Frances A. Chisutm, 
New York City 
Selby Brownlee, 
Oakland, Cal. 
H. C. Dugas, Jr., 
Augusta, Ga. 
Vivian A. Talbert, 
Detroit, Mich. 
Fleming H. Powell, 
McAlester, Okla. 
275 
Helen and Henry Barley, 
McAlester, Okla. 
Pete, Carle and Irving White ; 
Jimita Evans, Leo and John Jones, 
Lexington, Va . 
Lillian and Charles Sharp, Jr. 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Doris Foster, 
Atlanta, Ga. 276 TH E CRISIS 
100,000 an d more . Th e populatio n amounts, 
accordin g to the last census, to 30,635,605, 
o f whic h the sixt h par t (probabl y more ) 
is repute d colored . Th e census itself is no t 
bothere d wit h this distinctio n becaus e th e 
tendenc y o f the peopl e is to pass fo r white . 
Th e Brazilia n solutio n of th e racia l questio n o f th e colore d race , a t least, is certainl y wiser, mor e promisin g an d above al l 
mor e human e tha n an y othe r solutio n whic h 
operate s throug h separatio n o r segrega ­
tion. " 
DUTY OF THE BLACK RADICAL 
CLAUD E McKA Y believe s tha t th e test 
o f radicalis m is the genuin e acceptanc e 
o f th e Negr o i n th e class struggle . H e 
write s i n the Liberator, wit h whic h he ha s 
sinc e severe d his connection : 
Bein g a Negro , I think , i t is m y prou d 
birthrigh t to pu t the case o f the Negr o 
proletarian , to the best o f m y ability , befor e the whit e members of th e movemen t 
to whic h I belong . Fo r the proble m of the 
darke r race s is a rigi d test o f radicalism . 
T o some radicals i t migh t seem mor e terri ­
bl e to fac e tha n the barricades. Bu t this 
racia l questio n ma y be eventuall y the mon ­
ke y wrenc h throw n int o th e machiner y o f 
America n revolutionar y struggle . 
"Th e Negr o radica l wants mor e tha n any ­
thin g else to find i n th e workin g class move ­
men t a revolutionar y attitud e toward s Ne ­
groe s different fro m the sympatheti c interest o f bourgeois philanthropists an d capitalist politicians. An d i f this differenc e is 
no t practicall y demonstrated , Negr o leaders 
ca n hardl y go to the ignoran t blac k masse s 
an d sho w the m wh y the y shoul d organiz e 
an d wor k b y the standar d o f the whit e 
workers. Kar l Marx' s economi c theorie s 
ar e har d t o digest, an d Negroes, lik e man y 
othe r lazy-minde d workers, ma y find it 
easie r to pu t their fait h i n th e gospe l of 
tha t othe r Jew , Jesus. Th e Negroe s migh t 
remain , i n th e Unite d State s o f America , a 
soli d army , twelv e millio n strong , a reac ­
tionar y mass, men , wome n an d children . 
The y migh t remai n a reactionar y fact, distrustfu l o f the revolutionar y activitie s of 
the whit e workin g class. The y migh t re ­
mai n th e too l o f th e rulin g class, to be use d 
effectively, as i n the past against radica l 
labor. An d i n tha t event the blac k workers 
wil l suffer—th e whit e workers wil l lose— 
th e rulin g class wil l win . 
An d so i t is no t onl y th e birthrigh t o f 
th e Negr o radica l to educat e the blac k 
worker , bu t i t is also his dut y to interpre t 
hi m to the uninforme d whit e radica l wh o 
is pron e to accept the colorfu l fiction rathe r 
tha n the star k realit y o f th e Negro's strug ­
gl e fo r ful l socia l an d economi c freedom. 
Wher e the whit e radica l is quit e shar p i n 
detectin g ever y bourgeois trap , howeve r 
carefull y hidden , tha t is set fo r the whit e 
worker , h e ver y ofte n loses his kee n perceptions whe n he approache s the Negr o 
question , an d sometime s falls int o the trap . 
An d b y his blunde r he no t onl y aid s the 
bourgeoisie , bu t als o the ultra-nationalist 
Negr o leaders who , i n their insisten t appea l 
to th e rac e prejudic e o f blac k against white , 
declar e tha t n o class o f whit e peopl e wil l 
eve r understan d the blac k race . 
NOTES ON LIBERIA 
POSSIBL E financial relation s betwee n the 
Unite d State s an d Liberi a hav e stimu ­
late d ou r interest i n th e littl e republic . 
Henr y F . Downing , forme r U . S. Consu l a t 
St. Pau l de Loanda , tells u s somethin g 
abou t i t i n th e Clyde , N . Y. , Times: 
I n the matte r o f natura l resources, Li ­
beri a is fa r riche r tha n an y othe r lan d o f 
simila r siz e i n West Africa . He r forests 
ar e ful l o f mahogany , teak, ebon y an d othe r 
valuabl e har d woods, als o wood s suitabl e 
fo r conversio n int o commercia l lumber. 
Rubbe r abound s i n man y varieties. Pal m 
oi l tree s gro w wild . This kin d of tre e 
coul d be cultivate d fo r exceedingl y larg e 
cas h returns. He r forests ar e ful l o f game , 
he r rivers, lagoon s an d bay s teem wit h 
man y kind s o f fish. I n fact, Liberia's un ­
develope d wealt h is immense . Nativ e un ­
skille d labo r is plentifu l an d cheap . I t 
lack s th e qualit y o f continuity , bu t tha t 
faul t coul d easil y be cured . 
Monrovia , the capita l of Liberia , is situ ­
ate d a t the mout h of th e Mesurad o River , 
a sluggis h lagoo n connecte d wit h th e beau ­
tifu l St. Paul's Rive r b y Stockto n Creek , so 
name d afte r a n America n nava l officer wh o 
serve d th e Republi c wel l i n a n hou r c f 
he r grea t distress. Th e cit y ha s abou t 2500 
civilize d inhabitants, mad e u p o f Americo -
Liberians, West Indian s an d absorbe d na ­
tives. It contain s severa l churches—Metho ­
dist, Baptist , Episcopal , etc.; also severa l 
schools, al l doin g excellen t work . 
Man y o f the privat e residence s ar e quit e 
imposin g i n appearance , an d ver y comforta ­
bl e wit h numerou s air y larg e rooms, distribute d ove r tw o capaciou s floors, surround ­
ed b y wid e veranda s protecte d fro m the 
su n b y gree n ventilato r blinds. 
Th e streets ar e broad , an d the y ru n a t 
righ t angle s wit h each othe r alon e an d a t 
the tw o sides o f a long , undulatin g hill , 
whic h begin s a t th e jungle-edge d inferio r 
war d lin e o f the city , an d ends a t th e bas e 
of a n abrup t ascent whic h pushe s its rock y 
nose int o th e Atlanti c Ocean , an d whic h o n 
its heigh t contain s a smal l for t an d a somewha t ancien t lighthouse . 
O n one o f its sides the cit y descends steepl y to its onl y business thoroughfare , calle d 
"Th e Waterside" , containin g th e Custo m 
House , th e Post Office an d the warehouse s 
o f foreig n an d Americo-Liberia n merchants. 
O n its othe r side, the cit y decline s gentl y 
an d lengthil y to a stretc h o f ocean-edged 
sand , calle d th e Lon g Beach , wher e Mon ­
rovia's elit e ar e won t to assembl e afte r th e 
heated hours of the day . 
(Continued on page 285) TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 277 
The Whole World is Reading It ! 
The Novel by the Negro Author 
CROWNE D WIT H TH E 
PRIX GONCOUR T 
BATOUALA 
B y REN E MARA N 
Selling 8,000 copies a day in France 
A sensational success in every 
country in which it has appeared 
BATOUAL A is the Iliad of the Africa n Negro. Bu t it is the Iliad of a people who live in 
our own day. 
N. Y. Times—"An astounding book.' 1 
Living Age—"A tale so strange, so powerful, so unusual, that there is small difficulty in seeing 
why the ten members of the Academi c Goncourt awarded it their prize. ' 
George U. Cloud in St. Louis Argus—"There arises occasionally an epochal literary work and 
René Maran , full-blooded Africa n Negro, has given the worl d a piece of literature which wil l be 
read 500 years from now- " 
Baltimore Evening Sun—"The force, the tremendous force and power of its simplicity hammers 
upon one's min d like the beat of the tom-tom which sounds throughout the text and one realizes 
where its genius lies. " 
N. Y. Tribune—"The book lives mightily. BATOUAL A itself is superb. A strange exotic work. " 
Negro World—"BATOUALA wil l go down i n history and rest alongside the epics of all time. " 
N. Y. Herald—"A masterpiece. I n M . Mara n the Negro race has at last a writer and poet of a 
hig h order. His book is unqualifiedly the greatest intellectual or artistic achievement of his race 
thus far. " 
H. Wilson Harris in London Daily News—"When a novel of Negro life, written by a full-blooded 
Negro, gains the distinction of the Goncourt Prize ; when it appears wit h a label indicating that 
8,000 copies are being sold daily ; when it is made the subject of an interpellation in the Chambe r 
and of heavy rebukes i n the Temps—then it may reasonably be a.ssumed that the book is something 
out of the ordinary. An d so it is.*1 
The Crisis—"The fa n slat or has achieved a result almost as starkly simple and magnificent as the 
original. " 
$1.75 
A T AL L BOOKSELLER S 
THOMA S SELTZER , 5 West 50th Street, New York, N.Y. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 278 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Hampton Institute 
Hampton, Virginia 
Founded i n 1868 by Genera l Armstron g 
to trai n selected colored yout h who should 
go out to teach and lead their people. In 
1878 Indians were first admitted. 
Hampto n stands for " a sound body, a 
trained capacity, and an unselfish outlook 
on life. " 
Hampto n is an industria l village : 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings;. 850 boarding students, 
500 da y pupils i n practice-school; 600 summer-school students; 200 teachers and 
workers. 
Hampto n has ove r 2,000 graduates and 
8,000 former students; also numerous outgrowths, including Tuskegee , founded by 
Booke r T . Washington . 
Hampto n offers courses i n four schools 
of norma l and collegiate grade—Agricultural, Business, Home-Economics, Normal— 
and in two schools of secondary grade— 
Academy and Trade (11 four-year courses). 
Hampto n needs annua l scholarships at 
$100 each and endowed scholarships at $2,500 
each; also $135,000 annually above regula r 
income. 
JAME S E . GREGG , Principa l 
FRAN K K . ROGERS , Treasure r 
ROBER T HUNGERFORD NORMA L 
AN D INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
Incorporated 
(Non-Sectarian) 
Eatonville , Florida , Th e Onl y Incorporated Ne ­
gro Tow n in Florida . A N IDEA L HOM E FO R 
YOU R BO Y AN D GIRL . Nea r Maitland , 
Florida , whic h is our Railroad , Telegraph and 
Express Station. Summe r School Bega n Jul y 
3rd ; Regula r Fal l Ter m Begin s October 5th, 
1922; DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSIONS . 
Courses include Grammar, Norma l and Voca ­
tional. Terms reasonable. Send for further 
information. 
S. G. BAKER, D.D. 
Principa l 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSIT Y 
RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
is offering young men an excellent opportunity to secure a liberal education 
along a variety of lines. Ever y effort is 
made to stimulate a full, well-rounded 
development. Hig h school, college and 
professional courses are offered. Th e 
faculty is strong, the rates are reasonable. 
Fo r further information address 
The President 
Young Man! 
Young Woman! 
Do Yo u Wan t a 
Trade ? 
Do Yo u Wan t T o Be 
a Chauffeur ? 
Do Yo u Wan t a Business Education ? 
Do Yo u Wan t a Hig h 
School Education ? 
Do Yo u Wan t To Be 
a Milliner ? 
Do Yo u Wan t T o Be 
a Farme r ? 
D o Yo u Wan t T o Be 
a Nurse ? 
Enter DOWNINGTOW N INDUSTRIA L & 
AGRICULTURA L SCHOO L 
OPENE D SEPT . 21, 1922 
Re-fitted, Ne w Equipment, Ne w Aims, Ne w Manage ­
ment, Ideal Situation, Health y Location . 
Courses in College Preparation, Business Training , 
Agriculture , Home Economics, Blacksmithing , 
Automobil e Operation and Care , Buildin g Trades. 
Writ e DR . J . H . N . WARING , Principal , 
DOWNINGTOWN . PA . 
1882 LAN E COLLEG E 1922 
Jackson, Tennessee 
A growin g College with a splendid history 
and a bright future. It offers modern courses 
in Collegiate, Theological, Musical , College 
Preparatory, Teachers Training , Home Eco ­
nomics, Agricultura l and Pre-Medica l subjects. 
Several vocational courses are also taught. 
Prope r standards of conduct as well as 
scholarship are maintained. Registrations of 
students are now being made for the next 
session. Wel l equipped laboratories, dormitories with modern conveniences and facilities 
under positive Christia n influences are supported. Fo r further information address 
J. F . LANE , President, Jackson , Tennessee. 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal. Academic , Junio r and Musi c Courses. 
Teachers' Training , Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring , Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boardin g facilities. Idea l location. 
Facult y from leading Universitie s 
Writ e fo r Bulletin . 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
PAINE COLLEGE 
at 
AUGUSTA, GEORGIA 
offers 
Courses in 
HIG H SCHOO L 
NORMA L (college grade) 
HOM E ECONOMIC S (college grade) 
PRE-MEDICA L 
COLLEG E (A.B. , B.S. , B.S . in Edu -
THEOLOG Y (B.Th.) cation) 
For further information address 
RAY S. TOMLIN, Acting President 
PAIN E COLLEG E 
AUGUSTA . GA . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 279 
MEHARR Y MEDICA L COLLEG E 
wit h departments of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmacy and a Nurse Training School 
AL L DEPARTMENTS RECENTL Y REORGANIZE D 
Tw o years (Class One ) college work required for admission to the study of medicine. Graduation 
from a four years' Hig h School or Norma l School required for admission to the departments of dentistry and pharmacy and nurse training. Fo r catalog and application blank address 
Joh n J . Mullowney , M.D. , Presiden t of Meharr y Medica l College , Nashville , Tenn . 
EVER Y GIRL 
SHOUL D LEAR N A TRAD E 
It is better than a life insurance. 
It pays while you live. 
It puts dollars into your pocket. 
It Makes You Independent 
Giv e your daughter a trade in a school that 
has high standards, and you put her on a 
safe road to success in life. 
Ou r literary and vocational courses are so 
correlated as to develop strong character, alert 
minds and skilled nands. 
COURSES OFFERED: 
LITERARY—Sixt h grade through a standard 
Normal . 
PROFESSIONA L AN D VOCATIONA L 
COURSES—Business, Domestic Science and 
Arts, Dressmaking , Tailoring, Millinery , Music , 
Socia l Service , Laundering , Home Crafts and 
Beaut y Culture . 
REQUIREMENT S FO R ADMISSION : 
1. No t below Sixt h Grade . 
2. No t under fifteen years of age. 
3. Certificates from Doctor, Dentist and 
School last attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
TH E NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
FO R WOME N AN D GIRL S 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , President 
Lincoln Heights Washington, D . C. 
TH E DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
COLLEGE OF OSTEOPATHY 
INCORPORATE D 
1826 9th St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
A professional school devoted to the 
training of worth y colored men and wo ­
men to become proficient Osteopathic 
Physicians. A thorough course of study 
leading to the degree of DOCTO R O F 
OSTEOPATHY . 
T. THEO . PARKER, D.O., Oph. D., 
President . 
KINDERGARTEN DEPARTMENT 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlant a Universit y Atlanta , Ga . 
ARMSTRONG CORRESPONDENCE 
COLLEGE 
Announces COURSES BY MAIL 
Ou r system enables you to study at home at 
small cost. 
Ou r system is so simple that anyone can get 
our courses by means of our simplified text 
book digests. 
Ou r school is for the masses, not the classes. 
W e offer courses in : 
Business Commo n School subEducation jects 
Collegiate subjects Journalism 
Hig h School subjects Civi l Servic e 
Commerc e Insurance 
Stenography Banking , etc. 
If you don't see what you want, write . If it 
can be given by mail, we give it. 
Send for catalog. Writ e to-day. 
W e want Agents. Wh y not be a State or 
Distric t Agent ? W e pay a handsome commission on every course sold. 
Agents Wanted . Writ e for terms. 
BYRON K. ARMSTRONG, M.A. 
(Columbia) Director 
WESTFIELD , INDIANA 
A RACE COLLEGE FOR RACE PEOPLE 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR COLORED 
WOMEN NURSES 
in connection with Harlem Hospital, Ne w Yor k 
City , offers a two years and six months' course 
of instruction to colored women who meet the 
educational requirement of the New Yor k State 
law and who desire to enter the nursing profession. 
Ful l maintenance and text books are furnished. 
Als o an allowance of twenty dollars a month. 
The comprehensive service of the Hospita l and 
the new Residence, wit h its complete equipment 
of class rooms and lecture hall, afford unusual 
facilities for theoretical and practica l instruction. 
Fo r further information apply to— 
General Superintendent of Trainin g Schools, 
BELLEVU E HOSPITAL , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
LEAR N MECHANICA L DENTISTR Y 
This highl y trained Professional and Profitable Trad e taught i n a ver y short time by expert instructors 
BI G SALARIES , SHOR T HOURS , EAS Y WORK . 
Salarie s range from $25.00 to $125.00 per week. BI G DEMAN D FO R GRADUAT E MECHANICA L 
DENTISTS . Ear n while learning. Eas y Paymen t Plan . 
Writ e for particulars. 
PHILADELPHI A SCHOOL OF MECHANICA L DENTISTRY 
1143 SOUT H 19TH STREE T Dept. A . PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 280 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NEGR O IN OU R HISTOR Y 
By 
Dr. CARTE R GODWIN WOODSON 
$2.15 by mail 
Published in June, this book has already been adopted as a textbook for 
schools conducting courses in History and Sociology. The following desirable 
features make it the most useful book on the Negro: 
It contains 20 chapters, 126 illustrations, references for future study and important 
documents in the appendix. 
It is well-thought-out, logically developed, tersely written and beautifully illustrated. 
It has a logica l arrangement, accurate citations, a vigorous style and positive 
statements to avoi d ambiguit y an d inspir e clear thinking . 
It shows an admirable balance between the economic an d the political, between 
the purely narrative and the material. 
It analyzes and discusses every phase of Negro life an d histor y without the bias 
of man y writers on social problems. 
It is the only textbook on the Negr o written from the point of view of the 
student and i n conformity wit h the requirements of the schoolroom. 
Ther e is no better volume to recommend either to the ma n in the street or to 
the serious student. 
TH E ASSOCIATED PUBLISHERS, INC. 
1216 You Street, N. W. Washington, D. C 
Edward Waters College 
JACKSONVILLE , FLORID A 
A n Ideal Christia n Home School 
In the Heart of Beautiful Florid a 
Fo r students unable to stand the rigors of 
a Norther n winter. 
Gramma r School, Junio r Hig h School, 
Senior Hig h School, Norma l School, School 
of Theology, Music , Commercia l Courses, 
Manua l Training , Domesti c Science and 
Art , Band, Militar y training for men, 
Physica l education for women. 
JOH N C . WRIGHT , President; 
BISHO P JOH N HURST , 
Chairman , Boar d of Trustees. 
WALDE N COLLEGE 
Large Ne w Beautifu l Site . College organized to suit ad ­
vanced standards an d to do wel l wha t is undertaken. 
COURSES—Junio r College, emphasizing two years' standard 
college work above approved hig h school; An s Course ; Science 
or Pie-Medical ; Teachers Training . 
Hig h School; Music ; Home Economics; Practic e School: 
Seventh Grade ; Eight h Grade ; Kindergarten . 
Fifty-sixt h session begins October 3rd . Fo r Information address T. R. Davis, President, Walde n College, Nashville , Tetin. 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicate d i n publi c an d secondary school 
librarie s as an introductio n to the study of America n 
Histor y from the America n Negro viewpoint. 284 pages, 
32 chapters, 17 ful l page illustrations. Index an d 
bibliography other features. Pric e $2.00; postage prepaid 
$2.15; sent on receipt of net price . Orde r throug h any 
bookseller; C . O. D . or postage remittance. Fo r further 
information address the author. 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St., Washington, D. C. 
KELLEY' S 
A little monthly magazine 
devoted principally to Art 
and Literature. 
Subscription Price 
$1.50 per year 
SAMPL E COPIES FRE E 
KELLEY'S MAGAZINE 
2289 7th Avenue New York, N. Y. 
STUDENT S 
W e would like to secure the services of 
students during the school term to act as agents 
—taking subscriptions and selling single copies 
of 
The CRISIS 
Libera l commission is offered 
Address: A . G . DILL 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YORK , N . Y . 
SHORT COURSES 
Typewriting 3 months 
Bookkeeping 3 months 
Primer of shorthand 3 months 
Efficiency Course—Pitman shorthand, typewriting and hookkeeping—11 months. Fal l term opens October 2nd. 
DUNCAN'S BUSINESS SCHOO L 1227 South 17th St. 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 281 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind . Her singing prored aa 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily Newt. 
_ GEORG E LACY , Manager, 
116 Hamilton Avenue Columbus. Ohio 
CHESTE R A . SMITH 
Baritone 
Concerts and Recitals 
Fo r terms and dates, 
address 
67 MOUNTFOR T STREET , 
BOSTON , MAS S 
A MONEY GETTER because at is A CROWD GETTER 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment in one act; full of wit and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from One to Two hundred Dollars in One Night. Price. 50s. 
MISS NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Author 
Lincoln Heights Washington D . C. 
Is there a CRISIS agent in your 
community? If not, will you recommend some energetic and reliable 
person who will serve us in your 
locality? Our terms to agents are 
liberal. 
Cable Address: "DOMAR" 
Codes, A.B.C. 5th Edition. 
Established 1914 
COTTMAN and CO., Inc. 
IMPORTERS, EXPORTER S 
and DEVELOPERS 
101 WEST 135th ST. 
Corne r Lenox Avenue 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
U. S. A. 
Importers of Hides, Skins, Rubber, Cocoa, 
Cocoanuts, Limes, Lime Juices, Plantains, 
Eddoes, Pigeon Peas, Mangoes, Ginger, 
Cassia Fistula , Spices, Etc . 
Exporters of America n Foodstuffs, Flour, 
Meal , Meats, Vegetables; also General 
Merchandise . 
Bonded produce department—Handling 
Southern and Wester n produce in carload 
lots. 
Merchandis e forwarded for individuals 
and firms to the West Indies, South Amer ­
ica, Europe and Africa . 
Commercial agents wanted in the 
United States and abroad. 
P . S.—We cannot handle small shipments 
of vegetables. Ca r lots only. 
BERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATIO N 
FINANCIERS , BROKER S AN D GENERA L AGENT S 
Larg e and growin g enterprises desiring connections, expansion or correspondents are cordially 
invited to transact their business thru our nationally known organization. 
Gale Building, 413 S. Broad Street, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOT H POWDER— 
Absolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United Stales 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth. "BLEACHING" the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 282 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
T O TH E 
INVESTING PUBLIC 
How much money have you lost during the past five years in your endeavors to secure an investment with your savings that would give you a 
fair return and a safe security? 
If we are able to show you an investment where there is security of 
principal and interest with the practical certainty that the investment will 
double itself in value and which can be converted into cash without difficulty 
will you not be interested? Of course, you will. 
We have prepared for distribution a booklet describing the Black Swan 
Phonograph Company which has been organized for the purpose of increasing 
the output of Black Swan Records, Black Swan Needles and the "Swanola" 
talking machine, introduced and manufactured by the Pace Phonograph 
Corporation. 
This company is the first Race organization to manufacture on a large 
scale a nationally advertised and sold Product for which there has been a 
steady demand. It now controls a large and well equipped factory devoted 
exclusively to the manufacture of its own goods. This issue of stock is for 
the purpose of completing payment on this factory and the further growth 
and expansion of the business. 
With money flowing freely, as it is beginning to do, an investment in 
BLAC K SWAN PHONOGRAPH COMPANY PREFERRE D appears to us to 
be a most desirable form of safe investment with full promise of large 
increase in value. 
This is the time to get in on a money making proposition. If you want a 
safe investment at a conservative, sure rate of interest buy five shares of 
Black Swan Preferred for $575.00 and get a certain return of 6% on each 
share and an agreement that the stock will be redeemed at $600.00, plus 
6% dividends in three years. Or if you prefer to buy five shares of Common 
Stock at $300.00 and grow up with the company into a lifetime of dividends 
and the practical certainty that your investment will double in value in 
five years. 
We shall be glad to send you our booklet fully describing this issue of 
stock. Send us, without obligation on your part, your name and address and 
we will send you full particulars. If you are not in position to pay all cash, 
we can arrange terms that will be attractive to you. 
The Board of Directors has positively limited the amount of stock that 
can be sold at this time. Therefore, we want you to act quickly. 
Very truly yours, 
HARR Y H. PACE, PRESIDENT, 
2289 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 283 
National Capital Book of Etiquette 
Combined with Floyd's Flowers or Stories for Colored People 
A book absolutely i n a class by itself. Interesting, instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored society leaders 
on the street; at the theatre; at church; i n the home; at receptions, balls, parties, 
weddings, dinners, etc., etc. The illustrations are so perfect and natural that 
the well-bred, correctly clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Lear n how to dress and conduct yourself on any and all occasions; correct dress 
for men and women; suggestions i n colors and materials for the ladies; hints as 
to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, etc., for both sexes. 
Wha t to serve guests for breakfast, 
lunch or dinner. 
Ho w to converse intelligently; how to 
know when to talk and when to remain silent; how to make friends and 
gain popularity. 
A book that wil l help the most prominent member of society or the most 
humble. Illustrating Table Manners 
Agents Wanted 
We are looking for 1,000 hustlers, men and 
women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 
to $9 per day. Such an opportunity comes but 
once in a lifetime. AGENT' S SAMPLE S showing specimen pages and the pictures and covers of book will be mailed to you for 25 cents. 
A Boo k you wil l want—Must have in 
your home—a most excellent gift. 
100 pages of pleasing pictures taken from 
best photographs. A BIG BOOK , containing 
over 500 pages. The people are much pleased 
with this new publication and are sending thousands of orders to us. We send by insured parcel post; return your money if not perfectly 
satisfied. 
Price ONL Y $2.50. Write today. 
Dear Friend: -
Are you energeti c and enterprising , are you 
intereste d i n the development of the colore d people ? Are 
you intereste d i n seein g members o f the race buy and rea d 
good "books, "become self-educate d and enterprisin g 
citizens ? I s you r income perfectl y satisfactory , or 
would you lik e to make 50cts to $1.00 pe r hour fo r a 
littl e extr a time put i n fo r us i n you r community? 
Have you give n the rac e problems any thought? 
Are you a thinker ? Pleas e pause a moment and conside r 
the GOOD YOU MAY DO by sellin g our publications , NATIONAL 
CAPITAL BOOK OP ETIQUETTE, PROGRESS OP COLORED PEOPLE, 
DUNBAR'S POEMS, KELLY MILLER'S WAR HISTORY, EMMET SCOTT'S 
WAR HISTORY, DUBOIS'S DARKWATER, FLOYD'S PLOWERS and 
othe r specia l books on the race and our ful l lin e of 
bible s and religiou s books. 
Schoo l teacher s and student s shoul d giv e thi s 
propositio n thei r carefu l attention . $4 to $10 pe r day 
can be easil y made by workin g fo r us durin g vacation . 
Yours truly , 
Austi n Jenkin s Co., 
#523 Nint h St . N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Send fo r catalo g of 160 books. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 284 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
ARE YOU PREPARED FOR THE FUTURE ? 
ARE YOU 
MAKING 
INVESTMENTS 
THAT WILL 
HELP YOU 
ON THE ROAD 
TO FINANCIAL 
INDEPENDENCE? 
OPPORTUNITY IS CALLING YOUR ATTENTION TO 
ORCHARDVILL E 
Where, if you act soon enough, you can secure 
ideal BUILDIN G LOTS for only 
$35 ON VER Y EASY TERMS . $3.00 DOWN 
AND $1.50 A MONTH . NO INTEREST. 
CLEA R TITLE . EAC H LO T SOLD UNDER 
MONEY-BAC K GUARANTE E 
Real Estate is the foundation 
of all wealth. 
You have heard that said many times and you 
know it to be true. You know how people have 
made large sums of money out of Real Estate 
investments and you know that most of those 
people bought at TH E EIGH T TIME . That is 
an important factor. 
People from all parts of the country are buying Orchardville lots because they know that 
they have an excellent opportunity to earn BIG 
PROFIT S on their investment. They know 
that when a place is developed in the way 
Orchardville is being improved, the property 
there should INCREAS E IN VALU E CONSIDEHABLT . 
That is why they are buying their lots now, 
while the price is low. 
You can do likewise, 
if you wish. 
Space here is too limited to cover all the details 
of this attractive offer, but we would like to 
have yon know all about Orchardville and the 
opportunities It offers you. 
If you will write your name and address on the 
coupon below and send it to us promptly, we 
will gladly send you full particulars without obligation on your part. The stamp on your envelope is all it will cost you. 
Perhaps this is the very opportunity you have 
been waiting for. Who knows? 
In view of the increasing demand for these lots, 
we suggest that you send the coupon without 
delay. 
ARENSO N REALT Y 
DEVELOPMEN T CORP . 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL 
•WRITE PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realty Dev'pt Corp. 
Chicago, 111. 
Gentlemen: 
I am interested in your Orchardville offer and 
would be glad to receive full particulars, without obligation on my part. 
Name 
Address 
Town and State 
CRI-10-22-35 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 285 
(Continued from page 276) 
VINDICATION 
LESLIE' S WEEKLY carried, not long 
ago, an article on color prejudice among 
colored people. In a later issue of the same 
weekly, William Pickens replies to this 
charge sanely and ably: 
We do not need to prove to American 
Negroes that no such rigid color lines are 
drawn within the group as are drawn 
against the group by the Anglo-Saxon. The 
color mania within the group is mostly individual finicalness and the local peculiarity 
due to historical conditions. Bu t this has 
been passing out, even i n New Orleans and 
in Charleston (S. C) , where a three-cornered race problem came nearest to developing. To say that any considerable group 
of Negro Americans are more interested in 
color than are white people, is not only a 
false statement, but it tends to offer the 
white race an excuse for its own terrible 
color-mania against the whole colored 
group. 
The "seven" colors which the author of 
the article mentions are not only not "distinct " lines among colored people, but they 
are just merely the creation of the vaudeville stage, the pool room and the gayhearted, and a splendid exhibition of the 
incessant Negro humor. 
Bu t the greatest mistake of all is that of 
the half-truth, for 'which a white person, as 
an outsider, might be excused, but which 
any intelligent America n Negro can easily 
understand. The American Negro is accused 
of being without group pride. This illusion 
is derived from the fact that he is not a bigot 
about his color and features. An d for good 
reason he is not: because he has all the colors and features within his group. Physically the colored American represents the 
most cosmopolitan group of humans in the 
world. If he is to boast of his features, of 
which one must he boast? How can a group 
with every color known to nature, say: "I 
am proud of my color"? Of which "color"? 
Agents Earn $60 a Week 
5000 Agents 
Wanted 
Quick Sales 
Big Profits 
Photo Cuff Buttons. Photo Lockets, Breast Pins, Watch 
Charms. Photo Medallions and Novelties. 
We copy from any photo you send us. Negro Post Cards 
Calendars, Pictures. Books. Negro Dolls and many other 
novelties. Free Catalog. 
BEL L MFG . CO. 
Box 103 Jamaica, N . Y . 
SEASHORE LOTS 
50 x 150 
$200.00 Upwar d 
EAS Y TERM S 
Positively the prettiest cottage and bungalow sites i n the suburbs of Atlanti c 
Cit y on the Pleasantville, Atlanti c Cit y 
Millio n Dolla r Boulevar d opposite Doug ­
lass Park . 
Advanc e to builders, use of additional 
space for garden free. Fo r further particulars and prospectus, write, 
CRESCENT CORPORATION 
WM. B. SOUTHERN, PRES . 
Suite 404-5-6, Odd Fellows Building 
12th and Spruce Streets 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
RELIABLE AGENTS WANTED 
DON'T GAMBLE ! 
If you are afraid of oil and other speculative 
investment propositions and prefer 
SAFETY OF INVESTED CAPITOL 
plus reasonable profits, we have an ideal investment opportunity in a well established and seasoned, nationally known film corporation that 
shows wonderful indications of substantial 
profits. Our illustrated booklet No. 678 explains 
in detail. Send for a copy. Its FREE ! 
Southern California Investment Co. 
1154 Central Ave., Los Angeles, Calif. 
$$ FREE—$ $ FREE—$ $ FREE 
Wanted—2500 men and women who will use their spare 
time to make BI G MONEY , or go into business for 
themselves; $3 to $5 per day and up to a hustler. Wo 
will furnish you the goods to start with FREE . Al l 
« e ask is that you pay the postage. Our lino Is a sure 
repeater and fast seller. HURRY . HURR Y I HURRY ! 
Do not delay, but write to-day. 
DIXIE SALES AGENCY, 3161 S. State St., CHICAGO, ILL. 
YOTJ CA N BAN K B Y MAI L 
FIRST STANDARD BAN K 
Louisville, Ky . 
Capital and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilson Lovett, President 
"At Last We Have It" Just what you've been waiting 
for. Don't let his picture die 
out of your memory. Have his picture put on a Hand 
Tainted Army and Navy, American Legion Placque with the 
Flander Popples In BEAUTIFUL COLORS . Something you 
can always keep. Send ua his photograph, which will be 
returned unharmed. GUARANTEE D LIKENES S or MONE Y 
BACK. $2.75 
TH E TALBER T PRESS & NOVELTY CO. 
299 Walnut Street Buffalo. N . Y. 
BILLIE ELLIS , Branch Mgr . 
623 North 9th St., Fort Smith. Ark. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 286 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Agent s Wante d 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG . CO . 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY, OKLAHOM A 
MEN'S SWEATER 
BARGAIN 
$5.00 Value $2.49 
NO W 
This extra fine quality heavy 
weight men' s sweater is 
now offered at less than -
pre-war prices. 
Send No Money i 
Send your name and address, giving size and 
color wanted. We will 
send you sweater by mail 
postage paid. On delivery 
pay mailman our low bargain price of $2.49. Your 
money back if not pleased. 
Sweater is made of high 
grade yarn, large shawl 
collar, two knitted-in-pockets. Colors — Gray or Blue. 
Sizes--32 to 46. Good for 
either men or women. Why 
pay more for a sweater 
when you can get this guaranteed bargain for only $2.49. 
STAT E WHETHE R YO U WAN T MEN' S OR WOMEN' S 
SWEATER . Order by Number i91 C57. 
HOWAR D LU X CO. , DEPT . JS 1 CLEVELAND , O 
Tailoring Salesmen 
Mak e $75.00 a week selling our strictly 
All-Wool , Made-to-Measur e Suits at 
$26.50. Yo u collect profits i n advance 
and keep them. W e supply finest Sellin g 
Outfit in America . Man y exclusive 
money-making features. Tailoring , rain ­
coat and side-line men, part or ful l time, 
get in touch wit h us immediately. 
GOODWEAR, Chicago, Inc. 
Dept . 170 
843 W. Adams St., Chicago, III. 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue. New York 
Palm-Oi l 
Health Product s 
Palm Oil-Lemon (Neechina) , 50c. The Vey 
women of Liberia are celebrated for their beautiful skins, without blemish, firm and smooth 
as velvet. They secure this result by using 
"Neechina,'* which, translated, means Palm Oil 
—Lemon. It bleaches, beautifies, cleanses, 
heals, prevents and heals sunburn, helps the 
body to resist cold and heat. It is an ideal 
skin food. 
Palm Oil-Rubo, 50c. A soothing application, 
producing immediately a delightful sense of 
"comfort and warmth, and profound relief from 
the aches and pains of congestion and colds on 
chest, rheumatic and neuralgic pains, lumbago, 
backache, stiff neck, throat affections, neuritis, 
sore joints and muscles, sprains, etc. 
Palm Oil Hair Pomade, 50c. A perfect hair 
dressing for beautifying, strengthening and 
promoting the growth of hair. Removes dandruff and stops itching of the scalp. Makes the 
hair soft, luxurious and glossy. Especially useful for making dry, brittle or stubborn hair 
soft, pliable and easy to comb. 
PALM OIL HEALTH PRODUCTS CO. 
2543 Eighth Ave. New York, N. Y. 
Mail Orders must be accompanied by price in 
postage stamps, Money Order or cash. No 
extra charge for mailing. 
To prove oar unbeatable values anc_ 
get your steady trade, will make 3-piece I 
euit consisting of coat, panta and vest* 
to your measure for only $13.45. Style} 
shown in the picture or any one of 185 style 
combinations to select from. Absolute satisfaction guaran te ed or everynennyback—quick. 
NO EXTRA CHARGES 
You pay just what we say, not one penny of 
extras for anything. We even pay all postage 
and express. You save one-half—like before 
the war. 
Earn $60 Cash Weekly 
You can take orders easy for these clothes in 
Bp are time and make $3000 a year and up at 
borne. Friends and neighbors buy on sight. 
Young Fred Green made SEN D NO CAS H 
$174.50inseventeendays.
 OL "U
 " U bHan-
New samples show latest styles 
ana 80 real cloth samples. Buy at inside Wholesale prices. Write now for Big Free Outfit, g 
WASHINGTON TAILORING CO . 
Wholesale Tailors Oept.K-317 Chicago 
FREE BIG SAMPLES 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pnw. 
641 W. 9th St Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISI S A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Tw o COLORE D WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONAR Y 
FORCES . (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
TH E SOU L OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS O F BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO . (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(RidgeJy Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
UNSUN G HEROES . (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
TH E SHADOW . (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOIC E OF TH E NEGRO . (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. Du Bois) 90 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J . Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.50 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
TH E NEGRO I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
TH E HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO CHURCH . (Carter G. Woodson).. 2.15 
TH E UPWAR D PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S I N TH E GOSPE L MINISTRY . (T. G . Steward)... 2.70 
HARLE M SHADOWS . (Claude McKay) 1.35 
TH E BOO K OF AMERICA N NEGRO POETRY . (James Weldon Johnson) 1.75 
AMERICA N CIVILIZATION AN D TH E NEGRO . (C. V . Roman) 3.00 
TH E NEGR O I N OU R HISTORY . (Carter G . Woodson) 2.00 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y FOR BETTER BABIES 
Muc h talk now-a-days about better babies. Wh y shouldn't 
there be? Innocent little angels as they are need all the 
attention, talk and effort possible to make them larger, 
stronger, healthier and generally better babies than their 
imperfect, anaemi c and healthless little brothers of 
yesteryear. 
Afte r baby arrives man y simple everyday precautions 
can be taken to insure his infant and future health. 
Most beneficial, importan t and pleasing to babies are the 
following : 
A DAILY BATH — 
With Madam C. J. Walker's 
Vegetable Oil Antiseptic Soap. 
A pure, non-irritating, lathering-in-thehardest-of-water Soap, it cleanses and 
soothes baby's tender skin like few 
equals. 
15 Cents per Single Bar 
FREQUENT POWDERING— 
With Madam C. J. Walker's Floral 
Cluster Talcum 
A pleasingly soft talcum powder, safe, pure, delicately 
perfumed and designed to prevent chafe and infant 
irritations. 
A Quarter per Large Tin 
NOTE— 
Fre e samples of these Bette r Bab y Preparations wil l 
be sent to mothers on request. Writ e 
BETTE R BABIES DEPT. 
THE MADAM C. J. WALKER MFG. CO., INC. 
640 N. WEST ST. INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 