The Easter Crisis 
APRI L 
1916 
10c A copy $1.00 a year Publisher's Chat Easter Greetings to You. 
The Vernal Season is here with its carol of bird and 
its scent of opening flower. Surely you are thinking 
of your friends, and wishing them the greetings of 
this happy time. Why not let your greetings take 
the form of a year's subscription to the CRISIS? 
A line to your friend, a word to us, and joy abounds! 
A Selected List of Books 
Thes e prices do no t include pastage . Postag e extra. 
HAZEL. (Mar y Whit e Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) . 1.2 0 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare ) 1.5 0 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge ) 1.0 0 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley ) 1.2 5 
HALF A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.0 0 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
JOH N BROWN. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.2 5 
PRINCE HALL AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford ) .. . 1.0 0 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WES T AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 5 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carte r G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch ) 1.5 0 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C . Berwick 
Sayers) 2.2 5 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
Address, THE CRISIS, : :::: 70 Fifth Avenue, NEW YORK 
Mention TH E CRISI S EDITION 37,500 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOI S 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association (or the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for April, 1916 
PICTURES Pag e 
COVER . Photograp h Fro m Life . B y C . M. Batte y . 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 29 1 
TH E LYNCHIN G IN LE E COUNTY , G A 30 3 
EVOLUTIO N O F TH E NEGR O CHURC H 31 1 
ARTICLES 
A MAN . A Poem . B y Ethe l Caution-Davi s 29 2 
TW O POINT S O F VIEW . A Poem . B y Lucia n B. Watkin s 29 2 
THRE E CHURCHE S 31 2 
EASTE R EGG-ROLLING . B y Mrs. R. Ken t Beatti e 31 3 
TH E BAPTIS T CONTROVERS Y 31 4 
TH E CATHOLI C NEGR O 31 6 
VIERG E NOIR E D E NOTRE-DAM E D U PUY . B y Mrs. C . W . Cliffor d 31 8 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 28 3 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 29 0 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 29 3 
EDITORIA L 30 2 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E ' 30 7 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired, 
i n ordering a change of address, both the old and ti e new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. . , j , , , . , 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 280 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-six years 
of successful work have been completed 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA, OA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal. High School, Grammar School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1915 
Fer information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
The NEGRO AGRICULTURAL 
AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of NORTH CAROLINA 
(Formerly the Agricultural and Mechanical College for the Colored Race) 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
for progressive teachers. 
SEVENTEENTH ANNUAL 
SESSION 
June 26TH—July 29TH, 1916. 
Easy terms, practical courses, pleasant 
surroundings. For terms or catalog, 
address Dr. S. B. Jones. Director. Send 
$1.00 and secure lodging in advance. 
Jas. B. Dudley, President 
Greensboro , N . C . 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA GA 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Learn th e S. T. Taylor Syste m 
of Garment Cutting, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, 
Millinery and Designing. Prepare yourself to earn 
a large salary. 
Terms reasonable. Write for catalog. 
S. T. TAYLOR SCHOOL AND PATTERN PARLORS 
MRS. MAYBEL B. 
34 N. Garfield Ave., 
EVANS , Prin., 
Columbus, O. 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 28 1 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR, CHARLES H, PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
I T IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E 
DEPARTMENT . 
A HIG H STANDAR D COLLEG E DEPARTMEN T has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Nex t Schoo l Ter m Open s Oct . 4 , 1916 . 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL DURHAM , N . C . 
!!llinTml!lllllill!il!)Illllllllllilllllll|[||||||||||[||||[|lll|l||i|lii 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. For teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 28 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ROLAND W. HAYES , Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Oper a 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre. 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWICK ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
Concert Soloist 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Sopran o 
For terms write 126 West 134th Street, N.Y.C . 
SPECIAL OFFER. A year's subscription 
to TH E CRISIS will be given to anyone 
sending in at one time five paid-up yearly 
subscriptions to TH E CRISIS. The offer 
holds good until midnight of April 27, 1916. 
EASTER IS COMING. 
The 20th Annual Foreig n Mission 
Easter Programs ar e no w read y for 
Sunda y Schools. Good recitations, 
for inspiration of ol d and young , t o 
greate r lov e and servic e in Kingdom 
Work. Live , stirring , swee t song s 
with music . ORDER TO-DA Y. 
Write REV. L. C. JORDAN, 
70 1 S. 19t h St. , Philadelphia , Pa. 
gg y GET ALL YOU NEED FREE, -gg 
COLORED HELP WANTED 
Private families (also Hotels, season 
1916) 
SUBURBA N TRADE SPECIALTY 
Houseworkers $25-$35; cooks $30-
$100; chambermaids, waitresses $25-
$30; waiters, useful men, butlers, 
$25-$60; couples $50-$30; other 
positions, good pay. 
N. Y. & N. J. INDUSTRIA L 
EXCHANGE 
1931 Broadway, cor 65th St. 
New York City. 
Samuel T. Marrow 
Prop. Mrs. E. Marrow 
Asst. 
O F INTERES T T O VOCALIST S 
Tone-Placing and Voic e Development, With Supplement Co-ordinating with Original Chapters 
Highly recommended and endorsed 
by well known Choral and Musical 
Societies, Directors, Vocal Teachers 
and Musical Publications, as evidenced by the following extract! 
selected at random from those who 
know: 
Pedro T. Tinsley of Chicago is 
the first of the vocal teachers to 
realize the possibilities of Tone" 
Placing and Vowel Values (Study) 
as applied to music, and will soon 
be reaping his reward in the knowledge that he is helping thousands 
to a thorough musical education where he previously 
helped but hundreds. 
TH E MUSI C TRADES . 
I highly endorse your Book Tone-Placing and 
Voice-Development as being in a class by itself. This 
is my fourth order and will be able to use quite a 
number of additional copies very soon. 
G. W. WILLIAMS , B.M.A., 
1214 Pease Ave. , Houston, Texas. 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
this 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher; Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, Ill., or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave,, Chicago, Ill. 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO, 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
• E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati. Ohio 
HER E I S TH E LASTING , IMPERISHABL E MEMORIA L 
O F TH E RACE' S LAT E LEADE R AN D GREA T EDUCATO R 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON 
The peerless leader of "his people" in their hard industrial 
struggle upwards. These reproductions are completed in 
four beautiful finishes of White Marble. Old Ivory. Golden 
Bronze and Dark Bronze, at such inexpensive prices that every 
home will appear incomplete without one. If the United 
Art Company's Agent in your town can't supply you, send 
$1 for White Marble finish, $1 .2 5 for Old Ivory finish, $1.50 
for either of the Bronze finishes, direct to the 
UNITED ART CO., 35 W. 131st Street, Suite 12, N. Y. City 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 11—No. 6 APRIL, 1916 Whol e No . 66 
Along the Color Line 
MUSI C AND ART 
WE omitted to state last month tha t 
* * the beautiful cover picture of the 
March CRISIS was taken from a photograph 
made by Mr. A. N. Scurlock, of Washington, D. C. Mr. Scurlock has, during the 
last five years, furnished THE CRISIS with 
some of its most beautiful and striking 
pictures. 
C In the Central High School of Philadelphia, Pa., Negro composers were for the 
first time represented in the musical recital. Hebron's "Mammy, " and F. H. Johnson's Gavotte were rendered. 
C The Washington, D. C, Conservatory of 
Music has presented Mme. Marjorie Groves 
Robinson, assisted by Miss C. Adelphia 
Boger and Mme. Emma Lee Williams, at a 
concert. 
C The Modern Review of India is publishing the autobiography of Sir Rabindranath 
Tagore, the only colored man who has so 
far received a Nobel prize. 
The Italo-American Relief Committee recently held a benefit at the Biltmore Hotel, 
New York City, which netted $10,000. An 
interesting feature was the singing by Mr. 
Amato of a patriotic song translated into 
Italian from the English of James W. Johnson, and set to music by Harr y T. Burleigh. It was the sensation of the evening. 
Mr. Jame s W. Johnson has recently 
signed an exclusive contract with Fernando 
Periquet, the librettist of the Spanish opera, to translat e all of his works for this 
country. 
Zabetta Brenska, the young mezzo-soprano opera singer, when asked about her 
favorite American songs, said: "There are 
so many charming compositions, and they 
are being added to this year a t an astonishing rate ; but if I had to narrow my choice 
down to one composer I should select Harry 
Burleigh's songs." 
Owing to its popularity a second edition 
of "Alabama, " a piece for violin composed 
by the distinguished American violinist, Albert Spaulding, and written after the Negro 
idiom, is soon to be offered to the public. 
In Januar y a t the first concert of "The 
Singers," a new choral organization of 
Bronxville, N. Y., two Negro spirituals arranged by Carl Diton, and "Swing Along," 
by Will Marion Cook, were favorite numbers by the chorus. 
( The lecture recital given in February at 
Friends' Meeting House, Wilmington, Del., 
by Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, pianist, and 
Mr. William H. Richardson, baritone, of 
Boston, Mass., was attended by wealthy 
Quakers of the city, and commented upon 
at length and in the most favorable manner 
by the Wilmington Morning News. 
Mr: Roy W. Tibbs, Director of the Pianoforte Department of Howard University, who has had the advantage of study 
under Isidor Philipp, of Paris, France, has 
recently been appointed conductor of the 
Washington, D. C, Concert Orchestra. 
Mr. Roland Hayes, tenor, of Boston, 
Mass., who is now filling concert engagements in the South, was heard with much 
pleasure at Portland, Me., in February. The 
Portland Daily Press says: "It was a program of exceptional interest. Mr. Hayes 
uses his voice with art and intention. In 
tonal quality there was satisfying color and 
a dramatic touch." 
Fran k Van der Stucken's "Louisiana" 
Festival March, written in commemoration 
of the Louisiana Purchase, is in characteristic Negro rhythm. 
Mr. Augustus Lawson, pianist, of Hartford, Conn., made a splendid impression by 284 THE CRISIS 
his artistry in a piano recital given under 
the auspices of the Euterpians a t Howard 
Theatre, Washington, D. C, in February. 
The Music Lovers' Club of the MartinSmith Music School of New York City introduced at their fourth concert of the season Mr. Packer Ramsey, basso, of Jamaica, 
who was assisted by Miss Helen Elise 
Smith, accompanist, and Mr. David I. Martin, violinist. At the close of the program 
the School was presented with a marble 
bust of Beethoven. 
Twenty-five Negro societies of New 
York City, representing about three- thousand people, have joined a Shakespeare 
Celebration movement under the chairmanship of Mr. J. Rosamond Johnson. They 
plan to celebrate the tercentenary of 
Shakespeare's death in April in New York 
City. Scenes from "Othello," "The Merchant of Venice," and "Love's Labor Lost" 
will be given, and a chorus of two hundred voices from the Music School Settlement for Colored People will sing. 
Teachers in the colored public schools of 
the District of Columbia voted to celebrate 
the tercentenary of Shakespeare's death 
with a pageant by the colored pupils. Mr. 
Roscoe C. Bruce has appointed a committee, 
W. D. Nixon, chairman, and Miss Mary 
Cromwell, secretary, to consider plans for 
financing this movement. 
"Rachel," a play in three acts by Miss 
Angelina Grimke, was given in the theatre 
of the Miner Normal School, Washington, 
D. C. A careful critic thinks highly of 
"its essential sincerity and of its possibility as a play." 
The Washington Evening Star says: 
" 'Rachel' is a strong play, in which the 
point of view of the people on the colored 
side of the color line is set forth. 
"Wrongs suffered by the colored race as 
a result of wha t was termed by one character 'the white man's blight of prejudice' are 
depicted in a forceful manner. In all the 
play presents a view of the condition of 
colored people throughout the United 
States. It is claimed on the program that 
this is the first attempt to use the stage for 
race propaganda in order to enlighten the 
American people relative to the lamentable 
condition of 10,000,000 colored citizens in 
this free republic. 
"The participants were uniformly excellent. Miss Rachel Guy in the role of 
MISS GUY IN "RACHEL" 
Rachel, the leading character, displayed 
talent in a part tha t necessitated considerable range and ability along emotional 
lines. Miss Zita Dyson, as her mother, was 
also particularly good, as was Barrington 
Guy in the principal juvenile role. 
"Nathaniel Guy was director, Laura 
Bruce Glenn was manage r and Gregoria 
Frase r had charge of the music." 
Senor Jean Loncke, of British Guiana, 
a graduat e of the National Conservatory of 
Mexico, is in New York City. He has an 
excellent tenor voice and will give a series 
of recitals before sailing for Paris. 
GENERAL 
THE colored officers in the United States 
*• regular army are at present as follows : Line Officers: Major Charles Young, 
10th Cavalry; First Lieutenant Benjamin 
O. Davis, 9th Cavalry; First Lieutenant 
Charles Green, 25th Infantry. The regimental chaplains are ; Captain George W. 
Prioleau, 9th Cavalry; First Lieutenant 
W. W. Gladden, 24th Infantry ; First Lieutenant O. J. W. Scott, 25th Infantry; First 
Lieutenant Lewis A. Carter, 1st Cavairy. 
On the retired list are the following colored 
men: Major W. T. Anderson and Captain 
T. G. Steward, both formerly chaplains; 
Major John R. Lynch, formerly paymaster. 
Major Young is the only West Point grad-ALONG THE COLOR LINE 28 5 
THE SUB-COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT, COLORED ODD FELLOWS 
uate, Green and Davis having been promoted from the ranks. 
At the Congressional Conference of the 
New York Woman Suffrage Association, 
held in the Harris Theatre, New York, on 
February 24th, one of the delegates presented the following question: "Wha t 
means ar e being taken to interest colored 
women in the suffrage question, and are 
these efforts being carried on without any 
attempt to segregate colored and white 
women?" In reply to this question, Mrs. 
Norman de R. Whitehouse, a Southern 
woman by birth, said: "We welcome colored 
women in the movement for the political 
emancipation of women on all occasions 
and without distinctions of any kind. One 
of the things tha t pleased us most in the 
recent suffrage parade was the large number of colored women who took part in it. 
We say with absolute conviction tha t we 
want the right of suffrage for all women, 
for colored women exactly on the same 
terms as for white women." The most encouraging feature of this little incident is 
tha t Mrs. Whitehouse's sentiments were 
greeted with a storm of applause from all 
the two thousand women who were present. 
Rube Foster, Manage r of the Chicago 
Colored Giants, announces a colored baseball league with clubs representing Indianapolis, Kansas City, Chicago, St. Louis and 
Pittsburgh. The League will open May 3rd 
and close October 15th. 
In the distribution of Carnegie Hero 
Medals Nathan Duncan, a colored man of 
West Point, Tex., was awarded a gold 
medal and $2,000 toward the purchase of a 
farm. Duncan rescued William C. Anderson from suffocation in a well in the presence of a dozen or more onlookers who did 
not dare move. William G. Wills, a Texas 
white man, was also awarded a medal. He 
was helped in his work, however, by a Negro. 
The Sub-Committee of Management, the 
governing body of the colored Odd Fellows, 
met in Wilmington, Del. Edward H. Morris, Grand Master, presided. The most important work of the body was the revoking 
of the Grand Lodge Charter of the State of 
Georgia and the suspension of Grand 
Master Ingram and District Grand Secretary Davis. This precipitates a bitter fight 
in Georgia and the matter is already in the 
courts. It is feared tha t white lawyers will 
eventually get most of the property of the 
Georgia Odd Fellows, including the beautiful new Odd Fellows Hall. 
The sectional question cropped out in 
Congress in the effort of Southerners to 
push through their bill for wa r claims. 
Republican leader Mann declared tha t "We 
do not owe one cent to the men who endeavored to destroy the government. I do 
not think it is necessary to buy the South 
by making appropriations which we do not 
make anywhere else." Representative Heflin, of Alabama, got very angry and called 
Mann "a coward and a vulgarian. " Heflin 
is the man who advocated dynamite to blow 
up Roosevelt and Washington when they 
dined together. 
The Rev. I. Garland Penn, Secretary of 286 TH E CRISI S 
the F'reedman's Aid Society of the M. E. 
Church, declares tha t tha t society received 
for colored work $641,180 during the last 
four years of which the colored people 
themselves contributed $14S,000. 
THE CrISIS was wrong in assuming tha t 
Bishop Alexander Walters was the only colored member of the Executive Committee 
of the Federal Council of the Churches of 
Christ in America. All colored denominations are represented, and there are nearly 
a dozen colored members. 
PERSONA L 
JOHN A. ROSS, a young colored man of 
New York City, heads the list of persons examined for the position of teaching 
bookkeeping in the evening high schools. 
His rating was 99.5% He is a graduate of 
New York University, class of 1911. 
The name of Robert P. Taylor, a colored 
man, has been certified by the Secretary of 
State and the State Civil Service Commission of Illinois for appointment of Assistant 
Superintendent of State Capitol buildings 
and grounds at Springfield. 
Alfred I. Plato, for twenty-nine years a 
colored messenger of the Travelers' Insurance Company, of Hartford, Conn., was 
given a gold headed cane by the company 
on his sixtieth birthday. 
Mitchell Wilcox, a veteran of the Civil 
Wa r and sergeant in the 24th Infantry, 
died recently in Washington, D. C., at the 
age of sixty-seven. 
John T. Layton, Assistant Director of 
Music in the Public Schools of Washington, 
D. C. is dead. Mr. Layton made a notable record in drilling the chorus which rendered Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha " under 
the direction of the composer. For forty 
years Mr. Layton has led the choir of the 
Metropolitan A. M. E. Church in Washington. 
Alexander Gaines, a well known contractor and builder who. has lived in Richmond. Va.. for over fifty years, is dead. 
Bishop Alexander Walters has been 
elected to the Board of Trustees of Howard 
University to succeed the late Booker T. 
Washington. 
W. J. Hale has been re-elected President 
of the Colored State Normal School at 
Nashville, Tenn. 
A colored man's horse won the Merchants' Handicap a t New Orleans with a 
stake of $2,765. M. C. Moore was the 
owner. 
The Hon. Charles W. Anderson, State 
Supervisor of Agriculture, has been made 
one of the alternate delegates a t large to 
represent the State of New York a t the 
National Republican Convention. 
John H. Kelly, Jr., foreman of the composing rooms of the National Baptist Publishing House, Nashville, Tenn., is dead. 
Dr. W. A. Gallaway, the leading white 
trustee of the State School a t Wilberforce 
University, has resigned after more than 
twenty years of service. 
R. Henri Strange, the Negro reader, is 
dead. 
John Thomas, a colored bell boy, rescued 
a number of guests a t the Overbrook Hotel 
fire at Atlantic City, N. J. 
John B. White, a colored man, has just 
been retired from the police force at Cincinnati after a service of twenty-seven 
years and eleven months. He has served 
under four chiefs of police and fifteen mayors ; has made 4,008 arrests and 3,800 fire 
calls. 
Mrs. Martha Schofield, founder of the 
Schofield N. & I. School, Aiken, S. C, died 
recently at the age of seventy-six. She was 
one of the oldest of the white teachers of 
the freedmen, and greatly beloved by colored people. 
Harr y W. Bass and John C. Asbury 
have been appointed assistants in the city 
solicitor's office in Philadelphia, Pa. 
Lieutenant Joseph H. Martin, of the Liberian frontier force, has returned to this 
country. 
New Castle, Pa., has its first colored 
pcliceman in the person of Andrew Wells. 
Lieutenant Thaddeus W. Stopp has been 
given a medal of honor by the United 
States Government for distinguished service in Cuba. 
William E. Booker, of Norfolk, Va., recently made a mark of 90% in diving before 
the United States Civil Service Commission. His nearest competitor made 70%. 
Thomas Fleming, a colored man, is a 
member of the City Council of Cleveland, 
Ohio. 
INDUSTRY 
By an almost unanimous vote the Central Trade and Labor Union, composed of 
over five hundred delegates, refused to op-ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 287 
pose the segregation of Negroes in St. 
Louis. 
Miss Naomi B. Spencer has been appointed placement agent a t the Manhattan Trade School in New York City. Her 
work will be to secure employment for colored girls trained in the various trades. 
A colored jewelry store has been opened 
in Knoxville, Tenn. 
Hobson City, Ala., is a colored self-governing municipality, which has been incorporated for seventeen years. It has four 
churches, a public school, several grocery 
stores and a sanitary system. It is ruled 
by a mayor and seven councilmen. 
The Harding prize for craftsmanship 
done by students in the vocational schools 
of New York City was won by Hannibal 
L. Davis, a colored boy, who exhibited ornamental iron work. 
The seventh annual farmer's conference 
at Denmark, S. C, was attended by 1,500 
persons. 
D. McLauren, a colored farmer of Hoke 
County, N. C, raised §3,000 worth of cotton last year beside wheat, corn, peas, potatoes, hay and meat. 
It is said tha t eight hundred colored 
people from Western cities are planning to 
buy 20,000 acres of land in Western Kansas and establish a colored township. 
The Laborers' Penny Savings and Loan 
Company has opened a bank in Waycross, 
Ga. 
S3 
NORT H ATLANTI C 
ANOTHER attempt is being made to secure a Negro regiment in the New 
York National Guard. 
( It looks as though the Republicans of 
New York would prefer to gerrymander 
colored Harlem so as to distribute it in 
Democratic districts rathe r than to risk the 
election of a colored member to the Legislature. 
The Bulfinch Street Armory, of Boston, 
Mass., has been assigned as armory headquarters for Company L of the Massachusetts Sixth Regiment, a colored company. 
Binga Dismond and Sol Butler made remarkable track records in recent New York 
athletic meets. 
Mrs. Emmeline Pankhurst addressed the 
colored people of Harlem during her stay 
in New York. 
([Some colored people of New York City 
are asking the Board of Aldermen for 
$10,000 to celebrate the adoption of the 
Fourteenth Amendment. 
Land for the new Y. M. C. A. for colored men in New York City has been selected on 130th street, between Lenox and 
Seventh avenues. Building operations are 
expected to begin May 1st. 
A colored regiment is being asked for 
by Negroes of Pennsylvania. 
Lincoln Settlement House for Colored 
People, of which Miss M. W. Ovington is 
President, recently raised over $1,000 for 
its work at a meeting in Plymouth Church 
in Brooklyn. 
m 
SOUT H ATLANTI C 
THE colored dentists of Virginia met in 
Lynchburg. A large number were in 
attendance. 
A white school girl in Richmond, Va., 
who attempted suicide, was rescued from 
the river by George Turner, a Negro. 
A large indoor athletic carnival was 
held in Convention Hall by the colored 
schools of Washington, D. C. 
The School Arts Magazine of Boston, 
Mass., offered prizes to school pupils 
throughout the country for the best Thanksgiving book cover design. The first and 
two second prizes were won by Harold 
Joyce, Frances B. Brooks and Elise A. 
Palmer, of the M Street High School, 
Washington, D. C, pupils of Mr. W. D. 
Nixon. Sixty-seven pupils representing 
twenty-two cities and twelve States entered 
the contest. 
C The Spartan Literary and Athletic 
Association has been formed by one hundred and twenty young colored men of 
Richmond, Va. 
In Richland County, S. C, 2,500 colored 
voters have registered; 800 of them were 
in the City of Columbia. 
A petition has been sent to the Legislatur e of South Carolina reciting the fact 
tha t the per capita expenditure for white 
public school children is $16.22 a year for 
an average school term of one hundred and 
thirty-three days. Colored children receive 
$1.93 per capita for a term of sixty-three 
days. The petition claims tha t colored people pay $457,000 in taxes and receive only 
$371,573 for their schools. 
Charity Hospital of Savannah, Ga., is 288 TH E CRISI S 
the only city hospital with a Negro staff. 
Last year the institution served 906 patients and collected $4,708, of which only 
$900 was received from the city. There 
were 345 operations and a very small death 
rate. 
In the Virginia Republican Convention a 
dozen Negro delegates were refused recognition, and left the hall in a body. 
Bethany Congregational Church, Thomasville, Ga., celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary. It is a social service institution 
and does much excellent uplift work in the 
community. 
An effort to secure a colored militia 
regiment has been started in Virginia. 
A large farmers' conference was held at 
the Georgia State Industrial College under 
the presidency of R. R. Wright. 
Baltimore is endeavoring to raise $10,-
000 for the colored Provident Hospital. 
Colored citizens of Jacksonville, Fla., 
have organized to secure better service on 
the railroads. 
A colored branch of the Salvation Army 
has been started in Richmond, Va. Both 
races took part in the dedication ceremonies. 
Mt. Zion A. M. E. Church of Roanoke, 
Va., has celebrated its one hundredth anniversary. jjJEj 
NORTH CENTRAL 
THE proprietors of the film play the 
"Birth of a Nation" having been kept 
out of the State of Ohio by the Board of 
Censors have brought suit against tha t 
Board. 
In Topeka, Kan., the death rate of white 
people for last year was 15.8 per thousand, 
and tha t of the colored people 12.8. 
A rescue home for unfortunate colored 
girls is being planned in Cincinnati, Ohio, 
by white philanthropists and colored people. 
The Attucks Club of Cleveland, Ohio, 
gave a Lincoln-Douglass banquet. The 
speakers were Thomas W. Fleming, Mayor 
Harr y L. Davis, Hon. John J. Sullivan and 
Hon. Wilbur E. King, who delivered the 
oration on Frederick Douglass. Over two 
hundred members and guests were present. 
m 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
FORMERLY a colored man has always 
been one of the delegates at large 
from Kentucky to the Republican National 
Convention. This year four white men 
were counted a t first and finally eight delegates were selected, each with a half vote. 
One of these is colored. The Negroes are 
threatening to call another convention. 
The Alabama State Teachers' Association meets this month a t Birmingham, Ala. 
A large attendance is expected. 
The colored people of Montgomery, Ala., 
after vainly appealing to the city for a 
decent school house finally offered to raise 
$1,000 if the city would contribute $3,500 
to complete a building already begun. The 
new Swaine School thus built has just been 
opened, and for the first time in many 
years colored pupils have full day sessions 
instead of half day sessions. 
When the European wa r broke out the 
teachers of Calhoun Colored School, Ala., 
largely young Northern white women, were 
asked to return only on condition that they 
would be willing to give up their salaries 
and accept board for the year's work if 
the school were unable to raise sufficient 
sum. All but one accepted the conditions. 
The salaries were raised. 
The East Tennessee Colored Teachers' 
Association meets at Norristown this 
month. 
The National Association of Teachers in 
Colored Schools will meet in Nashville, 
Tenn., next July under the presidency of 
John Hope, of Atlanta, Ga. 
C The White Y. M. C. A., of Lexington, 
Ky., has opened classes for better citizenship and the study of common school value 
for colored men three nights a week. 
Sisson, of Mississippi, has introduced his 
annual bill in Congress declaring tha t the 
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments 
were not duly ratified and should be repealed. 
The National Negro Press Association 
met in Nashville, Tenn. C. J. Perry was 
elected President. 
m 
WES T AND SOUTHWES T 
THE Oklahoma Negro State Bar Association has met a t Oklahoma City. 
Twenty-six colored men have sued Texas 
City, Tex., and General J. F. Bell, U. S. A., 
jointly for $104,813 for compulsory labor 
during the hurricane last August. 
A conference of the Grand Officers of the 
Colored Masonic Order throughout the 
United States has met in Detroit, Mich. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 289 
Ten States and one foreign country were 
represented. A second conference will meet 
in Chicago, Ill., next August. John L. 
Thompson, of Des Moines, Ia., is President. 
The Gibbons High School, of Tyler, 
Tex., was recently burned and its library 
of 1,800 volumes totally lost. The city has 
rebuilt the school and the Principal, E. W. 
Bailey, is asking for donations of books. 
The Lincoln Club of Kansas celebrated 
Lincoln Day for the eighteenth time this 
year. T. F. Bradley, of Kansas City, is 
President. 
The colored people of Portland, Ore., 
held a fashion show for which all the merchants of the city contributed clothes and 
other articles. The show was arranged by 
Mrs. E. D. Cannady. 
The pupils of the Douglass High School, 
San Antonio, Tex., have presented Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream." 
FOREIG N 
THE United States Senate has ratified 
the Haitian treaty which practically 
makes the Island a dependency of the 
United States. 
On February 28th a general strike of 
agricultural laborers took place in St. 
Croix, D. W. I. The pay for labor of this 
kind is twenty-five cents per day for resident laborers on estates and thirty cents 
for porters living in town. The Union 
asked for fifty cents and sixty cents respectively. The capitalists refused—hence 
the general strike. Still no doubt was felt 
that some arrangements mutually satisfactory would be arrived at. Conferences with 
the governor and the capitalists have not 
altered the situation as the Union would 
prefer to make no arrangement than to 
make one which would not give assurance 
of meeting the situation effectively. 
The Industrial and Native Brass Bands 
of Christiansted, St. Croix, D. W. I., composed of Negroes, are handling such compositions as "Faust, " "Bohemian Girl," 
"William Tell," "Ramond," and "Il Trovatore." Danes compare these Bands, very 
favorably, with not a few of their Bands. 
Major Walter Loving, the well-known 
leader of the Filipino Constabulary Band, 
has resigned and is returning to the United 
States. He was given an ovation. 
Lewanika, King of Barotseland in British Rhodesia, is dead. He was a powerful 
Negro ruler of the Bantu tribes and was 
the twenty-second of his line. He was received by King Edward a t Buckingham 
Palace during the time of the coronation. 
The Bible has already been translated 
into one hundred and forty-eight African 
languages and dialects. 
The seventeenth annual meeting of the 
Grand United Order of Odd Fellows in Ja ­
maica was recently held in Kingston. 
GHETT O 
BILLY SUNDAY, who is conducting a 
revival in Baltimore, Md., excludes 
colored people from the audience. The colored people are to be congratulated. 
Another "Jim Crow" car bill has been 
killed in committee in Maryland. 
The new immigration bill to be reported 
to the United States House of Representatives proposes to exclude Chinese, Japanese and Hindoos. 
The New York Boxing Commission has, 
it seems, not yet removed the ban on colored and white bouts. The matter may be 
carried to court. 
New Orleans is afraid of litigation under the "grandfather " clause of the Constitution. Suits have already been filed to 
strike certain voters on this clause from 
the lists. 
In Sussex County, Del., a white man 
killed a colored man. The jury brought in 
a verdict which said: "Guilty of the act, 
but not guilty of the crime." 
The Equal Rights Law of Ohio is to be 
tested again in Steubenville on account of 
discrimination in saloons. 
The State of Texas recently sued the 
Pullman Company for carrying four colored passengers from Los Angeles to San 
Antonio. The court held tha t the matter 
was beyond the jurisdiction of the State as 
these were interstate passengers. 
The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Feb. 12th, in Twiggs' Co., Ga.—Marvin 
Harris, charged with murder, was hanged 
by a mob. 
Feb. 25th, a t Cartersville, Ga.—Jesse 
McCorkle was hanged by fifty men and 
boys. He was charged with breaking into 
the home of A. T. Heath and attacking 
Mrs. Heath and her children. Men of the Month 
A PREACHER The Rev J. B. Massiah who 
OF THE WORD died in Januar y of this year 
was born in Barbadoes, B. 
W. I., about fifty-five years ago. He 
studied at the General Theological Seminary in New York City, taught for a while 
at Raleigh, N. C, and began his ministerial career at Cairo, Ill. He served as priest 
at Annapolis, Md., and Newark, N. J. , was 
thirteen years in Detroit and ten years in 
Chicago. He made St. Thomas's church 
in Chicago, Ill., in its management, methods and contributions a model church. The 
property is worth $25,000, and the communicants number one thousand. His loss 
will be severely felt. 
m 
A SOLDIER Major George W. Ford, Superintendent of the United 
States Military Cemetery at Springfield, 
Ill., was born in Virginia in 1847 and was 
educated in New York City. In 1867 he 
enlisted in the Tenth United States Cavalry, served all non-commissioned grades, 
and was honorably discharged in 1877 with 
the rank of Regimental Quartermaste r Sergeant. He was commended in general orders for acts of good judgment and gallantry in the Indian wars. In 1898 he was 
made Major of the Twenty-third Kansas 
Volunteers, and served for a year in Cuba. 
He has served as Superintendent of Military Cemeteries of Beaufort, S. C, Fort 
Scott, Kan., Port Hudson, La., and Springfield, Ill. Major Ford was treasure r of the 
Lincoln Exposition in Chicago, and is President of the Springfield Branch of the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People. He is a man of ability, 
and devoted to good causes, and the father 
of seven children. 
AN EDITOR Under the editorship of W. N. 
Page the Pittsburgh, Pa., 
Courier became a real force among colored 
people. Mr. Page was for a long time secretary to a prominent Pittsburgh Captain 
of Industry. His interest was aroused in 
Negro journalism, and he took hold of this 
paper. Practically all his life was spent in 
Pittsburgh and he became a civic force to 
be reckoned with. His comparatively early 
death is a grea t loss. 
SBi 
A BUSINESS Miss Wilhelmina Tate, who 
WOMAN recently died in St. Louis, 
Mo., a t the age of thirty-six 
years was born in Nashville, Tenn. She 
was one of six children of a widowed 
mother, and early made her home with an 
aunt in St. Louis. Miss Tate began work 
at shampooing while still in short dresses 
going from house to house. Then she came 
to New York to study the culture and care 
of the hair, and soon she had an establishment with some of the wealthiest families 
of St. Louis as patrons. When she died 
over two thousand people came to pay their 
respects to her, and over one hundred floral 
emblems were received. 
A PROMINENT J. C. Duke was born in 185" 
CITIZEN in Alabama. He became editor of the Montgomery Herald, but was driven from the State because 
of his fearless editorial policy. Settling 
at Pine Bluff, Ark., he became editor of the 
Pine Bluff Herald. He served as a lieutenant of the Seventh United States Volunteers in the Spanish-American war, and 
for a number of years was Grand Chancellor of the Knights of Pythias of the 
State making tha t Order notable among 
colored men. For twenty-five years he was 
prominent in the civic and political life of 
the State. He died in Chicago, last January. 
A TEACHER G. P. Hamilton was born in 
Memphis in 1867. For thirty-two years he has been a teacher in the 
colored city schools. From 1892 to 1911 he 
was principal of the colored high school, and 
in the latter year he resigned to join an insurance company, but the school authorities raised his salary, and in 1915 made 
him supervisor of all the colored schools 
of the city of Memphis. In addition to 
this work he conducts a Shelby County Col-MAJOR G. W. FORD 
THE LATE W. N. PAGE 
THE LATE MISS HAY THE LATE FATHER MASSIAH 
THE LATE J. C. DUKE 
THE LATE MISS TATE MB. G. B. HAMILTON 
291 292 TH E CRISI S 
THE BISHOPS OF THE A. M. E. CHURCH 
ored Teachers' Institute, is principal of the 
night school, and has organized a high 
school band. Mr. Hamilton has also published two books. 
A VETERAN Miss H. Cordelia Ray, who 
TEACHER recently died in New York 
City, was the youngest 
daughter of the late Charles B. Ray. She 
was born in New York City, and was an 
unusually gifted woman, being well-read 
in Greek, French and German literature. 
For many years she taught in the public 
schools of New York, and after resigning 
gave private lessons. In 1910 she published a book of poems. She held a degree 
of Master of Pedagogy from New York 
University and served as secretary for 
many civic institutions. She died Januar y 
5th, "pure , gentle, peaceable and easy to be 
entreated. " 
A MA N 
By ETHE L CAUTION-DAVIS 
MAN was I born, tho garbed in hue of 
night, 
Disorderly of feature, crowned with stubborn hair. 
Part, yea, and parcel of the God am I; 
His Mind, His Spirit, His great Soul all 
live in me. 
Omnipotence, omniscience, these alone the 
bounds my life shall know. 
To grow toward God each day in mind and 
soul 
Till I shall come into mine own inheritance; 
For God in black and white is just the same. 
Then, shall my fellowman set me no bounds. 
Man was I born, so shall I die—A Man. 
TW O POINT S O F VIE W 
By LUCIAN B. WATKIN S 
FROM this low-lying valley: Oh, how 
sweet 
And cool and calm and grea t is life, I ween, 
There on yon mountain-throne—that sungold crest ! 
From this uplifted, mighty mountain-seat: 
How bright and still and warm and soft and 
green 
Seems yon low lily-vale of peace and rest! The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
ARTURO GIOVANNITTI in "Evil 
Wishes for the Wa r Year: " 
" I charge thee tha t this new year which 
began under the omens of blood and fire, 
this year which shall test the strength of 
all races, the potency of all peoples and the 
valor of all men, prove also and weigh thee 
according to thy worth and thy measure. 
"May war which discerns and sifts and 
sorts out the weak from the strong, the 
mute from the singer, the quick from the 
dead, find thee also awake and in arms 
when the reveille of thy ideal, whatever it 
be, shall blare loud and afar into the fecund silences of thy preparations to call 
thee forth for thy own tourney." 
Two excellent articles on "Negroes and 
Free Masonry" have been printed in the 
American Free Mason by Harr y A. Williamson. He says: 
"In conclusion, one can but add tha t man 
in all ages and in every country, has ever 
been inconsistent in his dealings with his 
fellows. The Prince Hall Mason maintains 
a kindly feeling toward his white American 
brother. Sympathizing with him, rather 
than condemning him for his failing to 
fully appreciate and assimilate the 
principles underlying the expression of 
'brotherly love and affection.' 'Truth 
crushed to earth shall rise again.' So be it; 
the time is coming and possibly not so far 
distant, when American Masonry will admit its error and acknowledge tha t under 
its proud banner men of every color may 
worship at its altars the highest good and 
the highest truth. " 
Mrs. A. W. Dickerson has an article on 
the "Progress of the Negro Women" in 
Femina. A revised edition of "Hand-Book 
of Colored Work in Dioceses in the South," 
has been issued by the Episcopalians. Dr. 
A. H. Abel has written a large work in 
three volumes on the "Slaveholding Indians." The first volume has been published by the Arthu r H. Clark Co., Cleveland, Ohio. The operation of the Freedman's Bureau in South Carolina has been 
studied by Laura J. Webster, and four chapters issued in the Smith College Studies 
History. Negro is spelt with a small "n. " 
The most ambitious work of the month is 
Dr. C. V. Roman's "American Civilization 
and the Negro" (F. A. Davis Co., Philadelphia, Pa.) This is a book of 434 pp., and 
is a compilation of the author's essays and 
speeches during the last twenty years. As 
such it is naturally rather loosely put together with a good deal of quotation and 
some repetition. It is written, however, in 
a lively, interesting way and while few may 
read it through, few can afford to be unacquainted with some of its chapters, and its 
stimulating suggestions. It certainly ought 
to be widely circulated among Southern 
white people. 
Mr. Samuel Coleridge-Taylor's "Life and 
Letters," by W. C. Berwick Sayers (Illustrated, 328 pp; $2.25), is one of the great 
books of the year. It is especially interesting to colored Americans because it 
emphasizes the late Mr. Coleridge-Taylor's 
interest in his African blood and his colored brothers. He is frankly put down as 
an "apostle of color." The concluding word 
is deep with thought and sympathy: 
"Tragic, almost, is the thought of these 
brief thirty-seven years; but he had lived 
longer than many who attain to twice his 
age. His memory is fragrant amongst all 
who touched his hand or heard his voice; 
he gloried in and gloried his art, and 
through it gave the purest pleasure to men. 
I have never heard of any to whom by 
word or deed he ever gave a moment of 
unhappiness; and in the record of men of 
fame, who have done positive work and who 
have faced disappointment and jealousy, 
there is surely no fairer praise." 
M 
LYNCHING 
GEORGIA has awakened to the unpleasant notoriety which has come to 
her this year as leader in the lynching industry. The real reason for this awakening is not far to seek. The Macon Daily 
Telegraph confesses: 
"Georgia must stand still industrially and 
economically until this saturnalia of lawlessness and crime is effectually stopped and 
293 294 THE CRISIS 
the State's reputation as a good place to 
live in and invest money in is redeemed 
from the hands of the anonymous figure 
with the rifle and the hemp. We want every 
acre of land in Georgia to be settled by the 
finest class of white people this Union can 
send us. We want every horsepower of 
waterfall developed and set to whirring the 
wheels of the factories in a thousand valleys, and we want money from every quarter of the globe to do it with—but as long as 
we give the editorial writers, cartoonists 
and publicists of sister states through industrially competing sections of the republic 
food for attacks and comparisons putting 
us in a class with Mexico, holding up life 
in Georgia as just one lynching after another, as being enjoyed only at the price of 
the vigilance of night-riders, just as the 
old-time pioneers had to fight Indians for 
the privilege of enjoying a night's sleep, 
as a State where law is impotent and the 
individual supreme, then so long will the 
good people stay away, naturally, and the 
worst element come just as water seeks its 
level. Tha t Georgia is one of the most delightful parts of the Union to live in, tha t 
life and social intercourse is as safe and delightful as anywhere else, if not more so, 
tha t lynchings are merely incidental and not 
typical every Georgian knows, but as long 
as lynchings go on in this State nobody else 
is going to believe it." 
The Governor of the State confesses his 
impotence: 
"Although it may not be generally understood and it probably isn't widely 
known, it is a fact, nevertheless, tha t the 
Governor of Georgia is a man whose hands 
are tied under the present laws. I have 
done all tha t I could to stop lynching and 
to bring the guilty parties to justice. The 
provisions of the law are such tha t the governor has no powers over the control of 
lynching unless the civil authorities apply 
to him. Then he can declare a state of 
martial law. In no instance during my 
term as governor have the civil authorities 
asked me for aid or said tha t they were 
unable to compete with the situation." 
Meantime the Atlanta Constitution is 
making frantic appeals: 
"Georgia must do something about this 
matter of indiscriminate lynching and do it 
quickly. For every day's delay the people 
of the whole state pay the penalty. 
"Certainly the public conscience is not 
so seared, nor the public eye so blinded to 
the state's welfare, tha t the people of Georgia propose to permit this sort of thing 
to go on indefinitely, growing worse and 
worse from year to year, with no effort to 
stop these assaults upon the law which are 
assaults indirectly upon every man, woman 
and child in the State. 
"Because of her lynching record, Georgia is being condemned from Maine to California and from the Lakes to the Gulf. 
"How long ar e we going to continue to 
hold this unenviable record? How long do 
we propose to continue to increase it? . . . 
"Time and again the Constitution has 
shown, inevitably, just where this disregard for law was leading; time and again 
has it urged revision of the law, looking to 
speedier and more certain punishment for 
guilt, in order to remove the last vestige 
of excuse for mob law. 
"Wha t has come within the last few 
months? Georgia has achieved the black 
and unenviable record of having led all the 
States of the Union in lynching, and not in 
one single instance for tha t particular 
crime for which, some years ago, was 
taken as the only offense tha t could possibly justify mob execution! 
"With another lynching in Twiggs county last week Georgia now ha s a record of 
an average of one a week since the beginning of the new year. If this rat e is maintained, it is easy to see how the state may 
double and even treble her performance of 
last year, when she surpassed every other 
state in the Union in her exhibitions of 
mob violence. 
"Isn't it time for Georgia's conscience to 
spur the manhood of the state to action, 
and to call the politicians from out of the 
cellars?" 
A southern woman, writing in the Macon 
Telegraph, strikes this ominous note: 
"Ha s the South so soon forgotten her 
bitter experience in the horrible struggle 
over State's rights tha t she would so foolishly rush into civil strife again? Who in 
the South after years of sober reflection 
but realizes the vain boastings of the 'fireeaters'? Who does not reverence the memory of our beloved Alex. Stephens, whose 
voice was ever raised in defense of law 
and union and peace? 
"And yet the sons of those men, who 
fought the bloody wa r and learned through TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 295 
suffering the sad and humiliating lesson; 
these men today ar e ready and willing to 
follow blindly, ignorantly, men who advocate disunion, strife, lawlessness and pretended citizens' and States' rights. A citizen or State has no rights but to be lawabiding. When they wilfully violate laws 
made to promote a more sane and temperate life, they deserve nothing but contempt; 
they have forfeited all rights. 
" I am convinced tha t the brutish men 
who would fiendishly take a human being 
out and put him to death without law are 
not trying to defend their homes nor protect Southern women. It is simply their 
thirst for blood, their brutish natur e lusting for expression. Southern women do 
not need, nor desire, nor appreciate such 
defense. They only blush in shame tha t 
they are fellow-citizens of such characters. 
I am today more afraid of such men than 
of all the colored races, brown, yellow, red 
or black, on God's green earth. " 
MASSACHUSETTS 
THE case of the colored stenographer 
dismissed from the Massachusetts institution on account of race prejudice has 
caused much discussion. A correspondent 
writes to the New Republic: 
"To my mind the saddest factor of the 
situation is tha t the discrimination applies 
to all Negroes. Inasmuch as we rightfully 
discriminate against illiterate and ill-bred 
whites, I see no reason why we should not 
also discriminate against the same type of 
Negro. But when a Negro endeavors to 
develop his character and to broaden his 
culture, and he receives from us frowns 
and discouraging hindrances, when his reward is not even equality of opportunity 
with the whites, then his case is pitiable indeed. 
"It has been with much interest and 
speculation tha t I have watched the vicissitudes of a fine Negro's struggle. I suppose 
this chap possesses all the best instincts of 
the Caucasian. He seems to be the kind of 
man who is never satisfied with present attainments and to whom success becomes but 
a step to a more distant goal. He entered 
Harvar d Medical School with the understanding tha t a hospital appointment was 
to be had after graduation. This appointment never materialized. 
"Given such a Negro, educated, wellbred, intelligent, likeable, and possessed of 
the best characteristics of the best whites, 
there can be only one reason for ostracism. 
Tha t is prejudice. And for anyone to suppose tha t the prejudice of Boston, Mass., 
is a superior kind of prejudice to tha t of 
Boston, Ind., or of Boston, Cal., is to be 
so smugly mistaken as to be almost beyond 
enlightenment's cure." 
A Tennessean answers hotly: 
"Ar e there still people tha t believe in the 
racial equality of the Negro? Would he be 
willing for a sister of his to marr y a Negro, 
or be doctored by one? To a Southerner 
the idea is too repulsive for words. The 
Negro has always been a servile race since 
the time of Noah's curse of servility on 
Ham. The highest civilization tha t they 
ever attained was in the Moors, and when 
they intermarried with the Spaniards they 
lost the best characteristics of both races. 
The same is true of the mulatto. 
"No one denies tha t the position of the 
ambitious Negro is a pitiful one, but are 
we willing to lower the standard of the 
white race so as to raise the Negro? It has 
been demonstrated tha t the fusion of the 
two races generally produces a sort of mongrel conglomeration. Wha t we want to 
strive for is more race purity, instead of 
letting down the bars. " 
The Boston Post says: 
"There is no denial of the fact tha t the 
trouble arose because the other employees 
of the hospital objected to sitting in the 
same dining room with this colored girl, 
although it seems evident tha t the highest 
authorities of the institution did not object 
to sitting in the same office with her. The 
time to have scotched this race perjudice 
was right then. 
"It should have been made clear to the 
employees who felt contaminated by eating 
in the same room with this well educated 
and refined girl tha t there would be no objection to their resignations at any time 
they wanted to send them in, but tha t Miss 
Bosfield would continue to eat in the main 
dining room. There would have been no 
resignations." 
"To be entirely frank," says a correspondent to the Boston Herald, "Miss Bosfield cannot and ought not to expect to be received on perfectly equal terms with her 
white co-workers. We are all subject to 
limitations of some kind; this is a limitation which is absolutely inherent in the Ne-296 THE CRISIS 
gro race, and there is no getting away from 
it. It is tragic in some of its effects as all 
limitations are, but it is mistaken kindness 
and illogical policy tha t defends the Negro 
when he demands perfect equality with the 
white, and the wise and thoughtful representatives of Negro blood will recognize the 
reality of the limitation tha t exists and 
accept it, not only bravely, but cheerfully 
and philosophically." 
The Boston American answers: 
"The question is whether or not public 
authorities have a right to discriminate 
against a citizen on account of her color in 
public occupations. It is no answer to say 
tha t the other employees of the State were 
not willing to associate with Miss Bosfield. 
They did not have to keep their jobs if they 
objected to tha t impartial administration 
of the law which gives all citizens, of whatever color, equal privileges. 
"The students of Harvard and of other 
colleges find it quite possible to sit beside 
and to work with colored fellow-students. 
They find it quite possible to play football 
and baseball with them, and they find it 
quite tolerable to be bested by them in 
athletics and debating and to be represented by them, as they often have, in the great 
intellectual debating contests with other 
colleges. 
"Therefore, if any supersensitive person 
in the public employ finds tha t a fellowcitizen, respectable, educated and well bred, 
is not agreeable on account of her color, the 
letter and the spirit of the law should not 
be violated in order to pander to such 
supersensitiveness and superciliousness." 
Miss Bosfield herself tells her story as 
follows in the Boston Evening Record 
"I am a graduate of the Cambridge Latin 
and High School. I studied bookkeeping 
and stenography a t evening school, after I 
had graduated. In 1912 I passed the civil 
service examination for the first time, and 
later tried for a position. I have been certified for almost every position in the clerical departments of Boston. From 1912 until 1915 I tried for positions, tried desperately hard, and always I was refused. For 
three years I was forced to work in a factory for half the money I could get at the 
work for which I had been trained. And 
then, during all these years, I was forever 
chasing the will-o'-wisp of the possible 
job. Again and again I would be certified. 
Again and again, so soon as I had had a 
personal interview, I would be refused. 
" 'Will you tell me—the reason?' I would 
ask. The employer would shake his head. 
'The civil service law does not require us 
to tell,' he would answer, in almost every 
case. But once in a while an exceptionally 
honest man would state his reason. It 
would always be because of my race ; in 
every other particular, I would have passed 
the requirements. 
"Then, last April, I heard Gov. Walsh 
speak in Symphony Hall. He said that he 
wished a fair chance for all Massachusetts 
citizens—well, it was a good speech. I 
wrote to the Governor. He answered. 
" 'When you have been certified again,' 
said he, 'let me know immediately.' 
"The 12th of last October I wa s certified 
again, I wrote. In two days I received a 
letter from Dr. French, asking me to call. 
I called. He gave me the same position 
which he had refused me, after a personal 
interview, six months before. 
"When I began my work there Dr. 
French told me tha t I would have to live 
off the grounds, as the rooms there were all 
full. The woman a t whose house he found 
me a place later was not able to supply 
meals, though she was glad to let me have 
the room. I spoke to Dr.- French about it. 
He found me a place on the grounds— 'But 
you will have your meals served to you in 
your office on a tray,' said he, 'it is not convenient for us to have you eat them in the 
dining room.' 
" I stood this for several months. It was 
most embarrassing for me. While I would 
be eating, errand boys and others would be 
passing through continually. The girls 
would rush in to look at my tra y and see 
wha t they would be served, a little later, in 
the dining room. It was very hard to 
stand, particularly as there were the most 
pleasant relations between me and all the 
others who ate in the regular place. One 
of these young ladies was a member of the 
'Girls' Friendly Society' with myself. We 
met in church; we were equal there. At 
the hospital we were separated. 
"At last I talked it over with my mother 
and father one week end a t home. We consulted my lawyer, Mr. Williams. He advised me to insist upon dining in the regular place. I spoke to Dr. French. I have 
been advised to go into the dining room,' TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 297 
I told him. 'Is it convenient for me to go 
now?' 
" 'It is not convenient,' said he, 'and you 
have been given very poor advice.' He 
turned to his desk. He would say no more. 
"The next day, a t dinner, I walked in. 
Everybody was very pleasant. Nothing 
was said. At two o'clock I was called in to 
Dr. French. He forbade my going in there 
again. Tha t night several doctors and 
nurses were gathered in the hall outside 
the dining room, when it was time for supper. I did not go in; I went without my 
supper. The next day I ate three meals in 
the dining room; everybody was pleasant 
except the head nurse. She left the table. 
The next day Dr. French gave me my notice. I was to leave in two weeks. The 
two weeks passed and I left. There was 
absolutely nothing tha t I could do about it, 
because it is one of the rules tha t during 
the six months' probation period an employee can be discharged without any reason given. No reason was given in my 
case. 
"This leaves me where I began, out of 
pocket, out of courage, without, at present, 
any defense in the law. My case came up 
last Tuesday. I lost. But we are going to 
carry it as far as we can. All this turmoil 
will probably do me no good, but it will 
make the way easier for other girls of my 
race. For the way things stand a t present, 
it is useless to have the requirements. 
Color, the reason nobody will give, the reason nobody is required to give, will always 
be in the way. Which, in other words, is 
the State standing back of a class of its 
citizens and saying: 'No, you cannot enter 
here. You may study; you may pass the 
requirements; but tha t is as far as you may 
go.' " 
m 
SEGREGATION 
THE attempt in St. Louis to establish a 
colored ghetto has brought a flood of 
comment within and without the city. The 
St. Louis Post-Dispatch says: 
"The Post-Dispatch has clearly stated 
its opposition to the proposed segregation 
ordinance on principle. We hold it to be a 
violation of American principles. We believe it to be a violation of fundamental 
rights of American citizenship and of constitutional law. 
"In order to enforce the segregation ordinance it will be necessary to deprive a citizen of the right to occupy his own property as a home, or to demonstrate tha t he 
and his family ar e nuisances to be abated 
or are menaces to the health and morals of 
their white neighbors. 
"The passage of the segregation ordinance would result in the branding of Negro citizens, regardless of character or capacity, as unfit to live near white citizens. 
It will result in an attempt to herd them in 
certain blocks where they will be at the 
mercy of property owners and house agents. 
"The treatment of Negro citizens is retrogression, not progress. It emphasizes 
and contributes to race prejudice and the 
racial demarcation of citizens. It makes a 
mockery of democracy and equality under 
law." 
It continues in a later editorial: 
"A minority with right on its side is 
better than a majority supporting wrong. 
It will be justified in the long run. 
"The forces backing the segregation 
movement were so powerful tha t they were 
able to control newspapers and induce them 
to abandon their principles. Tha t they 
should mislead for a time a large number 
of voters is not a matter of wonderment. 
"Of course, the ordinances adopted under 
the initiative will have to stand the test of 
the courts. We do not believe they will 
survive. If they do we do not look for a 
solution of the problems they were planned 
to meet. We believe they are mistaken and 
tha t they will be recognized as mistakes 
and set aside in favor of the principles they 
violate. We hope, however, the experiment 
of segregation will not lead to serious consequences. 
"The racial problems with which they 
are planned to deal must be solved on a 
sounder basis of justice and liberty and 
with a broader spirit of humanity than are 
embodied in these measures." 
The advocates of segregation have been 
put curiously on the defensive. An officer 
of the chief association which advocated 
the measure writes to the public press: 
"The writer has been personally appealed 
to by a number of our Jewish supporters to 
issue a statement especially assuring the 
Jewish people of St. Louis that the success 
of our laws providing separate blocks for 
colored and white people will not mean the 
segregation of the Jews. 298 THE CRISIS 
"We know of no better way to emphasize 
the grea t objections to Negro invasion as 
compared with the very few objections tha t 
are made against members of foreign white 
races, than to remind your readers tha t 
there has not, to our knowledge, been a subdivision laid out in the city of St. Louis 
during the past fifteen years tha t has not 
been restricted against selling or renting to 
Negroes. We have never heard, and do 
not believe any other St. Louisan ever 
heard, of a sub-division of this city which 
was restricted against any of the foreign 
white races. This being the case, we are 
at a loss to understand how any one can 
contend tha t home owners of St. Louis 
when they have succeeded in segregating 
the Negroes will proceed to segregate the 
Jews, or any other Caucasian race." 
A colored woman writes: 
"Now, Mr. Editor, if the white people 
need so much legislation and organization 
to paralyze our aggressiveness in tearing 
down 'nature's barriers,' ar e we really as 
stupid and obnoxious as you paint us? Did 
we do tha t jumping of the boundary lines? 
If we did our womanhood now is free—we 
are no longer slaves. We realize wha t virtue is and what it means and we are not 
a menace to the unprotected and unsuspecting whites in the South. Now can't 500,000 
white people in St. Louis manage the aspirations of 40,000 Negroes and prevent their 
'star' of civilization from a too dangerous 
westward course by any other means than 
to strike at their American citizenship and 
rights guaranteed by the Constitution? If 
not, too bad, too bad, tha t you must verily 
throttle the pernicious Negro and paralyze 
what few liberties are left because 'nature 
herself has set up boundaries which no laws 
can throw down.' " 
Another correspondent writes: 
"Were it necessary, even the 'paper case' 
which you make in favor of the scheme 
could be shown to be extremely vulnerable. 
Wha t are the districts into which the colored population of this city has 'poured' in 
the last decade or two? Are they not along 
those streets which the former white residents abandoned in their eager desire to 
move farther—and still farther—west. Do 
we not know tha t the substantial residences 
along Chestnut, Pine and Olive streets, 
Cook, Finney and other avenues, were depreciated by abandonment and neglect longbefore the Negro population was induced to 
enter the same? And is it not also true 
tha t for these abandoned residences Negroes paid a higher price, whether in the 
way of purchase or rental, than white people were willing to pay? 
"Conceding tha t an 'undesirable' colored 
family may depreciate values by moving 
into a given locality, is it not equally true 
tha t an undesirable family of any other 
race will do the same? Ar e we to establish the principle tha t a certain majority 
of property owners in a given sub-division 
of our city may place the stamp of the 
pariah upon all but the chosen few whom 
they shall select as their associates?" 
As to the result of the election the New 
York Times says: 
"The Missouri Constitution contains an 
'enjoyment of property' clause. Can an 
owner kept out of his own property be said 
to 'enjoy' his property? Jim Crow cars 
and separat e schools, which Missouri has, 
seem not in point. They injure no property rights. They gran t equal privileges 
of transportation and education. One of 
the St. Louis ordinances lays an equal disprivilege, affecting vested rights, upon both 
races. 
"It shall be unlawful for any white person to use as a residence, or place of abode, 
any house, building or structure, or any 
part thereof, located in any colored block, 
as the same is hereinafter defined; and it 
shall also be unlawful for any colored person to use as a residence, or place of abode, 
any house, building or structure, or any 
part thereof, located in any white block, as 
the same is hereinafter defined. 
"Would a similar ordinance, limiting the 
residence of Prohibitionists and Anti-Prohibitionists, native and foreign born citizens 
and so on, hold water ? The constitutional 
question is interesting. " 
The New York World adds: 
"Wha t can be done in the way of stirring 
up race prejudice is shown by the success 
of the real-estate interests of St. Louis in 
carrying by popular vote measures providing for the segregation of Negroes. The 
population of tha t city in 1910 was 687,000, 
the Negroes numbering less than 44,000. 
With a total poll of 130,000 a t the election 
of 1912, only 69,000 voters divided on this 
question Tuesday—52,000 to 17,000. 
"Of the two ordinances carried, one pro-THE LOOKING GLASS 299 
hibits Negroes or whites from residing in 
blocks occupied entirely by the opposite 
race. The other makes the same restrictions upon blocks in which 75 per cent, of 
the residents are of one race. Obviously 
the purpose of these enactments is to establish a geographical color line, regardless 
of personal and property rights, which no 
black man can pass. If sustained, they will 
embody in law restrictions hitherto enforced only by the will of individuals at 
their own cost and never to the injury of 
anybody else. 
"After a defeat or two in the State courts 
Baltimore is trying this experiment. In 
Washington a similar enterprise is under 
way without legal sanction. San Francisco 
attempted the same thing with reference to 
the Chinese and was halted by a Federal 
Judge. But while the United States Supreme Court has ruled on grandfathe r 
Constitutions, the new slavery of peonage 
and Jim Crow sleeping and dining cars, it 
has not yet reached a case of segregation. 
"The St. Louis ordinances are said in 
their preambles to be 'for the prevention of 
ill-feeling and conflict between the races.' 
They might more truthfully be described 
as intended to promote hatred and difficulty 
and to deprive black men of property, liberty and hope." 
A writer in the St. Louis Star notes 
certain difficulties: 
"The building permits for the city of St. 
Louis have dwindled steadily for the past 
five years until they have reached the sum 
of §9,000,000 for the year ending 1915. 
When we consider the effects of segregation from a material and progressive standpoint, article four goes the limit in placing 
an embargo on all building projects. 
"Considering the size and population of 
our city, the building permits last year 
should have approximated $30,000,000, to 
compare with any of the cities in this country. The segregation bill empowers the 
Building Commissioner to grant building 
permits after four weeks' publication in the 
daily papers of the applicant desirous of 
building to designate whether in any new 
section laid out, or on blocks heretofore 
unimproved a builder will be permitted to 
use such land for the desired improvements, providing notice has been posted on 
the property 'tha t is intended to be improved for certain purposes, or for white 
or colored people. It usually takes six 
weeks to draw plans and obtain bids for 
construction, so tha t it means a delay of 
two or three months after a builder contemplates improvements before work can begin. 
"No builder would be warranted in going 
to the expense of having plans drawn and 
bids taken until he knows whether he can 
use them. Fully 70 per cent of the moneys 
expended for construction work in building 
is supplied by builders, who either furnish 
the means, or borrow the money for building purposes, for constructing buildings, 
for investments or speculative purposes. 
Any embargo placed on the activities of the 
builder will retard and finally discourage 
building operations." 
Another writer has this far-reaching 
word: 
"Then what an inopportune time to do 
this. At such a time when Great Britain is recognizing, welcoming and honoring 
her black African heathen troops; when 
Russia is removing strictures from off 
her serfs and peasants; when all Europe, 
Asia, Africa, Canada and South America 
and Australia are lifting the bands from the 
limbs of their lesser people and when every 
American, black and white man, may soon 
be needed for 'immediate preparedness.' 
"To attempt to humiliate, to label as lepers, to restrict and to discourage the leading representatives of 10,000,000 of our 
100,000,000 true-blue Americans, and in imperial, great-hearted Missouri, a t such a 
time, is the height of nonsense, the nadir 
of folly and a stupendous blunder." 
m 
THE BUSINESS OF PREJUDICE 
R. L. CORDERY writes to the Baltimore 
"Why is it tha t a hundred idle Negroes is 
so much larger than a thousand idle whites? 
Why is it tha t they can be seen and noticed 
so easily? Prejudice. Tell me, sir, how 
many Negroes have you seen holding out 
their hands for alms upon your streets or 
the streets of any other American city? A 
blessed few, if any. 
"Your institutions and your prejudices 
close avenues of business and labor against 
him because of his black hide. Then you 
turn and point to the 'idle' Negro. Before 
he is born these same institutions and prejudices doom him to a certain sphere of ac-300 THE CRISIS 
tivity in life, and he goes forth, in so far as 
you ar e able to make him feel, tha t he is 
less than a human being and a man. " 
Dr. A. G. Holmes writes to the Miami, 
Fla., Metropolis: 
" I find almost an unanimous sentiment 
against importation of Negro chauffeurs. 
Why? Because: 
"First: This is a white man's town and 
we intend to keep it so. 
"Second: Permit Negro chauffeurs and 
the wedge has entered, and where will it 
stop? 
"Third: If you permit a Negro to compete 
with a white chauffeur, why not permit him 
to compete with a bank president or a 
Twelfth street merchant? The chauffeur's 
business means as much to him as dry goods 
to a merchant. 
"Fourth : Auto driving is in Miami, and 
should be everywhere, a white man's occupation. 
"Fifth: Substitute colored for white 
chauffeurs and wha t are you going to do 
with the white men and their families? Send 
them into the woods to grub palmettos?" 
The Columbia States says editorially: 
"If the Negro farm laborer is to remain 
in the South and in his present condition 
of ignorance, it is practically assured tha t 
he will hold the white farm laborer in a 
similar condition. The white man must 
compete with him. The Negro has every 
advantage. 
"The question tha t should address itself 
to the intelligence of the South is whether 
or not a number of white men shall be held 
down in order tha t the Negroes shall be 
retained as a class of cheap laborers. Not 
all the landless white men can be segregated 
in the textile and other industries from 
which the Negroes ar e excluded. Moreover, the wages even of the segregated and 
protected white laborers are necessarily affected to a great degree, though in an indirect manner, by the Negro wage which is 
the basis of our economic system." 
The States adds later: 
"To the suggestion of the State Tax 
Commission tha t personal property to the 
value of one hundred dollars be exempted 
from taxation in order tha t the poorer 
classes of the people may be aided and encouraged we suppose tha t the usual objection will be raised tha t it would relieve the 
Negroes of part of their taxes. 
"The fear tha t some benefit may be conferred on the Negroes has from time immemorial resulted in holding in poverty and 
ignorance thousands of the white people of 
South Carolina." -
Finally, in the news from Haiti reported 
by the Pan-American Union, observe these 
rays of pale blue light: 
"Reports from the capital of Haiti state 
tha t the National City Bank of New York 
has decided to lend to the Federal Government $5,000,000 for railway construction in 
the Republic. According to press reports, 
a number of Chicago bankers ar e studying 
the conditions of the Republic with the object of investing capital and establishing 
industries there. " 
THE NEGROES CAPACITY 
DISTINGUISHE D service by a Negro in 
one field or another, such as tha t 
recognized annually by the Spingarn medal, 
does not necessarily signify an advance by 
the race in tha t particula r line of endeavor. 
But it is significant as indicating the possibiities in tha t direction. Thus the medal 
this year—its second annual presentation— 
goes to Maj. Charles Young, of the United 
States army, for his services in organizing 
and training the constabulary of Liberia. 
It has been the popular superstition, even 
among the Negro's friends, tha t a great 
many doors are closed to him because of 
racial deficiencies. It cannot be gainsaid that, either because of his history or 
because of these racial deficiencies, there 
are some some activies for which the Negro 
shows no adaptability. But the number of 
doors which superstition or prejudice has 
closed is being yearly reduced by the simple process of their being opened by a 
Negro. 
Thus it is a legend among most tha t a 
Negro in a place of command, as the 
repository of authority and the wielder of 
executive power, is an anachronism not to 
be thought of. The theory has been tha t he 
will not only fail to show an understanding 
of his task, because of qualities primarily 
imitative and servile, but also tha t he will 
display the unreasoning tyrann y and inefficiency tha t usually accompany the promotion of the once oppressed. Here enters in 
the point tha t it would probably work out 
this way with the grea t majority of the race 
just at this stage. But the loose thinking 
begins when it is supposed tha t this field 
of the executive and commander is definitely 
and forever closed to the Negro because his TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 301 
inaptitude is racial and impossible of correction. 
The recipient of the Spingarn medal this 
year stands as another caution against such 
generalties. The possibilities of the Negro, 
under wise and considerate treatment, 
again become an open question in a new direction. Last year it was scholarly research, original, not imitative work, in the 
field of biology, tha t won the Spingarn 
medal for Dr. Edward E. Just, a Negro 
medical instructor. With each recurrence 
of such an incident comes the suggestion 
for a needed readjustment of preconceived 
ideas of the Negro's capacity—at least a 
suggestion of the wisdom of keeping an 
open mind on the subject.— Louisville (Ky.) 
Courier Journal. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
THE free-for-all fight in the Oklahoma 
House of Representatives was not 
an inspiring spectacle. In fact, it was 
a disgraceful affair from start to finish 
and the ruffians who engaged in it should be 
retired to private life the moment the voters of the State get a chance at them. The 
bill which the Democrats were trying to 
pass and which they did put through after 
the fight, was drawn for the purpose of 
disfranchising the Negroes of the State of 
Oklahoma, a former statute having been 
held unconstitutional by the Supreme 
Court of the United States. The Republicans and Socialists were therefore justified 
in saying some pretty mean things about 
the measure. The hurling of ink wells and 
paper weights was entirely unnecessary, 
although the Democrats being unable to answer criticism and having vastly superior 
numbers saw no other way to silence the 
opposition. 
It was a disreputable climax to a disreputable course of proceedings and we hope 
the new 'grandfather's clause' will meet the 
same fate as the last one in the court of 
last resort.— Salt Lake City (Utah) Tribune. 
"Can Dr. Dernburg really believe, deep 
down in his heart, tha t the '400,000,000 colored human beings,' who must be kept 
under control by '80,000,000 whites,' have 
been kept in subjection thus far, or can be 
kept in subjection in the future, by any 
mysterious respect and regard for the 
white man as a sort of demi-god, as 'the 
Mexicans thought the Spaniards were immortal, and their horses sprung from the 
gods' "?—Jessie Lee Bennett in the New 
York Times. 
m 
"A nut in the Mississippi Legislature 
has introduced a bill to prohibit white people from teaching in Negro schools. The 
Negro question has been used as a political 
issue in Mississippi so long tha t if all the 
Negroes in that State were to go to Liberia, 
two-thirds of the white politicians would 
either commit suicide or grease up the old 
cart and go back to work."—Montgomery 
(Ala.) Advertiser. 
"We are straining our sympathies for the 
victims of a war in Europe, for which we 
are not in the slightest degree responsible, 
but we are making still more difficult a 
problem at our own doors by insisting on 
ignoring it under the plea tha t we are not 
our brother's keeper if our brother happens 
to be a Negro. 
"The wonder of it is tha t any Negro in 
the North accepts the Christian religion, 
as interpreted by whites, for more than 10 
per cent of its face value."—Boston (Mass.) 
Traveler. 
"There are some things tha t we like to 
recommend. One of these is TH E CRISIS, 
the monthly magazine edited by Prof. W. E. 
B. Du Bois. The November issue, now before us, is full of interesting matter, almost 
all of it bearing on 'the fortunes of the 
darker races,' but all marked by a thoughtfulness and sense of refinement, as well as 
by earnestness, in a manner sometimes only 
too sadly absent from magazines with a like 
aim. So far as we have seen TH E CRISIS, 
it stands for determination but not for bitterness. It costs one dollar a year with 
twenty-five cents extra for foreign subscribers. The magazine has now completed five 
years of issue. Beginning with an edition 
of one thousand copies, of twenty pages 
each, it has now reached 35,000 copies of 
fifty-two pages each. Tha t is a fine record 
and the Jamaica Times, which strives with 
all its power to maintain a fair and sympathetic attitude towards man as man, apart 
from race or color, offers to TH E CRISIS 
hearty congratulations on the past, and sincere good wishes for the future."—The Jamaica Times. Editorial 
THE CHURCH 
THI S is a critical day for the 
Christian church. Th e 
whit e church of Christ finds 
itself in a position which 
gives the lie to man y of its finest professions. It is a church of 
Peace ; and its followers ar e a t war. 
It is a church of the Masses in theory 
while in practic e it is a church of th e 
Classes. It is an organization which 
despises wealth and ye t which finds 
wealth its only modern weapon. In 
fine,—as a follower of Jesus, the Jew. 
—it professes th e sublimest of ethical codes and yet falls so fa r from 
following it tha t some would deny 
tha t it is Christian. 
The Negr o church in Americ a 
comes neare r to being built along th e 
lines of its Founder. It is a democratic church of the masses; it welcomes all men despite race or color; 
and its wide activities touch every 
line of huma n endeavor. Neverthe ­
less, the Negr o church today in all 
its branche s faces a peculiar crisis. 
The 3,000,000 Baptists, who repre ­
sent mor e nearly tha n an y other 
branc h the grea t ran k and file of the 
colored people, ar e torn asunde r over 
a detail of organization. The African 
Methodist church must put stron g 
materia l in its leadership or it will 
drift into sectional disruption, or personal feuds. The Colored Methodist 
Episcopal church is passing throug h 
a regrettabl e ethical slough of despond in high places; while th e Zion 
church is havin g financial troubles-. 
The colored Congregationalists ar e 
still a remnant. Th e colored Episcopalians ar e as babe s overlaid by their 
none-too-loving mother; while the colored Presbyterian s ar e spiritually 
harassed. Th e grea t Methodist Episcopal church ha s a stron g element 
which is seeking to drive out its colored membershi p in orde r to welcome 
th e whit e South. 
Facin g such problems wha t shall 
we do? The appea l is first of all to 
the might y past. In slavery, in Reconstruction and in th e days after 
the Negr o church mad e th e Negro 
race in America . Today it can remak e it if it calls to th e front its 
strong, honest men ; if it puts aside 
petty sectarianism and creed, and if 
it work s for social uplift and individual honor. Will th e church do 
this ? In the long ru n an d after 
much travail of soul we believe it 
will. 
M 
PEONAGE 
THE pictur e on th e opposite 
page is authentic . It wa s 
take n in Lee County, Ga., 
wher e on Januar y 20 five 
Negroe s wer e take n from the 
Wort h County jail, rushed into 
the adjoining county in automobiles, 
hanged and shot. Th e photograp h 
wa s take n on the spot an d a copy sent 
to a prominen t whit e ma n in a neighborin g city.. His colored servan t took 
it while he wa s a t lunch, hande d it to 
a CRISIS agent, who ha d it quickly 
copied. The origina l wa s the n returne d and th e copy sent to us. It 
wa s a little dim and ha s been slightly 
retouched. Otherwis e it is absolutely 
authentic . 
These me n wer e killed for defending themselve s from "arrest. " The 
arrestin g mob wa s led by a sheriff. 
The sheriff wa s killed. Wha t wa s the 
real cause back of this wholesale 
lynching and back of th e lynching of 
six Negroe s in Earl y County, Decembe r 30th ? 
The answe r is clear: Peonage . 
Slavery unde r anothe r name ; the 
302 THE LYNCHING IN LEE COUNTY, GA., JAN. 20, 1916 
(From an actual photograph) 
303 304 TH E CRISI S 
absolute defiance of the spirit of the 
law of th e Thirteent h Amendment. 
This is perfectly well known. The 
United State s Governmen t once, quit e 
by mistake , ra n afoul of it. It wa s 
tryin g to stop the peonage of Italians 
when its over-zealous prosecuting officer ra n across this slavery of Ne ­
groe s ; but afte r a few desultory 
prosecutions Mr. Taft succeeded in 
hushin g this up. 
To understan d the situation look 
a t your ma p of Georgia. Worth , Lee 
and Earl y Counties ar e all in th e 
black belt. These thre e counties have 
18,000 whit e people and 31,000 colored people. Most of the whit e people ar e in th e small towns; most of 
the colored people ar e in the country. 
The business of the whit e people is 
to mak e th e colored people rais e cotton. We quote a southern whit e man, 
C. D. Rivers, of Somerville, Va.: 
"Th e Times only the othe r day carried an account of an overseer in 
southwest Georgia, named Villipigue, 
who, with his wife, wer e th e only 
white s living amon g a grea t Negr o 
population on a big plantation. This 
overseer wa s killed because he had 
thrashed a Negro boy for some impudent reply made to the overseer. A 
mob of white s gathere d and arme d 
and a reign of terro r wa s precipitated 
amon g the Negroe s for miles around. 
Their secret society halls wer e 
burned, a church wa s burned, cabins 
wer e burned and several Negroe s 
shot. Villipigue, th e overseer, would 
not have whipped this boy had he 
been white . Perhap s had the boy 
been whit e his word s would not have 
been considered impuden t a t all. 
Again, had Villipigue not been an 
overseer, charged with makin g the 
Negroe s produc e cotton, ther e would 
have been no reason for the altercation, and none would have happened. 
Bu t sir, thes e overseers, throughou t 
this vast black belt of cotton planta ­
tions ar e expected to do with the Negroes, to get results from them in th e 
form of cotton produced a t th e least 
possible cost, which cannot be got 
from white s or blacks, except by unrelenting harshness. Thes e overseers 
ar e in the position of a lion tame r in 
a den of lions. To hold their positions and to ge t the cotton made , they 
ar e obliged to use measure s which 
ar e unknown to the law. Villipigue 
violated the law whe n he whipped 
th e Negr o boy. Of course, ther e wa s 
no redress for the Negr o boy, for who 
think s a jur y controlled and in sympath y with th e black belt plantation 
interests could dar e to punish an 
oversee r for whippin g a Negr o for 
impudence ? To punis h overseers for 
whippin g saucy Negroe s would 
amoun t to turnin g over th e black belt 
cotton plantation s to the Negroes, 
who would mak e much less cotton if 
released from th e rule of th e overseer. Yes, but it is expecting too 
much of an y sort of huma n natur e to 
expect tha t Negroe s to whom redress 
a t law is impossible will not avenge 
themselve s for the whippin g of their 
own members, especially their boys. 
"An d as much as possible to pre ­
ven t the Negroe s from takin g revenge it is absolutely necessary tha t 
they should alway s be kep t in mind of 
swift and terribl e penaltie s which 
wai t not for th e slow movements of 
th e law but stand ever read y to strike 
them. Th e authorit y which th e overseers and owners of these plantations 
ar e obliged to exert over the Negro 
workers cannot be sustained by th e 
law. Ther e must be extra-legal means 
always in reach and this extra ­
legal mean s is the mob, alway s ready 
to inflict capital punishmen t upon 
Negroe s violating tha t code which 
arise s upon th e relations of blacks 
and white s in the black belt. Consider th e immens e territor y over 
which these conditions prevail and 
the immens e white population affected by them, and th e powe r and 
the influence of th e interests which 
ar e protected by lynch law, and you EDITORIA L 305 
ma y see how difficult it is to suppress 
lynch law. " 
"Th e powe r and the influence of 
the interests which ar e protected by 
lynch law! " Ther e you have the 
whole moder n governmen t of the 
black belt with the South in its naked 
nastiness. Small wonde r tha t the 
Presiden t of the United State s is 
"protesting " against the Armenia n 
atrocitie s of the Turks. We trust 
tha t A. Rustem Bey will answe r tha t 
protest. 
FRO M A FRIEN D 
IN enclosing a check for one hundred dollars for the work of 
the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colo
People, Helen Keller, the wonderful 
blind girl, herself born in Alabama , 
write s us as follows: 
"It ha s been my intention to writ e 
to you every day since I received your 
letter—a n appeal which smote me to 
th e depths of my soul. In fact, I 
have starte d several letters while 
traveling from place to place, bu t wa s 
interrupte d so frequently tha t I lost 
the threa d of though t between lectures. We ar e speaking every night, 
and changing train s constantly. 
These conditions ar e not favorable 
for correspondence. 
" I am indeed whole-heartedly with 
you and th e Nationa l Association for 
th e Advancemen t of Colored People. 
I warml y endorse your efforts to 
brin g before the country the facts 
about the unfair treatmen t of the colored people in some parts of the 
United States. Wha t a comment 
upon our social justic e is the need of 
an association like yours! It should 
brin g th e blush of shame to the face 
of every tru e American to know tha t 
ten millions of his countrymen ar e 
denied the equal protection of the 
laws. Trul y no nation can live and 
not challenge such discrimination and 
violence against innocent members 
of society as your lette r describes. 
Nay, let me say it, this grea t republic of ours is a mockery when citizens in any section ar e denied the 
rights which th e Constitution guarantee s them, when they ar e openly 
evicted, terrorized and lynched by 
prejudiced mobs, and their persecutors and murderers ar e allowed 
to walk abroad unpunished. The 
United State s stands shamed before 
the world whilst ten millions of the 
people remain victims of a most 
blind, stupid, inhuma n prejudice. 
How dar e we call ourselves Christians ? The outrage s against the colored people ar e a denial of Christ. 
The central fire of His teaching is 
equality. His gospel proclaims in 
unequivocal words tha t the souls of 
all men ar e alike before God. Yet 
ther e ar e persons calling themselves 
Christians who profit from th e economic degradation of their colored 
fellow-countrymen. 
"Ashamed in my very soul I behold 
in my own beloved southland the 
tears of those who ar e oppressed, 
those who must brin g up their sons 
and daughters in bondage, to be servants because others have their fields 
and vineyards, and on the side of the 
oppressor is power. I feel with those 
suffering, toiling millions. I am 
thwarte d with them. Ever y attemp t 
to keep them down and crush their 
spirit is a betraya l of my faith tha t 
good is stronge r tha n evil, and light 
stronge r tha n darkness. I declare 
this faith every day to large audiences, and in my heart I pra y tha t 
God ma y open the eyes of the blind 
and brin g them by a wa y they know 
not to understandin g and righteousness. My spirit groan s with all the 
deaf and blind of the world. I feel 
their chains chafing my limbs. I am 
disenfranchised with every wage -
slave. I am overthrown, hurt, oppressed, beaten to the earth by the 
strong, ruthless ones who have taken 
awa y their inheritance . The wrong s 
the poor endur e rin g fiercely in my 
soul, and I shall never rest until they 306 TH E CRISIS 
ar e lifted into th e light, and given 
their fair shar e in the blessings of 
life tha t God mean t for us all alike. 
"Le t all lovers of justic e unite ; let 
us stan d togethe r and fight every custom, every law, every institution tha t 
breeds or mask s violence and prejudice, and permits one class to prospe r 
a t the cost of th e well-being and happiness of anothe r class. Le t us hurl 
our strengt h against the iron gate s of 
prejudic e until they fall, and their 
bars ar e sundered, and we all advanc e 
gladly toward s our common heritage 
of life, liberty and light, undivided 
by rac e or color or creed, united by 
the same huma n heart tha t beats in 
the bosom of all." 
m 
SEN . CLAP P O F MINNESOT A 
THE term of Moses E. Clapp, 
United State s Senator from 
Minnesota, expires on March 
4th, 1917. Already his enemies ar e laying plans to defeat him 
for renomination and re-election. 
Wit h one possible exception, Senato r Clapp is th e only membe r of the 
Senat e who can be absolutely relied 
on to support every measur e in the 
interests of colored people, and to 
fight prejudic e and injustices without cessation. 
He ha s never failed us on a single 
occasion. Wheneve r this Association 
wants something done for ' colored 
people we writ e to him. We have 
never asked him to speak a t a mass 
meeting, to writ e a letter to some high 
official, to introduce a good bill or fight 
a bad one, and received a refusal 
from him. He ha s fought "Jim 
Crow" and anti-intermarriag e bills 
tooth and nail. He fought for favorable amendments to the Smith-Leve r 
and othe r unfair bills. It wa s he 
who induced th e Secretary of Wa r 
to send an official representativ e of 
the Wa r Departmen t to our Spingar n 
Medal meeting in Boston. 
We do not know if he desires reelection. Bu t if he does, every colored ma n an d woman , every friend 
of th e Negro , every lover of justic e 
and fair-play should rally to his support. An d if he does not, we should 
all do ou r best to persuad e him to alte r his mind. Fo r we need him just 
wher e he is. Senato r Clapp must 
continue to represen t the interests of 
Colored people in th e Senat e of the 
United States. J. E. S. 
INTERMARRIAG E 
THER E ar e thos e wh o from 
time to time suggest tha t the 
Nationa l Association for the 
Advancemen t of Colored 
People and TH E CRISIS go fa r 
afield in opposing laws to prohibit 
intermarriag e between whit e and colored people. The y argu e tha t neithe r 
race desires intermarriage ; tha t it is 
a matte r "purely social," and tha t 
legalizing the prohibition simply puts 
stern custom into law. Ever y now 
and then, however, ther e come cases 
which show th e utte r blindness of the 
persons who thu s argu e and prove 
tha t anti-intermarriag e laws ar e simply cloaks for wron g and injustice. 
In Evansville , Ind., just across the 
rive r from Kentucky, Clifford Yarborough, a wealth y whit e ma n of 
Pulaski, Tenn., came into th e Circuit 
Court the othe r day and asked permission to adop t a seventeen-year-old 
mulatto girl. Th e girl migh t easily 
pass for white ; she is strikingly beautiful and talented in music . Yarborough willingly admitte d tha t the 
girl's mothe r wa s colored, and tha t 
he wa s the father. He said, " I feel 
like I should rectify a wrong. " Ther e 
is no law against intermarriag e of 
races in Indiana , bu t ther e is in Tennessee. Judg e Givens, therefore , refused to permi t th e adoption. He 
said tha t "if he legitimatized the 
daughte r he would be takin g a step 
whic h would in practic e have the 
same results a s permittin g th e intermarriag e of races. " Therefor e let us 
piously ruin th e life of an innocent 
girl! National Association for the Ad 
vancement of Colored People 
THE AUTOMOBILE PHALANX . ST. LOUIS. MO. 
SEGREGATIO N IN ST . LOUI S 
THE voters of St. Louis, at the special 
election held February 29th, decided 
three to one in favor of segregation. The 
vote was light, only 70,000 out of a total 
registration of 140,010; whereas at the 
election of 1912 a total poll of 130,000 was 
counted. On both ordinances, the final vote 
stood approximately 52,000 against 18,000. 
The majority of the electorate expressed 
their indifference by staying away from the 
polls while the active real estate interests 
set aside 50,000 colored Americans as 
though all were criminals, lunatics, or 
afflicted with contagious disease. 
The ordinance provides that hereafter no 
colored person can move into any residence, 
place of abode, or place of public assembly 
in any block where seventy-five per cent of 
the number of such buildings are now used 
by white people. A block includes the 
buildings facing each other on both sides 
of a street. The Building Commissioner is 
charged with the duty of preparing a map 
which shall classify every block in the city, 
and "such map ... . shall be prima 
facie evidence of the facts." New additions 
to the city are to be black or white according to a vote of the property owners taken 
after a month's publication. And a fine of 
ten to one hundred dollars per day is provided for owners or agents who violate the 
ordinance. 
The act is humorously entitled "AN ORDINANCE TO PREVEN T ILL FEELING, 
CONFLICT AND COLLISIONS BETWEE N THE WHITE AND COLORED 
RACES, AND TO PRESERVE THE 
PUBLIC PEACE, " and there is another 
joker which makes it legal for the white 
servants employed by colored people to reside in the colored blocks; tha t is, in St. 
Louis, it is as legal for a millionaire to borrow from a pauper as it is for a pauper to 
borrow from a millionaire. 
The propaganda in favor of segregation 
was conducted by the United Welfare Association, a body including some twenty real 
estate and improvement associations, organized in 1911 for this express purpose; and 
by the Real Estate Exchange. The special 
election was the first held on initiative petition since tha t provision was incorporated 
in the city charter. The Republic ably 
assisted the real estate interests, and from 
the fact tha t the Central Trades and Labor 
Union tabled by a two to one vote a resolution condemning segregation on February 
27, it is evident where organized labor stood. 
Leading the fight against segregation 
were the St. Louis Branch of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, the Antioch Baptist Association, a 
Citizens' Committee composed of one hundred of the most prominent men and women in the city of both races, and the 
Socialists. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch and 
the Times were squarely and uncompromisingly against segregation, as was St. Louis 
307 108 THE CRISIS 
Labor, the official organ of the Socialist 
Party. 
Astride the fence, if not with one foot in 
the segregation camp, were the Catholics, 
the Globe Democrat and the Star, and the 
Republican party organization. 
As to the first, when it was brought to 
the attention of Archbishop Glennon tha t 
pro-segregation meetings were being held 
in Catholic School halls, he is reported to 
have stated tha t it was a matte r of real 
estate and politics and not a matte r in 
which he should be concerned. After the 
N. A. A. C. P. succeeded in inducing his 
friends to bring pressure to bear, the 
Archbishop at the eleventh hour telephoned 
the following to the Post-Dispatch: 
"It has come to my notice tha t some Catholics have united under parish auspices to 
promote the segregation ordinances. I wish 
to state tha t they are acting not under the 
head of Catholicity, but as owners of real 
estate. 
"I personally believe tha t the colored 
people will best succeed within the lines 
of their own race and racial associations, 
but in so far as the teaching of the Catholic Church goes, it does not stand for enforced segregation—neither residential, educational nor religious." 
The Republican City Committee was put 
on record before the election as against the 
ordinances, and the Negroes depended on 
them for the defeat of segregation, but 
early on the morning of the 29th it became 
evident tha t where they were not entirely 
indifferent, the Republican organization 
was working for segregation. 
Interest henceforth centers in the legal 
part of the battle which has only begun. 
The first step was to test the validity of 
the initiative clause in the city charter. 
The case was handled by Judge Henry S. 
Caulfield, formerly Judge of the St. Louis 
Court of Appeals, assisted by George L. 
Vaughn and Homer G. Phillips of the legal 
committee of the St. Louis Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P. Judge Shields decided it 
valid in the lower court, and on appeal the 
Supreme Court of Missouri sustained the 
decision. Judge Henry Bond, who wrote 
the opinion of the Supreme Court, said: 
"The question of the constitutionality of 
these laws is not now presented for decision. . . . After the lawmaking department of the government . . . has 
finished its work, . . . the question of 
the construction of the completed ordinance 
becomes one for ultimate determination by 
the judiciary. 
"Nor can it be doubted wha t judgment 
would be given if it were shown tha t a 
law had been enacted in violation of the 
fundamental principle upon which the government of the State and nation is founded, 
or destructive of the legal rights of persons 
or property of any citizen or class of citizens of the United States. " 
But though the forces of reaction ar e thus 
in the saddle until the ordinances can be 
nullified by the Supreme Court, the colored 
people of America can take heart from the 
natur e of the fight tha t was made against 
it, and from the fact tha t the Negro voters 
of St. Louis finally got together and voted 
solidly against it. 
Through the courtesy of A. W. Lloyd, 
Grand Chancellor of the Knights of Pythias, their temple at 3137 Pine Street was 
thrown open as anti-segregation headquarters. A citizens' committee, headed by Rev. 
John W. Day, pastor of the Unitarian 
Church, brought actively into the fight such 
distinguished men of affairs as Mayor Kiel, 
Charles Nagel, former secretary of Commerce and Labor, Judge Leo Rassieur, William Marion Reedy, Fran k P. Crunden, 
Judge Albert D. Nortoni, Hon. Hugo 
Muench and Rabbi E. C. Voorsanger. 
There was even one real estate man, John 
P. Herrmann, who not only had the courage 
to take issue with all the other members of 
his profession, but who wrote a strong circular and distributed 50,000 of the Lincoln 
cartoons at his own expense. 
The St. Louis Branch of the N. A. A. 
C. P., under the leadership of its president, 
Gustavus Tuckerman; Charles Pitman, 
chairman of the executive committee; and 
Dr. T. A. Curtis, chairman of finance, organized a corps of nearly a thousand volunteers who districted the city and by means 
of automobiles owned by colored people, 
distributed some 310,000 pieces of literature. 
The secretary of the Branch, Mrs. H. A. 
Smith, Kathryn M. Johnson, national field 
agent of the Association, and Attorneys 
Vaughn and Phillips, set a standard of service, in an uncompromising fight sustained 
through months of heartbreaking struggle, 
of which every lover of liberty in America 
should be proud. N . A . A . C . P . 309 
TH E BOSTO N MEETIN G 
THE activities of the Boston Branch for 
Februar y were given largely to arranging for the meeting at which the Spingarn Medal was awarded by Governor Samuel W. McCall of Massachusetts to Major 
Charles Young of the United States Army. 
The meeting was held in Tremont Temple, 
February 22nd, 1916, a t 8 o'clock in the evening. An audience of 2,500 people representing all elements of the citizenship of 
greater Boston was present. On the platform were Governor McCall with his staff; 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, National President 
of the Association; Bishop John W. Hamilton of the Methodist. Episcopal Church; Rev. 
Alexander Mann, D. D., Rector of Trinity 
Church, Boston; Dr. James J. Putnam; Miss 
Mary White Ovington; Rev. and Mrs. Theodore A. Auten; Mr. William H. Dupree; Mr. 
Rolfe Cobleigh, Editor of the Congregationalist; Colonel Ridgway, Commissioner of the 
Coast Artillery, and officers from the forts 
in the harbor; Rev. and Mrs. Henry Francis 
Smith; Mr. Thomas P. Taylor; Mr. George 
G. Bradford; Rev. Samuel A. Brown; Dr. 
Vincent Y. Bowditch; Miss Olivia Bowditch; 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, and Mr. Roy Nash. 
The Columbia Glee Club of twenty-six 
male voices sang delightfully from seventhirty to eight o'clock. The place on the 
program given to Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, who 
was prevented by a railroad wreck from 
reaching the meeting in time, was filled by 
Miss Ovington, who spoke for the Association. 
In addition to the meeting at Tremont 
Temple, a canvass has been made of many 
merchants in Boston with a view to ascertaining how many employ colored help, and 
how many of those not employing colored 
help are willing to do so. 
A canvass is now in progress through 
greater Boston with the purpose of ascertaining how many patrons of shops, stores 
and institutions are willing to be served 
by colored clerks and other help. Neither 
canvass is yet completed. 
In the death of Mrs. May Hallowell Loud, 
a member of the Executive Committee, the 
Boston Branch has suffered what seems to 
be an irreparable loss. 
The following resolution, adopted by the 
Executive Committee, has been put upon 
the minutes of the Branch: 
"The mantle of a brave and loving spirit 
has fallen on our shoulders. However inadequate each of us feels to bear even a 
corner of that mantle, something of tha t indomitable spirit impels us to bravely lift 
our corner. 
"When the news came that she had passed 
on to the other shore it seemed at first as 
if one of the eternal verities of life had 
ceased to exist. 
"He r personality was such a potent factor 
in each of our lives—we had counted with 
such certainty on her untiring energy, her 
unfailing sympathy and generosity, her 
courage, her truth and steadfastness for 
the right—these had come to be such essential facts in our scheme of life tha t the 
world seemed empty and lost without her. 
There came a realization of tha t ever recurring miracle, tha t a brave and loving 
spirit never dies; tha t it lives on eternal in 
our hearts—tha t each of us will go forth 
to our daily tasks braver and stronger in 
the thought tha t tha t brave spirit lives in 
us, and in all who have been privileged to 
know her. 
"Her courage, truth and justice are impelling forces in our lives, urging us on to 
noble achievement and to greater diligence 
in the struggle for humanity, in which she 
spent her self with much unfaltering enthusiasm." 
OTHE R MEETING S 
THE question of how to keep the interest 
••• of members during the periods when 
no critical fight for fundamental rights is 
on, is one tha t confronts the officers of all 
the branches. Des Moines has solved the 
question this winter by a series of exceedingly interesting meetings which have attracted not only the members of the branch 
but the whole colored community. On December 17 the branch listened to an illustrated lecture on the European Wa r by 
Dr. W. A. Guild, who is just home from a 
year in the military hospitals of Paris. On 
New Year's Day, over five hundred Negroes 
listened to Attorney General George Cosson, a member of the Association, who 
spoke on "The New Democracy," incidentally pointing out tha t Robert Lincoln of the 
Pullman Company, which hires colored porters on the basis of the tipping system, is 
not treading very squarely in the footsteps 
of his illustrious father. At the same meeting a former student of Tuskegee spoke on 310 THE CRISIS 
the life and works of Booker T. Washington, 
and a representative of the Iowa Equal 
Rights Association talked on "The New 
Emancipation," the struggle of women for 
political recognition. On Januar y 18th, Dr. 
Curtiss Reese, of the Unitarian Church, 
delivered a tribute to "The Greatness of the 
American Negro, " which is the more noteworthy as coming from a Southerner. And 
on Lincoln's Birthday, Des Moines held a 
Lincoln-Douglass Celebration at which Dr. 
Kerbye of Plymouth Church paid tribute 
to the great emancipator, and J. Owen Redmond, who won the Spaulding prize for excellence in oratory at Grinnell College, 
spoke on Frederick Douglass. 
This idea of a joint Lincoln-Douglass Celebration was carried out by several branches 
and is one which should become an annual 
custom with all. The Howard University 
Chapter combined with the history department in holding a memorial meeting on 
Lincoln's Birthday to Douglass, Sojourner 
Truth, and Booker T. Washington. In 
Cleveland, the branch co-operated with one 
of the leading white churches of the city, 
the First Methodist Episcopal, to fittingly 
celebrate the emancipator's birthday. Rev. 
Ernest Lynn Waldorf, pastor of the church, 
talked on Lincoln and the President of the 
Branch, Rev. H. C. Bailey, discussed the 
aims of the National Association. 
The Cleveland Branch proposes to hold a 
district conference in May or June at which 
delegates from Pittsburgh, Columbus, Detroit, Toledo, Buffalo, Dayton and Springfield, will meet with representatives from 
National headquarters. 
. m 
SOLDIER S 
THE following letter has been sent by 
Secretary Nash to the President, the 
Secretary of the Interior, the Congressional 
Chairmen on Military Affairs, and others: 
This Association is grievously disappointed in the Wilson administration not 
only because it has done nothing for the 
colored man but because it has at times been 
exceedingly unjust to him. Through our 
Treasurer, Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, 
we called your attention repeatedly to the 
chance for the President to show his regard 
for the rights of ten million colored Americans, and in no single case has the Administration availed itself of the opportunity. 
We now appeal to you to suggest tha t 
four of the new regiments about to be created be designated specifically for the enlistment of colored soldiers. 
The Adjutant-General has stated tha t he 
doubted if 175,000 regulars could be recruited in the United States. There is no 
difficulty in recruiting colored regiments. 
Yet, while officers ar e tearing their hair to 
get white recruits, the sign is up, "No colored men wanted. " Does it not seem a ridiculous program of preparedness which 
deliberately excludes the best material we've 
got? 
Tha t is no idle boast. When the Fiftyfourth Massachusetts stormed Fort Wagner 
in '63 it established for all time the fact 
tha t the colored soldier could fight and 
fight well. The history of the Ninth and 
Tenth Cavalry in the Indian fights between 
1868 and 1890 piled up the evidence of their 
courage and loyalty. 
There have been notably fewer desertions 
from the colored regiments than from the 
white. The Ninth Cavalry once astonished 
the army by reporting not a single desertion in twelve months, an unheard of and 
undreamed of record. 
Their service during the Spanish Wa r 
and since has shown our colored troops to 
be infinitely better fitted for service in our 
tropical dependencies than white troops. 
Company L, of the Forty-ninth Volunteers, 
composed wholly of colored men, and commanded by Capt. E. L. Baker, a colored veteran who had served for seventeen years in 
the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry, made a record 
which no white company remotely approached. This company had on its rolls 
during a period of twelve months one hundred and six men who were fit for duty at 
all times and never lost a day on account 
of sickness. More extraordinary still is the 
fact tha t during the same period not one 
of these men ever went before a courtmartial. Surely a striking illustration of 
what can be done by colored officers! Such 
traits enabled Gen. A. S. Burt, in relinquishing command of the Twenty-fifth Infantry, 
on April 17, 1902, to quote the InspectorGeneral of the army as saying, "The Twenty-fifth Infantry is the best regiment I have 
seen in the Philippines." It wa s noticeable, 
too, tha t neither the officers nor the men of 
any colored regiment figured in the charges 
and counter-charges which arose out of the 
use of the "wate r cure " in the Islands. EVOLUTION OF THE NEGRO CHURCH. II. A CITY CHURCH. ST, LOUIS, MO. 
311 
EVOLUTION OF THE NEGRO CHURCH. I. A COUNTRY MEETING-HOUSE 312 THE CRISIS 
THREE CHURCHES 
NOTHING will better illustrate the exact 
work of the Negro church in America 
than three notable examples: the Dixwell 
Avenue Congregational Church of New 
Haven, Conn.; the St. John's A. M. E. 
Church of Norfolk, Va., and the St. Mark's 
M. E. Church of New York City. 
Dixwell Avenue Congregational Church 
was established in 1820 when a white man, 
Simeon S. Jocelyn, gathered in New Haven 
twenty-four colored persons to teach them. 
He met much abuse and received many 
threats from the whites, but his congregation grew until in 1829 they became a regular Congregational Church. 
This church called to its pastorate in 
1836 the celebrated colored man, the Rev. 
J. W. C. Pennington. Pennington, who was 
born a slave, became one of the best educated men of his day, and had a degree of 
Doctor of Divinity conferred upon him by 
the University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
Between 1838 and 1857 the little church 
built a modest brick structure, and received 
from one of its deceased members $10,000, 
the income of which is still divided between 
the church and worthy colored students. 
Steadily the church has grown until today 
it has a large, brick edifice, a pipe organ 
and a chapel, and has just celebrated its 
ninety-fourth anniversary. It has always 
been foremost in public movements; in helping the Underground Railway; in seconding 
the efforts of William Lloyd Garrison; in 
encouraging education, and now in various 
lines of social uplift. A course of lectures is 
maintained; industrial classes are carried 
on, and a gymnasium teacher is hired; the 
Boy Scout movement has a center here; a 
pure milk station is in its chapel; and a 
social survey of the neighborhood was recently made. 
The present pastor is the Rev. Edward F. 
Goin, a graduat e of Yale. 
ST. JOHN'S A. M. E. Church of Norfolk, 
Va., was organized about 1840, and 
first met in an old soap factory. Then the 
white Methodist church took care of the congregation, and gave them their first house 
of worship in 184S. In 1863, under the Military Government, the church secured colored 
trustees, and after the wa r wa s admitted to 
the A. M. E. church through Bishop Wayman. 
From the first the church has had a hard 
struggle with debt. The present edifice, 
which is the third tha t the church has 
owned, was begun in 1888. A fine parsonage 
was added in 1907, and finally in August, 
1915, the church stood free from debt with 
an unusually excellent plant. 
Perhaps the pastor, the Rev. E. H. 
Hunter, is proudest of his Sunday School 
among all the branches of his work. This 
is one of the great Sunday Schools of the 
country with an enrollment of nine hundred 
in the main school, three hundred and fifty 
in the Home Department, and one hundred 
and twenty-five in the Cradle Roll, a total of 
1,375. There are thirty-two classes in the 
main school, and twenty-six classes in the 
Home Department, each in charge of a 
visitor. 
The Cradle Roll Department is one of the 
brightest features of the school. The superintendent has a committee of four women 
and twelve girls who serve as visitors. The 
singing is spirited, and assisted by an orchestra of twenty men, and a choir of thirty 
boys and girls. There are classes in sewing 
and basketry work; lawn tennis, basket 
ball and other sports are encouraged, and 
a company of fifty cadets, uniformed and 
equipped. 
The Superintendent is Lieutenant James 
N. Collins, who is serving his twenty-fourth 
term. 
ST. MARK'S M. E. Church, of New York 
^ City, dates from 1871, and first worshipped a t Broadway between Thirty-seventh and Thirty-eighth Streets. In 1874 it 
removed to West Thirty-fifth Street; in 1882 
to West Forty-eighth Street, and in 1895 
to West Fifty-third Street, where it now remains. 
The pastor, Dr. William H. Brooks, who 
has served since 1896, is an organizer of 
unusual ability. Not only does the church 
own its edifice, but in 1900 it purchased a 
parsonage for $8,000; in 1911 an apartment house in Harlem for $54,000, and in 1913 
a dwelling in New Rochelle for $6,000. This 
same year a house adjoining the church was 
bought and reconstructed as a Parish House 
a t a cost of $63,000. Negro architects, contractors and mechanics worked on it. There 
are about forty rooms for the various activities of the society, including a men's club 
room, shower bath, gymnasium, kitchen, rest 
and play rooms, and an assembly hall for 
moving pictures. On the second floor is the 
pastor's residence. All sorts of organizations have their headquarters here, and 
many books by and about Negroes have been 
collected. A day nursery is maintained, and 
fifteen of the church classes meet here regularly. 
Branches of St. Mark's Church have 
grown up in Brooklyn, in Harlem, in the 
Bronx and in Williamsbridge, and despite 
this the Mother church has grown from a 
membership of eight hundred to nearly two 
thousand in eighteen years. 
EASTER EGG-ROLLING 
By MRS. R. KENT BEATTIE. 
ONLY upon rar e occasions ar e the private grounds of the President of the 
United States, the south lawns of the 
White House, open to the public. The best 
of these occasions is on "Easte r Monday" 
of each year when the children of Washington gathe r for an egg-rolling unequalled 
elsewhere. 
Early in the morning, even to the remotest parts of the city, a holiday spirit stirs. 
Everywhere there are children. Their eager 
faces, their holiday attire, and, most of all, 
their gay Easter baskets, tell tha t school is 
not their rallying-point. All the streets 
worth traversing seem converging toward 
some important center. Busy street-cars 
EASTE R EGG-ROLLIN G 313 
OFFICERS AND TEACHERS. ST. JOHN A. M. E. SUNDAY SCHOOL, NORFOLK, VA. .314 THE CRISIS 
ON THE WHITE HOUSE GROUNDS 
throughout the city pick the youngsters up 
and hurr y them along. Automobiles join 
the procession, each making a bee-line for 
the great iron entrance to the White House 
grounds. 
From nine to three o'clock the gates 
swing wide. There is only one restriction 
as to who may enter. Each child must be 
accompanied by an older person and each 
adult must have a child escort. Distinctions of wealth, of social position, of race 
and of color, are forgotten. The chief requisite of a good time is a basket full of 
colored eggs. The President usually gives 
a word of greeting. After other festivities 
there is a concert by the country's most 
famous band. 
Other cities have their egg-rollings, but 
nowhere else is there an event so noteworthy as this grea t gathering of the 
children of the nation's capital. 
THE BAPTIST CONTROVERSY 
FEW American citi-
•*• zens realize how 
serious a matte r is the 
recent split in the National Baptist Convention. This organization is a loose federation of the majority of 
the Colored Baptist 
Churches of the United 
States. 
The National Baptist Convention was organized at Atlanta, 
Ga., September 28th, 
1895. Its objects are 
missionary and educational work, and the 
publication of religious 
literature. The membership consists of representatives of churches, 
Sunday schools, associations, and State Conventions of Baptists, 
and of such individual 
Baptists as wish to 
join. The Convention 
meets annually, and 
has a president, vicepresidents from each 
State, a statistical secretary, and other officers. This Convention 
elects annually a Foreign Mission Board, a 
Home Mission Board, 
an Educational Board, 
and a Baptist YoungPeople's Union Board. 
These boards all consist of one member from 
each State represented, and elect their TH E BAPTIS T CONTROVERS Y 315 
own officers and executive committee so located as to be able to meet monthly. The 
Convention also collects statistics concerning the Negro Baptists throughout the 
United States. 
Wha t has happened to this organization 
which brings some two and one-half millions 
of colored folk into union? 
Let us first set down the statements of 
the protagonists. The Rev. E. C. Morris, 
of Arkansas, is the chief executive officer 
of the Convention, and has been since its 
foundation. The Rev. R. H. Boyd, of Texas, 
is secretary of the Publishing Board, and 
beginning with no capital has in twenty 
years built up a publishing business which 
issues twelve million copies of periodicals, 
and has been rated by Bradstreet as worth 
$350,000. 
1. The Morris Faction. The Rev. E. C. 
Morris writes the CRISIS as follows: 
In 1896 the National Baptist Convention 
gave an order to the Home Mission Board 
to proceed at once to establish a Publishing 
House and get out a series of Sunday-school 
periodicals by Januar y 1st, 1897. But to 
be more specific, I quote a paragraph from 
a long article published in the Convention 
Teacher, September, 1897. "Read this and 
be convinced of our authority to publish 
these periodicals . . . The work was 
laid aside until the meeting in St. Louis, 
Mo., September, 1896. At this meeting the 
publication of Sunday-school literature was 
thoroughly discussed pro and con. A committee of one from each State was again 
appointed to recommend and plan for the 
beginning of the publishing of Sundayschool literature a t once; this committee 
reported to the House and recommended tha t 
a Publishing Board be elected, and tha t they 
proceed at once to issue a series of Sundayschool literature by Januar y 1st, 1897. The 
resolution was unanimously referred to the 
Home Mission Board with power to act." 
This excerpt is from a lengthy letter published in the Convention Teacher, September, 1897, over the signature of R. H. Boyd, 
as Secretary, National Baptist Publishing 
Board. 
From the day tha t this enterprise was 
launched to last September, 1915, when the 
Convention met at Chicago, Ill., a large 
majority of the Negro Baptists have given 
their patronage to tha t Board, believing 
tha t they were supporting an enterprise 
which really belonged to the denomination. 
I should say, however, tha t some doubted 
tha t the ownership was in the denomination 
and several investigations were made which 
disclosed tha t the deeds were made to the 
National Baptist Publishing Board, and it 
was believed that the Board was a creature 
of the Convention, and since it made an accounting to the Convention each year tha t 
it was still acting in good faith and in obedience to the Convention, its creator. But 
tha t Board refused to report to the Convention at Chicago after it had regularly organized on September 9th, 1915. The Convention as has been its custom for nineteen 
years elected a Board of one from each 
State, and after the adjournment of the 
Convention the Board went to Nashville, 
Tenn., and demanded tha t the secretary turn 
the property over, which he refused to do; 
hence the Board proceeded in a legal way to 
get possession of the property, which brings 
out the startling statement in answer to the 
claim set up by the Publishing Board elected 
at Chicago. "These Respondents say tha t 
it is not true tha t they claim to be or 
tha t they hold themselves out to be the Executive or Governing Board or the Committee of the Publishing Board of the National 
Baptist Convention of the United States. 
If the allegation of this bill is intended to 
mean tha t these respondents claim to be a 
Board created by, or governed by the National Baptist Convention of the United 
States, or tha t they claim to be a committee 
tha t derives its authority from any constitution, resolution or other action of such 
Convention, other than tha t may be hereinafter specifically set forth." 
2. The Boyd Faction. The Rev. R. H. 
Boyd says, in the Richmond Planet, tha t 
President Morris and his personal friends 
set out with a determination through another commission form of government to 
change the convention from a free volunteer Baptist Association to a kind of hierarchy or Episcopal form of government; 
brethren, using Mr. Griggs' words, "to be 
to the Baptists what the Board of Bishops 
is to the Methodists." 
In order to force this new plan they appointed from among themselves a committee whose duty it would be to go to Washington and secure from the District of 
Columbia a charter, and they appointed the 
same committee to draft a constitution different to the one then in use, and with this 
charter backed up by this constitution, they 316 THE CRISIS 
would be able to force all the demands by 
civil authority under the law. 
[At the Chicago Convention, 1915.] No 
person was allowed to enter the hall unless he or she wore a Morris badge. This 
so enraged the majority of the delegates 
until they stood out on the street and sidewalks until about eleven o'clock in a steady 
rain. At this hour President-elect Jones 
and his followers felt themselves outraged 
and appealed to the civil authorities and 
had these doors opened and the leaders restrained by injunction. 
When it was found tha t President Morris 
had the legal contracted rights to the hall, 
the Jones faction at once appointed a committee to wait on Dr. Haywood and his deacons and officials and secure the Salem 
Baptist Church for two days to finish up the 
business of the convention. 
I desire to state most emphatically tha t 
at the time of this division the question of 
the Publishing Board was not raised. It 
was a question of the charter and the unbaptistic methods resorted to by the leaders 
of the convention. As to the dissatisfaction, 
I confess tha t there is and has been dissatisfaction on both sides for a number of years; 
dissatisfaction because of the unbusinesslike and unprecedented actions on the pai't 
of the executive officers of the National 
Baptist Convention. 
These statements leave much lacking in 
clearness and frankness, but the facts seem 
to be: 
1. The greatest, single accomplishment 
of the National Baptist Convention is its 
Publishing House. 
2. Dr. R. H. Boyd has by his energy and 
ability built up this business. 
3. His greatest help in building this 
business was the pride and loyalty of between two and three million Negro Baptists 
who regarded this business as belonging to 
themselves. 
4. The Rev. E. C. Morris secured and 
kept control of the Convention by methods 
which were often called in question. 
5. Dr. Boyd feared tha t Mr. Morris' continued control might oust him from the 
business which he had built up. He, therefore, proceeded to vest the legal control,of 
the Publishing House in a Board which the 
Convention could not control. 
6. Mr. Morris feared tha t his hold on 
the Convention might weaken, and he proceeded to "incorporate" the Convention 
through a small body of his friends. 
7. The battle came a t the Chicago Convention, September, 1915. Apparently Morris had the votes and Boyd had the law; 
the result was a split and two bodies claiming to be the National Baptist Convention. 
8. Dr. Boyd then made the tactical error 
of apparently denying the right of either 
Convention to control his Publishing House. 
9. Mr. Morris made the very politic move 
of simply claiming tha t the Boyd Publishing House should belong to the Convention; 
and tha t if this was not true the Convention should have a Publishing House. 
Thus, in a factional fight, with something 
of right and something of wrong on either 
side, the interests of three millions hangs 
in the balance. 
THE CATHOLIC NEGRO 
MR. WM. McENTIRE, writing in the 
Tidings, a Catholic paper, says: 
"There have been but few Negroes ordained to the priesthood in the United 
States, although many have been ordained 
and have faithfully and earnestly labored 
and still are laboring in the Vineyard of the 
Lord elsewhere. Some have risen to high position. The writer has been and still is engaged in making a careful investigation, 
and can say tha t the historical proofs seem 
to indicate tha t Rt. Rev. Francisco Javier 
Luna Victoria y Castro, a Negro Bishop of 
Panama in 1751, afterwards transferred to 
Trujillo, Peru, was the first native-born 
bishop on this continent; and in our own day 
and time, we find in 1902, the late Pope Leo 
XIII, restoring the diocese of Marianna, 
Amazon, Brazil, with a population of 2,-
000,000 souls and designating a Negro, Rt. 
Rev. Silveria Gomez Pimentar, to rule over 
it as its Bishop. These were remarkable 
men, and they did many wonderful things. 
They were sons of slaves. The cathedral 
now standing in Panama was built by the 
first named bishop with funds from his pri-TH E CATHOLI C NEGR O 317 
vate purse. Through his efforts, before he 
was made a bishop, the University of Panama was founded and the Jesuits called to 
take charge of it. The second named bishop 
built and maintained in his diocese many 
churches and schools, a seminary, and 
houses of charity. Both were men of learning, who 'grew in virtue, knowledge, and 
wisdom.' 
"The first Negro priest ordained for the 
United States was Rev. Augustine Tolton, 
the son of slave parents, born in Hannibal, 
Mo., in April, 1S54. The family moved to 
Quincy, Ill., in 1861. He was sent to Rome 
by Fathe r McGirr and the Franciscans, in 
1880. He studied in the Propaganda College, was ordained in 1887, and returned to 
Quincy. He took charge of the colored 
Catholics of Chicago, November 28, 1889, 
and built St. Monica's Church. He died 
from the effects of sunstroke, July 9, 1897. 
Fathe r Tolton was a devout and holy man. 
"The second is Rev. Charles Randolph 
Uncles, born in Baltimore, and ordained by 
Cardinal Gibbons in 1891. He is a member 
of the Josephite community, and is now connected with Epiphany College, Walbrook, 
Baltimore, Md. 
"The third is Rev. John H. Dorsey, also a 
Josephite, and a native of Baltimore. He 
was ordained by Cardinal Gibbons in 1902, 
and is now teaching in St. Joseph's College 
for Negro Catechists, Montgomery, Alabama, and assisting the Rev. Joseph McNamar a in the management of the institution. 
"The fourth priest ordained was Rev. Joseph J. Plantevigne, born in Louisiana, and 
a Josephite. He was ordained by the late 
Bishop Curtis in 1907, and was assistant to 
Rev. Wm. Dunn, Pastor of St. Francis 
Xavier's Church, Baltimore, Md. He died 
Januar y 27, 1913. 
"The fifth is the Rev. Joseph A. Burgess, 
a priest of the Congregation of the Holy 
Ghost. Born in Washington, D. C, he 
was ordained in Paris in 1907. At present, 
he is a professor in the Apostolic College of 
his Congregation at Cornwall, Pa. 
"The last, Rev. Stephen Louis Theobald, 
born in British Guiana, was ordained in 
June , 1910, by Archbishop Ireland. He is 
now ministering in St. Paul, Minn." 
Mr. McEntire continues: 
"There are two colored Sisterhoods in 
the Catholic Church in the United States. 
"On July 2, 1829, Fathe r Joubert, a Sulpician Fathe r of Baltimore, established four 
young colored (free) women in the Sisterhood of the Oblates of Providence. The work 
in which they were to engage was the teaching of colored girls, the care of orphans and 
the saving of erring ones among the colored 
population. For eighty-six years this Order 
of holy women has been modestly and successfully doing the work set apart to be 
done by it. The Motherhouse of the Order 
is in Baltimore. It numbers 116 professed 
nuns, 25 novices, and 10 postulants. The 
Oblates of Providence have missions in 
Washington, D. C, St. Louis, Mo., Leavenworth, Kan., Havana, Cuba, and elsewhere. 
"The Order of the Sisters of the Holy 
Family was founded in New Orleans, November 21, 1842, by Fathe r Rousselon. Five 
young colored (free) women, whose wealth 
was partly inherited and partly earned by 
their labor, composed the original community. The purpose of the Order at first 
was simply to teach the Catechism to young 
and old colored women and to prepare,them 
for the Sacraments. Since then the scope 
of the Order's work has broadened until it 
takes in the whole range of the spiritual and 
temporal works of mercy. The sisterhood 
numbers 125 nuns, and they are carrying on 
19 schools with 2,855 pupils. It has four 
orphan asylums and a home for aged poor. 
The Motherhouse of the Sisters is adjacent 
to the Cathedral in New Orleans." 
As to the general work the author says: 
"There are now 110 Catholic churches exclusively for colored people. Only a few of 
these are missions without resident priests. 
There ar e 156 schools, wherein about 16,000 
children are being taught. Besides the 
schools, there are now 26 other institutions 
caring for orphans or aged or otherwise dependent members of the colored race. 
"There are 182 priests engaged in the 
work. Of these 56 are Josephite Fathers 
whose work is exclusively among the colored 
people; 32 are diocesan priests assigned to 
this work by their respective bishops; and 
39 are religious of some of the other communities. Besides these priests who labor 
exclusively in the colored missions, there are 
5,5 priests whose time is divided between the 
white and colored Catholics of- their respective parishes. 
"There are five orders of Sisters entirely 
devoted to the Colored Missions." 318 THE CRISIS 
VIERGE NOIRE 
DE NOTRE-DAME 
DU PUY 
By MRS. C. W . CLIFFORD 
ONE of the most interesting of the pilgrimages which we made was to the 
little village of du Puy situated high in the 
mountains of the Haute Loire. 
Of the many wonderful things to be seen 
a t Puy it was the ancient Cathedral which 
excited our liveliest interest. Tradition 
says tha t La Cathedral du Puy dates back 
to the first episodes of the history of St. 
George, who was one of the seventy-two 
disciples of Jesus Christ, and was sent by 
St. Peter into France. 
We were anxious to go into the Cathedral, 
for it was here we should find the unusual 
object for which we were looking. Slowly 
and with a sort of awe, we approached the 
choir, and there—yes, there upon the 
Maitre-Autel (main altar) was the wonderful statue of the Black Virgin! 
The origin of the original of the present 
statue is lost in the mists of antiquity; but 
it appears to be a pretty well-established 
fact tha t it was brought from the Holy 
Land by St. Louis in 1254. It was of ebony, 
and represented a black Virgin, sitting upon 
a stool, holding a black Infant Jesus on her 
knees. The bandages, tightly bound according to the fashion of the ancient Egyptian mummies, enveloped the body of the 
child and of the mother, leaving only their 
faces visible. 
On the 19th of January, 1794, during the 
Revolution, the Vierge Noire, object of the 
veneration of so many centuries, was despoiled of her rich garments, dragged ignominiously through the streets and burned 
amid the howling of the mob, with all tha t 
was found precious in the archives of the 
Cathedral. "Thus disappeared this precious 
image, the treasure and the safeguard of 
Vilay, at whose feet had bowed the posterity 
of Popes and Kings of innumerable generations," says the record. 
On June 8th, 1856, the present Vierge 
Noire, a faithful copy of the ancient one, 
was solemnly crowned. This was the signal for even greater honors than had been 
previously shown her, and thereafter on 
THE BLACK VIRGIN 
innumerable occasions she was carried in 
triumph through the streets, and hundreds 
of thousands of pilgrims came to worship 
at her shrine. 
Dear Negro-American, can you believe it! 
Can you believe tha t there are people in 
this world worshipping a Black Virgin who 
holds a Black Child? Tha t they place this 
figure on the main alta r of one of their oldest Cathedrals, and tha t her marvelous history is chiseled on tablets of stone, and otherwise preserved in the archives of the diocese? And tha t the stories of her care, 
and protection of her people ar e scarcely 
equalled by those of any of the Virgins who 
figure in the church history of ancient Europe? 
Notwithstanding all of the mythical and 
legendary romance of the past which is interwoven with the history of the Virgin 
(and which to our very practical Twentieth 
Century ears appears so superstitious and 
silly) the lesson remains,—that color is 
nothing. A Black Virgin, possessed of all 
the virtues, commands as much respect as 
a white one; tha t a white race of people 
trained to the ideal of a Vierge Noire can 
love her just as truly and reverence her 
just as devoutly. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 319 
National President Vioe-Presidents 
MOORFIELD STOREY, Boston OSWALD HARRISON VILLARD, New York 
REV. JOHN HAYNES HOLMES, New York 
Chairman of the Board of Directors JOHN E. MILHOLLAND New York 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN, New York ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE, Washington 
MARY WHIT E OVINGTON, Brooklyn 
REV. G. R. WALLER, Springfield, Mass. 
Director of Publications 
and Research 
DR. W. E. IS. DU BOIS. New York 
TH E 
N . A . A . C. P . 
Headquarter s 7 0 Filt h Avenu e 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD ' ROY NASH 
Treasurer Acting Secretary 
ADDITIONAL MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Chicago Brooklyn New York 
JANE ADDAMS DR. v. MORTON JONES REV. HUTCHIN S C. BISHOP 
DR. C. E. BENTLEY DR. O. M. WALLER REV. W. H. BROOKS 
_ . „ _ MRS. FLORENCE KELLEY 
Boston Ne w Haven PAUL KENNADAY 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOUD GEORGE W. CRAWFORD CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 
BUTLER R. WILSON Philadelphia ARTHUR B. SPINGARN 
Baltimor e DR. WILLIAM A. SINCLAIR CHARLES H. STUDIN 
TiT^-u^r, mrrv DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
BISHO P JOHN HURST Washington LILLIAN D. WALD 
DR. F. N. CARDOZO PROF. GEO. WILLIAM COOK WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLING 
Th e N . A . A . C. P . Organize d Ma y 25,1911 : 
To fight against terrorization and lynching 
To fight against segregation in ghettos and schools 
To fight against Jim Crow regulations and laws which put colored 
women at the mercy of their despoilers 
To fight for an enormous extension of educational facilities for colored 
children 
To fight for equality of opportunity in agriculture and industry 
To fight for a preparedness program which will treat 10,000,000 nativeborn, English-speaking colored people as loyal American citizens, and 
not as unassimilated foreigners 
The N. A. A. C. P. publishes the CRISIS. 
We have fifty-four branches, nine locals and four college chapters carrying on 
the work of self-emancipation. 
If this battle of democracy is yours, help us to reach the 10,000 mark before the 
fall election. 
Membership Blank 
Date , 1916 . 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD , Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for th e 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose two dollars. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Mention TH E CRISI S 320 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A Safe Investment 
A n Opportunity 
public 
THE STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY offers to the 
$25,00 0 
of its new issue of Capital Stock at $200.00 per share, under the following four 
methods of payment: I. Two Hundred Dollars Cash. 2. Giving First Mortgage 
on Real Estate for 5 vears. 3. 20% in Cash, balance in four notes, each for 20% 
of the purchase price and due respectively in 3, 6, 9 and 12 months from date. 
4. Eight Dollars cash and 24 monthly notes for Eight Dollars each. This stock 
has the three essentials of a good investment: 
1. SAFETY. Over a century and a half of experience has proven the 
scientific principles of Old Line Life Insurance to be absolutely correct. No 
other business has such inherent elements of strength and unusual safeguards 
thrown around it as the business of Life Insurance. 
2 . CONVERTIBILIT Y INT O CASH. The stock can be sold very 
readily, and if you desire to negotiate a loan for a short period you can obtain 
accommodation from the Bank much more easily, quickly and nearer the full 
value of a Government Bond than any other security. 
3. PROFIT . Handsome returns have been paid stockholders of Old 
Line Legal Reserve Life Insurance Company in cash and stock dividends. 
Stock in the STANDAR D LIF E I NSURANC E COMPAN Y is sure to increase in value and 
to pay large dividends. 
STANDAR D LIF E stock is recommended and has been purchased by 285 
prominent business and professional men and women and banking institutions. 
Every share of the Company's stock is owned' by members of the race. 
The increase of the Capital Stock from $100,000.00 to $125,000.00 is made 
to enable the Company to more rapidly extend its work and to purchase the 
business of other companies retiring from the field. The four examinations 
made by Insurance Departments, Certified Public Accountants and' Actuaries 
showed a healthy growth, low mortality, excellent financial condition and 
careful management. 
The first and only Old Line Legal Reserve Life Insurance Company 
organized and operated by colored men. Insurance in force over $2,000,000.00; 
Income saved during 1015, $23,526.40; Total Reserve. $51,779.46; Protection to 
Policyholders, $156,344.40; Deposited with State Treasurer, $100,000.00. 
Please \ 
send me \ 
particulars * 
about 
insurance. 
A Golden Opportunity—Buy Now 
Fo r ful l informatio n writ e 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Amount 
Sex 
Age \ 
Weight \ \ Hom e Office 
Occupation , 
Name \ 200 Auburn Avenue, 
Addres s
 ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
(C. April, 1910) 
Mention The CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 32 1 
THE MEN BEHIND THE STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
OFFICERS 
• HEMA N E. PERRY President 
A. L. LEWIS, Florida Vice-President 
THOS. H . HAVES, Tennessee Vice-President 
R. L. ISAACS, Texas Vice-President 
EMMETT J. SCOTT, Alabama Vice-President 
HARRY H . PACE Secretary and Treasurer 
H . C DUGAS Assistant Secretary 
C. C. CATER, M.D Medical Director 
WM. H. KING Director of Agencies 
DIRECTORS 
HENRY A. BOYD Nashville, Tenn. R. L, ISAACS Prairie View, Texas 
Asst. Secretary National Bapt. Treasurer A. & M. College 
Publishing Bd. SOL C. JOHNSON Savannah, Ga. 
WALTER S. BUCHANAN. . .Normal, Ala. Editor Savannah Tribune 
President A. & M. College A. L. LEWIS Jacksonville, Fla. 
B. J. DAVIS Atlanta, Ga. Secretary Afro-American Industrial 
Editor Atlanta Independent Insur. Co. 
W M . DRISKELL Atlanta, Ga. TOOMBS MCCLENDON. . .Washington, Ga. 
Superintendent of Inspections Merchant and Planter 
H . C DUGAS Augusta. Ga. HARRY H . PACE Atlanta, Ga. 
Cashier Penny Savings Bank Secretary and Treasurer 
J. F. DUGAS Augusta, Ga. HEM AN E. PERRY Atlanta, Ga. 
Undertaker President 
L. J. GARTH Decatur, Ala. J. O. Ross Atlanta, Ga. 
Coal Wood Merchant President Atlanta State Savings Bank 
A. D , HAMILTON Atlanta, Ga. EMMETT J. SCOTT .. . Tuskegee Inst., Ala. 
Contractor and Builder Secretary Tuskegee Institute 
THOS ; H. HAVES Memphis, Tenn. WALTER S. SCOTT Savannah, Ga. 
Undertaker. Vice-Pres. Solvent Pres. Guaranty Mutual Life & Health 
Savings Bank Insur. Co. 
J. W. HUGULEY Americus, Ga. N. B. YOUNG Tallahassee, Fla. 
Physician and Surgeon President A. & M. College 
ADVISORY BOARD 
J. C . NAPIER, Ex-Register of the Treasury, W. E. KING , Editor Dallas Express, Dallas, 
Nashville, Tenn. Texas 
W. S. CANNON, President Independent Benev- E. H. CARRY, Principal, Gibbs High School, 
olent Order, Atlanta, (Ga. Little Rock, Ark. 
SILAS X. FLOYD, Principal Mauge St. School, S. H. T HOMPSON , M. D., Physician and SurAUGUSTA, GA. geon, Kansas City, Kansas 
L. W. LOMAX, Real Estate & Loans, Houston, Texas C. C. CATER, Cashier, Atlanta State Savings 
M i. . i. i u . Bank, Atlanta, Ga. 
V. H. Tulame, Merchant, 1.anker, Montgom- ery, Ala. . (, R. S. WILLIAMS. Bishop C. M. E. Church, 
SCOTT BOND, General Merchant, Madison, Ark. Augusta, Ga. 
J . M. FRIERSON, Undertaker, Houston, Texas. MRS . MAMI E JOSENBERGER, Undertaker, Fort 
CHAS . H. ANDERSON, Fish & Oysters, Jackson- Smith, Ark. 
ville, Fla. M. GRIGGS, Pres. Farmers Bank, Palestine, 
H. STRAWBRIDGE, Secretary, Union Central Re- Texas 
lief Association, Birmingham, Ala. S . J . ELLIOTT. National Grand Master, Mosaic 
L. S . BALLARD, Letter Carrier, Jackson, Miss. Templars, Little Rock, Ark. 
L. E. WILLIAMS , Pres. Wage Earners Bank, M RS . A. H. COLEY, Teacher, Helena, Ark. 
Savannah, Ga. JAS. F. SHANNON , M . D., Pres. S. P. L. InC . K. ROBINSON, Editor and Publisher, St. vestment Co., Kansas City, Mo. 
Louis. .Mo. W. N. CuMMINGS, Principal Public School, 
R. L. S M (TH , Banker, Waco, Texas Galveston, Texas 
IRA T. BRYANT Secretary, A. M. K. S. S. J. C. MARTIN, BOOK Agent C. M. E. Church, 
Union, Nashville, Tenn Jackson, Tenn. 
J. S. FLIPPER, Bishop, A. M . E . Church, Atlanta Ga M RS . MARY L . MASON, Administratrix, CincinR. E. JONES . Editor Southwestern, New Or- atti, O. 
leans, La. L. M. Pollard Undertaker, Savannah, Ga. 
JOH N E. NAIL , Real Estate, New York, N . Y. MRS . M. A. BAKER, Capitalist, Houston, Texas 
J . H . K ING , M. D. ( Physician and Surgeon, DAVID D , JUNKS, Secretary Y . M. C. A., St. 
Albany, Ga. Louis, Mo. 
E. L. HARRIS , Druggist, St. Louis, Mo. G. W. CLINTON . Bishop A. M. E. Z. Church, 
J . W. MCCLELLAN , Physician and Surgeon, St. Charlotte, X. C. 
Louis, Mo. I . W. YOUNG, M. D., Mayor, Boley, Okla. 
ISAIAH B . SCOTT, Bishop, M . E. Church, Nash- J. E. BUSH , Secretary Mosaic Templars, Little 
ville, Tenn. Rock, Ark. 
Mention T H E CRISIS 322 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TAKE N FRO M NEALE' S LIS T 
"The Neale Publishing Company possesses a rare reputation for its 
standard series of works on American history."—Toronto Mail and Empire. 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; at present Major in United States 
Army. Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
The Negro Races: Second Volume of the 
Series, Containing a Full Account of the 
Slave Trade. By Jerome Dowd, white; 
Professor of Sociology and Economics, University of Oklahoma. The price of each 
volume of the series is $2.50 net; by mail, 
$2.65. 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors. 
By J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. 
Two editions; one in English and the other 
in French. Each edition $3.20 by mail. 
The Monroe Doctrine in Its Relation to the 
Republic of Haiti. By William A. MacCorkle, LL.D., white; author of "The White 
Sulphur Springs," published by this house, 
and other books. $1.00 by mail. 
Negro Tales. By Joseph S. Cotter, colored; 
Principal of one of the largest schools for 
Negroes in the South. Something new in 
literature. $1.00 by mail. 
The Political History of Slavery in the 
United States. By the late James Z. 
George, white; formerly Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court of Mississippi; later 
United States Senator. Introduction by 
John Bassett Moore, Professor of International Law and Diplomacy, Columbia University. Edited by William Hayne Leavell, 
United States Minister to Guatemala, who 
supplies a sketch of Senator George. A 
comprehensive survey of the political history of slavery in this country. $3.25 by 
mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D.D., 
K. C, colored; with an introduction by 
Adna B. Leonard, D.D., LL.D. $1.60 by 
mail. 
The Seed That Was Sown in the Colony of 
Georgia. By Charles Spaulding Wylly, 
white. "No one," says the Knoxville Sentinel, "has better understood the institution 
of slavery, its mission, and its defects," than 
Colonel Wylly, $1.35 by mail. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and 
Professor of Mathematics, Howard University. Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. Dean 
Miller's latest book, "Out of the House of 
Bondage," which is also published by this 
company, has already reached a large sale. 
$1.65 by mail. 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHIN G CO . 440 Fourth Avenue New York City 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and Young 
Women, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
Chief Characteristics of the Southern 
Negro. By E. H. Randle, A.M., LL.D., 
white; Dr. Randle discusses the changes 
wrought in the Negro character by the conditions of his freedom, the specialized education that the Negro requires, the Negro 
as a wage earner, his social qualities, the 
effect of the elective franchise, and many 
other matters. $1.00 by mail. 
The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. $1.00 by mail. 
Race Orthodoxy in the South. By Thomas 
Pearce Bailey, white; formerly Professor in 
the Universities of California, Chicago, and 
Mississippi, and now a Professor in the 
University of the South. $2.15 by mail. 
Redder Blood. By William M. Ashby, colored. One of the few novels of the Negro 
by a Negro to be published in this country. 
Mr. Ashby is a Yale man. $1.00 by mail. 
The Voice of Mizriam. By John Walter 
Paisley, colored. This volume of poems, by 
a teacher of literature, deserves a place in 
the rapidly increasing library of American 
Negro poets, to which Dunbar, Corrothers, 
Braithwaite, and others have made valuable 
additions in recent years. $1.25 by mail. 
My Ogowe. By Robert Hamill Nassau, 
M.D., S.T.D., white; for forty-five years a 
resident of Africa; pioneer and explorer; 
scientist and man of letters. The work of a 
lifetime; 700 octavo pages of text with 50 
full-page illustrations. $3.25 by mail. Dr. 
Nassau's book entitled "In an Elephant 
Corral" is also published by this house. 
$1.00 by mail. 
The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit.D., 
colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
easily among the foremost men of his race. 
$1.60 by mail. 
o r TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth AvenueNew York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 323 
SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR Musician 
HIS LIFE AND LETTERS By W. C. Berwick Sayers Illustr
SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLOR, the first composer of classic music to 
come from the colored races, was born in Loudon forty years ago. His 
genius asserted itself at the early age of six when, as one of his admirers 
describes it, he was found "holding a very small-sized violin in one hand, and 
playing at marbles with the other." The real discovery was, however, made by his 
guardian, friend, and benefactor, Colonel Herbert, of the Queen's Regiment. 
At thirteen, he was a brilliant solo violinist. Entering the Royal College of 
Music in 1890, three years later, he won an open scholarship for composition. His 
progress was marked by such landmarks as "Hiawatha's Wedding Feast," known 
the world over, "Herod," "Ulysses," "Nero," "Faust," "Endymion's Dream," "A 
Tale of Old Japan," "Othello." 
The tribute we pay to the darker races of the world who have produced artists, 
thinkers, and composers is notorious by its absence. Proud of his race, it was 
indeed characteristic of the sturdy, honest nature of Coleridge-Taylor that he never 
sought to keep in the background his Negro origin, but, on the contrary, was 
thoroughly proud of it and of his own position. Of the fascination the tale of his 
life holds for a biographer, it is needless to speak. Mr. Berwick Sayers has 
brought to his loving task an enthusiasm which makes of his volume charming 
reading. 
Alfred Noyes, in the poem entitled "Samuel Coleridge-Taylor," writes: 
The spark that falls from heaven, not oft on earth, 
To human hearts its vital splendor gives; 
His was the simple, true, immortal birth! 
Scholars compose; but 
THI S MAN'S MUSIC LIVES. 
Price, $2.25. Postage Extra 
TH E CRISI S :: :: :: 70 Fift h Avenue , NEW YOR K CIT Y 
Booker T. Washington's 
COMPLETE LIFE IN BOOK FORM NOW READY 
It is well illustrated, showing him leaving home, a rugged boy, for Hampton Institute. A history from the cradle to the 
grave. This is the best book on Dr. 
Washington. The publishers, Austin Jenkins Co., 9th Street, Washington, D. C , 
pay express and give the best life-size 
photograph to each subscriber. Anyone 
wishing an agency can get prospectus and 
photo for 15 cents. 
D 1 O Se e th e Selecte d Lis t o n 
BOOKS? th e Insid e Fron t Cove r 
Colored agents wanted everywhere to supply the big deman
The Haitian Revolution . By T. G. Steward 
$1.2 5 Ne t A book of 300 pages, beautifull y Illustrated. 
Tells th e story of th e birth of th e Black Republic . 
"No one can read this book without a greater love of freedom."—Kansas City Sun. 
"No more interesting book has been written."—Army and Navy Register. 
"Picturesque story."—Boston Transcript. 
"In a word the book is excellent."—Louisville News. 
"Should be read by every colored man and woman in America."—Chicago Defender. 
"Wonderful book."—Amsterdam News. 
"Temperate, comprehensive, instructive."—Columbus Ev'g Despatch. 
ORDER FROM TH E AUTHOR T. G. STEWARD, Wilberforce, Ohi o 
Or from THE CRISIS. 7 0 Filth Ave.. New York 
Mention T H E C RISI S 32 4 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
GANTT QUINO SCHOOL of BEAUTY CULTURE 
Hair Culture Scalp Treatment Facial Massage Manicuring 
SYSTEM SCIENTIFIC PRACTICE PERFECT RESULTS REAL 
Classes taught in your City or by Correspondence. Hair Grower, 50c. Temple Oil, 75c 
write today: Gantt Qusno School, 63S Fogg St., Nashville, Tenn. 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM Introducing 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guaranteed to Grow hair in SIX TREATMENTS 
or Money Refunded. Price 5O cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E . Slaughte r Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTON AVENUE ST. LOUIS. MO. 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York. 
7
DAYS In your ow n home , durin g th e evenings of just one week you can learn the famous 
H n J&^ r wee k you 
^ PARAGO N SHORTHAN D 
Spee d come s wit h use . Spee d capacit y practicall y un ­
limited. Wonderfull y eas y t o read . Writer s in servic e 
of U . S. Governmen t and offices of largest corporations. 
Syste m already adopte d by numbe r o f citie s fo r Hig h 
Schools. Writ e no w fo r full proof. 
PARAGON INSTITUTE, 15 5 Coliseu m St. . Ne w Orleans , La . 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furniah circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAIL DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUSE 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, Ill. 
TEACHERS The new efficiency era calls 
l £jAVjn £jllL l for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Registers, Classifies and Recommends Teachers, 
Supervisors, Matrons and Office Assistants. 
Prompt Recommendations to School Authorities 
regardless of kind or location of position. Anything 
from Kindergarten to University. 
Write us freely. 
B. F. BOWLES, Manager, 
2789 Converse Ave., EAST ST. LOUIS, ILLINOIS 
Mention THE CRISI S 
ADVANCE STYLES 
FRE E 
Suits 
To Introduc e 
Here we go again, breaking al l records for new, 
nobby, ahead-of-the-time 
styles. Be th e first in your tow n 
to wo w a suit tha t is ahea d of the 
time . You can d o it FREE . T o 
introduce thes e style s quickl y 
w e will giv e you a complet e suit 
free , and by you r wearin g it you, 
$50 to$100 aWeek 
Dro p u s a posta l fo r our advanc e 
book , selec t the st y log you wan t 
an d th e cloth , an d get 
Your Suit FREE 
Don' t wait . Don't delay . Writ e 
righ t away . A posta l wil1 do . W e 
Send everythin g th e day you r 
request is received . W e pay ex ­
press on everything . Ge t busy , 
dimpl y sen d u s a posta l wit h 
you r nam e an d address o n it. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
Dept.451 CHICAGO 
3 Months 
Ahead of 
the Times 
Rid your house of roaches with 
"Deli" Roach Powder 
25c . and $1.0 0 
BANEKER CHEMICAL CO, 
309 N. Jefferson Ave., St. Louis, Mo 
Agents "Wanted 
Comfort Indoor Closet 
ODORLESS, SANITARY 
GERM-PROOF 
Every hom e "without sewerage 
needs one. Most convenient, meritorious home necessity in a century. A boon to sick people. Can 
be placed anywher e in house. 
Make s Outdoor Priv y 
Unnecessar y 
Put a warm Comfort Toilet in your 
home; a guarantee of healthy, sanitary conditions. Germ-life killed by 
chemicals in retort. Emptied once 
a month—no more trouble than 
throwing out coffee grounds. Needs no 
other attention. Boards of Health, endorse it. Write 
now for literature, prices, etc. 
AGENTS CAN EARN $10 TO $2 5 DAILY 
Here's something going like a prairie fire. Best thing 
that ever headed your way—big chance to clean up $25 a 
day if you will hustle. Sale sure in every home without 
a toilet. Hardly any limit to your earning. Don't sleep 
over thia. Send postal by nest mail. Biggest moneymaking, easiest selling proposition ever put up to an 
agent. Exclusive territory. Write now for agents proposition. 
COMFORT CHEMICAL CLOSET CO. 1664 FACTORIES BLDTH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 32 5 
Atlanta Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
18 Monographs Sold Separately 
{ Addres s 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Rac e Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
dear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:• New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Ten poems by 
Effie T. BATTLE, A.M. 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W. Cable. 
PRICE 25 CENTS. 
ADDRESS: OKOLONA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commission s by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 ne t 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
BOOKS ! BOOKS ! 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
135 W. 135th St. , Ne w York City 
WORLD'S FAMOUS NEGRO WRITERS 
Bargains in Rare Books Mall Orders Solicited 
SOUTHER N COLORED TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Formerly TEXAS COLORED TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1025 Boll Street, DALLAS, TEXAS 
Recommends teachers to Colleges, Universities, School Boards and School Authorities. 
Write for information. R. O. GOTHARD, Manager 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
Evan s Ar t 
Pianos and Players 
Factor y t o Yo u $125 
and up can be saved by my plan of 
selling direct from my factory to you. I can 
save vou from $125 to $250 on an Evans Artist Model Piano or Player. 
Freigh t Pai d The easiest kind of terms.weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly 
payments to suit your convenience. All middle -
men . Jobbers , dealer s an d agent s profit s cut 
out . These are some of the reasons why I can sell 
the Evan s Artis t Mode l Piano s for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons. 
3 0 DAY S FRE E TRIA L 
We allow all freight charges, let you use the 
beautiful Evan s Artis t Mode l Pian o for thirty 
days free. If you are not entirely satisfied,we will 
take it back without any cost to you—you are the 
sole judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you 
may do so on our low factory wholesale price o n 
most convenient terms. 
MUSI C LESSON S WITHOU T COS T 
To every customer we will give a two years 
course of piano instruction free . Ask about our 
insurance plan. Write today . 
STOR Y & CLAR K PIAN O CO . 
F . O . EVANS . Gen . Mgr. . Dept . B 3 5 Chicag o 
•1 150 Envelopes, 150 Letter Heads, Size 
6x9 l/2 inches, neatly printed, mailed 
for only $1.00. Samples free. 
HERALD CO., Charlotteville. N. Y. 
Specia l Offe r 
to advertise ourswell clothes. Th e pants 
are splendidly tailored, in newest 
style. Extra big peg tops FREE 
if wanted. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. 
Big Pay—Easy Work 
Be a "walking- advertisement" of our elegant, made-tomeasure clothes—It pay s BIG . 
AGENTS! Make $35 to $65 a 
week right in your 
own Town. Part time or full 
time. We furnish Tailor Book with 
samples and full instructions 
I FREE. Write us Today . 
^ THE CHICAGO TAILORS ASS'N . 
Dept.648 515 So. Franklin St., Chicago 326 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
Telephones: 
Central 104-W 
Main 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland. Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
* COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St , Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suit e 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis _ Minn. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address. Ephen 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKINS & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIS T 
188 W. 135th Street Ne w York City 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Bo x 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
AGENTS WANTED FOR • 
I
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOU S 90 DAY S TREATMENT S 
No . 1, No . 2 an d No . 3 
For Scalp , Hair and Skin 
P . O. Bo x 102 , WILMINGTON . DEL . 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Filt h Avenue , Ne w York. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
EVERY AGENT CAN GET AN AUTO FREE 
NO CONTEST 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
You—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Free 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. NOT 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 60 years—the ROBINSON FOLDIN G 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years. Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensationa l Sale s Successe s 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 80 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1012 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write yon a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if you mean business. But you most be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S, ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO. 
4117 Factories Buildin g TOLEDO. OHIO 
BE YOUR OWN MASTER! 
STOP WAGE SLAVERY! 
Formulas and instruction for manufacturing 
Six Big Sellers and 100 Business Opportunities. Sent for 10c 
A. C. LUNN CO. 
2016 Vermon t Ave. . Washington . D. C. 
Cop y No . 6 E 
How to Get Your Suit 
FREE 
Send postal today for 
full information how to 
get your Spring' suit, 
made to measure , without a penny's cost. $30 
to 240 would not buy a 
bettor one. Simply wear It, 
tell your friends where you 
gut it—take their orders— 
MAKE $10 TO 
$1 5 A DAY 
In your spare time. It 
is dead easy—you neve r 
saw a nobbier suit or a 
more stunning pattern, 
cut in very latest style. Your 
choice of 60 fabrics and 32 
styles. Drop us a postal card 
for heavy pattern book. 
inside information about 
styles , self - measuring 
blanks, etc. DON'T WAIT. 
Mall Postal NOW. 
We Pay Delivery Charges 
Get ahead of other fellows—write this 
minute. A postal will do. 
American Woolen Milts Co. A Ne w Boo k b y Dr. D u Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 5 0 cents net—By mail 5 6 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
9 4 VOLUMES NOW READY 
Publishe d b y HENR Y HOL T & COMPANY , 3 4 Wes t 33 d Street , Ne w Yor k 
Is mad e u p o f ne w book s b y leadin g authorities. 
Th e editor s ar e Professor . GILBER T MURRAY , H . A . L. FISHER , W . T . BREWSTE R 
an d J . ARTHU R THOMSON . 
CLOT H BOUND , GOO D PAPER , CLEAR TYPE , 25 6 PAGE S PE R C J . 
VOLUME . EAC H COMPLET E AN D SOLD SEPARATELY - - 50c. net 
POSTAGE' EXTRA 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N B y J. A . Thomso n LATI N AMERIC A B y W . R. Shepher d 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIA N LITERATUR E 
B y Hilair e Bello c B y G . K. Chesterto n 
ROM E B y W . Ward e Fowle r GERMAN Y O F TODA Y 
PROBLEM S O F PHILOSOPH Y B y Charle s Towe r 
B y Bertran d Russel l EURIPIDE S AN D HI S AG E 
NAPOLEO N B y H . A . L. Fishe r B y Gilber t Murra y 
TH E CIVI L WA R B y F . L. Paxso n UNEMPLOYMEN T B y A . C . Pigo u 
ORDER THROUGH THE PUBLISHERS OR THROUGH 
Th e CRISIS , 7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISI S The Horizon Guild 
i n conjunctio n wit h a committe e o f citizen s announce s th e presentatio n o f 
A Pageant 
illustrating the 
history of religious faith in 
the Negro race, 
and commemorating the 100th 
anniversary of 
the meeting of 
the General Conference of the 
African Methodist Episcopal 
Church, entitled 
The Star of Ethiopia 
In the City of Philadelphia 
May 15, 17 and 19, 1916 
One Thousand Actors Fifty-three Musical Numbers Scenery and Costumes 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, Master of the Pageant, 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York City. 
This pageant, which has already been given in New York City and Washington, D. C , 
will be repeated in Boston, Baltimore, and other cities South and West. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 