The CRISIS 
Vol. 22—No. 1 MAY, 1921 Whole No. 127 
ONE DOLLA R AND A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N GENTS A COPY The Brownies' Book 
A Monthly Magazine for Children 
should have a hundred thousand subscribers and should be read by a 
million children who especially need its inspiring pictures, stories and 
news of colored youth. 
To introduce this magazine to many new readers we are launching a 
SPECIA L CIRCULATIO N CAMPAIG N and, in addition to regular liberal commissions to agents, we offer championship medals on the following terms and conditions: 
100 Championship Medals 
50 GOL D MEDAL S 
To the person in each State or 
Territory of the United States 
who sends us the largest number 
cf subscription s to TH E 
BROWNIES ' BOO K mailed to 
or delivered at our office on or 
before July i , 1921 (provided the 
highest is not less than 25 annual subscriptions), we will send 
a beautiful Championship Gold 
Medal, besides paying the usual 
agent's commission. The subscription price is $1.50 a year. 
Foreign subscriptions $1.7 5 a 
year. 
50 SILVE R MEDAL S 
To the person in each State 01 
Territory of the United States 
who sells the largest number of 
copies of TH E BROWNIES ' 
BOO K bought on or before July 
1, 1921 (provided the number of 
copies totals not less than 250), 
we will send a beautiful Championship Silver Medal, besides al-
, lowing the usual agent's commission. The sale price is 15c a 
copy. 
Th e contest is open to any man , woman , bo y or girl. 
In case of a tie for an y prize , each tieing contestan t will receive 
a priz e identical wit h tha t tied for. 
$50 Scholarship for Four Years 
To the person who makes the best showing in this Championship 
Contest a scholarship of Fifty Dollars a year for Four Year s is offered 
by Mr . Thoma s J. Calloway, a business man of the race, who is anxious 
to see TH E BROWNIES ' BOO K widely read and who desires to encourage the youth in industry and zeal. T o win the scholarship it is necessary to win a gold or silver medal. The $5 0 a year will be paid to the 
school to which the winner goes for education. 
Writ e at once for agent's terms, subscription blanks, sample copies 
and current copies to sell. 
DU BOIS and DILL, Publishers 
Tbe Brownies' Book 
2 West 13th Stree t Ne w York, N. Y . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITO R • 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 22-No . 1 MAY , 1921 Whole No. 127 
PICTURES P Bg e 
COVER. THE CHEVALIER SAINT-GEORGE. 
THE BLACK SWAN. Hilda Rue Wilkinson 13 
THE LIBERIAN COMMISSION TO AMERICA 19 
MEN OF THE MONTH 23 
ARTICLES 
SAINT-GEORGE, CHEVALIER OF FRANCE. Jessie Fauset 9 
THE BLACK SWAN. A Story. Maria Moravsky. Illustrated 12 
FOR ETHIOPIA. A Poem. Bessie Brent Madison 17 
SUNSET. A Poem. Mary Effie Lee 17 
WAITING. A Poem. James Waldo Fawcett 17 
OUR VALIANT MARINES 21 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 5 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 18 
MEN OF THE MONTH 22 
THE LOOKING GLASS 24 
THE HORIZON 31 
THE JUNE CRISIS 
The June CRISI S will tell how Charleston, S. C , got rid of her Southern white public school 
teachers. The July CRISI S is our annual Education Numbier. W e want pictures ot college graduates. High School graduates should send their pictures to The Brownies' Book. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS ; The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as .,ften as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be gi.en. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matteT Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office a t No w York, Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of March 8, 1879. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it ii young in history, the Institution fecli a juit pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arti and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Mas k The Department of Home Economic ! 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
Fo r farther information and Catalog, addreaa 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN , N. J. 
A high institution tor the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academi c training for all 
students. 
Courses In carpentry agriculture and trades for boys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic scleaoe and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
squlpped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term opens September 13. 1921. 
For Information address 
W . R. VALENTINE , Principal 
WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
SUMMER SCHOOL 
8th Annual Session. 
Summer of 1921 June 20 to July 30 
The Summer School is accredited 
and standardized, and teachers' certificates will be issued by the state of 
Ohio on credits received in the Summer School. 
For full particulars write Gilbert H. 
Jones, Director of the Summer School 
Dr. John A. Gregg, 
President of the Institution 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B. Kendall, D.D. , Lincoln University, 
Chester County, Fenna. 
Cheyney Training School For 
Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
Made in 1920 an accredited State Norma] School 
offering, in addition to the regular Normal CoursTof 
two years, professional three year courses in Home 
Economic, and Shop Work. A diploma from any™' 
these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach in 
£.»# ; schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
i & .1
 0 • ?°J lrs e 1 3
 ° ffere d t 0 3, 1 wh ° h« e completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Send application now far fall term opening September 
20th, 1921. 
Fo r further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLIE prNOKNBT HILL , Prlnutwil, 
Cheynay, Fa , 
THERE WiU/BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR mi 
Mentio n TH I CIISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 3 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta* Ca. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High 
School, Gramma r School, Domestic Science, 
Nurs e Training and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins Septembe r 14, 1921. 
For catalog and other Information addresi 
PRESIDENT J. KELL Y GIFFEN 
Knoivllle. Term. 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1921 
ATLANTA. GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modern 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use in 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—-Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and lit and 
2nd Years' High School Courses, with Certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medical Course 
53rd year of nine months opens September 21, 1921. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State baring for Its object 
OoUeaiate, Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training for Colored dozen s In Kentucky. 
Special training in Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and 
Normal? Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary 
training classireolna classes, umMSonaanea course Decrees offered. 
President C. H. Parriah 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Saptist College) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College. Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent yean 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE. N. C. 
Biddle Coiveraltj, «perated antler the amaptees ef 
the Northern P~~ibyterlao Church, has four Departments—High Senool. Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion ef a Grammar School 
course Is the requirement for entrance te the first vear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two soars** 
uf study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific, German la substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely •ngllsn. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are reqaired 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, aderses 
President H. L. MtCrerey, 
Charlotte. N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities ill the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School Nor. 
mal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Boaid 
««»tic* Tr a Canal. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana. Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h Schoo l graduates and youn g 
wome n o f higher education and goo d moral 
character, between the ages o f 18 and 35, a 
three years' cours e in the profession o f nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
DARKWATER 
O R 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
Dr. DuBois' new boo k is the sensation jf 
the day ; selling like "wil d fire." It contains 
a goo d picture o f Dr. DuBois. Pric e onl y 
$2.00. Orde r todav. Satisfaction guaranteed 
or mone y refunded. AGENT S WANTED ; 
send 50 cts. fo r outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKIN S CO. 
BOO K AN D BIBLE PUBLISHER S 
Catalog Free 
523 9th St. N. W., Washington, D. C 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood. 
For further information address 
F. A. SUMNER , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
G1BSLAND , LA. 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A, B, H. Society of Ne w York . Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TE E 
SISTER-INCH ARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue , 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
ST. PAUL'S HOUSE 
A TRAINING SCHOOL FOR BOYS 
High Christian Standard 
Address the Chaplain 
TH E REV . WM . E. HENDRICK S 
234 West Pen n Stree t 
Germantown , Philadelphia , Pa . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MARY McLEOD BETHUNE, - • Principal. 
Mention TH I Calais. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 22. No. 1 MAY , 1921 Whol e No. 127 
Opinion of W.E.B. Du Bois 
ATLANTIS 
of the greatest events in 
the Negro race 
publication 
in Germany of fifteen volumes of African folk-tales and poetry. It is to be edited by Leo Frobenius and is called "Atlantis". We 
translate literally from the announcement : 
"During many years of exploration, Leo Frobenius has gathered 
these documents and now at last, sifted and arranged, they are ready for 
their first complete publication. The 
blameless Ethiopians, 'Beloved of the 
Gods', awake again in this strikingly 
magnificent poetry of Africa, which 
hitherto was hardly dreamed of. The 
discovery of primitive Negro art is 
now followed by this revelation of 
Negro literature. It pictures in surprising colors clear-thinking men with 
depth of soul; peoples with pure serenity of mind; poets of astonishing 
deftness. Here humanity speaks with 
worldwide feeling; here are wonderful motifs, from a field unspoiled by 
the hundreds of Romance and European poets on stage or vaudeville; in 
tale on tale here pulses a strikingly 
original style glistening in its peculiar 
beauty like the pillars of a classic 
temple." 
This monumental work must be immediately translated and published in 
English. The N. A. A. C. P. and the 
Pan-African Congress will see that 
this is done. If you are interested 
and know of persons able and willing 
to aid this great patriotic and humanitarian service, please write THE 
CRISIS. 
Journey of Dr. DuBois From Fitchburg, Mass., by 
Wa y of Charleston, New Orleans, Oklahoma and 
Duluth to New York—7,00 0 Miles Wit h 38 Lectures 
Before Audiences Aggregating 20,000 People. 
PAN-AFRIC A 
THERE are powerful groups of 
Negroes all over the world. 
Their men of light and leading 
should know each other and 
take counsel for further co-operation. 
The centers nearest the largest number of these groups are London and 
Paris. A Second Pan-African Congress will meet in London August 28 
and 29; at the Palais Mondial, Brussels, August 31, September 1 and 2 ; 
and at Paris, September 4 and 5. 
Write for further information. 
7000 
I HAVE been journeying seven 
thousand miles: from Bunker 
Hill to Pittsburg and the Valley of the Shadow of Steal; 
from Hampton Roads to Fort Sumter, 
5 6 TH E CRISIS 
and from the Oranges of Florida to 
New Orleans. I have seen the Father 
of Waters from mouth to source, together with the Oil Bungalows of 
Oklahoma, the Sands of Texas and the 
Winds of Kansas. Bull, Palafox and 
State Streets, Canal, West Broad 
and Beale Avenue, have guided my 
feet. I have felt the Spring blushing 
in Louisiana and seen the Snow flying 
in Duluth. But through all these 
minor things have loomed faces: dark, 
wistful faces; eyes sweet with pain; 
and ears full of loud laughter; cosy 
homes, lynching, lovely children, "Jim 
Crow" cars (4,00 0 miles and 5 white 
nights in them), slave-songs and the 
snarl of human beasts—hope, caste, 
wealth, slavery, grit and despair in 
20,00 0 souls whose eyes met mine in 
doubt and silent questioning, in sudden sympathy and tears. Seven thousand miles in Afro-America and four 
thousand of them "Jim-Crowed". I 
have tales to tell. 
SLAVER Y 
SlAVERY still exists in the 
United States. In the courts 
of Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, 
Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas and Texas, human beings are daily 
sold into slavery to men like the murderer Williams of Jasper County, 
Georgia. Throughout the South—but 
especially in the Mississippi and Red 
River bottoms, from Memphis south; 
in middle and south Georgia and Alabama ; and in the Brazos bottoms of 
Texas—Negroes are held today in as 
complete and awful and soul destroying slavery as they were in 1860. 
Their overseers ride with guns and 
whips; their women are prostitutes 
to white owners and drivers; their 
children are trained in ignorance, immorality and crime. 
Every Southerner knows this. The 
States know it. The Government 
knows it. Distinguished Southerners 
are getting wealthy on the system; 
the Southern White Church is sending missionaries to Africa on its proceeds; lovely young white ladies are 
being finished in exclusive schools on 
its dirty blood profits; and yet it goes 
on and on and on, and it will go on 
until one day its red upheaval will 
shake the civilized world. 
But there comes a ray of hope. 
Georgia is to be congratulated on the 
conviction of Williams for murder, 
and for the fine spirit of press and 
people that stand behind it. The Atlanta Committee on Church Cooperation calls the conviction "Georgia's 
message to the Negro and to the world 
that this Christian State, whatever 
may have been conditions in the past 
in sore spots within her borders, will 
in the future do justice to the Negro" ; 
and the Atlanta Georgian adds "Georgia has renewed her sacred pledge to 
civilization." 
Amen! And the Negro stands ready 
to recognize and appreciate every act 
of Justice done by the white South. 
INTER-RACIA L COMIT Y 
T HERE are persons who assume 
that the N. A. A. C. P. and 
particularly the CRISIS are 
opposed to the Inter-racial 
Committees in the South and to any 
efforts of white Southerners to settle 
the problems of race. This is a singular misapprehension. On the contrary, 
we count it as one of the great results 
of the N. A. A. C. P., that its persistent fight in the last ten years has 
aroused and even compelled the South 
to attempt its own internal reform 
Can we not remember the day, but 2 0 
years since, when conferences on the 
Negro were confined to white men because white Southerners would not sit 
with Negroes? That day is gone and 
gone forever, and the N. A. A. C. P. 
prepared its passports. 
The Inter-racial movement sprang 
from the fight we have made. If it accomplishes anything, it will be because of our continued and persistent 
fighting. If it fails, it will show the OPINION 7 
need of redoubled effort on our part. 
If lulled by false hope and vague 
promises, we cease our vigilant effort, 
the Inter-racial movement would drop 
dead before the cry: "The Negroes 
are satisfied; why stir up trouble'." 
This has been the history of all such 
movements in the past. If the present movement succeeds (and God 
grant it may) it will be because the 
N. A. A. C. P. neither slumbers nor 
sleeps but keeps to its God-appointed 
task of making every black slave in 
the United States dissatisfied with his 
slavery, and every white slave-driver 
conscious of his guilt. 
Meantime, may we not advise our 
Inter-racial friends,—do not fill your 
committees with "pussy footers" like 
Robert Moton or "white-folks' Niggers" like Isaac Fisher. Get more 
real black men who dare to look you 
in the eye and speak the truth and 
who refuse to fawn and lie. An ounce 
of truth outweighs a ton of impudence. Do not seek to mislead or lull 
the Negro with ancient platitudes and 
generalities. Let your "black mammy" sleep and show your "best friendship" by deeds and not words. Do 
something. Do not dodge and duck. 
Face the fundamental problems: the 
Vote, the "Jim-Crow" car, Peonage 
and Mob-law. 
TH E PRESIDEN T 
THE bourbons have put the 
question up to Mr. Harding 
sooner than we had anticipated. T'he issue is clearly 
drawn: 500 clerks in the Bureau of 
the Registry of the Treasury do not 
want as chief any person of Negro descent. They refuse to consider any 
man or woman, however educated, 
gifted or fitted for the place, if his or 
her grandmother was of African descent. They do not object to any ignorant scoundrel, if only he be 
"white"! Can you conceive such a 
stand? How will Mr. Harding meet 
it? 
Meantime, how are we meeting it? 
Not in the wisest way. In the first 
place, our politicians have not learned 
much in the last decade. We had 
hoped that the intelligent conduct of 
the Negro voter during the war and 
in the last campaign, added to the 
great critical problems facing our 
race, would lead to a dignified plan 
of action in conduct and demand after 
the new President's accession. 
Such a plan would have included a 
clear statement to the administration 
that the Negro expects action and not 
blarney from the Republican party, 
and that unless the party in possession 
of all three branches of government 
takes steps legally to stop lynching, to 
abolish inter-state "Jim-Crow" travel, 
to aid common school education and to 
emancipate our brothers in Haiti and 
Liberia—that unless Republicans do 
these things or make earnest effort to 
begin their doing, the Negro vote will 
go to the Labor or Socialist parties in 
the very near future. 
In addition to this, it is proper for 
colored leaders in the Republican campaign to suggest certain colored men 
whose fitness and character entitle 
them to consideration for appointment 
to office. First and foremost among 
such recommendations should have 
been Dr. George E. Haynes, the 
trained colored student whose scientific work in the Department of Labor 
has already been so notable. He should 
have been given more money, scope 
and power. Instead of this, politicians have already succeeded in getting the Secretary of Labor to promise 
to oust Haynes forthwith so as to open 
a few clerkships for "the boys"! 
Amid all this the President's message comes as a clear voice. Against 
lynching there is the strongest pronouncement ever made by a President; and the general tone on race 
matters is finer than Roosevelt's 
vague generalities and Wilson's stentorian silences. 
Let us respond with an unselfish-8 TH E CRISIS 
ness so patent and a breadth of vision so evident that the silly protesters 
against race ability will be shamed 
to silence. 
TH E DRIV E 
AGAI N the pendulum has 
swung: it is no longer a question of educating the Negro 
to his just demands as an 
American citizen. He has ceased to 
be beguiled by the silly philosophy 
that a voteless, spineless suppliant 
who owns a three-story brick house 
is going to command anybody's respect. 
But today comes the question of 
practical, efficient means of getting 
the rights which he has at last been 
persuaded he wants. 
Into the field have jumped a hoard 
of scoundrels and bubble-blowers, 
ready to conquer Africa, join the Russian revolution, and vote in the Kingdom of God tomorrow. It is without 
doubt certain that Africa will some 
day belong to the Africans; that 
steamship lines and grocery stores, 
properly organized and run, are excellent civilizers; and that we are in 
desperate need today of organized industry and organized righteousness. 
But what are the practical steps to 
these things? By yelling? By pouring out invective and vituperation 
against all white folk? By collecting 
the pennies of the ignorant poor in 
shovelsful and refusing to account for 
them, save with bombast and lies? 
Or is it reason and decency to unite 
on a program which says: the battle 
of Negro rights is to be fought right 
here in America; that here we must 
unite to fight lynching and "JimCrow" cars, to settle our status in the 
courts, to put our children in school 
and maintain our free ballot. 
Far from being discouraged in the 
light, we are daily more and more triumphant. Yesterday 1,650 Negro 
women voted in New Orleans. Never 
since 1876 have so many Negroes 
voted in the South as in the last election. Our fight for right has the 
enemy on the run. He has had to retreat to mob violence, secret and silly 
mummery, clumsy and hypocritical 
promises. Twenty-five years more of 
the intelligent fighting that the N. A. 
A. C. P. has led will make the black 
man in the United States free and 
equal. 
Our enemies know this. They are 
scared. They are hastening to lay 
down a barrage of suspicion and personal bickering. They are encouraging and advertising any and all crazy 
schemes, to cut and run from the hard 
and bloody battle here, to Africa and 
the South Seas. Africa needs her 
children, but she needs them triumphant, victorious, and not as povertystricken and cowering refugees. 
Are we going to be misled fools, or 
are we going to put a quarter of a million level-headed, determined and unwavering black men and women back 
of the N. A. A. C. P. to continue the 
battle so nobly and successfully begun ? Answer, black folk of America, 
this month! 
ANTI-LYNCHIN G LEGISLATIO N 
DURING the last five years the 
N. A. A. C. P. has carried on 
a campaign against lynching, 
conducted in accordance with 
the most approved methods of publicity. This campaign has been financed 
by philanthropists North and South, 
and black and white, and by widespread popular subscription. We have 
never heard any serious criticism of 
our campaign save, naturally, from 
those who oppose any effort to defend 
and emancipate black folk. 
Our accomplishment from all our 
effort may thus be summarized: 
(1 ) Investigate d mor e than a scor e o f lynching s 
and race riots 
(2 ) Kep t an accurat e recor d o f lynching s 
(3) Published the onl y statistical stud y o f lynching s 
eve r compile d 
(4 ) Sen t 4,462,899 copie s o f the CRISI S t o ever y 
state in the Unio n and to ever y countr y o n the 
glob e 
(5 ) Sent out hundred s o f new s releases Durin g 
the yea r o f 1920 alon e 131 press stories wer e 
sent ou t from the Nationa l Office SAINT-GEORGE , CHEVALIE R O F FRANC E 9 
(6 ) Held more than 2,000 public meetings, attended 
by more than 3,000,000 people, at which speakers acquainted the audiences with the facts about 
lynchings 
(7 ) Sent literature on lynching, with actual photographs of lynchings and burnings at the staxe, 
all over the civilized world 
(8 ) Fought successfully three notable extradition 
cases when attempts were made to carry colored 
men accused of crimes from Northern States 
back to sections of the South where the men 
would probably have been lynched 
(9 ) Held in New York City in May, 1919, a great 
and successful conference against lynching. The 
call for this conference was signed by 120 of the 
leading citizens of the country, 20 of them from 
Southern States. The number included 5 governors, 4 ex-governors, members of Congress, 
judges of the higher courts, members of the 
President's cabinet, and other men and women 
prominent in the nation's affairs 
(10) Issued the "Address to the Mation 
(11) Raised and expended since 1911 in the fight 
against lynching $33,928.56 this amount being 
spent for investigations, printing and publicity 
of all kinds, meetings and conferences 
(12) Secured the passage of a law in Kentucky providing for the punishment of any peace officer 
who allows a prisoner to be taken from him and 
lynched 
(13) Secured the introduction of anti-lynching bills 
in both houses of Congress. For the first time 
the House Committee on the Judiciary reported 
favorably on such a bill during the second session of the 66th Congress 
(14) Presented to committees of both the Senate and 
the Hous e of Representatives of Congress, 
through its representatives, evidence and testimony showing the necessity of a Federal law 
against lynching 
(15) Furnished lawyers to defend colored men involved1
 in lynching cases; secured the acquittal, 
for example, of 12 of 13 colored men arrested 
in connection with the lynchings at Duluth, Minn., 
in June 1920, totally disproving the charge that 
criminal assault on a young girl had been committed by any of the three men lynched; defended since October, 1919, 12 men sentenced to 
death and 67 to prison terms, thus preventing a 
legal lynching in Phillips County, Ark. 
In addition to these things we have 
freely given help and information to 
other organizations, and when the colored Republican campaign committee 
asked the aid of our legal department 
in drawing an anti-lynching bill, we 
freely and gladly gave it. 
We are surprised and disappointed, 
therefore, to receive from Perry Howard an appeal for funds to finance a 
new organization to push an antilynching bill. This move is defensible only if the methods and aims of 
the N. A. A. C. P. in the anti-lynching campaign were failing. But this 
new organization is pushing practically the same bill by identical methods. 
Is not this move, therefore, the 
same futile division of effort and 
clouding of issues which continually 
misleads and discourages the Negroes, 
and gives joy to the Bourbon South? 
Would not these gentlemen convince 
the public of their disinterested efforts 
if they supported established agencies 
and proven work rather than attempted to build on new lines and to risk 
all that has been gained without hope 
of doing more? 
The strength of the N. A. A. C. P. 
has been its singleness of aim. We 
did not rescue Haiti in order to annex 
the $10,000 salary of the Haitian 
Minister; we are not fighting lynching in order to become Recorder of 
Deeds; and our promotion of business 
enterprise has no string on the Registry of the Treasury. This does not 
mean that we are unmindful of the 
right of competent black men to hold 
office,—indeed we strongly emphasize 
and maintain this right—but we insist that this is subordinate and unimportant beside our fight for freedom, and we refuse to have our most 
sacred right played with as pawns to 
official preferment. 
SAINT-GEORGE, CHEVALIER OF FRANCE 
JESSIE FAUSET 
THER E is a street in Basse-Terre, Guadeloupe, which since November, 1912, 
has borne the name Saint-George. The 
French have a charming and praiseworthy 
custom o f paying practical homage to 
their heroes. One's mind might not connect 
up with a memorial wreath or a statue, 
but it is difficult to forbear recalling the 
memory of a man when one treads the 
street which bears his name. 
The man who had this honor bestowed on 
him one hundred and seventy-seven years 
after he was born was Joseph Boulogne 
Saint-George, known in later years all over 
France as le Chevalier de Saint-George. 
He was born in 1745 in the town of BasseTerre, Guadeloupe, and although he won 
his fame in Europe, the little town in the 1 0 TH E CRISI S 
tropics never forgot him and one day was 
glad to memorialize him. Saint-George 
was the son of a black woman and of a 
Frenchman, a comptroller-general, M. de 
Boulogne, who called his mulatto son SaintGeorge after the stateliest vessel in the 
harbor of Guadeloupe. 
In spite of the wrong which Boulogne 
had inflicted on the child's mother, or perhaps because of it, he did all in his power 
to advance his son's interests. The latter 
was taken to France while still very young 
and placed under the care of the most famous and skilful teachers. Young SaintGeorge seems really to have been—to use 
an old-fashioned but effective expression— 
"a man of parts". He was not only remarkably versatile in his tastes and inclinations, 
but remarkably endowed with the ability to 
attain perfection in them. He skated admirably, shone as a marksman, sat and rode 
a horse with ease, and danced <i merveille. 
Yet these were only side issues with him. 
His real talents concerned themselves with 
fencing and music. And it is hard to think 
of any combination of gifts which would 
have so completely challenged the admiration of France. His fencing-master, La 
Boessiere, considered him among his few 
finest pupils, and his skill and accuracy in 
this art made it almost impossible for him 
to move without a host of admirers. In 
1766 he crossed swords with the great Italian fencer, Faldoni. Evidently this was not 
to his disadvantage for his biographer, 
Laurencie, gives this as evidence of his 
prowess; while a passage in the Memoirs 
du General Bon de Marbot characterizes 
him as the strongest blade in France. Later 
when Saint-George met with reverses of 
fortune he made his skill with the foils 
stand him in good stead. 
In spite of the time and devotion which 
must have been spent in order to bring 
about such a perfection in this art, it i:-
on his skill as a musician, a violinist, that 
Saint-George's fame most rests. Ye t it is 
interesting and inspiring to stop a minute 
to get a glimpse of the life which he led 
apart from his great calling. 
Indubitably he was a man of the world 
and of fashion. His father had left him 
an income of from 7,000 to 8,000 livres, 
not much even in those days when money 
was worth more than it is now, jut enough 
to make him independent. He spent, however, like a modern millionaire, frequented 
the finest society of Paris and—according 
to La Boessiere, "loved" (presumably the 
ladies), "and knew how to make himself 
loved". His nature was sympathetic, his 
manners engaging; he was an unfeigned 
sentimentalist and although Laurencie (but 
not his picture) speaks of him as "homely" , 
he was very attractive to the women of his 
day. His feats won him admission everywhere. 
During the years succeeding 1770 he 
paid really serious attention to his music. 
He had already studied composition with 
Gossec, who admired him greatly and in 
1766 dedicated to him as Opus IX , "Six 
Trios for Two Violins and Bass." In the 
winter of 1772-1773 he played at the Concert des Amateurs two concertos of his own 
for violin with orchestra. The Mercure, 
an important paper of the time, spoke of 
these concertos highly, and later they acquired considerable vogue ; yet they were 
only a beginning to be followed in June, 
1773, by six string quartets. This is especially significant since Laurencie declares that Gossec and Saint-George were 
the first French musicians to write string 
quartets. 
The eclat won by Saint-George as virtuoso and composer served to win him the 
coveted post of director of the Concert des 
Amateurs. Musical honors thronged on 
him. In 1775 he brought out through the 
publisher Bailleux, a series of concertos, to 
be followed by the end of the year with a 
collection of Symphonies concertantes. It 
is pleasant to know that Gossec, now director of the Concert Spirituel, had one of 
these played on Christmas Day. 
In 1777 his versatility took on a new 
turn and he essayed the theatre, presenting 
Ernestine, a comedy at the Comedie Italienne. The libretto was not worth mentioning but the music was excellent, bearing a 
distinct flavor of Gluck. Later he produced The Hunt (La Chasse), which succeeded fairly well. The most important 
feature in connection with this theptadventure was that it brought him to the 
attention of Mme. de Montesson, wife of 
the Duke of Orleans, who attached him to 
her theatre. Also she gave him a position 
in the Duke's hunting establishment with 
the title of "Lieutenant of the Hunt of 
Pinci." He gained some little distinction SAINT-GEORGE , CHEVALIE R O F FRANC E 11 
y acting not only in Madame de Montesson's theatre, but also on the private stage 
which the Marquise de La Montalembert 
had set up in her own home. Thus writing 
and acting Saint-George became a wellknown theatrical figure. The manuscript 
score of his Anonymous Lover (L'Amant 
Anonyme) is still in the library of the 
Paris conservatory. 
With the death of the Duke of Orleans, 
Saint-George lost his position in the hunt 
and with it a fair amount of his income. 
It was this occurrence which made him have 
recourse to his fencing in order to rehabilitate himself. From this time, 1775 to 1791, 
he seems to have lived between Paris and 
London, playing- and fencing, it is true, and 
yet pursuing a course curiously checkered 
by adventure and political intrigue. It 
must be remembered that France at this 
point was passing through parlous tim<"-
and the fortunes of Saint-George seem to 
have followed those of his beloved foster 
country. 
There is an odd confusion and contradiction among the books and papers which 
mention him here. But what is iplain is 
that in 1791 he was living in Lille and was 
a captain in the National Guard. Further 
proof of his versalitv! Moreover in 1792 
"he raised a body of light troops under the 
name of 'Sair>t-Gpora,e's Legion,' recruited 
among men of color" ! This is easily the 
most amazing of his many amazing feats. 
One wonders where he found them! 
Later he was arbitrarily removed, although the Mayo r and city officials o f 
Lille paid the highest possible tributes to 
his services and bravery. I think this 
broke his gallant spirit; his life thereafter 
seemed to lack motive. He wandered to 
Santo Domingo, took part in a revolt, was 
nearly killed, came back to Paris and lived 
in a condition almost poverty-stricken, due, 
one feels, to a lack of interest rather 
than to a lack of opportunity. When death 
came to him in June, 1799, he greeted it 
like a bewildered child weary for sleep. 
Such an unusual, such an engaging and 
above all such an exotic figure could 
fail to appeal to the imagination of a people like the French. Many a saying, many 
legend centred about that slender, graceful figure of the mysterious origin, of the 
great reclame gained from foil and violin. 
Roge r Beauvoir inevitably makes him 
the hero of one of his novels, "Le Chevalier de Saint-Georges," and although his 
style is a trifle melodramatic, his statement 
of facts we are assured, is usually accurate. 
So the following paragraphs ought to give 
some idea of the status of Saint-George 
in his hey-day. Boullogne (the father of 
the real Saint-George had the same name 
with one 1) has concealed his identity from 
the distinguished fencer, but on learning 
that the redoubtable Saint-Georges is to 
meet his white son Maurice (also natural) 
in a duel, he tells him his secret. We translate: 
" 'That day at Versailles,' said the old 
man, 'I was sitting beside the Duke of Burgundy, when on turning around I spied in 
the rear of the next box, ai face which the 
gloom seemed to make still gloomier. A t the 
first note of the violin, the face was uplifted, 
and I recognized a mulatto. I asked his 
name. Every one was amazed at my ignorance. "But he is all the rage; the finest 
gentlemen imitate him. The ladies wear 
his favorite colors; he is the life and pride 
of every party! " Nevertheless the sight of 
him caused in me an unspeakable revulsion. 
I had just recognized in him that son whom 
I had forced myself to abandon. My tawny 
sweetheart, his mother, had baptised her 
son under the name which this man bore, 
her letters had refused to let me ignore it. 
If, however, I confess, my thoughts ever 
turned toward that son, it was to think of 
him as a being doomed to share the humiliation of slaves, to semi-barbarism for his 
sole upbringing. I had not dreamed that 
he could ever shake aside the shame of his 
fetters. I trembled when I saw him; doubtless he would betray me by his transports, 
by his caresses. I became reassured, however, when I saw that he was unacquainted 
with a single fact of my life. "His mother", 
I said to myself, "Noemi, angel that she is, 
would kill herself but she would not tell 
him that he is my son." ' 
"'Noemi!' cried Saint-Georges, springing 
to his feet, deathly pale. 
His wretched father continues. " 'Only 
yesterday you were the butt of my sarcasm. Now you know the reason of my 
pitiless disdain. Today the idea of brother 
arming against brother, forces me to rend 
for you alone, this veil which your glance 
has never been able to pierce. Once more— 
you cannot fight with Maurice: both of you 12 THE CRISIS 
are of my own blood! Surely you will 
not make betrayal of myself to you vain! 
Speak to me: I await at your hands the 
fate of your brother. . . . 
" 'What would you have me give you 
in return?' 
" 'The reparation of an injustice, the 
blotting out of all the wrongs which you 
have made my mother suffer.' 
" 'Saint-Georges!' 
" 'Do you hesitate? So shall I hesitat" 
to recognize in Maurice a brother.' 
" 'You forget, Saint-Georges, that today 
you have entrenched on my confidence . . . 
you are, you shall always be my son!' . . . 
" 'Why should I acknowledge you as my 
father? I do not know you. Sir ComptrollerGeneral, you are mistaken. I am merely a 
mulatto, a poor mulatto who knows only 
his mother! She alone reared me, she 
alone gave me shelter and bread! Leave me, 
sir! Leave me!' 
"He seized his sword; he struck with his 
foot the door of the room . . . Noemi was 
standing on the threshold. 
" 'Mother,' cried the Chevalier, 'he has 
told me everything, he is willing to acknowledge me as his son. Mother, you have 
your revenge!' " 
I close the book with a sigh for the gallant, splendid figure, not one whit more 
gallant or splendid than his shining prototype! 
THE BLACK SWAN 
MARIA MORAVSKY 
pTANIA POLANOV, a student, meets the 
"Black Sivan" in the park of Odessa, 
Russia. She is a dancer in the theatre, and 
as they talk she tells him, with changing 
countenance, of her dead Negro father in 
America whose memory she loves. 
But Vania did not notice how she 
changed. His imagination was stirred by 
the word: Negro. 
"A Negro?" he repeated, "so your father 
came from Africa like the arap
1
 of Peter 
the Great? How wonderful! Was he an 
African prince? You look like a princess." 
She looked at him questioningly. No, 
he was not sneering at her. Pure admiration and wonder sounded in his voice. 
"Who was the colored man, you named?" 
she asked with shy curiosity. 
"He was not a colored man, he was a 
genuine black, an African Prince. He was 
the great-grandfather of our most famous 
poet, Alexander Pushkin. Did you not see 
his statue on the Sea Boulevard?" 
The girl recalled faintly a bust with the 
familiar curly head. Yes, the bronze figure 
on the boulevard looked much like her folks 
from Virginia. So the Russians honored a 
Negro? It seemed strange to her. 
"Tell me more about it," she asked. 
Vania willingly told her all he knew from 
the text books about the famous African and 
his descendant. How arap Ibrahim was 
made a favorite courtier of the Emperor 
*An ancient name for a Negro. 
and married a beautiful woman of the nobility. "She was the great-grandmother of 
Alexander Pushkin. He wrote wonderful 
poems, you know! I must recite some of 
them to you. People say that his songs 
were so full of joy because his ancestors 
came from sunny Africa." 
The girl listened to Vania with deep excitement, as one who had been heartsick for 
years would listen to the news of possible 
cure. 
"My father was not a prince," she said 
slowly with a strange, hopeful smile. "He 
was just a plain workingman. But he sang 
wonderfully! I will sing his favorite songs 
for you, if you like. Don't you really mind, 
that I am dark?" 
"You are beautiful!" he exclaimed sincerely. 
She believed in his admiration. Happy 
tears brightened her eyes. She turned her 
face up toward the moon and began to 
sing in a sweet low voice an old minstrelsong. 
Vania listened attentively to the moaning melody, then took the guitar and tried 
to accompany her voice. 
"I like it," he said softly. "It reminds 
me of our peasants' songs. Can you translate it into Russian?" 
"I had better not. The words are too 
sad . . ." 
She sighed and looked with regret at the 
reddening moon. "I must go home, it is 
getting late," she said. TH E BLAC K SWA N 13 
"Will you take me to my hotel? I suppose 
Smith is worrying why I have not yet returned. He is anxious for me, because I am 
his fortune. He makes his living presenting me . . . He is awfully afraid that I 
may marry some day. " 
Vania took her to the quiet summer 
gostinnitza, which stood in the peach garden near the liman. Before they parted 
he asked her shyly if 
she would be so kind 
as to come once more 
to the park of Hadji 
Bey. 
"O f course! Yo u 
will teach me the 
Russkaya! I wil l 
come next Saturday 
at noon." 
Saying good-bye to 
the Black Swan, Va ­
nia put her little dark 
hand to his forehead. 
He wanted to convince himself that she 
was not a vision. 
III. 
When Vani a came 
to school a few days 
later he heard great 
news: the Allies were 
going to leave the 
city. 
"Their sailors mutinied. The Soviets 
will be here again! " 
said the boys. Vania 
did not take part in 
th e discussion of 
these events. His 
soul was too full of 
the meeting wit h 
Black Swan. H e 
could not think about 
anything else. 
But they talked of 
her also! Large advertisements were pasted throughout the city announcing the arrival of "the great American dancer". The 
boys were very anxious to see her, but it 
was scarcely possible. The prices for tickets were prohibitive. 
"Only the foreign soldiers can afford to 
pay so many roubles for a ticket!" 
"They have real money, American dollars! " complained the boys with envy. 
"Let us try to sneak in without tickets!" 
they planned. 
Only a few of them could spend such a 
fortune in order to see the Black Swan. 
(She had put this name on the bills.) They 
promised solemnly to sit through only half 
of the performance, then go out and give 
their tickets to the others. "W e will see 
her in two turns," they joked. 
'Dancing Alone Under the Weeping Willow. " 
Vania had no money to go to the theatre. 
But he aroused common envy when he 
boasted: 
"I saw her off the stage!" 
"Lucky chap! People say she is a wonder! The American correspondent,—that 
clean-shaven man with short trousers and 
an 'eternal pen' who is always asking questions,—he saw her in Siberia and calls her 
a miracle." 14 TH E CRISI S 
Vania promised the boys to show them 
the Black Swan. 
"Yo u have planned to make bonfires tonight. W e may light them in the park of 
Hadji Bey and ask the lady to join our 
party. I will meet her there." 
"Look at him! Our tihonia' He has 
already a date with her!" wondered Vania's 
comrades. 
"When the evening came and the boys 
arrived at the cool park, they saw the slim 
dark girl in black dress and scarlet slippers, 
dancing alone under the weeping willow. 
They lay noiselessly down on the grass and 
watched her in silence. The irrepressible 
Kolia could not restrain his admiration and 
shouted loudly: 
"Fine ! Splendid!" 
The girl slipped away. Vania ran after 
her and explained that his friends wanted 
to see her very much. She was amused and 
pleased, but did not want to dance any more. 
She felt shy. 
"It was not real dancing, you know. Just 
exercises. I practice here, because the hotel 
is too noisy." 
The boys whispered: 
"How dark she is! She looks like Abdullah, the African prize fighter, we saw last 
winter." 
"Yes, but she is so much prettier!" 
"Is she an African, too? " 
"Maybe. Truly she dances beautifully!" 
"This is good luck! We saw her without 
paying for tickets!" 
They laughed. Black Swan complained. 
"Vania, they are laughing at me! " 
"Oh, no, impossible! They admire you! 
Nobody dares to laugh at you, krasavitza!' 
She believed him. She wanted to be 
friendly with the boys. She helped them to 
gather the dry branches for the fire. Soon 
the bright flame mounted high, reddening 
the blue dimness of the moon-lit park, filling 
the air with warmth and smoke. The 
sparks dropped through the air like falling stars. 
The boys jumped over the bonfires. Every high jump was greeted with shouts and 
laughter. 
They wanted the Black Swan to join this 
wild entertainment. 
"Come on, try! It is great fun. Girls 
do it quite often. Don't be so shy! " 
But she did not enjoy the fires. A strange 
expression came over her face, a mixture 
J A little, quiet one. 
J M y beauty. 
of pity, pain, hatred .. . Her eyes aged 
suddenly, as if the inherited suffering of 
many generations had come to their surface . . . But nobody could read their look 
in the pale moonlight, dimmed with smoke. 
They joked her, calling her a coward. 
They tried to prove by force that fire jumping is great fun. Two laughing boys grasped 
her arms and dragged her to the blazing, 
crackling heap. 
She resisted with all her strength. As 
she saw the flame nearer, her eyes opened 
wider and wider, till they became two mirrors of horror. 
She uttered a word in English. A cruel 
word, invented in America. The boys did 
not understand it. But such wild terror 
sounded in it, that they sobered at once 
and let her alone. 
"Wha t happened to you, little lady? Did 
they hurt you? " asked Vania anxiously, 
grasping her hand. 
"No! " she whispered with lips grey like 
ashes. 
"Wer e you scared? Yo u look so distressed!" He spoke with gentle pity. Then 
turning toward the boys: 
"Yo u rascals! You must not handle a 
lady as if she were a boy. " 
The boys looked embarrassed. "W e did 
not mean anything wrong. " They muttered. 
"W e just wanted to show her how to jump. " 
Vania tried to excuse his comrades: 
"Yo u must not mind them, milaya. They 
are rather rough, but they are good fellows. Please, don't be angry with us, my 
little swallow! " 
A t the sound of his gentle words tears 
came to her eyes. It was such a contrast 
with the terrible remembrance of the lynching! Her nerves could not stand it. She 
wept aloud on his shoulder. 
"They burnt my father alive! " she repeated desperately. "The white people murdered my father!" 
Vania was silent. He remembered the 
horrible stories printed in the papers, 
stories which he did not believe: Somewhere 
in America, in that free, highly civilized republic, black people were tortured and burnt 
alive like the witches of old . . . He 
thought then that the Russian newspaper 
men had invented these stories, because 
Americans started the intervention .. . He 
soon forgot them, for he was never much 
interested in politics and political lies. 
But this was not a lie. A girl, weeping 
bitterly on his shoulder, whispered in his TH E BLAC K SWA N 15 
ear the cruel details of the deed . . . They 
did do it,—the Americans did it to her own 
father! He must believe! 
Indignation stirred his heart. He tightened his fists. But he could only vaguely 
imagine the offenders, they were so far 
away . . . His anger faded soon. Vania 
could not hate strongly; he knew better how 
to pity. 
Great pity overwhelmed his heart. He 
kissed the dark head resting helplessly on 
his shoulder and repeated the gentlest words 
he knew from the peasant's' love songs: 
"M y evening star, my flower-by-the-brook, 
my little soul! " 
IV. 
The story of Black Swan stirred Vania's 
peaceful mind as a heavy stone thrown in a 
calm lake .. . He thought with great sadness about the far away country where the 
people were so dark as not to understand 
that God created all races equal. 
But he could not think long about any 
general problem. He had the soul of a 
child in spite o f his nineteen years, and was 
very self-centered. So he put aside the 
question of how to "enlighten" America and 
tried to find salvation for the Black Swan. 
"Certainly, you must never return to 
such a cruel country! " he declared. "Yo u 
must stay here, in Russia. Yo u will be 
made a citizen at once,—and we have equal 
suffrage, you know. " 
She sighed sadly. She remembered the 
news of coming Soviet rule. 
"Odessa will soon be abandoned by the 
Allied troops," she said, "and then Ole 
would not stay here, of course. He says 
Russians cannot pay well for entertainment . . . " 
"Leave him! " 
"I cannot do that, dear. Ole Smith was 
always kind to me. Yo u must not think that 
all Americans are cruel. He pays me well, 
buys me nice clothes and sends money to 
my mother. She lives in Paris, we emigrated after that terrible thing occurred." 
"Yo u have worked enough for him. Did 
you not say the other day that he had made 
a fortune out of you? Don't pity such a 
big strong man. He can earn his living 
with his own hands." 
Surely she longed to remain in Russia,— 
in the country where her race was not despised, where she was loved by a kind Russian boy. But she did not think it possible. 
"Ho w about my mother, Vania? " 
"W e will send her money. Yo u may 
dance for the People's Theatre. Is it not 
a splendid idea? W e appreciate good artists. You r mother may come here also." 
"Oh, Vania, it would be splendid, but you 
forget that Russian money has no value 
abroad, and my mother could not get a 
passport to Russia .. . I don't believe 
there will be any peace with your country! 
And if I leave Smith, he would get angry 
and stop supporting my mother. Oh, I don't 
see any way of settling it!" 
Despair sounded in her voice. The boy 
was silent for a long time. Neither of them 
noticed how far they went from the others. 
Vania's comrades called them several times, 
but in vain. Their plaintive songs were 
heard faintly from the distance. They left 
the park of Hadji Bey. 
The moon was setting. The dry grass of 
liman smelt sweetly and strongly, awakening passionate desires. . . . The spell of the 
warm and scentful southern summer prevented Vania from thinking clearly. He 
just wanted to take this gentle girl in his 
arms and protect her from any evil. He 
bent to her and kissed slowly her great, 
mournful eyes. It seemed to him that she 
embodied all the scents of the dark southern night. 
She returned his kisses. For the first time 
her lips touched his. He recalled the song 
about a starbeam that fell on the face of 
a lover . . . 
"But we must think! Sit down, my little 
swallow, and let us decide what to do . . . 
Yo u must not g o away. I shall die if my 
Black Swan flies away from me! " 
They could not come to any decision that 
night. They exchanged sweet smiles and 
enchanted looks, which have the same meaning for every race . . . They forgot all 
about the hatred dividing the maddened nations,-—for them all the world was united 
by love. 
Afte r a sleepless night Vania formed a 
plan to save his Black Swan. He shared it 
with his comrades who had seen the dancer 
in the theatre and admired her. 
"Wouldn't it be great to have her forever 
for the community theatre?" he asked. 
"I think you want her for yourself as 
well as for the community—" teased his 
friend Kolia. 
"Surely! " admitted Vania with boyish 
frankness. "I love her. Will you not help 
me? " 
The boys shook hands with him and swore 
that they would do everything he asked. 16 TH E CRISI S 
The Black Swan was not only a good 
dancer, but also a good actress . . . One 
evening, after a meeting with Vania, who 
explained to her the plan of her rescue, she 
approached her impresario: 
"Oh, Mr. Smith, I think I will never return home! " 
"Why? " 
"I have such dark presentments! I am 
afraid that I may die, or something terrible may happen to me! My mother always 
warned me not to go to this dangerous 
country!" 
She sighed, "Promise me, if anything bad 
happens to me, you will not let her know! 
I don't want her to suffer." 
"Don't be so depressed, girlie, or you will 
not dance well. Don't forget that tomorrow 
we have the performance at the military 
headquarters." 
"I will try to be cheerful . . . But promise me, please, what I asked!" 
"Why , certainly! I don't believe your superstitious forebodings, but if anything 
really happened I would send the old woman 
her money just the same every month, as I 
promised you before we came here." 
"Oh, you are so kind, Mr. Smith." 
"Not at all. You deserved it. We have 
worked so many seasons together . . . You 
are a very good girl, but you have moods 
too often." 
"Can't I have moods from time to time? 
I am not a dancing machine!" 
"All right, don't be cross! Want some 
amusement? You must get rid of the blues, 
you know . . . " 
"Please, take me on a ride around the 
park, will you? It is such a beautiful 
night!" 
"Not to-night. We will ride to-morrow 
before the performance, if you are a good 
girl." 
That evening Vania found a little scrap 
of paper, shoved under the stone at the lake. 
It read: 
"To-morrow Evening, After Sunset. 
B. S." 
V 
A few days later, the American correspondent, sitting in the comfortable British 
Embassy, clicked out rapidly on his portable 
typewriter: 
"A terrible affair happened here last 
night An American dancer, known at home 
as 'Molly the Blackbird', was kidnapped 
by a gang of masked men. Her scarf was 
found near the lake in the suburban park. 
She was undoubtedly murdered, then the 
body was throxvn into the water. No motive has been discovered for the crime; it 
seems quite meaningless. The only possible explanation is that the Russians, corrupted by communism, have grown so 
bloodthirsty as to . . ." 
There followed several paragraphs describing details of the mysterious murder. 
It was said, among other thrilling things, 
that heart-breaking cries had been heard 
from the lake by the guests of the nearby 
hotel. They supposed that the girl had been 
"tortured by the gang of hoodlums". 
Not all of these details were invented by 
the industrious correspondent. People in 
the hotel did hear cries. But this is what 
really happened: 
After the well-staged kidnapping scene, 
the boys took off their masks and Black 
Swan saw the fair 'young faces, smiling 
kindly at her. 
"This is our future star!" said Vania 
triumphantly. "She has consented to dance 
in the People's Theatre. She is the best 
dancer you ever saw and she is my sweetheart!" 
He put his hands on her shoulders and 
kissed her on both cheeks like a child. 
Everyone of the boys shook hands with 
the "kidnapped" girl. They shouted: "Welcome to our community! " 
"Long live Black Swan! " 
"W e hope you will be happy in Russia! " 
All these friendly greetings flooded her 
heart with an unknown joy. She was famous and adored before in England and 
France, but those audiences had admired 
her as a toy. Here she was treated as a 
nearest friend, a sister. 
The jo y was almost unbearable. It verged 
on pain. She must express it or it would 
choke her! She wanted to dance. Oh, never 
before had she had such a fierce desire to 
dance! 
She threw up her slim dark hands. Her 
body swayed rythmically. She was the living instrument on which jo y played an 
eternal melody! 
"Boys, attention! Black Swan is going 
to dance for us! " 
It was Vania who said it. Russian Vania, 
her sweetheart! He who kissed her before 
his friends, he who was proud of her! Oh, 
she must dance beautifully! 
She wanted to jump, to whirl madly, but 
she restrained herself. - Not yet,—she remembered the words of her old Spanish FO R ETHIOPI A 17 
teacher: "Dancing must be harmonious." 
She began to move slowly, like a swan 
just awakened by the first rays of sunrise. She lifted and lowered her arms, as 
if trying to fly. The long and wide sleeves 
of her black dress fluttered like real wings. 
The boys watched her in silence. The red 
crescent moon arose above the bay. The 
dry grass of liman, rustling faintly under 
the sudden breeze, smelt like exhilarating 
incense. There was no music to accompany 
her dance, but the air was filled with unheard melody . . . 
She moved more and more swiftly. It 
was difficult to watch her movements in the 
dim shining of the moon. 
"Light! " commanded Vania. 
The boys snatched their torches and lighted them hastily. Seven burning sticks were 
like seven flaming red lilies. Among those 
flowers of flame she floated,—the Black 
Swan in the pool of dreams. She dreamed 
Happiness! 
She danced passionately! The shining 
black laces of her dress fluttered like 
feathers, raised by storm. The wind of unheard melody stirred them. Her body was 
music itself. 
Her red shoes peeping through the 
feathery black laces completed the remarkable resemblance to the red-legged black 
swans from the park of Hadji Bey. She 
felt herself a bird, starting a long joyous 
flight! She wds in truth a swan! 
She could not restrain her mad jo y any 
more. She needed sounds. But the night 
was silent. The melody of feeling was not 
enough. She wanted music, real music, real 
songs, or cries! 
And then she uttered a shrill, long cry. 
It meant jo y on the verge of pain. All the 
wild emotions of her African ancestors 
sounded in it. It recalled the first note of 
song, sung before the bonfires of victory, 
the barbaric song of unrestrained triumph! 
She repeated it. Her cries startled the 
boys only for a short moment. Then, obeying the ancient instinct, they joined her like 
the flock of the wild swans answering the 
call of the leader. 
These were the cries heard by the peaceful 
guests of the summer hotel on the night of 
"the mysterious murder". 
FO R ETHIOPI A 
BESSIE BRENT MADISON 
O DARK-SKINNE D Mothers of America, 
Wh o sit today, perhaps, with bowed down 
head, 
Because your home is lonely since he left— 
Leave all to God, and rise and smile instead ; 
Stretch forth the arms that nursed him as 
a child 
And guided his dear feet in ways of truth, 
Remembering how your love has glorified 
And brightened all his earnest, hopeful 
youth. 
Stretch forth your arms to Heaven, and 
say to Him: 
"God, I have given my best, my all, to fight 
In Freedom's holy name—to live or die, 
Which seemeth best, for justice and for 
right! 
Grant thou, O God, that through this sacrifice, 
When blood has well atoned for ancient 
wrong, 
That Ethiopia's Sons may raise their heads 
And sing a louder, clearer, grander song." 
Let it be so, when this dread war shall 
cease, 
When hushed is every bitter cry of woe, 
That all your children who to earth are 
spared, 
In bonds of fellowship may firmer grow. 
For none were better, stronger, nor more 
brave, 
Than those of ours who sleep with ice-cold 
brow. 
Let other nations rise and plead our cause, 
And let them understand, who scorn us 
now! 
SUNSE T 
MARY EFFIE LEE 
SINC E Poets have told of sunset, 
What is left for me to tell? 
I can only say that I saw the day 
Press crimson lips to horizon gray, 
And kiss the earth farewell. 
WAITIN G 
JAMES WALDO FAWCETT 
I DO not sleep when others sleep; 
I wait and wonder, watch and weep. 
I make a little song in sorrow 
For those to sing who come tomorrow. National Association for the Advancemen
TH E HAITIA N MISSIO N T O TH E 
UNITE D STATE S 
A T the regular meeting of the National 
Board of Directors of the N. A. A. 
C. P. last November, it was voted that 
James Weldon Johnson should return to 
Haiti to organize Haitian sentiment and 
to arrange for a delegation of Haitians to 
come to the United States and work for the 
restoration of Haitian sovereignity. It 
was felt that such a step was absolutely 
necessary if the evils of American occupation were to be corrected. Mr. Johnson was 
considered the best iperson for that task 
because he had made the investigation that 
brought the matter for the first time to the 
attention of the American people. 
But the great amount of work to be done 
in the United States and the cost of another 
trip to Haiti, made Mr. Johnson decide to 
attempt to accomplish this delicate task 
through correspondence with the leading 
men he met while in Haiti. In this attempt 
he was successful. A number of letters were sent, pointing out the urgent need 
of the formation of a unified b'ody in Haiti 
which would speak for the Haitian people. 
Not only could this organization wage an 
active campaign for the restoration of Haitian independence and the ending of the 
American occupation, but it could answer 
the great mass of counter-propaganda, derogatory to the Haitian people, which was 
being spread throughout America and the 
world to justify American interference in 
Haitian affairs. 
As a result, in November L'Union Pntriotique d'Ha'iti was formed. From the 
Bulletin Mensuel of L'Union Patriotique 
we quote: 
"On November 17, 1920, in accord with 
the cherished wish of Mr. James Weldon 
Johnson, the devoted secretarv-general of 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peoole, eighteen Haitian 
citizens, at the call of M. Georges Sylvain. 
former minister plenipotentiary of Haiti 
to Paris, met at Port-au-Prince' in his law 
office, and decided to form an association, 
having as its prime object the working in 
accord with the defenders of the Haitian 
cause in the United States for the abolishment of all restrictions placed upon the 
full exercise of sovereignity and independence on the part of the Haitian govern 
ment." 
Through efforts put forth since that 
date, the Patriotic Union of Haiti is today 
a national organization, with branches in 
every town of the Haitian Republic. It has 
sent a commission to the United States 
composed of M. Pauleus Sannon, ex-Haitian 
Minister to the United States; M. Stenio 
Vincent, ex-Minister of the Interior of 
Haiti and president of the Haitian Senate 
at the time that it was dismissed at the 
point of a pistol in the hands of a United 
States Marine officer; and M. Perceval 
Thoby. Since their arrival they have drafted a memorial to the United States Congress, the essential points of the document 
being: 
1. Immediate suppression of martial law 
(which has existed since Sentember 2, 
1915). and the military courts. 
2. Immediate reorganization of the Haitian 
forces (police and military"! and consequently the withdrawal of the American 
occupation. 
3. Abrogation of the treaty, September 
16, 1915. (This treaty, forced urxm the 
Haitian people, practically made them 
foreswear their independence.) 
4. The convocation, within a short time, of 
a cor=tit"tional assembly to draft a new 
Constitution for Haiti, the existing Constitution not having been made by representatives of the Haitian people, but 
forced upon them bv bayonets in the 
hands of American Marines. 
Messrs. Sannon Vincent and Thoby have 
interviewed members of both houses of Congress relative to definite action by the 67th 
Con°ress. They will remain in America 
until such action is taken. 
TH E TWELFT H ANNUA L CONFERENC E 
A T DETROI T 
THE greatest conference in the history 
A
 of the N. A. A. C. P., according to 
all present indications, 'will be held in 
Detroit, Mich.. .TUTIP 2fi t/i July 1. In18 TH E LIBERIA N COMMISSION TO AMERICA . 
Standing: S. P. Wolo . Dr. Ernest Lyons. C. L. Dennis, J. L. Morris, E. W . McGill, 
Sitting: President C. D. B. King, Judge F. E. R. Johnson. 
Underwood and Underwood 20 THE CRISIS 
vitations have been sent to some of the 
most prominent individuals in America to 
address meetings, and from a number of 
them acceptances have already been received. 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, our National 
President, who was prevented from attending the conferences at Cleveland and Atlanta because of illness, has announced that 
he will be present and will speak at the 
opening session on Sunday afternoon, 
June 26. 
From Monday, June 27, through Friday, 
July 1, morning and afternoon business 
sessions will be held, at which time the 
problems of the branches and of the National Office will be discussed and acted 
upon. On each evening a mass meeting 
will be held, which will be addressed by 
speakers of national prominence. The National Office will be glad to receive suggestions from branches, members and friends 
regarding questions to be discussed and 
acted upon at Detroit. It is difficult to 
cover all of the ground necessary because 
of the immensity of the organization and 
the numerous problems which are constantly arising. We want, however, to do as 
much as possible, so that the Twelfth Annual Conference will be fruitful of results. 
Branches are urged to consider as soon 
as possible whether or not they will be able 
to send delegates, and also the number of 
delegates to be sent. In localities distant 
from Detroit where the branch is small, 
several branches can combine and send one 
delegate. As far as possible, we hope that 
every branch will be represented. A cordial welcome is also extended to all members and friends of the Association to be 
with us at Detroit and help make the conference a great success. 
Because of its central location, Detroit 
is excellently chosen and is an ideal place 
for the gathering together of many persons interested in the fight for freedom 
from prejudice for the Negro and in the 
success of the N. A. A. C. P. 
The National Office is making efforts to 
secure special convention rates to the conference. 
TWO-HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND 
MEMBERS OF THE N. A. A. C. P. 
I T has been a source of tremendous encouragement to see how the branches 
throughout the country are entering so 
eagerly into the plans for the drive for 
250,000 members of the N. A. A. C. P. 
which takes place April 24 to May 8. Most 
of the branches have appointed their colonels, majors, captains and lieutenants; 
have appointed their various committees 
and have inaugurated already all of the 
plans of intensive preparation. Every 
branch that has not kept pace is urged to 
use every possible effort to get the drive 
organization actively functioning, so that 
when the drive closes we will have reached 
and surpassed our objective of "A Quarter 
of a Million Members—A Force That Canriot Be Ignored." 
CAUSE OF THE NEGRO PRESENTED T O 
PRESIDENT HARDING 
O N Monday, April 4, James Weldon 
Johnson conferred at the White House 
with President Harding relative to definite 
steps that should be taken to relieve oppressive conditions affecting colored people 
and causing friction between the races. Mr. 
Johnson told President Harding frankly of 
the great unrest among colored people and 
their dissatisfaction with conditions which 
allowed lynching, disfranchisement, peonage and other forms of racial injustice to 
be continued. He emphasized the fact that 
the National Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, while holding to 
the right of the Negro to participate in the 
administration of the government by the 
appointment of colored citizens to office, 
was more interested in the enactment of effective measures to relieve oppressive conditions affecting the entire race. 
Mr. Johnson urged upon the President, 
that he include in his first message to Congress a definite recommendation for the 
passage of a Federal anti-lynching law in 
accordance with the pledge in the Republican Party platform. The memorandum 
which was presented to the President read 
as follows: 
April 4, 1921. 
MEMORANDU M TO TH E 
HONORABLE* WARRE N G. HARDING , 
President of the United States. 
The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People earnestly requests the President to include in his message to Congress, convening April 11, a 
recommendation that it take action to end 
lynching, the most terrible blot on American civilization. 
It earnestly urges that a wide and thorough investigation of peonage conditions be 
made by the Department of Justice. The OUR VALIANT MARINE 2 1 
recent disclosures in Jasper County, Ga., 
reveal conditions that are unspeakable, but 
the Jasper County conditions are not isolated. There are similar conditions in 
nearly every Southern State, especially in 
the Mississippi Delta region. The Federal 
government has full power to investigate, 
punish and abolish peonage. 
It earnestly urges an investigation of 
disfranchisement in the South, with a view 
to insuring to the Negro his right as an 
American citizen to vote under the identical qualifications required of other citizens. 
It earnestly urges the appointment of a 
National Inter-racial Commission to make 
a thorough and sincere study of race conditions and race relations in the United 
States with particular reference to the 
causes of friction. 
In addition to the above, the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People again calls to the attention of 
the President the cause of the Haitian people and the necessity for a thorough Congressional investigation of both the military and civil acts of the American Occupation in that republic under the last administration, not only as a matter of justice 
to the Haitian people, tAit in the interest 
of the good name and traditions of the 
American Republic. 
It also asks of this administration the 
appointment of colored assistant secretaries in the Departments of Labor and Agriculture. Such appointments would give 
the Negro official representation in the two 
phases of our national life where he needs 
most and suffers most. 
Finally, the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People asks that 
the President, by executive order, abolish 
all race segregation in the department at 
Washington and in the United States Civil 
Service—that most humiliating and undemocratic practice initiated by the Democraticadministration. 
OUR VALIANT MARINES 
R OTHSCHIL D FRANCI S writes us 
from the Virgin Islands: 
Enclosed you will find a circular and 
clipping of an outrage perpetrated on the 
peaceful inhabitants of St. Thomas, Virgin 
Islands, of the United States, by coward 
Marines of the Navy ; I am sure it will 
interest readers of TH E CRISIS to learn of 
the manner in which we are treated by 
these devils. Please note they had rifles 
and passed the night guards in barracks 
(who we believe are their accomplices) to 
fight a peaceful colored people, because they 
protested against the Marines mal-treatment of their wives and children. Letters 
have been sent to the Secretary of the 
Navy, Senators France and LaFollette, 
"The Nation", "The Crusader", "The New 
York Call", and American Civil Liberties 
Union, asking them to help us in the fight 
for the removal of these half civilized men 
of the navy from our midst. We are counting on you to help. 
The circular follows: 
How U. S. Marines Celebrated the eve of 
the Fourth Anniversary of American occupation in St Thomas, Virgin Islands, of the 
United States, March 30, 1921. 
(By the Editor of "The Emancipator".) 
But for the decency of the colored inhabitants of St. Thomas last night, an act 
more damnable than deviltry would' have 
been perpetrated by a most unrepresentative and disreputable gang of Law-breakers, who would rather call themselves 
the people's executors than their protectors. Imagine that from Saturday night 
some Marines stationed here together 
with some of the Sailors starting petty 
disturbances in that part of the town 
called "Back-of-all," and keeping up their 
war dance until last night when the culminating point was reached by a gang of 
a/j'out forty of these Marine law-breakers, arming themselves each with a rifle 
stepped bodly from Headquarters (the 
Barracks), and marched through the streets 
down to "Back of-all" shooting at anything imaginable, some of their bullets 
passing through the two story building of 
our citizen, Mr. J. Gimenez, mechanical 
electrician, entering through his window, 
destroying his large mirror, three and a 
half by two, lodging both in beam and 
ceiling, causing much discomfiture to his 
terror stricken wife and children. Sanitary Inspectors Wallace and Miller were 
chased off the streets by bullets hovering over and near their heads, they being forced to leave the Night-soil-car to 
the detriment of the tax-payers around 
the vicinity. Wha t refletcion may not 
be gathered from this most ignoble action when consideration is taken as to 
the unhappy position of a defenseless 
people? Defenseless indeed, when to 
make the statement more clear the police were called off the streets. By whom 
is the question to be asked? We 
hope not by the Policemaster. It is a 
very critical position in which to place 
our good Governor Oman, who has always tried his utmost to prevent a repetition of anything looking like the fiasco 
of 1917, and we are persuaded to Relieve 
that he will so act upon this bunch of 
cowards as their actions merit. Men of the Month 
MALACH I DUNMORE CORNISH was 
oorn in Philadelphia, Pa., April 11, 
1860. He was graduated from the Institute for Colored Youth in June, 1878. For 
5 years he was a teacher in Wicomico, Md. 
In 1889 he entered the New Jersey State 
Teachers' Examination and received a 
First Grade State Certificate, entitling him 
to the principalship of any school in the 
State. He has served as principal of colored schools in Merchantville and Gouldtown and as supervising principal in Woodbury and Camden, N. J. A t the Whittier 
School in Camden, Mr. Cornish had charge 
of 25 teachers and over a thousand pupils. 
In September, 1919, Mr. Cornish was retired on a pension of $1,500 per year, after 
41 years of service. 
Mrs. Cornish is a graduate of the Institute for Colored Youth. She was appointed a teacher in Harford County, Md., 
in October, 1879; 12 years later she was 
appointed principal of the Park Avenue 
School at North Woodbury, N. J., where 
she remained 28 years. She also has been 
pensioned. 
The Honorable Casely Hayford, of Gold 
Coast, West Africa, is the son of the Rev. 
J. de Graft Hayford, who was the nephew 
of the Omanhin—that is Paramount Chief, 
Kweku Attah, of Cape Coast, and the son 
of James Hayford, who at one time served 
as Government resident at Comassie, Ashanti. 
Mr. Hayford received his education at 
Wesleyan High School, Fourah Bay College and Cambridge University. In 1896 
he was admitted to the Bar. He is a member of the Inner Temple of London and 
the leader of the Gold Coast Western Province Bar. Since 1903 he has written the 
following books: "Ethiopia Unbound", 
"Studies in Race Emancipation", "The 
Truth About the West African Land 
Question", and several pamphlets. In 
June, 1912, Mr. Hayford was a member of 
the deputation to the British Colonial Office on the Forest Bill; in September, 1916 
he was appointed a member of the Legislation Council of the Gold Coast; in June, 
1919, he was made an M. B. E., and on the 
occasion of his decoration by His Excellency Brigadier-General Guggisberg, the 
Governor said: "I know that besides being 
a fine barrister and a brilliant author, Mr. 
Hayford is a man who takes the deepest 
interest in his own country and is always 
willing to bring to the notice of the Government any matter for discontent that 
may arise and come to his notice." 
In conjunction with Dr. Akiwandi Savage, of Nigeria, Mr. Hayford was instrumental in promoting the conference of Africans of British West Africa , which has 
become the National Congress of British 
West Africa, of which the Hon. P. HuttonMills is the president and he is the vicepresident. 
Mrs. Casely Hayford and her niece, Miss 
Kathleen Easmon, are now lecturing in 
the United States, as a means of raising 
a fund for a girls' school in Sierra Leone. 
Joseph Hugh Evans Scotland was born 
in Antigua, British West Indies, and educated at St. Michaels Institute. He enlisted in the British Navy and became a 
resident of Halifax, Nova Scotia, and Boston, Mass., where he became known as a 
tailor and an expert cloth and fur specialist. In New York City he was appointed 
to a position in the banking house of John 
H. Davis & Company. He was appointed 
Document Clerk in the Office of County 
Clerk Woolston, of Essex County, N. J., 
in 1908, being the first Negro to receive 
this appointment. A t Newark, N. J., 15 
years ago, Mr. Scott was elected Justice 
of the Peace; on November 2, 1920, he was 
elected by the Republicans as Justice of 
the Peace at Irvington, N. J., for a period 
of 5 years. 
The late Mrs. Martha E. Tucker was a 
teacher, a school principal and a social 
worker of Washington, D. C. She served 
at Bowen and Sumner Schools and was re 
tired from Logan School in September, 
1920, after having completed 50 years of 
notable service. Mrs. Tucker's greatest 
achievement was the regeneration of the 
once notorious southwestern section of 
Washington, for which she labored over 25 
years. 
22 MKS. H. S. CORNISH MRS. M. E. TUCKER 
HON. CASELY HAYFORD 
M. D. CORNISH J, H. E. SCOTLAND 
23 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
TO TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE 
TOUSSAINT , the most unhappy man of 
men! 
Whether the whistling Rustic tend his 
plough 
Within thy hearing, or thy head to now 
Pillowed in some deep dungeon's earless 
den;— 
O miserable Chieftain! where and when 
Wilt thou find patience? Yet die not; do 
thou 
Wear rather in thy bonds a cheerful brow: 
Though fallen thyself, never to rise again. 
Live, and take comfort. Thou hast left 
behind 
Powers that will work for thee; air, earth 
and skies; 
There's not a breathing of the common 
wind 
That will forget thee; thou hast great 
allies; 
Thy friends are exultations, agonies, 
And love, and man's unconquerable mind. 
—WILLIA M WORDSWORTH. 
Wordsworth's sonnet written to L'Ouver 
ture a century and some odd years a<rc 
held some prophetic Words. Hayti, foi 
whose emancipation Toussaint fought an< 
died, in these days of her freshly threat 
ened enslavement stUI finds powers tha 
will work for her and great allies,—ago)iics 
love and man's unconquerable mind. 
* * * 
The Encore, a new musical journal pub 
lished by Clarence Cameron White, come: 
to us from Boston. We wish it much sue 
cess. 
E. D. Morel, the Man and His Work, by 
F. S. Cocks (George Allen & Unwin, Ltd.. 
London, England), has been issued. Just 
because Morel has participated, contrary 
to our expectations, in the German outcry 
against blacks in the French Army of Occupation, we read with interest his tribute to 
the industry of the native African: 
He is speaking of the life of the native 
agriculturists of Nigeria: 
"Wha t a busy intensive life it is! From 
sunrise to sunset, save for a couple of hours 
in the heat of the day. every one appears to 
have his hands full. . . . The men driving the animals to pasture, or hoeing in the 
fields, or busy at the forge or dye-pit or 
loom; or making ready to sally 'forth to 
the nearest market with the products of the 
local industry. The women cooking thenbreakfasts, or picking or spinning cotton, 
or attending to the younger children, or 
pounding corn .. . or separating on 
flat slabs of stone the seed from the cotton 
lint. . . . The sowing or reaping, and 
the intermediate seasons, bring with them 
their several tasks. The ground must be 
cleared and hoed, and the sowing of the 
staple crops concluded before the early 
rains in May, which will cover the land with 
the sheet of tender creen shoots of guinea 
corn, maize and millet, and, more rarely, 
wheat. When these crops have ripened, the 
heads of the grain will be cut off. the bulk 
of them either marketed or stored. . . . 
The stalks . . . will be carefully gathered and stacked for fencing purposes. Nothing .. . is wasted in this country. 
. . . The bees receive particular attention for their honey and their wax. . ... . 
Before harvest-time has dawned 
the secondary crops come in for attention. 
Cassava and cotton, indigo and sugar-cane, 
sweet potatoes and tobacco, onions and 
ground nuts, beans and pepper, jams and 
rice, according to locality and suitability 
of the soil. 
"It is a revelation to see the cotton-fields, 
the plants in raised rows three feet apart, 
the land having in manv cases been oreeedently enriched by a catch-crop of beans. 
The fields themselves are protected 
. by tall ne"t fencine of guinea-corn 
stalks, or reeds, kept in place by native 
rope of uncommon strength. . . . Equally astonishing are the irrigated farms . . . 
on the banks of the watercourses. Th n 
plots are marked out with the mathematical 
precision of squares on a chessboard, divided by ridees with frequent gaps permittins: of a free influx of water from the central channel." 
Of the Northern Nigeria farmer he 
writes:— 
"Rotation of crops and green manuring 
is thoroughly understood . . . every 
scran of fertilizing substance is husbanded 
by this expert and industrous agricultural 
people." 
JAPAN AND YAP 
JAPA N has issued her intentions as manJ
 datory for the islands in the Pacific including Yap which were formerly Germany's 
possessions. The New York Tribune quotes 
her communique issued by the Tokio foreign office: 
Reiteration is made of the intention "in 
consonance with the spirit of the mandate" 
24 THE LOOKING GLASS 25 
not to establish military or naval bases. The 
communication calls attention to the tendency to exaggerate the economic and strategic value of the Islands, "whose total area 
is smaller than Rhode Island," and points 
out that Ya p contains only eight square 
miles, which is less than one-third of Guam 
and that its harbors are barely capable of 
accommodating three steamers whose combined tonnage is not more than 9,000 tons. 
The island has no natural produce, it adds, 
and, except for its cable facilities, is a 
"worthless piece of barren soil in midocean." 
"It might as well be said," the Foreign 
Office declares, "that the United States obtained control of the Atlantic seas by the 
purchase of the Virgin Islands as to say 
that, by the mandate to the islands in the 
South Pacific, Japan has staked a sea area 
of 4,000,000 square miles from Kamchatka, 
in the north, to the South Pacific islands." 
The Foreign Office then characterizes as 
fabrications reports which have been circulating that Japan is shifting administrative 
headquarters for the Marshall Islands from 
Jaluit to Woese for strategic purposes, is 
preventing the landing of foreign merchants 
and is unlawfully interfering with American missionaries and closing the mission 
schools. 
THE NATIONAL WOMAN'S 
PARTY 
THE miscarriage of the ideals of the 
"Woman's Party" was especially 
marked in the case of the deputation of colored women who attended the convention in 
Washington. Freda Kirchwey writes in 
The Nation: 
The efforts—wholly unsuccessful—of the 
representatives of the colored women would 
form a tragic chapter of the same story. A 
delegation o f 60 women sent by colored 
women's organizations in 14 States arrived 
in Wasbinerton several days before the convention. They requested an interview with 
Alice Paul so that they might take up with 
her the question of the disfranchisement 
of the women of their race. They were told 
Miss Paul was too busy to see them. They 
said they would wait t;ll she had time. 
Finally, grudgingly, she yieMed. The colored 
women presented their case in the form of 
a dignified memorial—which read as follows : 
We have come here as members of various organizations and from different sections representing the five million colored 
women of this country. We are deeply appreciative of the heroic devotion of the National Woman's Party to the women's suffrage movement and of the tremendous sacrifices made under your leadership in securing the passage of the Nineteenth 
Amendment. 
W e revere the names of the pioneers to 
whom you will do honor while here, not 
only because they believed in the inherent 
rights of women, but of humanity at large, 
and gave themselves to the fight against 
slavery in the United States. 
The world has moved forward in these 
70 years and the colored women of this 
country have been moving with it. They 
know the value of the ballot, if honestly 
used, to right the wrongs of any class. 
Knowing this, they have also come today to 
call your attention to the flagrant violations 
of the intent and purposes of the Susan B. 
Anthony Amendment in the elections of 
1920. These violations occurred 'in the 
Southern States, where is to be found the 
great mass of colored women, and it has not 
been made secret that wherever white 
women did not use the ballot, it was counted worth while to relinquish it in order that 
it might be denied colored women. 
Complete evidence of violations of the 
Nineteenth Amendment could be obtained 
only by Federal investigation. There is, 
however, sufficient evidence available to justify a demand for such an inquiry. We are 
handing you herewith a pamphlet with verified cases of the disfranchisement of our 
women. 
The National Woman's Party stands in 
the forefront of the organizations that have 
undergone all the pains of travail to bring 
into existence the Nineteenth Amendment. 
We can not then believe that you will permit this amendment to be so distorted in 
its interpretation that it shall lose its power 
and effectiveness. Five million women in 
the United States can not be denied their 
rights without all the women of the United 
States feeling the effect of that denial. No 
women are free until all are free. 
Therefore we are assembled to ask that 
you will use your influence to have the convention of the National Woman's Party appoint a special committee to ask Congress 
for an investigation of the violations of the 
Susan B. Anthonv Amendment in the elections of 1920. 
Miss Paul was indifferent to this appeal 
and resented the presence of the delegation. 
Their chance of being heard at the convention was gone. A Southern organizer told 
the one active supporter of the colored 
women—a white woman and a delegate from 
New York—that the Woman's Party was 
pledged not to raise the race issue in the 
South; that this was the price it paid for 
ratification. But no such sinister motive 
is necessary to explain the treatment of the 
colored delegation; they were simply an interruption, an obstacle to the smooth working of the machine. Their leading members 
were not allowed to ride in the elevators of 
the Hotel Wa°Hri<»to" wV>ere the convention 
was held, until finally they made a stand 
for their rights. And only b y the use of 
tactics bordering on Alice Paul's own for 
vigor and persistence, did their spokesman— 
the delegate from New York—ge t a moment 
to present a resolution in their behalf—a 
resolution which was promptly defeated and 
which left the question precisely where it 
stood. 26 THE CRISIS 
Lide Gilhard Goldsmith, writing also in 
The Nation, faces the injustice of disfranchisement and intimates that it is a problem 
for the National Woman's Party: 
I am not a member of said party, but if 
they stand ready to take the responsibility 
of making the fight for forcing the enfranchisement of the American colored woman, 
I am ready to join their ranks. 
The East has its 'oroblem of the foreignhorn women, b" t if thev become citizens thev 
have a right to a voice
 ;n the government 
under the Nineteenth Amendment. Wh y 
should the "South handle its own problems." 
or the "Californians solve their own problems." or any other part of the United 
States, as regards the right of the American 
woman to vote? The Nineteenth Amendment has been ratified. By what right can 
those who have charge of the registration 
offices disfranchise any woman for the reasons set forth bv Mr. Pickens? 
If, as Susan P. Frost says, in your svmnosium in the issue of February 16 "the 
Negro population in communities of the 
South, either predominates numerically, or 
>« at the rate of half and half." that same 
Ne«To population is doing its part in the 
building up of the South, and because oi 
that work the women as well as the men 
are entitled to c^st their votes for the candidate who has their best interest at heart. 
The Africans were brought into the 
United States by the white man and sold 
as slaves to the white man. We foufht a 
Wiar with the South to make those slaves 
free men and women, giving to them the 
i-ight to citizenship of the United States. 
We seem still to have another war to fight: 
t
u
a t against race and color prejudice. 
GILPIN 
T
, H E controversy aroused by the possibil-
*- ity that the Dramat'e League of New 
York would invite the distinguished Negro 
actor, Charles Gilp'n, to its annual dinner, 
evoked a host of editorial comments. Musicral America says: 
Among intelligent and cultured people it 
is adnrtted that if there is one domain 
where there must he no prejudices on account of race, religion, even personality, it 
should be in that of art. music, drama, the 
sciences. Let it be the work, on the merits, 
and that alone, and this should be particularly true where the work is of such exceptional merit as t> contribute to the cause of 
cultural progress. 
Let us not forget, too, that we put into 
our Constitution as embodying our ideals 
as well as our ideas, that there shall be no 
prejudice in the United States on account 
of race, religion or previous condition of 
servitude. 
I am forced to these reflections Vy an 
incident which has recently caused considerable stir and controversy, which focused 
about one Charles Gilpin, a Negro star 
actor. 
When the question of his election as one 
of the guests at the Drama League dinner 
came up, several members refused to sit 
at the same table with a Negro. Others 
again, prominent members of the profession, 
stated that if he were not admitted, they 
would resign or at least stay away from the 
banquet. 
The issue here raised is vital. 
If a man does a great piece of work 
whether as actor or singer or composer, or 
as <painter. dramatist, writer or sculptor, 
what has the color of his skin to do with 
it and especially in a country that has proclaimed to the world its freedom from such 
prejudice: though under the influence of 
our dominant Calvinism, we know that no 
Hebrew, no Roman Catholic could ever be 
elected President, and we further know, 
that with all our boast of freedom and a 
Statue of Liberty at the entrance to the 
port of New York, the Negro is virtually 
disfranchised in whole sections of this 
country. We have seen the same spirit come 
out through the strain, stress and horror of 
t'->e war and cause us to discriminate against 
the works of the great German masters, 
though nearly all of them, including Wag ­
ner, were revolutionists and as anti-Prussian 
as they could well be. 
* * * 
This article draws a contrast between Old 
and New World methods which is greatly to 
the advantage of the former: 
In this regard the old world is ahead 
of us. for while we discriminate against 
the works o f Warner, thev were given in 
London in Italy and even in Paris during the war or immediately thereafter. In 
these countries, too, the prejudices which 
shame us, scarcely exist. Europe did not 
refuse to receive Alexander Dumas, the 
ereat writer, because he had Negro blood 
in his veins. The Europeans have not discriminated against great art'sts because 
nerhans their personal lives did not conform to the best moral code. But we, who 
vaunt our democracy, who positively pu f. 
as I said, into our Constitution that we shall 
be free from preiudice, we nresent to the 
world the spectacle of being the most prejudiced people on earth. 
We accept tens of thousands of ignorant 
peasants, raroi v nr ,i e to read and1 write, from 
all parts of the world, but we exclude the 
educated Japanese gentleman and merchant. 
Has not the time come for us to adopt 
a more broad-minded, more just attitude, 
especially to those who distinguish themselves in music, drama, the arts, the sciences, regardless of race, color, or religion 
or whether they live by the code, and that 
doesn't mean that we should for a moment 
depart from the highest standards in personal or social life. THE LOOKING GLASS 27 
The Brooklyn Eagle comments: 
W e think that the world of art, o : music 
and of the stage will sooner or later have 
to make up its mind to fellowship colored 
persons of marked proficiency. There may 
or may not be sufficient basis for the theory 
that the Negro will never excel in mathematics, in the exact sciences or in chessplaying. But in acting, in oratory, in music 
ana in painting or sculpture, if he can master the technique of the latter two, the onceenslaved race does otter something temperamentally distinctive, and compelling recognition. 
Mr. Gilpin's own statement with reference 
to the issue so hotly discussed by the Drama 
League people is entirely temperate and selfrespecting. He says: 
I am honestly striving to present my art 
rather than myself to the public. . . . 
1 have no right to pose as an object of compassion. . . . Against those who do not 
care to sit in the same dining room with me, 
i have no complaint. This only will I say: 
Thus far in the world's history, no race or 
profession has ever been permanently prevented from winning an equality rating for 
itself. 
Neither Booker T. Washington nor Frederick Douglass, nor even the creator of 
D'Artagnan and the Count of Monte Cristo, 
the grandson of a Santo Domingo Negress, 
could have put more of personal dignity 
into an analysis of such a situation. But 
Alexander Dumas, developing in the broader andl more catholic atmosphere of a Latin 
country, had no occasion for such an apologia. 
THE ANTHROPOLOGIST SPEAKS 
FFAN Z BOA Z writes in the Yale Review 
on the probable disappearance of race 
consciousness: 
The greatest hope for the immediate future lies in a lessening of the contrast be 
tween Negroes and wnites which Will bring 
about a lessening of class consciousness. As 
I have already pointed out, under present 
conditions a penetration of the white race 
by the Negro does not occur, while the effects 
of intermixture in which the fathers are 
white and the mothers Negro will lead in all 
probability to an increase of the amount of 
white blood in the Negro population. This 
should allay the fears of those who believe 
that the white race might deteriorate by 
race mixture. On the other hand, intermixture will decrease the contrast between the 
extreme racial forms and for this reason, 
this alone will lead to a lessening of the 
consciousness of race distinction. If conditions were ever such that it could be doubtful whether a person were of Negro descent 
or not, the consciousness of race would 
necessarily be much weakened. In a race 
of octoroons, living among whites, the color 
question would probably disappear. 
There is absolutely no biological evidence 
which would countenance the assumption 
that race mixture of itself would have unfavorable results, that the children of white 
fathers and of mulatto or quadroon mothers 
would b'e inferior to their Negro ancestors. 
It would seem, therefore, to be in the interest of society to permit rather than to 
restrain marriages between white men and 
Negro women. It would be futile to expect 
that our people would tolerate intermarriages in the opposite direction, although no 
scientific reason can be given that would 
prove them to be detrimental to the individual. Intermixture between white males and 
Negro females has been common ever since 
Negroes were brought to our continent, and 
the efficiency of the modern attempts to repress this intermingling is open to grave 
doubt. 
THE WOES OF INDIA 
AT the National Convention of the 
Friends of Freedom for India, held recently in New York, the following charges 
were made against the alien rule of Great 
Britain in India: 
We charge that for 150 years the official 
oligarchy of Great Britain has ruled and 
dominated India in the exclusive interests 
of the British Empire and that such rule 
has been opposed to the welfare of all the 
Indian people. 
We charge that as a direct result of British exploitation, the native industrial system 
has broken down and has almost wholly disappeared so that workers in the native 
crafts have been forced to abandon their 
accustomed and preferred callings to work 
on the land and in factories in order to provide such foodstuffs and other products as 
British imperial necessities demand. 
We charge that as general ignorance and 
illiteracy were a necessary condition to the 
successful exploitation of the resources and 
people of India, Great Britain has steadily 
and persistently cut off the means of education as is evidenced by the educational appropriation of $1,838,338 out of an annual 
budget of about $600,000,000. As a result 
the Indian people of today have not opportunities equal to those which existed prior 
to the time that Britain seized India. 
We charge that through a carefully fostered system of scanty credit, excessive taxation, enforced exportation and beggarly pay, 
Great Britain has literally starved the people of India by the millions in spite of the 
fact that India, left to herself, would be 
able to raise sufficient food to nourish her 
entire population. 
We charge that under British rule, native 
women have been drawn into the horrors of 
prostitution in order to satisfy the lust of 
the soldiery who, for the purpose of supporting the mastery of the foreign rule, 
have been maintained under unnatural conditions in tremendous numbers and at the 
expense of the Indian people. THE HORIZON 
COMPILED BY MAOEL INE G. ALLI50N 
MUSIC AND ART 
A T the annual dinner of the Drama 
** • League in New York City, Charles S. 
Gilpin, the Negro star of "The Emperor 
Jones", was among 10 honored guests who 
were judged to have contributed most to 
the stage this season. 
Musical America says of H. T. Burleigh's 
new song, "Tell Me Once More" : "With its 
flowing vocal phrases, the expressive rise 
and fall of its melody line, and its simple, 
yet beautifully managed accompaniment, it 
is a fine example of how much the composer 
can do for his lyric, to what a degree he can 
infuse it with warmth, color and imagination." 
Samuel Coleridge-Taylor's "Bamboula" 
has been rendered as the overture number at 
the Rivoli Theatre, New York City. 
The Coleridge-Taylor Association of Boston, Mass., has given a musicale of works 
by its members. Among the numbers were 
compositions by J. Shelton Pollen, Clarence 
Cameron White, Marietta Bonner, Eva Roosa 
Hutchins, Charity Bailey and R. Percival 
Parkham. The organization is conducting a 
series of 9 lecture-recitals. "Creole Folk 
Music" has been presented by Mrs. Maud 
Cuney Hare, and "Sculpture" by Mrs. Meta 
Warrick-Fuller. 
In New York City, the Colored Players' 
Guild has presented two playlets written by 
its members, "The Niche", by Mrs. Dora C. 
Norman, and "Pitfalls of Appearances", by 
Mr. G. A. Woods. A purse of $100 was 
given to the Circle for Negro Relief. 
Alfred H. Johnson, the Negro baritone, 
has been touring the South in-recitals at colored schools. A t a concert in Germantown, 
Pa., he was assisted by Carl R. Diton, as 
pianist. Mr. Johnson is a Lockwood scholarship student of Yale University. 
Mr. A. H. Woods, of New York, has 
signed a 3 year contract with Bert Williams, 
the Negro comedian. Mr. Williams will appear next season in a musical play, "The 
Pink Slip." 
r
 Adolph Klauber, of New York City, who 
presented Charles Gilpin, the Negro star, 
in "The Emperor Jones," is arranging to 
produce "Nobody Knows, " a musical comedy, with a cast of 30 Negroes, among 
whom will be Creamer and Layton. 
Students of Morehouse College, Atlanta, 
Ga „ have presented Shakespeare's "Hamlet", under the direction of Mary L. Strong. 
A. Jackson-Rigell acted the leading role, and 
other participants were Mrs. J. B. Watson, 
Mrs. P. M. Davis, W. E. King, Ralph Harris, Charles Perkins, Julian Barnett, Burnett Hudson, H. W. Thurman and E. S. 
Hope. 
Of a recital by Roland Hayes, William 
Atheling says in the New Age: "His rhythm 
sense is unsurpassed by anyone now singing 
in London. It is not necessary to have a 
book of the words. Whether English, 
French, or Italian, Mr. Hayes enunciates 
each one so that the hearer can understand 
it. .. . I can at the moment think of 
no singer who employs so many different 
qualities of voice, from operatic delivery to 
a singing which is almost speech. It goes 
without saying that the Negro Spirituals 
filled the audience with enthusiasm." West 
Africa adds: "A t the piano Mr. Lawrence 
B. Brown proved himself a worthy colleague. Possessing a delicate, almost 
womanly touch, he combined with his technique that sympathy which marks the perfect accompanist." 
"The Mayor of Jim Town, " a Negro 
musical comedy, is to be produced in New 
York City this spring. The book is by 
Miller & Lyle and the lyrics and music by 
Sissle & Blake, Negroes. 
MEETINGS 
THE North Carolina Negro Farmers' 
-"- Congress has been held at Brick School, 
Bricks, N. C , with 2,000 Negroes in attendance. Sixty per cent, of those present 
are farm owners; 57, taken at random, are 
paying taxes on 7,000 acres of land. Mr. 
T. S. Inborden, principal of Brick School, 
is president of the organization. 
28 THE HORIZON 29 
The 6th annual National Race Congress 
of America, Inc., "Reconstruction Session," 
will convene in Washington, D. C , May 4-7. 
A . Y. M. C. A. conference will convene 
at Coleman College, Gibsland, La., April 27 
—Ma y 2. 
I The Northwestern Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs will meet in Phoenix, Ariz., 
July 18-21. 
. The National Association of Negro Musicians will hold its 3rd annual convention, 
July 26-28, in Nashville, Tenn. Manuscripts 
by Negro composers should be submitted not 
later than June 1, to Carl Diton, 432 North 
Fifty-third Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE 
THE salaries of two nurses, Miss Mae 
Lee and Mrs. Vivian Nash, doinghealth work on the staff of the Atlanta Urban League, are provided by the colored 
churches, fraternal organizations and insurance companies of the city. 
For the first time in the history of the 
state, a colored woman has been appointed 
as matron in the Recorder's Court of Atlanta, through the efforts of the League. 
Seventy-five delegates in a tri-state 
(South Carolina, Georgia and Al a jama), 
Big Brother and Big Sister conference, 
under the auspices of the Atlanta Urban 
League, voted to become a permanent organization, meeting annually. 
A group of young business, soca l and 
clerical women workers in Boston, Mass., 
have formed an Urban League Auxiliary 
for volunteer community welfare under the 
direction of Miss Mabelle Brewer. 
The Boston Urban League is a charter 
organization of the new Boston Council of 
Social Agencies. 
The St. Louis Urban League has organized committees to provide entertainment 
and recreation and to assist in mending for 
soldiers in the U. S. Public Health Hospital. 
T. Arnold Hill, of the Chicago Urban 
League, reported April 1: 15,000 colored 
men and women are out of employment, 
1,000 of whom are homeless. The colored 
churches and social agencies, using the 
League as a clearing house to recommend 
those eligible for relief, are sheltering 150 
men each night and serving 300 meals a 
day. On March 20, 17,261 meals had been 
served; 6,473 men have been furnished 
shelter since January 1. 
The Detroit, Pittsburgh, St. Louis and 
Louisville Urban Leagues have done similar 
work. The colored social agencies in 
Louisville established a shelter for homeless 
men in the basement of the Y . M. C. A. 
The Detroit League collects and disburses 
money given by the churches for relief of 
persons in neighboring towns not cared for 
by the City Department of Public Welfare. 
The persistence of the industrial and 
placement secretaries of the Armstrong Association o f Philadelphia resulted in the 
placement of 268 persons during January 
and February, when unemployment was at 
its height. A t an industrial conference 
called by the Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce, Mr. A. L. Manly, the industrial secretary, outlined the economic loss to the 
Philadelphia business interests caused by 
race prejudice. 
William Ashby, of the New Jersey Urban League, has made openings for colored 
women in two dressmaking establishments 
in Newark; one in which they do the machine work and the other in which they wi.l 
be employed as drapers. 
FRATERNITIES 
TH E Knights of Pythias, Inc., in Florida, 
has resources of $277,291; since 1912 
the organization has paid $309,210 in death 
claims. Mr. W. W. Andrews is Grand Chancellor. 
The Negro Masonic Order of Alabama 
has $130,000 in available cash and $70,000 
in other resources. Mr. W. T. Woods is 
Grand Master. 
Negro Elks at Hartford, Conn., have secured property for a club house, at a cost of 
$60,000. The building will consist of club 
rooms and a large auditorium. 
EDUCATION 
EAR L ALEXANDE R has been selected 
as a member of Ohio State University 
Debating Team. Mr. Alexander is one of 
the editors of the Sjjhinx, official organ of 
the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity. 
Beatrice Pennman, a Negro student at 
Ohio State University, is an associate editor of the Phoenix, a freshman publication. 
The Colored Inter-Collegiate Athletic 
Association has convened in its 10th annual 
session at Virginia Union University. The 
annual track meet will 'b'e held May 14 at 
Howard University. 
John Diamond DuPee Wilkerson, a Negro art-law student of Western Reserve 30 THE CRISIS 
University, Cleveland, Ohio, has been 
awarded the gold "R " debating pin. 
Two colored boys at Gary, Ind., have 
enrolled in a Russian school, where they 
are studying the language, history and literature of Russia. 
Howard University becomes the first 
Negro institution to promote graduate 
work by the establishment of fellowships. 
Recipients receive compensation from the 
University for limited service. 
Yearly scholarships to the amount of 
$200 are to be given by the Kappa Alpha 
Psi Fraternity to one or more of its undergraduate members. The fraternity will 
also make an annual award of the golden 
laurel wreath to one graduate member for 
meritorious achievement. 
At the University of Pennsylvania, 
Fletcher S. Manson has been graduated 
with the degree of Master of Arts in Political Science. 
A t Columbia University, New York City, 
Negro students have established Omicron 
Chapter of the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity. 
Beginning April 14 and continuing 4 consecutive weeks, a post-graduate course for 
Negro physicians will be conducted at the 
John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Ala. 
The Alumni Association of Hampton Institute is raising a fund of $30,000 to erect 
a grandstand and equip an athletic field. 
Laura A. Oden, a 17 year old colored 
student, of Mechanics Arts High School, St. 
Paul, Minn., won the first place in a competitive essay contest. She is the only Negro in a class of 30 students. The title of 
her essay was "The Art of Tactfulness." 
The cornerstone of Auburn Branch of the 
Carnegie Library, Atlanta, Ga., has been 
laid. The building will cost $50,000. It will 
be the first branch of the library for Negroes in Atlanta. 
Joberta Des Mukes, a Negro student of 
literature, has been admitted to the Phi 
Beta Kappa Society at the Harvard-Radcliffe Graduate School. Miss Des Mukes is 
a graduate of Howard University, '19. 
For the academic year, 1919-20, Kelly 
Miller, Jr., served as assistant in the Ballistic Institute of the Department of Physics 
at Clark University, Worcester, Mass. Mr. 
Miller is now with the Madsen Electrical 
Research Laboratory, New York City. 
The statement—which went the rounds 
of the white and colored press—that Morehouse College had lost only one football 
game in 20 years, is incorrect. Morehouse 
has been defeated several times within this 
period. 
The Reserve Officers' Training Corps 
Unit, at Howard University, has completed 
its organization as a Battalion of Infantry 
by the addition of a bandl of 48 pieces. The 
unit has an enrollment of over 400. 
Through the General Education Board, 
annual appropriations amounting to $209,-
700 have been made for Negro education. 
These include $80,000 to the Jeanes Foundation toward salaries for supervising industrial teachers; $68,000 for teachers' salaries 
in country training schools in 13 Southern 
States; and $28,000 for teachers' salaries in 
summer schools in 12 Southern States. 
The Senate and House have passed a 
bill appropriating $500,000 to make Lincoln 
Institute, at Jefferson City, Mo., a State 
University. The school was founded in 
1912, and has an endowment fund of $250,-
298; its campus of 444 acres and buildings 
are valued at $250,000. Walthall L. Moore, 
the recently elected Negro Legislator, is 
sponsor for the bill. 
Howard University's appropriation was 
not decreased as the House bill proposed, although the large increase hoped for was refused. For 1921-22, its appropriation is 
$280,000, an increase of $37,000 over last 
year. 
POLITICS 
A T Hamtramack, Mich., Ordine H. Toliver, a Negro, has been elected to the 
City Council by the Victory Party. 
In Chicago, 111., Louis B. Anderson, a 
Negro, is serving his third term as Alderman; formerly he was assistant corporation 
counsel. 
THE CHURCH 
A T Fort Smith, Ark., the Rev. James A. 
Stout, assistant to the General Secretary of Church Extension in the C. M. 
E. Church, raised $1,825 in three weeks. 
The Progress of the Presbyterian Church 
in Afric a during the past 20 years, according to the Rev. A. L. Edmiston, is as follows: 6 stations manned by 50 missionaries, 
10 organized churches officered by natives, 
477 outstations manned and officered by natives, 2 ordained native ministers, 687 THE HORIZON 31 
Christia n voluntee r nativ e workers, 20,00 0 
Christia n natives. Ther e ar e 42 9 da y 
schools wit h 16,16 4 pupils an d 85 6 pai d na ­
tiv e teachers. Th e Sunda y Schools num ­
be r 46 0 wit h 85 4 teachers an d 32,07 5 pupils. 
Th e Methodist Episcopa l Churc h ha s establishe d a Burea u o f Colore d Wor k wit h a 
Negr o executiv e secretary , Dr . W . A . C. 
Hughes. 
Th e A . M . E . Churc h ha s planne d a 3 
yea r driv e fo r $5,000,000 . O f this su m 
$1,500,00 0 is fo r education ; $500,00 0 fo r 
churc h extension ; $500,00 0 fo r a pensio n 
fun d fo r age d an d super-annuate d ministers; $250,00 0 fo r socia l servic e work ; $1,-
000,00 0 fo r hom e an d foreig n missio n work ; 
$1,250,00 0 fo r th e liquidatio n o f debts an d 
fo r increasin g equipmen t in schools. Joh n 
R . Hawkins, o f Washington , D . C , is directo r o f th e drive . 
Th e Rev . Willia m H . Dean,- o f Ame s 
Memoria l M . E . Church , Baltimore , Md. , 
reports 56 4 conversion s an d 80 9 accession s 
sinc e Jun e o f last year ; $16,00 0 ha s bee n 
raise d fo r all purpose s an d $2,60 0 fo r missionar y work . 
CRIME 
THERE ha s bee n a rac e rio t a t Spring -
field, Ohio . A drunke n policeman , wh o 
attempte d to maltrea t a Negro , an d 2 0 Ne ­
groe s an d white s wer e killed . 
O n th e far m o f Joh n Williams, Jaspe r 
County , Ga. , ther e wer e 11 peonag e mur ­
ders. 
Ther e hav e bee n th e followin g lynching s 
sinc e ou r last record : 
Versailles, Ky. , Marc h 13 , Richar d 
James; murder . 
Pol k County , Fla. , Marc h 14, Willia m 
Bowles ; insultin g woman . 
Hope , Ark. , Marc h 15 , Brownin g Tuggle ; 
assaultin g woman . 
Wate r Valley , Miss. , Marc h 20, Adolphu s 
Ross; attackin g woman . 
Hattiesburg , Miss. , Arthu r Jennings; 
murder. 
Hope , Ark. , Marc h 22 , Phi l Slater, shot ; 
assaultin g woman . 
INDUSTRY 
GOVERNO R SPROU L ha s appointe d 
Edwar d W . Henry , a Negr o o f Phila ­
delphia , a s a n adjuste r in th e Workmen' s 
Compensatio n Bureau . His salar y is $2,00 0 
pe r yea r wit h travelin g expenses. 
Negroe s i n St . Louis, Mo. , hav e forme d 
th e St. Louis Realtors' Association . On e 
o f its purpose s wil l b e t o mak e mor e an d 
bette r residenc e districts fo r colore d people . 
I n 1911 , Negroe s in Virgini a incorporate d th e El k Ru n Telephon e Company , wit h 
a capita l o f $5,000 . Durin g the first yea r o f 
business th e compan y built an d operate d 
11 mile s o f service ; toda y 40 mile s o f wir e 
an d connectio n ar e bein g operate d fo r ove r 
9 0 subscribers. Messrs. T . C. Tyle r is presiden t an d E . A . Blackwell , secretar y an d 
genera l manager . 
Th e colore d Idea l Investmen t Company , 
o f St. Louis Mo. , own s $120,00 0 wort h o f 
real-estate , wit h a renta l incom e o f $12,00 0 
annually . Its capita l stoc k is t o b e increase d fro m $100,00 0 t o $200,000 . Transaction s ar e bein g mad e fo r th e purchas e o f 
$80,00 0 wort h o f additiona l propert y an d 
the erectio n o f a $400,00 0 office building . 
Mr . J. M . Nimock s is presiden t o f the com ­
pany . 
Negroe s hav e organize d th e Ovingto n 
Hote l Company , Inc. , an d capitalize d a t 
$500,000 , t o erec t a hote l in Atlanti c City , 
N . J. Joh n W . Lewis, o f Washington , D . 
C , is president . 
Th e colore d firm o f Scot t Bon d & Co. , at 
Helena , Ark. , ha s filed a petitio n in volun ­
tar y bankruptcy . Th e petitio n lists liaMlitie s o f $550,00 0 an d assets o f $1,000,000 . 
Mr . Scot t Bon d ha s bee n reporte d to b e th e 
wealthiest Negr o in Arkansas. 
I n December , 1916 , Mr. R. S. Morgan , a 
Negr o in Ne w Yor k City , organize d th e 50 
Pe r Cent . Profit Sharin g Company , capitalized at $50,000 . Th e compan y no w ha s assets o f $227,53 2 an d liabilitie s $178,902 . 
Sinc e its first yea r o f operatio n the compan y 
ha s declare d an annua l dividen d o f 13V£% . 
Th e Bankers' Fir e Insuranc e Compan y 
ha s bee n forme d b y Negroe s a t Durham , N . 
C. It ha s an authorize d capita l o f $500,000 , 
ove r $135,00 0 o f whic h ha s bee n pai d in. 
Mr . W . G. Pearso n is president . 
Thre e whit e superintendents a t Sum -
rail, Miss. , hav e bee n fined $10,75 0 fo r maltreatin g Negr o laborers. This is th e first 
tim e in th e histor y o f the stat e fo r whit e 
me n to b e punishe d fo r suc h an offense . 
Th e Hote l Dal e Company , o f Philadelphia , Pa. , sinc e March , 1920, ha s sol d 6,636 
share s o f preferre d an d 6,575 share s o f 
commo n stock , amountin g t o $66,36 0 an d 
$65,750 , respectively ; it ha s pai d t o agents 
$21,436 ; Hote l Dale , $34,564 ; the balanc e 
du e o n deferre d sale s is $76,109 ; th e ex ­
pense s hav e bee n $7,763. 32 THE CRISIS 
Negroe s o f Spartansburg , S. C , hav e 
capitalize d a t $10,00 0 th e Woodwar d Trust 
an d Loa n Company , to engag e in th e han ­
dlin g o f rea l estate . 
Th e Commercia l Ban k o f Wilson , N . C , 
capitalize d a t $50,000 , ha s bee n organize d 
b y Negroes. On e o f the promoters, Mr . J. 
D . Reid , sol d $39,00 0 wort h o f stoc k in 30 
days, 99 % o f whic h represente d cash . 
Forme r Lt . Henr y O . Flipper , wh o 
serve d as Spanis h interprete r t o the Sub ­
committe e o f th e Committe e o n Foreig n Re ­
lation s o f the Unite d State s Senat e in 1919 , 
ha s bee n appointe d specia l assistan t t o the 
secretar y in th e Alask a Engineerin g Com ­
mission . His salar y is $4,00 0 pe r year. 
In th e colore d sectio n o f Ne w Yor k City , 
Mr. C. W . Anderson , a Negro , is conductin g 
a marke t wit h a stoc k value d a t $18,000 . 
H e employ s 7 clerk s an d doe s a n annua l 
business o f $50,000 . 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
RUBEN CARTE R is the first Negr o t o 
be appointe d a traffic policema n in 
Ne w Yor k City . His post is in Harlem — 
th e Negr o section . 
"Ji m Crow " sign s in the governmen t de ­
partments a t Washington , D . C , hav e bee n 
removed . 
Twenty-tw o Negroe s a t Evanston , 111., 
hav e contribute d $10 0 eac h towar d a Com ­
munit y Home , whic h wil l includ e a store , 
offices an d a lodg e hall. 
Frederic k Brook s an d Willia m Waller , 
Negroes, hav e been awarde d $50 0 eac h a t 
Philadelphia , Pa., fo r havin g bee n ejecte d 
fro m a ca r o f the Washington , Baltimor e 
an d Annapolis line . 
A t Burlington , N. J., Edwar d Lane , a 
Negro , ha s serve d as forema n o f a jur y at 
the Count y Court . 
A t an expenditur e o f $25,000 , Negroe s at 
Roanoke , Va. , hav e opene d th e ne w Burrell Memoria l Hospital— a moder n institutio n wit h 35 bed s an d a n operatin g sectio n 
o f 4 rooms. 
Clarenc e Gregg , a Negr o a t Kansa s City , 
Mo. , ha s perfecte d a machin e gu n whic h 
will carr y 1,400 cartridges; it ca n be fired 
withou t the immediat e attentio n o f the op ­
erator. 
Students o f Howar d Universit y hav e 
forme d the Howar d Universit y Colleg e 
Branc h o f the N . A . A . C. P. Osca r C. 
Brow n is president . 
Lillia n Beal e ha s bee n awarde d a verdic t o f $10 0 b y Judg e Adam s against th e 
Spoehr's Cand y Shop , Chicago . 111., fo r 
discrimination . 
Willia m H . Carter, a Negr o o f Brook ­
lyn , N . Y. . ha s bee n appointe d a Specia l 
Deput y Sheriff. 
Th e propert y in the Frederic k Douglass 
Hom e a t Anacostia , D . C , whic h ha s been 
hel d in trust fo r 2 5 years—ha s bee n turne d 
ove r t o Mrs. Mar y B. Talbert , presiden t o f 
the Frederic k Douglass Historica l an d Me ­
moria l Association . Th e associatio n ha s 9 
wome n trustee s an d a n advisor y boar d o f 
15. Mrs. Napie r ha s bee n electe d treasure r fo r life . 
A t East Liberty , Pa. , Charle s H . Stew ­
art, a Negro , ha s bee n appointe d t o the 
Burea u o f Count y Detectives. 
Th e Ne w Jerse y Assembl y ha s 'passed 
a Civi l Rights Bil l draw n b y Dr . W . G. 
Alexander , the recentl y electe d Negr o legislator. 
Nea r Ceda r Grove , La. , Gu s Salomon , a 
Negro , wh o own s 2,20 0 acres, is organizin g 
the tow n o f "Salomon " fo r Negroes. 
Dr. Henr y C. Stevens, o f Wilmington , 
Del. , ha s bee n appointe d on e o f th e city's 
vaccin e physicians, bein g th e first Negr o 
appointee . 
Throug h wor k o f th e branc h o f th e N . 
A . A . C. P. a t Seattle , Wash. , a bill pro ­
vidin g against the intermarriag e o f Ne ­
groe s an d whit e peopl e ha s me t defea t in 
the Stat e Legislature . 
Claud e McKay , th e Negr o writer, ha s 
bee n mad e a co-edito r o f th e Liberator, si 
radica l whit e magazin e o f Ne w Yor k City . 
Th e othe r editors ar e Ma x Eastman , Floy d 
Dell an d Rober t Miner . 
Ne w Yor k Cit y ha s 158,08 8 Negr o inhabitants, makin g it th e largest cente r o f 
Negroe s o n th e Wester n Hemisphere . 
Representativ e Patton , o f Nashville . 
Tenn. , ha s introduce d a measur e t o provid e 
separat e entrance s an d exits fo r Negr o 
passengers o n stree t cars. 
Th e Saving s Ban k o f Danville , th e first 
Negr o bankin g institutio n in Danville , Va. , 
chartere d in September , 1919 , an d capitalized a t $50,000 , ha s recentl y purchased , a t 
a pric e o f $25 000 , a four-stor y bric k build ­
in g t o b e use d a s a bankin g house , situate d 
almost in th e cente r o f th e business sectio n 
o f tha t city . Th e resource s o f this ban k ar e 
no w $150,000 . 
These items are culled from letters and clippings, 
Every effort is made to insure their accuracy, but 
mistakes sometimes occur. W$ arc glad to Correct 
essential errors. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 33 
NATIONA L CAPITA L COD E O F ETIQUETT E 
combined with SHOR T STORIE S FO R COLORE D PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PAR T i 
A Boo k absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, 
instructive, handsomel y illustrated. Wonderfu l pic ­
tures o f Washington's prominent colore d Society 
leaders o n the street; at the Theatre ; at Church ; 
in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls. Parties, Wed ­
dings, Dinners, etc . Th e illustrations ar e s o 
perfec t an d natura l that the well-bred , correctl y 
clothe d me n and wome n almost speak to you . 
Lear n ho w to dress and conduc t yourself o n any 
and all occasions; correc t dress fo r me n and 
women ; suggestions in colors and materials fo r the 
ladies; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate com ­
binations, etc., fo r bot h sexes. 
Wha t to serve you r guests at breakfast, lunch o r 
dinner. 
Ho w to convers e intelligently; ho w to kno w whe n 
to talk an d whe n to remain silent; ho w to mak e 
friends and gain popularity. 
A boo k that will help the most prominent membe r 
o f society o r the most humble . 
STORIES 
PAR T 2 
A wonderfu l collection o f Short Sto ­
ries fo r Youn g and Old . Storie s that 
will hol d you r attention from start to 
finish. By the most famou s colore d 
write r o f Short Storie s in America . 
Stories of Adventur e 
Stories of Bravery 
Stories of School Days 
Stories of Pluck 
Stories of Success 
Stories of Great Men 
Storie s fo r Father, Mothe r o r the Children. Funn y Stories; Storie s that will 
brin g the tears to you r eyes; Storie s 
onc e started must be finished befor e 
laying aside the book . Handsomel y illustrated—pictures that seem to live 
throughou t the story. 
A Book you will want 
Must have in your home 
A most excellent Gift 
Ove r fifty page s o f pleasing pictures taken 
from best photographs. A BI G BOOK , 
:ontaining ove r 400 pages. Th e peopl e 
ar e muc h pleased with this ne w publica ­
tion and are sending thousands o f orders 
to us. Orde r today. W e send by insured 
parce l post ; return you r mone y if not 
perfectl y satisfied. Pric e ONL Y $2.50 
cloth ; $3.50 half morocc o like picture . 
Writ e today . 
Illustrating Table Manners 
Agent s Wante d 
W e are lookin g fo r 1000 hustlers, men 
and women . Ou r offer will pay yo u positively $4 to $9 per day. On e agent mad e 
$21 the first day. Such an opportunity come s but onc e in a lifetime. 
AGENTS ' SAMPL E showin g specimen 
page s and the pictures and covers o f book , 
will be mailed 10 yo u fo r 25 cents. It 
represents exactly the complet e book . 
Sen d 25 cents fo r agents' outfit to-day . 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
No. 523 9th STREET, 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Publishers of the Life and Works of Dunbar, Booker T. Washington, 
Kelly Miller and Du Bois. Send for Catalog of 160 books. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 34 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Kellv Miller's Authentic History of Negro in World War 
A NEW AND UP-TO-DATE 
WAR HISTORY 
JUST OFF THE PRESS 
200 pictures 700 pages 
Price, cloth . . $2.50 
Morocco $3.50 
Sent by insured parcel post. 
The 
Only 
War 
History 
That 
Will 
Fully 
Satisfy 
The 
American 
Colored 
People 
On the firing line in France 
This Boo k appeals t o the Colore d People . The y are 
eage r to bu y it. Why ? Becaus e it is the onl y Wa r 
Boo k publishe d tha t thrillingly , graphically , ye t faithfully describe s the wonderfu l part the Colore d Soldie r 
ha s taken in the Worl d Wa r an d is absolutel y fair to 
the Negro . 
It relate s t o the worl d ho w 300,000 Negroe s crosse d 
the Nort h Atlantic , bravin g the terrors o f the Sub ­
marin e Peril, t o battl e fo r Democrac y against the Blood ­
thirsty horde s o f a wa r ma d Lor d o f th e Hous e o f 
Hohenzollern . 
Mor e than fifty page s o f the Boo k devote d t o the 
ACHIEVEMENT S O F TH E NEGR O I N TH E 
AMERICA N NAVY—Guardin g the Trans-Atlanti c 
Rout e t o F ranee—Battlin g the Submarin e Peril—Th e 
Best Sailors in an y Nav y in the World—Makin g a Nav y 
in Thre e Month s fro m Negr o Stevedore s an d Laborers 
—Wonderfu l Accomplishment s o f Ou r Negr o Yoeme n 
an d Yoewomen . 
AGENTS WANTED 
Millions of these books will be sold. BI G MONE Y it being made by our 
sales people 30,000 sold in one month. Our offer will pay you from $ 3 to $9 
per day. One agent made $317 last month. AGENT' S SAMPL E showing specimen pages and all the pictures and covers of book will be mailed to you 
for 28 cents (stamps) to pay postage. It represent* exactly the complete book. 
Send 28 cents for outfit TODAY . 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
(BOO K AN D BIBL E PUBLISHERS ) 
Send for Catalog of 160 books 
No. 523 9th Street Washington, D. C. 
Size Gl/i x &y2 Inches, 700 Pages. 
You should read this book, it will 
make a valuable addition to your 
library; send for it today. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 3 5 
BRAZIL 
DO YOU WANT 
LIBERTY AND) WEALTH 
IN A LAND OF PLENTY? 
UNLIMITED OPPORTUNITY AND 
EQUALITY? 
Then Buy 
Land in Brazil 
South America 
Kindly Send 26c in Stamps for Our 
Booklet 
BRAZILIAN AMERICAN 
COLONIZATION SYNDICATE 
American Office S5t»j4 South State Street, 
Chicago, III. 
MISS MADELINE ALLISON 
SHOPPER 
Spring is here! 
Have you done your spring and summer shopping ? Why not shop in New York, instead of 
in Gopher Prairie? It is cheaper and you get 
more satisfaction. 
Let me do your shopping for you. 
Write me immediately. 
Have you seen my little catalog ? 
Address: Room 622 
70 Fifth Avenue New York, N. Y. 
(Refers by permission to the Editor of the Crisis.) 
Negro Technical Men to Organize 
All Negro architects, chemists, physicists, civil, 
electrical, mechanical and mining engineers, 
wherever located, whether practicing or not, who 
are interested in the formation of a Technical 
Society, are requested to send their names and 
addresses to Mr . Darnley Howard, 608 Warren 
St., Brooklyn, N. Y . 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAP E MAY , N . J. 
Comfort and Elegance Withoutj^Extravaganc 
This Magnificen t Hotel , Locate d in th e 
Heart o f th e Mos t Beautifu l Seashor e 
Resor t in th e World , 
is replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, garage, bath houses, 
tennis, etc.. on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. Sanitarium added with Dr. C . A. 
Lewis of the University of Penn. in attendance. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 36 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Hampto n Institut e 
Agricultura l Schoo l 
HAMPTON , VIRGINI A 
Opportunity Knocks at the Door 
of the Man Wh o Knows 
and Can Do 
If yo u wis h t o prepar e yourself t o fill a 
responsibl e positio n o f wid e 
usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teacher of vocational agriculture 
Rural-school principal 
Hampton now offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEGIATE COURSE 
Base d o n Four-Yea r Secondar y Cours e 
Wit h Wor k in Well-Equippe d Classrooms, 
Shops, an d Laboratories; Wit h Summe r 
Fiel d Practice ; Wit h All-Roun d Trainin g 
Unde r High-Grad e Instructors. 
Jame s E . Gregg , Principal , 
Warre n K . Blodgett , Directo r 
K3 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
Graduates Lose No Time 
Hav e yo u eve r see n a stenographe r 
(? ) operatin g a typewrite r (eye s righ t 
dow n o n the keyboard ) an d ever y fe w 
second s sto p the machin e t o loo k at the 
cop y o r he r notes ? Tha t stenographe r 
wa s a doubl e expens e t o the firm. Sh e 
wa s paid a salary an d als o fo r the time 
she lost . Ever y time she stoppe d the 
typewrite r she lost time . Th e graduate s 
o f The Stenographers' Institute are 
trained t o kee p their eye s o n the cop y and 
kee p the machin e goin g all the time . 
The y can d o twic e as muc h wor k as 
most graduate s from othe r schools. The y 
writ e accuratel y and los e n o time . 
Ne w classe s will b e organize d in 
Shorthand , Typewriting , Bookkeepin g 
and Commercia l Law, June ist. All auxiliary subjects for training in office efficienc y are include d in the full business 
course . 
The Building and Loan Association and Real Estate Office, now heinfc organized and officered hy 
the graduates r.nd students of the school, will be 
a practical business training as-et that has not 
been offered students in most business schools. 
If you live near Philadelphia be sure to attend 
"Founder's Dav" K.xercises at East Calvary M . E 
Church fRev. C. A. Tindley. D.D. , Pastor). Broad 
and Fitzwater Sts. Wednesday evening, May 4*h. 
Remarkable feats in blindfolded typewriting. Children (10 to lfi years of age) will show marked 
ability in shorthand, typewriting ana elementarv 
bookkeeping. 
Edward T. Duncan, President. 
1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia. Pa. 
Educat e You r Gir l a t 
The National Training 
School for 
Women and Girls 
Lincol n Heights. Washington , D . C. 
Among the best schools for ivomen and 
girls in the United States. 
Th e Schoo l that develop s CHARACTER and PERSONALITY. W e fill 
ou r students with a burnin g desire to 
g o ou t into the worl d and mak e not 
onl y a LIVING but a LIFE. 
COURSE S 
6th, 7th and 8th Grades, Norma l Preparatory 
and Norma l Music, Business, Domestic 
Science and Arts 
Social Service 
Beauty Culture Physical Culture 
Idea l Locatio n Hig h Grad e Teachers 
Thoroug h Trainin g 
SEN D FOR CATALO G 
Nannie H. Burroughs, President 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
A T 
TH E VIRGINI A NORMA L AN D 
INDUSTRIA L INSTITUT E 
The Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute will offer courses leading to the State Examination, Elementary Professional Certificate, 
the Normal Professional Certificate for teaching 
in graded schools and high schools; special 
courses in Music, Physical Education, Homr 
Economic^, and School Gardening; all the 
courses of the High School; an unusually 
strong Faculty; and Cordial and Home-Like 
surroundings. For further information address, 
JOH N M . GANDY , Conductor 
Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute 
PETERSBURG , VA. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. 
The only school of Its kind Ln historic Northern 
Virginia. 
State standard Four-Tear High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade 
Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepares boys and girls to 
become useful men and women; terms reasonable, 
For information address 
EDWAR D D. HOWE , Principal 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Addr—• 
i ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY •• ATLANTA, GA. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 37 
SUMMER SESSIO N 
of the 
DERRICK BUSINESS SCHOOL 
DERRIC K BLDG. , 151 4 PIN E STREE T 
PHILADELPHI A 
WIL L B E VER Y POPULA R BECAUSE : 
1. Boyd's 30-Day System is time and money saving. Just 
the thing for busy people with limited study-time. 
2. There are rooms for out-of-town students right in the 
building at $2.5 0 per week. 
3. The School is centrally located—handy to all car lines, 
railroad stations and only a few hours from Atlantic City, 
Cape Ma y and other fashionable Waterin g Places. 
4. Many well known people have enrolled for the SUMME R 
COURSE . 
5. School Teachers, Business Men and Women, College 
Students have made reservations in order to study the 
short, practical, efficient System: meet each other in a 
business wa y and at the same time spend a pleasant and 
profitable vacation. 
6. News of the great success and progress of this School has 
reached far and wide, there is hardly a business institution 
in which at least one representative of the DERRIC K 
SCHOO L is not proving his or her efficiency. 
W E TEAC H SHORTHAND , TYPEWRITING , 
BOOKKEEPING , FILING, OFFIC E PRACTIC E 
Appl y at onc e for reservations in Classes forming 
JUNE 27th. 
M. J. DERRICK, Principal and Manager 
Mention THE CRISIS. 38 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
NE W YOR K SCHOO L O F CHIROPRACTI C 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
A recognized institution for Chiropractic (KI-BO-PRAK-TIK) training offering a strictly 
residential course leading to degree of D. C. (Doctor of Chiropractic). 
Chiropractic, the world's foremost drugless healing science, is daily increasing in popularity because of the astounding results obtained in almost every human ailment. An unsurpassed opportunity is offered young men and women of character and ability. 
The school Is well located and well equipped. The faculty is made up of men well known 
and recognized in the profession as capable practitioners and teachers. 
WRITE FOR PROSPECTUS 
DR. J. FREEMAN OTTO GERTRUDE MILLER-FAIDE 
Registrar Secretary 
24 0 W . 138t h STREET , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
STORAGE BATTER Y REPAIRING 
has been added to the Course in 
AUT O MECHANICS 
A t Th e Prairie Vie w State Norma l & Industrial College 
which has turned out more 
ENGINE REPAIRMEN, TR\CT0 R OPERATORS, CHAUFFEURS, 
MECHANICS & AUTO ELECTRICIANS and VULCANIZERS 
than any other Automobile School for Negroes 
ADDRES S : Division of Mechani c Arts, Prairi e View , Tex . 
Architectura l Draughtsman—Wante d 
Ma n capabl e o f developin g plan s an d elevation s fro m sketches. Mus t b e proficien t 
in makin g perspective s an d in lettering . Writ e at once , statin g training , experienc e 
an d salary wanted , t o Willia m W . Cooke , Architect , 2308 Adam s Street, Gary , 
Indiana . Enclos e specimen s o f recen t work . 
DOW N G O BADG E PRICE S 
LODGE S TAK E NOTIC E 
BI G REDUCTION S I N PRICE S O N BADGE S 
Get our price list for your society and save money. 
In our new and permanent home we have ample equipment to give prompt service. Let this old reliable race 
enterprise serve you whatever your needs. Reductions 
on all regalia. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 641 W. 9th St., Cincinnati, Ohio 
JOS. L. JONES. Sr.. Pres. JO S . L. JONES. Jr., Manager. 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
27th ANNUAL STATEMENT OF SOUTHERN 
AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. (Condensed) 
Th e SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y O F VA , INC , notes with a high regard the 
timely an d insistent deman d o f ou r peo i *e fo r Facts and Figure s from corporation s 
and institutions appealing to them fo r patronage and investment. Th e Southern Ai d 
Societ y o f Va. , Inc., has annually published full and accurate statements o f its Income 
and Disbursements, as well as its Assets and Liabilities: An d it has given wid e distribution o f this matter to its membershi p and the public. This wa s don e despite the 
criticism o f competitors and othe r uninforme d persons: wh o said that, "since ou r peopl e 
wer e no t u p o n financial matters, the time and mone y spent in preparing and publishing 
such informatio n wa s simply a wast e o f efforts and goo d money. " But the Southern 
Ai d managemen t kne w that the rac e wa s makin g rapid strides o f advancement in 
education, business and finance, and would , therefore , soo n be alive to such matters. 
Today's "Sho w Me " spirit o f ou r peopl e compensate s us fo r ou r efforts and convince s 
the critics that the peopl e no w deman d mor e than Name s and Promise s as inducements 
fo r their support o r investment. Therefor e the Southern Ai d Societ y o f Va , Inc., 
takes grea t pleasure in spreading befor e the public its 27th Annua l Financial Statement 
fo r consideration . 
RECEIPT S 
Tan. 1, 1920, Cash Balance Brought Forward $145,076.94 
Dec. 81, 1980, Annual Income 712,647.68 
Gross Receipts for 1920 $867,724.62 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec. 81 , 1920, Total Paid Out (Including investments made during the year) $759,086.86 
Cash Balance, De c 31, 1920 $98,688.17 
ASSETS LIABILITIE S 
Cash Balance $ 98,688.17 Capital Stock $ 30,000.00 
Real Est. (Free of all Liens) 803,252.67 Deposits of Employees 15,203.89 
Real Estate Mortgages 71,699.60 Ledger Accounts 10,488.00 
Federal, State and City Bonds 62,838.00 
Furniture and Fixtures 7,000.00 SURPLU S FUN D 498,046.67 
Bills Receivable 1,368.15 
Inventories, Sundry Accts 4,001.87 
Total $548,788.46 Total $648,788.46 
CAPITA L AN D SURPLU S $ 623,046 57 
Total Amount of Claims Paid to December 31, 1920 $2,170,734.86 
Th e abov e verified recor d o f great achievement doe s not satisfy us: W e are therefor e planning fo r greate r growt h thru better and larger service to ou r policyholders in 
the hours o f sickness, accidents and death : In openin g mor e avenues o f employmen t 
to mor e o f ou r people : An d b y supporting and co-operatin g with other Rac e Enterprises. 
Th e unstinted and liberal support o f ou r policyholders has mad e it possible fo r us 
to attain this splendid position in finance: Therefor e the conservation o f their best 
interests' shall alway s receiv e ou r first consideration . 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second St., Richmond, Va. 
District Offices and Agencies throughout the State of Virginia 
Write for your copy of the 27th Annual Statement. 
Mention THE CIUIS. 4 0 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Soothing, the after-smart of sh
Madam C.J. Walker's Witc
A sharp razor and good lather are not «y>ngh 
to prevent a tingling smartness after the 
morning shave. 
An application of Madam Walker's Witch 
Hazel Jelly soothes the skin, prevents chap and 
35 cents of Agents and Druggists 
Made bv the Mme.C. J.Walker Mfg. Go. 
640North West St.. Indianapolis. Ind 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 41 
Buy New Black Swan Records Every 
Month and Encourage Negro Singers, 
Musicians and Composers 
Our monthly program will contain music that every home can 
use, no matter what your tastes may be. 
W e will record popular songs of the day, dance melodies, blues, 
high class ballads, sacred songs, Spirituals and operatic selections 
just as the other phonograph companies do. 
W e will give opportunities to our own singers such as they can 
get from no other companies. Every record you buy means encouragement to some Negro singer and some Negro musician to continue their work and to develop their talent. 
Every record you buy means employment along new lines to 
a large number of our talented people, in addition to clerks, stenographers and others. 
BLAC K SWA N RECORDS are not "colored records" in the 
sense that they are cheaper or inferior. In appearance, in finish, in 
tone and in lasting qualities BLACK SWA N RECORD S will stand 
the test with any records made today. 
Ask your dealer to carry all our records in stock. Buy from 
him regularly. If he does not carry them send direct to us and we 
will supply you. Or send us the name of a Live young man or 
youn g woman agent who will handle our records in your community. 
Buy BLACK SWA N RECORDS and you will help preserve 
the best voices of the race, besides getting music which the race 
wants but which other companies do not record. 
BLAC K SWA N RECORDS are the only records using exclusively Negro voices and Negro musicians. 
Pace Phonograph Corporation 
257 W. 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
DON' T WAI T ANOTHE R DAY -
SEND FOR FREE BOOKLET THA T TELLS AL L ABOUT 
BEAUTIFUL ORCHARDVILL E AND HOW T O GE T 
BUILDING LOTS THERE, WIT H FRUIT TREES ON THEM , 
FOR 
ONL Y $5 6 
ON EASY 
TERMS 
A s predicted in our previous announcements, the 
deman d for Orchardvill e lots is increasing rapidly 
and should soo n be GREATE R THA N I T HA S 
BEE N FO R A LON G TIME . Condition s are 
improvin g t o a noticeabl e extent, and in man y 
places there is n o longe r that uneas y feelin g whic h 
caused people to hol d back in their investments. 
The y now see that the worst has passed, and they 
are prepared to g o ahead with their plans again. 
RIGH T NO W I S TH E TIM E T O BU Y 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S BECAUS E W E HAV E 
ONL Y A LIMITE D NUMBE R LEF T WHIC H 
WIL L B E SOL D UNDE R OU R ATTRACTIV E 
DEVELOPMEN T PLAN , AN D WHE N THE Y 
AR E AL L SOL D I T WIL L B E TO O LAT E T O 
AVAI L YOURSEL F O F THI S OFFER . 
Don' t risk the chanoe o f losing out by delayin g 
too long. Remembe r that whil e vo u are waiting 
OTHER S are ACTING . 
Th e lots nre size 30 x 144 feet , and each on e will 
have FIV E FRUI T TREE S aim a BEAUTIFU L 
SHAD E TRE E planted on it which will be taken 
car e o f for FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A 
COST . Beside s the roo m to be taken up by the 
fruit trees, th e lots hav e plent y o f roo m fo r a 
house , garden , chicke n yard , shed , etc . 
Each lot is sold unde r a MONE Y BAC K GUAR ­
ANTE E an d the TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . Th e terms ar e onl y $6.0 0 dow n and 
$3.00 a mont h pe r lot . Smalle r terms per lot 
whe n mor e than on e are purchased. N O IN ­
TEREST . 
SEN D FO R OU R BEAUTIFU L BOOKLET . It's 
FRE E and contdn s all the details o f this remarkable offer as well as severa l view s o f the land. 
W e also hav e a bookle t containin g letters from 
peopl e wh o have bee n to Orchardvill e and wh o 
tell yo u what they think o f the place . A cop y 
o f each o f these booklets is yours fo r the asking. 
Simpl y write you r nam e an d address plainly on 
the coupo n belo w an d sen d it t o tis RIGH T 
AWAY . Th e booklets will b e maile d to yo u 
promptly . DON' T DELA Y THI S ANOTHE R 
DAY , or yo u ma y regre t it. 
ADDRES S 
Arenson Realty Development Corporation 
19 S. La Salle Street -:- -:- CHICAGO, ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSO N REALT Y DEV'PT . CORP . 
Chicago , 111. 
Gentlemen: — 
D
»
t e
 1921 
I a m intereste d in you r Orchardvill e offe r and woul d lik e t o receiv e a cop y o f eac h o f 
I you r booklets withou t an y obligatio n t o me . 
Nam e 
Address 
| Tow n 
CRI-5-2 1 
State . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 4:-! 
MAD E t o MEASUR E $13.
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $13.50. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
mak e you a suit for $13.50, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
sav e 50 % on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remembe r we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save $8 to $11 
This suit for S13.50clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field, W e offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell •» • ti..lt'. l CDC P 
you about them. W e would rather you did Big Sample Outfit Free 
not send us any money until we send our 
Writ e us today and we will mail you absolutel y FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. Yo u will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 606, CHICAGO 
Mentio n TH E CBISH . 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
NOW ON SALE 
THE ONLY RECORDS USING EXCLUSIVELY 
NEGRO VOICES and MUSICIANS 
At Your Phonofirraoh Dealer 
2001 ( AT DAWNING, Soprano with Violin. Cello, Piano Revella Hughes 
10 Inch { 
$1.00 { THANK GOD FOR A GARDEN " Revella Hughes 
200 2 ( FOR ALL ETERNITY, Baritone. Violin obligato Carroll Clark 
10 Inch \ J- Cordie Williams, Violin, F. H. Henderson, Jr., Piano 
$ioo DEAR LITTLE BOY OF MINE " Carroll Clark 
9nf t
 BLIND MAN BLUES, Blues Novelty Little Katie Crippen 
'
UU "5
 ] Soprano with Orchestra 
$1.00
 PLA Y
 ' E M F0 R MAMMA , Blues Little Katie Crippen 
Watc* Soprano with Orchestra h For Our New Releases Each Month 
// Your Dealer Does Not Supply You 
Order Direct From 
Pace Phonograph Corp., 257 w. i38thSt.,NewYork,N.Y. 
Live Agents Wanted in Every Community. Liberal Commissions. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 45 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"Sh e combine s an excellent voic e with artistic finish or the most matur e kind . He r singing prove d as 
charmin g as anythin g the concert programs will offe r 
this season."—Detroi t Daily News. 
GEORG E LACY , Manager , 
15 6 Hamilto n Avenu e Columbus, Ohi o 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
GRADUATE OF INSTITUTE OF MUSICAL AR T 
Organist-Directo r o f Muei c o f St. Mark s M . E. 
Church ; Concert Accompanist ; Piano , Voice , 
Theory , Instruction , Conducting , Coaching . 
Harmon y taught from beginnin g to com ­
pletion. Privat e or correspondence . 
Geothiu s system. 
STUDIO: 25 0 W . 138th St., Ne w YORK , N , Y . 
Telephon e Morningsid e 1708. 
Genuin e Blue-Bel l 
Chambray Shirts Z ~ 
SEND NO MONEY Rus h you r orde r in 
_ toda y sure. Greatest shirt offe r eve r made . " 3 fine heav y Blu e 
Chambra y shirts fo r wor k an d semi-dress guarantee d fast colo r and wort h $1.50 each, only $2.29. 
AIIB fillADJIIITEC I* y° u ca n matc h thes e 
UU n UUAIIAIIICC 3 wonderfu l shirts fo r 
less than $4.50, and d o no t think yo u hav e saved 
at least $2 .50 . return at our expense. Don't pay high 
retail prices Order today sure, before it is too late. 
W E PAY DELIVER Y CHARGES TO YOUR DOOR, 
another big saving. All 3 shirts $2.29 . Give neck size. 
O BARNARD-HEWIT T & COMPAN Y 
Desk F C4 4 91 0 W . VAN BUREN ST. . CHICAG O 
CROCHET BEADING TAUGHT 
B Y MAIL—ALL BRANCHES $S 
Learn at Home How to do Crochet Beading Correctly and Speedily on DRESSES, WAISTS. BAGS, 
HATS. SLIPPERS. ETC.. With all kinds of Beads, 
Bugles, Spangles, Fringes. Twists, Loops, Etc. 
The only Authoritative Correspondence Courses on 
Crochet Beading ever published. Contains 24 illustrated charts with detailed explanations by Mme. 
Bertha La Mors, International Art Needlework Authority. 
ALSO 10-day TRADE COURSE AT SCHOOL, $7.50. 
WORK GUARANTEED WHEN YOU FINISH 
SCHOOL COURSE. 
Classes in all branches of Art Needlework. Art Embroidery, Perforating, and Stamping, at the Studio. 
MME , B. L A MER S LA MERS STUDIO 
34 5 WES T S8t h ST. , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
TELEPHONE COLUMBUS 617 
A MONEY GETTER because It Is A CROW D SETTE R 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun. should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
Aa entertainment In one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night PRICE. ftOi. 
MISS NANNIE 
Lincoln Heights, 
BURR0UGH8, Author 
Washington. D. 0 . 
AGENT S EAR N $75.0 0 A WEE K 
Selling our Enlarged Photo Medallions, Photo Cuff Button, 
Photo Lockets, Photo Watch 
Charms, Photo Breast Pins, 
Phou> Clocks and 
Life Size Portraits (16 z 20). 
We copy from 
an y Photograph 
and Return Your 
Original Photo. 
Agents' EnJar?<-II 
Sample s 60c. 
Negro Books, Pictures and Post 
Cards. Prompt Shipments. 100() 
Agents and Dealers Wanted. Free Catalog. Bethel Art 
Co., 97 South St.. Jamaica, N. Y. 
^STUDENTS! ATTENTION! 
W e assist in preparing material for special articles, papers, manuscripts, essays and 
orations. Proficient literary service. 
JOH N A . MARTIN , Secretary 
222 0 Sixth St., N . W. , Washingto n D . C. 
IMPROV E YOURSEL F I 
HEL P OTHERS ! 
Easy, pleasant*, dignified 
work . $2 per hour. Unusua l 
opportunity. Sen d 50 c in 
stamps for membership , supplies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Ton S t N. W., Wash., D. C. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo n Ge t a Bette r Parin g Position . 
KEGISTEB , NO W REASONABL E TEE M 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, WLLBERFOREE, 0 . 
SEND NO MONEY 
SMASHIN G SHO E OFFE R 
Rush your order in this minute for a pair o f 
the famous AMERICAN. EAGLE Muneon laet, 
sem i -dres s and 
work shoe. Worth 
00 . NOW $3.39 . 
SOLES. SPED 
PROCESS MAKES THEM 
PROOF AGAINST ACIDS,AND 
BI-HOWB TONGUE MAKES 
THEM WATERPROOF. 
W E GUARANTEE TO 
REFUND MONEY I F 
YOU CAN MUTCH 
THEM FOR LESS 
THAN $6.00 . 
GUARANTEED 6 MONTHS' WEAR 
Don't wait. Only limited quantity. Be sure 
to get yours. Get in on this amazing offer. 
State size and color. We pay shipping cnarges, 
BEP^ARD-HEWIT T & COMPAN Y 
DEPT. CM44 90 0 W . VAN BUREN, CHICAG O 
Mention TH E Cams. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OU R LATES T CATALO G WIL L B E 
MAILE D T O YO U UPO N REQUES T 
W e are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAI R GOOD S who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME. BAUM, by the most skillful artists in the 
trade. 
Try Mme. Baum's Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made 
of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using 
them. 
We carry the largest selection of Hairdressers' Tools and Accessories. 
Mme. Baum's Bob 
gives the appearance of wearing the 
hair bobbed, but 
makes cutting unnecessary. Mad e 
of strictly Supreme 
Quality huma n 
hair, with natural 
waves, sewed OH 
Velve t Ribbon, 
fitted with three 
tuck Comb s to 
hold secure. IN 
all shades. Price. 
$5 30. 
MME. BAUM'S 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE 
OU R FACTOR Y I S LOCATE D A T 
8 0 FOURT H AVE . NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Wben writing, mention this paper. 
t 
X 
H 
m 
O 
X 
O 
> 
1 
r 
O 
O 
Agents Wanted 
I N EVER Y 
TOW N AN D 
LOCALITY . 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog) Free 
TH E EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG. CO. 
31 6 N . CENTRA L DEPT . B 
OKLAHOM A CITY , OKLAHOM A 
Traveling Salesman Wanted 
T O HANDL E SID E LINE . 
Good Paying Proposition. 
ZEN A BAKE R 
3116 Indian a Avenu e Chicago , 111, 
Rus h you r orde r in toda y sure . Genuin e Swoizen e 
shirt material, extr a fine count , ver y hig h luster 
Latest effects, most beautiful black , blu e and 
lavende r stripes. Guarantee d fast colors, ric h 
looking , wea r bette r tha n silk. Cu t extr a full, 
coa t fron t style , soft Frenc h turn-bac k cuffs. 
11 / /~" ^„ _ t o refund your money imW E OUARANIC C mediately if you can match 
these shirts for leas thun 86.50 . Don't PAY high retail 
prices. Order yours today sure, before it is to o late. 
Delivery charges paid—another big saving. Send n o 
money, all three shirts $3.5 9 C. O. D. Giv e neck size. 
BERNARD-HEWIT T & CO . 
DEPT . r 3444 90 0 W . VA N BURE N ST. . CHICAG O 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated in public and secondary school 
libraries as an introduction to the study of American 
History from the American Negro viewpoint. 2S4 pages 
chapters. 17 full page illustrations. Indei and 
bibliography other features. Price $2.00; sent on receipt 
of net price. Order through any bookseller: C O D or 
postage remittance. For further information address the 
author. 
JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St., Washington. D. c. 
Mentio n TH I CLINT , TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
A well established Corporation doing a halt 
million dollar business yearly, desires the 
services of an intelligent, live-wire man or 
woman to take charge and sell a block of 
stock in a nationally known concern. 
Only those wanting to connect themselves 
with a permanent organization where good 
services are quickly recognized and repaid 
need apply. 
Address Sales Manager 
BERESFORD GALE CORPORATION 
GALE BUILDING 
413 South Broad Philadelphia, Pa. 
Send No Money 
Profit Smashing Bargain — Just sen d 
your name , address, siz e and colo r fo r 6 
pairs of thes e handsome , durable.irenuine 
Duo-We b silk socks. Pa y onl y $2.80 fo 
si x pairs o n arrival. GUARANTEE D 
$6.00 VALUE. Wonderfu l quality, 
extra heavy silk. Elastic ribbed top. 
Doabl e toe and sole, high epli 
heel. Choic e of brown or l>lac 
Fast colors-. Writ e today for 
tbisastoundingoffer. Limited 
quantity. Only 6 pairs ^ 
to a customer. 
Shipped delivery 
charges paid. Pay 
onl y S3.1 9 o n 
arrival. Mone y 
back if you can 
matc h them for SG.OO. 
Dent. 044* 
BERNARD-HEWITT I 
BE A LAND OWNER! 
Enjoy that proud, self-satisfied and independent feeling that comes with the ownership 
of a fine country estate. Invest your savings where they will he safe and where 
they can some day earn you maximum returns, Get away from the turmoil of the 
city, the lay-offs, strikes, congestion, high 
cost of living, etc. If you act QUICKL Y you 
can secure a Woodvill e country estate consisting of 10, 20 or 40 acres in a fine location in Michigan, on very easy terms, 
FRE E TOW N LOT with each 10 acre tract, 
also a SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUNT 
to those who act A T ONCE. The tract is 
well located, RIGH T ON A RAILROAD , with 
the station right there. The land is high 
and dry and sold under a MONE Y BAC K 
GUARANTEE . The TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . Send for our BEAUTIFU L BOOKLE T and get all the details of this offer 
without any obligaton to you. It contains 
& great many good views of the property, 
as well as interesting information. Simply, 
ask for a WOODVILL E booklet and mention 
the Crisis. Writ e your name and address 
plainly. SEND FOR YOU R COP Y TODA Y 
because the tracts are going FAST. Address 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Salle St. Chicago, III. 
HOME S 
I am in a position to sell you a beautiful home 
in CORONA, L. I. Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New 
York City. All city improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York 
City for 5 cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L . S. REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. Corona, N. Y. City. 
Mention TH E CIISIS . 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WANTED WANTED 
Live Agents A t Once To Sell 
DUDLEY' S FAMOUS AUT O POLIS H 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hardwood floors 
and hundreds of other things that have a varnished 
surface. Makes them look like new. Agents can 
make $50.00 to $75.00 per week selling Dudley's 
Polish to furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile stores, paint 
stores and grocery stores. Special Offer: For 90 days 
we will ship to all new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this 
special offer at once. 
DUDLEY MANUFACTURING CO. 
Formerly 
DUDLE Y & PORTE R MFG. CO. 
and 
DUDLE Y LEATHE R & CHEMICA L WORKS , 
Bo x 542 
MUSKOGEE, OKLAHOM A 
r«f«»hon«. Baring TT»4 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgage* 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 6417 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTOINI T AND COUNSILLOI-AT-LA W 
14 School Street Boiton, Mass. 
9 that stirred the peo ­
ples o f both continents. " A Programme for Life. " Agents Wanted . 
Pric e 10c. Tr y the 5c. and 10c . stores. A . R. Gillespie, 2278 East 97th St., Cleveland , Ohio . 
Send No Money 
Snap this bargain up right 
now before it is too late. 
Only limited quantity . 
Amazing underwea r bargain. Greatest ever made. 
3
UNIO N $060 
SUIT S for fc— 
Send postcard or letter today — this very 
minute, forthese three 
athleti c style, whit e dimit y 
chec k summe r union suits, 
cu t full, well made , wea r 
splendid. 
Sen d N o Mone y —pa y 
only $2.G0C.O.D.on arrival, 
n o more ; We pay delivery 
charges, another big saving. 
W E GUARANTE E 
T O REFUN D YOU R MONE Y 
if yo u ca n match thes e 
thre e wonderfu l summe r 
union suits fo r $4.50. Orde r this amazin g bargain 
this minut e befor e it is to o 
late. Just giv e name , address and breast measure . 
BERNARD-H E WIT T & CO . 
Dept . G0444 CHICAG O 
Genuine Imported $5.00 Toy o 
PANAMA HAT 
Delivered 
FREE 
Pay Only 
$2.79 on 
Arrival 
THIS ^ 
SEASON'S 
LATES T 
MODEL 
Becoming to 
Young or Old 
Write quick for this 
amazing bargain. Only 
limited lot. lit this 
profit - smashing low 
price. Guaranteed S5 
value for only S>2.79. 
SEND NO MONEY 
Just mail post card or letter today for this handsome Toyo 
Panama Hat. Beautiful drop crown style; flexible non-breakattie 
brim; made of the tinest sup-Tex; tine Tough fibre, tightly woven. 
Looks and wears like a regular $12.00 hat. Heavy blackgrosgrain 
silk ribbon bund, non-soiluble swent bund, tremendous •* } *|Q 
bargain. Send no money, pay on arrival only ... . wt i / 3 
W e pay delivery charges, anothe r big saving. 
\A / o f^iiai 'anta o t n refund your money if you can 
•
f C
 UUdrdlH W match thiswonderful hat forlesBthar. 
»5.00. Save money by writing today sure before this astounding 
offer is withdrawn. Just give your name, address and size. 
» BERNARD-HEWIT T & CO . 
Dept . M 044 900 W . Van 3uren St. , Chicago , III, 
A Beautiful Complexion 
The Greatest Charm 
of All 
In all seasons, in all weathers, yo u 
can have a lovel y skin. Maintai n 
its dainty softness and smooth ­
ness. Cleans e an d refresh the 
skin, beautify and preserv e the c c 
Keeps the skin smooth, firm, fresh, youthful looking. 
Clears up muddy and sallow skins. Removes,lines and 
wrinkles. No harm to tender skins. Guaranteed harmless. It's 100% pure. 
Always protect the skin before going out by applying a 
bit of Yvonne; also before retiring to keep the skin 
Invigorated and glowing with youth. 
50c a jar by mail prepaid. Order today—NOW. 
YVONN E LABORATORIE S 
3011 Cottage Grove Ave.. Dept. B. Chicago, III. 
Lemon Massage Cream 
WANTED 
Agents*!o r TH E CRISIS , Dignifie d Wor k 
Daaa 70 Filt h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CIIIII . If I send you a s
mad e t o If you r measur e i n th e 
1 a t e s t V style , fro m choices t 
fabrics , woul d yo u b e willin g t o 
kee p an d wea r it, sho w it t o you r 
friend s an d le t the m se e ou r beauti ­
fu l sample s an d dashin g ne w styles ? 
Could You Use $10 a Day 
for a Little Spare Time? 
Perhaps I can offer you a steady job. If you will write me c 
letter or a postal at once and say: "Send me your special offer,' 
I will send you samples and styles to pick from and my new 
surprising liberal offer. 
0 
Banne r Tailorin g Co. 
FREE SAMPLE BOOK COUPON 
Banner Tailoring Company, Dept. 927 , Chicago, 111. 
Gentlemen: Please send me your big NE W book of Samples and Styles and your 
Special Offer. Everything free and postpaid. 
Name Postoffice 
Street and No. R. F. D. Box State Nil e Quee n Preparation s 
FOR HAI R and SKIN 
Scientifically manufactured to meet your particular beauty requirements 
NILE QUEEN Hair Beautiber 
NILE QUEEN Cold Cream 
NILE QUEEN Vanishing Cream 
NILE QUEEN Liquid Cold Cream 
NILE QUEEN Face Powder 
I'ink, flesh, IS'liitc, Brunette and Cream Brown 
50c EACH - POST.lGBficF.XTRA 
The country-wide demand for NIL E QUEE N preparations has become so great that they are on sale at most drug stores and first 
class beauty shops. If your dealer or agent cannot 
supply you. send us his name with your order. 1^ |"C W*J F J 
FREE — Beauty Book ==== = 
KASHMI R CHEMICAL CO. 
3423 Indiana Avenue Dept. K Chicago, Illinois 