THE CRISIS 
EASTER NUMBER 1915 
with 
FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT N.A.A.C.P. 
R. L. Brown Attention, Masons! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORGE W . CRAWFORD, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale, formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of Ne w Haven and no w a practicing lawyer there. Mr. 
Crawfor d is one o f the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENTS 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A. & A. Scottish Rite: 
"'Prince Hall and His Followers,' written by a scholarly Afro-American, presents to the Masonic world a treatise on the legitimacy of Negro Masonry that 
should be in the hands of every Mason seeking for Truth. The information 
contained in the chapter devoted to Prince Hall is alone worth to the young 
Mason the price of the book. Brother Crawford's easy and pleasing style 
creates in the reader a desire to complete the volume before putting the book 
out of his hands." 
From Henry A. Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"The book fills a long-felt want among intelligent Masons of our Race. 
To know that we are right, and to substantiate that fact by intelligent research 
and logical statements, is worth more to us than what the other fellow may 
say. This is what Brother Crawford's book does; and it should be in the hands 
of every Mason of our Race." 
From Jose H. Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners : 
"A very strong brief, setting forth plainly the legitimacy of prince Hall 
Masonry, and, as well, a stern call to all Negroes to assume full pride in the 
happy possession of a Rite which can show such clear proofs of its contentions." 
From William H. Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of "A History of Colored Freemasonry": 
"1 have read with great pleasure 'Prince Hall and His Followers.' The book 
is well written, containing clear and convincing diction. The impartial accuracy 
with which the facts are marshalled makes the book a very valuable asset 
to Masons." 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDER NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 7 0 FIFTH AVENUE . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducte d by 
W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for April, 1915 
PICTURES Pag e 
COVE R DESIGN . Photograph from life. Decorations b y Richard L. Brown . 
HEADING S AN D DECORATIONS . B y A . G . Kennedy . 
TH E LAT E EX-CONGRESSMA N ROBER T SMALLS . Reproduction from wood -cut .. . 273 
MUSIC 
"H E 'ROSE.' * A Negr o Folk-Song . Transcribed b y J.Rosamon d Johnson 294 
ARTICLES 
TH E FIFT H ANNUA L REPOR T O F TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Repor t of the Chairman — 286 
Repor t of the Director of Publications and Research 296 
Repor t of the Treasure r 297 
Repor t of the Secretary 298 
Branche s - 300 
Th e Spingarn Meda l 307 
N . A . A . C . P. Officers 307 
POEMS . B y William Stanley Braithwaite 309 
TH E IMMEDIAT E PROGRA M O F TH E AMERICA N NEGRO . B y W . E. B. DuBois .. . 310 
MR . TAYLOR' S FUNERAL . A Story. B y Charles W . Chesnutt 313 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 267 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 273 
OPINION S - 276 
EDITORIA L -- 284 
TH E BURDE N 316 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 264 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College. Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainige. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September 1, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & M. College Greensboro, N. C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A, 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE. President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St 
Mary. Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa, 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educate your children at home under our expert teachers 
Course s fo r Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Writ e to 
Educationa l Extension School , Bo x 319 4 Station F, Washington , D . C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
C. W. Morrow, Acting President. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 265 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school will not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but will open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuition is free. 
Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNE Y HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 266 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
Ho w to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing . 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr . Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y. : " A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students," 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has bee n for years. It seems to me that I 
un getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W. , Washington, D. C. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, Ill.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
PHOTOGRAPHS ENLARGED 
W e produc e the finest enlargements eve r mad e at 
reasonabl e prices, dealing directly with the consumer. 
Ou r original patented process brings out in lifelike 
fashion all the shade s and tints o f colore d people. 
Writ e us today. W e guarante e return o f original 
pictures. Frame s at factory prices. 
TH E DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S CO. . 
DEPARTMEN T K 
3548 Verno n Avenu e Chicago , Ill. 
CONCER T SOLOIS T 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES , Sopran o 
Fo r terms writ e 12 6 West 13 4 Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
A Legal Education for Lett Than Ten Cents a Day 
What Has the New Year to 
Offer You? 
High Grade Legal Training and Instruction by Correspondence 
The Lincoln Extension University 
offers to each and all alike thes e valuable 
courses: College , Post Graduate , Business 
La w and Ba r Examinatio n Review . 
Improve d methods, the celebrate d Putne y 
La w Librar y furnishe d fre e with each course . 
Hundred s o f Lectures, Moo t Court, Brie f 
Writing , Practice , Degrees. 
Enroll at an y time . Actua l daily lessons. 
No t a boo k selling concer n but a recognize d 
La w School . Approve d b y Benc h an d Bar. 
Write today for free catalog giving all necessary information. 
This valuable coarse to pertinent to every American Citizen. 
This Coupon is Worth Eleven Dollars to All Who Enroll 
T o LINCOL N EXTENSIO N UNIVERSIT Y 
312 Sout h Clark Street, Chicag o 
Pleas e sen d m e withou t obligation you r 
valuabl e catalog. 
Name 
Stree t an d Numbe r 
P. O 
State 
E. ALDAM A JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teache r of Theor y and Piano 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
TH E NATIONA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Throug h us schoo l authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communicatio n with the strongest and 
most carefull y investigate d teachers in all lines. 
Teachers wh o seek position s or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service . Promp t and courteou s attention to correspondence . 
B . F . BOWLES , MANAGER , 
2739 CONVERS E AVENU E EAS T ST . LOUIS , ILL. 
What Salary Do You Earn? 
If you are making less than $3.00 per day, we can help you to make more. Our agents 
Average from $3.00 to $10.00 per day easily, and you can do the same. Pleasant dignified employment for men or women, boys or girls. We want one agent in every town. Be a step 
ahead of the crowd and write us today for free information. 
DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S COMPAN Y 
354 8 VERNO N AVENU E Department K CHICAGO . ILL. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 9 -No . 6 APRIL, 1915 Whole No. 54 
MUSIC AN D ART 
LAS T month marked the first appearance of the Vocal Quartet at the 
Music School Settlement for Colored 
People in the City of New York, and 
also the String Quartet. Among the 
speakers has been the Hon. Charles W . 
Anderson and the musical performers 
have included Mr. and Mrs. David Mannes, David Bispham and Walter Damrosch. 
[The Philippines Constabulary Band 
has been engaged for the entire term of 
the San Francisco Exposition. 
The Washington Concert Orchestra of 
the District of Columbia is now in its 
second season under the leadership of 
Mr. Harry A. Williams. The concert 
of the orchestra at the Howard Theatre 
last month was unusually successful and 
evinced a high degree of orchestral development. The assisting soloists were 
Mrs. Daisy Tapley, contralto of New 
York, Miss Celestine Lott, pianist and 
Mrs. Marjorie Groves Robinson, accompanist. An excellent program was 
given including numbers from Offenbach, Grieg, Rossini, Schubert, Schumann, Bizet, Burleigh, Strauss, Rosamond Johnson and Will H. Dixon. Miss 
Lott played the Schumann concerto in 
A minor for the closing number. 
f[Mr. Charles Burroughs of New York, 
the well known reader, was heard in 
Washington, D. C , in a program of 
classical modern writers. 
In a recital at Aeolian Hall, New 
York City, by Christine Miller and 
George Hamlin, two songs by Burleigh 
were sung. One, "The Glory of the Day 
Was in Her Face," was set to words by 
James W. Johnson. 
In the auditorium of John Wanamaker's store, New York City, a Lincoln's birthday concert was given by the 
Jubilee Glee Club compose d of colored 
employees. Mr. Harry Burleigh, Mr. 
Gordon Kahn and Mr. Alexander Russell assisted. Selections from ColeridgeTaylor, Rosamond Johnson and Wil l 
Marion Cook were rendered. 
8 [Will Marion Cook's "Swing Along" 
was sung by the University Gle e Club 
a t the Princeton Club House, New York 
City. 
J [ A mixe d chorus of 50 voices at the 
Upper Montclair Presbyterian Church 
sang Burleigh's "Negro Spirituals." 
(Th e works of Samuel Coleridge- Tay ­
lor appeared i n the program o f Miss 
Jea n Vincent Cooper at the West Side 
Y. M. C. A., New York City. Miss 
Cooper is a pupil of Sergei Klibanski. 
The same composer appeared on the 
program o f Mr. Carl Rupprecht, baritone, at the Claude Warford Studios, in 
the Metropolitan Opera House. 
(T[On th e afternoo n of February 20th, 
Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, pianist, assisted by Mr. William H. Richardson, 
baritone, gave a lecture-recital before 
th e Hascall Music Club. This is an or ­
ganizatio n o f musi c students and pa ­
tron s o f musi c unde r the presidency o f 
Mrs. H. Hascall, a note d vocal teacher 
of Boston. The recital was given in the 
hall of the Pierce Studio Building. 268 TH E CRISIS 
£Mr . William Stanley Braithwaite, th e 
poet and critic of Boston, Mass., was 
given a dinner party in New York City 
as an expression of appreciatoin of his 
value to American writers. The dinner 
was attended by leading literary folk of 
th e country including a number of poets 
and was followed by added attentions to 
Mr. Braithwaite and his wife upon the 
part of the individuals who composed 
the committee. 
CA t Ellis Island in New York Harbor, 
where large numbers of immigrants are 
detained on account of the war, a series 
of concerts are being given. On February 14th the music was furnished by 
the Clef Club Orchestra and Wanamaker's Colored Jubilee Club. 
MEETINGS 
THE annual meeting of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, held in New York City, 
has attracted much attention throughout 
the country. The Governor of the State 
was present, the first Spingarn medal 
was presented and a large audience witnessed the proceedings. 
([Many of the colored teachers' associations are meeting this spring. The 
Alabama State Teachers' Association 
met in Montgomery, the Virginia Teachers' Association and Improvement 
League met in Richmond and the 
Brunswick Teachers' Institute was held 
at St. Paul School, Lawrenceville, Va. 
([ A State Negro Bar Association has 
been meeting in Oklahoma. 
([Th e National Negro Press Association 
had a two days' session in Nashville. 
Considerable attention was paid to the 
matter of securing advertising for 
colored periodicals. 
(] A meeting of colored people in New 
Haven was addressed by Joseph C. 
Manning and adopted resolutions condemning the attitude of President Wilson. 
Lincoln memorial meetings were held 
by colored people at numbers of places 
throughout the United States. At Mo ­
bile, Ala., prizes were distributed to 
children for essays on Lincoln. 
3 1 The Republican Club of New York 
City took as its subject for discussion, 
Saturday, February 20th, the question 
"Is Democracy Gaining Over Aristocracy and the Spirit of Brotherhood 
Over Race Hatred ?" Among the speakers were Prof. W . M. Sloane and Prof. 
Franz Boaz of Columbia University, 
Prof. Jeremiah W. Jenks of New York 
University and Prof. T. Iyenaga of Chicago University; the Negro race was 
represented by Prof. William Pickens of 
Wiley University. 
At the Dinner of the Sunrise Club 
for March the question of land and labor 
in the South will be discussed. Dr. W. 
E. B. Du Bois will make the principal 
address. This is a radical organization 
in New York City for the free discussion of social questions. 
([Th e Houston College Settlement Association of Houston, Texas, has held its 
fourth annual session. 
Congressman Madden has addressed 
audiences in Washington and Boston. 
The latter meeting, under the N. A. A. 
C. P., filled Tremont Temple and was 
the largest meeting for Negro rights 
since Abolition days. 
([Th e Odd Fellows have been celebrating Peter Ogden Day by a series of 
meetings. 
EDUCATIO N 
PRESIDEN T John Hope of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Ga., announces a gift of $15,000 from the General Education Board for the erection of 
a new dormitory. The American Baptist Home Mission Society will add 
$5,000 to this and the colored people of 
the state must raise an additional $5,000. 
([Th e denial of high school training to 
colored children in the South is causing 
agitation for Negro high schools in cities 
like Norfolk, Va. The white people of 
this city have a high school which cost 
$275,000 with equipment, and are planning an equally costly one. The Negro 
schools stop with the seventh grade. 
([In Baltimore, Ohio, colored people are 
agitating for a new high school building, 
the present one being wretchedly inadequate. 
( I In his Washington birthday address at 
Washington and Jefferson College, 
Washington, Pa., President Charles W. 
Dabney, of Cincinnati University, advocated a national fund for the education ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 269 
of Negroes and mountain whites. He 
instanced the appropriations for Indian 
education as precedents. 
([Th e General Education Board of New 
York City has increased its appropriation 
for industrial work in rural schools 
among the Negroes of Georgia from 
$3,500 to $5,500. 
([President James N. Gregory of the 
Bordentown State Industrial School for 
Negro Boys together with Mrs. Fannie 
E. Gregory, preceptress, and the Rev. 
Frank Gregory, principal, have resigned 
their positions. William R. Valentine of 
Indianapolis has been suggested to succeed the president. 
([The Howard University appropriation 
was held up in the House of Representatives on a point of order by Sisson, of 
Mississippi. The Senate restored the 
item and the University will receive 
$101,000. A proposed item of $3,000 for 
sociological work was dropped. 
([The mid-winter meeting of the Board 
of Trustees of Tuskegee Institute has 
taken place. Among the distinguished 
visitors were Dr. F. A. McKenzie, the 
new president of Fisk University, Mr. 
Julius Rosenwald, Miss Jane Addams, 
Dr. Jenkin Lloyd Jones and Mr. Seth 
Low. 
A gift of $40,000 has been made to 
Hampton Institute by an anonymous 
donor. 
POLITICS 
PRESIDEN T WILSO N continues his 
policy of replacing colored officials 
with white men no matter what the efficiency of the colored men has been. Mr. 
Charles W. Anderson, Collector of Internal Revenue in the richest district of 
the nation, including Wall Street, New 
York City, has recently been displaced by 
a comparatively unknown southern white 
man. An Indian, H. B. Tehee, has been 
appointed Register of the Treasury, a 
position long held by colored men. 
Charles A. Cottrill, a colored man of 
Ohio, has been a most efficient Collector 
of Customs at Honolulu, Hawaii. He is 
now to be replaced by a white man. The 
only office hitherto held by colored men 
which is unfilled is that of Recorder of 
Deeds in the District of Columbia. 
There is little hope that President Wilson will have the courage to put a colored 
man even in this place. 
([Major R. R. Jackson, a colored member of the General Assembly of Illinois, 
has introduced a bill designed to prevent 
the presentation of plays and moving 
pictures like the "Clansman." 
([Th e legislature of Arkansas has passed 
a bill to consolidate state and federal 
elections. White people have feared that 
this bill may so increase the power of 
Negro voters as to put Negroes in the 
legislature. 
tj[In Moberly, Mo., colored men for the 
first time have been allowed to vote in 
the democratic primaries. 
([ A colored man, Oscar De Priest, has 
been nominated by the republicans for a 
seat in the City Council of Chicago. He 
was formerly a County Commissioner. 
([ A strong civil rights bill has been introduced into the Pennsylvania legislature by Representative Stein of Pittsburgh. 
([Lemuel W. Livingston, a colored man 
and American Consul at Cape Haitien, 
Haiti, has been called to Port au Prince 
to assist the American Commission 
which is aiding in the reorganization of 
Haitian finances. 
([Charles H. Turpin, a colored man of 
St. Louis, who has held the office of 
Constable has been allowed a recount of 
votes by the Supreme Court. On the 
face of the returns his opponent was 
declared elected at the last election. 
ECONOMICS 
THE colored people of Ocala, Fla., 
have started a small knitting factory. It is at present situated in a building owned by George Giles. This is the 
first venture of the sort among people of 
either race in Florida. 
([Tw o colored men, Moses McKissack 
and Searcy Scales, have bought the Capital City Planing Mill, one of the oldest 
plants of its kind in Nashville, Tenn. 
McKissack is an architect and Scales a 
contractor. They propose to manufacture all the material used in their business. 
([The Atlanta Mutual Insurance Company, a strong colored organization of 
which A. F. Herndon is President, has 
recently absorbed the Union Mutual As-270 TH E CRISIS 
sociation, a similar organization. It is 
expected that the combined companies 
will have a premium income of nearly 
half a million dollars a year. Mr. T. K. 
Gibson will be General Manager of the 
consolidated company. 
It is said that the African Union Company, a New York corporation, has shipped from Africa to New York recently 
5,820 pounds of cocoa beans and 294 
tons of mahogany. 
([Th e Alabama Penny Savings Bank 
founded by the late W. R. Pettiford 
twenty-five years ago, has recently absorbed the Prudential Savings Bank 
which is four years old. The combined 
institutions, situated in Birmingham, 
Ala., will have a paid up capital of $100,-
000. 
m 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
MR. Booker T. Washington as Presi-
-
L
^-*- dent of the National Negro Business League has issued a call asking various national Negro associations to join 
in observing National Health Week, 
March 21st to March 27th. The organizations invited are the Medical Association, Colored Women's Clubs, Urban 
League, the teachers in colored schools, 
etc. 
([Th e Eighth Infantry of the Illinois 
National Guard has had a house-warming in their new armory at 35th Street 
and Forest Avenue, Chicago. Some 5,000 
people attended. The armory has cost 
nearly $200,000 and is due largely to the 
persistence of Col. F. A. Dennison. W e 
call the attention of the militant South 
to the fact that the white Adjutant-General of the State led Mrs. Dennison in 
the grand march, and that fully 200 
white people joined in the dancing. 
([Th e United Colored Charities have 
been at work in Norfolk, Va., and a 
colored employment fund has been raised 
in Louisville, Ky. 
([Records of immigrants to the United 
States in the last fifteen years show that 
the Portuguese are most illiterate (63 
per cent.) followed by the South Italians 
(52 per cent.) and Poles (35 per cent.) 
and the Japanese (22 per cent.). Of the 
Negroes 19.8 per cent, were illiterate. 
([The Colored Women's Clubs of the 
state of Missouri after twelve years of 
work have secured an appropriation of 
nearly $75,000 for the completion and 
maintenance of the state industrial home 
for wayward colored girls. 
([Th e Organized Charities and Civic 
Settlement League composed of colored 
people of Macon, Ga., have been looking 
after housing and health conditions in 
that city. 
([Th e Negro exposition to be held July 
4th to August 4th will take place on the 
Virginia State Fair Grounds in Richmond. 
([Dan Ferguson, a colored sprinter of 
Ohio State University, has just won the 
indoor mile race with the best time record in the history of the University. 
([Th e Columbus, Ohio Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P. has 150 paid up memberships already but is determined to reach 
the 200 mark before permanent organization. Among its members is a former 
Secretary of State of Ohio. 
([Th e Colored Citizens League of Atlanta, Ga., is urging colored men to pay 
their poll taxes, register and vote. 
([A n "Afro-American History Story 
Telling Association" has been incorporated in the District of Columbia. It 
aims to collect and preserve historical 
material, maintain libraries and museums 
and take part in historical celebrations. 
Miss Laura E. Wilkes is president. 
([Th e National Benefit Association, an 
industrial insurance company of colored 
men in Washington, D. C , is running a 
nine inch advertisement three columns 
wide in the leading local daily, The 
Washington Post. 
([Th e Homemakers' Club for Negro 
girls in Alabama has had 11 agents who 
have traveled 7,324 miles in making their 
weekly visits and held 743 meetings. 
They have canned 7,272 jars of fruit and 
vegetables. Some of their work was exhibited at the Alabama State Fair. 
A new theatre for colored people, said 
to be the finest in the South, has been 
opened in Birmingham, Ala., on Fourth 
Avenue between 17th and 18th Streets. 
Two thousand paid admissions were 
taken in on the opening afternoon. 
At the Congregational Club in Brooklyn Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard 
strongly denounced that element in the 
South which oppresses the black man. ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 271 
A movement is on foot to place a 
monument on the grave of Sojourner 
Truth at Battle Creek, Mich. 
In Brooks County, Ga., the Negroes 
own property the assessed valuation of 
which is $556,977. 
W. Calvin Chase, the militant editor 
of the Washington Bee, went to the 
High School the other day to tell Prof. 
A. H. Glenn how to run his classes. The 
professor refused to let the editor show 
him, and resented some of the alleged 
sharp remarks of Editor Chase by bringing a chair down upon his head with 
sledge hammer force.- Afro-American 
Ledger. 
sa 
TH E CHURCH 
WHIT E and colored ministers of 
Raleigh, N. C , have had a joint 
meeting to discuss moral uplift. 
([Th e Young Women's Christian Association has started a colored branch in 
Indianapolis and has interested 600 
women. In Washington, D. C , the 
colored branch has bought and paid for 
its property and last winter installed 
steam heat. In St. Louis, Mo., the 
colored branch has raised $9,300 among 
colored people for a new home and a 
white friend added $10,000. 
([Th e Foreign Mission Board of the 
National Baptist Convention has arranged its nineteenth annual program for 
the 17,000 colored Baptist Sunday 
Schools throughout the country. It will 
be used on Easter Sunday. Copies can 
be had by addressing the Rev. L. G. 
Jordan, 624 S. 18th Street, Philadelphia, 
Pa. 
PERSONAL 
THE Atlantic City (N. J.) Daily 
Press says editorially: 
"To secure two acquittals out of three 
homicide cases and to have the third 
settled on a manslaughter basis with a 
penalty of from one to ten years in 
prison is no small task for even the bestknown white lawyer with a great reputation—especially when the whole calendar 
is cleared up within one week. But for 
this feat to be accomplished by a colored 
lawyer—a man who has persevered 
under the severe handicap which is the 
undeniable lot of all Negroes in America 
—is genuinely remarkable. Isaac T. 
Nutter, colored member of the local bar, 
is entitled to full credit for his splendid 
work at Mays Landing during the weekjust closing." 
Irvin T. Howe, a colored sprinter 
from Colby College, won the 75 yard 
dash in 7 4-5 seconds, beating the IrishAmerican champion, in New York City. 
([Edgar C. Young of the Senior Class in 
the General Theological Seminary captured the Ward prize for Bible reading 
from nine white competitors. The Seminary is in New York City. 
([Dr. Paul Crosthwaite, a young colored 
dentist, made the second highest average 
in a recent civil service examination in 
Chicago. His mark was 81.9 per cent., 
while the mark of the first man was 82.8 
per cent. Dr. Crosthwaite is an assistant 
in the office of Dr. C. E. Bentley. 
([Harry E. Burris, a colored mail carrier 
of Rock Island, Iowa, was given a banquet recently by the mail carriers of his 
post office, on the completion of twentyfive years continuous service. The postmaster and his assistant were present. 
([Lawyer W. A. Carter of Cincinnati, is 
said to be responsible for initiating the 
movement which allows colored men in 
that city to take the firemen's examination. 
([President B. F. Allen of Lincoln Institute has been re-elected by the Regents 
for two years. 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois has been lecturing in West Virginia, Ohio and Illinois. 
In Ohio he addressed the City Club on 
the underlying causes of the present 
European war. 
([Gabriel L. Jones one of the best known 
colored men of Indiana died recently. 
He was a former member of the legislature. 
m 
TH E GHETTO 
THE record of discrimination this 
month is appalling and begins with 
another suit against the New York 
Tribune for refusing to deliver lots 
bought by Thomas A. Payton. The 
Tribune finally compromised by paying 
Mr. Payton a satisfactory sum. 
([Rural segregation was pushed in the 
North Carolina legislature, by a bill of 
Senator Majette, but defeated. 272 TH E CRISIS 
([In Richmond, Va., a proposal has been 
made to amend the segregation law so as 
to make it more difficult for Negroes to 
buy property. 
In Morristown, Tenn., a colored 
teacher in a colored college hired a house 
opposite the campus but the white neighbors protested so that the owner broke 
the contract. 
([ A bitter fight for a segregation ordinance is being made again in St. Louis. 
A segregation ordinance has been passed 
in Spartanburg, S. C. 
In Petersburg, Va.. an evil smelling 
incinerator plant has been placed adjacent to the Jones Street colored public 
school, by the city. 
([White people in New Orleans are trying to keep a colored public school from 
being located on the site of the former 
New Orleans University, a colored institution which has been removed to the 
country. 
The "Jitney Bus" is bringing new 
"Jim-Crow" problems. In St. Louis a 
judge has decided that Negroes cannot 
be discriminated against. In Jackson and 
Vicksburg, Miss., all the chauffeurs are 
to be white and only white people will be 
allowed to ride. 
By a vote of 179 to 99 the House of 
Representatives at Washington refused 
to consider the "Tim-Crow" street car 
bill. 
([In Oklahoma they are proposing to 
amend the present "Jim-Crow" car law 
so as to meet the supposed objections of 
the Supreme Court. 
([Mob s against Negro tenants have been 
driving out colored people in New Madrid County, Mo., and in Kentucky. 
Threats have also been made against 
Negro inhabitants of the suburb of Pine 
Bluff, Ark., and in Gallup, New Mexico. 
([It has been practically impossible to 
secure a jury to try white lynchers at 
Walhala, S. C. 
([Twelve houses of prostitution containing 50 colored women and run for the 
benefit of white men, have been closed 
in Columbia, S. C. No wonder that the 
Iowa bill against intermarriage is called 
by the Des Moines, Iowa, Evening 
Tribune "a bill to legalize white debauchery." 
([Th e ranking patrolman in Oakland, 
Cal., is a colored man but the chief will 
not promote him because of his race. 
([ A colored girl, Miss Eola Chichester, 
won a prize offered by the School Art 
League in New York City. She was 
assigned to the School of Applied Design for Women which refused her on 
account of color. The prize was then 
given to a white classmate who had a 
lower mark. Superintendent Maxwell 
finally intervened; the prize was reawarded to Miss Chichester and she will 
now enter Pratt Institute. 
([Prof. William Starr Myers, of Princeton, spoke recently at the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music and went out of his 
way to state the following falsehoods 
concerning the Negro: That 98 per cent, 
of the race were sexually immoral; that 
even educated Negroes were only 
"grown up children" and that neither 
Negroes nor women ought to vote! 
COURTS AN D CRIME 
THE segregation law of Atlanta has 
been declared unconstitutional by 
the Supreme Court. A new ordinance is 
threatened. 
(I Suits for civil rights in restaurants 
have been won in New York City, Los 
Angeles and in Cleveland, Ohio. In the 
latter cases $50 each was recovered and 
in the first case $200. E. B. Ceruti, of 
Los Angeles, and Harry Davis, of Cleveland, were two of the successful lawyers. 
([Th e following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Will Reed, Forest City, Fla., alleged 
assault on a white woman. 
Alexander Hill, Brookville. Miss., 
murder. 
Horace Robinson, Brookville, Miss., 
murder. 
John Richards, Sparr, Fla., giving improper note to a white woman. 
W. F. Williams (white), Hot Springs, 
Ark., murder. 
Bob Grayson, alias Dave Jones, El 
Paso, Texas, murder. 
At Clarenden, Ark., two white men for 
stealing. 
An unknown Negro was killed by a 
policeman in Jacksonville, Fla. He was 
suspected of stealing. TH E LAT E EX-CONGRESSMA N ROBER T SMALL S 
A HERO OF TH E WA R 
ROBER T SMALL S who has just 
died at Beaufort, S. C , was born 
there in 1839. He had little chance for 
education and in 1851 moved to Charleston where he became a sailor. Eventually he became pilot of the "Planter," a 
steamer running as a transport in the 
harbor of Charleston. It was as pilot of 
the "Planter" that Smalls did the greatest deed of his life. In 1862 the "Planter" was used as the special despatch boat 
ME N of the MONT H 274 TH E CRISIS 
MR . W . F. CROCKET T GOVERNOR . HATFIEL D O F WES T VIRGINI A 
of Confederate officers. When the officers were all ashore one night, Smalls 
and his crew of eight colored men seized 
the boat and ran it to the Union fleet. 
At first the fleet moved into deep water 
and prepared to fight, but a white 
flag was run up 
and then it was 
discovered tha t 
the Government 
had by this feat 
received a boat 
which, with its 
property , wa s 
worth at leas t 
$75,000 . Th e 
thankful government gave Smalls 
only $1,500 and 
Congress, whil e 
thanking him, refused to put him 
an the retired list 
o f the navy . 
Smalls became a MR . CROCKETT' S HOM E 
member of the State Constitutional Convention and afterward held office as state 
representative and state senator. He was 
also brigadier-general of the South Carolina militia. Later he was elected to 
Congress and served as Representative 
in the 47th, 48th 
and 49th Congresses. Presiden t McKinley 
appointed Gen ­
eral Smalls collector of the port 
o f Beaufort , 
where he served 
until ousted by 
President W i 1 -
son. The venerable hero has for 
years been regarded a s th e 
leadin g colored 
ma n i n South 
Carolina . H e 
leaves a number 
of descendants. ME N OF TH E MONT H 275 
THE LAT E MRS . ANN A WAD E RICHARDSON . 
A LEGISLATOR 
WILLIAM FRANCIS CROCKETT 
* * was born in 1863 at Rural Retreat, 
Va. He had very little chance to go to 
school when young, being an orphan at 
four years of age and self-supporting at 
ten. At seventeen he was working on a 
railroad. Then he began to study, starting at the Biblical Institute at Baltimore. 
He finally entered the law department of 
Michigan University from which he was 
graduated in 1888. For a while he practised law at Montgomery, Ala., but in 
1901 visited the Hawaiian Islands and 
settled there. He became in time Deputy County Attorney, served twice as 
District Judge and recently was elected 
to represent Maui County in the territorial legislature. 
m 
A NE W COLLEGE 
ON February 17th the House of Delegates and Senate of West Virginia 
passed House Bill Number 329. This 
bill changed the name of the "West 
Virginia Colored Institute" to the "West 
Virginia Collegiate Institute," and made 
a small appropriation for beginning college work at the institution. This is 
very significant, being the first time in 
the last ten years that a state south of 
the Mason-Dixon's line has appropriated 
money to initiate college work among 
colored people. For the most part the 
southern states have been abolishing 
college departments or crippling them by 
inadequate support. The colored people of West Virginia are giving credit 
for this accomplishment to Governor 
Henry D. Hatfield. They say that Mr. 
Hatfield is one of the few public officers 
who has honestly redeemed his pre-election pledges to the Negro race, both in 
appointments to office and especially in 
the establishment of a new Negro college. 
m 
A TEACHE R 
A NN A WAD E RICHARDSO N was 
^ born in Marshallville, Ga., in 1862. 
At thirteen she entered Atlanta University where she was graduated in 1885, 
after spending some time in Boston for 
the purpose of having her eyes treated. 
Immediately after graduation, she began to build up a private school at her 
home. Boston people sent money, white 
people of the town furnished material, 
and finally the school was placed under 
the American Missionary Association. 
For twenty-seven years she was principal of this school which in time came 
to be supported partially by the Missionary Association and partially by public funds. 
Mrs. Richardson married E. S. Richardson in 1886 and had four children. 
She died last October, highly respected 
by people of both races in the town 
which she did so much to uplift. 
([Dr. C. W. Reeves received a rating of 
92.3 per cent, in the examination for 
medical registration held in Atlanta, Ga., 
last October. The highest rating given 
was 93.2 per cent. 
([The marriage of Capt. William H. 
York of the Liberian frontier forces to 
Miss Hazel E. Reed of Oxford, Ohio, is 
announced. PURITY OF BLOOD 
Thre e Points Few people realize how 
o f View deep and persistent is 
the campaign for racial 
hatred. Here comes Stephen Phillips 
writing on "The Black Peril" in the Los 
Angeles Times with four frightful quatrains of which we quote two. 
"Beware, the black blood with the white ! 
The skull of brass, the hands that tear: 
The lecherous ape, not human quite, 
The tiger not outgrown his lair! 
"And him no shout upraised can fright, 
Nor lighted bonfire scare away ; 
Restless he crouches day and night, 
Leaps ! and a woman is his prey." 
This means that the mixing of white 
blood with black is a devilish, inhuman 
combination. The Quarterly Journal of 
the Society of American Indians has a 
calm and ready answer. 
"No race, as we know races, is an unmixed race. All so-called races are the 
result of mixtures. Food, soil, locality, 
climate, available materials, systems of 
thought, and dominant languages caused 
the development of the types of humanity when the various geographical areas 
were more or less isolated. Yet all 
groups of human beings since remote 
periods have received the influx of blood 
from others. The peoples of Europe 
terming themselves Caucasian are the result of mixtures of prehistoric elements 
as well as of later races. Europe received and absorbed mixtures of Asiatic 
and African peoples. Asia received the 
blood of Africans and Malays. Even 
the red men of America may have received, even after the crystallization of 
the race, the influx of Scandinavian, 
Malayan, and Mongolian blood. * * * * 
"Races originally were the outgrowths 
of widely separated divisions of the primitive human species. Primitive men, 
wherever they may have been found, 
were quite alike. Separated for generations in isolated regions and subject to 
varied climates, methods of procuring 
food, and caring for themselves, they 
evolved the specialized types that now 
distinguish the great races. Within these 
great racial stocks special divisions or 
tribes were formed. Intermarriage thus 
only brings again together long separated 
strains of blood. The mixing of blood 
or racial strains is more rapid today than 
at any time in the history of the world. 
It is inevitable." 
Need we add to this the fine salutation 
of Walt Whitman? 
"I salute all the inhabitants of the earth. 
You whoever you are ! 
Yo u daughter or son of England! 
You of the mighty tribes and empires! 
Yo u Russ in Russia ! 
You dim-descended, black, divine-souled 
African, large, fine-headed, noblyformed, superbly-destined, on equal 
terms with me! " 
TH E REA L SOUT H 
Curious Con- Everybody's Magazine 
tradictions (New York City), has 
gotten into trouble with 
two of its subscribers because it called 
a Negro "mister." 
"It is not difficult to understand how a 
descendant of the 'Master' class in the 
South might find it very difficult to address a descendant of the once 'slave' 
class as 'Mr.' But in a democracy there 
are no 'Masters' in the old sense. 
Every man is a 'Mr.' We reserve the 
word 'Master' for the men and women 
who have mastered the arts, or sciences, 
or whatever; and the Negro who won 
the prize in the Rum Contest would appear to have fairly won the title of 
'Master' as we use it now. He competed 
with nine thousand 'Masters' and 'Mistresses' and won. 
Opinions OPINIONS 277 
"The Negro race has made tremendous 
progress in fifty years. Its leaders are 
urging their people to earn the respect of 
the white race by honest effort, and to 
use every care against giving offense. 
Everybody's Magazine would not wittingly hurt their cause or halt their progress by giving offense. Will others of 
our friends in the South, or elsewhere, 
be good enough to tell us whether or not 
we gave real cause for offense when we 
called a Negro 'Mr.?' " 
These subscribers are evidently well 
represented in Congress by the Hon. 
Percy E. Quin of Mississippi, who said 
recently: 
"No Negro is good enough to associate 
with a white man. The white people in 
the South will never stand for the Negro 
to even attempt to stand on any plane of 
equality. Wh y not let this amendment 
of the Senate stand, which forbids any 
Negroes coming into the United States? 
Why not be real men and stand up for 
the purity of the white race all over our 
country. There is no evil that is so great 
to the real success of the perpetuity of 
our institutions as the black blood of this 
country." 
Undoubtedly Quin represents the mass 
of Southern democracy which curiously 
combines in thought, intense and vulgar 
hatred of the Negro and intense and 
striving hatred of aristocracy. For instance, the Yellow Jacket, of Moravian 
Falls, N. C , goes into hysterics over an 
inter-racial marriage in Boston in which 
a white Virginian figured. 
"What is there in the air, water, soil 
or Boston surroundings that poisons the 
minds of Virginians who go there to 
preach, and transforms them from ambassadors of righteousness to senseless 
and sensuous skunks? Has social equality and ethical liberty destroyed the pristine patriotism of men in the grand old 
Bay State, that they will countenance 
such depraved conduct in their most 
cultured city as the wedding of a beaneating, blanch-faced babboon to a soursmelling Southern Senegambian? 
***** * 
"W e believe that, next to slavery and 
next to the aggravated elevation of a 
slave race into full political powers without the restraining saving grace of some 
years of probationary preparation, the 
most damning infamy ever perpetrated 
since the dawn of Time has been the 
devil-hatched, hell-spawned theory of 
'social equality' that ever and again 
erupts like a syphillitic sore on the social 
surface of some city like Boston, and 
prompts the simple trusting, unsophisticated black man to believe he is the equal 
of his white neighbor who through the 
ages has had the advantages of humanizing, elevating civilization and culture." 
In Austin, Texas, there is a curious 
publication called K. Lamity's Harpoon 
which has as its motto "minnows are 
safe; I am out after whales." Yet issue 
after issue of this radical sheet is filled 
with abuse of Negroes so vulgar and 
nasty that it can hardly be quoted. We 
venture to give three of the milder paragraphs from one issue. 
"Whenever you find a white man—or 
community—that believes the African is 
the moral, mental, and social equal of the 
Anglo-Saxon, that man—or community 
—is as rotten as the cesspools of hades, 
and should have lived in the days of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, when God grew 
weary of such cattle and roasted hell out 
of them with heaven-rained fire and 
brimstone. 
"Social equality will inevitably lead to 
the amalgamation of the pure whiteskinned race, with the flat-nosed, thickskulled African. 
***** * 
"People are waking up to the enormous increase of the mule-nigger breed, 
and you may confidently expect to soon 
see legislation enacted throughout the 
South that will hold the dirty, lecherous 
white daddy of all future mule-nigger 
brats, legally responsible for the support 
and education of their poker-dot offspring." 
What does this mean ? Are the white 
masses of the South absolutely hopeless 
in their brutal ignorance of the logic of 
democracy? No, they are not hopeless, 
for one who represents them, J. C. Manning, has a most illuminating article in 
the New Review. 
"Prior to the Civil War, insisting upon 
it as a right, the slave-holding Democratic party held representation in the 
general government on a basis of repre-278 TH E CRISIS 
sentation which included three-fifths 
of the slave population. Five slaves 
of the South, voiced for by Southern masters, were pitted in the basis of 
representation with three white citizens 
of the free North. Now the continued 
aggression of the audacious leadership 
of the present so-called Democratic 
party of the South has succeeded in 
going much farther; it not only finally 
brought about the usurpation of representation for practically all the colored 
population, but has, through a system of 
political intrigue and political repression, 
accomplished the suffrage elimination of 
more than half of the white male population of voting age in the far Southern 
states. Having obtained domination over 
the masses of the people of the South, 
by subverting popular government, this 
regime is now the controlling factor of 
the general government; while, with this 
force and fraud acquired power, Southern leadership is now seeking to plant 
and to foster their prejudices and ideas 
on the government at Washington and to 
imprint their conceptions of human justice upon the public sentiment of the 
country. 
***** * 
"The rest of the country must come to 
view with amazement the plea coming up 
from the Democratic party leadership in 
the Southern states to 'let the South 
alone' when it beholds, as it must behold, the states of Alabama, Arkansas, 
Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia, 
having, in round numbers, an aggregate 
of 5,000,000 male citizens of voting age, 
while, in the face of this fact, the entire 
delegation in Congress from these states 
was elected in 1910 upon an aggregate of 
but 950,000 ballots. It is not so much 
the South that this leadership would 
have let alone as it is the methods of 
those responsible for this system. The 
appeal of 'let the South alone' is rather 
in their own behalf than in the behalf of 
the masses of the South who have not 
now and who have never had republican 
form of government. Of the 5,000,000 
male citizens of voting age in these states 
of the South, there are, approximately, 
3,500,000 white and 1,500,000 colored 
citizens. The aggregate vote polled by 
the Democratic party in these states in 
the last Presidential election is no more 
than half the white male citizenship and 
about equal to the number of colored 
male citizens of voting age. 
***** * 
"Not only was the ballot taken from 
colored citizens of voting age, not only 
were they, without their consent, put in 
the attitude of voting their own disfranchisement, but more, the frauds returns, 
predicated upon the colored male citizenship of voting age, went to override the 
ballots polled in opposition to disfranchisement and to annul the white majorities voting against these acts. The motive of a general law can best be judged 
by the results arising from its application. When the disfranchisement acts 
went into operation in Alabama there 
were 232,294 white and 181,471 colored 
male citizens in the state of voting age, 
making a total of 413,765. The number 
of qualified voters in the state at present 
will not aggregate 150,000. Of the 180,-
000 colored male citizens of voting age 
there are, perhaps, 3,000 permitted to 
register and to vote." 
W e regret to say that Mr. Manning 
finds the climate of the North more suitable to him than that of Alabama. But 
there is one man, W . O. Saunders, who 
publishes and edits the Independent of 
Elizabeth City, N. C , who is talking out 
remarkably these days. W e hope that 
Mr. Saunders will not have to leave his 
native state. This is the kind of thing 
he is saying editorially referring to a 
poor old colored washerwoman: 
"The total of Lizzie's income is, $2.00 
to $2.25 a week. It is true she makes an 
extra dime now and then; her married 
daughters some times contribute a mite, 
and the white folk who know her give 
her little things once in a while. Three 
dollars a week would be a magnificent 
income in the eyes of Lizzie Pool. 
"There are scores of Lizzie Pools in 
this little town and in every little Southern town. Everybody knows them. I 
have picked this particular Lizzie Pool 
because I wanted a specific case. I have 
got something I want to say and I like 
to have my facts well in hand. I found OPINIONS 279 
this Lizzie Pool at 415 South Road St., 
Elizabeth City. Anyone else can find 
her there so long as she pays her rent, 
and find out the facts about her income. 
"I don't know how Lizzie lives on 
$2.25 a week; I don't know how she 
could live on $3.00 or $4.00 a week. But 
I know where the bulk of her wages goes 
and I am going to paint a picture here 
just as strong as I can. One dollar and 
thirty-five cents of her wages every week 
goes to Old Man X | Saunders 
gives the name in full], one of Elizabeth City's respectable landlords, for 
rent of the dirty, leaky, raggedy, rundown little shack in which Lizzie lives. 
"There are dozens of X s in this 
town and dozens of them in every other 
town. But I have singled out this particular specimen for the same reason I 
singled out Lizzie Pool. 
"The rent of the house in which 
Lizzie lives was formerly $5 a month, 
which is $3.00 a month more than it is 
actually worth. But Lizzie being just a 
Nigger is made to pay by the week, and 
as very few poor folk discriminate between four weeks and a month, she was 
made to pay just about $5.35 a month, or 
35 cents more than the agent had any 
legal or moral right to collect from her. 
"I said the rent Lizzie used to pay was 
$1.25 a week. That is what she used to 
pay. For the past two years she has 
been paying $1..35 a week. About two 
years ago Old Man X came around 
and told her the town had put a sanitary 
tax on the property and she would have 
to pay him ten cents a week extra. It 
is not on record that he told her the tax 
was only $2 a year and that he was calling upon her to pay him from her scanty 
income just $3.20 more a year than the 
tax demanded. 
***** * 
"W e have already seen that the tax is 
only $2. One would suppose that Old 
Man X paid the $2 and was content 
to keep his $3.20 graft money. But you 
don't know X — because you don't know 
landlords. X • is like most landlords. 
When X went to give in his taxes to 
the list takers sitting at the Court House, 
he did the Ananias act; he failed to give 
in. He didn't say anything about eleven 
or more of his shanties, like the one occupied by Lizzie Pool, that were subject 
to the Sanitary Tax of $2 a year each. 
Not a word! He just kept the facts 
under his own bald head ; concealed any 
shame he may have felt, behind his old 
gray whiskers, and kept the whole 
amount of $5.20 a year that he had collected from Lizzie and others like her. 
The facts arc a matter of record. Indeed, more than 700 such cases have 
been exposed in this town by a public accountant who did his work so well that 
the Board of Aldermen don't want to 
pay him for his work. The picture is 
finished. Stand back, you people, and 
study it closely." 
To this we can only append the fine 
strong word of Ray Stannard Baker on 
"The Burden of Being White" published 
in the American Magazine. 
"Oh, my friend, why will men not see 
that there can be no true civilization 
while any men in the world are left out 
of it? and that no race or no nation can 
go far forward while other races and 
nations lag behind ? 
"Let the white person again tread the 
black person under his heel! (Say! 
which is trodden under heel, after all?) 
"It is not enough that we give the 
alien nations our learning, our religion, 
our science. What signify all these 
things? Are we hurt by giving them? 
Are we not, on the contrary, the material gainers? No, we must be prepared to go further than that, else we 
have not learned the fundamental concept of religion. 
"It is not the great task of any nation 
that it shall remain pure, or white, or 
learned, or that it shall assure to its posterity the possession of land and comfort (though this has been the belief, 
and the doom, of every aristocracy from 
the beginning of time). The great task 
of every advanced race or nation is to 
bring more love—more light—into the 
world. 
" A stand for racial aristocracy means 
war, hatred, barren exclusiveness, and 
finally degeneration and failure: a stand 
for racial democracy and brotherhood 
means love in the world, friendliness, 
sacrifice, new fertility, a wider sweep for 
faith, and final triumph. Individuals 
may suffer in the process, nations may 280 TH E CRISIS 
perish, but civilization, the kingdom of 
humanity, will grow, will become more 
beautiful." 
TH E NE W ABOLITIO N 
The Spingar n Elizabeth P. Bond writes 
Meda l in the Friends Intelligencer (Pa.) concerning 
the last meeting of this Association: 
''It is good to know that this Advancement Society has in its membership and 
officers, men and women who know the 
past, and realize the cruel odds against 
which the Negro race is making great 
strides. When Oswald Garrison Villard, the presiding officer of the evening, 
announced the principles for which the 
Society stands, and added: 'This association will not swerve!' there sounded 
from the second generation back of him, 
the memorable declaration: I am in 
earnest; I will not excuse, I will not 
equivocate; I will not retreat a single 
inch ; and I will be heard!' " 
A colored paper, the St. Louis Argus 
has this ingenious comment: 
"When the future historian looks back 
a hundred years or so to write of us and 
our times, he will describe us as one of 
the most mysterious of human puzzles, 
the paradox of races—everlastingly complaining of conditions, yet lifting not a 
ringer to change them; continually crying for our rights, yet doing nothing to 
remedy the wrongs which stand in their 
way. 
"Here, right under our eyes, is a 
branch of a great organization, a splendid piece of machinery, well constructed, 
well engineered, ready and willing to do 
our work, taking the leading part in the 
fight for our rights, winning us many 
friends. 
"Our first duty, our great opportunity, 
is to join at once the local branch of 
the N. A. A. C. P. And those letters 
mean, The Negro Awake Always Counts 
for Power." 
The editor of the Negro Farmer published at Tuskegee Institute. Ala., has 
been recently calling for unity among all 
branches of Negro thought but he answers his own appeal rather discouragingly when asked his reasons for not 
protesting against wrong and aggression. 
The Louisville (Ky.) News says: 
"Mr. Fisher's editorial stirs the religious soul," but he throws in an irritant 
when he says, I shall shoot no arrows 
idly into the air.' He may not mean it 
so but most readers will doubtless take 
that as a sarcastic reference to that class 
of our leaders who believe in fighting 
back with all the instruments of publicity. 
"Taking that view we ask, who will 
say that Wendell Phillips, Garrison, 
Douglass, John Brown and others were 
shooting arrows idly in the air? Who 
will say that without the arrows shot 
into the air by these brave anti-slavery 
advocates that the prayers of our fathers 
and mothers would have availed ? 
"Wh y are those brave souls who protest and agitate against the evils that beset us any less valuable than those who 
'cheer and make efficient.' " 
It is surprising to note the new tone 
of certain colored papers. Here comes 
the Amsterdam News of New York 
City with a strong editorial, much 
stronger than it has ever ventured before. 
"No close observer of the situation of 
to-day would deny that we have been, 
and are yet, traveling along the wrong 
road. 
"We have been advised to take the 
path of least resistance. W e have been 
told we must gain respect by commercial 
conquests and peaceful achievements. 
But has any race or nation gained respect wholly by these methods? Does 
any one believe that Belgium would 
have been better off to-day and in the 
future had she chosen the path of least 
resistance offered by the Germans? Had 
she voluntarily opened her pathways to 
the Teutons must she not have found 
herself aligned with them against the 
allies? Once the Germans determined 
to go through Belgium to get at France 
there was no third way. As it is, Belgium has chosen the most honorable and, 
in our opinion, the best in the end. The 
path of least resistance is not only dishonorable and cowardly, but IT DOES 
NO T PAY ! 
***** * 
"Lynching would cease in short order 
if the colored people of this country resented the lawless murdering of friends, OPINIONS 281 
relatives and compatriots as they should 
—with the rifle and sword. The ballot 
will not settle it definitely. Neither will 
commercial nor intellectual achievement. But mobs do not lynch when they 
are assured of a come-back. Least of 
all, would a mob invade a colored district in chase of its victim were there 
any likelihood of their being received as 
they should be—with bullets. 
***** * 
"Organize ! Organize ! Agitate ! Agitate ! Let the American nation and the 
entire world know that you are men and 
will no longer tolerate wrongs and persecutions. Let the world know you are 
willing to fight for your rights, if only 
by fighting can you obtain and enjoy 
them." 
The white press on the other hand has 
been stimulated to some thinking by the 
bestowal of the Spingarn medal. The 
New York Evening Post says: 
"The bestowal of the first Spingarn 
medal—an admirably planned prize, to 
be awarded annually to the colored man 
or woman who has rendered the greatest service to the colored race—upon 
Prof. Ernest E. Just, a young scientist 
and professor in the Howard University 
Medical School, is certain to attract 
widespread attention. The committee, 
of which Mr. Taft is a member, did not 
find the choice an easy one, there being 
a number of possibilities from whom to 
select. That the recipient should be a 
scientist rather than an inventor, or a 
leader in farming or banking, will doubtless surprise many people, as it will put 
to their trumps those who continue to 
maintain that the Negro is incapable of 
the higher education. Professor Just, 
be it noted, is not thirty-one years of 
age; yet he has already attracted the attention of scientists of repute, no less a 
one than Prof. Jacques Loeb endorsing 
his original work in physiology, biology 
and zoology. 
***** * 
"For the exceptional man of Professor 
Just's type no one ought, * * * to fence 
in any field of learning. He should be 
free to roam where'er he will in our 
choicest educational pastures. Anything 
else would spell folly and, what is worse, 
a gross national injustice which would 
merely have to be stated to carry its 
own condemnation. Whenever opposition to throwing open the doors of our 
educational institutions is based merely 
on color prejudice and a belief in another person's alleged inferiority, it must 
be attacked without a moment's delay. 
Professor Just and his peers of his race 
are the most effective answer to those 
who would go back to the educational 
Dark Ages." 
Other papers concur as, for instance, 
the Jamestown (N. Y.) Post says: 
"It is gratifying to observe that many 
colored men are winning distinction in 
various fields of human endeavor." 
The Pittsburgh (Pa.) Chronicle Telegram says: 
"Such a recognition of effort as the 
bestowal of a medal of this character, 
and the public attention directed to its 
presentation, must have a fine effect on 
earnest workers among our citizens of 
African descent." 
The San Francisco (Cal.) Bulletin 
thinks 
"People who are susceptible to race 
prejudice and racial arrogance would do 
themselves good by becoming familiar 
with all such cases as this." 
Even the Louisville (Ky.) CourierJournal has this comment: 
"There is a large group of professed 
friends of the Negro—including some of 
the Negro educators, themselves—who 
will not be greatly impressed by this 
newest activity of this Association. The 
workers for Negro welfare in this country are divided into those who believe 
that the Negro's destiny and salvation 
lie in manual labor and menial service, 
and those who claim that his potential 
capabilities are no more restricted than 
those o f his white neighbor. The first 
group claims to be no less warm in its 
zeal for the Negro's welfare than the 
second, but insists upon the recognition 
o f what it believes to be inelastic racial 
limitations. 
"Such declarations are always a little 
perilous; the recurrence of 'exceptional 
instances' is constantly putting a strain 
upon them. The assignment of races to 
particular classes of endeavor should not 
be carried forward with too high a hand. 282 TH E CRISIS 
In all probability the ethnological arguments of the 'repressive' group of Negro educators could be put to a severe 
strain if the other group cared to present an array of concrete instances of 
varied Negro achievement. At all 
events it will be interesting to watch the 
cases called into notice by the annual 
award of the Spingarn medal." 
ffl 
SEGREGATION 
The Colo r Dr. Francis J. Grimke, a 
Lin e well known colored clergyman of the District of Columbia, has been writing to Mr. "Billy" 
Sunday as follows: 
"I am a colored clergyman. I see that 
you are to be in our city on the 18th of 
this month. Race prejudice is rampant 
in this city, it flaunts itself everywhere. 
Has Christianity no message on the subject? Is this evil, this ever-growing evil 
that is doing almost more than anything 
else to destroy the self-respect and to increase the burdens of ten millions of 
colored people in this country, to go unrebuked by the representatives of religion ? Will you not say a word on the 
subject while you are in our midst? I 
notice that you have been striking with 
sledge-hammer blows some of the great 
evils of to-day—intemperance, impurity, 
gambling, the lust of gold, frivolity, political corruption, the tobacco habit, and 
the like. Will it be asking too much of 
you to turn for a moment to this gigantic evil, RACE PREJUDICE, and deal 
it also one of those sledge-hammer 
blows? It is difficult to get any one to 
speak on the subject. All seem to be 
afraid. A short while ago we had a 
Bible conference in our city. It was attended by some of the most distinguished representatives of Christianity 
in the country and even from abroad. 
Foremost among these representatives 
was the Rev. G. Campbell Morgan, of 
England. 1 wrote to him; called his attention to the subject; begged him to 
say a word on it, but he skulked away 
like a coward without opening his lips. 
And what is true of him is true of the 
great majority of the men who fill the 
white pulpits of the land, North as well 
as South. They are a set of moral cowards. From what I have read of you, 
however, I am led to think differently. 
The Christianity which you possess 
seems to have sufficient power in it to 
stiffen up a man's backbone and to take 
out of him the craven spirit that fears 
the face of man. I seem to recognize in 
your ringing words the dauntless spirit 
of Peter and John and the other apostles 
as they stood before the Jewish officials 
and said: 'We must obey God rather 
than man.' A clear, strong utterance 
from you on the subject at the National 
Capital will greatly help matters." 
We regret to say that Mr. Sunday has 
not seen fit to answer this letter. 
The Norfolk (Va.) Journal & Guide, 
a colored paper, has these few facts on 
the results of residential segregation. 
"The exponents of race -segregation 
claim that the colored people 'want to 
live among white people because of a desire to associate with them.' That is 
decidedly untrue. Colored people object 
to being segregated because it deprives 
them of municipal protection; the sanitary laws are not enforced with due regard for their health; the money that 
they pay in taxes is usurped for the benefit of white communities; their streets 
are unpaved, and, in case of fire, the fire 
fighting apparatus cannot reach their 
property. They have inadequate police 
protection and the streets are not properly lighted. An example : When Huntersville and Barboursville were annexed to 
Norfolk, the boundaries were extended 
to cover enough of adjoining white 
wards so as to preclude forever the possibility of Negro votes ever controlling 
the revenue from Negro taxable values. 
Taxes were raised 100 per cent and 
$270,000 were appropriated for street 
improvements in the ward, but not one 
dollar of it was spent for paving or curbing of a single street in the colored section of the ward." 
Another colored paper, the Cincinnati 
(Ohio) Union, edited by W. P. Dabney, 
is making a brave fight in Cincinnati 
against the evident anxiety of the 
colored people of that city to segregate 
and "Jim-Crow" themselves. It says: 
"Instead of fighting to put competent 
teachers of our race in the mixed schools 
a few ambitious and selfish people, 
backed up by those who did not know OPINIONS 283 
and could not know, for they doubtless 
never had the opportunity of learning, 
succeeded in establishing the Colored 
School. 
"The white board now finds it a necessity ! The Colored people have to all 
intents and purposes shown that they 
want segregation. 
**** * 
"They will get it. North or South, 
whenever the Negro cries for segregation, the hearts of our white fellow-citizens are immediately touched and as immediately responds. We are getting it 
here in large doses. W e understand that 
the magnificent new hospital has its 
Colored building, Colored operating 
room, etc., etc. When the hospital was 
thrown open for inspection the guide announced the fact in such a burst of eloquence that even the little white children could understand and get that 
chesty feeling of superiority." 
The American Journal of Sociology 
(Chicago) recently asked 250 representative American citizens as to what 
true Americanism in the future should 
stand for. The Journal publishes this 
reply from W . E. B. Du Bois: 
"Americans in the immediate future 
should place most stress upon the abolition of the color line. Just so long as 
the majority of men are treated as inhuman, and legitimate objects of commercial exploitation, religious damnation 
and social ostracism, just so long will 
democracy be impossible in the world. 
Without democracy we must have continual attempts at despotism and oligarchy, with the resultant failure 
through the ignorance of those who attempt to rule their fellow-men without 
knowing their fellow-men. America, 
instead of being the land of the free, has 
made herself a hot-bed of racial prejudice and of despicable propaganda 
against the majority of men." 
m 
MISCELLANEOU S 
"It was Anthony's quietly cherished 
contention that if he had only been a 
white man he would have risen high in 
the world. There is something to support the contention in the record of a 
slave who earned and bought his freedom, then his mother's freedom, then 
his wife's, and furthermore earned the 
confidence and respect of every man, 
white and black, with whom he came in 
contact. Distinction he did earn among 
people of his own race. There were no 
more influential churchmen, and few 
more honored Masons, than Anthony 
Brown. Where is another old man of 
87, ex-slave and untutored, of Anthony's 
generation, who stood as well ? Born 
a generation later, his inborn urge of 
leadership would have found freer assertion, and he would have mounted 
higher than porter—yet what's in a title ! 
"Only a porter, yet a great porter, 
just as one may be great in any calling 
which he graces and ennobles as Anthony did."—St. Louis (Mo.) Post Dispatch. 
"The influences which have been potent in forming the character of our native music are, first, Negro melodic 
idiom, and, second, Celtic and English 
national songs. 
"The Negro influence has been one of 
propinquity. The African slave is a 
singer whose life of suffering and hardship has brought to the surface all his 
powers of expression. A humble member of the National family from the beginning, his songs of pathos and glorification have made a deep impression on 
every music-loving child, who, on becoming later a trained musician, finds his 
own speech somewhat akin to that of his 
old friend."—Arthur Whiting in the 
Outlook (New York City) on "The 
American Composer." 
"Speaking of a lynched Florida Negro 
the brief dispatch says 'it is alleged that 
he had insulted a white woman.' An allegation is sufficient in such a case, of 
course. The Georgia mob of chivalrous 
citizens who hanged two colored girls 
'alleged' that the victims had insulted a 
policeman. When pleasure seekers determine to enjoy a lynching bee there is 
never any lack of allegations."—Cleveland (Ohio) Plaindealer. 
" O Lord, chune his lips to de lute of 
de Gospel and hang his jaws on de Harp 
of Salvation !"—From an Old Time Sermon. TH E SPINGARN MEDAL 
THER E can be no doubt but 
X&*^&ffl?3'
 tha t th e
 ceremonious ofK^^[H^\£ y fering of a visible prize 
/^(joJLcj)rrC\ for real and meritorious 
]>Z~^2>v^zs6 accomplishment among 
colored men and women 
is one of the most significant steps taken 
in recent years to advance the race. At 
first it seemed as though it might be difficult to find anyone really worthy of such 
an honor; but when the nominations began to pour in, the Committee were astonished at the number of people who 
had done real work, even if we confine 
the matter of accomplishment to the year 
1914. There were in all thirty nominations. Among them were Howard Drew, 
the athlete who holds the world's record 
for the 100 yard dash; Mrs. Meta Warrick Fuller, the sculptress ; William Monroe Trotter, the intrepid agitator; 
Heman Perry, the founder of the first 
Negro old line life insurance company; 
Major John R. Lynch, the reconstruction 
statesman and author; William Stanley 
Braithwaite, the poet and critic; Major 
R. R. Moton, of Hampton Institute; 
Isaac Fisher, the essayist of Tuskegee 
Institute; Cornelia Bowen, the principal 
of Mt. Meigs School, Ala.; and a couple 
of dozen others. The selection of Mr. 
Just out of this deserving number was 
eminently fitting. His work is real and 
lasting. His promise is great, his character is modest, unassuming and honest. 
This is the sort of man that this Association, this race and this country delight to 
honor. To Joel E. Spingarn we owe a 
debt not simply for the medal but for the 
idea on which it was founded; and also 
for the long and exhaustive excursions 
through the country to popularize our 
principles ; and for singular devotion to a 
great cause. 
m 
THE WHITE CHRIST 
KffijS^YT^T? You will kindly discon-
\\£<xfit\fi)l tinue TH E C RISI S 
#^^W^f^Vv
 to my address. I feel 
((t^JP6^)) that your motives are 
ENE^SS ^ probably righ t but 
you r influence can 
only be regrettable. Fear, hate and revenge are responsible for the present 
dreadful war, not Christianity in the 
least, and those who foster fear, hate and 
revenge are breeding war and if they are 
reasonable beings should know what they 
are doing. 
"Because I am 'white' you may imagine all sorts of things about me, 
nevertheless, I know that I desire this 
world to be a cleaner, kinder, more 
reasonable, more just place for us all to 
live in." (From Pennsylvania) 
" 'The White Christ' contribution in 
the March number of TH E CRISIS is so 
absolutely rich in truth, so exquisitely 
sarcastic in tone, and so altogether appealing, that I wish it might be brought 
to the attention of the 'white contingent' 
of Christianity, especially those afflicted 
with Spiritual pride, and who are so absorbed in THINKIN G of their own 
'beautiful development' that they positively have 'no time' to crystallize their 
mighty thoughts into deeds, and so they EDITORIA L 285 
continue to be muffled in thick veils; 
veils of ignorance, superstition, imagination, prejudice. It's the most pathetic 
spectacle of so-called modern civilization 
to witness on all sides the fruit of prejudice: namely, oppression. 
"May GOD speed the day when all 
will realize that 'the world is one home' 
and that all the inhabitants of the world 
are the children of one Divine Father. 
"Please accept a word of appreciation 
for the very effective service accomplished through T h e Crisis. " 
(From a colored friend) 
"Be lenient with the great mass of 
'white public' as its religious training has 
been confined mostly to the Salvation 
Army type of conversion and not to the 
steady growth of knowledge of Him that 
is given us in our churches. The first 
merely emphasizes the other and increases its good effects. It appeals to all 
classes of humanity at a certain stage in 
their development. 
"In this day of seeming retrogression 
we must appeal to such men as you; 
the editor of the New York Press, and 
Andrew Carnegie (who believed this 
world to be 'growing more and more like 
Heaven') to hold to that ancient belief. 
Stand firm for the benefit of the poor, 
benighted brother to whom any lapse of 
faith on your part will be a blasting of 
hopes. Time and God will vindicate 
you." (From New Jersey) 
"I don't see how one who has known 
a single life like that can think of Christianity as a failure. We are all so narrow 
and selfish and blind; and if there's a 
force which can lift and transform even 
one life, surely there's hope for the 
world. 
"I hope you won't mind my saying 
that. That editorial distresses me so, 
both for the one who felt and wrote it, 
and for those whose faith may be dimmed in reading it. The world needs reshaping dreadfully ; and there isn't any 
constructive force but love. And love 
includes patience—long patience like 
God's—and faith in human kind. To 
face mankind as men are, without loving 
them, enemies and all—it seems to me 
that would drive one mad. That's why 
I'm sorry." 
(From a Southern white woman) 
M 
WOMA N SUFFRAGE 
^-~^-^ N IN the fall of 1915 the 
VV^ M KV S V COLORED voters of Massa-
^vi^ k chusetts, Ne w York , 
(K&/M}\&A\ New Jersey and Penns$^=^-i4^~ZYTI sylvania are going to be 
asked for their opinion 
on the enfranchisement of women. There 
were in 1910, 151,341 Negro voters in 
these states. The number is probably 
near 200,000 today. It is safe to say 
that in an electorate of over 5,000,000 
these 200,000 votes may easily hold a 
balance of power and certainly would be 
a valuable asset. Undoubtedly among 
Negro voters there is a good deal of indifference and lack of knowledge concerning woman suffrage. W e tend to 
oppose the principle because we do not 
like the reactionary attitude of most 
white women toward our problems. We 
must remember, however, that we are 
facing a great question of right in which 
personal hatreds have no place. Every 
argument for Negro suffrage is an argument for woman's suffrage; every 
argument for woman suffrage is an 
argument for Negro suffrage; both are 
great movements in democracy. There 
should be on the part of Negroes absolutely no hesitation whenever and whereever responsible human beings are without voice in their government. The man 
of Negro blood who hesitates to do them 
justice is false to his race, his ideals and 
his country. FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT, 1914 
Report of the Chairman of the Board of Directors 
t^t t $ t $ i£ (5* 
ORGANIZATION 
During the year the Association has doubled its membership, which now numbers 6,000, and has increased its branches and locals throughout the country to 
fifty. The net paid circulation of its official organ, THE CRISIS, is 31,450, including every state in the Union and ten foreign countries. 
The work of the Association is carried on by the Executive Offices and by the 
Department of Publications and Research. The retrenchment necessitated by the 
war compelled the Association to give up its Legal Department before it was fairly 
tested and to delay once more all ambitions for the thorough organization of its 
vvork in the field, as well as to reduce the staff of the Executive Offices one-half, 
which has meant double work for the remainder. Some idea of the work carried 
by this staff, which now consists of the National Secretary, a bookkeeper and a 
stenographer, may be inferred from the fact that two years ago, when the membership of the Association was only 300 and there were only three branches, it 
used the same number on the staff of the Executive Offices. The Department of 
Publications and Research, which has entire charge of THE CRISIS, has a staff 
of seven, with over seven hundred agents in the field. 
The Association finds itself this year in new and more adequate headquarters, 
with a reserve fund in bank, and clear of debt except for certain liabilities of 
THE CRISIS. The latter is now entirely self-supporting except for $1,300 of the 
Editor' s salary which the Association pays. 
PUBLICITY 
Publicity is the breath of life to a movement whose main object is to alter 
public opinion, and we have continued to hammer at the barriers of silence and 
evasion with which this great national problem is everywhere invested. 
ANNUAL MEETING
 I n additio n t o th e
 publicity received through its official organ, 
AND ANNUAL
 th e Associatio n
 during the year has made distinct advance in 
CONFERENCE bringing its program before the country in a series of notable 
meetings. The Annual Meeting in New York, with its stirring 
addresses by Mr. Grimke and Mrs. La Folette, and Dr. Du Bois's scholarly paper 
on farm segregation, the three days' Annual Conference in the Spring in Balti-TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 287 
more, the lecture tours of Mr. Villard and your Chairman in the Middle West, 
and the meetings held by our branches all over the country, have made a creditable 
record and brought our work to the attention of the press as never before. 
The Conference at Baltimore should be a source of congratulation for many 
reasons. It is the farthest South we have pushed, and it had the cooperation and 
support of the colored people to a greater degree than any previous conference; 
its program contained some of the most distinguished names in the country, including several Southerners. To accomplish this at the very threshold of the 
South on our sixth birthday was no slight achievement. The Conference, from 
its opening session in the Lyric Theatre, with an audience numbering 3,000, 
through the post-Conference meetings in Washington and Memphis, was largely 
attended by interested crowds who received the gospel of the New Abolitionism 
with an enthusiasm and seriousness which significantly showed the field for the 
Association's work in the South. The Association realizes that the success of its 
Sixth Annual Conference was largely due to the enthusiasm and hard work of 
the Baltimore Branch. A word should also be said in regard to the post-Conference meeting at Memphis, where the Association presented its ideals as a 
challenge and a responsibility to the thousands of delegates to the National 
Conference of Charities and Correction. 
When Mr. Villard went West in May to attend the American 
VILLARD AND I 
.Newspaper Congress in Lawrence, Kansas, he generously arSPINGARN TOURS . . . . . . 
ranged to give part of his time to the Association, paying all 
his own expenses. In the very limited time at his disposal, and in spite of the 
pressure of many other engagements, he addressed eight meetings for the Association in the following cities: St. Louis, Kansas City, Topeka, Indianapolis, and 
Cleveland. These included meetings before local branches, city clubs, chambers 
of commerce, and other organizations. Mr. Villard secured many new members 
and made many warm friends for the Association, and his trip undoubtedly was 
the cause of a more friendly feeling and of a better understanding of the Association among newspaper men. ' 
Your Chairman spent three weeks in January, 1914, in the Middle West, addressing meetings in Detroit, Chicago, Quincy, Kansas City, Topeka, St. Louis, 
Indianapolis and Cleveland. A full account of this trip appeared in Th e Crisis 
of March, 1914. He has just returned from his second annual tour, embracing 
fourteen cities from Pittsburgh to Omaha and St. -Paul, but he leaves it to his 
successor to comment on the results of this second trip. He hopes, if sufficient 
leisure permits, to cover the whole country in his successive tours. 
The work of the Association has been kept before the country by 
series of meetings held by our branches everywhere. Mention is made 
of a few only. The Sumner and Douglass meetings held by the District 
of Columbia Branch early in the year, together with a well organized series of 
smaller meetings held throughout the city of Washington, carried the message of 
the Association to lodges, churches, schools, and to the masses of the people 
everywhere. Boston was almost equally active and held several notable public 
meetings to protest against segregation. The Louisville meeting in the summer 288 TH E CRISIS 
launched a campaign against the new segregation ordinance in that city and 
resulted in the organization of a branch of the Association. 
At many of the branch meetings, notably Cleveland and St. Paul, there were 
distinguished speakers. Some of the branch meetings were of a distinctive character. Seattle and others gave emancipation celebrations. Tacoma held a Coleridge-Taylor memorial. The Northern California Branch arranged a series of 
educational meetings with paid lecturers as speakers. The Quincy Branch held 
a two-days' inter-state conference on the race question which attracted representatives from the surrounding states and many noted speakers. Chicago had 
a two-days' bazaar, which resulted in raising funds to open permanent headquarters. These meetings have been held in branches as far south as El Paso, 
Tex., and Shreveport, La. 
The press notices of all these meetings make an encouraging showing. The 
Conference received a gratifying amount of editorial comment, and many papers 
carried telegraphic "stories." The Chairman's trip was widely noticed in the 
press, and the work of the Association has received publicity in the colored press 
as never before. Nothing gives us more encouragement than the growing sympathy which we find expressed for our work in colored newspapers throughout 
the country. In the white press a fairer attitude is on the whole discernable, 
but silence or deliberate falsification of facts continues to be the rule in some 
sections of the country. 
LEGA L WOR K 
civil A large number of civil rights cases have been considered during the 
year. The appeals varied from that of the Negro who complained beright s caus e a res taurant had discriminated against him by serving him but 
half a portion of an order, a single frankfurter, to that of the colored citizens of 
Tampa who requested the aid of the Association in securing for the colored people 
of that city library privileges in a new Carnegie institution now being constructed. 
Largely through our efforts an improved Civil Rights Law was passed by 
the New York Legislature some time ago, but it still falls short of being the 
model statute which we had hoped to send forth for imitation to the legislatures 
of all the states. Partly as a result of the defects of this law, partly because of 
the lack of witnesses or the failure of complainants to follow up their cases, 
partly because discrimination in ice cream parlors, pharmacies, and the like, is 
not clearly included under the statute, partly because of the successful ruses of 
defendants or the deliberate refusal of justice by prejudiced courts or juries, as 
well as for other reasons, we have no definite victories to record in the courts of 
New York during the past year. But elsewhere through our branches, we have 
been successful in prosecuting a number of civil rights cases. 
Baltimore succeeded through its attorneys, Messrs. McGuinn and Hawkins, in 
acquitting George Howe, a colored man who shot into a mob bombarding his 
house. This branch also succeeded in defeating the Frick Jim Crow Car Bill, 
which, had it passed Maryland's legislature, would have been state wide in its 
operation. The activity of the Baltimore Branch against the segregation ordinance is mentioned elsewhere. Detroit fought fourteen cases of discrimination in 
theatres and won four. Indianapolis secured the acquittal of two colored boys 
convicted of carrying concealed weapons. The boys had been arrested as the 
result of a fight with white boys who had been the aggressors in trying to prevent 
the colored boys from using a swimming pool lying between the colored and 
white base ball parks, TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 289 
The Philadelphia branch took up the case of the bombardment of the home 
o f a colored woman who with her son and two daughters moved into a house in 
West Philadelphia which she had purchased. A mob of one thousand "neighbors" 
turned off the street lights and bombarded the house doing great damage. The 
local branch at once got in touch with the police department and for seven months 
policemen guarded the house. This cost the city of Philadelphia $9.00 a day. 
The courage of this woman in remaining in her house contrasted favorably with 
that of a colored man whose family suffered the same treatment under almost 
identical circumstances but who, when pressed by the Association to push his case 
not only refused to prosecute or to stay on the ground but even declined to rent 
or sell his house to a colored family so that the Association could make a test 
case. 
civil 
service Here again, careful investigation indicates defects in the Civil Service 
laws. The Association's attorney spent some time in investigating the 
discharge of colored clerks from the Atlanta Post Office. The postmaster claimed the men dismissed were inefficient or dishonest. This was not 
proved by the evidence of white people who testified to the contrary. No redress 
is possible while the present postmaster remains in office, nor can the race issue 
be raised with the National Civil Service Commission until its personnel. is 
changed. 
In Philadelphia the Association's first attempt to investigate the discharge of 
post office employees was baffled by the men themselves who claimed that they 
feared the attempts they were making to get certain politicians to redress their 
grievances might be jeopardized by our efforts to help them. Later they applied 
to the Association and the matter was taken up with the Civil Service Commission 
with no results except to reveal defects in the civil service act which gives the 
Commission no jurisdiction to review discharges from the classified service, even 
if the clearest proofs of race prejudice can be given. The Commission can review 
discharges only when proof is offered that they were for religious or political 
reasons. The Civil Service Reform League has been requested to incorporate an 
amendment in the civil service law to correct this and now has the matter under 
consideration. 
The Association made an unsuccessful effort to secure the repeal of the 
executive order requiring all candidates for civil service positions to file photographs with their applications. In spite of claims that this order is only for the 
purpose of identification to prevent impersonation at examinations, it should be 
remembered that since it has been in force in the Philippines no colored man has 
received an appointment there. 
segregatio n Our investigations and our agitation first called the attention 
i n governmen t of the country to this matter, and we are continuing both our 
departments investigations and our protests whenever needed. 
The field of the Association's activities against segregation ordisegregatio n nanC e s extends from Birmingham, Alabama, to Harlem, New 
i n citie s York, and as far west as St. Louis. The Baltimore branch has 
won two cases and is now working on a third which it intends to carry to the 
Supreme Court of the United States. The Louisville branch has engaged one 
of the best law firms in the city to carry a test case to the United States Supreme 
Court. 
In Richmond, Va., the cases pending were investigated and it was decided 
inadvisable to cooperate because of local conditions. If the case now pending 
in Ashland, Va., is appealed to the Supreme Court the attorneys in charge will 
ask our assistance. Birmingham, Alabama, has announced its intention of passing a segregation ordinance but after listening to protests from the local com-290 TH E CRISIS 
mittee of colored people acting under our advice it was decided to await the outcome of the Louisville and Baltimore cases. 
The segregation problem was raised in Harlem by the attempt to organize 
a corporation in New York to remove colored people from certain sections in 
Harlem in order to restore land values there. Plans to cooperate with the National League on Urban Conditions among Negroes to meet this condition were 
abandoned temporarily because of the retrenchment necessitated, by the war. 
In concluding the legal report it is gratifying to note two victories, one of 
them that of our President, Mr. Storey, who at the meeting of the American Bar 
Association succeeded in rescinding the resolution passed two years before, which 
declared that it was never contemplated that colored people should be admitted. 
In its place a resolution was passed that application for membership must hereafter state race and sex and such other facts as the executive committee required. 
In the case of Private Anderson, of Honolulu (see Th e Crisis, April, 1914), 
sentenced by a court martial to five years imprisonment for burglariously entering 
an officer's home, Mr. Villard personally interviewed the Judge Advocate General 
in the army and also obtained an opinion on the case from Mr. Storey, John 
Chipman Gray, and ex-Judge William G. Choate. The case was passed upon by 
the Judge Advocate General, the Assistant Secretary of Wa r and the Secretary 
of War, and as a result Anderson was released. This does not undo the wrong 
but saves him four and one-half years of imprisonment. 
Since losing the valued services of Mr. Chapin Brinsmade our legal work has 
been carried on by Mr. Arthur B. Spingarn and Mr. Charles H. Studin, who have 
generously donated their services. 
We are at present advising with Mr. Storey and Mr. Boston in regard to 
suits which the Association intends to bring to test the Jim-Crow law in Oklahoma. These suits are being brought as the result of the experience of Mr. W. 
Scott Brown who accompanied your Chairman on his recent speaking tour in 
Oklahoma. Shortly after the Supreme Court of the United States refused to 
declare the law unconstitutional, the Chairman paid a flying visit to Oklahoma, 
the result of which has been to stiffen the backbone of colored opposition to the 
Jim-Crow law of the state. 
CONGRESS 
Undoubtedly the most important work of the year has been the Association's vigilance and activity in opposing hostile legislation in Washington. For 
over a year it has employed a man in each branch of Congress. These men are 
experts, newspaper men who are trained especially for legislative work. They 
keep in the closest touch with New York Headquarters and with the District of 
Columbia Branch, which acts as a Congressional Committee and takes the lead 
in the local campaign against hostile bills. As soon as word is received of a 
discriminating measure the Association immediately wires its branches urging 
them to influence their representatives in Congress to vote against it. Officers, 
directors and friends of the Association cooperate personally and when necessary representatives are sent to Washington to appear at Committee hearings. 
No better example of the way the Association is able to work through its 
branches can be given than the following letter from Judge Brown of the Appellate Court of Illinois, who is President of the Chicago Branch. 
Illinois Appellate Court, Chambers of Mr. Justice Brown. 
Chicago, January 15, 1915. 
My Dear Dr. Bentley : 
In compliance with your request over the telephone, I take pleasure in sending you a 
report of the action taken in behalf of our Branch of the National Association in relation 
to the legislation concerning Negro aliens and also the legislation which passed the House TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 291 
of Representatives concerning intermarriage in the District of Columbia. Immediately upon 
the passage of the Immigration Act with its prohibition of the admission of Negro aliens, 
1 telegraphed for the Branch to the Hon. James Mann, the Hon. Martin Madden, the 
Hon. Adolph Sabath, in the House of Representatives, protesting against the said amendment and asking them to exert their utmost efforts to defeat it. In these telegrams yourself, Mr. Allinson, Jane Addams, George Packard, Robert McMurdy and Sophonisba Breckenridge personally joined. I also telegraphed for the Branch to the President, requesting 
him to veto the Immigration Bill if it came to him with the prohibition of Negro aliens. 
The action of the gentlemen named in the House perhaps shows that the telegrams were 
not needed, but they could have done no harm, and upon the result, from whatever cause, 
we may congratulate ourselves. The telegram to the President was courteously acknowledged by his Secretary, who said that it would be brought to his attention. 
Immediately upon being informed by the press of the passage of the Anti-intermarriage bill, I telegraphed a long night letter to each of our Senators. Senator Lewis was 
at Hot Springs. Arkansas, Ill. Senator Sherman was in Washington, and telegrams were 
addressed to them at these respective points. We referred them to letters written to them 
in relation to the matter when the bill was before Congress at its last session. We renewed 
our protest against the legislation, pointing out its injustice, its inexpediency and its futility, 
and especially indicating both its offensiveness as a studied insult to the Negro race and 
the great wrong that it did in taking away from some women the protection which the law 
afforded to others against men who would take advantage of them. We asked each Senator 
to exert his influence against the passage of this Act by the Senate. 1 also addressed a 
telegram in the name of the Branch by myself as its President, to a dear friend of mine, 
who is a Democratic member of the House from another State, who has a close acquaintance with many Democratic Senators. 1 have received from him an acknowledgment of 
my letter, an expression of sympathy with its object and a promise immediately to use 
his influence in the line indicated. I am, 
Very truly yours, 
(Signed) E. O. BROWN . 
Following these methods, the Association was able during the year to act 
upon a flood of discriminating legislation, including anti-intermarriage bills. 
Jim Crow bills, a bill making Negroes ineligible for service in the army and 
navy, and residential segregation bills for the District of Columbia, in addition 
proposed legislation on the subject of rural credits, the University of the United 
States, vocational education, the extension of the Interstate Commerce Commission's jurisdiction to carriers by water, was examined for jokers. Among 
the bills stifled was the Clark Jim Crow car bill. Such pressure was put on the 
House to prevent its passage that rather than have it come to a vote it was voted 
to lay aside District Day, which is the only day on which measures relating to 
the District of Columbia can be considered. The Clark Bill now goes over until 
the next Congress where it will probably be defeated most decisively. 
Whenever possible these bills have been stifled in committee. When necessary to fight in the open the Association has done so. When the Aswell-Edwards bill proposing to segregate civil service employees throughout the country 
came before the Civil Service Reform Committee, Mr. Grimke, President of 
the District of Columbia Branch, appeared before the Committee, and as a result of his arguments the bill was never reported. Our fight on the SmithLever Bill was not successful. As soon as this was reported to us by our legislative agent it was discovered that though the colored farmers of the South 
might or might not receive any of the millions which the bill appropriated for 
agricultural extension work, no specific provision was made for them. To insure colored farmers a fair share of the moneys appropriated the Association 
persuaded Senator Jones to introduce an amendment providing for this. A 
scholarly memorandum supporting this amendment was then prepared by Dr. 
Du Bois and Mr. Brinsmade and sent to every member of Congress. Both Dr. 292 TH E CRISIS 
Du Bois and Mr. Brinsmade went to Washington to attend the hearings o n the 
bill and to interview Congressmen. 
The fight o n this amendment lasted fo r over tw o days. A substitute, the 
Shafroth Amendment, was offered, passed by the Senate and then lost. But 
raising the issue had its effect. Although the allotment of funds is in the hands 
of the state legislatures, the final disposition really rests with the Secretary of 
Agriculture, and if he should permit abuse by the states in allotting these funds, 
the whole matter can be brought up again and thrashed out in Congress. The 
fight over this bill brought the whole race issue squarely before Congress and 
before the country, to the surprise and disgust of the more conservative Democrats who were anxious to keep it in the background and little dreamed o f its 
becoming conspicuous as a part of an agricultural extension measure. The debate on the bill was printed in the Congressional Record. A letter of protest 
"from this Association was read on the floor of the Senate and also appeared in 
the Record with comments calling attention to the prominent people the Association included in its membership. The name of the Association appeared again 
and again in the debate and speeches were made by Senators Jones, Clapp, 
Smith of Michigan, Sherman, Gallinger, Root and others championing our cause. 
Senator Works of California read a telegram of protest received from our 
Northern California Branch. Most important of all was the fact that our part 
in the fight was made clear to the people of the country by the press which gave 
it the widest publicity. 
We cannot close the account o f the Association's work of the year in Congress without a mention of its activity in securing the reappointment of Judge 
Terrell who had been nominated by the President. Senator Vardaman had widely announced his intention of defeating Judge Terrell's confirmation. The Association sent an open letter to Senator Clapp which was published widely in the 
Dress to call the attention of the country to the fact that the Southern senators 
were openly making color a reason for declining to affirm an appointment o f the 
President. Judge Terrell's record on the bench was such that these Senators 
were unable to find any pretext for this opposition. They were forced to come 
out in the open. Senator Clapp led the fight to secure favorable action by the 
Senate on the nomination and was successful. 
In order to bring the race issue before the incoming Congress a questionnaire was sent to all candidates asking them in answer to certain questions to 
state definitely where they stood. Their answers or their failure to answer were 
printed and distributed before election by the Association's branches throughout 
the country. Particular attention was paid to the pivotal states where the 
colored vote is of strategic importance. Results were also published in Th e 
Crisis, where the Association regularly prints a record of the vote on all legislation discriminating against the Negro. To quote the summary of the results of 
this questionnaire given in T h e Crisis: "Perhaps the most striking thing about 
all these answers is the number of people who frankly say they are not informed 
o n the Negro problem. They simply 'do not know the facts.' This is the 
severest condemnation of the past attitude o f the colored people and their friends 
that could possibly be made. It is the business o f peopl e wh o want wrongs 
righted to let the world know just what the wrongs are. " Should the Associa-TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 203 
tion have followed the advice of Mr. Peter Ten Eyck, candidate for representative from the Twenty-eighth District of New York, one does not like to contemplate what might have been the position of the colored people in the District 
of Columbia and ultimately in the whole country. Mr. Ten Eyck in answer to 
our questionnaire wrote, "It is my advice to you to stop agitating the things 
which you have outlined in your letter until such time that you find that the 
wild rumors are liable to become a reality." 
W e may congratulate ourselves on the fact that, despite the overwhelming 
Southern majority in Congress, not a single bill which was directly on its face 
intended to humiliate or repress colored men and women, was permitted to pass 
during the year 1914. We do not ask that all the credit for this achievement 
be given to our Association, but if this Association had never existed it is almost 
certain that some or all of these bills would have passed. The District of Columbia Branch has been on the firing line in all this work; circumstances have 
given it the post of labor and of danger and therefore the post of honor; and ail 
men owe it a debt of gratitude for what it has accomplished. 
Our 
Staff Before concluding it would be unjust not to express a word of appreciation for the work which has been rendered by our two heads of departments. Th e Crisis is our chief organ of publicity; it is also one of the 
standard bearers of the world's ideals. This position it owes to the talent and 
energy of its editor who, at his own suggestion, now receives the cooperation 
and advice of a special committee of the Board in the carrying on of his work. 
Our Secretary has devoted an extraordinary energy and resource to our many 
problems, and has performed the tasks of three ordinary men. Without her 
indefatigable loyalty, it would have been impossible to carry on our work with so 
little help. It is only fair to add that the clerks in both offices have proved that 
colored men and women can work as efficiently as white men and women, and 
with at least equal loyalty to their daily tasks. 
CONCLUSION 
The record of the American people on the race question now stands as follows. During the year just passed some seventy colored men and women were 
lynched without trial and in many cases with barbaric torture. Segregation ordinances restricting the property rights of colored people have passed or are pending in some of our largest cities, including Baltimore, Richmond, Louisville, and 
St. Louis. Legislation opposed to the interests of colored people has been introduced into the legislature of nearly every state in the Union during the last few 
years. Farm segregation is being agitated in the South. It is not unfair to 
say that at this very moment an orgy of Negro-baiting is going on in Congress. 
Out of eleven million people, including 1,600,000 men of voting age who can 
read and write, only 550,000 were permitted to vote at the last Presidential 
election. The Supreme Court of the United States has virtually declared that 
the colored man has no civil rights, and has refused redress on one ground or 
another to every case that has come before it. All this does not take account 
(Continued on page 296) 294 THE CRISIS 
"He 'Rose" 
A Negro Folk Song- for Eastertide 
(Hampton Collection) 
Transcribed for the CRISI S b y 
J.ROSAMON D JOHNSON . 
Dust! Dust and ashes 
Fly over on my grave: 
They crucified my Saviour 
And nailed Him to the Cross! 
Nor death's cold iron band! 
He 'rose! 
He 'rose, He 'rose from the dead, 
And the Lord shall bear 
The cold grave couldn't hold Him, My spirit home 
Andante sustenuto. 
Publication rights reserve d by J. Rosamond Johnson, He Rose 2 F. J. LAWSON CO. N.Y 
THE FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT 295 296 TH E CRISIS 
(Continued from page 293) 
of the daily humiliations, persecutions, and wrongs to which the American Negro is subjected, or the political, economic and social opportunities which are 
withheld from him. Certainly our labors have but begun. Certainly we should 
dedicate ourselves anew to the great task of securing justice to all who have 
the right to share the opportunities of our democracy. Our task like that of 
the old Abolitionists, is to "alter public opinion." But whereas they fought for 
men whom they considered essentially unlike themselves, we fight side by side 
with men whom we know to be essentially like ourselves. Their weapon was 
the oid idealism, ours not only the old idealism but the new science. W e know, 
as they did not know, that race is but historical opportunity, and nationality but 
funded ideals. To make the world realize these truths we must use every possible effort and endure every possible sacrifice. 
"For freedom sternly says : I shun 
No strife or pang beneath the sun 
When human rights are staked and won." 
J. E. Spingarn , 
February 12, 1915 Chairman, Board of Directors. 
o o o o o 
Report of the Director of Publications and Research 
The business of Th e Crisis as certified to by F. J. Batchelder, C. P. A., 
our auditor, is as follows: 
Th e Crisis R evenu e an d Expens e A ccount , 1914 
B alanc e S hee t 
expense s 
Publishing $10,0S9.82 
Salaries 4,006.48 
General expenses 2,559.30 
Bad debts 1,781.25 
Postage 1,682.65 
Stationery and supplies. . . . 957.01 
Depreciation on furniture. . 98.49 
$21,175.00 
Net profit 949.00 
$22,124.00 
REVENUE 
Sales of copies $12,794.31 
Subscriptions 5,608.65 
Advertising 2,703.89 
Profit on books 1,017.95 
assets 
Cash $115.40 
Accounts receivable, advrs. 1,389.82 
Accounts receivable, agents. 2,048.27 
Books on hand 322.64 
Petty cash fund 25.00 
Furniture and fixtures 1,871.32 
$5,772.45 
liabilitie s 
Accounts payable: 
Harvey Press $126.25 
N. A. A. C. P 9.30 
Loans payable: 
W. E. B. Du Bois 966.85 
Mrs. Hoggan 484.05 
$1,586.45 
Net worth 4,186.00 
$22,124.00 $5,772.45 TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 297 
Since the first issue of Th e Crisis, in November, 1910, to January 1st, 1915, 
the total income has been $58,766.40. If we take the first four full years of the 
magazine (November, 1910-Novcmber, 1914), we have these figures: 
First year $5,219.94 Fourth year 21,315.36 
Second year 12,291.83 -
Third year 17,006.64 Or a total income of $55,836.77 
This income has been expended as follows: 
For printing $30,788.18 For general expenses, inFor salaries 9,513.71 cluding rent , supplies, 
For capital 3,732.97 books, etc 7,059.96 
For postage 4,741.95 
Since publication Th e Crisis has distributed one million one hundred and 
. fifty thousand magazines of which considerably over 1,000,000 copies was net 
paid circulation. The average net paid circulation for the year 1914 has been 
31,450 copies monthly which is a circulation more than twice as large as any 
other Negro publication. We circulate in every state and territory, in Mexico, 
South America, Hawaii and the West Indies and in Europe, Asia, Africa and 
the South Seas. 
Usually a magazine is allowed five years to become self-supporting. We 
had hoped to accomplish this in four years but the war delayed us. To-day Th e 
Crisis is paying all its expenses of over $20,000 except $1,300 of the editor's 
salary which the Association will carry for another year. On January 1st, 1916, 
Th e Crisis will be financially independent unless the war and its aftermath 
change the present probabilities. 
The present organization of Th e Crisis includes five offices covering 1,300 
feet of floor space on the fifth floor of 70 Fifth Avenue, New York City; the 
force consists of an editor, a business manager, a shipping clerk, a bookkeeper, 
and three other clerks, and stenographers; we have over seven hundred regular 
agents in the field. W. E. B. Du Bois, 
January 1, 1915 Director of Publications and Research. 
o o o o o 
Report of the Treasurer 
The accounts of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, as certified by F. J. Batchelder, C. P. A., our auditor, are as follows: 
N. A. A. C. P. R evenu e an d Expens e A ccount , 1914 
B alanc e Sheet, Decembe r 31, 1914 
assets 
expense s 
Salaries $7,395.34 
General expenses 
Printing 
Traveling expense 
Postage 
Depreciation on furniture. 
Net gain 
2,606.15 
1,613.53 
879.51 
868.88 
96.80 
$13,460.16 
570.54 
$14,030.70 
revenu e 
Memberships 
Donations 18.70 
Literature sold 
Profit on pins sold 16.00 
$14,030.70 
Cash in banks 
Petty cash fund 
Due from "Crisis" . . . 
Pins on hand 
Furniture and fixtures 
liabilitie s 
Special funds reserved: 
Maclean Memorial 
Fed. Aid Educational.. 
Net worth 
$1,374.04 
25.00 
9.30 
130.92 
876.65 
$2,415.91 
302.90 
195.63 
$498.53 
1,917.38 
$2,415.91 298 TH E CRISIS 
It is gratifying to note that in spite of the decrease in our income brought 
about by the war, the Association can report itself out of debt with a substantial 
balance in bank. Its net gain for the year is almost $600 and its net worth 
over $1,900. 
An analysis of the membership list shows that eighty per cent, are colored 
and twenty per cent, white. The membership falls into the following classes— 
75 per cent,, $1.00; 10 per cent., $2.00; y2 per cent., $3.00; y2 per cent., $4.00 
14 per cent., $5.00 and up. 
Since fifty cents of each membership fee is returned to branches the balance 
of the one-dollar fees barely covers the clerical work involved in making the 
necessary membership records and the cost of literature sent out. As every 
member paying two dollars and more gets T h e Crisis, there is also no gain to 
the Association on memberships of two dollars. In other words, the Association 
is supported by 15 per cent, of its membership. This includes nine contributors 
of $100 each, one of $300, three of $500 each, three of $1,000 each, and two of 
$2,000 each ; also contributions from branches, the most generous of which came 
from the District of Columbia Branch which gave almost $2,000 during 1914. 
Boston and Baltimore have also sent generous donations to the work and other 
branches contributing were Indianapolis, Kansas City, Northern California and 
Seattle. 
The preceding financial report by a certified public accountant shows expense and revenue only. It is interesting to note in this connection that since the 
Association's books were opened in May, 1911, its income has been as follows, 
that for 1914 being within about $300 of that of the previous year despite the 
financial depression: 
1912 $11,815.15 1914 15,237.98 
1913 • 15,526.85 
February 12, 1915 O swal d Garriso n V illard , Treasurer. 
o o o o o 
Report of the Secretary 
The Secretary has charge of the executive offices of the Association. In 
addition to the work of securing new members and subscribers to Th e Crisis, 
the work of the Secretary includes the organization and supervision of branches 
and other field work such as arranging speaking tours and supplying lecturers 
for miscellaneous meetings ; work with Congress ; some legal work ; press work; 
correspondence; and the financial work of the Association. 
Membership and branches have increased as follows: 
1912 1913 1914 1915 
Membership 329 1,100 ' 3,000 6,000 
Branches and Locals 3 10 24 50 
This increase in membership has been secured by appeals to individuals, by 
sending out circular letters, by public meetings, through branches and Th e 
Crisis, and especially as a result of the lecture tours of Mr. Villard and the 
Chairman, who not only gave their services to the Association but also paid all 
their own expenses. The total number joining as a result of the Chairman's 
second western trip ending in January, 1915, probably will reach 1,000. The 
success of this trip was largely due to Mrs. Butler R. Wilson and Miss Kathryn 
M. Johnson who preceded him addressing a series of advance meetings in the 
cities in which he was to speak and getting in touch with the communities in 
general. TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 299 
In this arduous work Mrs. Wilson generously gave her services to the Association and as a tribute to the success of the work she is doing for the cause in 
New England, a committee of interested women in Boston paid one-half of her 
expenses. In addition to this western trip which included Pittsburgh, Columbus, 
Springfield, Dayton, Cincinnati and Toledo, Mrs. Wilson also addressed meetings 
for the Association in East Orange and spoke in New York at (he Friends School, 
at a parlor meeting at the home of Mrs. Villard, before the Forum of the Church 
of the Messiah and at the Fifth Avenue Suffrage Shop, everywhere receiving a 
sympathetic and often enthusiastic response and arousing great interest in the 
work of the Association. 
As an experiment early in the year almost 3,000 people were circularized for 
membership with an expenditure of a little over $200 and a return of $224. 
Seventy new members were added and fifty subscribers to Th e Crisis secured. 
Of the former about forty are members paying five dollars or more. 
congress an d The Association's work in Congress and its legal work are relega l wor k ported upon in detail by the Chairman. The Secretary's office 
acts as a clearing house for all information from Congress in 
regard to legislation affecting colored people. From here news of it is sent to 
branches and friends all over the country. Since the Legal Department has been 
given up, much of the prelimniary interviewing and correspondence in legal cases 
falls on this office. During the year a new form of constitution and by-laws for 
the Association's branches was made and submitted for approval. 
press Although this work necessarily has been somewhat spasmodic, the results 
have been encouraging for the effort and time put upon it. In addition 
wor k to the publicity given the annual conference when the work was done by 
an expert, the press has given considerable space to the Association's work for 
the Jones Amendment to the Smith-Lever Bill, the fight for Judge Terrell's 
reappointment, the western trips of Mr.- Villard and our Chairman, and to some 
of our larger meetings mentioned elsewhere. A few articles have been published 
in periodicals. 
corre s Almost 30,000 pieces of first class mail were sent out during 1914 
from the executive offices. At least 10,000 of these were individual 
pondenc e inters, the balance being form letters. The second class mail totalled 
over 43,000 pieces. Since the retrenchment necessitated by the war forced the 
executive offices to dispense with its mailing clerk, this work now falls on the 
bookkeeper who also has entire charge of the membership list of 6,000 and of 
the filing of correspondence. All the stenographic work is carried on one stenographer. 
financ e Without the active assistance of our Treasurer, the Association would 
soon be bankrupt. It has never had an active budget committee. The 
actual work of this committee falls on the Secretary's office where each month 
hundreds of letters, are sent to members, delinquents and possible contributors. 
It is this persistent effort which has enabled the Association to close this year of 
financial depression out of debt and with a balance in bank. 
boar d o f The Association is fortunate in having a Board which is ready and 
willing to give personal and active assistance to the work. The work 
directors of Miss Ovington and Mr. Kennaday on Th e Crisis Committee, of 
Dr. Holmes and Mr. Russell in making addresses for the Association, of Dr. 
Bentley and Mrs. Kelley in giving advice, and of various others, has made it 
easier for the executive officers of the Association to get results. 300 TH E CRISIS 
BRANCHES 
["Starred branches are mentioned also in the reports of the Chairman and Treasurer.] 
Many of these branches have been chartered too recently to make it possible for them 
to submit anything but a brief routine report which has not been printed. The organization 
and supervision of branches is at present very unsatisfactory since it has to be done largely 
through correspondence. The Association should have at least two agents in the field constantly. Almost all the branches are doing effective work. The District of Columbia 
Branch leads with a membership of 900, Boston has 567, Baltimore runs a close second with 
556 and among the younger branches Cleveland has the largest number, 250. A brief 
summary of their more important work follows, all of which has been described more fully 
from time to time in T H E CRISIS. 
ALTON, ILL. 
Dr. George L. Samuels President Mrs. Anna Gillis (1200 Wise St.) . . .Secretary 
Mr. H. B. Coats Vice President Mr. Joel Russell Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Mr. H. B. Coats, Chairman Mr. H. B. Hunter 
Miss H. I. Robinson Mrs. Mary Samuels 
Mr. Joseph Craig Mrs. I. H. Kelley 
* BALTIMORE, MD. 
Dr. F. N. Cardozo President 
Mr. George B. Murphy Vice President 
Miss Ethel A. Lewis Rec. Secretary 
Miss Lucy D. Slowe Asst. Rec. Secretary 
Miss Margaret A. Flagg (1405 Arglye Ave.) 
Cor. Secretary 
Dr. H. S. McCard Treasurer 
Mr. W. Ashbie Hawkins Attorney 
Executive Committee 
Mr. George B. Murphy, Chairman Mr. E. B. Taylor 
Mr. D. O. W. Holmes Mr. Julius C. Johnson 
Mr. W. T. McGuinn Rev. L. Z. Johnson 
Dr. A. O. Reid Rev. J. R. L. Diggs 
Mr. W. Ashbie Hawkins 
The success of the Conference was largely due to this branch which contributed five 
hundred dollars in cash toward its expense and secured over two hundred new members 
during its three days' session. The branch has held thirty-three meetings during the year 
including several mass meetings and has given two concerts for the benefit of the Association. 
Its legal work, which has been brilliant, is described in the Chairman's report. 
•BOSTON, MASS. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison President Mr. Butler R. Wilson (34 School Street) 
Mr. George G. Bradford Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. Joseph P. Loud, Chairman Dr. Horace G. Bumstead 
Miss Maria L. Baldwin Miss Adelene Moffat 
Mrs. May H. Loud Rev. Samuel A. Brown 
Boston has held one hundred and twenty-one meetings including eighty-one parlor 
meetings, church and club meetings, reaching in this way eight thousand people. Early in 
the year the branch gave a reception at the Twentieth Century Club for the national officers 
of the Association. Through the efforts of Mrs. Butler R. Wilson, fifty-eight colored women 
arranged a series of musicales and dances which netted sixty dollars for the Association. 
Under the direction of Mrs. Francis J. Garrison, a committee of twelve ladies gave a concert 
at the home of the Misses Mason and sent the proceeds, $278, to the Association. At this 
concert the Caroline Belcher Quartette volunteered their services. 
The victory of the branch in persuading the Boston School Committee to withdraw 
from the schools a book entitled "Forty Best Songs," which contained words objectionable 
to colored people, was more far reaching than perhaps was realized at the time. This book 
was published by one of the leading text book companies of America. As soon as Southern 
representatives of this publishing house heard of the agitation in Boston, they wired for the 
whole edition, saying that they would have an increased market for the books in the South, 
because of the advertisement given them in Boston. They were advised that the firm had 
decided to withdraw the entire edition. TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 301 
BUFFALO, N. Y. 
Mr. John E. Brent President Miss Amelia G. Anderson (106 Walnut St.) 
Secretary 
Rev. Philip L. Frick Vice President Mr. Cornelius Ford Treasurer 
•CALIFORNIA, NORTHERN 
Mr. Walter A. Butler President Miss Eva B. Jones (1929 Linden St.. Oakland) 
Secretary 
Rev. David R. Wallace Vice President Mrs. H. E. Dc Hart Treasurer 
Directors 
Rev. David R. Wallace, Chairman 
Mrs. Lutie Gilbert 
Mrs. T. Tighman 
Mr. William N. Ricks 
Mr. B. O. Johnson 
Mrs. Elizabeth Brown 
Miss Charlotte A. Whitney 
Mrs. M. E. Terrell 
This branch has been successful in having discriminating signs removed from cheap 
restaurants and in getting favorable notice in the local press for the work of the Association 
including some editorial comment 
•CHICAGO, ILL. 
Judge E. O. Brown President Mr. T. W. Allinson (701 West 14th Place) 
Mr. S. Laing Williams Vice President Secretary 
Mr. T. W. Allinson Treasurer Mr. George R. Arthur Asst. Secretary 
Directors 
Miss Jane Addams Mr. Charles R. Crane Mr. Robert McMurdy 
Dr. C. E. Bentley Dr. George C. Hall Mr. George Packard 
Mrs. Emmons Blaine Mr. Charles T. Hallinan Mr. Julius Rosenwald 
Miss S. P. Breckenridge Mr. Jenkin Lloyd Jones Miss Garnetta Tibbs 
Chicago has held several large and successful meetings culminating in a two days' 
summer tent festival which netted the branch over $400 which is to be used as the nucleus 
of a fund for the establishment of permanent headquarters. 
* CLEVELAND, O. 
Mr. Roddy K. Moon President Mr. S. P. Keeble (2158 East 43rd Street; 
Secretary 
Mrs. Sarah Mitchell Bailey Vice President Mr. C. F. Hunnicutt Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Rev. Elam A. White Mr. Theodore B. Green 
Rev. H. C. Bailey Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt 
Mr. Alexander H. Martin Judge T. M. Kennedy 
The Cleveland Branch has checked indiscriminate arrests of colored men which were 
caused by a rumor that a Negro had attacked a patrolman and has taken the initiative in 
getting two colored people on the General Welfare Council of the city. In this it had the 
cooperation of several other organizations. 
CORNELL UNIVERSITY, N. Y. 
Mr. H. B. Murray President Mr. G. J. Rich (Cornell University) 
Mr. B. H. Stash Vice President Cor. Secretary 
Mr. R. B. P. Waller Secretary Mr. J. M. Ballou Treasurer 
•DETROIT, MICH. 
Mr. William Osby President Miss Addie Butler Rec. Secretary 
Dr. A. H. Johnson .....Vice President Mr. Walter Johnson..... Treasurer 
Rev. R. W. Bagnall (329 Antoine Street)......Secretary Mr. Francis H. Warren Attorney 
In February, this branch smothered an anti-intermarriage bill in the Michigan Legislature. It has fought fourteen civil rights cases and won four. It has secured the appointment 
of two colored detectives to the police force. 302 TH E CRISIS 
•DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
Mr. W. B. Hartgrove (1428 Florida Avenue, 
N. W.) 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke President 
Miss Charlotte E. Hunter Vice President 
Mr. Garnet C. Wilkinson Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Miss Charlotte E. Hunter, Chairman Mrs. Julia Mason Layton 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw 
Mr. Neval H. Thomas 
. Secretary 
Rev. A. C. Garner 
Prof. George W . Cook 
The field of the work of this branch is both local and national in scope. The results of 
its local work may be summarized as follows: 
A petition of protest to the White House because colored people were not represented 
in local civic welfare organizations. 
The reinstatement of three men discharged as a result of abolishing the U Street Station 
of the Post Office. 
The reinstatement as watchman of a government employee who, after being reduced 
from the grade of clerk to laborer had been dismissed. 
Successful agitation to compel the commencement of work on the new colored high 
school. 
Checking of discrimination in the restaurant of one of the large department stores. 
Attempting to secure positions for colored boys and girls in the District of Columbia 
public library. 
Securing assurances from the Board of Education that moving pictures on educational 
topics for the public schools should be enjoyed by colored pupils. 
The work of the branch in Congress, which is of national significance, has been reported 
upon by the Chairman. 
The Branch has several important standing committees: The Committee of Fifty and 
More, Prof. George Cook, Chairman, which, during the year raised almost $2,000 for the 
Association ; the Drama Committee, Mrs. Laura B. Glenn, Chairman, which is studying ways, 
and means of utilizing the stage in the service of the cause; the Juvenile Committee, Mrs. 
Carrie W. Clifford, Chairman, which has the problem of organizing a Juvenile department 
for the National Association and the Committee on Songs, Miss Harriet Shadd, Chairman, 
which is making up a collection of songs to be used at public meetings by our branches everywhere. The songs include a number of original compositions. 
EAST ORANGE, N. J. 
Dr. George Woodson President Mr. Fred Buford Asst. Secretary 
Mr. T. W. Hudspeth Vice President Mrs. Lizzie Sears Treasurer 
Mr. W. P. Burrell (32 Jones St.) . .Secretary Mrs. H. C. Crawford Chaplain 
Dr. George Woodson 
Mr. J. W. Hudspeth 
Mr. W. P. Burrell 
Mrs. Lizzie Sears 
Executive Committee 
Mr. C. F. Tinsley 
Dr. W. G. Alexander 
Mr. W. H. Easley 
Mrs. Lottie Cooper 
Mr. W. R. Lomax 
Mr. J. B. Selden 
Rev. G. W. Krygar 
Rev. J. E. Churchman 
* EL PASO, TEX. 
Mr. Jasper B. Williams President Mr. Burlie A. Mabrey (1201 East 2nd Street) 
Prof. William Coleman Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. Jasper B. Williams, Chairman 
Mr. S. M. Collins 
Mr. L. W. Washington 
Mr. John F. Kelley 
Dr. L. A. Nixon 
Dr. J. H. Donnel 
Mr. John Slater 
HARRISBURG, PA. 
Dr. C. L. Carter President Dr. Stephen J. Lewis (609 Boas Street) 
Secretary 
Mr Mr. James Auter Treasurer . Frank N. Robinson Vice President 
Mr. Robert J. Nelson 
Dr. C. L. Carter 
Mr. James M. Auter 
Dr. Stephen J. Lewis 
Executive Committee 
Mr. A. Denee Bibb 
Miss Clara E. Reed 
Mr. W. Justin Carter 
Rev. E. L. Cunningham 
Rev. U. G. Leeper 
Mr. Frank L. Jefferson 
Mr. C. S. Jackson 
Mr. F. N. Robinson 
Dr. C. H. Crampton TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 303 
In spite of the defects in the Pennsylvania Civil Rights Act, Harrisburg has won a 
number of civil rights cases. In the Davenport Lunch case, brought by Dr. Carter, the 
President of the branch, it was agreed to settle when the defendant offered to no before the 
Board of Aldermen and admit his violation of the law and to put himself on record as 
opening his place with equal accommodations For all. He paid all costs in the case. 
Even more encouraging was the branch's victory over a local moving picture theatre. 
According to witnesses, the proprietor of this theatre had the following notice posted at the 
ticket office: "The balcony of this theatre is provided for our colored patrons. If you do 
not wish to sit in the balcony, do not purchase tickets, as they will not be honored in any 
other section of the theatre." In giving his decision in the case, Judge McCarrell ruled that 
to reserve a certain section of a public amusement house for the special accommodation of 
the white race and to deprive colored patrons of the right to occupy that particular section, 
is a discrimination against the colored race and a violation of the criminal statute and 
punishable by a fine. This decision is the first of its kind by a Dauphin County Court judge. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY, D. C. 
Mr. R. McCants Andrews President Mr. George E. Hall (326 T Street, N. W.) 
Miss M. Frances Gunner ....Vic e President Cor. Secretary 
Mr. George E. Brice Rec. Secretary Mr. W. D. Delainey Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Miss Eulalia Lane. Chairman Mr. L. G. Koger 
Mr. W . A. Pollard Mr. M. B. Me Aden 
Mr. W. E. Ricks Mr. C. C. Stuart 
Mr. E. C. Terry 
This was the first college chapter chartered. From the beginning it has set a high 
standard for other chapters. As a student organization, it has devoted itself especially to 
the study of the race question and to spreading the propaganda of the N. A. A. C. P. by 
sending speakers to other colleges, by correspondence, and by distributing literature broadcast. Whenever practicable it has cooperated with the District of Columbia Branch. The 
dispatch with which briefs protesting against the Afro-Exclusion amendment to the Immigration Bill were distributed to members of Congress was largely due to the energy of the 
students of the Howard Chapter. It has offered a prize for the best essay on "What Should 
be the Objects of a College Chapter of the N. A. A. C. P." The prize is an engraving of 
Garrison framed, the gift of Mrs. Henry Villard. 
INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
Mr. Robert L. Brokenburr President 
Mrs. Beulah Porter 1st Vice President 
Mrs. Mattie Dangerfield. .2nd Vice President 
Mrs. S. B. Henderson (2850 Boulevard Place) 
Secretary 
Miss Fannie Brown Asst. Secretary 
Mrs. Cora Willis Treasurer 
The Indianapolis Branch has increased its membership to 200. It has held a scries of 
meetings and in the Spring gave a children's festival. In its legal work it won an important 
victory described in the report of the Chairman. 
KANSA S CITY, KANSA S AN D MISSOURI 
Mr. J. Dallas Bowser President Mrs. Myrtle F. Todd Treasurer 
Dr. Howard V. Smith Vice President Mr. Woody E. Jacobs Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. H. O. Cook Miss Anna Jones , Mr. W. C. Hueston 
Mr. I. F. Bradley Mr. G. A. Gregg 
Kansas City was successful in its agitation against segregation and Jim Crow street 
cars. It also protested against the refusal of a large factory in Kansas City to admit colored 
welfare workers and has received assurances that in the future no such discrimination will 
be made. It succeeded in persuading the local Park Commissioners to reverse their decision 
in regard to Garrison Square which had been originally intended for Negroes, but which the 
Park Commissioners had decided to give to Italians before the branch protested. It successfully contested state bills against intermarriage. 304 THE CRISIS 
LOS ANGELES, CAL. 
Dr. Charles Edward Locke President Mr. E. Burton Ceruti (501 Thorpe Building) 
Dr. I A. Somerville 1st Vice President Mrs. Beatrice S. Thompson.. .Asst. Secretary 
Hon. Reynold E. Blight...2nd Vice President Mrs. Morgan E. Robinson Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Dr. A. C. Garrott, Chairman Mr. F. H. Crumbly 
Rev. W. T. Cleghorn Mr. J. H. Shackleford 
Dr. J. S. Outlaw Prof. Charles Alexander 
•LOUISVILLE, KY. 
Mr. William Warley President Mr. J. H. Butcher (1717 West Chestnut St.) 
Mr. C. H. Bullock Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Dr. A. C. Mclntyre Mr. S. O. Johnson Rev. C. H. Parrish 
Dr. J. A. C. Lattimore Dr. R. B. Scott Mrs. Nolan King 
MINNEAPOLIS, MINN. 
Dr. S. N. Deinard President Mr. Gale P. Hilyer (2441 Fifth Avenue, S.) 
Dr. J. H. Redd Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. William R. Morris, Chairman Mr. R. Skinner 
Hon. Albert H. Hall Miss Sarah Marshall 
Judge E. F. Waite Miss Eva Walker 
Rev. Thomas E. Cullen Dr. S. N. Deinard 
Hon. B. S. Smith Dr. R. S. Brown 
NEWARK, N. J. 
Rev. J. R. Waters President Mr. R. W. Stewart (512 Metropolitan Bldg.) 
Secretary 
Mr. John S. Pinkman Treasurer Miss Alverta Harris Asst. Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Dr. W. R. Granger, Chairman Mr. George A. Douglass 
Dr. E. F. Eggleston Mr. T. W. Doubley 
Mr. D. D. Woody Mr. A. C. Fletcher 
* PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Mr. Ellwood Heacock President Air. Isadore Alartin (6 North 42d Street) 
Dr. J. Max Barber 1st Vice President Secretary 
Mrs. S. W. Layten 2d Vice President Mr. R. R. Porter Bradford Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Mr. George H. White Miss Frances Bartholomew 
Rev. Richard R. Wright, Jr. Miss Addie W. Dickerson 
Airs. Mary Murdah Mr. Ellwood Heacock 
Mr. James G. Davis Dr. J. Max Barber 
Rabbi Eli Mayer Mrs. S. W. Layten 
Bishop J. S. Caldwell Mr. Isadore Martin 
Rev. E. W. Moore Mr. R. R. Porter Bradford 
PITTSBURGH, PA. 
Mr. William M. Randolph President Miss Jennie Proctor (600 5th Ave.) Secretary 
Dr. John W. Brown Vice President Mr. John T. Writt Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Rabbi Rudolph I. Coffee Rev. C. H. Trusty Rev. P. A. Scott 
Dr. James A. Page Rev. C. A. McGee Mr. Hezikiah Anderson 
Mrs. Rebecca Aldridge Rev. G. B. Howard Mr. S. R. Morsell TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 305 
PORTLAND, ORE. 
Dr. J. A. Merriman President 
Mr. B. A. Day Vice President 
Mrs. E. D. Cannady (520 East 26th Street) 
Secretary 
Mr. H. J. Dickens Asst. Rec. Secretary 
Mr. T. S. Bell Treasurer 
Mr. E. J. Minor Special Reporter 
Mr. E. G. Dickens 
Executive Committee 
Mr. E. D. Cannady Mr. Joseph Miller 
PROVIDENCE, R. I. 
Rev. J. J. Robinson President Miss Reberta J. Dunbar (58 Winter Street) 
Rev. Zechariah Harrison Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Board 
Mr. John C. Minkins Mr. M. Williams Mr. William P. Freeman 
Rev. C. C. Alleyne Mr. William Heathman Dr. A. L. Jackson 
Mr. Frederick Carter Mr. James Dixon Mr. R. L. Smith 
The most important work accomplished by this branch was its successful protest against 
color discrimination in the Y. M. C. A. Cooperating with the branch in this matter were 
the Interdenominational Ministers Alliance, the Baptist Ministers Union and many prominent men and women. 
QUINCY, ILL. 
Dr. H. J. Nichols President Mrs. Florence E. Cook (522 Maple Street) 
Mr. A. H. Brown Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mrs. F. G. Munday Mrs. Susan Humphrey Mr. Henry Carr 
Mrs. F. P. Monroe Mr. Wilson Cobb Mr. Chas. Vaughn 
•ST. LOUIS, MO. 
Mr. Gustavus Tuckerman President 
Mr. Chas. A. Pitman 1st Vice President 
Mr. Albert Burgess 2d Vice President 
Mr. Chas. H. Brown Treasurer 
Mrs. Henry A. Smith (2343 Market Street) 
Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. Chas. A. Pitman, Chairman Dr. W. P. Curtis 
Mrs. Percival Chubb Mr. Roger N. Baldwin 
Dr. T. A. Curtis Prof. J. L. Usher 
Miss Jessie L. Moller Mr. David E. Gordon 
Dr. John W. Day 
St. Louis is fighting a segregation ordinance through a local committee of thirty. 
•ST. PAUL, MINN. 
Hon. J. A. Burnquist President Mrs. L. A. Turner (386 North St. Albans) 
Secretary 
Dr. Val Do Turner Vice President Mr. Louis Nash Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Dr. Val Do Turner, Chairman Mr. O. C. Hall 
Mr. Hugh F. Halbert Mr. J. H. Lewis 
Dr Parley P. Womer Judge Grier M. Orr 
Rabbi Rypins Mrs. Bryant 
Mrs T. H. Lyles
 Mr
- George W. Jones 
Mr Jose H. Sherwood Mr. J. Q. Adams 
Mr. W. T. Francis
 Mr
- O. D. Howard 
St Paul has checked discrimination in a private circulating library and in a school of 
shorthand. It has also prevented the introduction of an anti-intermarriage bill into the 
legislature. 306 TH E CRISIS 
* SEATTLE, WASH . 
Mrs. Letitia A. Graves President Mr. W. L. 
Mr. G. W. Jones Vice President 
Mrs. Zoe Young Recording Secretary Mr. G. O. 
Executive Committee 
Mr. G. W. Thompson Mr. G. W. Jones 
Mr. H. R. Cayton Mr. B. F. Tutt 
Presto (1818 30th Avenue) 
Corresponding Secretary 
Allen Treasurer 
Mr. A. R. Black 
Mr. S. H. Stone 
* SHREVEPORT, LA. 
Mr. P. L. Blackman President Mr. A. W. Hill (918 Pierre Avenue) 
Secretary 
Mr. J. D. Demery Vice* President Mrs. Lizzie Wills Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Mr. T. M. Brown Mr. A. B. Williams Mr. S. J. Law 
Mr. A. Mitchell Mr. A. W. Carroll 
* TACOMA , WASH . 
Mr. S. A. Johnson President Mrs. T. J. Saddler (1405 South Yakima Ave.) 
Secretary 
Mr. D. H. Parker Vice President Mrs. Lottie Brown Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Mrs. Nettie J. Asberry Mr. S. D. Pierre Mr. C. A. Graves 
Mrs. Rebecca Parker Mr. Silvester Ray Mr. Edwin Moore 
Tacoma has held several distinctive meetings. The branch presented a loving cup to 
Senator Wesley L. Jones for his work in the interest of colored people in Congress. 
TALLADEGA, ALA. 
Dr. E. H. Jones Vice President Mr. E. E. Lightner (Talladega College) 
Mr. Hampton Taylor Treasurer Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Mr. E. H. Jones Dr. F. W. Terry Mr. V. A. Brockman 
Dr. J. P. Barton Rev. W. L. Boyd Rev. A. T. Clark 
TOPEKA, KAN. 
Hon. Arthur Capper.. President Mrs. Julia B. Roundtree (1317 Van Buren 
Rev. Gilbert Walker Treasurer Street) Secretary 
Executive Committee 
Prof. Nathaniel Sawyer, Chairman Rev. Chas. G. Fishback 
Mr. Patrick H. Coney Dr. O. A. Taylor 
Mr. James H. Guy Mr. A. G. Hagan 
TRENTON, N. J. 
Rev. John A. White President 
Mr. Nathan Hovington Vice President 
Mr. J. Williams Treasurer 
Mr. T. Edward Kinney (102 Bellevue Avenue) 
Secretary 
Rev. R. M. Johnson Chaplain 
Executive Committee 
Dr. Solomon Porter Hood, Chairman Dr. Howard Bundv 
Rev. L. O. Jones Rev. L. C. Hurdle 
Prof. G. W. Clark Mr. John Lewis 
Mr. Philip Logan Mr. William H. Salters 
Mr. D. J. Graham Mr. John Herbert TH E FIFTH ANNUA L REPORT 307 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY, VA. 
Rev. E. D. Caffee President Mr. N. D. Oyerinde. .Corresponding Secretary 
Mr. J. M. Ellison Vice President 
Mr. A. C. Webb Recording Secretary Mr. I. T. D. Ross Treasurer 
WILMINGTON, DEL. 
Rev. J. B. St. Felix Isaacs President Dr. George J. Sykes (208 East 10th Street) 
Secretary 
Mrs. John H. Woodlen Vice President Rev. B. T. Moore Treasurer 
Executive Committee 
Mrs. William Bancroft Mrs. Alice M. Dunbar Mrs. Susan G. Lones 
Rev. J. B. St. Felix Isaacs Miss Edwina B. Kruse Mr. Lewis A. Redding 
Rev. W . H. Hoxter Miss Alice G. Baldwin Rev. J. A. T. Fouse 
PROSPECTIVE B RANCHE S 
Most of the following are to be chartered in the near future: 
Albuquerque, N. Mex. Dayton, Ohio. Springfield, Ill. 
Atlantic City, N. J. Des Moines, Iowa. Springfield, Ohio. 
Baltimore County, Md. Jacksonville, Ill. Saint Joseph, Mo. 
Cincinnati, Ohio. New Orleans, La. Toledo, Ohio. 
Columbus, Ohio. Peoria, Ill. 
FEBRUARY 12, 1915. MAR Y CHILD S NERNEY , Secretary. 
SPINGARN MEDA L 
The first Spingarn Medal was awarded at the annual meeting on February 
12, 1915, at Ethical Culture Hall, New York City, by Governor Whitman, to Prof. 
Ernest Everett Just, head of the Department of Physiology in Howard University 
Medical School. Prof. Just was chosen from a long list of candidates in many 
fields including education, invention, literature, medicine, political life, business 
and social work. He was recommended by men of the highest standing in boLh 
races for his recent research work and for the work he has done in raising the 
standards of medical education for his own race. The committee making thp 
award were: Bishop John Hurst, Chairman; ex-President William Howard Taft, 
Mr. John Hope, Dr. James H. Dillard, Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard. 
N. A. A. C. P. Officers 
National President 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston 
Vice Presidents 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Washington 
Rev. Garnett R. Waller, Springfield 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
Dr. J. E. Spingarn, New York 
Director of Publications and Research 
Dr. W. E. B. DuBois, New York 
Treasurer 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York 
Secretary 
Miss Mary Childs Nerney, New York 
Board of Directors 
Terms expire 1916 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New Haven 
Mr. Thomas Ewing, Jr., New York 
Mr. Paul Kcnnaday, New York 
Mr. Joseph Prince Loud, Boston 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., New York 
Dr. W. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia 
Mr. Chas H. Studin, New York 
Rev. G. R. Waller, Springfield, Mass. 
Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Boston 308 TH E CRISIS 
Terms expire 1917 
Miss Jane Addams, Chicago Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, New York 
Dr. C. E. Bentley, Chicago Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York 
Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, New York Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn 
Rev. W. H. Brooks, New York Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York 
Dr. F. N. Cardozo, Baltimore Dr. John G. Underhill, New York 
Terms expire 1918 
Prof. George William Cook, Washington Dr. J. E. Spingarn, New York 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Washington Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York 
Dr. V. Morton Jones, Brooklyn Dr. O. M. Waller, Brooklyn 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York Mr. William English Walling, New York 
STANDIN G COMMITTEES 
Legal Redress and Legislative 
Mr. Arthur B. Spingarn, Chairman Mr. Chas. H. Studin 
Mr. Melville Cane Mr. D. Macon Webster 
Mr. Philip Thorne Mr. Charles S. Boston 
Membership 
Mrs. Alice Wiley Seay, Chairman Dr. V. Morton Jones 
Mrs. Lottie M. Cooper Mr. Royal Freeman Nash 
Miss Bertha Johnston Mr. T. P. Moseley 
Miss Caroline M. Dexter Mr. N. B. Dodson 
Miss Nina E. Wilson Mr. R. M. Maroney 
Budget 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, Chairman Dr. W . E. B. Du Bois 
Miss Mary White Ovington Miss Mary Childs Nerney 
Mrs. Francis P. Barlow 
Publications 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, Chairman Prof. John Dewey 
Mr. William English Walling Dr. John Haynes Holmes 
Dr. Walter E. Weyl Mr. Paul Kennaday 
Branches 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Chairman Dr. J. E. Spingarn 
Mr. Charles H. Studin 
Crisis 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Chairman Dr. J. E. Spingarn 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois Mr. Paul Kennaday 
Advisory Committee 
Miss Maria Baldwin, Boston, Mass. Dr. Henry Moskowitz. New York 
Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, Ill. Dr. N. F. Mossell, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia, Pa. Miss Leonora O'Reilly, New York 
Hon. William S. Bennet, New York Hon. Thomas M. Osborne, Auburn, N. Y. 
Miss S. P. Breckenridge, Chicago, Ill. Mr. William Pickens, Talladega, Ala. 
Dr. W. L. Bulkley, New York Hon. Albert E. Pillsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, Brookline, Mass. Mr. Julius Rosenwald, Chicago, Ill. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass. Pres. W. S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, Ohio. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa. Mr. Jacob H. Schiff, New York 
Mr. Charles W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. Prof. E. R. A. Seligman, New York 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford, Washington, D. C. Hon. Harry C. Smith, Cleveland, Ohio 
Prof. John Dewey, New York Mrs. Anna Garlin Spencer, New York 
Dr. John Lovejoy Elliot, New York Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington, D. C. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Mass. Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw, Washington, D. C. Pres. Chas. T. Thwing, Cleveland, Ohio 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill, Cheyney, Pa. Mr. William Munroe Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Hamilton Holt, New York Mrs. Henry Villard, New York 
Pres. John Hope, Atlanta, Ga. Rev. J. Milton Waldron, Washington, D. C. 
Miss Maud R. Ingersoll, New York Mr. D. Macon Webster, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Rev. Harvey Johnson, Baltimore, Md. Dr. Walter E. Weyl, New York 
Pres. H. C. King, Oberlin, Ohio Mr. George E. Wibecan, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Washington, D. C. Dr. Stephen S. Wise, New York 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston, Mass. Mrs. Celia Parker Woolley, Chicago, Ill. 
Prof. L. B. Moore, Washington, D. C. Rev. R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. James F. Morton, Jr., New York POEMS 309 
WILLIAM STANLEY BRAITHWAITE 
SCINTILLA 
I kissed a kiss in youth 
Upon a dead man's brow; 
And that was long ago,— 
And I'm a grown man now. 
It's lain there in the dust, 
Thirty years and more;— 
My lips that set a light 
At a dead man's door. 
m 
LAUGHING IT OUT 
He had a whim, and laughed it out 
Upon the exit of a chance; 
He floundered in a sea of doubt— 
If life was real—or just romance. 
Sometimes upon his brow would come 
A little pucker of defiance; 
He totalled in a word the sum 
If life was real—or just romance. 
And then a hearty laugh would break, 
A reasoning shrug of shoulder; 
And we would from his fancy take 
A faith in death which made life bolder 310 TH E 
Th e 
Immediate Program 
of the 
American Negro 
By W . E. B. DUBOIS 
TH E immediate program of the American Negro means nothing unless it 
is mediate to his great ideal and the ultimate ends of his development. We 
need not waste time by seeking to deceive our enemies into thinking that we 
are going to be content with a half loaf, 
or by being willing to lull our friends 
into a false sense of our indifference and 
present satisfaction. 
The American Negro demands equality—political equality, industrial equality and social equality; and he is never 
going to rest satisfied with anything less. 
He demands this in no spirit of braggadocio and with no obsequious envy of 
others, but as an absolute measure of 
self-defense and the only one that will 
assure to the darker races their ultimate 
survival on earth. 
Only in a demand and a persistent 
demand for essential equality in the 
modern realm of human culture can any 
people show a real pride of race and a 
decent self-respect. For any group, nation or race to admit for a moment the 
present monstrous demand of the white 
race to be the inheritors of the earth, 
the arbiters of mankind and the sole 
owners of a heritage of culture which 
they did not create, nor even improve 
to any greater extent than the other great 
division of men—to admit such pretense 
for a moment is for the race to write 
itself down immediately as indisputably 
inferior in judgment, knowledge and 
common sense. 
The equality in political, industrial 
and social life which modern men must 
CRISIS 
have in order to live, is not to be confounded with sameness. On the contrary, in our case, it is rather insistence 
upon the right of diversity ;—upon the 
right of a human being to be a man even 
if he does not wear the same cut of vest, 
the same curl of hair or the same color 
of skin. Human equality does not even 
entail, as is sometimes said, absolute 
equality of opportunity ; for certainly the 
natural inequalities of inherent genius 
and varying gift make this a dubious 
phase. But there is a more and more 
clearly recognized minimum of opportunity and maximum of freedom to be, 
to move and to think, which the modern 
world denies to no being which it recognizes as a real man. 
These involve both negative and positive sides. They call for freedom on the 
one hand and power on the other. The 
Negro must have political freedom; 
taxation without representation is tyranny. American Negroes of to-day are 
ruled by tyrants who take what they 
please in taxes and give what they please 
in law and administration, in justice and 
in injustice; and the great mass of black 
people must stand helpless and voiceless 
before a condition which has time and 
time again caused other peoples to fight 
and die. 
The Negro must have industrial freedom. Between the peonage of the rural TH E IMMEDIATE PROGRAM 31 1 
South, the oppression of shrewd capitalists and the jealousy of certain trade 
unions, the Negro laborer is the most exploited class in the country, giving more 
hard toil for less money than any other 
American, and have less voice in the 
conditions of his labor. 
In social intercourse every effort is 
being made to-day from the President of 
the United States and the so-called 
Church of Christ down to saloons and 
boot-blacks to segregate, strangle and 
spiritually starve Negroes so as to give 
them the least possible chance to know 
and share civilization. 
These shackles must go. But that is 
but the beginning. The Negro must 
have power; the power of men, the right 
to do, to know, to feel and to express 
that knowledge, action and spiritual 
gift. He must not simply be free from 
the political tyranny of white folk, he 
must have the right to vote and to rule 
over the citizens, white and black, to the 
extent of his proven foresight and ability. He must have a voice in the new 
industrial democracy which is building 
and the power to see to it that his children are not in the next generation 
trained to be the mudsills of society. He 
must have the right to social intercourse 
with his fellows. There was a time in 
the atomic individualistic group when 
"social intercourse" meant merely calls 
and tea-parties; to-day social intercourse 
means theatres, lectures, organizations, 
churches, clubs, excursions, travel, hotels,—it means in short Life ; to bar a 
group from such methods of thinking, 
living and doing is to bar them from the 
world and bid them create a new world; 
—a task to which no single group is today equal; it is to crucify them and 
taunt them with not being able to live. 
What now are the practical steps 
which must be taken to accomplish these 
ends ? 
First of all before taking steps the 
wise man knows the object and end of 
his journey. There are those who would 
advise the black man to pay little or no 
attention to where he is going so long as 
he keeps moving. They assume that 
God or his vice-gerent the White Man 
will attend to the steering. This is arrant nonsense. The feet of those that 
aimlessly wander land as often in hell 
as in heaven. Conscious self-realization 
and self-direction is the watchword of 
modern man, and the first article in the 
program of any group that will survive 
must be the great aim, equality and 
power among men. 
The practical steps to this are clear. 
First we must fight obstructions; by continual and increasing effort we must first 
make American courts either build up a 
body of decisions which will protect the 
plain legal rights of American citizens 
or else make them tear down the civil 
and political rights of all citizens in 
order to oppress a few. Either result 
will bring justice in the end. It is lots of 
fun and most ingenious just now for 
courts to twist law so as to say I shall 
not live here or vote there, or marry the 
woman who wishes to marry me. But 
when to-morrow these decisions throttle 
all freedom and overthrow the foundation of democracy and decency, there is 
going to be some judicial house cleaning. 
We must secondly seek in legislature 
and congress remedial legislation; national aid to public school education, the 
removal of all legal discriminations 
based simply on race and color, and 
those marriage laws passed to make the 
seduction of black girls easy and without legal penalty. 
Thrid the human contact of human beings must be increased ; the policy which 
brings into sympathetic touch and understanding, men and women, rich and 
poor, capitalist and laborer, Asiatic and 
European, must bring into closer contact and mutual knowledge the white 
and black people of this land. It is the 
most frightful indictment of a country 
which dares to call itself civilized that 
it has allowed itself to drift into a state 
of ignorance where ten million people 
are coming to believe that all white people are liars and thieves, and the whites 
in turn to believe that the chief industry 
of Negroes is raping white women. 
Fourth only the publication of the 
truth repeatedly and incisively and uncompromisingly can secure that change 
in public opinion which will correct these 
awful lies. TH E CRISIS, our record of 
the darker races, must have a circulation 
not of 35,000 chiefly among colored folk 312 TH E CRISIS 
but of at least 250,000 among all men 
who believe in men. It must not be a 
namby-pamby box of salve, but a voice 
that thunders fact and is more anxious 
to be true than pleasing. There should 
be a campaign of tract distribution— 
short well written facts and arguments 
—rained over this land by millions of 
copies, particularly in the South, where 
the white people know less about the 
Negro than in any other part of the 
civilized world. The press should be 
utilized-— the 400 Negro weeklies, the 
great dailies and eventually the magazines, when we get magazine editors who 
will lead public opinion instead of following afar with resonant brays. Lectures, lantern-slides and moving pictures, 
co-operating with a bureau of information and eventually becoming a Negro 
encyclopedia, all these are efforts along 
the line of making human beings realize 
that Negroes are human. 
Such is the program of work against 
obstructions. Let us now turn to constructive effort. This may be summed 
up under (1 ) economic co-operation (2 ) 
a revival of art and literature (3 ) political action (4) education and (5 ) organization. 
Under economic co-operation we must 
strive to spread the idea among colored 
people that the accumulation of wealth 
is for social rather than individual ends. 
We must avoid, in the advancement of 
the Negro race, the mistakes of ruthless 
exploitation which have marked modern 
economic history. To this end we must 
seek not simply home ownership, small 
landholding and saving accounts, but 
also all forms of co-operation, both in 
production and distribution, profit sharing, building and loan associations, systematic charity for definite, practical 
ends, systematic migration from mob 
rule and robbery, to freedom and enfranchisement, the emancipation of 
women and the abolition of child labor. 
In art and literature we should try 
to loose the tremendous emotional 
wealth of the Negro and the dramatic 
strength of his problems through writing, the stage, pageantry and other 
forms of art. W e should resurrect forgotten ancient Negro art and history, 
and we should set the black man before 
the world as both a creative artist and a 
strong subject for artistic treatment. 
In political action we should organize 
the votes of Negroes in such congressional districts as have any number of 
Negro voters. W e should systematically 
interrogate candidates on matters vital 
to Negro freedom and uplift. We 
should train colored voters to reject the 
bribe of office and to accept only decent 
legal enactments both for their own uplift and for the uplift of laboring classes 
of all races and both sexes. 
In education we must seek to give 
colored children free public school training. W e must watch with grave suspicion the attempt of those who, under 
the guise of vocational training, would 
fasten ignorance and menial service on 
the Negro for another generation. Our 
children must not in large numbers, be 
forced into the servant class; for menial 
service is still, in the main, little more 
than an antiquated survival of impossible conditions. It has always been as 
statistics show, a main cause of bastardy . 
and prostitution and despite its many 
marvelous exceptions it will never come 
to the light of decency and honor until 
the house servant becomes the Servant 
in the House. It is our duty then, not 
drastically but persistently, to seek out 
colored children of ability and genius, 
to open up to them broader, industrial 
opportunity and above all, to find that 
Talented Tenth and encourage it by the 
best and most exhaustive training in 
order to supply the Negro race and the 
world with leaders, thinkers and artists. 
For the accomplishment of all these 
ends we must organize. Organization 
among us already has gone far but it 
must go much further and higher. Organization is sacrifice. It is sacrifice of 
opinions, of time, of work and of money, 
but it is, after all, the cheapest way of 
buying the most priceless of gifts—freedom and efficiency. I thank God that 
most of the money that supports the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People comes from 
black hands; a still larger proportion 
must so come, and we must not only support but control this and similar organizations and hold them unwaveringly to 
our objects, our aims and our ideals. Mr. Taylor's 
Funeral 
By Charles W. Chesnutt 
MR. David Taylor had been for many 
years chief steward, during the 
season of navigation, upon a steamboat 
running between Groveland and Buffalo, 
on one of the Great Lakes. The salary 
and perquisites made the place a renumerative one, and Mr . Taylor had 
saved considerable money. Durin g the 
winter time he ran a coal yard, where he 
supplied poor people with coal in small 
quantities at a large profit. He invested 
his savings in real estate, and in the 
course of time became the owner of a 
row of small houses on a side street in 
Groveland, as well as of a larger house 
on the corner of the adjacent main street. 
Mr . Taylo r was a stout mulatto, with 
curly hair and a short gray mustache. 
He had been a little wil d in his youth, 
but had settled down into a steady old 
bachelor, in which state he remained until he was past forty-five, when he 
surprised his friends by marrying a 
young wife and taking her to live with 
him in the corner house. 
Miss Lul a Sampson was a very personable young woman, of not more than 
twenty-two or twenty-three. She had 
not been without other admirers; but 
Mr . Taylor's solid attractions had more 
than counter-balanced the advantages of 
these others in the way of youth and 
sprightliness. Fo r Miss Sampson, while 
not without her sentimental side, had a 
practical vein as well, and concluded that 
on the whole it would be better to be a 
rich old man's darling than a poor young 
man's slave. 
They lived together very comfortably 
in the corner house, and Mrs. Taylor 
enjoyed to the full such advantages as 
regular rents and savings-bank dividends 
carried in their train. Mr . Taylor had 
been for many years a leading member 
of the Jerusalem Methodist Church, in 
which he had at various times acted as 
class-leader, trustee and deacon, and of 
which he had been at all times the financial backer and manager. Mrs. Taylor 
had been brought up, so to speak, in the 
Mt. Horeb Baptist Church, and had at 
one time sung in the choir; but after her 
marriage she very dutifully attended service with her husband, only visiting the 
Baptist church on special occasions, such 
as weddings or funerals or other events 
of general public interest. 
One day in May , 1900, a month or 
more after the opening of navigation in 
the Spring, Mr . Taylor left Groveland on 
the steamer Mather for Buffalo, on one 
of her regular semi-weekly trips to that 
port. Whe n the steamer returned 
several days later without him, his wife 
and friends felt some concern at his nonappearance, as no message had been received from him in the meantime. 
Inquiry on the steamer merely brought 
out the fact that Taylor had not been on 
hand when the boat was ready to leave 
port, and that she had sailed without 
him; in fact he had not been missed until 
the Mather was some miles out. 
Whe n several days more elapsed without news from the absent man, his wife's 
uneasiness became a well-defined alarm. 
She could account for his absence on no 
hypothesis except that some harm had 
befallen him. An d upon reading an item 
in a newspaper, about a week after Mr . 314 TH E CRISIS 
Taylor's disappearance, to the effect that 
the body of a middle-aged mulatto had 
been found floating in Buffalo harbor, 
she divined at once that her husband had 
been the victim of accident, or foul play, 
and that it was his body that had been 
recovered. With a promptitude born of 
sincere regret and wifely sorrow, she 
requested the company of Deacon 
Larkins, the intimate personal friend and 
class-leader of her husband, and with 
him took the train for Buffalo. Arriving 
there they found the body at an undertaking establishment. It had evidently 
been in the water several days, and the 
features were somewhat disfigured, but 
nevertheless Mrs. Taylor had no difficulty in identifying the body as that of 
her late husband. She had the remains 
prepared for shipment, and the day after 
her arrival at Buffalo accompanied them 
back to Groveland. She had telegraphed 
for a hearse to be at the depot, and when 
she saw the coffin placed in it she took a 
carriage with Deacon Larkins and drove 
to her home. 
"Brother Larkins," she said, in griefstricken accents, as she thought of her 
good friend and husband and of the 
narrow cell in which he must soon be 
laid, "I wish you would t-t-take charge 
of the arrangements for the f-f-funeral. 
I know my dear dead David loved you, 
and would have wished you to attend to 
it." 
"I shall be glad to, Sister Taylor. It is 
the last service I can perform for my 
dear friend and brother. His loss will 
be a sad blow to the church, and to us 
all." 
In pursuance of his instructions 
Deacon Larkins engaged an undertaker, 
inserted in the newspapers a notice 
announcing the date of the funeral, requested six of the intimate friends of the 
deceased to act as pall-bearers, and telegraphed the pastor of the Methodist 
Church, who was out of town, to be on 
hand on Wednesday, at 2 o'clock in the 
afternoon, to conduct the services and 
preach the funeral sermon. 
Several friends of the family called on 
Mrs. Taylor during the day preceding 
the funeral, among them the Reverend 
Alonzo Brown, pastor of the Mt. Horeb 
Baptist Church. Mr. Brown was a 
youngish man, apparently not more than 
thirty, and had himself suffered a bereavement several years before, in the 
loss of a wife to whom he bad made a 
model husband, so excellent a husband" 
indeed that more than one lady had envied his wife when living, and when she 
died, had thought that her successor 
would be indeed a fortunate woman. In 
addition to possessing these admirable 
domestic qualities the Reverend Alonzo 
was a very handsome man, of lightbrown complexion, and with large and 
expressive black eyes and very glossy 
curly hair. Indeed, Mrs. Taylor herself had several times thought that if an 
overruling Providence in its inscrutable 
wisdom should see fit to remove her dear 
David from his earthly career while she 
was yet a young woman—which was not 
at all unlikely, since he was twenty-five 
years her senior—there was no man of 
her acquaintance with whom she could 
more willingly spend the remainder of 
her days and the money her good David 
would leave her, than the Reverend 
Alonzo Brown. Of course this had been 
only one of the vague day dreams of a 
lively imagination ; but it is not surprising, when the central figure in this vision 
called on her upon the heels of the very 
event upon which the day-dreams had 
been predicated, that the idea should 
penetrate even the veil of grief that surrounded her, and assume something of 
the nature of a definite probability. 
Mr. Brown was a man of tact, and 
consoled the widow very beautifully in 
her bereavement. 
"Yes, Sister Taylor," he said, pressing 
her hand with soothing friendliness, 
"your loss is indeed great, for your husband was a man of whom any woman 
might have been proud. You displayed 
excellent taste and judgment, too, Sister 
Taylor, in selecting as your companion a 
man of steady habits and settled character, who could leave you suitably provided for during the rest of your life. 
The widow sobbed at the magnitude 
of her loss, but was not unmindful of the 
compliment to her own taste and 
judgment. • 
"But the saddest feature about our 
dear brother's taking off is not your 
loss;" he said, again pressing her hand MR. TAYLOR'S FUNERAL 315 
consolingly, "it is what he himself has 
lost—the companionship of one who 
made his household a model for his 
friends to imitate, and the despair of 
those who could not hope to be so fortunate. It is true," he added, with proper 
professional consistency, "that he has 
gone to his reward; but I am sure he 
would willingly have waited for it a few 
years longer in this terrestrial paradise." 
The minister, as he said this, looked 
around appreciatively at the very comfortable room in which they sat. There 
was handsome paper on the walls, a 
bright red carpet on the floor, lace curtains at the windows, a piano, a wellfilled book-case,—and in fact all the evidences of solid prosperity, based on 
landed proprietorship. And by his side 
too, sat the weeping young widow, to 
whom tears and weeds were by no means 
unbecoming. 
While he had been speaking an idea 
had occurred to Mrs. Taylor. She was 
before her marriage a member of his 
church. The pastor of the Methodist 
church, she had learned since her return 
from Buffalo, was out of town, in attendance on the general conference of 
his denomination in session at New 
York. It would be a very nice thing 
indeed to have Mr. Brown preach the 
funeral sermon. 
"Brother Brown," she said, on the 
impulse of the moment, "I want you to 
do me a favor. Will you preach my 
dear David's funeral sermon?" 
He reflected a moment. It was an opportunity to secure that influence which 
would enable him to lead back into his 
fold this very desirable sheep. 
"If you don't think it will be taken 
amiss by his own church," he answered, 
"it would give me great pleasure to perform the last sad rites over our departed 
friend." 
"There will be no trouble about that," 
she replied. "Elder Johnson has gone 
to general conference, and there is no 
one else whom I would prefer to yourself. I ask it as a personal favor." 
"It shall be done at any cost," he said 
determinedly, again pressing her hand in 
farewell. 
"And if you will ask the choir to sing, 
I shall be under still greater obligations," 
she said. "They are all my friends, and 
I have often joined with them on similar 
occasions, before I was married, and I'm 
sure you would prefer them." 
About an hour after Mr. Brown went 
away, Deacon Larkins called to make a 
final report of the arrangements he had 
made. 
"I've requested several of the brethren to act as pallbearers," he said, naming them, "and have asked the choir to 
furnish the music. Elder Johnson telegraphed this afternoon that he would be 
here in time to preach the sermon. He 
has already started, and will get here by 
half-past one, and come right up from 
the depot." 
Mrs. Taylor scented trouble. "But I 
thought he couldn't come, and I've invited Elder Brown to preach the sermon," she said. 
Deacon Larkins looked annoyed. 
"There'll be trouble," he said. "You 
asked me to make arrangements and I 
acted accordingly." 
"What can we do about it ?" she asked 
anxiously. 
"Don't ask me," he said. "I'm not responsible for the difficulty." 
"But you can help me," she said. "I 
see no way out of it but to explain the 
situation to Elder Brown and ask him to 
retire. Please do that for me." 
Deacon Larkins grumbled a little and 
went away, intending to do as requested. 
But the more he thought about the matter the more displeased he felt at the 
widow's action. She had not only been 
guilty of disrespect to him, in asking a 
minister to conduct the services without 
consulting the man in whose charge she 
had placed the arrangements, but she 
had committed the far more serious offense of slighting the Methodist church. 
He could hardly think of a graver 
breach of propriety than to ask the minister of a rival denomination to officiate 
at this funeral. If it had been some obscure member of the congregation the 
matter would have been of less consequence; but to request the Baptist minister to preach Brother David's funeral 
sermon was something like asking Martin Luther to assist at the Pope's interment. The more Deacon Larkins thought 
of it the less he liked it; and finally he 316 THE CRISIS 
concluded that he would simply wash his 
hands of the entire business—if the 
widow wanted to call off Elder Brown 
she would have to do it herself. 
He wrote a note to this effect and sent 
it by his youngest son, a lad of ten, with 
instructions to deliver it to Mrs. Taylor. 
The boy met a companion and went off 
to play, and lost the note. His father 
was away when he got back home. In 
the meantime the boy had forgotten 
about the note, and left his father to infer that it had been delivered. 
About a quarter of two on the day 
of the funeral the friends began to arrive. The undertaker in charge seated 
them. When the Baptist choir came it 
was shown to the place provided beforehand for the singers. When a few minutes later the Methodist choir arrived 
and stated what their part in the service 
was to be, the undertaker, supposing 
they were an addition to the number already on hand, gave them the seats nearest those occupied by the Baptist choir. 
There was some surprise apparent, but 
for a while nothing was said, the members of the two bodies confining themselves to looks not altogether friendly. 
Some of them thought it peculiar that, 
if the two choirs had been asked to cooperate, there had been no notice given 
(To be 
and no opportunity to practice together; 
but all awaited for the coming of the officiating minister to solve the difficulty. 
Meantime the friends of the family continued to arrive, until the room where 
the remains were placed was filled to 
overflowing, and there were people 
standing in the hall and seated in other 
rooms from which they would be able 
to see or hear very little of the exercises. 
At just five minutes to two a livery 
carriage drove up to the gate, and deposited on the pavement a tall dark man, 
wearing a silk hat, a high vest, and a 
coat of clerical cut—it was Elder Johnson, of the Jerusalem Methodist Church. 
The elder paid the driver his fee, and 
went in at the front gate. At the same 
moment the pastor of the Baptist Church 
came in at the side gate and drew near 
the front door. The two preachers met 
on the porch, and bowed to one another 
stiffly. The undertaker's assistant came 
forward and took their hats. 
"Which of you gentlemen is to conduct the service?" asked the undertaker, 
with a professionally modulated voice. 
"I shall conduct the service,'' answered 
Elder Josnson in a matter-of-fact tone. 
"I am to conduct the service," said 
Mr. Brown firmly, in the same breath. 
continued.) 
Obsequiousness begets friends; truth, 
hatred.— Terence. 
College, Baltimore, Md. c 
I should be glad personally to listen to 
Dr. of whom I have some knowledge and I think it would be a very suitable thing for the college to hear him 
speak, but Baltimore is not yet educated 
up to that point and until it is it would 
only do harm instead of good for me to 
comply with your request. [From a 
white college president who had been 
offered a colored lecturer.] 
The Hartman Furniture and Carpet 
Company, 400 Wentworth Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, is sending out circulars for 
mail orders. It asks its customers to 
"please answer the questions below." 
One question is "State whether white or 
colored." We wonder why? 
M. L. Matlock, of Cleveland, writes us 
that Collier's Weekly will not accept 
colored people on their installment plan 
which they are pushing in that city. 
M. Gehrts relates an amusing incident 
in Togoland, West Africa. A little 
(Continued on page 318) 
BURDEN THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 317 
The Proper Amount of Life Insurance 
You Should Have 
Nearly every colored man in America carries a weekly policy. Fully two-thirds 
of the men over 21 are members of some secret order whose death benefits arc from 
$50.00 to $300.00. There are a very few hundred colored men who have over $5,000 
life insurance in legal reserve life insurance companies. 
In fact, one insurance publication said, "The amount of life insurance carried by 
Negroes is so negligible that it is left out of all consideration in this book." This, 
too, despite the fact that the total amount of insurance carried in America amounts 
to Billions of Dollars, and every year the Life Insurance Companies of America 
pay to the heirs of deceased Americans Millions of Dollars in good current United 
States Money. 
Even the average white man who dies leaves his family in better condition. 
Whatever else he has neglected he has been thoughtful of his life insurance. On 
the other hand, many well-to-do colored men die and leave their families poorer 
than when they lived. The average white man's life insurance is $2,500. The 
average colored man's is $350.00. The white man begins to buy a home for 
$3,000.00: he protects that obligation by taking out the amount of life insurance 
so that if he dies before he finishes payment, his family will not lose the place nor 
will they be forced to sacrifice everything to complete payment on that home. The 
usual colored man begins to buy a home and immediately declares he is unable to 
carry' any life insurance. Then when the interest has accumulated on his notes 
and it is really a job for him to pay these notes with all his efforts while he lives, 
he dies and leaves his family to pay them as best they can with no means left 
behind with which to pay. 
Somebody remarked that "there are very few dead rich Negroes." You know 
estates crumble. You know how surprised you have been when So-and-so died 
and left nothing but a lot of debts. Everybody thought he was rich while be lived. 
His family lived and dressed well. Apparently, he had lots of money and property. 
When he died it took all his money and property to pay his debts. He failed to 
protect his estate -with Life Insurance. He might have kept on being prosperous 
if he had lived, but he failed to leave anything in his place at death. A few thousand dollars in immediate cash such as a life insurance policy provides would have 
saved to his wife and family the estate of many a man who was rated as rich 
while he lived. 
You know of such a case in your own community. Have you ever stopped and 
seriously thought of your own affairs? Are you as well protected as you should 
be? Today you are sound and well. Tomorrow—accidents are frequent and deadly. 
How would your affairs look if put under the microscope of the administrator or 
receiver? Geo. W. Vanderbilt insured his life for a Million Dollars when he first 
began building his famous Biltmore estate. He was a rich man but he wanted if 
he died that there should be no lack of funds to complete the project. The 
Great Boston Store of Chicago is the result of the Half Million Charles 
Netcher left in life insurance. 
You need every dollar in life insurance you can carry. We can protect you 
no matter where you live in amounts from $250.00 to $5,000.00. The cost 
is negligible compared with the protection. Write today to 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.01 
Over One Million and a Quarter Insurance in Force 
Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
HEMA N E. PERRY, President 
HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
.' Please 
send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance . 
Amoun t $. . . . 
Sex 
Age 
.•' Weight 
Occupatio n 
Name 
Address 
(C. Apr. 1915) 318 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
I n 
191 4 
And Every Year Since 
Speed an d Accuracy 
Contests began the 
Underwood 
HA S HEL D FIRST PLAC E 
"The Machine You Will Eventually Buy" 
UNDERWOO D BUILDING NE W YOR K 
native child was very much afraid of the 
first white woman that he saw because 
she was "so ugly." 
Miss Gehrts asked the boy "Am I 
really and truly ugly?" 
"Really and truly you are, Miss," he 
replied with childish frankness. "But," 
he added, "Yo u cannot help that, for the 
good God made you so, did He not? We 
cannot all be black and beautiful!" 
(["N o form of government can be based 
on systematic injustice. The election of 
Congressmen is a national not a local 
matter. If it be a race question, is there 
any reason why the white man in the 
South should have two votes to my one ? 
Is he alone of mortals to eat his cake and 
have it too ? Is he to suppress his Negro 
and have him also? Among all his 
remedies he has never proposed to surrender the representation which he owes 
to the very Negro whose vote he refuses. 
The Negro is human enough to be represented, but not human enough to have 
his vote counted."—THOMA S B. REED. 
"I have just forwarded an article in 
which you might be interested. It is 
about the manly effort of the Rev. Mr. 
J. B. Brandon of Edge Hill, Pa., to bring 
to justice a wealthy white man of that 
place who attempted to rape a respectable colored woman who is a member of 
Mr. Brandon's church. You can write 
to Rev. Mr. Brandon, Pastor Antioch 
Baptist church, Edge Hill., Pa. The 
daily papers here are keeping the matter 
as still as possible." THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 319 
Foot Wear Fit To Wear 
FROM FACTORY TO YOU BY PARCEL POST WITH NO ADDITIONAL COST 
For the discriminating buyer of shoes who experiences difficulty in being suited, w e guarantee to fit and satisfy you. Our 
illustrated catalog and self measuring blank mailed on request. A 
large and carefully selected line. Patronize a Rac e Industry. 
Guaranteed Line $3.50, $4.00, $4.50, $5.00 
Other Shoes $2.00, $2.50, $3.00 
FRE D DOUGLAS S SHO E CO. , INC. DEPT. 
LYNN , MASS . 
A NE W WA Y 
To Get Your Clothes Free 
Publisher's Chat 
The MAY 
Crisis 
will be 
SPRIN G 
number 
A Beautiful Baby Cover 
The conclusion of Mr. Chesnutt's fascinating story. 
A double page cartoon by Adams. 
Strong articles, poems and departments, as usual. 
A NEW PLAN TO MAKE 
BIG MONEY DURING 
YOUR SPARE TIME 
Something different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes— 
bigger cash profits—Express paid on everything. 
Double Pay 
FREE clothes and cash profits 
besides. W e don't ask you 
to use your cash profits for 
your own clothes. Ours is a 
new and better plan. 
A N EXTRA PRESENT with every order. Not a prize 
scheme. Choose what you want, work for it and get 
it besides your CASH PROFITS. AGENT'S COMPLETE OUTFIT FREE, fifty-six stylish, real cloth 
samples — fifty Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. EVERYTHING FREE. Get into the BIG 
MONEY-MAKING CLASS. Just put your name on a 
post card and mail it to us TODAY. 
SPENCER MEAD CO., Dept. 303, Chicago 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
In all 
STYLES 
Leathers 
A 
SHO E 
of 
Quality 320 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Be Successful 
LEAR N shorthand in your own home. Shorthand helps all to success. The Paragon system is one that can be learned quickly and easily. It is wonderfully 
simple. It is used in offices of the large corporations (Standard Oil Co., Westinghouse Co.) the U. S. Government and in Court Reporting. It is being endorsed 
and adopted by leading high schools and business colleges. It is easy to learn, easy 
to write and easy to read—these are the three requisites for a successful system of 
shorthand. 
PARAGO N 
SHORTHAND in 7 
LOW COST. The cost of this wonderful system 
than 1/4 of the cost of others. Just think of 
in the world for a small sum of money—a 
to improve their condition at a nominal cost. 
EASY TO LEARN. A bright mind can learn 
day. Even the average can do that—certainly 
with practice. When you compare this to 
perceive how easy it must be. 
SIMPLICITY is the keynote of this system. It 
you write it. It is fast and accurate. There 
of shorthand is remarkably low. It is less 
the best and most efficient system of shorthand 
chance for those who are ambitious and earnest 
Paragon shorthand in seven lessons—a lesson a 
in two weeks one can acquire it. Speed comes 
six months or more under the old systems, you 
is easy to learn, easy to write, easy to read after 
is no shading or other complicated arrangements. 
Besides being useful to preachers, doctors and lawyers for taking notes, it offers an opportunity for those who wish to advance themselves. If you are not interested call this to the attention of some of your ambitious young friends. Write at once for information. 
WHA T ON E MA N DI D 
Here is a picture of Dan'l Washington who worked in a Y. M. C. A. building, became ambitious and studied shorthand to improve himself. He succeeded well—others can do the same. 
652 Mass. St., Gary , Ind. , January 16, 1915. 
Mr. A . Lichtentag, Ne w Orleans, La . 
Dea r Sir:—It affords m e grea t pleasur e in testifying to the efficiency and simplicity o f you r Parago n system o f Shortland , after havin g studied some o f the mor e 
complicate d systems without ver y muc h success. 
Whil e workin g in the Y . M . C. A . Buildin g a few month s ago , I had occasion 
to examin e you r system o f Shorthand , and after reading the prefac e o f you r book, 
I foun d it wa s just what I needed—a system that coul d be learned without a teacher, 
as I coul d not afford to attend a Shorthan d School . By lookin g ove r the principles, 
which are embodie d in seve n short lessons, and whic h I mastere d b y devotin g a tew 
minute s each mornin g glancin g into the desk cop y in the Principal's office, it 
prove d to me , beyon d doubt, that Parago n is in a class by itself. Afte r about four 
weeks, I told Prof. Evenso n that I had mastered the Parago n System o f Shorthand, 
and he gav e me an examinatio n in orde r to satisfy himself that I really had. H e 
advise d me to continu e and I had him get me a book . Now , I am able to write 
any o f the letters in you r dictation book , an d in fact, anythin g that I can write in 
longhand . I find no troubl e in readin g my notes, 
I think so well o f Parago n Shorthan d that I am goin g to devot e my entire time 
in putting Parago n befor e the peopl e o f my race . I cheerfull y recommen d the 
system to all wh o are interested in learning Shorthan d either fo r business or pleasure. 
Ver y truly yours, DANIE L M . WASHINGTON . 
The Paragon Institute, 68-76 Coliseum Street, New Orleans, La. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 321 
$3000 FOR YOU 
Exclusive 
Territory. 
100% 
Profit. 
THAT'S the money you should get this year. I mean it. I want 
County Sales Managers quick, men or women who believe in 
the square deal, who will go into partnership with me. No 
experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works 
required. Full length bath in any room. Folds in small roll, handy 
as an umbrella. 1 tell you it's great ! GREAT! Rivals $100 bath 
room. Now listen 1 I want YOU to handle your county. I'll furnish demonstrating tub on liberal plan. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger money in a week with me than you ever 
made in a month before. I KNOW IT ! 
Tw o Sale s a Day— 
$300.0 0 a Mont h 
That's what you should get—every month. 
eagerly bought. Modern bathing facilities for 
DEMONSTRATIN G 
TAB 
FURNISHED H. S. Robinson, Pres., 
Needed in every home, badly wanted, 
all the people. Take the orders right 
and left. Quick sales, immense 
profits. Look at these men— 
Smith. Ohio, got 18 orders first 
week; Meyers, Wis., $200 profit first 
month; Newton, California. $60 in 
three days. Yon should do as well. 2 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. 
The work is very easy, pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating. It means a 
business of your own. 
Little capital needed. I grant 
credit—Help you out—Back you up 
— Don't doubt— Don't hesitate — Don't 
hold back —You cannot lose. My other men are 
building houses, bank accounts, so can you. Art then 
quick, SEND NO MONEY. Just name on penny post card 
for free tub offer. Hustle! 
42 2 Factories Bldg. . TOLEDO , OHI O 
Canadian Branch — Walkerville . Ont. 
Made-to-Measure 
Express $2.7 5 
Prepaid sfc = 
Pants cut in the latest 
style. Made-to-your individual measure. Fit, 
workmanship and wear 
guaranteed. 
No Extra Charg e 
for peg tops, no matter how 
extreme you order them. 
Agents Wante d 
A good live hustler in every 
town to take orders for our 
celebrate d made-to-measure clothes. Samples of all 
the latest materials FREE . 
We Pay Big Mone y 
to our agents everywhere. 
Turn your spare time into 
cash by taking orders for our 
stylish clothes. Writ e today 
for beautiful FRE E outfit. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Department 803 CHICAGO 
"Made $2 8 in 1 Day 
I Don't Know of Anything to Compete 
With the Minute Picture Business" 
So says J. A. McMillian, of 
Nettie, W.Va. , who has one of 
|
 our Champion Cameras. If you 
want to mak e more money 
than you've ever made before 
—quicker and easier 
—this is the business 
for you. N o matter 
wher e you live or 
wha t your occupation, you can coin money right from the start. 
Experience Not 
Necessary 
J.H. Arnold,Rock Lake, 
N.D., writes;"Received 
outfit O.K. Took it to a 
little town. set It up for 2 
hours and took in $12.35." "Made $25 yesterday." 
writes Arthur Neely, Alvardo, Tex. "First day did 
$30 in business," says B. Basha, Bell Island. Newfoundland. "Made $50 Christmas"—O. V. Lovett. 
Fort Meade, Fla. "Had an excellent business of 
*$9.90."—Vernard Baker, Holbrook, Neb. 
Photo Postcards All the Rage 
at Fairs, picnics, sorts, bchools. Factories Depots, on Streets—anywhere, everywhere. Camera take s pictures size 
2 1/2 x 3 1/2, 1 3/4X2 1/2 and one-inch buttons. Photograph 
persons singly or in groups, houses, animals, autos, 
beautiful scenes, et c Make the m o n the spot, in 
broad daylight. NO GALLERY, NO RENT, NO PROFITS TO diVIDE WITH OTHERS. The 
Champion Minute Picture Machine 
takes, develops and finishes perfect pictures in 30 seconds: 200 an hour. No Dark Room . NEARLY 85C PROFIT 
ON EACH $1.0 0 YOU TAKE IN. Get into this lucrative 
business a t once. Travel if you like—see the world 
and enjoy life. QUIT WORKING FOR OTHERS; be your own 
boss. An opportunity like this does not occur every 
day. Take advantage of it and write for Free Book, 
Testimonials, Liberal Offer, etc. 
AMERICA N MINUT E PHOT O COMPAN Y 
2214 Ogden Ave.. Dept. X 4 1 CHICAGO, ILL. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 322 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TEACHERS The new efficiency era calls 
I li^V.I I 1_. I V . 3 {o r th e moder n wa y 0f 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
13S5 T Street, N . W . Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.0 0 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 
Profit Margin From 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalog 
C. R. PATTERSON 
&. SONS, 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern in the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
_ Yo u can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now ! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, Ill. 
PROFITABL E SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Big demand everywhere. Exclusive territory. Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNING . Indianapolis. Ind . 
Will You Introduce These 
Styles For Us, If You Get 
Your Suit 
FRE E 
Her e we go again , break ­
ing all records, for new, nobby, 
ahead-of-the-time styles. Be 
the first in your town to wears emit 
that ia ahead of the time. Earn it 
while you wear it; we send the suit 
complete; you can make big money 
too; there IS u 
$50 to $100 a Week 
in it for you. Drop us a postal for 
our advance book, select the styles 
you want and the cloth; let us prove 
now you can get 
Your Suit FREE 
Don't wait. Don't delay. Write 
right away. A postal will do. We 
send everything the day your request is received. We pay express 
on everything. Get busy, simply 
send us a postal with your name 
and addresa on it. 
PARAGON TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 451 CHICAGO 
WEAR NEXT 
SEASON'S 
STYLE NOW 
BEAUT Y 
CULTUR E 
An art every woman should cultivate to retain the transparent, 
velvety complexion of youth. 
There's no secret or mystery 
about it, just use 
REJUVENATIN G CREA M 
(or cleansing and massage 
DE LUX E POWDE R 
for a beautiful complexion. Rejuvenating Cream, 20 cent jars. DeLuxe Powder, white, pink, or high 
brown, 50 cent boxes. 
As a profession Beauty Culture offers a dignified and lucrative employment fo r young wom ­
en. Most completely appointed Beauty Culture Parlors and School hi the east. All 
branches taugh t Special terms fo r a limited 
time . 
MADA M BARREA U 
B RISTO L B UILDIN G 
NE W BEDFORD , MASS . 
PIANOS-PLAYER PIANOS 
Factory TO Home 
B Y M Y PLA N 
of selling direct from factory to home. I can save you 
from $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Model Pianos. 
TWO TO FOUR YEARS TO PAY 
The easiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
All middlemen, jobbers, dealers and agents 
profits cut out. No charge for salesroom expense for my 
office is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
why I can sell the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons. Write today. 
3 0 DAYS FREE TRIAL 
We allow all freight charges, let you use the 
beautiful Evans Artist Model Piano for thirty days/W JT 
free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we will laKe/fy^ J 
it hack without any cost to you—you arc the sole,4/V" «r 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you may/W\j^L<* 
do so on our low factory wholesale price on /X/'cT ^ 
most convenient terms. /-r^V* ^ 
FREE MUSIC LESSONS 
TO EVERY CUSTOMER /® V 3 ^ 
we will give a two years course of piano /iy ^ j*^tf^ 
instruction free. Ask about our Insur J? •>"• i. 
ance plan and our method of saving A y 4* t.'VT 
you money. Write today. S\/ V^C* •"" •'" 
F.O.Evans Piano Co. A/Vf*? 
Dept. 81 Chicago 
Mail this coupon today. 
F. O. Evans Piano Co., Dept. 81 Chicago, Illinois 
Please send me your wholesale price list and catalogue of the 
Name Address Town State .VT .A J 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
$110.00 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
YOU Can Play 
Piano First Day 
New Plan Makes Teachers, Lessons or 
Study Needless—New Music Read 
Easily as a Newspaper, Being 
Written in Plain English Letters (C-D-E-F-G-A-B-C). 
Sent Free to Prove It. 
Just Sen d Addres s fo r Complet e System 
and 100 Musi c Pieces , All 
Charge s Prepaid , 
"Wha t D o Yo u Thin k o f Tha t I Neve r Playe d 
Befor e an d No w Just Hea r He r I " 
Anyon e ca n no w pla y th e pian o o r 
orga n wit h th e fingers o f bot h hands . 
No t afte r month s o f stud y an d practic e 
an d expensiv e lessons, bu t RIGH T AWA Y 
— almos t a s soo n a s yo u ge t th e Eas y 
Metho d Musi c System . 
Joh n H . Ferguson , Acme , Alta. , Can ­
ada , says : " I wa s no t a littl e amaze d 
whe n I foun d I coul d pla y in a fe w min ­
utes. " O . Pltmann , Meno , Okla. , says : " I 
hav e tw o children , on e is 1 2 an d th e othe r 
10, wh o I n a ver y fe w minute s coul d pla y 
it well , an d the y di d no t kno w on e not e 
fro m anothe r in th e ol d music. " V . R . 
Perkins , Romney , Ind. , sayi: " I studie d 
'Eas y Form ' musi c fifteen minute s an d 
the n starte d t o play. " Thousand s o f 
simila r report s ar e in ou r files. Doesn' t 
this convinc e yo u tha t yo u ca n pla y b y 
this wonderful , ne w method ? 
Prov e it fo r yourself . Sen d fo r com ­
plet e syste m an d ful l instructions . Tr y i t 
in you r ow n hom e fo r seve n days , FREE . 
I f yo n wan t t o kee p It, the n sen d u s 
$1.50 down , an d $1.00 pe r mont h fo r five 
months . I f no t satisfactory , simpl y re ­
tur n it t o us an d ow e nothing . Isn' t tha t 
fair ? Whe n writing , stat e ho w man y 
whit e key s o n you r pian o o r organ , an d 
whethe r yo u pla y old-styl e not e music . 
Sen d today ! Th e quicke r yo u ge t this, 
th e soone r yo n ca n entertai n you r famil y 
an d friend s wit h you r playing , s o sen d 
now . Addres s : Eas y Metho d Musi c Co, 
790 Clarkso n Bldg . Chicago , Ill . 
BOOKS ? 
Se e page s 324 . 32 5 an d 32 7 
Open s Jul y 1 
Close s Sept. I5 The Ocean House 
The Gordon Sea View, 
323 
Bette r 
know n as 
SE A ISL E CIT Y 
N . J. 
Personally managed by Mrs. Lucy Lee. This is 
the only property we own on the Atlantic Beach 
front. Every room opens on the ocean. Bathing, 
boating, fishing, music, dancing. A beautiful view of 
the ocean while dining from our new conservatory 
dining room. 
Special rates to school teachers for July. 
Writ e for rates. Address: 
MRS . LUC Y LEE, 5 PLAIN ST., ELMHURST, N. Y . 
Afte r Jul y 1st , Th e Ocea n House , Se a Isle , N . J. 
Let Us Show You How to Get Your 
Next Suit 
FRE E 
Made to Your Measure 
Do you want this swell suit? 
Want it for nothing? Without A peony's cost? $30 to $40 would not buy 
a better one. Simply wear it. tell 
your friends where you got it—and 
Make $10 to $15 a Day 
taking their orders. It is dead easy. 
You never saw a nobbier suit or a 
more stunning pattern, cut in strictly Tango style (3 months ahead of 
the times). Your choice of 60 patterns and a dozen styles to choose 
from. Drop us a postal card for 
heavy pattern book, inside information about styles, self-measuring 
blanks, etc.. etc. DON'T WAIT. 
Everything FREE. 
Suit Delivered FREE 
, Get ahead of other fellows — Write 
b I this minute. Postal will do it. 
Hand Tailored - Classy Linings - Millionaire Trimming
Dept. 45 1 CHICAGO 
To Every Woman 
I want every girl and woman to have this daintiest, 
handiest little Good-LuckVanity Case I ever carried. 
I will send you one FREE. Thin, flat, smooth, round. 
With mirror puff and adjustable powder compartment. Finished in black or any color you name. Fits 
purse, hand-hap;, corsage or stocking. You'll like it. 
And you'll like my Special long-lasting; Complexion 
Powder as 11,000 others do. It is exquisitely fine— 
abolutely pure. State whether white, pink, flesh or 
brunette powder is wanted. If now using my powder 
you'll soon want some more, so order at once. Send 
5Oc in coin or stamps and I will forward a large box 
of my Complexion Powder and send you the Vanity 
Case, FREE. Write today. 
HELEN CLARE,Suite24,2637 Michigan Ave. Chicago 
RAR E OPPORTUNIT Y 
Boy and girls wanted to learn typewriting. 
Typewriters free. For particulars address 
The Peerless Supply Co . 
1 1 0 Wes t 134l h Stree t Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
FREE TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
A Ne w Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound—By mail 5 6 cents—Ready April 3rd 
AT THE LOW PRICE OF 5 0 CENTS NET 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THESE BOOKS MAY BE OBTAINED FROM THE CRISIS, 7 0 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
IS MADE UP OF NEW BOOKS BY LEADING AUTHORITIES. 
THE EDITORS ARE PROFESSORS GILBER T MURRAY , H . A . L. FISHER , W . T. BREWSTE R 
AND J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
CLOTH BOUND , GOO D PAPER , CLEAR TYPE , 25 6 PAGE S PE R 50C. NET 
VOLUME . EAC H COMPLET E AN D SOLD SEPARATELY - - Ov/L t UC l 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N BY J. A . THOMSON LATI N AMERIC A BY W . R. SHEPHERD 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIA N LITERATUR E 
BY HILAIRE BELLOC B Y G K CHESTERTON 
ROM E BY W . WARDE FOWLER GERMAN Y O F TODA Y 
PROBLEM S O F PHILOSOPH Y BY CHARLES TOWER 
BY BERTRAND RUSSELL EURIPIDE S AN D HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N BY H. A . L. FISHER BY GILBERT MURRAY 
TH E CIVI L WA R BY F. L. PAXSON UNEMPLOYMEN T BY A . C . PIGOU 
94 volumes nm; ready. Send for a list 
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY
 3 4 W. 33d Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
324 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 325 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 7 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y n ATLANTA . GA . 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R. WRIGHT , JR., and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e Ne w Yor k 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND* * 
Ten poems by 
EFFI E T. BATTLE . A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 2 5 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : OKOLON A INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL , 
Okolona, Miss. 
SILVE R CHOR D POEM S 
By one of the leading poets of the race, 
ADOLPHU S JOHNSON. 
Printed on fine Aberdeen book paper, highly glazed, and handsomely bound in Olive 
green cloth. A book for every home. In dialect and English. Start the buy a book movement. Agents wanted. 
Pric e 75C . Postpai d 
THE GRAY PUBLISHING CO. 
420 South 11th St., Philadelphia 
IN NEW YORK AT 
The Crisis, 70 5th Ave. Young's Book Exchange, 135 W. 135th St. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
TH E NEGR O 
ABL Y DEFENDE D 
Th e boo k o f the hour. Blease,Tillman , Varda 
man, and all othe r demagogues, handled without gloves. A strong hand is thrown into the 
throat o f all Negr o Haters by the Autho r o f 
"Th e Conflic t an d Comminglin g o f th e 
Races. " 
In this boo k the question is discussed as neve r 
before , and placed at a pric e in reach of all. 
75c . per copy . T o Foreign Countri es, 
$1.0 0 postpaid . Published by (he Broadwa y Publishing Company , 935 Broadway , Ne w 
York , N . Y . Fo r sale by the Author, C. A . A . 
P. Taylor. • 
170 9 Lombar d Street Philadelphia . Pa. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights: Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y 
The Story of Wendell Phillips 
b y 
CHARLES EDWAR D RUSSELL 
"The story of the great abolitionist by a modern 
abolitionist." 
Mr. Russell says: 
Th e real emancipators o f the slaves wer e Garrison, 
Phillips, Joh n Brow n and the few that, standing with 
them upon the exalted groun d o f right, despised expedienc y and refused to compromise . 
This excellent boo k should be an inspiration to 
every love r of freedom. 
PRICE. 50 CENTS 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
PRESIDENT S O F LIBERI A 
and other prominen t workers. 100 pages, 19 full 
page engraving s in colors, complet e life o f all the 
Presidents to 1915. Ever y library, reading room and 
home ough t to have a copy . Pric e $1.25. Advanc e 
pric e for 30 days only 75c. Boo k will be sent C. 
O. D , Parce l Post whe n 25c . accompanie s order. A 
wall chart 16 x 20 of the Negr o Presidents that sells 
tor 50c , free if cash in full is sent with order. 
Agents wanted. Writ e today. 
THOS. H. B. WALKER, 1150 Darwin St.. Jacksonville, Fla. 
WANTE D 
Agent s fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
Mention TH E CRISI S 326 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
Telephone. : Central 104-W Main 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
A TTORNEY-AT -L A W N OTAR Y P UBLI C 
160 7 Williamso n Buildin g Cleveland , Ohi o 
Office L . D . Telephon e 3297 Marke t 
Residenc e L. D . Telephon e 5277-M Marke t 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolita n Buildin g 
11 1 Marke t St , Cor. Washington , Newark , N . J. 
Genera l Practic e ' Notar y Publi c 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
A TTORNE Y AN D C OUNSELOR-AT -L A W 
1020 Metropolita n Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROWN S. SMITH 
A TTORNEY-AT -L A W 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Bloc k 
Nea r Thir d and Hennepi n 
Minneapolis Minn . 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
A TTORNEY-AT -L A W 
908 Walnu t Stree t 
Philadelphia Pa . 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
A TTORNE Y AN D C OUNSELOR-AT -L A W 
34 Schoo l Stree t Boston , Mass. 
Telephon e Connectio n 
W. Ashbi e Hawkin s Georg e W . F. McMcche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
A TTORNEYS-AT -L A W 
2 1 East Saratoga Stree t Baltimore , Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephon e 5277 Morningsid e 
DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
S URGEO N D ENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Stree t Ne w Yor k City 
WILLIAM L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
30 0 ODD FELLOW BLDG. ATLANTA , GA . 
\ J. E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audit a Systems 
Business informatio n by mail. Ope n fo r 
engagements July and August 
Bo x 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O . 
Mentio n TH E C RISI S 
Make$35to$65aweek showing this great Tailor-Book. , 
Goods 8 0 much finer and prices' 
so much lower, everyone sees 
the difference at a glance. 
Special Offer 
To prove our unequalled quality, 
we will let you order at the 
wholesale price, a Sample Suit or 
even a pair of pants as low as$2.25 
—and no extra charges even for the 
biggest peg top styles. You can 
now make more quick money and buy your 
own fine tailored clothes cheaper than you ever thought possible. 
We prepay the charges on every order and don't keep a cent of 
any customer's money unless ho is well pleased. Let us send you 
this fine sample outfit and show you how to take the moat perfect 
measures for the finest tail Olios on the market. Write us today. 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
Dept. 237 • Van Buren and Market Sts.. CHICAGO 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corne r 8t h en d Plu m Streets, Cincinnati, Ohi o 
LADIES ! 
$2.40-Pe r Day-$2.4 0 
Selling our high-grade Food Flavoring. 
Saucepan Free with each order. 
W . HENR Y ELMORE , JR . 
51 0 Carolin a Stree t Chattanooga , Tenn . 
Learn the S. T. Taylor System 
o f Garmen t Cutting, Dressmaking , Ladie s Tailoring , Millinen,'. Embroiderin g and Designing . Prepar e yourself t o 
earn a large salary. Th e onl y system whic h wil l mak e its 
drafts so accuratel y that fitting is practically unnecessary. 
Term s reasonable ; Spring term just opened . Writ e for 
catalogue . 
S. T . TAYLO R SCHOO L AN D PATTER N PARLOR S 
Mrs. Maybel B. Evans, Prin. 13 2 E. Lon g St., Columbus, O . 
A Base Ball 
Jersey Without a Cent of Cost to You 
I giv e you a very fine pure 
wool sweater ; double collar 
and cuffs, your choice of color. 
Just handle for me your club's 
spring order for basebal l 
goods — at special discount, 
and this jersey is yours. Send 
for complete catalog of my best 
grade sporting goods at wholesale prices— basketball, baseball, 
tennis, golf, etc. Write me now. 
JAC K SHANNO N CO . 
Dept. 25 , 54 E.Monroe St., Chicago 
|I NEED BRANCH MANAGERS 
| for m y world-wid e mail-order busiI ness. Operate from your home . 
I Spare time. Yo u should make $5 0 weekly. Experienc e 
unnecessary. C. A. BUTLER, 35 0 Factories, TOLEDO, OHIO A Selected List of Book s 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HOUSE B EHIN D TH E CEDARS. (Charles W. Chesnutt) $1.50 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
T H E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED M AN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRICS OF L OWL Y LIFE. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
T H E MARROW OF TRADITION. (Charles W. Chesnutt) 1.50 
T H E SPORT OF TH E GODS. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRIS W RIGH T C UNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF B LAC K FOLK. (W . E. B. Du Bois) 1.25 
RACE A DJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
H ALF A M AN . (Mary White Ovington) 100 
M IN D OF P RIMITIV E M AN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
A FTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
J OH N B ROWN . (W . E. B. Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO I N A MERICA N HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE H ALL AN D HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 100 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF TH E NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T. Washington) 3.00 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.50 
POEMS OF P AU L L AURENC E DUNBAR 2.00 
T H E AFRICAN ABROAD. 2 Volumes. (William H. Ferris) 5.00 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
OUT OF TH E HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
T H E COLORED INVENTOR. (Henry E. Baker) 15 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. (Julia L. Henderson) 25 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S HOTEL DALE 
FOU R years ago the managemen t o f the 
Hote l Dal e undertoo k to submit to the 
traveling publi c the opportunity to 
choos e as a place o f abode , durin g their vacation in the summe r season a first-class hotel, 
to supplant the ol d custom o f being crowde d 
into small lodgin g and boardin g houses, wher e 
the sanitary conditions, as a rule, wer e not 
conduciv e to goo d health. Th e Hote l Dal e is 
not a pictorial structure on paper, but, in 
reality, an architectural building—a wor k o f 
art, a monumen t to goo d taste. Ever y known 
devic e which make s for safety and comfort 
has been introduce d to make this as complet e 
a living place as possible , for the accommoda ­
tion o f our race, wher e the elite, as well as 
others, can enjo y the pleasures of life without 
any infraction, surrounde d by most pleasant 
environments, with accommodation s to meet 
the demand s o f all classes. Th e interior o f 
this hotel, conceive d in perfec t taste, even in 
seemingly insignificant details, cannot he surpassed. In fact, as on e wanders through the 
rooms, it seems mor e like a dignified, yet 
genial, residenc e than any building of public 
nature. Th e rooms are light, airy and luxuriously furnished, and contain every moder n 
convenience , includin g suites with bath. 
Th e dining room is operated on the Europea n 
system, and its cuisine rivals that o f the finest 
hotels o f record . Her e is a place wher e those 
wh o appreciate simple eleganc e of servic e and 
all that make s for ease o f living may have their 
desire satisfied without extravagance . 
Th e Abyssinia n Orchestr a renders afternoon 
and evenin g concerts daily durin g the season. 
Th e open-air amusements are numerous, with 
lawn tennis courts on the premises. 
Th e mora l status o f the hotel is abov e reproach. 
Until on e has seen for himself the charming 
rooms in this palatial building, it is not possible to conceiv e the grac e and eleganc e o f the 
decorations, lighting and furnishing o f the 
room floors. 
Th e success thus far attained has bee n ver y 
gratifying, and prove s that the managemen t 
has made no mistake in the openin g o f this 
gem of seashore resorts, and the publi c has 
demonstrated approva l o f these efforts by the 
patronage afforded. 
Th e price s for the privileges, comforts and 
convenience s cannot be had anywher e fo r less 
than on e is asked to pay in this hotel, and here 
is a goo d place to punctur e an overworke d 
misconceptio n concernin g the financial requirements for a hotel o f this class.. Indeed , for 
servic e and surroundings, the rates are low, 
and the proprietor wh o has mad e possible this 
hotel desires it to be understoo d that every 
effort has been mad e to adjust a minimum rate 
t o a maximum o f service . 
A sojour n to Cape Ma y will convinc e the 
most skeptical person s that in registering at 
the Hote l Dale , they have visited the most 
finely equipped Negr o hotel known , wher e 
there are to be foun d accommodation s unequaled. 
Requisitions for reservations, or for informa ­
tion, will receiv e prompt attention by addressing 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY , NE W JERSEY 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 