THE CRISIS 
APRIL, 1912 
EASTER Publishers' Chat with Readers 
ENLARGEMEN T 
With this edition TH E CRISIS becomes a magazine of 52 pages. We hope 
always to keep the magazine small and readable, excellent by the quality rather than 
by the amount of matter presented. 
NE W TYPE—Ou r printer begged a month's respite before installing wider 
columns and new and more readable type. These changes will therefore inaugurate 
the opening of the fourth volume. 
NE W OFFICERS—W e began in one room, like all good things, and we 
had space to share. We overflowed into three rooms in three months and hastily 
engaged offices on another floor of the Evening Post Building, where we had a 
suite of four rooms. Here we sat down and breathed freely—for about one month. 
Then the desks multiplied and the visitors came crowding; there were the new 
addressograph, the new multigraph, and so many new typewriters that we lost 
count. In short, we must have more room or step on each other. 
Beginning, therefore, with April 15, we shall occupy a whole floor of the 
Evening Post annex—about 1,600 square feet of space. Here the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and TH E CRISIS will occupy 
eight offices, beside a small reception room, a library, a large workroom and dressing 
rooms. As soon as we are settled, please call. 
TH E GROWT H O F TH E CRISIS—From the printing of the first copy 
of TH E CRISIS our policy has been to tell the exact truth as to its circulation. 
Some of our business advisers thought this inadvisable, but we have maintained 
our position. We publish here again the facts as to our circulation: 
Nov. 1910 1,000 
Jan. 1911 3,000 
Mar. 1911 6,000 
Apr. 1911 10,000 
June 1911 12,000 
July 1911 15,000 
Dec. 1911 16,000 
Apr. 1912 22,500 
Practically the whole edition, each month, has been sold, less than 500 copies 
on the average being returned, and very few samples being sent out. 
TH E MA Y CRISIS—The May CRISIS will be "Conference" Number. 
Three great churches hold conferences during that month and this seems a fit time 
to pass their work in careful critical review, to illustrate their leaders and meetings, 
and in general to give an idea of their work. 
There will be a striking cover picture, a cartoon by Adams, and an article 
on "The Color Line" by Dr. W . Flinders Petrie of London University, the 
greatest living authority on Egyptology. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
J . MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W . S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
W . B. BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN , Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
SUBSCRIPTIO N : $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for sIX months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. 
Subscriptions to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th 
of the month. 
Volume Three APRIL, 1912 Number Six 
CONTENT S 
COVE R DESIGN . By Richard Lonsdale Brown. 
Page 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 227 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 234 
OPINIO N 236 
EDITORIA L 244 
TH E DOLL— A Story. By Charles Waddell Chesnutt. Illustrated 248 
RONDEAU . By Jessie Fauset 252 
TH E BURDE N 253 
RICHAR D LONSDAL E BROWN . By M . D. Maclean. Illustrated 255 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 258 
HISTORI C DAY S I N APRIL . By L. M . Hershaw 259 
TWILIGHT—A n Impression. By William Stanley Braithwaite. 
Illustrated Title by Louise R. Latimer 260 
WHA T T O REA D 261 
APRIL EDITION 22.500 COPIES 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P. O. at N. Y . Cit y 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y 22 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga. 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
mal School and College, wit h manua l training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth , Smit h 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments : College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r 
School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required i n the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy , with manua l training , giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepar e a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
Wilberforc e Universit y 
Th e only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y De -
partment equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
Unite d States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintaine d in 
par t by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Pal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Afro-American 
Correspondence 
School 
Offers a full Norma l Preparator y Course, 
consisting of thorough reviews in Arith ­
metic, Grammar , Geography, History , 
Physiology, Reading, Spelling, Penman-, 
ship, Drawing , Civi l Government and 
Theor y and Ar t of Teaching. Just the 
thing to prepar e you for a teacher's examination. Address 
Afro - American Correspondence School 
2808 St. An n Street New Orleans, La . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 22 5 
A Social Study of the Negro in Ne w Yor k 
"HAL F A MAN " 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
<J This book is the result of years of careful study and personal acquaintance with actual conditions in New York. 
f] Its truths being applicable to all communities where the two races live 
together, it must be considered one of the best social studies of recent years. 
Price. $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
a» ^ This book is for sale in the Book Department of TH E CRISIS, 20 
Vesey St.. New York. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 5 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
PUBLICATION S 
A . M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLIS WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1778; a valuabl e book. 
Price , $ 1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wba t 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphle t form. 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B r T . G. 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Price , $ 1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
75 cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Research Fellow in 8oclology i n the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania . Price , Paper , $ 2.00; 
Cloth, $ 2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pin e Street. Philadelphia . Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
LIFE AND WORKS 
PAUL 
LAURENCE 
DUNBAR'S 
BY 
LIDA KECK WIGGINS 
AND INTRODUCTION 
BY 
W . DEAN HOWELLS 
Wha t lat e Col . Root . Ingersol l though t 
o f work : 
220 Madiso n Ave. , 
April , 1896 , Ne w Yor k City . 
M y Dea r Dr . Tobey : 
A t last I go t th e tim e to rea d the 
poem s o f Dunbar . Som e of them ar e 
reall y wonderful—ful l of poetr y an d phil ­
osophy , I a m astonishe d at thei r dept h 
an d subtlety . Dunba r is a thinker . "Th e 
Mystery' 1 is a poe m worth y of th e greatest. I t is absolutel y tru e an d prove s tha t 
its autho r is a profoun d an d thoughtfu l 
man . "Er e Slee p Come s Dow n to Sooth e 
th e Wear y Eyes' ' is a wonderfu l poem ; 
th e fifth vers e is perfect . 
I hav e onl y tim e to sa y Dunba r is a 
genius. No w wha t ca n be don e fo r him ? 
I woul d lik e to help . 
Thankin g yo u fo r the book , I remain , 
Your s always, 
R . G . INGERSOLL . 
Postpaid, $2, $2.75, $3.75. 
J. G . GUILE S 
214A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can . 22 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMENT of COLORED PEOPLE 
OFFICES : Suite 311 , 2 0 Vesey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25 , 191 1 
OFFICER S 
National President—Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Chairma n of the Executiv e Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garriso n Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Directo r of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois, New York . 
Secretary—Miss Mar y W . Ovington, Brooklyn , 
N . Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Marth a Gruening , 
New York . 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO E TH E ADVANCE ­
MEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in 
Class paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 
per year. 
Class 4. Contributing Members, 
$10, $5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members, paying 
per year. 
paying 
$1 
Al l members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. ' 
Members paying $5 or more will receive TH E CRISIS on signifying their wish 
that $1 of their dues be devoted to that purpose. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 20 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 
MEMBERSHIP 
448,MARC H 1, 1912 
5oo MEMBERS , 
JOI N US 
OUR 
1500 MEMBERS , 
CLOC K 
2ooo MEMBERS , 
100 0 MEMBERS , TH E CRISI S 
Volume Three APRIL, 1912 Number Six 
ALON G 
COLO R LIN E 
POLITICAL . 
Mr . George H . Woodson , a colored 
lawye r of Buxton , Ia., is considering 
makin g a race for the legislature. Bux ­
ton is a large Negr o minin g community. 
<| Frederick, Md. , has finally given up 
its fight wit h the courts and eliminated 
the "grandfather clause" from its charter. 
f& Th e colored Republicans of Virgini a 
have been appealing to President Taft 
against the machinations of the Lil y 
Whites. Colore d men from Nort h Caro ­
lina are makin g the same appeal. 
t$ It is said that President Taft is somewhat worrie d concerning the effect of 
the Roosevelt candidacy on the Negr o 
vote. O n the other hand, the Negroe s 
are still remembering Brownsville . 
<I Charles Griffin, a colored membe r of 
the Miners' Associatio n of Indiana, 
received a large vote for office in the 
recent primaries. 
<J Th e proposed "grandfather clause" 
amendment to the Arkansa s constitution 
is being fought by the newly organized 
Suffrage League amon g the colored 
people of Arkansas. Th e Socialists also 
seem to be goin g on record against it. 
tj Th e Republica n party of Louisian a 
was reorganized by a subcommittee of 
the nationa l committe e a few weeks ago, 
but the reorganization has caused a big 
split and things are in as bad a shape as 
before. Th e new trouble comes from 
members of the erstwhile William s 
committee, wh o resent the interference 
of the nationa l subcommittee in Louisi ­
ana Republica n affairs. The y claim that 
the Louisian a courts are the prope r 
authorities to whic h Louisian a Repub ­
licans must go for the settlement of differences bearing on the construction of 
primar y election and organization laws 
and not the Nationa l Republican Com ­
mittee. Th e national subcommittee 
settled the old trouble by takin g the 
returns of the Secretary of State of the 
Republican primar y of January 24 as the 
basis for adjusting the differences. 
These returns showed the election of 
eleven of the so-called black-and-tan 
candidates for State Centra l Committee ­
men and awarded that number of committeemen to the Kunt z faction. Al l 
the rest were awarded to the William s 
faction. Th e subcommittee awarded 
seven delegates to the Kunt z faction and 
thirteen to the William s faction. 
TH E GHETTO . 
Fo r the first time in the history of 
Decatur, Ind., Negr o children have been 
allowed to enter the public schools as 
pupils. 
<i Th e "Christia n Endeavorers " have 
again distinguished themselves by their 
attitude toward colored people. A t their 
recent meeting in Washingto n colored 
delegates were segregated in the back of 
the room and nearly half of them 
walked out in protest. 
•J Th e America n Ba r Associatio n is tryin g to get rid of Hon . W . H . Lewis, wh o 
was elected a membe r by its executive 
committee before the last annual meeting. Th e new executive committee has 
rescinded his election and placed him 
on the list of candidates to be voted for 
again. Attorney-Genera l Wickersham 
and others have sent letters of protest. 
Dr. Thoma s E . McLain , of Denver, 
Col. , has finally been so intimidated by 
the white people as to give up buildin g 
the new house that he had started in a 
white neighborhood. 
<J Th e Virgini a Senate has passed a bill 
givin g any city or town in the State the 
right to segregate Negroes. 228 THE CRISIS 
Th e Associatio n of America n Medica l 
Colleges, at its twenty-second annual 
convention in Chicag o recently, voted to 
have a "Ji m Crow " associate membership for Negr o colleges. 
Th e colored people of Chicag o and 
Philadelphi a are keeping careful watch 
of a few reactionaries and their colored 
tools, wh o seek to have separate schools 
for the races. 
<I Th e Hous e of Delegates of Marylan d 
defeated, by a vote of 76 to 11, the antilynchin g bil l whic h made communitie s 
where lynchings occur liable for damages up to $5,000. One of the opponents 
of the bill said: "It may be true that 
Ohi o and Illinois have this bill in their 
statutes, but there isn't a Southern State 
that has it and I believe there are good 
reasons wh y all of them should not. I 
don't think Marylan d wants to begin 
this. " 
<J Th e city of Asbur y Par k is tryin g to 
get ri d of its very efficient Negr o fire 
company. Th e company is carryin g the 
case to higher courts. 
<J Willia m F . Brown , a prominent whit e 
Southerne r and head of the Southern 
Femal e College at LaGrange , Ga., one 
of the oldest institutions for white girls 
in the South, was found in an Atlant a 
hotel wit h one of his 19-year-old pupils 
registered as man and wife. Mr . Brow n 
has resigned. 
<I It has leaked out that whe n Sylvi a 
Pankhurst went to Nashvill e at the 
invitation of the loca l suffrage association, the Nashvill e League learned that 
she had accepted an invitation to 
address the students of Fis k University . 
The y "kept the wire s hot between that 
city and Ne w York, " but Miss Pankhurst 
kept her engagement. 
<J A poor white woma n in Montgomery , 
Ala. , tells of her distress as follows: 
"Durin g the summer, when there was no 
wor k at the mill , I worke d at a laundry 
in the city. 
"Whe n I first went to the laundry there 
were fourteen white women . One by one 
they left, and I had to wor k wit h Ne ­
groes or throw up my job and see my 
children starve. Ther e were four of them 
sick in bed wit h fever when I finally 
came to words wit h one of the Negr o 
women and was myself discharged. Well , 
I was wretched then, to be sure. I looked 
high and lo w for work , but none was to 
be found. A t one time things looke d so 
black for us all that I was desperate. I 
thought of suicide, and then I remembered my little children, wh o needed me." 
<J In Knoxville . Tenn., two policemen 
recently arrested a youn g white woma n 
of twenty-two wh o was livin g wit h a 
colored man. 
t$ I n Miami , Fla. , the white people are 
alarmed because the colored settlement 
is growin g so fast. It is "encroaching " on the whites. 
<I A woma n at Allentown , Pa., is seekin g a divorce because she has discovered 
her husband is colored. A whit e Chi ­
cago bartender has marrie d a colored 
widow, whil e a colored man, after being 
refused by several ministers, has succeeded in marryin g a whit e girl at Be -
loit, Wis. 
<I Th e superintendent of the Count y 
Hospita l of Lo s Angeles, Cal. , has asked 
the supervisors to adopt a polic y as to 
whether or not they wil l admit Negr o 
women to the nurses' trainin g school. Dr. 
Whitma n declared that it had been 
reported to him that a youn g Negr o 
woma n had been denied admittance to 
the school. Th e question was taken 
under consideration by the board and 
wil l be carefully studied before a decision 
is rendered. 
<I A t Madison , Wis. , the Rev . C. H . 
Thoma s and the trustees of the Africa n 
Methodist Churc h have addressed an appeal to the public, setting forth that on 
account of race prejudice the pastor is 
unable to rent a residence for himself 
and family. The y wil l call upon the 
public for aid to enable them to buy a 
parsonage. 
<I Nea r Jacksonville , Fla. , a Negr o brick 
mason was made foreman. Severa l of the 
white bricklayers stopped work , but the 
job is still goin g ahead. 
<I Th e question of providin g amusements 
for colored people or allowin g them the 
same rights of other citizens i n places of 
amusements continually comes to the 
fore. 
I n Montgomery , Ala. , a whit e man was 
about to open a moving-pictur e show for 
colored people, but was forbidden to by 
the city authorities on the ground that 
it was on one of the mai n streets. 
I n Springfield, Ill., and Pert h Amboy , 
N . J., and Paterson, N . J., Negroe s are 
protesting against the color line in picture shows and cafes. 
_ I n Ne w Yor k Cit y the question of the 
rights of colored people in theatres is 
again being taken to court. 
<I Th e Domesti c Workers' Unio n of 
Auckland , Ne w Zealand, recently protested strongly against the unfair competition involve d by the practice of a 
system of importin g colored boys into 
the dominio n for domestic service. Th e 
Ministers of Labo r stated in the Hous e 
of Representatives that inquiries wil l be 
made into the matter, and if it is found 
that the importatio n of this class of labor 
is likel y to affect Ne w Zealand workers, 
steps wil l be taken wit h a view to stoppin g the practice. ALONC THE COLOR LINE 229 
EDUCATION . 
Charle s M . Melde n has been inaugurated president of Ne w Orleans University. A feature of the inauguration was 
the presence of the presidents of the 
schools of the Freedmen's Ai d Society. 
Tulan e Universit y was also represented, 
and their representative, Dr. B. V . L . 
Dixon , asserted that education was for all 
the people and that no one had the right 
to deprive or deny to anyone the enjoyment of this blessing; that it was better 
for all that all the people be educated. 
Amon g the others wh o made addresses 
were James H . Dillard , agent of the 
Slater Fund ; Dr. Robert E . Jones, editor of the Southwestern Advocate , and 
Dr. M . C. B. Mason , secretary of the 
Freedmen's Ai d Society. In his address 
Dr . Melde n took occasion to remark 
that a prominent colored educator went 
too far when he advised the Negr o to 
"get money, get property, and after that 
yo u wil l have time enough for religion 
and culture." Dr. Melde n said that such 
an emphasis upon materia l things con ­
stitutes a peril. 
<J Wichita , Kan. , is erecting a new 
school for colored children at a cost of 
$29,000. It wil l have a large auditorium 
and manua l training and domestic science. 
<J Mr . W . J. Edwards, principa l of Snow 
Hil l Institute, writes that in Wilco x 
County , Ala. , (according to the report of the State Superintendent of 
Publi c Instruction for 1910) there are 
10,758 Negr o children of school age and 
2,000 white children. Th e school expenditure in Wilco x Count y for 1910 
was $33,952.45.' of whic h $3,339.70 was 
spent on the 10,758 Negr o children and 
$30,612.75 was spent on the 2,000 white 
children. Th e expenditure for Negr o 
children was, therefore, less than 32 
cents per capita; for white children, 
about $15.30 per capita. In the seven 
counties surrounding and touching Wil ­
cox Count y there are. according to the 
same report, 64,285 Negr o children of 
school age, for who m $47,719.24 was 
appropriated in 1910. In these same 
counties there are 21,841 white children 
of school age, wh o receive $224,842.32. 
Th e tabulated report below indicates 
the distribution of this money : 
Negro Children White Children 
Counties POP. Appor. Pop. Appor. 
Monroe 5,107 $3.605.08 3,568 $24,300.12 
Dallas 15,860 14.567.10 2.629 45.734.58 
Lowndes 11,633 8,694.94 1,304 28.371.20 
Butler 6,919 4,800.00 5.038 34.000.00 
Clarke 6,054 4,584.12 4.323 27,700.06 
Marengo 10,060 3.945.50 2.742 39,380.54 
Perry 9,452 7,522.50 2,239 25,340.54 
64,285 $47.719.24 21.843 $214,842.32 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e Nort h Carolin a Mutua l and 
Providen t Association , a colored insurance company, whose headquarters are 
at Durham, N . C , is doin g a business 
of $260,000 a year and has not a single 
unpaid claim. 
•5J Delegate Pegg, the colored city sealer 
of weights and measures of Omaha , 
Neb., was unanimously elected sergeantat-arms of the Seventh Annua l Conference of Weights and Measures of the 
Unite d States, which took place at the 
Hote l Raleigh , Washington , D . C. 
f$ In the Graded Sunday Schoo l Teach ­
ers' Unio n of all the churches of Buffalo, 
N . Y. , there arc three educational 
leaders of the section groups, of who m 
Mrs. Mar y B. Talbert, a colored woman , 
is one. Mrs. Talbert is a membe r of 
the Advisor y Boar d of the N . A . A . C. P. 
«J Th e Hubbar d Hospital , a part of 
Meharr y Medica l College , has been 
given $10,000 by Andre w Carnegie. 
<J Matthew Henso n has published his 
travels in a volume entitled " A Negr o 
Explore r at the Nort h Pole. " 
•1 Senator Root, from the Committe e on 
Expositions, has reported favorably to 
the Senate a bill to appropriate $250,000 
for the Negr o exposition celebrating the 
emancipation. 
<I Th e Southern Commercia l Congress, 
whic h meets at Nashville , Tenn. , this 
month, wil l have amon g its conferences 
one on Negr o education, under W . D . 
Weatherford, a white Y . M . C. A . secretary wh o has made some study of the 
colored people. 
Th e 142d anniversary of the death of 
Crispus Attuck s was observed by the 
colored people of Cambridge . 
<I Figure s from 148 of the 600 colored 
women's clubs in the land reported, in 
1910, $57,387 collected durin g the year; 
$120,950 in club property; 3,664 members; and the taxable property owned 
by the club members amounted to 
$18,776,860. 
Q Mr . Booke r T. Washingto n and 
friends have been in the State of Florid a 
makin g speeches. 
<i Th e Senate of the State of Ne w Jersey 
has passed a bil l carryin g an appropriation of $20,000 to aid in the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of emancipation. It is thought that the bill wil l 
eventually become a law. 
<J Th e Flanne r Guild , a social settlement in Indianapolis for colored people, 
has lost its white donor and chief promoter, Mr . F . B. Flanner, wh o committed suicide recently. It is expected that 
the wor k of the guild wil l be continued. 
<J A Colore d Women's Civi c Club , wit h 
125 members, has been formed in In ­
dianapolis. 
<J Th e Youn g Men's Business Leagu e 
of Brooklyn , N . Y. , under its president, 230 THE CRISIS 
Mr. A . J . Loring , is pushing out in 
many lines of business endeavor. Amon g 
other things they are agents of TH E 
CRISIS . 
(I A t a mass meeting in Zio n Baptist 
Church , Philadelphia , lync h law was 
attacked and Mr . Booke r T. Washing ­
ton severely criticised. Mr . Joh n E . 
Milhollan d and Dr. W . A . Sinclair 
spoke. 
<J Th e twenty-fourth annual conference 
of the Teachers' and Schoo l Improve ­
ment League of Virgini a has been held 
at Lynchburg , Va . The y reported that 
local, county and city leagues numbe r 
mor e than 600 and have raised over 
$15,000 durin g the year to help the 
colored school system. 
•I A report from Galveston states that 
the 8,000 colored people there have four 
public schools, representing $50,000, own 
250 homes valued at $200,000 and fifteen 
churches valued at $120,000. Ther e are 
100 colored people engaged in business 
and eight organizations ownin g real 
estate. Ther e are 1,500 colored stevedores durin g the busy season. Th e 
total wealth represented by the colored 
people is estimated at $600,000. 
•J A delegation of Negr o clergyme n 
called upon the board of education of 
Orange , N . J., to ask that there be no 
discrimination in the appointment of 
teachers on account of color. 
<I Solomo n Phillips, of Uniontown , Pa., 
has left a part of his estate to Tuskege e 
Institute. 
f$ A company of Negroe s at Austin , 
Tex., has secured contro l of real estate 
to the amount of $100,000. The y propose to operate a bankin g and trust 
company. 
(} Mrs. Alic e M . Dismukes, wh o has 
charge of the laundry at Fis k University and is also a graduate of the norma l department, has given her accumulated wages, amountin g to $1,000, 
toward the erection of a buildin g for 
the musica l department of the institution. 
^ J. P. Bond , of Birmingham, Ala. , has 
established the Southern Business Col ­
lege, whic h has special courses in shorthand, typewritin g and general business 
lines. 
CHURCH . 
Ther e is continued unrest amon g the 
colored membership of the M . E . 
Church . Th e colored bishop Scott is 
leading a movement lookin g toward the 
erection of a new church of the colored 
members exclusively. Others are opposing this. But they, on the other hand, 
are revivin g the demand for Negr o 
bishops, and without a doubt there is 
goin g to be some sharp discussion at 
the comin g general conference. Ther e 
are 325,000 colored members, for who m 
two bishops are asked. 
<J South Carolin a is becomin g the center of a spirited debate on the question 
of electing an Episcopa l suffragan 
bishop. Bisho p Guerr y has raised 
funds for the support of such a bishop, 
but he is meeting considerable opposition. 
<I Th e semi-annual session of the bish ­
ops of the A . M . E . Churc h has been 
held in Baltimore , under the presidency 
of Bisho p Turner. 
<J Cardinals Gibbon s and Farle y and 
Archbisho p Prendergast have issued an 
appeal for Negr o and Indian missions. 
The y refer to Negroe s as "but recently 
raised from slavery and savagery wit h 
childlike minds, lackin g that development whic h other races have had for 
centuries! " 
ECONOMICS . 
Tw o youn g colored men, born in 
Texa s but bred in California , have 
invented an electrical device for con ­
trollin g traffic in congested districts. 
Th e invention takes the appearance of 
a four-sided railroad semaphore. It is 
electrically operated and obviates the 
necessity of the crossing policeman 
standing in the middl e of the street. 
Instead, he may stand on any one of 
the corners and by pressing a button 
sound the signal and change the signs. 
Th e inventors are C. R. Baile y and 
W . O. Warren . 
<fl A colored school in Greenvill e 
County , S. C, has a curious little local 
extension fund by whic h the patrons 
have purchased a few acres of land, and 
this is cultivated and the profits turned 
over to the school. In the past fall they 
raised six bales of cotton. This extr a 
income helps them to pay a highe r salary to the teacher and consequently gets 
a better teacher. 
<J Th e Pythian s Savin g and Loa n Asso ­
ciation, capitalized at $100,000, filed 
articles of incorporation at Indianapolis 
last month. 
PERSONAL . 
Th e Eight h War d Settlement, at 922 
Locust Street, Philadelphia , whic h represents an outlay of $25,000 and requires 
$6,000 a year, is supported by a white 
philanthropist, W . W . Frazier, and is 
doin g a most important and interesting 
work . 
•J Joh n B. Parker, a pioneer, and one 
of the best-known colored citizens of 
Spokane, Wash. , has recently died. He 
went to Spokane in 1881. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 231 
Mr . James Elliot , a wealthy citizen 
of Binghamton , has recently died at the 
age of 101 years. H e made considerable money through real estate. 
«I Mr . C. D . McClelland , wh o has a successful plumbin g and gas-fitting business 
at 240 East 33d Street, Chicago , is the 
first Negr o master plumbe r to pass the 
examiners of plumbers i n the State of 
Illinois. 
<I Prof. Thoma s M . Gregor y has been 
restored to his position at Howar d Uni ­
versity. Mr . Gregor y was rather summaril y dismissed for the alleged crime 
of drinkin g a glass of beer in public, 
but wise r counsels prevailed and after 
some delay justice has been done. 
*J Majo r Taylor, the celebrated bicycl e 
racer, has invented a meta l spring tire 
which , he says, wil l revolutioniz e the 
commercia l truck tire business. 
<J Miss Doroth y Coates, of Spokane, 
Wash. , has the distinction of being the 
first colored woma n to he called for jur y 
duty in the Unite d States. 
Q A recent pronouncement on racia l 
intermixtur e says: 
"Ther e is as muc h an America n type 
to-day as there is an Englis h type or a 
Frenc h type. Th e population of the 
Unite d States is no more mixe d than 
any of the great Europea n nations, wit h 
the possible exception of the Scandinavians—Norwa y and Sweden. 
"Ever y race that ever amounted to 
anythin g was always mixe d and therefore always progressing. An y nation 
whic h shuts itself up and receives nothin g from the outside worl d must perforce degenerate. 
"Whe n man y races meet the tendency 
is for the communit y as a whol e to shed 
off the defects and retain the good 
qualities of its component parts. 
"If yo u were to take a hundred men 
of half a dozen different races, shave 
their heads and color them all dead 
black, it woul d be impossible even for 
an expert to pick them out correctly. I n 
75 per cent, of the cases yo u could not 
tell to wha t race they belonged. " 
<I A t the annual meeting of the Women's 
Hom e Missionar y Society, of the Metho ­
dist Episcopa l Church , recently held at 
Wichita , Kan. , Miss Ida R. Cumming s 
of Baltimor e was made reserve field 
secretary for youn g people's work . 
Miss Cumming s wil l make the anniversary address for the society at the 
Washingto n and Delawar e conference. 
<J Miss Ma y Belcher, wh o has been associated wit h the Luc y Lane y Schoo l at 
Augusta , Ga., for several years, spent the 
mont h of Decembe r in the Y . W . C. A . 
Trainin g Cente r at Ne w Yor k City , and 
has gone to fill the secretaryship i n the 
association recently organized at St. 
Louis. 
ART . 
Th e unveilin g of a life-size portrait of 
Wendel l Phillip s took place Marc h 5 at 
the Wendel l Phillip s Schoo l in Boston , 
Mass. Mr . Edwi n D . Mea d and Darius 
Cobb, artist, addressed the pupils at the 
presentation services. Th e artist is 
Cloy d Boykin , a Virginia n by birth, and 
a graduate from Hampto n Institute. Th e 
painting, whic h was made from a little 
wood-cut print, has attracted much 
attention by its faithful likeness and is 
considered a remarkable piece of work, 
as the painter has never had the advantage of art training. 
Mr . Boyki n came to Bosto n a year 
ago with the hope that he migh t find 
opportunity for study. Th e unusual 
talent, as shown in the Phillip s painting, has attracted the notice of artists 
and has wo n for him the interest of 
friends who have made it possible for 
him to enter the art school connected 
wit h the Bosto n Museum of Fin e Arts, 
where he is receiving instruction under 
the best art instructors of Boston . 
«] Mr . Carl R. Diton , pianist, of Phila ­
delphia, Pa., has accepted a position as 
teacher of musi c at Payne College , 
Augusta , Ga . 
Mrs. Carri e W . Clifford has recently 
been appointed instructor in the department of voca l expression, connected 
wit h the Washingto n Conservator y of 
Musi c at Washington , D . C. Mrs. Clifford is honorary president of the Ohi o 
Federation of Women's Clubs. 
<I Mr . Kempe r Harrold , formerly 
orchestral conductor and pianist of Chi ­
cago, Ill., has been appointed teacher 
of piano at the Atlant a Baptist College , 
Atlanta , Ga . 
•I O n Februar y 19, in Chicago, Ill., the 
Chora l Study Club , Mr . Pedr o T. Tinsley, conductor, gave their thirty-fifth 
concert, presenting the "Laud a Sion, " by 
Mendelssohn, and "Th e Seven Last 
Word s of Christ, " by Th . DuBois. Th e 
soloists were Cor a Spriggs, soprano; 
Dian a Hackley , contralto; Wm . H . 
Hackney , tenor, and T. Theodor e Tay ­
lor, baritone. Th e accompanists were 
Gertrude Jackson and Mrs. Pelagi e 
Blair. 
I n 1900 the Chora l Study Clu b was 
organized under the leadership of Pedr o 
T. Tinsley , who , by his perseverance, 
uncompromisin g artistic ideals and 
exceptiona l ability for instructing and 
directing a chorus, has brought the club 
to a hig h place amon g chora l organiza ­
tions. 
Th e wor k of the chorus is marke d by 
clarity of tone, clear annunciation and 
precision of attack and a remarkabl e 
sensitiveness to musica l expression. 
Th e object of the organization is to 
maintain a chorus for the study and performance of moder n works, as wel l as 23 2 THE CRISIS 
to present the great chora l compositions 
of the best masters, assisted by prominent soloists of the race. 
•J Th e Pre-Lente n Recita l and Assem ­
bly, whic h is given annually in Ne w 
Yor k Cit y under the management of 
Walte r F . Craig , was held Februar y 15 
at Pal m Garden. Th e artists were 
Mme . Octave Dishman , soprano; Mr . A . 
W . Smith , tenor; Mr . J. T. Butler, reader, 
and Mr . H . Emanuel , violinist. Mr . 
Melvill e Charlto n was the accompanist. 
MISCELLANEOUS . 
Cases of alleged human sacrifice still 
come up occasionally in the Indian criminal courts, and one of them, just ended, 
has been causing an unusual amount of 
interest in the Unite d Provinces. 
A youn g girl, gathering firewood i n a 
woo d in the Mirzapu r district, was 
struck down wit h a stick by a man wh o 
was diggin g earth. He r companions 
havin g run off to the village in terror, 
the man took up the girl, pushed her 
into the pit he had been diggin g and 
then filled in the pit and jumped upon 
the earth. H e was seen by villagers 
wh o came seeking the child to be brandishin g a stick and crying , "Hail , Maha -
vir; hail Blac k Goddess; I offer yo u a 
sacrifice!" 
<J Mr . J. Pierpont Morga n has just paid 
a large sum, reported in some cases as 
high as $400,000, for fifty-seven volume s 
on the rise of the black Christians in 
Nort h Africa , called the Copts. 
Th e Supreme Court of Pennsylvani a 
has refused to grant a change of venue 
for the tria l of the Coatesvill e lynchers. 
The y will , therefore, be tried at home, 
but a large body of evidence has been 
obtained and a strong fight wil l be made 
for a conviction. 
AFRICA . 
Th e Hig h Court in the Unio n of South 
Afric a has recently construed the Cape 
Tow n school board act of 1905 to mean 
that a chil d wh o has a mixtur e of Euro ­
pean and Africa n bloo d is excluded from 
the schools maintained for the whites. 
Th e chief justice in announcin g the decision said that it was regrettable that 
there should be a socia l chasm between 
the races, but it undoubtedly existed and 
affected legislation throughout South 
Africa . 
^ Th e tota l population of the South 
Africa n Unio n is 5,379,000, of who m onl y 
1,278,000 are of Europea n stock. Th e 
number of the latter, seven years ago. 
was 1,116,806; Nata l has gained onl y 
1,473, and the Cape onl y 3,436; the Transvaal and the Orang e Rive r Colon y show 
gains of 32,756 and 123,554, respectively. 
Th e male whit e population in Nata l and 
Cape Colon y has fallen off mor e than 
20,000 in the seven years, and the female white population has increased 
mor e than 25,000. Throughou t the Unio n 
as a whol e the gain i n whit e population 
in the seven years was fourteen per cent., 
whil e the native population has increased 
566,000, or sixteen per cent. 
<J Th e recent arriva l at Tripol i of a contingent of the black troops from Eritre a 
was made the occasion of war m demonstrations of welcome by the Italian 
forces. Th e Eritrea n askaris, wit h .some 
hundred came l drivers, paraded before 
the Italian commander, Genera l Frugoni , 
and performed a kin d of fantasia, whic h 
seems to have muc h impressed the 
native population. Genera l Frugon i made 
a speech recallin g the gallantry and 
loyalt y the newcomers had already 
shown whe n fighting under the Italian 
flag, and expressing the pleasure experiA N OFFICIA L GARDE N PARTY , FREETOWN , SIERR A LEON E ALONG THE 
enced by his soldiers in welcomin g them 
as comrades. It is hoped that the presence of these Africa n Mussulman s in the 
Italian army may have a conciliatory 
effect on the Arab s and persuade them 
of the possibility of terms of good fellowshi p wit h the Italian invader. 
<I One of the most prosperous countries 
in West Afric a is Britis h Nigeria . Th e 
population of Southern Nigeri a is 
7,836,189. Th e progress and development of Southern Nigeri a withi n the 
last decade have been little short of 
phenomenal. Th e surest wa y of gaugin g this development is through the 
medium of the imports and exports of 
the colony. Accordin g to the latest 
reports, the total value of both imports 
and exports in 1910 was £11,790,000, 
exceeding that of any previous year, 
even the record year, 1909, when the 
figures reached the then unprecedented 
amount of £9,540,000. This volume of 
trade is nearly double what it was seven 
years ago, when, in 1904, it amounted to 
onl y £4.939,000. Th e revenue now exceeds £1,900,000. O f the total value of 
exports which , excluding specie and 
goods in transit, amounted in 1910 to 
£5,258,000, palm produce constituted 
four-fifths. Th e exports of palm oil, 
whic h amounted to £1,742,000, and palm 
kernels £2,451,000, greatly exceeded, 
both in value and quantity, the record 
figures of 1909. 
<J Statements as to progress of the 
Negr o tribes around Benito, Africa , are 
made by a Presbyterian missionary. 
"Thes e people. " he said, "gave a little 
mor e than $8,000 i n gold, America n 
money, for education last year. Whe n 
I began wor k in Afric a ten years ago 
there was no self-supporting wor k at all 
in this district. No w we have fifteen out 
of our sixteen churches that look after 
their own work , and one of them is what 
we call self-propagating—that is, it has a 
missionary of its own ministering to 
another tribe. I have seen the number of 
schools increase from seven to eightythree. Th e natives themselves wil l put 
up a buildin g and erect a house for the 
teacher, payin g him also a little salary, 
so that all we have to do is to continue 
the school. Th e wages of the laborin g 
man are 10 cents a day, vet this year the 
grand tota l of their contributions in our 
district has been $10,087.04." 
CRIME . 
Th e record of lynching s since our last 
account is as follows: 
A t Chattanooga , Tenn. , three colored 
men, charged wit h killin g a special officer, were taken from the officer at the 
courthouse, beaten to death an d their 
bodies riddled wit h bullets. 
A t Marshall , Tex. , a colored man and 
a colored woma n were lynched because 
COLOR LINE 23 3 
of alleged complicit y in the killin g of a 
white man by another Negro . 
A t Memphis, Tenn., a mob of twenty 
citizens lynched a colored man for an 
alleged attempt to assault a girl . 
A t Starkville , Miss. , a Negr o was 
lynched for an alleged assault upon a 
woman. 
A t Paducah, Ky. , a Negr o mortall y 
wounded a clerk in a country store and 
being pursued by a mob committed suicide. 
<J Th e trial of the Texan s wh o lynche d 
a Mexica n is being carried on i n 
Georgetown , Tex . 
<J Judge Dicker, of the Harriso n Street 
Station, Chicago, said recently: " I have 
reached the conclusion that the Negroe s 
are less to blame than are the conditions whic h surround them. It speaks 
well for the Negroe s of Chicag o that so 
many lead honest lives in the face of 
hardships and temptation. In the 
months when wor k is scarce Negroe s 
have a harder time than any other members of the workin g class, because they 
are barred absolutely from so many 
kinds of employment open to the white 
workers. This condition costs the taxpayers of Coo k Count y mor e than $100,-
000 a year directly. - Te n per cent, of 
the prisoners at the Bridewel l are Ne ­
groes and the maintenance of this number of prisoners is an expense of large 
proportions. " 
«J Rev. Charle s P. Tincke r testifies as 
follows: "Justice to the Negroe s of our 
prisons in Ne w Yor k County , particularly the Tombs, or Cit y Prison , and in 
the Blackwell's Island penitentiary, 
where I am chaplain, compels me to 
say that there can be no doubt about 
the superior behavior of these men 
whil e behind the bars. 
"On e of the conclusions I have 
reached as a result of my experience 
wit h the prisoners is that the Negr o is 
not, as a rule, an habitual criminal. H e 
does not go out of prison, as so man y 
of the whites do, prepared to commit 
another crime, and interested only in the 
prospect that it wil l be of sufficient proportions to atone for the punishment 
that he has received. It is axiomati c 
amon g prison workers that the Negr o 
prisoner can be reformed. H e may, 
after he leaves prison, commit another 
crime ; but on investigation it wil l be 
found that even this second offense is 
not the outcome of deliberate planning. 
It is mor e often due to anger, passion, 
or the circumstances under whic h he is 
living. " 
<I Gov . Hadley , of Missouri , has pardoned 507 convicts. A large numbe r of 
these are colored men, and the reason 
for the pardon is unjust sentences. ME N O F TH E 
MONT H 
DR . C. V . ROMA N 
DR. CHARLE S V. ROMAN . 
Charle s Victo r Roma n was born in 
Williamsport , Pa., Jul y 4, 1864. H e was 
educated in the public schools of Can ­
ada, began his medica l trainin g at the 
Ontari o College of Physicians and Surgeons, and finished it at Meharr y Medi ­
cal College . Afte r several years' prac ­
tice he began to specialize in diseases of 
the eye, ear, nose and throat. H e afterwar d took the post course at the Roya l 
Londo n Ophthalmi c Hospita l and the Cen ­
tral Londo n Nose , Throa t and Ea r Hospital. Th e work, however, whic h has 
brought him most to the notice of 
American s is his editorship of the really 
admirabl e Journa l of the Nationa l Medi ­
cal Association . This important publication, issued by the colored physicians, 
is well printed and contains man y excellent articles. Dr. Roma n has been 
spoken of as the next editor of the A . 
M . E . Churc h Review. W e trust, however, that he wil l not be tempted to 
leave his professional wor k for other 
fields. 
DAVI D MANNES . 
Years ago a youn g colored boy 
named Douglass went to Europ e and 
studied the violi n under the celebrated 
Rapoldi , a pupil of the master Spohr. 
H e returned to America ; but wha t was 
there in Americ a for a colored ma n wh o 
knew musi c and wh o knew it better than 
his whit e contemporaries ? H e could do 
little, but one thin g he did do whic h 
bore fruit. H e saw a little whit e boy 
tryin g to teach himself to play the 
fiddle. H e taught this little boy and 
the boy is now Davi d Mannes, director 
of the Ne w Yor k Musi c Schoo l Settlement. Is it not fitting that Davi d 
Manne s should be the prime move r in 
the establishment of a musi c school for 
Negroe s now conducted in this city by 
Davi d Irwi n Martin ? 
BASKETBAL L VICTORS . 
Th e increase of interest amon g youn g 
colored people in athletics is one of the 
best signs of our time. On e of the chief 
DAVI D MANNE S MEN OF THE MONTH 23 5 
BASKETBAL L TEA M O F M STREE T HIG H SCHOOL , WASHINGTON , D . C . 
To p Row—E . C. Williams , principal ; Ralp h Smith , E . B . Henderson , Physica l Director . Middl e 
Row—Kell y Miller , Jr. , Fred . Randall , J . K . Rector , Harol d Tyler. " Botto m Row — 
Wm . Hughes, Verno n Green , Josep h Holland . 
centers of this interest is the city of 
Washington . W e are glad this month 
to present the pictures of the winnin g 
M Street Hig h Schoo l basketball team 
in the Washingto n series. Th e team 
wo n three straight games and lost none, 
being thus successful over Howar d 
Academy , the Commercia l Hig h School 
and the Armstron g Technica l Hig h 
School. Principa l William s and Direc ­
tor Henderso n deserve credit for the 
personal encouragement whic h they are 
givin g to this kind of work. O f the 
grammar-school teams in the Distric t of 
Columbia , the Garriso n Schoo l were 
champions in the lightweight class and 
the Stevens Schoo l in the heavyweight 
class. 
IN GOD' S GARDENS . 
O mist-blown Lil y of the North , Lo ! sense its sleep-sown subtle breath, 
A-bendin g southward in thy bloom, Wher e wheel in passioned whirl above 
An d bringin g beauty silver sown Al l lingering, lurin g love of love— 
An d pale blue radiance of snows—• Al l perfume born of dole and death. 
O fair white Lily , bowin g low, 
Abov e the dream-swept poppy's mouth, 
Athwart the black and crimso n South— 
Wh y dost thou fear—why dost thou 
fear? 
Where , over moon-mad shadows whirled, 
Th e star-tanned mists dim swathe the 
sky 
In phantasy to dream and die— 
A wil d sweet weddin g of the World . 
. W . E . B. D . 
Col d ghost-wreathed Lil y of the North , 
Whe n once thy dawnin g darkens there. 
Come then with sunlight-sifted hair 
An d seek the haunting heaven of Night . LA W AN D LAWYERS . 
Attorney-Genera l Wickersha m has 
been the object of several calumnies wit h 
regard to his attitude towar d his colored assistant. First he was said bitterly to oppose the appointment. The n 
there was a tale of socia l difficulties 
between Mrs. Wickersha m and Mrs. 
Lewis—a lie out of whol e cloth, since 
Mrs. Lewis is livin g i n Franc e for the 
purpose of educating her children. Fin ­
ally, however, the Attorney-Genera l has 
made his attitude so plain that he wh o 
runs may read. 
Th e situation grew out of Mr . Lewis's 
election to the America n Ba r Associa ­
tion. A s Mr . Wickersha m says i n a 
public letter: 
"Th e case, then, in a nutshell, is this: 
Th e name of Mr . Lewis was recommended to the executive committee by 
the local committee. Th e members of 
the latter committee knew perfectly well 
that he was colored. The y knew also 
that he had been appointed an Assistant 
Attorney-Genera l of the Unite d States. 
If the members of the executive committee did not kno w these facts, it was 
because they made no independent 
investigation, but accepted as conclusive the recommendation of the loca l 
committee. You , as secretary, addressed 
to Mr . Lewis an invitation to joi n the 
association. H e signified his willingness 
to do so. Th e executive committee 
thereupon elected him a member. H e 
paid his dues. Now—si x months later— 
an executive committee, one-third of 
whose membership has changed since 
Mr . Lewis was elected, withou t the 
faintest shadow of authority in the constitution or by-laws of the association, 
assumes by its vote to cancel the election and to place Mr . Lewis's name on 
the list of persons proposed for membership. This action is taken at the 
instance of certain of you r members 
wh o object to the membership of a colored man in the association. Ther e 
being nothin g in the constitution or bylaws of the association to limit its membership to whit e persons, they, nevertheless, arrogate to themselves the 
powe r to cancel a previous election had 
in conformity wit h the organi c law of 
the association, because the person so 
elected is not white , and to remit any 
discussion of the question to the next 
annual meetin g of the association next 
summer, meantime deprivin g Mr . Lewis 
of all rights as a member. I n the face 
of such outrageous action, Mr . Lewis 
can onl y appeal to the body of members 
of the association and invoke their sense 
of fairness to protest effectively against 
the unconstitutiona l and unauthorized 
proceedings of the executive committee. 
Neithe r he nor I can believe that the 
action of the committe e wil l be 
approved by any considerable numbe r 
of the members of the bar wh o constitute the association. " 
Th e president of the America n Ba r 
Association , Mr . S. S. Gregory , of Chicago, replies, in part, as follows: 
"Ever y effort was made to represent 
the matter to Mr . Lewis in such a way 
as to induce him to relieve the situation 
by retirin g voluntarily , and it was hoped 
at one time that this had been accomplished. This accounts for the delay 
referred to by the Attorney-General . 
"Finally , after due notice to Mr . 
Lewis, and after he had declined to 
appear before the committee, and di d 
not, in fact, appear nor send any representative, the members of the committee, after the most careful consideration, 
took the action indicated by their resolution of January 4. 
"Notwithstandin g all efforts to raise 
an issue not involved , the fact remains 
that Mr . Lewis was elected to membership in the association under a misapprehension; and he now insists on retainin g the advantages of an election thus 
obtained. 
"It woul d seem as if the prope r time 
, to raise this question woul d be whe n the 
report of the executive committe e comes 
before the association, and that this 
effort thus to recall the decision of the 
committee is to this extent premature. 
Bu t of this each membe r is, no doubt, 
quite competent to judge. 
" I sincerely regret that this controversy has arisen. Th e members of the 
committe e acted accordin g to their best 
judgment, withou t conscious prejudice 
and in an honest effort to reach a right 
conclusion. " 
Th e case has been widel y commented 
on. Fro m the Nort h has come either 
silence or disapprova l of the course o f OPINION 237 
the committee . Th e Lyn n Item calls it 
"pitifu l prejudice. " "If the executive 
committe e is sustained, the association 
wil l proclaim itself as un-American . 
Ther e ought to be mor e men in the 
membership of the calibre of that eminent lawye r and noble man, Joh n A . 
Andrew , wh o said: T kno w not what 
record of sin awaits me in the other 
world . Bu t this I know : that I was 
never mean enough to despise any man 
because he was ignorant, or because he 
was poor, or because he was black.' " 
Th e East St. Louis Journal : "Her e is 
a display of narrowness that is particularl y disgusting. Thos e wh o are responsible for it try to justify their action by 
asserting that the America n Ba r Association is a social body. Tha t is ridiculous. 
Th e association is clearly professional in 
its character. I n any event, however, a 
man of ability, education and culture like 
Assistan t Attorney-Genera l Lewis belongs in the society by right of intellect. O n his persona l and professional 
merits he was elected a member. T o 
cast him out because of his color was to 
offer an insult to manhoo d regardless of 
color. " 
Th e Bosto n Journa l brings out an in ­
teresting point: "Th e ways of Providenc e 
are mysterious, but there is something 
ironica l in the manne r in whic h certain 
things wor k themselves out. Her e is W . 
H . Lewis, a Negro , Assistant Attorney -
Genera l of the Unite d States, regularly 
chosen a membe r of the America n Ba r 
Association , a group of gentlemen wh o 
are swor n officers of the law among 
other things, illegally cast out of that 
association to the detriment of the sense 
and administration of justice. Judged 
by every decent standard of right, Mr . 
Lewis should be promptl y reinstated, 
and we have no doubt this wil l be done. 
Bu t what makes this action mor e significant is that Mr . Lewis has always been 
one of those Negroe s wh o have counseled their fellow Negroe s to be moderate in the insistence upon their political rights. " 
Th e De s Moine s Capita l exclaims: "I n 
heaven's name what kin d of a record are 
we makin g if less than half a century 
after the martyr's death of Abraham Lin ­
coln we are goin g to throw every possible obstacle in the wa y of a man's 
progress, moc k his ambitions and crush 
his hopes—for no other reason than 
because his skin is black? " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post adds: 
"Attorney-Genera l Wickersham has done 
a manl y and a useful thin g in protesting 
so vigorousl y against the action of the 
executive committee of the America n 
Ba r Association , whic h has voted to 
exclude from membership in the Asso ­
ciation Assistant Attorney-Genera l 
Willia m H . Lewis, on the groun d that 
Mr . Lewis is a Negro . Mr . Wickersha m 
speaks of the committee's 'outrageous' 
action. It is difficult to say whether it 
is the outrageous injustice or the outrageous stupidity of such conduct that 
stands out most conspicuously. " 
Th e Chicag o Record-Heral d says: "T o 
the Record-Heral d the whole affair is 
most astonishing. Th e excuse that the 
Ba r Associatio n is a social organization 
and entitled to exclude any element for 
any reason whatever is lame and farfetched. Th e association discusses hig h 
questions of law and legal ethics. It 
professes to stand for high principle s and 
noble purposes. Th e exclusion of educated, cultured, able and honorable lawyers on account of their race or color 
is an exhibition of bigotry and stupid 
prejudice that causes one to hang his 
head in shame." 
Th e Chicag o News asserts that: 
"Ther e can be no hope that any good 
thing wil l come out of the organization 
until it learns to act in accordance wit h 
the essential principles of justice." 
Th e Southern lawyers, however, seem 
to feel pretty gay. Attorne y Lancaste r 
of Chattanooga writes: "Th e presumptuous interference wit h the inwar d 
affairs of the America n Ba r Associatio n 
on the part of the Attorney-Genera l in 
his official capacity was done for politica l 
purposes and that only. " Mr . Lancaste r 
further stated in his letter that while he 
did not care particularly about the election of Lewis, at the same time he 
thought that no man without self-respect 
should be a membe r of the America n 
Ba r Association , and that if Lewis 
insisted on being a member after he had 
been elected under false pretenses and 
after he was shown that he was not 
wanted, he was not fit to be a membe r 
of the Ba r Associatio n or any other 
association of professional men. 
Muc h mor e diverting is the repl y of 
Burto n Smith , of Atlanta , brother of 
Hok e Smith, know n to fame. H e writes 
the Attorney-Genera l of the Unite d 
States: " I had believed that yo u 
thought the primar y object of the American Ba r Associatio n was social equality 
for the Negr o and renomination for 
President Taft. I am delighted to kno w 
that the Attorney-Genera l of the 
Unite d States is not perverting his office 
and disgracing his race. I say 'disgracing his race' because I take it for 
granted yo u belong to the white race." 
Such gentle inuendo is commo n i n 
the South, because when tossed in a miscellaneous Southern crowd it's apt to hit 
—somebody. Th e comedy—or tragedy 
—o f the situation is further emphasized 
by the fact that Mr . Lewis is the son of 
a membe r of one of the first white families of Virginia , and probably not one 
membe r of the association out of ten 
woul d kno w he was colored if they saw 
him. 238 THE CRISIS 
LYNCHING. 
The Sacramento (Cal.) Bee says: 
"Negro lynchings create less and less 
comment as they grow commoner in the 
South. Mobs have spent their fury even 
on two black women recently, most 
revoltingly, too, without arousing more 
than faint expressions of protest from 
some newspapers and scarcely any at all 
from humanitarian societies. 
" A year or so ago the lynchers paused 
in their bloody work for awhile when a 
country-wide protest became particularly 
vehement and officers responded by 
doing their duty. But relaxation in 
criticism and indifference have brought 
about a return to the old conditions. 
"Those conditions are even worse than 
they were before, since mobs are more 
cruel and lawless than ever. This is 
illustrated by the incident of the murder of three Negroes in a Southern courtroom one day last week. 
"The wrong of these proceedings is 
apparent. They are in defiance of divine 
and human law and travesties on civilization. 
"The provocation is great in some 
cases, no doubt, but to kill without trial, 
without knowing whether the victim is 
guilty or not, is just as bad, or worse. 
"Another national protest is due." 
With regard to the lynching of the 
colored woman in Texas, the Galveston 
News says that the reason for the lynching in this case was that a man accused of 
murder alleged that he got the gun from 
this woman. 
The lynching of three Negroes in Tennessee leads the St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
to say that "this affront to the court and 
intolerable example of bloodthirstiriess 
should not be permitted to go unpunished. The Negro offender is entitled 
to all the rights accorded the white man 
under the law. The court is entitled to 
respect. The law must be obeyed. If 
the authorities of Shelby County fail to 
prosecute and punish the men who shot 
down three prisoners already in the 
shadow of the gallows, they will not 
have done their duty to the State." 
On the other hand, a member of the 
governor's staff in South Carolina is 
urging, through an editorial in the An ­
derson Intelligencer, the lynching of 
William Reid, who is in jail charged 
with having entered the bedroom of a 
white woman with the intention of 
attacking her. This leads the Pittsburgh 
Post to note that "this is a case in which 
the law has a chance to assert itself. 
Colonel Cheshire is a murderer running 
loose in Anderson County in defiance of 
law and order. The sheriff and all his 
deputies are fully cognizant of the 
offense, and it becomes their duty to 
arrest this criminal and bring him to the 
bar of justice." 
TH E SUPERIOR RACE. 
It is a curious study in psychology to 
notice the calm judicial joy of papers 
like the Charleston News and Courier 
at the occurrence of any reactionary deed 
tending to the degradation of races of 
men or their alienation. Here is a case 
in point: 
"It is well known that England's policy with inferior races has been the absolute prohibition of social equality. In 
South Africa, where the Negro question 
threatened at one time to become as 
acute as it ever was in the United States, 
miscegenation is treated as a legal as 
well as social outrage. No false sympathy is permitted to deracialize the 
Caucasian. 
"The German Secretary of State for 
the Colonies has issued an order prohibiting marriage between whites and 
natives in the Samoan Islands belonging 
to Germany. For a generation German 
officials have observed the effect of 
mixed marriages in Samoa. They have 
studied the matter scientifically, with 
open minds. They have seen whites sink 
to the level of their helpmates invariably. 
That is the woeful fact about these interracial marriages. The one of the higher 
race inevitably seeks the level of the 
lower race. In addition, it is observed, 
the children of such unions seem to 
inherit the bad qualities of both races, 
the good qualities of neither." 
Once in a while, however, this calm 
assurance is shaken by some comparatively insignificant thing. The Macon 
Telegraph quotes the Savannah News 
concerning two prisoners in Atlanta who 
were asked to sign certain papers. A 
young white man of 26 made his mark 
while the Negro took a pen and wrote 
his name. This the clerk of the court 
pronounced "disgusting," and the Telegraph calls it a "Startling Spectacle!" 
"The Negroes are undoubtedly more 
earnestly desirous to take advantage of 
public-school privileges than are large 
numbers of whites. Even if there were 
no other arguments in favor of compulsory education, this one alone would be 
unanswerable." 
Again, the New Orleans Picayune, in a 
long editorial on Weale's demonstration 
of the conflict of color, says: 
"Weale's alarm call to the white race 
is based on the assumption that the 
whites as whites are likely to be faced 
by the colored races in solid array. He 
calls attention to the fact that the 
European nations are disunited and cannot act harmoniously in either Asia or 
Africa, and that they will be so hopelessly outnumbered in the near future 
that even united action would leave their 
position hazardous. 
"But while a tremendous conflict 
between the peoples of the Far East and 
of the West is likely, and it will not be OPINION 23 9 
the first time that Europ e was invaded 
by Asiatics, as the Tarta r conquests in 
Russi a and those of the Turk s testify, 
the invaders were not yellow men, but 
whites; religions, if not race jealousies, 
wil l be a great obstruction to any union 
between the Mussulman s of Indi a and 
the Buddhists of Chin a and the Shintos 
of Japan. It wil l not be easy to brin g 
those diverse races and religionists into 
a great militar y combination for the 
invasion of Europe . The y may rally, 
each race on its own soil, to drive out 
and exterminate the whites amon g them, 
but a vast army made up of a consolida ­
tion of those races and religionists 
marchin g across Asi a to invade Europ e 
woul d be a condition difficult to accept 
as a realization. 
"I n the meantime, whatever else may 
occur, and it is certain that great nations 
wil l arise and grow to vast powe r and 
then fall to decay, as they have done 
in the past, the white race wil l not only 
survive, but remain at the summit of 
development, a position it gained and 
has occupied from a very early period in 
human history. " 
So there, now! 
LIGH T IN DAR K PLACES . 
Harper's Weekl y publishes a heartenin g echo from Nort h Carolina : 
"I n Asheville , it seems, as in other 
places, good people had been having 
their attention drawn to the social evil 
by finding it at their own doors—or at 
any rate across the street or next door, 
and even in the immediate neighborhood 
of their churches and schools. Protests 
were promp t and vigorous, and as they 
came from people wh o knew how to 
secure a hearing and whose wishes 
counted wit h any city government, there 
was comparatively little doubt of getting 
action from the authorities. So far, so 
good ; but there happened to be one man 
in Asheville , a minister, the Rev. R. F . 
Campbell, to who m it occurred to inquire 
where these disreputable establishments 
were goin g when driven from reputable 
quarters. H e had no difficulty in discovering that the mass of them were already 
in the close neighborhoo d of the homes 
and churches and schools of the socalled Negr o quarter of the town. The y 
were there, of course, in obedience to a 
sort of law of the real-estate business, 
but he wrot e to the papers and con ­
fessed that he, for one, could not look 
upon the matter wit h an easy conscience 
so lon g as the Negroe s could not protect 
themselves in this matter and most white 
people could. 
"It was not a subject about whic h 
people like to rush into print or make 
speeches, but Dr. Campbel l very soon 
found that the better people of his own 
race felt just as he did, and also acknowledged their responsibility; and with good 
support he set about finding a remedy. 
Fo r once our Anglo-Saxo n hypocrisy in 
such matters made the remedy easy. It 
appeared that the entire business was 
illegal; that the contro l of it was practically lodged in the hands of one man 
—the judge of the city police court; and 
the judge was in sympathy wit h the 
movement and not in the least afraid to 
use his power. Th e Negr o ministers 
wanted to help, and did so with a simple 
statement of the facts, addressed to the 
white ministers, which these in turn presented to Judge Adams, and the judge 
took such effective action that withi n a 
week or two there was not left a single 
'social-evil' establishment in sight of a 
Negr o church or school. " 
TH E NE W YOR K NEGR O REGIMENT . 
Th e controversy about the Negr o regiment in Ne w Yor k is well summed up 
by two editorials. Th e Syracuse Heral d 
declares that the regiment is not needed 
and that, "without intending any reflection upon the colored race, the fact must 
be recognized that our militiamen do not 
associate wit h Negroe s in any way ; and 
why , pray, should they be expected to 
fellowship wit h them in the militi a 
organization of the State? But it is not 
solely a matter of race prejudice, though 
that aspect of the question cannot be 
ignored. Wha t concerns the public even 
mor e is the probability that the plan for 
a Negr o regiment, if carried out, woul d 
discourage the militar y spirit of our citizen soldiers and weaken their pride in 
the State organization. " 
T o this the Clevelan d Plai n Dealer 
replies: "T o a casual observer it woul d 
seem that the question depends somewhat upon one's conception of the purpose of the Nationa l Guard . If it is 
maintained primaril y as a social organization, it is easily believable that the 
admission of a Negr o regiment woul d be 
bad for the guard, since it woul d introduce a fruitful source of friction and misunderstanding. 
"Bu t if the guard is designed as a 
fighting organization—if soldiers rather 
than society eligibles are desired—it is 
difficult to see how the establishment of 
Negr o regiments woul d be otherwise 
than desirable. It is to the credit of 
active colored citizens of Ne w Yor k that 
they desire to see the establishment of 
the proposed new regiment. " 
Meantime the Republicans have kille d 
the bill by recommittin g it. 
LIGH T O N RURA L CONDITIONS . 
Th e America n Missionary , the organ 
of the America n Missionar y Associa ­
tion, publishes an extremely interesting 
article by Professor T. S. Inborden, a 24 0 THE CRISIS 
colored man of Enfield, N . C , on the 
vexed question of conditions amon g the 
rura l Negroe s of the South : 
"Th e matter of Negr o migratio n to 
the cities wil l be easily solved if it can 
be made possible for colored people to 
buy small farms. In this community , in 
Halifa x and Edgecomb e counties, there 
are large farms being sold all the time. 
The y average in area two hundred to 
two thousand acres. Negroe s cannot 
buy on such a large scale and expect 
to pay cash. The y need farms from 
twenty-five to one hundred acres. Some 
of them can pay cash for that size farm. 
The y need to buy on the larger scale 
in communitie s where they can add to 
their holdings from time to time. W e 
could locate a hundred prosperous 
Negr o farmers in five miles of the 
Joseph- Keasbe y Brick , Agricultural , 
Industria l and Norma l School, near 
Enfield, N . C , withi n a year if we could 
buy small farms wit h easy payments. 
Th e farmers in this region, as a rule, 
have large families and practically none 
of their boys have the city fever. 
"Pu t schools in these centers and put 
in good teachers. Man y schoolhouses 
for politica l reasons have been move d 
several miles from the Negr o population, 
which , of course, reduces the school 
attendance and is a source of great discouragement to the people wh o want to 
educate their children. If Negroe s cannot get the good advantages in the communit y in whic h they live, they wil l 
move to the cities and towns. This 
is good sense. It is right. 
"Goo d public roads wil l also help to 
keep the best Negroe s in the country. 
Equalit y in the administration of the 
laws wil l also help to retard the migra ­
tion of the Negroe s to the towns. Some 
of the worst lawbreakers in certain 
communitie s are immune from arrest, 
tria l and punishment, whil e others are 
snatched up for the most trivia l offenses 
and sent to the chain gang. Th e 
ignorant kno w when there is an in ­
equality in the enforcement of law as 
well as the intelligent. The y are un -
restful and resentful; this restlessness 
and resentfulness permeate the society 
in whic h they move. Hence , they go 
direct to the cities and towns. 
" I doubt seriously the frequent assertion that if the majority of Negroe s 
owned their farms such ownership 
woul d establish them in the good wishes 
of their white friends. Ever y Negr o 
who owns his farm takes that much 
labor, himself, wife and children out 
of the labor market. This reduces the 
white man's help, and wit h the large 
plantations this reduction in labor 
woul d retard seriously the Southern 
farm output. Truly , they might brin g 
in foreign labor, but it wil l take man y 
years to adjust Southern conditions to 
the exactions of foreign help. Certainly , 
the me n wh o have always had Negr o 
help woul d not, at once, submit to such 
exactions. 
"No , there is a better way. Ther e 
are thousands and thousands of acres of 
lan d that are not in cultivation, and 
are in possession of those wh o are 
immun e to the climate and wh o kno w 
the conditions. Thes e lands migh t be 
cleared and ditched by the Governmen t 
or by the State, but they wil l not be 
kept clear until the small farmers get 
hold of them and depend on them for 
their living . The n they wil l be kept 
cleared, ditched and cultivated. 
" I was at the State Far m of Nort h 
Carolin a some years ago and I think 
I never saw such a fine farm wit h its 
produce. I was told by the manage r 
that they could grow such crops only 
because they could contro l their labor. 
Th e large planter must contro l his labor 
if he runs a thousand-acre farm economically . This cannot be done unless 
the State passes certain laws whic h wil l 
enable large planters to do this. Whe n 
the State passes laws to enable farmers 
to control their labor by certain con ­
tracts whic h are unintelligibl e to the 
ordinar y laborer, it thwarts goo d government and engenders nothin g but 
hatred towar d those wh o seek the execution of those laws. It creates discontent and tends to lawlessness on the 
part of the laborer. Ver y large farms 
cannot be run without an immens e lot 
of help, and where such are thrown together, as they are on man y of the big 
farms, yo u may expect bad sanitation 
and bad morals. This does not make 
for agricultura l progress nor wil l it keep 
the Negr o people from seeking the 
cities." 
EDUCATION . 
"Wit h no vote must necessarily follo w no schools, " says the St. Louis 
Advanc e (colored). "W e cannot educate a people and keep them disfranchised. Schools do not promot e slavery, 
peonage or disfranchisement. No disfranchisement can be complete unless it 
sinks in the same vorte x of decitizenzation, suffrage, schools and the proper 
rights. Th e men wh o disfranchise the 
Negr o in the South do not mean to stop 
wit h the destruction of his suffrage, but 
also to restrict him in his education and 
property franchises. This is not only a 
matter of course, but is evident in the 
reduction of the studies of the Negr o 
schools of Louisiana ; in the cripplin g 
of Negr o schools in Virgini a by a very 
insufficient appropriation ; in the shortening of the term of colored schools in 
many of the counties of Maryland ; in 
legislation pendin g in Mississipp i to 
reduce the curriculum of Negr o schools 
to the crudest studies; in the general OPINION 24 1 
agitation to separate the schoo l fund of 
Southern States on a race basis. Th e 
man must be blind wh o cannot see that 
disfranchisement in the South finally 
means nothin g short of the demolitio n 
of the entire Negr o school system. It 
is not pessimistic to say when a house 
is on fire, and there is no effort to extinguish the flames, that the whol e fabric 
wil l be destroyed. " 
(| W e believe the time has fully come 
for the colored people of the State to 
wake up on the school question and see 
if some existing laws now operating to 
the detriment of colored schools cannot be changed. 
W e believe the law fixes the length 
of the term of school for all white 
schools throughout the State, but the 
length of term for colored schools is 
left entirely to the discretion of the 
school commissioners of the several 
counties. Now , this arrangement has 
witnessed the cutting down of the 
school term in man y places to just a 
few months. 
Such treatment of our people is so 
manifestly unfair that we feel it can be 
changed if the wor k is gone at intelligently and persistently. Wh y should the 
State La w fix the length of the school 
term for all others withi n our borders 
and then leave the colored schools to 
the merc y of school commissions, wh o 
might, for various reasons, politica l and 
otherwise, cut the Negr o schools short? 
—Afro-America n Ledger. 
A TRIBUTE . 
Abou t nineteen years ago I was employed on a Germa n daily in Newark , 
and given instruction to visit the 
gamblin g places and writ e them up 
for the Sunday edition. Amon g others, 
I visited a resort frequented by Negroes. 
I was the only white man—a superblond Northerne r at that — in the 
crowde d hall. Th e poverty of some 
wome n lurked through thin and torn rags 
and from haggard faces and hungry 
eyes. I was here confronted wit h a 
sight strongly remindin g me of the communisti c companionship of misery in 
the catacombs. Th e thirsty and hungry 
were fed by those wh o were mor e fortunate. Bu t there was present in their 
midst a spirit of fellowship. Gloo m at 
first had hun g over the whol e room. 
Bu t one roug h touch on the discordant 
piano sufficed to awaken the jo y of living . 
I was elated wit h my experience and in ­
stead of a denunciatory article my pen 
brought forth a hosannah on the communisti c instincts of the race. Th e result was the severance of m y connection 
wit h that paper and a three months' 
vagrancy in Ne w York , until, after servin g as dish washe r and at other labor, 
I found a place in a drug store. 
Si x years later I was the proprietor 
of a drug store in Baltimore . M y 
porter, Walter, a talented musician, a 
noble character, often had to walk two 
or three blocks out of his way to avoid 
the policeman's club. His crime and that 
of his family, lovable, clean and sober 
people, consisted in the undeniable fact 
that they had dark skins. 
A Negro, tired and emaciated, on a 
hot summer day, entered the store for a 
glass of water. Afte r he left, a white 
man came in and requested us to break 
the tumbler. Upo n our refusal he declared that his and other neighbors' 
custom woul d be withdrawn from us. 
Soon after I closed the shop and 
returned to Ne w York . 
To-day , as nineteen years ago, I am 
convinced that if a real leader should 
emerge from this race and use the 
latent greatness of the masses for cooperative purposes, his endeavor woul d 
culminate in the elevation to an economicall y and socially useful powe r of 
a people wh o now as a rule have to 
maintain themselves wit h the crumbs of 
society.— F . TH . in the Ne w Yor k 
World . 
So we leave it to the South, and the 
South denies education to the Negro , and 
when he does a deed of darkness or 
ignorance, burns him alive and gives 
thanks for a "whit e civilization. " 
Now , I kno w that this is not popular 
talk and is not supposed to be well advised for the great movement of whic h 
I am an humble supporter; but for once 
I am goin g to have my say about it, 
elections or no elections, Mississipp i or 
elsewhere; and the thin g that is most on 
my chest is this monstrous injustice of 
providin g the conditions that make evil 
inevitable and then lynchin g the victims 
of the conditions that we ourselves 
create. So lon g as that is the case, I 
should think that the hugest jest in the 
worl d was the idea of sending America n 
missionaries to Burm a or Rarotonga . 
W e ought to petition Burma and Raro ­
tonga to send missionaries to us. 
I n the last twenty-five years, 2,458 
colored men have been lynched in this 
country, and in only a minorit y of the 
cases has there been any allegation of 
the crime that is viewed as offering the 
sole excuse for this monstrous lawlessness. 
I should think this fact alone woul d 
give a missionary from Rarotong a reason 
to believe that he had enough to do in 
the Unite d States. 
Havin g prevented Negroe s from obtaining education, the South proceeds to 
denounce the Negr o as ignorant and 
shiftless, and is vastly indignant because 
he does things that befit the state of 
ignorance that the communit y decrees 
for him.— Charle s Edwar d Russell in the 
Comin g Nation . 242 THE CRISIS 
q Mr. Sutton seems to think that the 
Negroes should be educated and that the 
South owes it to them to do it, as it 
would make better citizens of them. I 
differ very materially from Mr. Sutton. 
**** * 
But what does Mr. Sutton hope to do 
by educating these creatures? Does he 
hope to make such characters as I have 
mentioned? Or does he hope to elevate 
them to a social equality with the white 
man? If so, why did our Maker not 
save him this trouble in the beginning? 
If Mr. Sutton will go to the State prisons 
and farms he will find a very large 
majority of the inmates fairly educated, 
and yet they are convicts. Why is this? 
From my observation, education inflates 
nine-tenths of them with arrogance and 
bigotry, which destroys all tendency to 
work and supplants it with a desire for 
idleness, which begets crime. 
Mr. Sutton says every well-informed 
Southerner is willing to confess at least 
some of the sins he committed in owning slaves. J am a Southerner in the 
fullest extent of the phrase and was an 
owner of Negro property from infancy 
to the close of the Civil War (thirty 
years,), and I cannot recall a single 
instance that I regret.—A. B. Nibbs in 
the Houston (Tex.) Post. 
The obligation of the Southern writers 
to make a representation which should 
accord with the theory of patriarchal 
ownership was destructive of all vigor.. 
They were under some enfeebling limitation as Landseer would have suffered 
from had he been compelled to represent in every picture a theory of patriarchal government of dogs. Suppose Landseer had never been permitted to paint 
a dog that was not happy. Suppose 
he had never been able to paint a mournful or unfortunate dog. What a restraint 
it would have been upon the liberty of 
the artist. The Southern writers were 
just as much impeded by the necessity 
they were under never to paint a 
Negro who was not laughing.—The 
Independent. 
<I A man and his wife had been lighthouse keepers for twenty-six years. Just 
now they had been shut off from the 
mainland for some days and food and 
supplies ran short. Forced to act, the 
wife at last ventured ashore and was 
kept by the weather conditions until 
after dark. Approaching the lighthouse, 
the unlighted lamp told of disaster within, and the fears were confirmed when 
the wife, with assistance summoned, 
found the keeper dead, kneeling by the 
bed as though in prayer. But the keeper's 
wife rallied from the shock to hasten 
to light the warning signal; and when 
they took her long-time companion's 
body ashore, she made no moan that her 
lot was to remain alone to tend the light 
that was to save life from danger. 
And now the newspaper correspondent in that section has called to mind 
that in the whole twenty-six years of 
their service the government has never 
received any complaint of the management of the light, and he writes that 
"the keeper and his wife, although 
Negroes, were esteemed by all who knew 
them." 
Perhaps no higher tribute could have 
been paid them than to say that, in a 
State with a critical attitude toward the 
Negro, these two were esteemed; but 
the faithfulness they have always maintained and the courage and loyalty the 
one left has now manifested are not to 
be judged on the basis of color. That 
phrase "although Negroes" was meant 
to emphasize the praise. What it really 
emphasizes is that qualities of character 
know no race distinction.—New Bedford 
Standard. 
^ One thing is certain, as this article 
will demonstrate, and that is that there 
is not much to choose between the East 
and the West in this respect. Missionaries and self-complacent Europeans 
and Americans declare that woman occupies an exalted social position in the 
West; that she is respected and 
honored as man's equal; that she 
ennobles and purifies society by her presence; that she enjoys true freedom and 
great opportunities for education, and 
that she is immeasurably happier, cleverer and nobler in the West than in the 
backward ignorant Asiatic countries. 
Al l this talk is very fine and inspiring, 
but it has only one small defect: it is 
false. 
***** * 
I draw the veil over the darker 
aspects of the question. The "social 
evil," a euphemism employed by refined 
persons in talking of the degradation 
of thousands of women through poverty 
and the exigencies of the present marriage system, is the product of these 
institutions, on which Europe plumes 
herself. Congresses meet to discuss the 
"white-slave traffic," which is an organized trade now as it was in the days 
of Harounal-rashid or the Mahdi. Modern Europe is not a whit better in this 
respect than Morocco or old Turkestan. 
The "maiden tribute" is exacted by the 
rich and the profligate from the working classes to-day as it was in antiquity. 
Thus Europe honors its women! Those 
who wish to know more about the 
human side of this tragedy may read 
the reports of special commissions and 
Bernard Shaw's play, "Mrs. Warren's 
Profession." These armies of, "abandoned" women are the nemesis of 
society in the West. Their existence is 
due not to human depravity, but to OPINION 24 3 
economi c conditions and the marriage 
customs of the people.— Ha r Daya l in 
the Moder n Review of Calcutta . 
<J "Wakin g U p Late " is the heading of 
an editoria l in the Maco n Telegrap h and 
it points a truth this Associatio n is 
tryin g hard to make people understand. 
"Ex-Governo r Hok e of Kansas, " says 
the Telegraph , "wh o has been inquiring 
into conditions as they affect the Ne ­
groes whil e touring the country to till 
Chautauqua engagements, reports that 
race prejudice is rapidly increasing in 
the North ; that the Negr o is practically 
barred from white churches; that few 
hotels wil l give him accommodations; and 
that the labor unions shut their doors 
against him. Th e ex-Governo r from the 
land of Joh n Brown , wh o expresses astonishment at the results of his observations, is late in discoverin g what has 
been plain to other observers for a long 
time. 'If we had it all to do over again 
there wouldn't be any war,' said a youn g 
Ne w Yorke r in a recent discussion of 
the Negr o question, and probably this 
is pretty typica l of the present attitude 
of at least the youn g North. " 
<J A newspaper correspondent writes 
concernin g commerc e in Ne w York : 
" I was surprised, whil e out on the 
docks, to see the large quantity of 
Africa n products sent to this country. 
O n the Englis h dock at 14th Street I 
counted over one hundred hogsheads 
of palm oil ; on the Germa n dock, Ho -
boken, I saw thousands of bags of 
Africa n redwood bark, used for tanning 
leather, and equally as many bags of 
ivor y nuts, used for makin g buttons. 
Th e names of the importers of these 
products are those of white men. Ne ­
groes do not seem to be interested in 
these ventures. Haitia n coffee and 
Liberia n coffee, and even Africa n yams, 
are imported in large quantities. Ther e 
must be a marke t for these products, 
else they woul d not come into this port 
wit h such regularity and in such great 
quantities." 
<J Th e St. Louis Post-Dispatc h speaks 
its min d frankly on the question of 
segregation: "Neighborhoo d associations of this city are advocating the 
passage of an ordinance for the segregation of white and colored races on the 
Baltimor e plan of last spring. Whit e 
persons are to be forbidden under penalties from movin g into blocks in whic h 
a majority of the residents are colored, 
and colored persons are to be forbidden 
to move into blocks in whic h a majority 
of the residents are white. 
"Th e plan is fatuous and futile.^ Th e 
aims of the improvement associations are 
entitled to sympathy, but the desirability 
of neighborhoods cannot be conserved 
in this way. Racia l prejudices cannot 
be crystallized in legal enactments in 
this country any more than religious 
prejudices." 
<J "Immediately after the Civi l Wa r a 
youn g colored man in Alabama determined to wi n independence," says the 
Ne w Yor k Survey. "Th e Unite d States 
government had given him his freedom, 
but left him naked and ignorant, without 
land and without schooling. Eve n Russi a 
when she freed her serfs went through 
the form of givin g each of them a bit of 
earth on whic h to live and to die. Joh n 
Benson, along with millions of other 
freedmen, was left to shift for himself; 
but he did not in the process, like most 
of them, become shiftless. Th e first year 
he worked for pay whic h was to be a 
bale of cotton. By good luck cotton 
was high that year and his bale brought 
him several hundred dollars. H e was no 
man's hired servant after that. His 
former master sold him a scrap of land 
and he bought a mule. Tha t was the 
beginning of a long, hard-working, honest life. To-da y he is the owne r of mor e 
than 2,000 acres of land and countless 
mules. A t least when he was asked, the 
other day, how many he had, he laughed 
and said, 'T o tell the livin g truth I do 
not know.' 
"Joh n Benson lives in the uplands of 
Alabama , eighteen miles from any railroad, on stony soil. Kowaliga , his home, 
is away from all modern appliances of 
culture, save the school whic h his son 
was instrumenta l in establishing some 
years ago. It is not very far from We -
tumpka, where the State of Alabama has 
a great prison farm. Mr . Benson goes 
often to Wetumpk a and is acquainted 
with conditions there- H e knows all the 
colored people withi n a radius of many 
miles and has more than three hundred 
on his own land. H e has been a tremendous powe r in keeping these men industrious and honest. H e was asked how 
many had been sent to Wetumpk a from 
this hilltop community. H e paused a 
few minutes, and then replied: 'No t one 
that I can recollect. The y have had to 
wor k too hard to have time for mischief.' " 
A LOS S O F MEMORY . 
"Uncle Mose," said a drummer, addressing an old colored man seated on a drygoods box in front of the village store, 
"they tell me that you remember seeing 
George Washington. A m I mistaken?" 
"No , sah," said Uncle Mose. "I useter 
'member seein' him but I done fo'got sence 
I jined de church."—Everybody's. EASTER . 
THE winter of Despair has long 
lain upon our souls. Agai n 
and again, out of the awful 
mists of Nowhere , the cold, white 
hands of God have crept down and 
gripped His world until the people 
shivered and starved and children 
whimpered in their mothers' arms. So 
was the day of long night. 
No w all is changed. 
This is the Resurrection Morning . 
The world-Go d stands aloft and 
smiles with splendor on his brows. 
The waters trickle, the birds sing, and 
pulses beat in the eternal hills. 
"Awake , awake, put on thy 
strength, O Zion ; put on thy beautiful 
robes." 
There is in this round world neither 
Death nor Despair, but ever continually, eternally triumphant over mist 
and mire, crime and cruelty, springs 
the unending Hope of Life , of Lif e 
that is Life , that lives. 
This alone is real. These other 
things that fill and, alas! must fill our 
pages—murder, meanness, the hurting of little children, the dishonoring 
of womanhood, the starving of souls 
—al l these are but the unsubstantial 
smoke and shadow that hide the Real 
Things. This reality is ever there, 
howsoever dark the darkness that 
blackens and hides it. 
Richar d Brown is real—the modest, 
good-faced colored boy, told to paint 
barns when he can paint the morning 
as he has done on our cover this 
month ; or that Boston black boy told to 
earn a living when his soul sees visions 
in the human face; this whole great 
black and wonderful race (more wonderful perhaps in countless subtle 
ways than anything this worl d has 
seen), whose spirit nothing can break 
and whose upward rending nothing 
can stop. This is the Eterna l Reality 
of the Easter of the world ; this is the 
Resurrection of the Hope that burned 
in the breast of Douglass and Garrison, of Phillips, Langston and John 
Brown . This is the Hope that never 
dies. 
TH E UNQUENCHABL E THIRST . 
THER E is a deep and painful 
silence among certain elements 
in the Census Bureau since the 
latest agricultural statistics have 
appeared. Eve n John Lee Coulter, 
who is a clerk in the agricultural 
division and can see anything detrimental to black folk about as far as 
the next person, has, we are told, a 
severe case of lockjaw. The reason 
for this is the difficulty of finding anything but surprise, praise and congratulation in the record of farm 
holding among black men. The value 
of farm property owned and rented 
by colored farmers has, in the Southern States, increased from 50 per cent, 
to 225 per cent, in the last ten years. 
In Texas, for instance, it has gone 
from $56,000,000 to $113,000,000; in 
Nort h Carolina from $29,000,000 to 
$81,000,000, and in Georgia from 
$48,000,000 to $158,000,000. No r 
has this been merely increase in the 
value of the same land. In these ten 
States the Negroes controlled, in 
1910, 3,683,154 more acres than in 
1900. It is not yet possible to separate the land owners and the renters. 
W e only know that the owners have 
increased in eight States from 125,413 
to 149,235 in these ten years. W e 
dare affirm that no class of white 
peasantry in any European State has 
in the face of the most favorable ordinary conditions paralleled this record 
EDITORIA L EDITORIAL 245 
which the colored people have made in 
the midst of outrage, discrimination 
and lawlessness. This is the answer 
which the young postbellum Negro is 
making to the Southern gentleman. 
FIS K UNIVERSITY . 
NOT only has the General Edu ­
cation Boar d done very little 
for higher education among 
colored people, leaving the best of 
their tottering colleges to struggle on 
unaided, but even when, in response 
to repeated appeals, it offered help to 
Fis k University, the conditions accompanying the offer were so onerous that 
the board could hardly have expected 
them to be fulfilled. Fis k University 
is the largest and oldest colored college in the South. It has a record 
of effective work and influence which 
few white institutions in the land can 
match. The quality and standing of 
its wor k are far above that of the Uni ­
versity of Virgini a or the University 
of Georgia, and probably equal to that 
of Vanderbilt. The work of Fis k has 
been done with a wretchedly restricted 
income, almost without State aid and 
without endowment. To such an institution the General Education Board 
offers $60,000, on condition that the 
institution raise $240,000, four times 
as much, itself, and at the same time 
keep out of debt! 
Industrial schools like Hampton and 
Tuskegee have repeatedly gotten 
donations from the board with easy 
conditions; white Southern colleges 
have gotten gifts on condition of raising dollar for dollar; if we mistake 
not, the hardest condition usually 
imposed is that the college must raise 
two, or even three, dollars to each 
dollar of donation. In the case of Fis k 
University, four dollars must be 
begged for every one dollar donated. 
The conditions are unfair. Nevertheless, they ought to be met. The very 
fact that failure was possibly expected should be incentive to make 
every graduate and friend of Fis k give 
to the cause. Ove r $125,000 has been 
pledged, but nearly $115,000 is still 
needed. The alumni are bending 
every effort. Wil l not the friends of 
manhood and education among Ne ­
groes rally to this great cause? 
TH E SERVAN T IN TH E SOUTH . 
DURIN G slavery days the house 
servants were rewarded with 
extra privileges, among which 
were the left-over food and cast-off 
clothing of the "big house." This 
easily became, under the less rigorous 
forms of serfdom, a sort of payment 
in kind for personal service, and now 
and then "tips" in actual money were 
given. Whe n formal emancipation 
came the servants were promised 
wages, but as a matter of fact the 
wages were seldom paid in cash, while 
a money value was often given to the 
food and old clothes. This old custom 
could easily degenerate into something 
very like stealing, and yet the custom 
could seem justifiable in the eyes of 
the ignorant, especially when their 
wages were low and often unpaid, and 
when they saw mistresses wink at and 
even expect peculations of this sort. • 
O n the other hand, colored servants 
are not dishonest; money, jewelry and 
the like are safe in their hands with 
few exceptions. 
The result of the old system was 
unrest among servants, and the more 
intelligent and thrifty escaped from 
domestic service into the care of their 
own homes or day's work or other industrial avenues. O r if they continued 
in service they went North , where instead of receiving $1.50 a week in old 
clothes and cold victuals, they could 
earn $5 and $6 a week in cash. 
Moreover, the conditions under 
which a colored servant in the South 
must work are the worst in the civilized world. The hours are endless, 
the quarters are poor, the deference 
demanded is unbearable to people of 
the least spirit, and the assumption 
of the natural inferiority of the servant is almost universal. 
No t only this but there is in the 
majority of cases in the South absolutely no protection for the black 
girl's virtue in the white man's home. 
Everybody knows that the mulatto 
both before and since slavery was the 
outcome of house service. 24 6 THE CRISIS 
Wha t is the result? Poo r and unwilling service. The best Negroes are 
withdrawing their sons and daughters 
from house service just as quickly as 
they can, and they deserve commendation for so doing. Eve n those Negroes 
who publicly commend house service 
are curiously careful to keep their 
children out of it. Those who cannot 
escape are demanding shorter hours, 
proper wages and better treatment. 
An d those Southern families who can 
keep their black servants but three 
weeks would better ask advice of their 
neighbors who keep good and faithful 
black servants for ten and twenty 
years. 
Instead of responding to a legitimate demand for change in working 
conditions, the majority of Southerners take their usual refuge in 
whining and shrieking "Negro " 
problem. Ever y time that the white 
South runs head foremost into the 
inevitable laws of nature by trying 
to keep slavery, establish peonage, 
deny manhood rights to men and degrade decent women—every time the 
South tries this there is a mawkish 
sentimentality throughout the Nort h to 
encourage the idea that these laws are 
not human but peculiar or racial. 
If people pay their laborers low 
wages and cheat them out of even 
these, they will get cheap labor, 
whether that labor be black, white or 
blue. 
If the South or the Nort h wants decent domestic service it must 
(1) Pay decent wages. 
(2) Give shorter hours and more 
definite duties. 
(3 ) Treat servants as men and 
women and not as cattle. 
The people that are unwilling to do 
this wil l find the "servant problem" 
always with them, even though they 
nickname it a "Negro " problem. 
MODES T ME . 
THE editor of Th e Crisis 
assumes to be a fairly modest 
man as modesty goes in these 
trumpeting times; but with some diffidence he admits to a swelling of pardonable pride at a certain occurrence 
i n South Carolina which the papers of 
that realm, wit h somewhat singular 
unanimity, have omitted to notice. 
Some time since—to be exact, in 
1901—the editor and certain other 
persons (among them the Hon . Wood -
row Wilson , then unknown to a 
newer kind of fame) were asked to 
write on "Reconstruction" for the 
Atlantic. The editor concocted an 
article which he liked quite well, and 
in turn the Atlanti c was persuaded to 
publish it. It was called "Th e Freedman's Bureau. " It caused no stir in 
the world, but the editor kept it carefully in his archives to gloat over now 
and then in the fastnesses of his study 
when the family had retired. Ver y 
well. 
Some time in 1911 the Wad e 
Hampton Chapter of the United 
Daughters of the Confederacy offered 
a medal to the student of the University of South Carolina writin g the 
best article on "Th e Freedman's Bu ­
reau." Mr . Coli n W . Covington, of 
Bennettsville, S. C , won- the coveted 
prize, and his essay was published in 
the Columbi a State, January 28, 1912. 
Imagine, now, the editor's gratification on reading this work of genius 
to discover that nearly one-half of 
the essay, and that the important and 
concluding half, was the editor's own 
work from his Atlanti c essay of 1901. 
A single quotation wil l indicate more 
clearly this new instance of racial concord : 
From Colin W . 
Covington's essay on "The 
Freedman's Bureau," which won 
the Daughters 
of the Confederacy medal. 
I n a distracted 
land, where slavery had hardl y 
fallen, to keep the 
strong from wan ­
ton abuse of the 
weak, and the weak 
from staring wit h 
hate over the halfshorn strength of 
the strong, was a 
thankless, hopeless 
task. Th e forme r 
masters of the 
From "The Freedman's Bureau," 
by W . E . B. Du 
Bois, Atlanti c 
Monthly, 1901. 
I n a distracted 
land, where slavery had h a-r d 1 y 
fallen, to keep the 
strong from wan ­
ton abuse of the 
weak, and the weak 
from gloatin g insolently over the halfshorn strength of 
the strong, was a 
thankless, hopeless 
task. Th e forme r 
masters of the EDITORIAL 247 
land were absolutely ordere d 
about, seized and 
imprisoned, an d 
punished over and 
again, wit h almost 
no courtesy from 
army officers. Th e 
forme r slaves were 
intimidated, beaten, raped and butchered by angry 
an d revengeful 
men. Burea u 
courts tended to 
become center s 
simpl y for punishin g whites, whil e 
the regular civi l 
courts tended to 
become solely in ­
stitutions for perpetuating the slavery of blacks. Al ­
most every law 
and metho d in ­
genuity could devise was employe d 
by the legislatures 
to reduce the Ne ­
groes to serfdom— 
to make them the 
slaves of the State, 
if not of individua l 
owners; whil e the 
bureau officials too 
often wer e found 
strivin g to put the 
"bottom rail on 
top, " and give the 
freedmen a powe r 
and independence 
whic h they could 
not yet use. It is 
all wel l enough for 
us of another generation to wa x wise 
wit h advic e to 
those wh o bore the 
burden in the heat 
of the day. It is 
full easy now to see 
that the man wh o 
lost home, fortune 
and famil y at a 
stroke, and saw 
his lan d ruled by 
"mule s and nig ­
gers," was really 
benefited by the 
passing of slavery. 
It is not difficult 
no w to say to the 
youn g freedman, 
cheated and beaten 
about, wh o has 
seen his father's 
head beaten to a 
jell y and his own 
mothe r namelessly 
land ' were peremptorily ordere d 
about, seized and 
imprisoned, an d 
punished over and 
again, wit h scant 
courtes y from 
army officers. Th e 
forme r slaves were 
intimidated, beaten, raped and butchered by angry 
an d revengeful 
men. B ur e a u 
courts tended to 
become center s 
simpl y for punishin g whites, whil e 
the regular civil 
courts tended to 
become solely in ­
stitutions for perpetuating the slavery of blacks. Al ­
most every law 
and . method in ­
genuity could devise was employed 
by the legislatures 
to reduce the Ne ­
groes to serfdom— 
to make them the 
slaves of the State, 
if not of individua l 
owners; whil e the 
bureau officials too 
often were found 
striving to put the 
"bottom rail on 
top," and give the 
freedmen a powe r 
and independence 
whic h they could 
not yet use. It is 
all well enough for 
us of another generation to wa x wise 
wit h advic e to 
those wh o bore the 
burden in the heat 
of the day. It is 
full easy now to see 
that the man wh o 
lost home, fortune 
and family at a 
stroke, and saw 
his land ruled by 
"mules and nig ­
gers," was really 
benefited by the 
passing of slavery. 
It . is not difficult 
no w to say to the 
youn g freedman, 
cheated and cuffed 
about, wh o has 
seen his father's 
head beaten to a 
jelly , an.d his own 
mothe r namelessly' 
assaulted, that "the 
meek shall inherit 
the earth." Abov e 
all, nothing is more 
convenient than to 
heap on the freedmen's bureau all 
the evils of that 
evil day and damn 
it utterly for every 
mistake and blunder that was made. 
Al l this is easy, 
but it is neither 
sensible nor right. 
Someone had blundered befor e 
Olive r Howar d was 
born ; there was 
crimina l aggression 
and heedless neglect, but without 
some system . of 
contro l there 
woul d have been 
far more than there 
was. Ha d that 
control been from 
withi n the Negr o 
woul d have been reenslaved to all in ­
tents and purposes. 
Coming , as the 
control did, from 
without, perfect 
men and methods 
woul d have bettered all things 
and even wit h im ­
perfect agents and 
questionable methods, the wor k accomplished was 
not without much 
praise. 
assaulted, that "the 
meek shall inherit 
the earth." Abov e 
all, nothing is more 
convenient than to 
heap on the freedmen's bureau all 
the evils of that 
evil day and damn 
it utterly for every 
mistake and blunder that was made. 
Al l this is easy, 
but it is neither 
sensible nor right. 
Someone had blundered, but that was 
lon g befor e 
Olive r Howar d was 
born ; there was 
crimina l aggression 
and heedless neglect, but without 
some system of 
contro l there 
woul d have been 
far more than there 
was. Ha d that 
control been from 
withi n the Negr o 
woul d have been reenslaved to all in ­
tents and purposes. 
Coming , as the 
control did, from 
without, perfect 
men and methods 
woul d have bettered all things 
and even wit h im ­
perfect agents and 
questionable methods, the wor k accomplished was 
not undeserving of 
commendation. 
There is nothing to mar the fulness 
of the tribute here involved—not even 
quotation marks! 
Mor e might be quoted to the extent 
of two or three of these pages, but let 
us forbear. Wer e the editor a grasping man he might (either for himself 
or for his race) ask to have a large 
share of that medal clipped from the 
proud young Southern breast that 
bears it and pinned on his own. But 
no. Sufficient be the secret sense of 
desert and warmest flattery, and the 
editor yields to vanity only to the extent of bringing all this to the attention of his assiduous friend, the 
Charleston News and Courier, whose 
frequent sallies have in the past 
caused him much innocent amusement. TH E DOL L 
A story written for TH E CRISIS by CHARLE S WADDEL L CHESNUT T 
Autho r of "Th e Conjur e Woman, " "Th e Hous e Behin d th e Cedars, " etc . 
(Copyrighte d 1912. ) 
Whe n To m Taylor, proprietor of the 
Wyando t Hote l barber shop, was leavin g home, after his noonday luncheon, 
to return to his work , his daughter, a 
sprightly, diminutive brown maid, wit h 
very bright black eyes and very curly, 
black hair, thrust into his coat pocket a 
little jointed doll somewha t the wors e 
for wear. 
"Now , don't forget, papa," she said, in 
her shrill childish treble, "what's to be 
done to her. He r arms won't work, and 
her legs won't work , and she can't hol d 
her head up. Be sure and have her 
mended this afternoon, and brin g her 
home when yo u come to supper; for 
she's afraid of the dark, and always 
sleeps wit h me. I'l l meet yo u at the 
corner at half-past six—and don't forget, whateve r yo u do." 
"No , Daisy , I'l l not forget," he 
replied, as he lifted her to the leve l of 
his lips and kissed her. 
Upo n reaching the shop he removed 
the doll from his pocket and hun g it 
on one of the gilded spikes projecting 
above the wir e netting surroundin g the 
cashier's desk, where it woul d catch his 
eye. Some time durin g the afternoon 
he woul d send it to a toy shop around 
the corner for repairs. Bu t the day was 
a busy one, and when the afternoon was 
well advanced he had not yet attended 
to it. 
Colone l Forsyt h had come up from 
the South to attend a conference of 
Democrati c leaders to- consider presidential candidates and platforms. H e had 
put up at the Wyando t Hotel , but had 
been mainl y in the hands of Judge Bee -
man, chairman of the loca l Jackson 
club, wh o was charged wit h the duty of 
seeing that the colone l was made comfortable and given the freedom of the 
city. It was after a committee meeting, and about 4 in the afternoon, that 
the two together entered the lobby of 
the Wyandot . The y ' were discussing 
the platforms to be put forward by the 
two great parties in the approaching 
campaign. 
" I reckon, judge, " the colone l was 
saying, "that the Republica n party wil l 
make a mistake if it injects the Negr o 
question into its platform. Th e question 
is primaril y a loca l one, and if the Nort h 
wil l onl y be considerate about the matter, and let us alone, we can settle it 
to our entire satisfaction. Th e Negro's 
place is defined by nature, and i n the 
South he knows it and gives us no 
trouble. " 
"Th e Norther n Negroe s are different," 
returned the judge. 
"The y are just the same," rejoined the 
colonel. "It is yo u wh o are different. 
Yo u pampe r them and they take liberties wit h you . Bu t they are all from the 
South, and whe n they meet a Southerne r 
they act accordingly. The y are bor n to 
serve and to submit. If they had been 
worth y of equality they woul d never 
have endured slavery. The y have no 
prope r self-respect; they wil l neither 
resent an insult, nor defend a right, nor 
avenge a wrong. " 
"Well , now, colonel, aren't yo u rather 
hard on them? Conside r their past." 
"Hard ? Why , no, bless you r heart! 
I've got nothin g against the nigger. I 
like him—i n his place. Bu t wha t I say 
is the truth. Ar e yo u i n a hurry? " 
"No t at all. " 
"The n come downstairs to the barber 
shop and I'l l prove what I say." 
Th e shop was the handsomest barber 
shop in the city. It was in the basement, and the paneled ceilin g glowe d 
wit h electric lights. Th e floor was of 
whit e tile, the walls lined wit h large 
mirrors. Behin d ten chairs, of the latest 
and most comfortabl e design, stood as 
man y colored barbers, in immaculat e 
white jackets, each at wor k upon a white 
patron. A n air of discipline and good 
order pervaded the establishment. Ther e 
was no lou d talkin g by patrons, no 
unseemly garrulity o n the part of the 
barbers. It was very obviousl y a wellconducted barber shop, frequented by 
gentlemen wh o could afford to pay lib ­
erally for superior service. A s the 
judge and the colone l entered a custome r vacated the chair served b y the 
proprietor. 
"Nex t gentleman, " said the barber. 
Th e colone l remove d his colla r and 
took his seat i n the vacant chair, remarking, as he ran his hand over his neck, 
" I want a close shave, barber." 
"Yes, sir; a close shave." 
Th e barber was apparently about 
forty, wit h a brow n complexion , cleancut features and curly hair. Committe d 
by circumstances to a career of personal 
service, he had lifted it by intelligence, 
tact and industry to the dignity of a 
successful business. Th e judge, a regu-THE DOLL 24 9 
lar patron of the shop, knew him well 
and had often, whil e in his chair, conversed wit h him concerning his race— 
a fruitful theme, muc h on the public 
tongue. 
"A s I was saying, " said the colonel, 
whil e the barber adjusted a towe l about 
his neck, "the Negr o question is a perfectly simple one." 
Th e judge thought it hardly good 
taste in the colone l to continue in his 
forme r strain. Norther n men migh t 
speak slightingl y of the Negro , but seldom in his presence. H e tried a little 
diversion. 
"Th e tariff," he observed, "is a difficult problem. " 
"Muc h mor e complicated, suh, than 
the Negr o problem, whic h is perfectly 
simple. Le t the white man once impress 
the Negr o wit h his superiority; let the 
Negr o see that there is no escape from 
the inevitable, and that ends it. Th e 
best thin g about the Negr o is that, wit h 
all his limitations, he can recognize a finality. It is the secret of his persistence 
amon g us. H e has acquired the faculty 
of evolution, suh— by the law of the surviva l of the fittest. Lon g ago, when a 
youn g man, I kille d a nigger to teach 
him his place. One wh o learns a lesson 
of that sort certainly never offends 
again, nor fathers any others of his 
breed." 
Th e barber, havin g lathered the 
colonel's face, was stropping his razor 
wit h long, steady strokes. Ever y wor d 
uttered by the colone l was perfectly 
audible to him, but his impassive countenance betrayed no interest. Th e 
colone l seemed as unconscious of the 
barber's presence as the barber of the 
colonel's utterance. Surely, thought the 
judge, if such freedom of speech were 
the rule in the South the colonel's contention must be correct, and the 
Negroe s thoroughl y cowed. T o a 
Norther n man the situation was hardly 
comfortable. 
"Th e iron and sugar interests of the 
South, " persisted the judge, "wil l resist 
any reduction of the tariff." 
Th e colone l was not to be swerved 
from the subject, nor from his purpose, 
whatever it might be. 
"Quit e likel y they will ; and we must 
argue wit h them, for they are whit e 
men and amenable to reason. Th e nig ­
ger, on the other hand, is the creature 
of instinct; yo u cannot argue wit h him ; 
yo u must order him, and if he resists 
shoot him, as I did. 
"Don' t forget, barber," said the 
colonel, "that I want a close shave." 
"No , sir, " responded the barber, who , 
havin g sharpened his razor, now began 
to pass it, wit h firm and even hand, over 
the colonel's cheek. 
"It must have been," said the judge, 
"an aggravated case, to justify so 
extreme a step." 
"Extreme , suh? I beg yo ' pardon, 
suh, but I can't say I had regarded my 
conduct in that light. Bu t it was an 
extreme case so far as the nigger was 
concerned. I am not boasting about my 
course; it was simpl y a disagreeable 
necessity. I am naturally a kind -
hearted man, and don't like to kil l even 
a fly. It was after the war, suh, and 
just as the reconstruction period was 
drawin g to a close. M y mothe r employed a Negr o girl, the child of a former servant of hers, to wait upon her." 
Th e barber was studying the colonel's 
face as the razor passed over his cheek. 
Th e colonel's eyes were closed, or he 
might have observed the sudden gleam 
of interest that broke through the barber's mask of self-effacement, like a 
flash of lightnin g from a clouded sky. 
Involuntaril y the razor remained poised 
in midair, but, in less time than it takes 
to say it, was movin g again, swiftly and 
smoothly, over the colonel's face. T o 
shave a talkin g man required a high 
degree of skill , but they were both 
adepts, each in his own trade—the barber at shaving, the colone l at talking. 
"Th e girl was guilty of some miscon ­
duct, and my mothe r reprimanded her' 
and sent her home. She complained to 
her father, and he came to see my 
mothe r about it. H e was insolent, 
offensive and threatening. I came into 
the room and ordered him to leave it. 
Instead of obeying, he turned on me 
in a rage, suh, and threatened me. I 
drew my revolver and shot him. Th e 
result was unfortunate; but he and his 
people learned a lesson. W e had no 
further trouble wit h bumptious niggers 
in our town. " 
"An d did yo u have no trouble in the 
matter?" asked the judge. 
"None , suh, to speak of. Ther e were 
proceedings, but they were the merest 
formality. Upo n my statement, confirmed by that of my mother, I was discharged by the examinin g magistrate, 
and the case was never even reported 
to the grand jury. It was a clear case 
of self-defense." 
Th e barber had heard the same story, 
wit h some details ignored or forgotten 
by the colonel. It was the barber's 
father wh o had died at the colonel's 
hand, and for many lon g years the son 
had dreamed of this meeting. 
H e remembered the story in this wise : 
His father had been a slave. Free d by 
the Civi l War, he had entered upon the 
new life wit h the zeal and enthusiasm 
of his people at the dawn of liberty, 
whic h seem, in the light of later discouragements, so pathetic in the retrospect. Th e chattel aspired to own 
property; the slave, forbidden learning, 
to educate his children. H e had worke d 
early and late, had saved his money 
wit h a thrift equal to that of a Germa n 250 THE CRISIS 
immigrant, and had sent his children 
regularly to school. 
The girl—the barber remembered her 
very well—had been fair of feature, soft 
of speech and gentle of manner, a pearl 
among pebbles. One day her father's 
old mistress had met him on the street 
and, after a kindly inquiry about his 
family, had asked if she might hire his 
daughter during the summer, when there 
was no school. Her own married 
daughter would be visiting her, with a 
young child, and they wanted some neat 
and careful girl to nurse the infant. 
"Why, yas ma'am," the barber's 
father had replied. "I reckon it might 
be a good thing fer Alice. I wants her 
ter be a teacher; but she kin l'arn things 
from you, ma'am, that no teacher kin 
teach her. She kin l'arn manners, 
ma'am, an' white folks' ways, and nowhere better than in yo' house." 
So Alice had gone to the home of 
her father's former mistress to learn 
white folks' ways. The lady had been 
kind and gracious. But there are ways 
and ways among all people. 
When she had been three weeks in 
her new employment her mistress's son 
—a younger brother of the colonel— 
came home from college. Some weeks 
later Alice went home to her father. 
Who was most at fault the barber never 
knew. A few hours afterward the 
father called upon the lady. There was 
a stormy interview. Things were said 
to which the ears of white ladies were 
unaccustomed from the lips of black 
men. The elder son had entered the 
room and interfered. The barber's 
father had turned to him and exclaimed 
angrily: 
"Go 'way from here, boy, and don't 
talk ter me, or I'm liable ter harm you." 
The young man stood his ground. 
The Negro advanced menacingly 
toward him. The young man drew his 
ready weapon and fatally wounded the 
Negro—he lived only long enough, 
after being taken home, to gasp out the 
facts to his wife and children. 
The rest of the story had been much 
as the colonel had related it. As the 
barber recalled it, however, the lady 
had not been called to testify, but was 
ill at the time of the hearing, presumably from the nervous shock. 
That she had secretly offered to help 
the family the barber knew, and that 
her help had been rejected with cold 
hostility. He knew that the murderer went unpunished, and that in later 
years he had gone into politics, and 
became the leader and mouthpiece of 
his party. Al l the world knew that he 
had ridden into power on his hostility 
to Negro rights. 
The barber had been a mere boy at 
the time of his father's death, but not 
too young to appreciate the calamity 
that had befallen the household. The 
family was broken up. The sordid 
details of its misfortunes would not be 
interesting. Poverty, disease and death 
had followed them, until he alone was 
left. Many years had passed. The 
brown boy who had wept beside his 
father's bier, and who had never forgotten nor forgiven, was now the gravefaced, keen-eyed, deft-handed barber, 
who held a deadly weapon at the throat 
of his father's slayer. 
How often he had longed for this 
hour! In his dreams he had killed this 
man a hundred times, in a dozen ways. 
Once, when a young man, he had gone 
to meet him, with the definite purpose 
of taking his life, but chance had kept 
them apart. He had imagined situations where they might come face to 
face; he would see the white man 
struggling in the water; he would have 
only to stretch forth his hand to save 
him; but he would tell him of his 
hatred and let him drown. He would see 
him in a burning house, from which he 
might rescue him; and he would call him 
murderer and let him burn! He would 
see him in the dock for murder of a 
white man, and only his testimony 
could save him, and he would let him 
suffer the fate that he doubly deserved! 
He saw a vision of his father's form, 
only an hour before thrilling with hope 
and energy, now stiff and cold in death; 
while under his keen razor lay the neck 
of his enemy, the enemy, too, of his 
race, sworn to degrade them, to teach 
them, if need be, with the torch and 
with the gun, that their place was at 
the white man's feet, his heel upon 
their neck; who held them in such contempt that he could speak as he had 
spoken in the presence of one of them. 
One stroke of the keen blade, a deflection of half an inch in its course, and 
a murder would be avenged, an enemy 
destroyed! 
For the next sixty seconds the barber 
heard every beat of his own pulse, and 
the colonel, in serene unconsciousness, 
was nearer death than he had ever been 
in the course of a long and eventful life. 
He was only a militia colonel, and had 
never been under fire, but his turbulent 
political career had been passed in a 
community where life was lightly 
valued, where hot -words were often followed by rash deeds, and murder was 
tolerated as a means of private vengeance and political advancement. He 
went on talking, but neither the judge 
nor the barber listened, each being 
absorbed in his own thoughts. 
To the judge, who lived in a community where Negroes voted, the colonel's 
frankness was a curious revelation. His 
language was choice, though delivered 
with the Southern intonation, his tone 
easy and conversational, and, in addressing the barber directly, his manner had 
been courteous enough. The judge was THE DOLL 251 
interested, too, in watchin g the barber, 
who , it was evident, was repressing some 
powerful emotion. It seemed very probable to the judge that the barber might 
resent this cool recital of murde r and 
outrage. H e did not kno w what might 
be true of the Negroe s in the South, but 
he had been judge of a police court in 
one period of his upward career, and he 
had found colored people prone to sudden rages, when under the influence 
of stron g emotion, handy wit h edged 
tools, and apt to cut thick and deep, 
nor always careful about the color of 
the cuticle. Th e barber's feelings were 
plainly stirred, and the judge, a student 
of human nature, was curious 
to see if he woul d be move d 
to utterance. It woul d have 
been no novelty—patrons of 
the shop often discussed race 
questions wit h the barber. It 
was evident that the colone l 
was tryin g an experiment to 
demonstrate his contention 
in the lobby above. But the 
judge could not kno w the 
barber's intimate relation to 
the story, nor did it occur to 
him that the barber might 
conceive any deadly purpose 
because of a purely impersonal grievance. Th e barber's hand did not even 
tremble. 
I n the barber's mind , however, the whirlwin d of emotions had passed lightl y over 
the general and settled upon 
the particula r injury. So 
strong, for the moment, was 
the homicida l impulse that it 
woul d have prevailed already 
had not the noisy opening of 
the door to admit a patron 
diverted the barber's attention and set in motio n a current of ideas whic h fought 
for the colonel's life. Th e 
barber's glance toward the 
door, from force of habit, 
took in the whol e shop. It 
was a handsome shop, and 
had been to the barber a 
matter of mor e than merely 
personal pride. Prominen t 
amon g a strugglin g people, 
scarcely beyond the 
the hands of men of his race. Man y an 
envious eye had been cast upon it. Th e 
lease had only a year to run. Stron g 
pressure, he knew, had been exerted by 
a white riva l to secure the reversion. 
Th e barber had the hotel proprietor's 
promis e of a renewal; but he knew full 
well that should he lose the shop no 
colored man would succeed him; a center of industry, a medium of friendly 
contact with white men, woul d be lost 
to his people—many a good turn had 
the barber been able to do for them 
whil e he had the ear—literally had the 
ear—of some influential citizen, or held 
some aspirant for public office by the 
Arranged and photographed by Walter Baker, New York 
'If the razor went to its goal he would not be able to fulfil 
his promise to Dais y !'' (p. 252.) 
as yet 
threshold of 
citizenship, he had lon g been looked 
upon, and had become accustomed to 
regard himself, as a representative man, 
by whose failure or success his race 
woul d be tested. Shoul d he slay this 
man now beneath his hand, this beautiful shop woul d be lost to his people. 
Years before the whol e trade had been 
theirs. One by one the colored master 
barbers, trained in the slovenly old 
ways, had been forced to the wall by 
white competition, until his shop was 
one of the few good ones remaining in 
throat. O f the ten barbers in the shop 
all but one were married, wit h families 
dependent upon them for support. On e 
was sending a son to college; another 
was buyin g a home. Th e unmarried one 
was in his spare hours studying a profession, with the hope of returning to 
practice it amon g his people in a 
Southern State. Their fates were all, in 
a measure, dependent upon the proprie ­
tor of the shop. Should he yield to the 
impulse whic h was swayin g him their 
livelihoo d woul d be placed in jeopardy. 
Fo r what whit e man, whil e the memory of this tragic event should last, 252 THE CRISIS 
woul d trust his throat again beneath a 
Negro's razor? 
Such, however, was the strength of 
the impulse against whic h the barber 
was strugglin g that these considerations 
seemed likel y not to prevail. Indeed, 
they had presented themselves to the 
barber's min d in a vague, remote, 
detached manner, whil e the dominant 
idea was present and compelling , clutchin g at his heart, drawin g his arm, guidin g his fingers. It was by their mass 
rather than by their clearness that these 
restraining forces held the barber's arm 
so lon g in check—it was society against 
self, civilizatio n against the primitive 
instinct, typifying, mor e fully than the 
barber could realize, the great social 
problem involve d in the future of his 
race. 
H e had now gone once over the 
colonel's face, subjecting that gentleman 
to less discomfort than he had for a 
lon g time endured whil e undergoin g a 
simila r operation. Alread y he had 
retouched one cheek and had turned the 
colonel's head to finish the other. A 
few strokes mor e and the colone l could 
be released wit h a close shave—how 
close he woul d never know!—or, one 
stroke, properly directed, and he woul d 
never stand erect again! Onl y the day 
before the barber had read, in the newspapers, the account of a ghastly lynch ­
in g in a Southern State, where, i to 
avenge a single provoke d murder, eight 
Negroe s had bit the dust and a woma n 
had been burned at the stake for no 
other crime than that she was her husband's wife. On e stroke and there 
woul d be one less of those wh o thus 
wantonl y played wit h human life ! 
Th e uplifted hand had begun the 
deadly downwar d movement—when one 
of the barbers dropped a shaving cup, 
whic h was smashed to pieces on the 
marble floor. Fate surely fought for 
the colonel—or was it for the barber? 
Involuntaril y the latter stayed his hand 
—instinctivel y his glance went towar d 
the scene of the accident. It was returnin g to the upraised steel, and its 
uncompleted task, whe n it was arrested 
by Daisy's doll, hangin g upon the gilded 
spike where he had left it. 
If the razor went to its goal he woul d 
not,,be able to fulfil his promis e to 
Daisy ! She woul d wait for him at the 
corner, and wait in vain ! If he kille d 
the colone l he himself could hardly 
escape, for he was black and not white , 
and this was Nort h and not South, and 
personal vengeance was not accepted by 
the courts as a justification for murder. 
Whethe r he died or not, he woul d be 
lost to Daisy . His wife was dead, and 
there woul d be no one to take care of 
Daisy . His own father had died i n 
defense of his daughter; he must live to 
protect his own . If there was a righteous God , wh o divided the evil from the 
good, the colone l woul d some time get 
his just deserts. Vengeanc e was God's; 
it must be left to Hi m to repay! 
Th e jointed doll had saved the colonel's 
life. Whethe r society had con ­
quered self or not may be an open question, but it had stayed the barber's hand 
until love could triump h over hate! 
Th e barber laid aside the razor, 
sponged off the colonel's face, brought 
him, wit h a movement of the chair, to a 
sitting posture, brushed his hair, pulled 
away the cloths from around his neck, 
handed him a pasteboard check for the 
amount of his bill, and stood rigidl y by 
his chair. Th e colone l adjusted his collar, threw down a coin equal to double 
the amount of his bil l and, without waitin g for the change, turned wit h the 
judge to leave the shop. The y had 
scarcely reached the door leading into 
the hotel lobby whe n the barber, overwrough t by the lon g strain, collapsed 
heavily into the nearest chair. 
"Well , judge, " said the colonel, as 
they entered the lobby, "that was a 
good shave. Wha t a sin it woul d be 
to spoil such a barber by makin g him a 
postmaster! I didn't say anythin g to 
him, for it don't do to praise a nigge r 
much—it's likel y to give him the big 
head—but I never had, " he went on, 
runnin g his hand appreciatively over his 
cheek, " I never had a better shave in 
my life. An d I prove d my theory. Th e 
barber is the son of the nigge r I shot." 
Th e judge was not sure that the 
colone l had prove d his theory, and was 
less so after he had talked, a week later, 
wit h the barber. And , although the 
colone l remained at the Wyando t for 
several days, he did not get shaved 
again in the hotel barber shop. 
RONDEAU . 
Whe n April's here and meadows wide 
Onc e mor e wit h spring's sweet growths 
are pied, 
I close each book, drop each pursuit, 
An d past the brook, no longe r mute, 
I joyous roam the countryside . 
Look , here the violets shy abide 
An d there the matin g robins hide— 
Ho w keen m y senses, how acute, 
Whe n April's here! 
An d list! dow n where the shimmerin g 
tide 
Har d by that farthest hil l doth glide, 
Ris e faint strains from shepherd's 
flute, 
Pan's pipes and Berecyntia n lute. 
Eac h sight, each sound fresh joys provide 
Whe n April's here. 
JESSI E FAUSET . TH E BURDEN 
LAN D LEAS E WHIC H NEGR O 
TENANT S AR E REQUIRE D T O 
SIGN IN ALABAMA . 
Said tenant further agrees that until 
the rent, and advances, if any, arc paid 
to the owner, to have all the cotton made 
on the premises durin g the term of this 
lease ginned at any ginnery or stored 
at any place in said county the owne r 
may designate, and to turn over to the 
owne r the receipts for each bale, to hol d 
until sold. 
It is further agreed to between the 
parties to this contract that no alterations or repairs are to be made in, o n 
or to the premises, without the written 
consent of the owner, and that the tenant 
shall first pay for all advances made by 
or due to the owner, and then pay the 
rent due under this contract. 
Said tenant further agrees that if he 
violates this contract, or neglects or 
abandons or fails (or i n the owner's 
judgment violates this contract or fails) 
to properl y wor k or cultivate the land 
early or at the proper times, or in case 
he should become physicall y or legally 
incapacitated from workin g said lands, 
or should die durin g the term of this 
lease, or fails to gather or save the crops 
when made, or fails to pay the rents, 
or advances made by the owne r when 
due, then in case of any such failures, 
the owne r is hereby authorized to take 
full possession of said premises, crops 
and improvements, i n whic h event this 
contract may become voi d and cancelled 
at the owner's option, and all indebtedness by the tenant for advances or rent 
shall at once become due and payable 
to the owner, wh o may treat them as due 
and payable, without further notice to 
the tenant; and the tenant hereby agrees 
to surrender the quiet and peaceable possession of said premises to the owne r 
at said time, in whic h event the owne r 
is hereby authorized by the tenant to 
take possession of said premises, and 
transfer, sell or dispose of all thereon 
the tenant has any interest in, and this 
lease, together wit h all wor k done and 
all improvements o r crops on or gathered 
from said premises in whic h said tenant 
may have any interest, in such manne r 
and at such times as he (the owner) may 
deem best without further notice to said 
tenant, this contract being sufficient 
notice ; and i n order to entitle the owne r 
to do so, it shall not be necessary to 
give any notice of any failure or viola ­
tion of this contract by the tenant, or to 
make any demand for said premises, the 
execution of this contract or lease, signed 
by the said owner and tenant, whic h is 
hereby acknowledged, being sufficient 
notice of defalcation on the part of the 
tenant, and of the owner's demand for 
possession of the premises, and shall be 
so construed between the parties hereto, 
any law, usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding. 
TH E "JIM CROW " CAR . 
Interstate Commerc e Commission , 
Washington , D . C. 
Gentlemen : Some time ago in answer 
to complaints from colored citizens, I 
understand that you r commissio n said 
that the interstate travelers of color 
woul d have equal accommodations. I 
have had numerous difficulties in securin g Pullma n sleeper-car accommodations 
in all parts of the South. 
O n Thursda y night, Decembe r 7th, I 
purchased a ticket from Pensacola , Flor ­
ida, to Savannah, Georgia , by the way 
of the L . & N . and Seaboard Ai r Line . 
I had to be in Savannah at a meeting 
of the church conference, but on applica ­
tion at the depot I was refused; thus, the 
only way to make connections to arrive 
in Savannah on time was to take a passenger car as far as Montgomery . 
Bein g an interstate traveler, I applied 
for a sleeper, but was told I could not 
secure one; understand there were any 
number wh o secured berths after my 
application. O n my arriva l at Ne w 
Orleans I was told I coul d not secure a 
berth because of my color, although there 
were half a dozen persons wh o secured 
berths after my application; the result 
was that I had to remain over two hours 
longe r for a slowe r train, whic h put me 
in Montgomer y two hours after my train 
left for Savannah, whic h threw me about 
thirteen hours late in getting to Savannah, and cost me a loss of not less than 
$50. I have had so many refusals in 
different States that I send yo u this in ­
formation that yo u may kno w that Negr o 
passengers do not get equal accommoda -
tions, so far as sleeping and eating are 
concerned. 
Yours very truly, 25 4 THE CRISIS 
q Mr . Ralp h W . Gloag , a Bosto n lawyer, gave to the Bosto n Recor d his im ­
pressions of an extended trip through the 
Southern States. H e found it "distinctl y 
unpleasant " to see youn g wome n in dress 
and deportment unimpeachable, standing 
in a street car behind a sign that read 
"Fo r Negroes, " and enduring the stolid 
gaze that an indifferent spectator migh t 
leve l at a pen of cattle. I n a town i n 
Missouri a crowd of whit e boys mocke d 
and jeered a Negress in the same car 
wit h the whites, and kept up the cr y of 
"Nigger! Nigger! Nigger! " until the train 
left. Mr . Gloa g had listened to inquirie s 
addressed to a Negr o concernin g his 
private life, and was taken throug h a 
black man's home withou t so muc h as 
"b y you r leave." I n the rura l districts, 
he says, killin g is not murder, whe n the 
victim is a Negr o and the slayer a 
white man. This is true, at least, in 
Southern Texa s and in Oklahoma . 
HOM E FO R FRIENDLES S GIRLS . 
On e day in 1883, as two wome n were 
goin g alon g a Washingto n street, they 
noticed two little colored children 
wh o were eating out of a garbage can. 
Shocked at the sight, they began questionin g the children and found that the 
mothe r was very il l and that they had 
for days sustained both themselves and 
her on food obtained in this manner. 
Th e wome n followed the children home, 
found their story to be true, and began 
to plan for the relief of the family. 
The y tried to find a place where the 
children could be cared for until the 
mother's health was sufficiently regained 
to enable her to resume the care of her 
family. Ther e was, however, no institution to meet the need of such cases. 
This led to the consideration of plans 
for some such home, the result being 
that a house was secured and a Hom e 
for Friendless Girls took tangible shape. 
One of the pioneers of the wor k was 
Mrs. Carolin e Taylor, wh o lost her life 
in service to the cause. Th e unexpired 
term of her office was filled by her 
daughter, Mrs. Teeni e Pierre , wh o served 
as president for eleven years. It was 
under her administration that the wor k 
was brought to the attention of Con ­
gress, and interest in it was stimulated 
to the point where plans were formu ­
lated for the buildin g of a regular institution. Some objection, however, was 
raised by a Mr . Herbert Lewis, wh o 
wanted the wome n to make the wor k a 
rescue home for fallen women . Th e 
wome n tried to make it clear to him 
that that was just the kin d of wor k they 
were hopin g to make unnecessary by 
beginnin g wit h the girls and formin g 
in them prope r habits, rather than tryin g to reform them after they had fallen, 
nevertheless, he failed to endorse the 
plan and the matter dropped. 
Fo r the past three years Mrs. Rosett a 
Lawso n has been president of the home, 
an d under her leadership the wor k has 
made gratifyin g progress. Th e home is 
now located i n a good , comfortabl e 
buildin g of twelve rooms at the corne r 
of Sixt h and Girar d Streets, on a lot 
one hundred by one hundred and fifty 
feet, whic h property they are buying . 
TH E AUSTRALIA N BLACK . 
Fro m an article by W . M . Burton , in 
Th e Sydney, Ne w South Wales, Morn ­
in g Herald , we clip the followin g paragraph : 
"Th e treatment of our blacks i n 
Nort h Australi a is dreadful in the extreme. I n Kimberle y the native is 
merely a do g and a slave. On e man 
wit h who m I camped tol d me that to 
'get ri d of the rubbish ' he made them 
a present of a poisoned bulloc k and then 
watched them die i n dozens. I n the 
Norther n Territor y the black is an outcast and pariah. Th e most heinous 
crime in the Nort h is the bartering of 
the youn g female children. I have seen 
half-caste girls sold to Chines e for a 
few pounds of provisions. Th e old 
blacks wil l sell their youn g wives. O n 
the large cattle stations, no one protects 
the youn g children, wh o are being 
brought up without education for one 
purpose. It is a scandal on our socalled civilization . Th e polic e patrol 
amon g these stations, and kno w what 
is goin g on. I n no Man's Lan d girl 
children are sold from one man to another for a few pounds. Th e worst case 
of callous cruelty that came to my 
knowledge was wher e a ma n used to 
shoot the blacks for sport. H e called 
it 'shooting on the wing, ' as he shot them 
whilst running. Th e polic e acknowledged this to be the case, but they could 
not brin g a case home . Th e Territor y 
blacks are a fine race. Their lack of 
protection is a standing disgrace to 
Australia. " 
q Th e Philadelphi a Recor d says: "I n the 
Londo n clubs and publi c houses men are 
talkin g this week about America n savagery. Wonderin g Chines e in Shangha i 
and Pekin g are askin g if this is the 
Americ a whic h they have accepted as 
their special mentor. India , quick to 
draw histori c parallels, is pointin g out 
that in the days of the Moguls there was 
never a brutality like this one from the 
part of Americ a called Coatesville . 
Turke y lifts her blood y hands in selfexculpation—there was never anythin g in 
an Armenia n massacre to equal this. 
Fiv e continents and the islands of the 
sea are pointin g fingers of scorn at this 
country because of the black deed of one 
wil d night in a Pennsylvani a borough. " RICHAR D LONSDAL E BROW N 
[Writte n for TH E CRISI S and the Ne w Yor k Times.] 
By M . D. MACLEA N 
Last sprin g a boy, wit h portfolio under his arm, walke d up an odd little 
street in Ne w Yor k and knocke d at the 
door of Mr . George de Forest Brush , the 
famous artist. H e was eighteen years old, 
and since that is not an age of wide 
worldl y experience, and he knew Mr . 
Brus h only through his work , it took 
some courage to make the brief journey 
from the corner to the studio door. Perand a return to such occupations as are 
open to youn g colored me n wit h a good 
high-school education. 
Richar d Brow n was his name and he 
came from Parkersburg , W . Va . H e 
had been born in Indiana, but all his 
life had been spent amon g the hills of 
West Virginia . H e had come to know 
and love those hills as few kno w and 
love them. T o get away off from everyhaps he woul d never have ventured if 
he had not been somewha t desperate. 
H e meant to put squarely to Mr . 
Brus h the great question that woul d 
settle his life for him : "D o yo u think 
I can ever become an artist?" If Mr . 
Brus h said yes then he woul d not change 
his fate wit h anybody in the world . If 
he said no, it was good-by to dreams 
body and paint them had been his chief 
pleasure in life. H e cared to paint nothing but landscape. 
His parents had been ambitious for 
him and sent him to the West Virgini a 
Institute, and there in the manual-training department he was taught house 
painting. H e did well in his studies and 
well in his house painting, but it was 
RICHAR D 
LONSDAL E 
BROW N 25 6 THE CRISIS 
in his wor k in water colors that he wo n 
most applause. Everybod y assured him 
he was remarkable. 
Fortunatel y for Richar d Brown , 
heaven had put his head on his shoulders in a very square and level fashion. 
Nearl y any boy woul d have been quite 
content to accept the opinio n of everybody about them. Most of us have a 
lurkin g suspicion that we are remarkable, and the suspicion rapidly becomes 
a conviction as soon as people begin to 
loo k on wit h approbation. Richar d was 
pleased to be complimented, and he 
might have become quite satisfied wit h 
himself had the flame in his heart 
burned less steadily and clearly. 
A s it was he thought the matter out 
very sanely. H e was certainly able to 
paint muc h better than other people he 
knew, but it was easy to shine where 
there are no rivals. It was true that 
Charleston thought him already a 
finished artist, but then Charleston, 
wit h all its advantages as a place of 
residence, could hardly be called a center of art. Youn g Richar d was deeply 
disturbed about himself. H e had an 
ideal, formed entirely from his fancy, 
for he had seen nothin g of what landscape paintin g should be that could help 
him. It was vague, but he felt it to be 
true so far as he could formulate it, and 
he was sure he was a lon g wa y from 
attaining it. 
I n time this anxiety to kno w where 
he stood grew quite unbearable. Some ­
thing had to be done, and he packed his 
bag and went to Pittsburgh . There , he 
knew, were pictures and a school. Th e 
first woul d tell him what he wanted to 
kno w and the second woul d help him to 
reach his ideal. 
Pittsburg h was a revelation. I n the 
institute he found man y pictures and 
he studied there day after day. H e 
worke d in the school, too, but somehow 
he did not feel that things were goin g 
well wit h him. Before the perfection of 
the pictures he saw he was discouraged. 
"Wil l I ever be an artist? " he asked 
himself, and he grew mor e and mor e 
restless and uncertain. Nothin g satisfied him. 
H e must have been very wretched 
and unhappy, for he was a sensible boy 
and yet he did a very wil d thing. H e 
was convinced that Ne w York , where 
great artists lived and great landscape 
paintings were collected, woul d settle 
his difficulties one way or the other. 
Countin g his money, he found he could 
pay his fare to Ne w Yor k and have two 
dollars left over. Hardl y stopping to 
consider what might happen to him 
when that small capital was gone, he 
took the train. 
Th e cost of livin g in Ne w Yor k 
woul d be mor e than in Parkersburg , 
that he knew, but he was rather bewildered to find that to hire a room woul d 
alone require all his money. H e had 
not, indeed, considered the matter very 
carefully, but this was a shock. H e had 
the choice of a bed to sleep i n and no 
food, or of food and no bed; naturally 
he bought somethin g to eat. 
Th e first night he spent i n the trains 
of the elevated railroad. On e can ride 
a lon g wa y for five cents and he rode 
the longest wa y three times, carryin g 
his little bag of clothin g and his precious portfolio. A t the end of each 
journey the guard woul d yel l "Hi , yo u 
there! Wak e up! Al l out! " and the 
exhausted boy woul d struggle up from 
his cramped corner. 
Th e next ten days are a goo d deal of 
a blank to him. H e remembers that he 
ate buns and apples, as providin g more 
food for a starving boy at a cost of five 
cents than anythin g else. H e made a 
few pennies in one way or another, but 
he lived for the most part on his two 
dollars. 
Ther e was hardl y an art dealer in Ne w 
Yor k the boy di d not approach. H e 
woul d have sold any of his paintings for 
ten cents and been thankful, but everywhere the result was the same. A colored boy of eighteen—who wanted to 
look at him? Nobody—no t one dealer— 
took him seriously enough even to 
glance at his pictures. Some did not 
bother themselves to treat him wit h decent courtesy. H e had absolutely nothing for his pains but disappointment, 
tired feet and an increased need for 
something to eat. Finall y he got wor k 
house painting. 
H e spent every evening in the Metro ­
politan »Museum. Th e pictures he found 
there stirred him as nothin g else had 
ever done. Befor e the landscapes of 
the Frenc h school, Rousseau and Coro t 
especially, he fairly worshiped. An y selfconceit he may have had fell away completely , before them. H e knew he was 
only at a beginning wit h a lon g weary 
road to travel. 
Fate had undoubtedly determined to 
try Richar d Brow n to the utmost, for at 
this period of his vicissitudes she gave 
the threads of his already tangled existence another twist whic h had very 
nearly the effect of tyin g them up in an 
inextricabl e knot. A t the moment when 
he was most discouraged, when the 
struggle most reduced him mentally and 
physically, he received an offer whic h 
meant comfort and usefulness. His old 
school needed someone to teach house 
painting and offered him the position. 
Ther e he was squarely confronted wit h 
the question whethe r or not he had a 
right to sacrifice his youth to so far off 
an ideal, whethe r it woul d not be better 
and, above all, mor e honorabl e toward 
the parents wh o had done so muc h for 
him to settle down in Charleston, RICHARD LONSDALE BROWN 257 
teach for a living , paint for his pleasure, 
and fill his useful, inconspicuous, commonplac e niche in the world . 
T o a conscientious boy, free from con ­
ceit, it must have been a hard struggle. 
In fact, it was so hard that he could not 
fight it alone and he migh t have given 
in had he not had his great ideal. H e 
had seen the wor k of Mr . George de 
Forest Brush , and he had not only 
admire d but had recognized that it was 
alon g somewha t simila r lines that he 
himself should develop. H e decided to 
call on Mr . Brus h and ask him frankly 
whether he was runnin g after a rainbow 
or whethe r he really might some day 
reach his goal. 
So this was the history of Richar d 
Brow n wh o was knockin g at Mr . Brush's 
studio door, that the oracle migh t speak 
and determine his future course. 
Mr . Brush , fortunately, is by no 
means so haughty a personage as an art 
dealer's clerk, for he is much too busy 
to think about his fame in the world . 
So he invited his caller to come in and 
said he woul d be glad to look at his 
studies. Richar d Brow n took them out 
and held them up for inspection. 
Ther e was this quality in the youn g 
artist's mind , that all nature was so dear 
to him he never chose distinctly "pretty 
spots." H e had gone out and painted 
what he saw all around him. Ther e 
were winte r scenes, wit h only a bare 
tree and dried grasses in the snowy 
foreground and the West Virgini a hills 
misty and ghostlike in the distance. H e 
had painted hillsides in the autumn, 
bleak and treeless, wit h perhaps a little 
cabin somewhere about, but never a 
human being. An d everywhere he saw 
everything through the love of nature 
that was his passion above all else. 
Al l his little sketches he showed Mr . 
Brush . Tha t gentleman looked at them 
wit h interest and asked a few questions. 
Finall y Richar d Brow n came to the fatal 
point and asked if Mr . Brus h thought 
he could ever be an artist. T o whic h 
the great man made prompt reply: 
"Why , m y boy, " he said heartily, "yo u 
are one now! " 
The n he explained to Richar d that 
Natur e had given him, indeed, her 
inmost secrets, but that Ar t still had 
man y things to teach him. Thos e things 
whic h teaching cannot give—the eye 
that sees and the heart that feels—these 
the boy knew, but other things having 
to do wit h some matters of technique he 
had to learn. However, even technically 
he had acquired a good deal. H e had 
perspective, and his foregrounds, whic h 
artists may say are stumblin g blocks to 
all beginners, were already good. 
Thu s Richar d Brow n was able to make 
his great decision. Ther e was an end 
to anxiety; an end to the period of 
house painting, buns and apples, for Mr . 
Brus h did mor e than give advice. H e 
made the boy his pupil and in the goodness of his kin d heart took him to his 
summe r place in Ne w Hampshire , that 
the boy might lose no time. Her e all 
last summe r he painted the Ne w Eng ­
land landscapes wit h the same insight he 
had had in West Virginia , with his 
master nearby to help and criticise. H e 
progressed so rapidly that at the end of 
the summe r a dealer offered to take 
some of his wor k and exhibit it in his 
rooms on Fift h Avenue . Orders, too, 
had come in here and there, so that even 
financial success seems to have arrived. 
Th e boy's friends had looked forward 
to four or five years of study for him, 
and it was a little disconcerting to find 
him so soon on the road to independence. Richar d Brow n has, however, 
no disposition to overestimate his early 
success. Th e same clear flame that 
saved him before saves him still. H e 
only rejoices that he is able to be independent and that he sees, not very far 
off, the possibility of helping others. 
It was not lon g after the desperate 
pilgrimage to the studio of Mr . Brus h 
that the youn g artist came in contact 
wit h the Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colore d People, and the 
members of the society were amon g his 
earliest friends and admirers in Ne w 
York . It is, therefore, the privilege of 
TH E CRISI S to give the first public reproduction of the wor k of which , the critics 
say, so much may be heard later—for, 
fortunately, one may writ e of Richar d 
Brow n frankly, since he has that heavensent gift—abiilty to see his own shortcomings. 
Mr . W . Rothenstein, the well-known 
Englis h artist, says of him : "Th e youn g 
artist was a charmin g fellow, and his 
wor k has very real and rare qualities. 
I was greatly pleased wit h it and pray 
that the naivete and sincerity it shows 
wil l not be lost. H e has a very precious 
gift—a visio n all his own of nature 
whic h has a touching quality of beauty. 
I pray that he may be able to keep it. 
H e wants all the encouragement he can 
get." 
Althoug h he lives, apparently, only for 
his art, it does not fill all the corners of 
Richar d Brown's heart. H e cares deeply, 
too, for his race, and he thinks much of 
its present of persecution and its possible future of success, especially alon g 
the lines of art. Artisti c by instinct the 
white America n is not, but the black 
America n certainly is. N o one disputes 
his musica l talent and the day may not 
be lon g off when in painting, also, he 
wil l begin to be a factor. H e needs the 
right environment to develop, like all 
other human beings, but here and there 
some gifted boy or girl by force of 
determination wil l find it as Richar d 
Brow n has done. T o be able, some day, 
to help them is his greatest ambition. Th e Chicag o conference should be a 
matter of first importance to association 
members. Fo r the fourth time we shall 
meet to discuss the Negr o problem in 
America . Ne w Yor k and Bosto n have 
had notable gatherings, but we hope 
that, wit h our increased membership and 
our mor e central location, Chicag o wil l 
have a larger conference than any that 
has been held before. 
Th e program is in formation. O n 
Sunday, Apri l 28, the religious leaders 
of the city—ministers, priests, rabbis— 
are asked to speak on the nationa l evil 
of lynching . O n Monda y afternoon it 
is hoped that Mr . Villar d wil l be present and wil l open the conference. H e 
wil l be followed by Dr. D u Bois, wh o 
wil l give a lecture wit h lantern slides, 
illustrative of conditions amon g the 
Negroe s in the Unite d States. Monda y 
evening the meeting wil l be addressed 
by Miss Juli a Lathrop , of Hul l House , 
Chicago , Mr . I. M . Rubinow, Specia l 
Agent, Bureau of Labor, Washington , 
D . C, formerly of the Imperia l Russian 
Civi l Service, and Mr . Chas. Edwar d 
Russell. Tuesday mornin g representatives from all the States are asked to 
report on legal and politica l conditions 
amon g the Negroe s in their sections. O n 
Tuesday afternoon there wil l be a reception at Hul l Hous e to members and 
their friends, and on Tuesday evening 
the city Negro , wit h especial reference 
to conditions in Chicago, wil l be the 
topic for discussion. Altogether, we 
can promis e our audiences a thoughtful, 
interesting presentation of the larger 
aspects of the Negr o problem in 
America . 
If members outside of Chicago , wh o 
expect to be present, wil l communicat e 
wit h the secretary of the conference, 
Mr . W . T. Allinson , 701 Fourteent h 
Place, every effort wil l be made to 
arrange for their stay in the city. 
<J Th e association has brought out 
another pamphlet, "Th e View s of a 
Southern Woman, " by Miss Adelen e 
Moffat; price two cents. 
<I One of our board of directors, Mrs. 
Mar y Churc h Terrell , spoke recently on 
the color question at Radcliffe College 
and at the Bosto n Englis h Hig h School. 
Th e principa l of the high school wrot e 
to our president, Mr . Moorfiel d Storey : 
"Th e girls were very muc h interested in 
wha t Mrs. Terrel l said, and I am sure 
her address wil l help them to deal fairly 
wit h colored girls whe n they come i n 
contact in after life. " Dea n Brigg s also 
wrot e that Mrs. Terrel l made a stron g 
impression and had an excellent audience. Th e N . A . A . C. P . is formin g a 
lecture committe e that shall begin this 
spring makin g engagements for its members to speak durin g the comin g year. 
Wor k of this character has been done 
from the office, but a mor e comprehensive plan is necessary if we are to come 
before the publi c as we should. 
<I Th e Lewis incident, mentione d under 
"Opinion, " has attracted considerable 
attention. Th e association wrot e to 
Attorney-Genera l Wickersham , thankin g him for his determined stand 
against the illega l procedure practiced 
upon Mr . Lewis; and to the president 
of the America n Ba r Association , Mr . 
S. S. Gregory , protesting against the 
color discriminatien whic h he showed 
clearly, from his ow n statement, was 
the onl y reason for attempting to annul 
Mr . Lewis's election. W e regret that, 
owin g to a clerica l error, one of our letters whic h received considerable publicit y was addressed to the president of 
the Ne w Yor k Ba r Association , Mr . 
Lewis Cass Ledyard , wh o was not concerned in the controversy. 
<I W e have received a numbe r of letters 
congratulating us on our protest. Dr. 
Stephen S. Wise , of the Fre e Syna ­
gogue, Ne w York , write s to our chairman : " I have wanted to writ e to yo u 
for some days in order to tell yo u how 
I rejoice in you r fine and strong appeal 
to the president of the America n Ba r 
Association. " Mrs. Dian a Belais, president of the Anti-Vivisectio n Society, 
writes: " I thank yo u heartily for havin g writte n this letter, and I beg that 
yo u may push the matter to the utmost 
limit, because a victor y in this instance 
would , I think, mean a very, very great 
victor y to this oppressed race." Ou r 
final wor d is that of the Bosto n Com ­
mo n whic h asks: "Dar e the America n 
Ba r Associatio n assert that a man wh o 
is fit to be a law officer of the Unite d 
States is unfit to be a membe r of its 
body, just because, by accident of birth, THE N. A. A. C. P. 259 
his color is black? Le t us have a 
straightforward answer to this question! " 
<! B y the middl e of Apri l the association 
wil l move into larger quarters in the 
Evenin g Post Annex , 26 Vese y Street. 
Th e difficulty of carryin g on the wor k 
of a Nationa l Associatio n and editing 
and mailin g a magazine that now prints 
22,500 copies has been stupendous. 
<J Forty-nin e persons joined the association in February , payin g $189 in memberships. Twent y were from Ne w York , 
fifteen from Massachusetts, ten from 
Ne w Orleans and four from the West. 
Th e meeting in Washington , D . C , in 
the interests of the N . A . A . C. P. was 
an overwhelmin g success, and reflects 
extraordinary credit on its efficient 
organizers, amon g who m that indefatigable worker, Mrs. Carri e W . Clifford, 
may be specially named without disparaging the man y others wh o co-operated towar d securing the gratifying 
result. Th e gathering was held in the 
Metropolita n A . M . E . Church , on Tuesday evening, Marc h 19, 1912, the audience numberin g mor e than a thousand, and includin g many of the leaders 
in the social, educational, industria l and 
professional life of the colored people 
of the city. Judge Wendel l P. Stafford, 
of the Supreme Court of the Distric t of 
Columbia , presided. Musi c was furnished 
by the Howar d Glee Club . A telegram 
of regret from Dr. W . E . B. D u Bois was 
read, sickness havin g prevented his attendance. Th e speakers were Professor 
Joe l N . Spingarn, Miss Marth a Gruenin g 
and Mr . James F . Morton , Jr., all of Ne w 
Yor k City . Professor Spingarn aroused 
tremendous interest through his account 
of the aggressive wor k of the association against specific acts of discrimina ­
tion and injustice, dwellin g especially on 
the wor k of the Ne w Yor k branch and 
the successes of the Ne w Yor k Vigilanc e 
Committe e in enforcing the provisions 
of the Civi l Rights Law . 
Mr . Morto n dwelt on the basic prin ­
ciples of agitation and education on 
behalf of human rights, and on the wor k 
of the association in counteracting the 
agencies devoted to the spread of race 
prejudice. Miss Gruenin g presented an 
admirable summary of the varied activities of the association not covered by 
the other speakers, callin g special attention to the publication of TH E CRISIS , the 
encouragement of such artistic talent as 
that of Richar d Brown , the risin g colored 
painter, the investigations into lynchin g 
and other forms of work. 
Rev. J. M . Waldro n then brought the 
whol e matter to a focus by an appeal for 
personal work, to begin then and there. 
A lively response was manifested. Man y 
subscriptions were taken to TH E CRISIS , 
and a number of memberships secured to 
the N . A . A . C. P., for whic h a special 
collection was also taken. A large number signified in writin g their intention 
to affiliate actively wit h the incipient 
loca l branch, and a meeting for permanent organization and for mappin g out 
district lines of wor k wil l be called in 
the near future. 
HISTORI C DAY S I N APRI L 
3. Negr o troops enter Richmond , 
1865. 
4. Richar d Alle n and Absalo m Jones 
organized the first Negr o aid and beneficial society, 1787. 
5. Report of commissio n sent to San 
Doming o to investigate the question of 
annexation sent to Congress, 1871. 
6. Second Continenta l Congress 
passed resolution against importation of 
slaves. 1776. 
7. Lewis Hayden , fugitive slave and 
tireless worke r for the advancement of 
the Negro , died, 1889. 
8. Ne w Yor k prohibits slave trade, 
1801. 
9. Lyma n Trumbull's Civi l Rights 
Bill , whic h gave the Negr o status in the 
courts of the Unite d States, became law, 
1866. 
11. Richar d Allen , first bishop of the 
Africa n Methodist Episcopa l Church , 
consecrated, 1816. 
'12. Battle of Fort Pillow , 1864. 
14. First abolition society in the 
Unite d States organized, 1775. 
15. Abraham Lincol n died, 1865. 
16. Emancipatio n in the Distric t of 
Columbi a by act of Congress, providin g 
for compensation of slaveholders, 1862. 
17. Robert G. Shaw commissioned 
colone l of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, 1863. 
18. Reconstruction constitution of 
Louisian a ratified, 1868. 
19. Oberlin , O., founded, 1833. 
20. Anti-Ku-Klu x Ac t approved, 
1871. 
23. Gen. Benjami n F . Butle r offers to 
suppress servile insurrection in Mary ­
land, 1861. 
27. Toussaint L'ouvertur e died, 1803. 
30. Th e Fifteenth Amendmen t proposed, 1866. 
L . M . HERSHAW . TWILIGHT: AN IMPRESSION 
BY WILLIA M STANLE Y BRAITHWAlTE 
The road followed part of the way 
between rows of stone walls on either 
side that enclosed meadows and fields, 
and groups of little woods straggling 
along, until they began to border the 
road with tall trees when the stone walls 
stopped. The trees stood bare in the 
crisp, still air at the top of the hill where 
the road began to descend, their 
branches tracing the lemon and orange 
of the western sky as I left them behind 
me; a low murmur of sighing winds 
mingled with the cracking of dry bark 
which sounded fainter and fainter as I 
descended where the woods abruptly 
ended. Before me lay the sea to the 
southeast, and circling the southern 
shore jagged cliffs fortified the sloping 
land against centuries of assaulting and 
angry foam. The sandy beach formed a 
crescent eastward, along which the road 
separated it from the alternate swamp, 
meadow and neld, stretching to the outskirts of the town in the distance that 
lay south and west, meeting the open 
uplands and valleys to the north. 
Going down where the ocean lay at 
my feet, I inhaled a full breath of its 
pungent odors, and turned around to 
look upon the scene that silhouetted 
itself against the vivid western sky. On 
the crest of the hill the naked tree 
trunks cut their dark shadows into the 
infinitude of the heavens, and seemed 
not terrestrial things that had very firm 
roots in this earth. Already the rosy 
tinge reflected from the departed sun 
was filling the spaces between the trees, 
contrasting its delicate, immaterial color 
against the sombre hilltop. I turned 
from the miracle of the west to the mystery of the east; to the earth and sea 
and sky, melting their outlines, their 
definite and sharp formations of wave 
and rock and cloud, into the obliterating 
dusk creeping insistently from the east. 
A white sail stood against the obscurity 
bravely for a while, just above the 
horizon, where the green wall of the sea 
was fast changing to dark purple. First, 
its reflection of a slant of crimson from 
the west faded, then the gleaming sail 
itself became dimmer and dimmer until 
it melted into the afterglow. The meadows and fields kept their character 
longer than the sea. When the sun or 
moon is shining on the sea at any angle 
it is full of wonderful changes; atmosphere, clouds and winds give it color 
and motion and mood; twilight gathers 
all these effects into one modulation of 
tone and feeling, full of suggestion and. 
spiritual symbolism, before passing into 
the monotone of night's darkness. It is 
different with the land. The slant of 
meadow and field, the delicate, shimmering outlines of distant hills against 
the sky, the pointed tops of trees, hollows and rocks, and winding roads, 
reflect by some inexplicable magic their 
shadowy presences against the soft suffusion of the dusk. The atmosphere 
becomes a woven veil of shadows; the 
wind undulates it as if the spirit of 
nature breathed meditatively through 
the changing hour, that was conscious 
in itself of that deeper change beneath 
appearances from which the seasons are 
born. An d so I looked upon the land 
and saw Nature, as it were, in her private chamber of dreams, and felt vaguely 
the sea, passionate in its tranquil unrest, 
its innumerable and unending waves like 
a silent army of soldiery stealing upon 
the sleeping shores of the world. 
It was neither day nor night; it was 
the pause between, the suspension of 
twilight. There was no sound, for the 
murmur of the waves upon the sands 
and the sigh of low winds that ran over 
the sere grass, mingled and became 
silence to that tense and physical passivity when all the senses become but one 
sense of spiritual feeling and vision. I 
walked on over the hardening road 
where neither man nor beast broke upon 
my solitude. I was conscious of no 
motion; I seemed to have fallen in with 
the rhythm of silence that bore me in 
perfect harmony with earth. There was 
the realization of not being alone, of 
having companions that the sound of TWILIGHT 261 
my lips could not reach, nor my hands 
touch, but wh o crowded my memor y 
wit h images and filled my imagination 
wit h voices. I paused often and turned, 
as if to answer some question, just to 
catch a shadow settling alon g the ridge 
beside the road, and nothin g beyond but 
the dim gray-blue silence for miles. I 
had kept my eyes leveling the landscape, 
discerning the contour of the road, 
defining against the distance a track of 
foam that marke d the rim of the sea, but 
now, lifting them to the sky, I discovered a point of light breaking through 
the atmosphere; it twinkle d and van ­
ished, but gazin g steadily, I saw it burst 
a white flame, the first star burnin g 
against the shadow of the sky. I 
watched a cluster bloom and shoot their 
javelin points of radiance into an infinity 
of silence. Turnin g my eyes to earth 
again, everythin g had drawn closer; the 
sea seemed to wash its liqui d presence 
around my feet, my hands felt the hilltops pressing their vague strength 
through the gloom, and the roadside 
fields rose in the foreground to shut out 
the rumbling s of humanity. Th e light 
waned and the dusk began to menace. 
I had been lifted for one minute above 
time and eternity; I had felt the foregathering of all existence in the visible 
delay of night and day. Th e passage of 
the ivor y gates had been traversed, and 
I saw the meanin g of man y things that 
had puzzled and escaped me in the 
crowded streets of cities. Fo r I read 
clear in the twilight pause that was now 
a swift surrender, the secret at the heart 
of humanity. I had gone upon that twilight walk the messenger of man's mystery, his inexplicable relationship to 
nature, his still more subtle and inexplicable relationships with his kind . His 
very existence seemed to me symbolize d 
in that scene of earth and sea. Th e 
presence of man exiled from it, nothin g 
could be realized without his memor y or 
the memor y of him. Brai n and wil l and 
spirit, he dominated the solitude and 
silence, the inviolable regularity of 
earth's rhythm, the law of win d and 
wave, all these worke d according to his 
necessity, harnessed themselves to his 
perpetuation. 
Ther e was no more day. Th e darkness 
completely swallowe d the hills; now and 
then a dull washin g of waves upon the 
sands told me where the sea heaved its 
naked breast to the stars that spangled 
the wide heavens. Th e earth was in 
secret, hidin g her memorie s in the 
silence and obscurity of night. I stood 
wit h no questioning spirit. I was satisfied to be, assured and confident of what 
was to be. Th e twilight I had know n 
was the womb of time that conceived 
to-morrow, and I knew that man's life 
was the womb that carried the seed of 
immortality . 
Conducted by Jessie Fauset 
"Letters to Unknow n Friends. " Lyma n 
Abbot t in the Outlook , January 20, 
1912. 
Wh o says there is nothin g new under 
the sun? Her e comes Dr. Lyma n Ab ­
bott wit h an entirely origina l exposition 
of the parable of the Goo d Samaritan 
and the ma n wh o had fallen amon g 
thieves. 
For, he says, just as a man has a 
doubtful, if any, right to brin g into his 
home an obnoxious guest, just so it is a 
mora l blunde r to introduce into a white 
or a Christia n or a Protestant school 
—the school being merely a larger 
home—a Negro , or a Jew, or a Roma n 
Catholic . Thes e last, in the opinion of 
this whit e Gentil e Protestant divine, 
evidently constitute, by the mere fact 
of their color, nationality and religion, 
the obnoxious guests. "This is not " (we 
quote, and the italics are ours) "the wa y 
to promot e the spirit of human brotherhood, is not recorded that the Good 
Samaritan took the wounded traveler into 
his own home. He took him to an inn." 
Surely we are behind the times then 
if we think this parable was meant to 
teach the lesson of charity to all. Le t us, 
wit h Dr. Abbott, learn to consider it 
merely the prototype of America n expediency. 
"Robert Goul d Shaw. " Willia m James. 
Oratio n delivered Ma y 31, 1897, upon 
the unveilin g of the Shaw monument. 
Reprinte d in his "Memorie s and 
Studies, " 1911. Longmans, Green & 
Co . 
WHA T T O REA D 262 THE CRISIS 
Th e oration is a masterpiece, not only 
in its rare felicity of expression, but also 
in the genuineness of the tribute whic h 
is paid to this hero. W e do not think 
of Shaw too often, and many of us do 
not recogniz e to its full extent the 
pathos, the glor y and the sacrifice of 
his beautiful youn g life. Al l this Mr . 
James sets before us wit h a new and 
vivi d meaning. Thin k of a youn g man 
—he was onl y twenty-five—a favorite in 
a favored regiment, secure of his 
advance as a white man in a white man's 
war, suddenly flinging aside ambition, 
socia l position, assured preferment, to 
establish the honor of the despised and 
subject race whic h comprised the rank 
and file of the 54th Massachusetts! 
This even mor e than the loss of his life 
may be accounted the supreme sacrifice. 
Ho w well he taught his new comman d 
to do their duty is shown by that memorable attack on Fort Wagner, in whic h 
Shaw led from first to last and in whic h 
five-twelfths of those gallant black soldiers followe d their brave youn g leader 
to a glorious death. 
It is impossibl e to read the oration 
without being struck by the singula r 
appositeness of Mr . James' remarks to 
some of our latter-day conditions. Take , 
for instance, the followin g memorabl e 
passage: 
"Th e deadliest enemies of nations are 
not their foreign foes; they always dwell 
withi n their borders. An d from these 
internal enemies civilizatio n is always in 
need of being saved. Th e nation blest 
above all nations is she in who m the 
civi c genius of the people does the savin g day by day, by acts without external 
picturesqueness; by speaking, writing , 
votin g reasonably; by smitin g corruption swiftly ; by good temper between 
parties; by the people knowin g true men 
when they see them, and preferring 
them as leaders to rabid partisans or 
empty quacks. Suc h nations have no 
need of wa r to save them. Their 
accounts wit h righteousness are always 
even; and God's judgments do not have 
to overtake them fitfully in bloody 
spasms and convulsions of the race." 
"God's judgments! " Ho w these words 
spoken in 1897 leap forward to meet the 
terrible needs of 1912! 
"Ne w Slavery at the South. " A Negr o 
nurse in the Independent for January 
25, 1912. 
Th e "old , unhappy, far-off things " of 
slavery are not so far away after all 
This wail from a Negr o nurse shows 
how ver y muc h they are still wit h us. 
This woma n is over forty years of age 
and she has been a servant i n one 
capacity or another for thirty of those 
years. He r experience, whic h follows in 
brief, is that, she declares, of two-thirds 
of the Negroe s of her town . 
She lives "at service. " Generall y she 
work s from fourteen to sixteen hours a 
day. Her e is what she does: She 
nurses a little whit e chil d of eleven 
months, acts as playmat e to the other 
three children, waters the lawn , sweeps 
the sidewalk, mops the porc h and halls, 
dusts around, helps the cook, darns the 
stockings, is allowe d a Sunday afternoon off once in two weeks, never goes 
to church, a lecture or an entertainment. 
She gets no consideration—for instance, 
in all those forty-od d years she has 
never been called Miss or Mrs. by any 
white person. Th e first name that 
occurs to her master or mistress wil l do 
for her, and if no name occurs there is 
always the term "nigger. " Incidentall y 
she, and the class of Negr o wome n of 
who m she is the type, is expected—this, 
she cries, is the burden that lies heaviest 
on her heart—to submit graciously to 
any advances that her madam's husband 
or son may choose to make. She is the 
slave, body and soul, of the family for 
whic h she works. 
Wh y doesn't she leave her "place, " or 
save up her mone y and come away? 
Well , to begin with , before she had been 
in a new position twenty-four hours she 
woul d find that her ol d employe r had 
sent over the telephone an account of 
her character and ability that woul d 
necessitate another change. An d as to 
saving money—how much could yo u 
save if you, like her, received ten dollars 
a mont h for wages and were a widow 
wit h three children? Is it any wonde r 
that she cries out for help, sympath y and 
the protection the law denies? A s a last 
resort, she calls for aid on the Southern 
women , if onl y in their own defense, 
since it is their children that she and all 
these other poor slaves are rearing. Is 
it not "inevitable that the lives of these 
children wil l in some measure be pure 
or impure, accordin g as they are affected 
by contact wit h their colore d nurses?" 
"Huma n Natur e in Hawaii. " Ra y Stannard Bake r i n the America n for January, 1912. 
Th e subtitle of this article explains 
the entire situation in Hawaii . It runs: 
"Ho w the Fe w Wan t the Man y to Wor k 
for Them—Perpetually , and at Lo w 
Wages. " Mr . Bake r characteristically 
states the facts as they are and gives us 
a frank exposition of the white man's 
effort to exploit the brown . It makes 
interesting reading and one learns 
afresh that America n law seems made 
to be juggled with . "On e important 
official," writes Mr . Baker, "said to me 
boldl y and naively : 'Yo u see, these 
youn g Japanese bor n in the islands 
under the law are as muc h citizens as 
we are. The y are, therefore, entitled to 
take up homesteads. Th e problem wit h 
us is to interpret the law so that none 
of them can get in.' " Tha t last sentence has a familia r ring . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 26 3 
The 
National Religious Training 
School and Chautauqua 
extends a cordial greeting to the ministers of all denominations 
to be the guests of the School for one week, beginning July 
6, 1912, for the purpose of discussing the following and 
kindred questions: 
What is the moral condition of the people in your community? 
Is crime on the increase? If not, what was the cause of its 
reduction? 
What is the sanitary condition? What effort, if any, has 
been made to improve the sanitary condition? 
Is the death rate increasing? 
T o what extent do you co-operate with the Civic Improvement 
Leagues? 
Has settlement work been conducted to any extent in your 
community, and with what results? 
What has been the effect of Temperance Organizations, and 
have you co-operated with them? 
T o what extent has the work of the Y . M . C . A . and 
Y . W . C . A . been effective in your community? Do 
you approve them? 
What is the general fitness of the city and country school 
teacher? 
What has been the attitude of the day-school teacher toward 
the Church and Sunday School? 
What is the real religious condition of your people? Revivals, 
how conducted? 
Al l ministers who intend attending this Conference should 
make it known at an early date, addressing the President, so 
that reservation can be made for them. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua of the National 
Religious Training School will open July 3, 1912, and 
continue for six weeks. The most complete and most up-todate Summer School for the Colored Race in the United 
States. For particulars and terms address 
Presiden t JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
DURHAM , N . C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 26 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
$5 to $10 A DAY 
On e Goo d Hustlin g Agen t Wante d 
in every community to take orders for 
our celebrate d made-to-measure 
clothes. You make big profits—$2.00 to 
$7.00 on every suit. Write us before 
we get an agent in your territory 
and you will receive an astonish ­
in g offer . No money, no experience necessary. 
W E STAR T YO U FRE E 
We furnish you with everything and place you in a business 
of your own that will mean 
from $1,50 0 t o $3 ,00 0 a 
yea r t o you . Easies t an d 
mos t profitabl e busines s 
I n th e world . Every man 
in your vicinity a possible 
customer. Our low prices 
and able assistance 
get the trade for you. 
PANTS 2.50 uP 
Suits $9.00 
UP 
We Prepay Express Every garment cut 
and made to measure in latest city style, perfect fit 
guaranteed. Money refunded if goods are not satisfactory. Beautifu l Sampl e Outfit , order blanks, 
tape line, FREE . With our complete instructions you 
can take measurements as accurately as any tailor. 
Write for your territory and outfit today. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO., 185 Harrison Street. Chicago 
SUITS
 $9£ 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and 
Supplies for all Fraternal and Church 
Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Writ e 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
The May number will contain 
illustrated articles on three General 
Conferences which convene during 
the month of May. 
MAYERS ' INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
BOARDIN G AN D DA Y SCHOO L 
Fo r the industrial, literary, mora l and religious 
training of the Negro youth. 
Term s reasonable. 
Fo r particular s address 
FLOR A E . MAYERS , Principa l 
606 Payn e Street Knoxvllle , Tenn . 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J . DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNEY AND CouNSELOR-AT-LAW 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel . 622 2 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Unio n Block, Fourt h and Cedar Streets 
S t Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY P UBLIC 
Office: Room 502 , Eberl y Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW. 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
90 8 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 26 5 
A PAG E O F ADVERTISEMENT S FO R WOME N 
KELSEY'S 
Human Hair Goods and 
Hair Preparations 
Have stood the test for years. Al l 
the latest styles in Braids, Transformations. Puffs, Toupees, Wigs, 
etc., carefully matched to a sample 
of your hair, and beautifully made. 
Only the best hair used in manufacturing. 
KELSEY' S Hair Grower and 
Dressing, made of the purest Hair 
and Scalp foods, relieves the Scalp 
of all of the many diseases for 
which it is subject, causing the 
Hair to become soft and healthy, 
and POSITIVEL Y prevents its 
falling out. 
Puffs, Braids and Transformations, $1 up. 
Hair Grower and Dressing, $1. 
Sen d sampl e of Hai r for pric e quotation 
S. A. & A. C. KELSEY 
328 Leno x Avenu e Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Sunlight at Night 
Our new inverted gas burner. 300-candlepower light, made of steel enameled white, 
with white crystal globe. burns 3 1/4 cubic 
feet of gas per hour. Perfect combustion, 
never smokes if properly regulated. 
Also our Sun-Ray Kerosene Mantle Burners, 100-candle-power light. One quart of 
kerosene lasts 16 hours. Money back if 
not as represented. Particulars free. 
Simplex Gaslight Co. , Dept. C , New York 
Telephone 325 3 Harle m 
CARPE T GLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 WES T 135th STREE T 
W e make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R 
SPECIALT Y 
Odessa Millinery 
41 W . 135th Street New York 
Started as the first; still leading 
in all advanced Parisian Millinery. 
Telephone 624 Harle m 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cor a Va n Schoick is conducting a sale 
and exhibit of unusual interest at the CLI O 
SCHOOL . 487 6th Avenue , between 29th and 30th 
Streets, New York . 
Ther e is on sale hand-painted china and pillow tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive 
for gifts and interior decorations. 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
Ou r buffet lamp, all brass, burns 
kerosene. Suitable for all social 
functions. Repousee, brass shade. 
Line n cuirass lining with silk 
fringe in six colors; makes a 
beautiful gift. Useful as night 
lamp. Stands 11 inches high and 
is weighted at bottom so as to 
stand. A very fine table decoration. B y mail, postpaid, 60 cents 
each. Pe r dozen, $6. 
SIMPLE X GASLIGH T COMPAN Y 
Dept. A . NE W YOR K 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelse y Schoo l of Beaut y Cultur e and Hair Dressin g 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Beauty Culture, Hair Making and 
Chiropody scientifically taught. Day and night sessions. Instructions given to 
pupils in their own homes if desired. Diplomas awarded. Send for bookletdirectory of recently graduated students. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 26 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A professional man advertised in TH E CRISI S for a partner wit h capital. The 
profession is one that offers little encouragement to colored men and yet he writes: 
"Kindl y stop the advertisement in TH E CRISIS , as my want has 
been filled. We appreciate the very good results (from TH E CRISIS ) 
and wil l forward check on the 15th. " 
A large corporation advertised in TH E CRISI S for a general manager wit h capital. 
The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those wit h capital 
and experience. They write : 
"W e believe that one of the parties is really interested in our . 
proposition and wil l close with him in a few days. " 
They "closed " wit h him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
There is our story in a nutshell. 
Those who require high-grade help should use our "Hel p Wanted " columns, and 
those who are trained or experienced as high-grade helpers should advertise their 
services where they may reach the largest number of possible employers. 
TH E CRISIS CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING SERVICE IS TH E 
MEETIN G PLAC E O F BUSINES S AN D PROFICIENCY 
HELP WANTE D 
AGENT S mak e bi g mone y sellin g ou r Negr o 
pictures, .size 16 x 20. ' 'Jesu s Die d fo r 
Both, " "Clingin g to the Cross, " "Protectin g 
Angel, " "Booke r T . Washington,' ' "Heaven -
ward, " " A Mother' s Joy, " "Inspiration, " 
"Mama , I Lov e You, " "Jac k Johnson. " 
Catalo g free . People s Portrai t Co. , 71 0 W . 
Madiso n St. , Dept . C, Chicago , Ill. 
'Phone : Harlem , 6370 
Middlese x Employmen t Agenc y 
Offers yo u the benefit o f its experience , gained 
b y years of actua l conduc t o f business and the 
prestig e tha t come s fro m a larg e clientele of 
satisfie d patrons. 
Ou r rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standar d high . Mai l orders solicited. 
2229 Fift h Avenue , near 136th Street, 
New York . 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence Invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue Mew Yor k 
Agents—Big Money 
Sellin g ou r seven -
piec e combinatio n 
kitche n set, mad e u p 
of article s absolutel y 
neede d i n ever y 
household , The y sel l 
on sight . Mr . Jarvi s 
sol d fift y sets in one 
day . Send $1 fo r 
sample . Sen t prepai d 
to an y address i n 
Unite d State s o r 
Canada . Als o ou r improve d Slidewel l Casters fo r 
chairs, which sel l to everybod y everywhere . Se t 
of fou r sen t postpai d fo r 15 cents. 
BUSSING-WHEATO N CO . 
23 PAR K RO W DEPT . A NE W YOR K 
AGENT S WANTE D fo r the most rapid-sellin g 
Negr o shee t picture s o n earth ; ever y ma n an d 
woma n wil l bu y o n sight—n o talking—th e 
picture s sel l themselves. Writ e to-da y fo r 
fre e sampl e an d circulars. 
CRESCEN T NOVELT Y CO . 
423 E . KIN G ST . Bedford City , Va . 
BATH TUB 
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water. 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lasts for years. 
Write for special agents offer and description. Robinson MFG. Co., 205, 
Adams St., Toledo, O. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 267 
AGENTS WANTE D 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
ma y be made in commissions by parties handling ' 'Histor y of Negro Soldiers in SpanishAmerican War " combined with "Histor y of the 
Negro Race. " 400 pages. 50 illustrations. 
Pric e $1.25 net. Address 
E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street New Yor k 
AGENTS—$6 0 IN 6 DAY S 
This is the report of Mr. 
Edw. Carney, one or our 
Agents. You can do as 
. well selling our Daisy 
— Safety Razor. Sample by 
mail 25 centa. Per dozen 
$2.00—12 New Sharp Keen 
Blades 35 cents. All postpaid. Guaranteed. Money 
back if not as represented. Territory going fast. Start 
at once. Other money makers as well. Particulars free. 
BUSS ING-WHEATON CO.. Inc., Dept. C 
23 Park Row New York 
ME N AN D WOME N WANTE D 
to sell beautiful Art Pictures of Negro 
subjects. Our agents are coining money 
on these pictures. 
Three sample pictures by mail, 35 cents. 
Ten sample postcards by mail, 6 cents. 
Address: JACO B GRIFFIT H 
252 W. 53d Street New York 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a numbe r of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. Cit y property a 
specialty. Business lots in the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Lug e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texas real estate. Land s are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T. B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company, 2415 El m 
Street, Dallas. Texas. 
To Colored People 
F
O R SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRIS E 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Rea l Estat e 
1218 1/2 Mt. Verno n Ave . Columbus . Ohi o 
PATENTS 
L. H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
56 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technica l Translations. 
Telephone 343 Joh n Room 604 
FURRIER 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
24 WES T 135T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
MUSIC 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduat e of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupil of Sigismund Stojowski 
Teache r of Piano, Theory , Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
INSURANCE 
Telephon e 139 3 Wort h 
E . O. BUSSIN G 
Fire, Life, Plate Glass and Casualty 
Insurance 
320 BROADWA Y New York City 
Suit e 72 3 
BOOK S 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAMES F . MORTON , JR. . A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bug -
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already sold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street. 
New York , N . Y . 
The May number of TH E CRISIS will 
be the General Conference number. 
ORDE R TO-DAY . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 268 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
AR E YO U INTERESTE D 
I N TH E 
NEGR O PROBLE M 
OR 
PAR T OF I T 
THE 
BOOKS 
THE 
MAGAZINE 
STUDENTS OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM 
The Souls of Black Folk, DuBois 
History of the Negro = Washington 
John Brown • • DuBois 
Up From Slavery • • Washington 
Poems of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar 
Poems of W. S. Braith= 
waite 
Race Adjustment • Miller 
Negro In the New World, Johnston 
Following the Color Line, Baker 
Works of Charles W. 
Chestnutt 
Atlanta University Studies 
Negro and the Nation = Merriam 
Negro In the South I Washington 
'DuBois 
• Sinclair 
Ovington 
Aftermath of Slavery 
Half a Man . • 
Life of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe • • • • Stowe 
Mind of Primitive Man, Boaz 
Race Prejudice • • Finot 
Curse of Race Prejudice, Morton 
Quest of the Silver Fleece, 
a novel - - -. DuBois 
Through Afro • America, Archer 
Southern South • • Hart 
Inter=Racial Problems, Official Record 
of the Universal Races Congress 
An d general readers will 
find this list embraces the 
most popular and comprehensive studies of the Negro 
question. The y are the 
best books by the best 
writers and thinkers. By 
special arrangements with 
the publishers of the books 
we are in position to make 
combination offers at remarkably low prices. This 
offer is good for a limited 
time only and is made to 
increase the subscription 
list of 
THE CRISIS 
the magazine edited by 
W - E . B. DuBois with the co-operation of Oswal d Garrison 
Villard , Charles Edward Russell, Kell y Mille r and 
others. Th e Crisis is the organ of the National Association For the Advancement of Colored People 
and is a record of every important happening and 
movement in the world which bears on the great 
problems of inter-racial relations and especially 
those which affect the Negro American . 
OUR OFFER: 
To (he 
Publishers 
of the CRISIS, 
20 Vesey StreetNew York City. 
«» ; L J ii . , Gentlemen: 
W e have made special combinations ^ 
, , L I n a & Please send, 
with these books in sets of five, ten, fif- « ^ 
. L • L /> without any cost to 
teen and twenty, together with a . 
. .. . „ . . C V
 me
- y° u r descriptive 
year's subscription to the Crisis ,
 v
 . , n . .
 1 
t circular offering these 
and will be glad to have the «*\ r i t i 
fj* sets or books on the 
names and addresses of all / \ T D LI J 
/ Negr o Proble m and a 
who find themselves / y ^ subscription to the 
interested in this / CRISIS 
greatest o f
 / Name 
problems. /Address 
City 
State 
MENTION TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 26 9 
Mutual Teachers' Agency 
(A Bureau for Colored Teachers) 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures employment for 
teachers. Now is the time to register. Blanks and information furnished free on application. Local and longdistance telephone, North 1625. 
S. M . KENDRICK , Secretary 
1335 T STREET , N . W. WASHINGTON , D. G. 
GOO D COMMISSION PAID T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOIN NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
llO 1/2 Colfax Ave., South Bend, Ind. 
Too, Too! Too, Too! Too, Too! 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
With a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
For particulars write G. W. BLAND , H . S. P. 
Telephon e 421 4 Greele y 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
Formerl y Manage r Virgini a Transfe r Compan y 
45 9 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Orders b y mai l o r 'phon e receiv e promp t attentio n 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c . PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C . V . B . A . 
Te n Year s wit h Dr . D . C . Whit e 
Telephon e 718 9 Morningsid e 
DR. JAME S A BANK S 
DENTIS T 
20 4 WES T 133d STREET , NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crow n and Bridg e Wor k a Specialty 
Pur e Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
COMFORT—Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE—I n the hotel and dining room the "Marshall" service is an exceptional feature, which assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30. 30c. Luncheon, 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner. 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinner Every Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J- L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 136th and 136th Sts. 
Rea l Hom e Cooking ; Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-made Rolls Served Ho t 
Telephon e 172 1 Harle m 
A Quie t Plac e fo r Quie t Peopl e to Slee p an d Ea t 
TH E BRADFOR D 
7 3 WES T 134t h STREE T NE W YOR K 
Bet . 5t h an d Leno x Aves . 
FURNISHE D ROOM S T O LE T 
(Transient ) 
MEAL S A T AL L HOUR S 
Joh n E . Bradford , Prop . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 270 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A limited numbe r o f 
free beds maintaine d 
for the worthy poor . 
Othe r war d patientsmaintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured fro m 
$12.00 to $30.00 pe r 
week. 
Th e training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an. 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a freebed. 
Andrew F . Stevens. 
President. 
Nathan F . MosselI, M.D . 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
Th e original front stroke visible writing 
typewriter. 
A mechanical masterpiece and universal 
favorite. 
Underwoo d sales exceed those of any 
other machine. 
"The Machine You Will 
Eventually Buy" 
Underwood Typewrite r Co., 
INCORPORATE D 
Underwood Building New York 
PAMPHLET S 
Published by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by the Rev. John Haynes Holmes. 
Price 5 cents. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about 
the discrimination against the Negro. By 
the Rev. Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta University. Price 5 cents. 
3. The Real Race Problem: A scientific 
comparison of the black and the white man 
by America's foremost anthropologist, 
Prof. Boas, of Columbia University. Price 
5 cents. 
4. Social Control: By Jane Addams, of 
Hull House. Price 1 cent. 
5. The Negro as a Soldier: By Brigadier-General Burt, U. S. A. Price 5 cents. 
6. Leaving It to the South: An experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edward Russell. Price 5 cents. 
7. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Price 2 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
20 VESE Y STREET NEW YOR K 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . Fourth Annual Conference 
OF 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
TO BE HELD AT 
Chicago, Ill., April 28, 29 and 30, 1912 
Make your plans now to be present at the meetings. One session to be given up to reports from the 
various States represented. 
The following speakers will deliver addresses: 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
DR. W. Ε. B. D U BOIS 
MISS JAN E ADDAM S 
Al l Association Members living outside of 
Chicago, who find that they can attend the meetings, 
will kindly send word to the secretary of the conference, 
Mr. T. W. Allinson, 701 14th Place, Chicago. 
We have members in twenty-nine States. We 
want all of them represented. 
For particulars regarding the meetings read the 
N . A . A . C. P. notes in this number. Before Your Letter Is Read 
Your Stationery Has Given an Impression of You and Your Business 
Your stationery is your representative. 
As you would avoid having a shabbily dressed man as 
your business representative, you should avoid cheap, ordinary 
stationery. 
The stationery created in our print shop is distinctive 
because each type formation is consistent with the texture, 
weight and size of the paper and nature of the business. 
Distinctive stationery carries with it a certain charm, which 
adds power and effectiveness to your arguments and personality. 
Mr. Condé Nast of 
Vogue, Dr. Du Bois of 
TH E CRISIS and Prof. 
Spingarn of Columbia 
University are among our 
discriminating patrons, who 
appreciate the exclusiveness of our printed things. 
j . E. SPINGAR N 
9 WEST 73D STREET 
NEW YORK 
December 6, 1911. 
ME . ROBERT N . WOOD, 
202 East 99th Street, City. 
My dear Mr. Wood: 
I enclose my cheque for $561.72, in full 
payment of the balance of my account in 
connection with the printing and distribution of my pamphlet, "A Question of 
Academic Freedom." I have not yet verified the completeness of the distribution 
by the mailing company which you 
employed, but so far as your work as 
a printer is concerned, I take pleasure in 
saying that you attended to every detail 
in the most efficient and conscientious 
manner possible, and that I owe you cordial 
appreciation for the interest and care you 
have taken in this whole matter. You may 
use this letter in any way you please, and 
may refer to me any prospective client who 
is anxious to obtain the services of a firstclass printer. 
Very truly yours, 
(Signed) J. E. SPINGARN. 
The same careful attention is given to Wedding Invitations, 
Personal Cards, Pamphlets, etc. Let us make an estimate on 
your work. 
Out-of-town orders receive our immediate attention. 
Robert N . Wood, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAST 99th STREET NEW YORK CITY 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 