(Supplement to the CRISIS, July, 1916) 
The Waco Horror 
AN account of the recent burning of a human being at Waco, Tex., as reported by a 
special agent of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
1. The City. 
THE city of Waco , Tex., is the county 
seat of McLenna n county. It is situated on the Brazos river, about half wa y 
between Dalla s and Austin . It is the junc ­
tion point of seven railways. The city is i n a 
fertil e agricultura l region wit h grai n and 
cotton as the chief products, and wit h nearl y two hundred manufacturin g establishments, representing some seventy different 
industries. 
It had a population of 14,445 i n 1890 
whic h increased to 20,686 i n 1900, and to 
26,425 i n 1910. The whit e population i n 
these twenty years has almost exactly 
doubled. The colored population has in ­
creased from 4,069 to 6,067, formin g thus 
23% of the population. The bulk of the 
population is native whit e of native parentage, there being only about 1,000 foreigners 
i n the city. 
The whole of McLenna n county contained 
i n 1910 a population of 73,250 of whom 
17,234 were Negroes. This tota l population 
has nearly doubled i n the last twenty years. 
Wac o is well lai d out. Th e streets are 
broad, over sixt y miles of them being paved. 
The sewer system of one hundred miles is 
excellent. Ther e is a fine city-owned wate r 
system, and park s on the surroundin g 
prairies. 
Ther e are thirty-nine whit e and twentyfour colored churches i n Waco . B y denominations the whit e churches are : Baptist, 
14; Methodist, 9; Christian , 4; Presbyte ­
rian , 3 ; Jewish , 2 ; Episcopal, 2 ; Evangelistic, 1; Lutheran , 1; Catholic , 1; Christia n Science, 1; Salvatio n Army , 1. 
The colleges are : Baylo r University , Bay ­
lor Academy , the Catholi c College, the In ­
dependent Biblica l and Industrial' School, 
all white ; and the Centra l Texa s College 
and Pau l Quinn , colored colleges. Ther e 
are also the A . & M . College, the Gurle y 
School, the Wac o Business College, Toby's 
Practica l Business College, the Providen t 
Sanitarium, and the Trainin g School. 
Baylo r Universit y was founded i n 1854 
and has between 1,200 and 1,300 students. 
It is co-educational. Th e president is run ­
nin g for the Unite d States Senate. 
Tw o hig h schools serve whit e and colored 
population, and there are seven banks, in ­
cludin g four nationa l banks. 
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY, WACO. 
1 2 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 
I n other words, Waco is a typica l southern town, alert, pushing and rich. 
2. The Crime. 
NEA R the country town of Robinson, 
some six miles from Waco, lived a 
white famil y of four, named Fryar, who 
owned a small farm. This they cultivated 
themselves wit h the help of one hired man, 
a colored boy of seventeen, named Jesse 
Washington. 
Jesse was a big, well-developed fellow, 
but ignorant, being unable either to read 
or write . H e seemed to have been sullen, 
and perhaps mentally deficient, wit h a 
strong, and even darin g temper. It is said 
that on the Saturday night before the crime 
he had had a fight wit h a neighboring white 
man, and the man had threatened to kil l 
him. 
On Monday, Ma y 8, while Mr . Fryar , his 
son of fourteen, and his daughter of twenty-three, were hoeing cotton i n one part of 
their farm, the boy, Jesse, was plowing wit h 
his mules and sowing cotton seed near the 
house where Mrs. Frya r was alone. He 
went to the house for more cotton seed. A s 
Mrs. Frya r was scooping it up for him into 
the bag which he held, she scolded him for 
beating the mules. H e knocked her down 
wit h a blacksmith's hammer, and, as he confessed, criminall y assaulted her; finally he 
killed her wit h the hammer. The boy then 
returned to the field, finished his work, and 
went home to the cabin, where he lived 
wit h his father and mother and several 
brothers and sisters. 
Whe n the murdered woman was discovered suspicion pointed to Jesse Washington, 
and he was found sitting i n his yar d whittlin g a stick. He was arrested and immediately taken to jai l i n Waco. Tuesday 
a mob visited the jail . They came i n wit h 
about thirt y automobiles, each holding as 
many as could be crowded in . There was 
no noise, no tooting of horns, the lights 
were dim, and some had no lights at all. 
These were all Robinson people. They 
looked for the boy, but could not find him, 
for he had been taken to a neighboring 
county where the sheriff obtained a confession from him. Anothe r mob went to this 
county seat to get the boy, but he was again 
removed to Dallas. Finally , the Robinson 
people pledged themselves not to lynch the 
boy i f the authorities acted promptly, and 
if the boy would waive his legal rights. 
A second confession i n which the boy 
waived all his lega l rights was obtained in 
the Dalla s jail . The Gran d Jur y indicted 
him on Thursday, and the case was set for 
tria l Monday, Ma y 15. 
Sunday night, at midnight, Jesse Wash ­
ington was brought from Dalla s to Waco, 
and secreted i n the office of the judge. 
There was not the slightest doubt but that 
he would be tried and hanged the next day, 
if the law took its course. 
There was some, but not much doubt of 
RIGGINS HOTEL, WACO 
TH E FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH, WACO 
TH E COURT HOUSE, WACO TH E WAC O HORROR 3 
TH E CITY HAL L 
(The Boy Was Burned Back of This Hall) 
his guilt. Th e confessions were obtained, 
of course, unde r duress, and were, perhaps, 
suspiciously clear, and not entirely i n the 
boy's own words. It seems, however, probable that the boy was guilt y of murder, and 
possibly of premeditated rape. 
3. Waco Politics. 
M EANTIME , the exigencies of Wac o 
politics are said to have demanded a 
lynching . Ou r investigator says: 
"The y brought the boy back to Wac o because a lynchin g wa s of politica l value to 
the county officials who are runnin g fo r 
office. Ever y man I talked wit h said that 
politics wa s at the bottom of the whole business. Al l that element who took part i n 
the lynchin g wil l vote for the Sheriff. Th e 
Judg e is of value to his part y because he 
appoints the three commissioners of the 
jury , and these commissioners pick the 
Gran d Jury. " 
Th e Distric t Judge of the Crimina l Court 
is R. I. Munroe , appointed by Governor 
Campbell. H e is a low order of politician , 
an d a product of a local machine. His 
reputation fo r moralit y is bad, and his 
practice at the Ba r has been largel y on 
behalf of the vicious interests. 
Th e Sheriff of the county, S. S. Fleming , 
is a candidate for re-election, and has made 
muc h politica l capita l out of the lynching . 
H e says, i n a n advertisement i n the Wac o 
Semi-Weekly Tribune: 
"Mr . Flemin g is diseased wit h a broad 
philanthropy. H e believes i n the equality 
of man . H e carrie s wit h hi m i n the dail y 
wal k of his officialdom none of the 'boast 
of heraldr y or the pomp of power.' H e is 
just as courteous, just as obliging, just as 
accommodating as Sheriff as he wa s when 
selling buggies and cultivators for the hard ­
war e company. H e presents to the voters 
for their endorsement the record made by 
him and his corps of splendid deputies." 
Ou r investigator says: 
"Whe n I saw the Sheriff (Fleming ) he 
had a beautiful story to tell. H e had his 
story fixed up so that the entire responsibilit y was shifted on the Judge . The Judge 
admitted he could have had a change of 
venue, but said the mob anywher e woul d 
have done the same thing. " 
Meantime , the tip went out: 
"Th e crowd began pourin g into the town 
the day before and continued earl y Monda y 
morning . Th e court room was packed ful l 
and a crowd of 2,000 wa s on the outside. The jurors could scarcely get i n 
and out from their seats. I asked the Judge 
i f he could not have cleared the court room, 
and he answered tha t I di d not know 
the South. I said, 'I f a person is bi g 
enough, he can get up and stop the biggest 
mob.' H e asked, 'Do you wan t to spil l in ­
nocent blood for a nigger? ' 
"Some one had arrange d i t so tha t it 
would be easy to get the boy out of the 
courtroom. A door whic h opened by a peculia r device had been fixed so tha t i t woul d 
open. One of the jurors wa s a convicted 
murdere r wit h a suspended sentence over 
him. 
"Le e Jenkin s is the best deputy sheriff, 
but he is under Fleming . Barne y Gold ­
berg, the other deputy sheriff, said, 'If 
Lee Jenkin s had ha d it, it would never have 
been, but we are workin g fo r the ma n highe r 
up and must take our orders from him. ' 
Barne y Goldberg knows perfectly well tha t 
i f Flemin g is not re-elected, and the other 
candidate gets in , he wil l be out of a job. 
The other nominee fo r sheriff, Buchanan , 
is reported to be unable to read an d write , 
but is said to have three dead 'niggers' to 
his 'credit.' 
"Th e boy, Jesse Washington , was asked 
wha t he thought about the mob comin g 
after him. H e said, 'The y promised they 
would not i f I woul d tell them about it.' 
H e seemed not to care, but was thoroughly 
indifferent." 
Th e tria l was hurrie d through. Th e 
Wac o Semi-Weekly Tribune, Ma y 17, says: 
"Th e jur y returned into court at 11:22 
a. m., and presented a verdict: 'We , the 
jury , find the defendant guilt y of murde r 
as charged i n the indictment and assess 
his punishment at death.' This was signed 
by W . B . Brazelton , foreman. 
" 'Is that you r verdict, gentlemen?' asked 
Judge Munroe . 
"The y answered 'yes.' 4 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 
THE WAITING CROWD 
"Judge Munroe began writin g i n his 
docket. H e had written : 'Ma y 15, 1916: 
Jur y verdict of guilty,' and as he wrote 
there was a hush over the entire court room. 
It was a moment of hesitation, but just a 
moment. Then the tall man started over 
the heads of the crowd. Fre d H . Kingsbury, who was standing alongside of Judge 
Munroe , said, 'They are coming after him,' 
and as the Judge looked up, the wave of 
people surged forward. " The court room 
accommodates 500 persons, but the Judge 
had allowed 1,500 persons to crowd in . 
Ou r investigator continues: 
"The stenographer told me that there was 
a pause of a ful l minute. He said the people crowded around him and he knew what 
was coming, so he slipped out of the door 
back of the Sheriff, wit h his records; and 
Sheriff Flemin g slipped out also. 
"Flemin g claims that all he was called 
upon to do i n the way of protecting the boy 
was to get him to court. 
" A big fellow i n the back of the court 
room yelled, 'Get the Nigger!' Barne y 
Goldberg, one of the deputy sheriffs, told me 
that he did not know that Flemin g had 
dropped orders to let them get the Negro, 
and pulled his revolver. Afterward s he got 
his friends to swear to an affidavit that he 
was not present. Flemin g said he had sworn 
i n fifty deputies. I asked him where they 
were. He asked, 'Woul d you want to protect the nigger? ' The judge made no effort 
to stop the mob, although he had firearms 
i n his desk." 
4. The Burning. 
*"T HE Y dragged the boy down the stairs, 
A put a chain around his body and 
hitched it to an automobile. The chain 
broke. The bi g fellow took the chain off 
the Negro under the cover of the crowd and 
wound it around his own wrist, so that the 
crowd jerkin g at the chain was jerkin g at 
the man's wrist and he was holding the boy. 
The boy shrieked and struggled. 
"Th e mob ripped the boy's clothes off, cut 
them i n bits and even cut the boy. Someone cut his ear off; someone else unsexed 
him. A little girl workin g for the firm of 
Goldstein and Mingl e told me that she saw 
this done. 
" I went over the route the boy had been 
taken and saw that they dragged him between a quarter and a half a mile from the 
Court House to the bridge and then dragged 
him up two blocks and another block over 
to the Cit y Hall . Afte r they had gotten him 
up to the bridge, someone said that a fire 
was already going up at Cit y Hall , and they 
turned around and went back. Several people denied that this fire was going, but the 
photograph shows that it was. They got a 
little boy to light the fire. 
"Whil e a fire was being prepared of boxes, 
the naked boy was stabbed and the chain 
put over the tree. H e tried to get away, 
but could not. He reached up to grab the 
chain and they cut off his fingers. The big 
man struck the boy on the back of the neck 
wit h a knife just as they were pullin g him 
up on the tree. Mr . Lester thought that 
was practically the death blow. H e was 
lowered into the fire several times by means 
of the chain around his neck. Someone 
said they would estimate the boy had about 
twenty-five stab wounds, none of them 
death-dealing. 
"Abou t a quarter past one a fiend got 
the torso, lassoed it, hun g a rope over the 
pummel of a saddle, and dragged it around 
through the streets of Waco. TH E WAC O HORROR 5 
"Ver y little drinkin g was done. 
"Th e tree where the lynching occurred 
was righ t under the Mayor's window. May ­
or Dollin s was standing i n the window, not 
concerned about wha t they were doing to 
the boy, but that the tree would be destroyed. The Chie f of Police also witnessed 
the lynching. The names of five of the 
leaders of the mob are known to this Asso ­
ciation, and can be had on application by 
responsible parties. 
"Wome n and children saw the lynching. 
One man held up his littl e boy above the 
heads of the crowd so that he could see, and 
a little boy was i n the top of the very tree 
to which the colored boy was hung, where 
he stayed until the fire became too hot." 
Anothe r account, i n the Waco Times 
Herald, Monda y night, says: 
"Grea t masses of humanity flew as 
swiftl y as possible through the streets of the 
city i n order to be present at the bridge 
when the hangin g took place, but when it 
was learned that the Negr o was being taken 
to the Cit y Hal l lawn , crowds of men, 
women and children turned and hastened 
to the lawn . 
"O n the wa y to the scene of the burnin g 
people on every hand took a hand i n showin g their feelings i n the matter by strikin g 
the Negr o wit h anythin g obtainable, some 
struck him wit h shovels, bricks, clubs, and 
others stabbed him and cut him until when 
he was strung up his body was a solid color 
of red, the blood of the man y wounds in ­
flicted covered him from head to foot. 
"Dr y goods boxes and all kinds of in ­
flammable materia l were gathered, and it 
required but an instant to convert this into 
seething flames. Whe n the Negr o was first 
hoisted into the air his tongue protruded 
from his mouth and his face was besmeared wit h blood. 
"Lif e was not extinct withi n the Negro's 
body, although nearly so, when another 
chain was placed around his neck an d 
thrown over the limb of a tree on the lawn , 
everybody tryin g to get to the Negro and 
have some part i n his death. The infuriated mob then leaned the Negro, who was 
half alive and half dead, against the tree, he 
havin g just strength enough withi n his 
limbs to support him. A s rapidl y as possible the Negr o was then jerked into the 
air at whic h a shout from thousands of 
throats went up on the mornin g air and 
dry goods boxes, excelsior, wood and every 
other article that would burn was then i n 
evidence, appearing as i f by magic . A huge 
dr y goods box was then produced and filled 
to the top wit h all of the materia l that had 
been secured. The Negro's body was swayin g i n the air, and all of the time a noise 
as of thousands was heard and the Negro's 
body was lowered into the box. 
"N o sooner had his body touched the box 
than people pressed forward , each eager to 
be the first to light the fire, matches were 
touched to the inflammable materia l and as 
smoke rapidl y rose i n the air, such a demonstration as of people gone ma d was never 
heard before. Everybod y pressed closer to 
TH E MOB 6 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 
get souvenirs of the affair. Whe n they had 
finished wit h the Negro his body was mutilated. 
"Fingers, ears, pieces of clothing, toes and 
other parts of the Negro's body were cut 
off by members of the mob that had crowded to the scene as i f by magic when the 
word that the Negro had been taken i n 
charge by the mob was heralded over the 
city. A s the smoke rose to the heavens, the 
mass of people, numbering i n the neighborhood of 10,000, crowding the Cit y Hal l lawn 
and overflowing the square, hangin g from 
the windows of buildings, viewing the scene 
from the tops of buildings and trees, set 
up a shout that was heard blocks away. 
"Onlookers were hanging from the win ­
dows of the Cit y Hal l and every other buildin g that commanded a sight of the burning, 
and as the Negro's body commenced to burn, 
shouts of delight went up from the thousands of throats and apparently everybody 
demonstrated i n some wa y their satisfaction at the retribution that was being visited upon the perpetrator of such a horrible crime, the worst i n the annals of Mc ­
Lennan county's history. 
"Th e body of the Negro was burned to 
a crisp, and was left for some time i n the 
smoldering remains of the fire. Women and 
children who desired to view the scene were 
allowed to do so, the crowds partin g to let 
them look on the scene. Afte r some time 
the body of the Negro was jerked into 
the air where everybody could view the remains, and a mighty shout rose on the air. 
Photographer Gildersleeve made several 
pictures of the body as well as the large 
crowd which surrounded the scene as spectators." 
The photographer knew where the lynchin g was to take place, and had his camera 
and paraphernali a i n the Cit y Hall . He 
was called by telephone at the proper moment. H e writes us: 
"W e have quit selling the mob photos, 
this step was taken because our 'Cit y dads' 
objected on the grounds of 'bad publicity,' 
as we wanted to be boosters and not knockers, we agreed to stop all sale. 
"P . A . GILDERSLEEVE. " 
Ou r agent continues: 
"Whil e the torso of the boy was being 
dragged through the streets behind the 
horse, the limbs dropped off and the head 
was put on the stoop of a disreputable woman i n the reservation district. Some little 
boys pulled out the teeth and sold them to 
some men for five dollars apiece. The 
chain was sold for twenty-five cents a link . 
"Fro m the pictures, the boy was apparently a wonderfully built boy. The torso 
was taken to Robinson, hung to a tree, and 
shown off for a while, then they took it 
down again and dragged it back to town 
and put it on the fire again at five o'clock." 
5. The Aftermath. 
"I TRIE D to talk to the Judge. I met 
him on the street and said, 'I want 
to talk wit h you about something very im ­
portant.' H e asked, 'Wha t is the nature 
of it? ' I said, 'I want to get your opinion 
of that lynching.' H e said, 'No , I refuse 
to talk wit h you about that. Wha t do you 
want it for? ' I said, 'If you refuse to talk 
wit h me, there is no use of telling you what 
I want it for.' 
"Whe n I met him the second time, wit h 
different clothes on, he did not recognize 
me. I put on a strong Englis h accent and 
said I was interested i n clippings from New 
Yor k papers which showed that Waco had 
made for itself an awful name, and I wanted to go back and make the northerners feel 
that Waco was not so bad as the papers 
had represented. Then he gave me the 
Court records." 
Ou r investigator continues: " I went to 
the newspaper offices. They were all of the 
opinion that the best thin g to do was to 
hush it up. They used it as a news item, 
and that finished it. The Dalla s News did 
not cite anything editorially because not 
long ago they had done something quite 
as bad and the boy was not guilty. 
"Wit h the exception of the Tribune, all 
the papers had simply used it as a news 
item and let it drop. The Tribune is owned 
by Judge McCullum, who says anythin g he 
pleases. He is nearly blind. Whe n I read 
the article to him I said, 'I would like to 
ask you, if that had been a colored woman 
and a white boy, would you have protected 
TH E VICTIM TH E WAC O HORRO R 7 
TH E TORTURE (Note the "Frenzied" Mob) 
that woman? ' H e answered, 'No. ' 'If it had 
been a colored boy and a colored woman? 
No. ' 'We would not have stopped the nig ­
gers doing anythin g they wanted to.' 'Do 
you think they would? ' 'No. ' 'Then, they 
prove their superior civilization.' Then he 
began to tell me how he knew all about 
the niggers and we northerners do not. He 
said that as an old 
southerner he knew 
perfectly well how 
to handle the colored population. H e 
told me how he was 
raised wit h them, 
had a colored mammy, nursed at her 
breast, etc. 
"Ther e is a bunch 
of people i n Waco 
who are dyin g to 
see someone go forwar d and make a 
protest, but no one 
i n Waco would do it. 
Ex-Mayo r Mackay e 
and Colonel Hamil ­
ton both said, 'We 
do not know wha t to 
do. We are not organized to do it. It 
is a case of race and 
politics.' 
" I put out a lot 
of wire s for a lawye r to take up the 
case, but no human 
being i n Wac o would take it up. I wrote 
to a friend i n Austi n and one i n Houston, 
and the Austi n friend telegraphed me that 
he would send me word as soon as he had 
found someone. I had a letter from the 
Houston friend who gave me the names of 
three lawyers, but am not sure whether 
they would take up a case of this kind . Al l 
have their doubts of 
ever getting the case 
into court. 
" I did not dare 
ask much about lawyers. 
"A s a result of 
the lynchin g a Sun ­
day School Convention whic h was to 
have met there, wit h 
15,000 delegates, has 
been stopped. 
"W . A . Brazelton, 
the foreman of the 
Jury , was very outspoken against the 
whol e affair and 
blames the officials 
for it. H e felt that 
as foreman of the 
Jur y he could not 
lead i n a protest but 
thought some protest ought to be 
made. 
"Mr . Ainsworth , 
one of the newspaper men, seemed the 8 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMEN T 
only one who wanted to start a protest. 
"Colonel Hamilton , a man of hig h standing , a northerner, and at one time a bi g 
railroad man, was outspoken against the 
whole affair, but said that i f he led i n a 
protest they would do the same thin g to 
him. He said he would never register i n 
any hotel that he came from Waco. Two 
Waco men who did not register from Waco. 
"Alla n Stanford, ex-Mayo r of Waco, saw 
the Sheriff and the Judge before the tria l 
and received assurances that the lynching 
would not take place. They shut the 
mouths of the better element of Waco by 
telling them that the Robinson people had 
promised not to do it. They had gotten the 
promise of the Robinson people that they 
would not touch the boy durin g the trial , 
but they did not get the pledge of the disreputable bunch of Waco that they would 
not start the affair. 
"Judge Spell said the affair was deplorable, but the best thing was to forget it. 
"Whe n representing myself as a news 
reporter, I asked, 'Wha t shall I tell the 
people up North? ' Ex-Mayo r Mackay e 
said, 'Fi x it up as well as you can for 
Waco, and make them understand that the 
better thinkin g men and women of Waco 
were not i n it.' I said. 'Bu t some of your 
better men were down there.' The whole 
thin g savors so rotten because the better 
men have not tried to protest against it. 
You r churches have not said a word. Dr. 
Caldwell was the only man who made any 
protest at all. " 
6. The Lynching Industry. 
THI S is an account of one lynching. It is 
horrible, but it is matched i n horror by 
scores of others i n the last thirt y years, and 
i n its illegal, law-defying, race-hating aspect, it is matched by 2842 other lynchings 
which have taken place between Januar y 1, 
1885, and June 1, 1916. These lynchings 
are as follows: 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D B Y YEARS , 
1885-1916. 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 90 
1891 121 
1892 155 
1893 154 
1894 134 
1895 112 
1896 80 
1897 122 
1898 102 
1899 84 
1900 107 
1901 107 
1902 86 
1903 86 
1904 83 
1905 61 
1906 64 
1907 60 
1908 93 
1909 73 
1910 65 
1911 63 
1912 63 
1913 79 
1914 69 
1915 80 
1916 (5 mos.) 31 
Tota l 2843 
Wha t are we going to do about this record? The civilization of Americ a is at 
stake. The sincerity of Christianit y is challenged. The Nationa l Association for the 
Advancemnt of Colored People proposes immediately to raise a fund of at least $10,000 
to start a crusade against this modern barbarism. Alread y $2,000 is promised, conditional on our raisin g the whole amount. 
Interested persons may writ e to Roy 
Nash , secretary, 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w 
Yor k City . 
FINIS 