TheCRISIS 
[ Vol. 23-No . 5 MARCH, 1922 Whole No. 137 
ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY 28th Annual Financial Statement 
of the 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. (Condensed) 
RECEIPT S 192 1 
Jan. 1, 1921, Cash Balance Brought Forward $ 98,688.17 
Dec. 31, 1921, Annual Income 781,392.32 
Gross Receipts for 1921 $880,080.49 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec. 31, 1921, Tota l Paid Out (Including investments made during 
the year) $807,95760 
Cash Balance Dec. 31, 1921 $ 72,122.89 
ASSETS LIABILITIE S 
Cash Balance Dec. 31, 1921 $72,122.89 Capital Stock $30,000.00 
Real Estate 362,266.71 Bills Payable (Unmatured notes on 
Real Estate Mortgages 86,082.48 Purchase Price of another Company's 
Federal, State and City Bonds 42,258.00 debit) 60,412.24 
Bills Receivable 12,774.29 Real Estat e Mortgage (Mortgage asFurniture and Fixtures 7,500.00 sumed on recent purchase) 4,000.00 
Inventories of Sundry Accts 5,210.81 Deposits of Employees 17,400.63 
Ledger Accounts 7,510.00 
SURPLU S FUN D 468,892.31 
Total $583,215.18 Total $588,215.18 
CAPITA L AN D SURPLU S $ 498,892.31 
Total Amount of Claims Paid to Dec. 31, 1921 2,511,894.92 
The unusual business depression of 1921 was a fiery trial to practically all 
businesses. The Industrial Sick Benefit Business was especially adversely affected 
by the lack of employment of thousands of policyholders. Some were forced to 
retire. Most of them experienced a great slump in the year's business. Only a few 
were able to show an increase in business over the former year. The Southern 
Aid Society of Va., Inc., was numbered among the favored few. 
The Society did its largest business during 1921. It served acceptably a 
larger number of people than ever before. It is now better prepared to protect 
its membership—through its'Xe w Liberal Policy—which provides for One Small 
Premium, protection against Sickness, Accident and Death. 
District Office^ and Agencies located throughout the State of Virginia and the District of Columbia. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street 
RICHMOND, VA. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET LITERAR Y EDITOR ­
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 23-No . 5 MARCH, 1922 Whole No. 137 
Page 
COVER 
Drawing by John Henry Adams 
OPINION 
Boddy, Black France, Homicides, The Woman's National Foundation, 
Mr. Dyer to Mr. Johnson 199 
GANDHI AND INDIA 203 
NO END OF BOOKS. Jessie Fauset 208 
POEMS. Langston Hughes 210 
TWELFTH ANNUAL REPORT (Abridged) OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 211 
MAP OF N. A. A. C. P. BRANCHES 213 
TWELVE PRESIDENTS OF BRANCHES OF THE N. A. A. C. P 215 
THE HORIZON Illustrated 216 
THE RULING PASSION. An Estimate of Joseph C. Price. .. . 224 
THE LOOKING GLASS 225 
THE APRIL CRISIS 
The April CRISI S will be our Easter Number. It will contain an article on Negro banks and 
a striking story by Robert W . Ragnali. A beautiful cover, of course. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS " The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS - The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accom 
panied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matte r November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Ac t of March 3, 1879. 196 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it it young in history, tht Institution feels a just • ride in the work thai 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Trminlag Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic*. 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
Pioneer in Collegiate and BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A hlfh Initltutlos f«r tht training OF colored Theological Education youth. Excellent equipment, thorouih Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training for ALL Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various students. 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. professions in Forty States. Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic science and domestic art for The College is ranked in Class I. by the girls. American Medical Association. A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly Address: equipped. 
Terms reasonable. John 3. ».end»ll, D.D., Lincoln Unlvsriity, 
For Information address Chester County, Penna. 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
Cheyney Training School For Wiley University Teachers 
Marshall, Texas Cheyney, Pa. 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M. W. DOGAN, President THE 197 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta , Ca . 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments. College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Winte r Term Began December 7, 1921 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y G1FFE N 
Knoxvllle , Tenn . 
187 0 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 192 1 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modern 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religions atmosphere—Athletics^—Co-educational, Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Gratlea and 1st and 
2nd years' High School Courses, with certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Tear Hi*li Sehool with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A. 15. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlcal Course 
53rd year of nine months opened September 21, 1921. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President 
Ity e Jflortb a Agricultura l 
an a ittechanica l Colleg e 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallaha8ee , Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. 
sua ; sss s i a r a w s . * 
SKMnS n m i«. . Social Serylc Nor* * and 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent yemri 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A.. 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOHN HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CBABLOTTE , N . C . 
Blddle University, operated under tna auspice* of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Urammar School 
course is the requirement tor entrance to Lhe first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two oouraea 
of study, the Classical and tne Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class li 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In ilie others. 
All students in the Higii School Dept. are required 
to take trades in ttie Industrial DepL 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrerey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University Atlanta , Ga . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses rea 
sonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Nor 
mal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science. Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address oEL-rcl.1. Music. Dom-tle Selene Mlaalonary 
JOH N H . LEWIS . President 
BISHO P J . S . FLIPPER * Chairma n Truste e Board 
Mention T n Cmm . 198 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Howard University 
Washington , D . C . Founded by GENERA L 0 . 0 . HOWAR D 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M., Ph.D., D.D., President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT, A.M., LL.D., Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 1 Winte r Quarter January 3, 4, 1922 
REGISTRATIO N | Spring . Quarter March 18, 20, 1922 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON , Registrar 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 Talladega College 
BEREAN Talladega, Alabama 
Manual Training and Founded in 1S67 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders Industrial School 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. (Non-Sectarian) Literary, Scientific, Educational, So­ S. College Ave. & N. 19th St. cial Service, Theological, Musical, Philadelphia, Pa. Business Administration, Journalism, 
Winter Term Opening January 3, 1922 Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Man­ DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S hood and Womanhood . Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D. For further information address 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. F. A. SUMNER, President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(Richmond, Va.) NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
In addition to regular high school, college, pre- Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
medlcal ajld theological courses, now offers an espe­ cially arranged course In connection with the School It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Aca­ of Social Work and Public Health of Uila city. This course will lead to a decree. For particular* demic and Musical departments. 
address The President. For further information write 
SAMUE L A. OWEN , President 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home COLEMAN COLLEGE TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
GIBSLAND, LA. in the city of New York 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home offers to young colored women a three Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and years' course of instruction in nursing. A. B. H. Society of New York. Students 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. from alz different states. Gradaetes ex­ empted on first grade by Loatsiana. Arkaiaas Post Graduate Course of six months to and Oklahoma. 
graduates of accredited schools. O. L. COLEMAN, Fr,.id»ni For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
Lincol An Episcopal boarding school for glrla, under the n Hospital and Home direction of the alatera of St. Mary. Address: THE 
New York, N.Y. 8ISTEK-IN-CHARGE, 6188 Germantown Avenae, Philadelphia. Pa. 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Glrla, Daytona. Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNF, . . Principal. 
Mention T n Caiaia. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 23. No. 5 MARCH, 1922 Whole No. 137 
Opinion of W.E.B. Du Bois 
BODD Y haps in the horrible muddle of our WHAT more pathetic, baffling, penal code there is nothing else to do. and heartrending case can 
one conceive? Here is a 
boy of nineteen—too young 
even to have begun to live. He is 
comely, straight, quick of brain, and 
with lightning speed of hands. He 
can read and write. He has spent 
two years in the high school. And yet 
he stands today a murderer, frank 
and red-handed. 
He has been in jail; he has been 
in the penitentiary; he has been in 
the army. He has stolen; he has 
killed. Now society is going to kill 
him. Why? Whose fault is it? Who 
made this boy what he is? 
Society assumes that he is to blame, 
but he is not wholly to blame and it 
is barely possible that he is not a bit 
to blame. How fair a chance to live 
has he had? First, it is a question 
if his own family and companions and 
race have shown any real and continued interest in him. They have 
been content to call his energy and 
quickness and revolt against bonds, 
"badness". They have withdrawn 
from him and let him go his way. He 
has figured for years as one of the 
"bad boys" of Harlem, for whose reform his own people have had no adequate program and for whose type 
they have had no sympathetic understanding. 
His city and his country have 
laughed at him, insulted him, hated 
him, given him few places for play 
or recreation, and filled his ears with 
too true stories of outrage and lynching. We can kill this boy, and perBut one or two things must ring 
in our ears forever. He said: "They 
kick and knock you about for two or 
three hours in the station house." 
They do and we know it; it is one of 
the greatest outrages of our present 
police system. It has been said that 
Boddy himself has been beaten by the 
police a dozen times when they could 
prove nothing against him. It is said 
the dead detectives have beaten and 
killed unconvicted Negroes, and 
slapped and insulted black women. 
His mother said, "They taught him 
to shoot in the army." They did. 
Millions of boys have lately been 
taught to shoot in the armies of the 
world, and civilization is to blame for 
the murders which they did in the 
army and for those which they are 
doing outside the army. 
And finally, when this boy is dead, 
remember that the same forces which 
made him what he was are alive and 
powerful and working to make others 
like him. 
BLACK FRANCE 
THE article by Norman Angell 
in The Freeman reveals an 
astonishing attitude of mind 
in higher quarters than we 
had hitherto looked to see it. To the 
ordinary American or Englishman, 
we have always realized, the race 
question is at bottom simply a matter 
of the ownership of women; white 
men want the right to own and use 
all women, colored and white, and 
they resent any intrusion of colored 
men into this domain. 
199 200 THE CRISIS 
This, as we have said has long 
been the attitude of the ordinary 
white man, but we had scarcely 
thought to see this attitude illustrated in an article by Norman Angell. 
Mr. Angell by way of climax reminds us of the use of white French 
prostitutes for colored soldiers in 
France; and his use of this illustration is apparently not to make us hate 
prostitution—for when was there an 
army that did not thrive on prostitution and rape—but rather to make his 
readers feel that social equality in 
France on any plane is a menace to 
the modern Anglo-Saxon world! 
Of course Mr. Angell does not 
say this in so many words; however, every implication of his article points this way. The Negroes 
of Anglo-Saxon lands are uniting to 
fight intolerable aggressions; they 
are thinking black in the face of a 
white world. French Negroes, on 
the other hand, (at least the civilized 
and the cultured), are thinking 
French because they have been treated as men by Frenchmen. This to 
Mr. Angell's mind constitutes a grave 
danger and that danger is that the 
French policy of treating Negroes 
decently may in the end compel England and America to do the same and 
open parlors and brothels to black 
gentlemen and soldiers. This is what 
he calls the "Negro conquest of 
France", and this is what he fears 
with a perfect Fear! 
HOMICIDES 
THERE is a species of propaganda going on against the 
Negro which is so subtle that 
most people do not notice it. 
For instance, The Spectator, an insurance magazine periodical, records 
from year to year all homicides,— 
that is all persons killed in the United 
States by criminal violence. It notes 
that for every million of population 
in 31 cities there are 85 homicides 
and that the rate is increasing. 
Then the statement, which is written by Frederick L. Hoffman, goes on 
to say (the italics are ours) : "Furthermore, it will be noted that the 
cities experiencing the highest rates 
are those having a large colored population." And comparing North and 
South, he says that the homicide rate 
among the whites in the South "is but 
little higher than for the New England and Middle Atlantic States and 
below that for the West. For the colored race the incidence is shown to be 
four times as frequent as among the 
whites in the South." 
Now what is the inference that any 
number of papers quoting this passage have made? It is that the Negro 
is a murderer and causes the great 
murder rate in the South. And yet as 
a matter of fact, what is the truth? 
The truth is that the Negro is MURDERED four times as fast as the 
whites and that the unfortunate preeminence of the South in murder is 
because there are so many black folk 
there to be killed. 
In other words, a fact which is to 
the shame of the white race and pitiable for the colored race, is, we had 
almost said, deliberately so stated 
that nine people out of ten in the 
United States have twisted the facts 
to the discredit of the black South. 
TH E CRISI S itself was so puzzled at 
the figures that it wrote Mr. Hoffman 
to be certain, and received from him 
a letter confirming the fact: "The 
term homicide as used in my article3 
.. . is strictly limited to deaths from 
homicide." He also adds: "I have 
always stood clearly upon the position 
that it was immaterial whether the 
persons killed were white or colored. 
The Negro's life economically as well 
as socially is as valuable and as 
worthy as that of a white man." All 
of which sounds very well and yet OPINION 201 
Mr. Hoffman has allowed an ambiguous statement to go out under his signature, and he may still be counted 
as he was when he published that 
vicious book "Race Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro",—as 
one of the most persistent and subtle 
enemies of the Negro race. 
TH E WOMAN' S NATIONA L 
FOUNDATION 
Our attention has been called 
in two separate instances to 
Woman's National Foundation of Washington, D. C. 
It is. an imposing organization. It 
calls itself: 
" A nationwide movement to unify the 
woman power of the country along civic, 
welfare and patriotic lines. . . . 
"Grea t enthusiasm for the movement is 
reported from all sections of the country. 
Although the Foundation is less than six 
months old it has secured thousands of members, acquired a million dollar national site 
in Washington, and is endorsed and backed 
by leading financiers, statesmen, educators 
and officials. 
"Th e board of governors of the Foundation includes such nationally known women 
as Mrs. George Barnett, wife of a major 
general of the U. S. Marine Corps; Mrs. 
Stephen B. Elkins, widow of former Senator Underwood of Alabama ; Mrs. Charles 
B. Howry , wif e of Judge Howry of the U. 
S. Court of Claims; Miss Jane t Richards, 
the noted woman lecturer; Mrs. John Hays 
Hammond, Mrs. J. Borden Harriman, Mrs. 
James McDonald, Mrs. Henry R. Rea of 
Pittsburgh; Mrs. Sidney Ballou, Mrs. Marie 
Moore Forrest, the celebrated pageant writer; Mrs. Jame s Carroll Frazier, head of the 
Comforts Committee of the Nav y League , 
Mrs. Henry D. Flood, wif e of Representative Flood of Virginia , and Mrs. Maud 
Wood Park , national chairman of the 
League of Women Voters. " 
This organization has high ideals. 
Its prospectus issued November 15, 
1921, says: 
"It is the aim of the Foundation to educate its members in citizenship and to teach 
the same rights and responsibilities of 
women so tha t they ma y thoroughly understand the duties they owe to their country. 
"Organized womanhood is now recognized 
to be the greatest dynamic force for good 
in the world today. If women are united, 
nothing is now outside of their power. " 
It would have been ordinary honesty for this organization to have said 
that they wished to confine their 
membership to white women, that all 
their great and high aims were to be 
held strictly within the barriers of 
race. But they did not do this,— 
they did not dare do it. They were 
too cowardly to let the world know 
what they really believed, and thereby they have made to our knowledge 
two horrible mistakes. 
In the first place, they appointed 
October 21, 1921, Mrs. Ailene Parson of Keystone, W. Va., by unanimous action to their board of governors as organization chairman for 
her city and its environs. They said: 
"Yo u have been selected for this official 
position of the Foundation from a number 
of nominations made by members of the 
Board of Governors of the Foundation, by 
United States Senators and Representatives 
in Congress from your State, as well as by 
nationally prominent club women, and other 
reliable sources who are cognizant of your 
standing and ability." 
Mrs. Parson went to work, organized her units and sent in her units' 
checks, whereupon December 12, 
1921, she received from Mrs. Charles  
202 THE CRISIS 
B. Howry, financial secretary, a letter 
which stated: 
"We appreciate your interest in so 
promptly forming a unit to carry on our 
work in your locality, but are sorry to say 
that we cannot under our by-laws accept 
your membership as this organization is 
made up entirely of Caucasians. 
"We regre t very much that through inadvertence this situation wa s not brought 
to your attention." 
The same thing happened in Washington. A prominent colored artist, 
whose color is not entirely visible, 
was importuned by letter to join the 
Foundation. Assuming that they 
must know that she had a greatgrandfather who was a Negro, she 
went to one of their meetings. She 
was welcomed effusively, she was importuned to say how she could help 
and what she could do. She told 
them frankly that as a Negro she was 
interested in Negro sculpture. Her 
hostess gasped and fluttered and finally with maladroit boorishness told 
her that Negroes were not admitted 
to this organization. 
What does this all mean ? That we 
are losing something by being excluded from the Woman's National 
Foundation? Certainly not! This is 
but a cheap advertisement for social 
climbers. But it does mean that today movements that are foolis h 
enough to try to draw the color line 
have not the courage to say so. They 
sneak down back alleys in order to 
keeD the Negro "in his place." 
MR. DYER TO MR. JOHNSON 
I WISH to congratulate you, and 
through you, the officers and 
members of your organization
you have rendered to me in carrying 
on the fight for the enactment into law 
of legislation that will make lynching 
a crime against the United States. 
The Bill has passed the House of Representatives and is now pending in 
the United States Senate. The Senate has over a year in which to take 
action upon the Bill that passed the 
House. I feel sure that the United 
States Senate will promptly and favorably consider this very important 
legislation. In my opinion, the Congress has not undertaken more important legislation for a long time, 
than the enactment into law of this 
bill. It is to safeguard life from 
mobs. 
The greatest blot upon the otherwise proud record of the United 
States of America is the crime of 
lynching, that has been so prevalent 
in so many portions of this country 
for the last 35 to 40 years. Simple 
justice and our obligations as a Nation to the people under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States demands 
that we act with promptness. We have 
already delayed this matter too long, 
resulting in the sacrificing of lives 
of many innocent people. We must 
end this horrible crime, and this legislation when enacted into law will 
do it. My best efforts in that direction will be continued till this legislation is put upon the statute books 
and enforced to the letter. 
I trust that you, your organization, 
and all friends of this legislation will 
continue the campaign till same is enacted into the law of the land. We 
are sure to succeed if we work together and in earnest. 
The people of the United States 
and the press of the whole country 
are for this legislation. There can be 
and there must be no failure. 
 fo FRED PROCTOR-FRAUD r the splendid 
COMPLAINTS are coming to 
us from persons who paid 
money for CRISI S subscriptions to one Fred Proctor. 
He is not an agent for The CRISIS . 
If he comes to your community, please 
escort him to the police. The CRISI S 
does not employ traveling agents in 
any capacity. GANDHI AND INDIA 
TNDI A has been called a land of saints, 
•*• the home of religions, and, living up to 
her well earned reputation, she produces 
in our own time a man who from sheer impeccability of character, and extraordinary 
personality, and from loftiness and originality of doctrine and ideas, takes rank at 
once among the great men of the world 
whose mark is 
high enough to 
make for them 
a perm a n e n t 
niche in the repository of the 
benefactors o f 
mankind. 
No man who 
is in the least 
interested in the 
throbbing mass 
of peoples of the 
earth can fail to 
take notice of 
this exceptional 
soul called forth 
by a great need 
and destined to 
make a significan t contribution to the very 
huma n effort 
which man is 
putting forth to 
get himself out 
of the encircling 
gloom into the 
promised land. I 
say "destined", 
but that is to 
detract from the 
glory which already enshrines 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. I should speak in the present instead of the future tense, for the 
man about -whom I write, not only will be 
but is. Indeed he is so vital a factor that 
he is called at once the most dangerous yet 
the most beloved man in India today. 
When Lord Reading, the newly appointed viceroy of India,
one of his first acts
heart talk with Mr.
the London Nation,
ment says: 
 reached that country, 
 was a long heart to 
 Gandhi. Writing in 
a member of parlia­
"The saint, or Mahatma (Gandhi) has 
India at his feet. The 'intellegentsia' differ from him sometimes in private, rarely 
in public; property differs from 
him and trembles ; the government—a n y 
government differs from him 
and thinks it is 
best to—wait." 
To ask who 
this man Gandhi 
is, is to ask 
more than one 
ca n properly 
answer . T o 
many of his Indian countrymen 
he is Mahatma, 
or saint, a human being in 
touch with the 
divine, to bring 
relief to the suffering, food to 
the hungry, and 
satisfaction t o 
the other physical wants of India; to enthusiastic and ideali s t i c students 
and members of 
the e d u c a ted 
class, and to 
many leaders in MOHANDAS KAKAMCHAN D GANDHI political life he 
is the embodiment of a great challenge, which, if answered, must lead out into the possession of 
not only that which the body needs and 
must have, but into that indefinable realm 
of the mind and spirit, the imponderable 
kingdom of the soul—a possession which 
may sound very theoretical and impractic203 204 THE
able, yet one which is the very stuff that 
life, and living, human well being, and 
achievement are made of. 
Mr. Ben Spoor of the British Labor Party, 
who went to India to represent that organization at the Indian National Congress, 
writes: 
"The West has produced a Lenin, strong, 
masterful, relentless alike in logic and 
method. The East has given birth to a 
Gandhi, equally strong, masterful and relentless. But whilst the former pins his 
faith on force, the latter relies on non-resistance. One trusts the sword, the other 
the spirit. In an extraordinary manner 
these men appear to incarnate those fundamentally opposing forces that—behind all 
the surface struggle of our day—are striving for the mastery." 
A learned man of India writes that no 
one can understand Mr. Gandhi's crusade 
who does not know Mr. Gandhi. Let us 
dispose briefly of the common facts of his 
life and then undertake to see the man as 
he is. 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born 
of an old Bania family, resident in Kathiawar, India, October 2, 1869. Politics appears to be the heritage of his fathers. 
Through business enterprise they had accumulated some wealth. His mother, an 
orthodox Hindu lady, rigidly observing religious obligations, performing in the highest manner her duties as wife and mother, 
could be expected lo demand of her children 
the most desirable qualities of character. 
From the records one reads, young Gandhi 
was no disappointment to her. Mohandas 
Gandhi received his early training in Kathiawar and his final academic instruction in 
London, where he qualified as a barristerat-law. It is reported of him during his 
stay in London, that he was rich and clever, 
of a cultivated family, gentle and modest 
in manner. He dressed and behaved like 
other people. There was nothing particular about him to show that he had taken 
a Jain vow to abstain from wine, from 
flesh, and from sexual intercourse. He 
took his degree and became a successful 
lawyer in Bombay, but he cared more for 
religion than for law. Gradually his asceticism began to show itself. He gave away 
all his money to good causes, except the 
most meagre allowance. He took vows of 
poverty. He gradually ceased a large part 
of his practice at law because his religion 
 CRISIS 
forbade him to take part in a system which 
tried to do right by violence. 
The beginning of Mr. Gandhi's larger life 
was in South Africa, whither he had been 
induced to go in connection with an Indian 
legal case of some difficulty. It is worth 
while to relate his first experience after 
disembarking at the port of Durban in 
Natal. Brought up in the British tradition 
of the equality of all British subjects, an 
honored guest in the capital of the Empire, 
he found that in the colony of Natal he 
was regarded as an outcast. When he applied for admission as an advocate of the 
supreme court of Natal, he was opposed by 
the law society on the ground that the law 
did not contemplate that a colored person 
should practice. Fortunately, the supreme 
court viewed the matter in another light 
and granted the application, but Mr. Gandhi 
received sudden warning of what awaited 
him in years to come. 
If this was the test of fire through which 
a great man was to pass, it was certainly 
not a fire which consumed, but rather one 
which kindled all the nobler qualities of 
his soul, and sent him forth purged of 
whatever dross he may have had—Mahatma Gandhi, both feared and loved. Professor Gilbert Murray, writing in the Hibbert Journal, relates the significant part 
of Mr. Gandhi's South African experience: 
"In South Africa, there are some 150,­
000 Indians, chiefly in Natal, and the South 
African government, feeling that the color 
question in its territories was quite sufficiently difficult already, determined to prevent the immigration of any more Indians 
and if possible to expel those who were already there. This could not be done. It 
violated a treaty; it was opposed by Natal, 
where much of the industry depended on 
Indian labor; and it was objected to by 
the Indian government and the home government. Then began a long struggle. The 
whites of South Africa determined to make 
life in South Africa undesirable, if not for 
all Indians, at least for all Indians above 
the coolie class. Indians were specially 
taxed; were made to register in a degrading way; their thumb prints were taken by 
the police as if they were criminals. If, 
owing to the scruples of the government, 
the law was in any case too lenient, patriotic mobs undertook to remedy the defect. 
Quite early in the struggle the Indians in 
South Africa asked Mr. Gandhi to come and 
help them- He came as a barrister in 1893; 
he was forbidden to plead; he proved his 
right to plead; he won his case against the GANDHI AND INDIA 205 
Asiatic Exclusion Ac t on grounds of constitutional law and returned to India. 
"Gandhi came again in 1895. He was 
amost mobbed and nearly killed at Durban. 
I will not tell in detail how he settled down 
eventually in South Afric a as a leader and 
counsellor to his people; how he began a 
settlement in the country outside Durban 
where the workers should live directly on 
the land and be bound by a vow of poverty. 
For many years he was engaged in constant passive resistance to the government 
and constant efforts to raise and ennoble 
the inward life of the Indian community. 
But he was unlike other strikers or resisters in this: that mostly the resister 
takes advantage of any difficulty of the 
government in order to press his claim the 
harder. Mr. Gandhi, when the government 
was in any difficulty that he thought serious, always relaxed his resistance and offered help. In 1899 came the Boer War. 
Gandhi immediately organized an Indian 
Red Cross Unit. There arose a popular 
movement for refusing it and treating it 
as seditious. But'it was needed. The soldiers Wanted it; it served throughout the 
war, and was mentioned in dispatches and 
thanked publicly for its skillful work and 
courage under fire. In 1904 there was an 
outbreak of plague in Johannesburg, and 
Mr. Gandhi had a private hospital opened 
before the government had begun to act. In 
1906 there was a native rebellion in Natal. 
Gandhi raised and personally led a corps 
of stretcher bearers whose work seems to 
have proved particularly dangerous and 
painful- Gandhi was thanked by the governor of Natal and shortly afterward 
thrown in jail in Johannesburg. 
"Lastly, in 1913, when he was being repeatedly thrown into prison among prisoners of the lowest class and his followers in 
jail were to the number of 2,500; in the very 
midst of the general strike of Indians in 
the Transvaal and in Natal, there occurred 
the sudden and dangerous strike which endangered for a time the very existence of 
the organized society in South Africa. From 
the ordinary agitator's point of view, the 
game was in Gandhi's hands. He had only 
to strike his hardest. Instead, he gave orders for his people to resume work until 
the government should be safe again. I 
cannot say how often he was imprisoned, 
how often mobbed and assaulted, and what 
pains wei"> taken to mortify and humiliate 
him in public. But by 1913 the Indian case 
had been taken up by Lord Hardinge and 
the government of India. An imperial commission reported in his favor on most of 
the points at issue find an act was passed 
entitled the Indian Relief Act. " 
Manifestly, a man of such lofty ideals, 
so perfectly displayed in practice is bound 
to exert no small influence in. a country 
like India at this period of her life. In 
order to understand the man himself in relation to his country it is perhaps necessary to observe a few facts of the political 
history of India. 
India was the contemporary of great 
Egypt, ancient Assyria and Persia, but unlike her contemporaries of antiquity, she 
lives. They are dead. Through a continuous 'period running back to most archaic 
times, she has come with her literature, her 
religions, her customs—in short—with all 
that makes her justly proud today. One 
could go on and state what has become 
the classic theme of the demands of contemporary India. We cannot consider here 
the interesting facts of her kingdoms and 
empires, her wars and warriors, of which 
the Mahabharata so gloriously sings; nor 
of the coming of Islam and the great empires of the Moguls. It is certainly not 
possible to write here of Indian society— 
of caste; of poverty widespread and dazzling wealth; of the depth of illiteracy which 
grips the country octopus-like and a culture and education as noted for their literary and scholarly achievements as for 
their far reach back into the haze of unhistorical days; of marriage, home, and the 
family. 
India has for centuries been a land much 
desired by Europe. Every school boy remembers that it was this land that Columbus sought in 1492. The immense wealth 
of that country as it lured on the bold discoverer of America, in the same way was 
the object of expeditions of the Portuguese, 
Dutch, French, Austrians and Germans. 
The tragic results of their seeking, both to 
themselves and to India, form interesting 
yet harrowing reading. Intrigue, murder, 
robbery—wholesale pillage—all for the 
wealth of the Indies! 
In 1600 Queen Elizabeth granted a charter to what became known later as the 
East India Company. This company established in India trading-posts and settlements and built forts to protect its ports and 
settlements. It sent out governors and a 
governor-general and when it applied at 
London for charters and courts of justice, it 
got charters and courts of justice; then follows the sordid yet romantic periods of 
Warren Hastings, Lord Clive and others 
(see Macaulay and Burke), until the East 
India Company ceased to exist in the Sepoy 
Wa r of 1857 and the British crown assumed 
the sovereignty of this country and its mil­206 THE CRISIS 
lions in 1858. Upon and out of this more 
than half-century of foreign rule, a rule 
of which one reads great good and much 
evil, comes what is today termed "Indian 
unrest", and upon the very crest of this 
wave Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi occupies his position. 
These 315,000,000 people, largely poor and 
illiterate, though with a highly cultured and 
educated leadership, what is it they want 
and in what is it that Gandhi is for many 
of them the spokesman? In the past the 
leaders have with their might protested 
against a bureaucratic government vested 
in a foreign civil service. Indian national 
gatherings of the past have recommended 
again and again that "measures be taken 
by government to organize and develop Indian industries", and also "that invidious 
distinctions here and abroad between his 
Majesty's Indian and other subjects be removed by redeeming pledges of provincial 
autonomy and recognizing India as a component part of a federated empire. A t the 
December meeting of the National Liberal 
Federation the Hon. Mr. Srinivasa Sastri 
moved that in the opinion of the Federation, 
the inauguration of the new regime conferring a measure of self-government on 
the people of India must be signalized by a 
comprehensive measure abolishing all distinctions in law based merely on the race 
of an individual, and urged in particular 
that provisions in the criminal law of India 
conferring upon Europeans and Americans 
certain privileges and rights must be repealed at an early date." 
One could mention an almost unending 
list of complaints, demands, memorials and 
resolutions. Each year it appears the leaders of the people have become more bold and 
have given increased expression to their 
larger and national aspiration. A demand 
granted has only served to reveal their miserable weakness and the mighty strength of 
the power that granted it. Thus has a new 
state of mind come upon this country almost 
with the suddenness of the dawn of day 
but with the same surety of travel and 
background as that upon which dawn depends. Instead of a half loaf, the whole 
is desired. The same sort of patience is no 
longer advocated and a conditional loyalty 
to the British Empire is preached. 
Without doubt the war primarily and 
other subsequent developments have given 
the immediate impetus to the rising tide 
of new and popular thought. But it is possible for almost every Indian to name specifically definite overt acts and administrative measures which led an erstwhile patient and philosophic people into a state 
which an unfriendly reporter characterizes 
as "an atmosphere surcharged with heat and 
an horizon obscured by smoke screens of 
racial passion". Of the overt acts, the one 
which touched the very quick of the people's 
heart, was the Amritsar massacre whereby 
several hundred Indian men, women and 
children were shot dead under the order of 
a British general and hundreds of others 
were left wounded. And this because these 
unarmed people refused to obey the order 
of the British general to disperse! 
In the second place, the Moslems of India are dissatisfied over the turn events 
have taken during the -past three years 
which, they claim, humiliate Islam and completely subjugates the Mohammedan world 
to the Christian. Their deepest feelings 
are stirred over what is to them a studied 
insult to their religion. The very heart 
of India's racial self-respect is stirred. But 
behind these two questions just referred to 
the New Republic states: "There is a greater and all embracing one, that of national 
wrong and shame of which every Indian is 
sensitive." 
Upon a governmental report on the Amritsar massacre Mr. Gandhi writes: "The 
condonation of the Punjab atrocities has 
completely shattered my faith in the good 
intentions of the government and the nation supporting it." Writing on "the situation and the remedy", Mr. G. A. Natesan, 
an Indian, finishes with the remark, "The 
people of India have lost faith in British 
justice". 
Thus begins the newer attitude of Indian leaders towards Britain! New terms, 
or rather old terms with new meanings are 
now the order of the day. Swaraj, noncooperation, non-violence, and Gandhism, 
are the terms which have turned the eyes 
of the world upon the man responsible for 
their use, and have won for him the devoted following of great masses of his own 
people. 
At the 35th session of the Indian National 
Congress, held at Nagpur, India, in December, 1920, Mr. Gandhi moved in the 
open Congress: "That the object of this GANDH 207 I AND INDIA 
TH E NON-COOFEKATIVE CONGRESS 
Congress is the attainment of Swaraj by all 
legitimate and peaceful ends". The motion 
was opposed, but it was carried with a large 
majority and by its passage it made Mr. 
Gandhi the most powerful man in ti.e Congress. Mr. Gandhi explains what is meant 
by Sivaraj, or home rule or national rule 
as follows: 
"Swaraj means a state such that we can 
maintain our separate existence without the 
presence of the English. If it is to be a 
partnership, it must be a partnership at 
will. There can be no Swaraj without our 
feeling and being the equals of Englishmen. 
Today we feel that we are dependent upon 
them for our internal and external security, fo r our armed peace between Hindus 
and Mussulmans for our education, and for 
the supply of our daily wants. The Rajahs 
are dependent upon the British for their 
power, and the millionaires for their millions. The British know our helplessness 
* * * to get Swaraj then is to get rid 
of our helplessness." 
But how is this great miracle to be 
wrought in India? Non-cooperation is the 
war-cry of Mr. Gandhi's non-violent crusade. It is his first and most powerful 
weapon. This is the general scheme of the 
principle of non-cooperation as proposed by 
the Indian National Congress: 
1. Giving up of all British titles and honorary offices 
2. Boycott of all official functions 
3. Withdrawal of all students from all 
government owned or aided schools, 
and the establishment of Indian National schools 
4. Boycott of British courts by Indian lawyers and litigants and the establishment of private courts of arbitration 
5. Refusal of Indians to be candidates for 
the new assemblies and the total abstinence from all voting 
6. Boycott of English-made goods. 
In commenting on the effectiveness of 
non-cooperation in Mr. Gandhi's program, 
Mr. B. K. Roy, a Hindu, writes in the Independent : 
"Mr. Gandhi has fired the imaginations 
of the people, and the non-cooperation 
movement is meeting with tremendous success. Many titleholders like Rabindranath 
Tagore have given up their titles. Women 
like Sarajina Neidee and Sarala Devi have 
given back their medals of honor for warservice, thousands of students have left 
British colleges and national institutions 
are being established." 
The second outstanding factor in Mr. 
Gandhi's program is the idea and practice 
of non-violence or passive resistance. Like 
the principle of non-cooperation, it kills 
without striking its adversary. More than 
that, it disarms its enemies. 
Behold a man who has ancient and great 
India at his feet; whom a powerful government is afraid to arrest; who causes visiting members of royalty to be snubbed; who 
threatens as a last resort to lead his people in an anti-tax paying crusade, thus 
striking at the very root of government; a 
man who professes to love his enemies and 
who refuses to take advantage of or embarrass government in a crisis! NO END OF BOOKS 
JESSIE FAUSET 
The Wings of Oppression. By Leslie 
Pinckney Hill. The Stratford Company, 
Boston. 
Batouala. By Rene Maran. Albin Michel 
Publisher, Paris. 
Unsung Heroes. By Elizabeth Ross 
Haynes. DuBois and Dill Publishers, New 
York. 
History of Liberia. By Thomas H. B. 
Walker. The Cornhill Publishing Company, Boston. 
Ringworm. By John P. Turner, M.D., F. 
A. Davis Company, Philadelphia. 
The Slaughter of the Jeivs in the Ukraine 
in 1919. By Elias Heifetz. J.U.D. Thomas 
Seltzer Publisher, New York. 
The History of the Negro Church.. By 
Carter Godwin Woodson. The Associated 
Publishers, Washington, D. C. 
Fifty Years in the Gospel Ministry. By 
Chaplain T. G. Steward. A. M. E. Book 
Concern, Philadelphia. 
THOSE of us who read Mr. Hill's "Armageddon" a few years ago doubtless 
expected something in a "higher mood" 
than what we find in his present volume. 
For his verse, while very sweet and musical, fails with but few exceptions to reach 
great heights. Yet on the other hand an 
attraction persists and finally outweighs 
the sense of disappointment for these poems 
are a manifestation of the reaction which 
so many of us feel, but cannot express, to 
beauty, to truth, to the presence of imponderable things. So we are grateful to 
Mr. Hill for his sensitiveness of spirit and 
his happy feeling for words which makes the 
expression possible. He makes one think of 
Wordsworth at his best and worst. What 
one does like one likes immensely and wonders how he found just the words to say 
it. And what one does not like, one does 
not like at all. In the "Lines Written In 
The Alps Above Chamounix", Mr. Hill has 
caught the very essence of the feeling which 
comes to one confronted by such a spectacle 
of nature. Life beyond these natural boundaries may seethe and roar. But here is rest. 
As an interpreter of the emotions aroused 
by certain stimuli either of the times or of 
environments Mr. Hill excels. It is only 
when he writes in the vein of the Sundayschool teacher that one becomes impatient 
and wishes he would cease to dwarf and 
restrain his fine and decidedly classical 
gift. 
"Batouala" is really what its sub-title indicates, a story of actual Negro life (veritable roman negre) and because it is it differs absolutely from any concept which we 
in this Western World have of life. In 
fact it is extremely probable that this description of Negro existence differs from 
its manifestation in other parts of Africa. 
For Maran is writing of the people of the 
equatorial regions whose customs differ 
from those of the people of the coast towns. 
Batouala is an African chief and the novel 
is an account of his life, his love and his 
death. The familiar romantic situation is 
there, the husband Batouala, the wife (one 
of nine), Yassiguindji, and the favored lover 
Bissibingui. But the telling and the setting 
are anything but familiar. Rene Maran, 
though a native of Guadaloupe, has lived 
with these people many years and he tells 
with a wealth of detail and great plainness 
what he has seen. His methods are realistic 
and objective and the result is that we see 
the drowsy African village, its awful poverty, its lassitude, its domestic life as typified by the "mokoundji" (chief) and his 
family, its hunting expeditions, its calls 
on the tom-tom. And last, but not least, 
the orgies of the native feasts and dances. 
These last shock us; from our point of view 
they are too raw, too unvarnished. Yet 
Maran is never offensive, never suggestive. 
The genius of the French language takes 
care of that. The color problem is only indirectly indicated in the story proper, but 
the preface contains a white-hot indictment 
against "civilization, the pride of Europeans 
but the slaughter-house of innocents * * * 
not a torch, but a conflagration which consumes everything it touches." 
This is really a great novel. It is artistic, 
overwhelming in its almost cinema-like 
sharpness of picturization. And there lies 
its strength. No propaganda, no preach208 NO END OF BOOKS 209 
ments, just an actual portrayal of life from 
the moment when Batouala awakes, yawning, scratching himself, meditating on the 
relative values of going back to sleep and 
getting up, to the moment when in the 
agony caused by his noisome, festering 
wound he rises in his death jealousy and 
confronts the lovers, aghast, shrinking, almost plastering themselves against the 
wall. 
No one can doubt the value of "Unsung 
Heroes". It is just the sort of book we need 
to offset the tendency of American schools 
to impress upon children of both races that 
the only heroes in the world have been 
white heroes. Fo r "Unsung Heroes" tells 
the story of those black men, Douglass and 
Attucks, Henson and Washington, and 
others, who did their part in adding to the 
glory of American History. It is a book 
that ought to be in every home and a supplementary text-book at least in every 
school. The influence of the printed word is 
so great that these stories gain greater authenticity by the mere placing of them 
between the covers of a volume, instead of 
leaving them as we have too long in the 
form of anecdotes and personal recollections to be handed down from father to 
son. It is because of this influence that we 
wish Mrs. Haynes had looked more carefully to her diction and to the rounding of 
her periods. Noble subjects are still more 
enhanced by noble treatment. However, the 
stories are there to fulfill the need of our 
children and that is the main thing. A 
pleasing and novel feature of the book is 
its illustrations which also are the work 
of colored artists, Laura Wheeler, Hilda 
Wilkinson, Carlton Thorpe and Marcellus 
Hawkins. 
The "History of Liberia" might also be 
called a "History of Slavery", for almost a 
third of the book is devoted to a study of 
that institution. Fo r the rest it is a work 
of careful though uninspired research and 
the student of Africa who wishes to clear 
up his ideas about the Dark Continent beginning with Liberia would do well to put 
in two or three hours reading Mr. Walker's 
effort. He would learn that the plant and 
animal life of the little republic are different for some strange reason from the other 
countries of West Africa, that the bulk 
of the population consists of uncivilized natives constantly seeping in from the hinterland and yet that the governing class is 
composed of some 12,000 American-Liberians. The country is rich in practically 
untapped supplies of gold, garnets, mica and 
sapphires. The Kru and Vai tribes have 
played a large part in the development of 
Liberia, and France and England have done 
their share toward its retardation. Most 
of us will agree with the author's desire 
that missionaries should no longer try to 
thrust the customs of the white man upon 
the natives. We should like to see Liberia 
while developing creeds and customs which 
will enable her to cope with foreign methods, stick to her own system of dress and 
ethics and traditions. 
Dr. Turner's little book is especially valuable to colored people because the ringworm, it has been proved, works more ravages among Negroes than among whites. 
All phases of this disease are traced, its 
history given, its manifestations differentiated, a diagnosis and a definite remedy presented. Already a bad epidemic of ringworm in one of the Philadelphia public 
schools has been wiped out by Dr. Turner's 
efforts. The book has the endorsement of 
Walter S. Cornell, M.D., Director of Medical Inspection in the public schools of Philadelphia. 
Dr. Heifetz's chronicle adds another 
chapter to the history of prejudice. In 182 
pages he gives an account of the cruellest 
and bloodiest butcheries of human beings 
that the world can ever have known. The 
pogroms of the eighties of the 19th century 
were different from those of more recent 
times. They were instituted under the 
czaristic regime to divert the attention of 
the dissatisfied masses from social and political abuses, but they were aimed at the 
destruction of the possessions of the Jews 
rather than at their lives. Women were 
violated, "men were beaten (but not to 
death)" , and property was wantonly and 
completely destroyed. In the later pogroms from 1903 on, cold-blooded murder 
was introduced reaching its culmination in 
1919 in a total of 30,500 people killed in 
the Ukraine alone. All this bloodshed and 
madness arose from the conviction real or 
pretended of Denikin and his associates in 
the Ukraine that the Soviet power was a 210 THE CRISIS 
Jewish power and that "the armed fight 
against the Soviet power must be supported 
and strengthened by Jewish pogroms." The 
terrible statements of the text of this book 
are supported by an appendix containing 
signed reports of participants and spectators. The whole volume is a bloodstained 
commentary on latter-day civilization. 
With his usual scholarly thoroughness Dr. 
Woodson has traced for us the history of 
the church from its slightest manifestations 
in Latin America to the form in which we 
know it today. It makes an attractive and 
interesting narrative much more readable 
than most of its author's former works, 
and by the same token not as good a text 
book, but there can be no question as. to its 
authenticity and Dr. Woodson's complete 
acquaintance with his subject. The Anglicans and Quakers were the first to take up 
the work of proselyting Negroes. But the 
ritual of the one and the supreme simplicity 
of the other alike baffled the mentality of 
the ordinary 17th century Negro, who 
turned with better results to the Methodist 
and Baptist sects and in these camps he 
has practically remained ever since. Dr. 
Woodson looks on the latter-day Negro 
Church as a social institution whose role 
is "to keep the fire burning on the altar 
until the day when men again become reverent". The loss of interest in the church 
which the white world has experienced is 
fittingly stressed as well as the iniquitous 
part played by Thomas Jesse Jones as the 
tool of capitalists to keep the colored Americans out of Africa. The book contains a 
careful index and several instructive and 
interesting foot-notes and is profusely illustrated. 
The personal note running through Chaplain Steward's narrative frees it from the 
usual dry-as-dust quality of a history. His 
fifty years in the ministry have been spent 
in visiting and meeting many places and 
people and his book is an account of all he 
has seen and done. Secular affairs are interwoven with his pulpit adventures. He 
has seen the Civil Wa r and the Reconstruction, encounters between freedom and exslave holders, as well as the development of 
the A. M. E. Church. Out of his copious 
notes he gives us selections from sermons 
and addresses and little pictures of his relationships with men well known to those 
familiar with outstanding figures in Negro 
history. His book is not at any time historical in the sense of Dr.Woodson's book. 
It is too personal for that. Thus the latter 
third of the narrative is almost entirely 
confined to the account of his life in the 
army and his travels abroad. But it often 
furnishes a good commentary for nearly 
three-quarters of a century on the happenings among colored people in the United 
States. 
POEMS 
LANGSTON HUGHES 
QUESTION 
WHE N the old junk man Death 
Comes to gather up our bodies 
And toss them into the sack of oblivion, 
I wonder if he will find 
The corpse of a white multi-millionaire 
Worth more pennies of eternity, 
Than the black torso of 
A Negro cotton-picker'' 
THE NEW MOO N 
THERE'S a new, young moon riding the 
•"• hills tonight; 
There's
the
There's
face
 a sprightly, young moon exploring 
 clouds; 
a half-shy, young moon veiling her 
 like a virgin, 
Waiting for her lover. 
MEXICA N MARKE T WOMA N 
THIS ancient hag 
Who sits upon the ground 
Selling her scanty wares 
Day in, day round, 
Has known high wind-swept mountains; 
And the sun has made 
Her skin so brown. National Association for the Advancem
TWELFTH ANNUAL REPORT
(The full report is in press)
W.G. SIMMONS, "Imperial Wizard"
of the Ku Klux Klan, has called
the N. A. A. C. P. the <chief opponent of
the Klan. A t the trial of John Williams,
accused of murdering Negro peons, in Jasper County, Ga., a special challenge was
made of the talesmen to see if they were
members of the N. A. A. C. P. or if voluntary counsel in the case had received
any part of their pay from our Association. Such strains indicate our growing
influence,
During the last year our chief work has
been to influence the administration in our
behalf at Washington, to fpush the Dyer
Anti-Lynching Bill, to continue legal detense of the Arkansas peons and numbers
of other victims, to investigate race riots,
to investigate peonage, to take up cases of 
discrimination, to fight the Ku Klux Klan,
to promote the Second Pan-African Congress, to hold the usual Annual Conference,
and to forward our publicity work, including the publication of TH E CRISIS.
The membership and contributions received by the N. A. A. C P. during the last
four years are as follows:
1918 Memberships $24,.r;72.71
Contributions 5,704.40
30 077 11
-,^-,r> H I u I • c>aV,7»;'qQ
1919—Memberships 39,o lb.66
Contributions 8,398.93
47,975.20
1920—Memberships VAU'nn
Contnbutions 15,388.00
43,333.99
1921—Memberships 42,684.40
Contributions 18,523.97
$61 208 37
O N April 4, the secretary conferred at
the White House with President Harding,
He asked the President to include a recommendation for action against lynching in his
211 
 annual message, to make an investigation 
 of peonage, to investigate disfranchisement i n th e South, to appoint a national Inter­
 racial Committee, to investigate the situa­ tio n i n Haiti, to appoint colored assistant 
 secretaries in the Departments of Labor a n d Agriculture, and to end race segrega­ tio n i n t h e Executive Department, 
 Of these recommendations the President 
 took note as follows: He said in his 
 annual message that Congress ought "to 
 wipe out the stain of barbaric lynching 
 from the banner of a free and orderly rep­
 resentative democracy." 
 Later the secretary headed a delegation 
 of 30 leading colored men and women who 
 presented a petition to the President for 
 the pardon of the soldiers of the 24th In­
 fantry. This petition was signed by 50,000 
 persons, 
Lynching The chief work of the year 
 has been our endeavor to 
 push the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill. This 
 bill was introduced in the 67th Congress 
 by Representative L. C. Dyer of Missouri, 
 April 11, 1921. On July 20, a hearing 
 was held before the Committee on the Ju­
 diciary. On October 20 the bill was favor­
 ably reported by the House Committee on 
 the Judiciary. Untoward efforts to amend 
t e w e r e ' l ^ warded off and the favorable 
 opinion of the Attorney-General was se­
„ , , t , . 
 cured. After long effort and repeated lnterviews with leading members of Congress 
 special rule on the bill was decided upon. Thi s special rule came up for action Mon­
 day, December 19, and after considerable 
 difficulty, on account of a filibuster by the 
 Southern members, the rule was adopted. 
a
 December 20 the House went into the 
 Committee as a whole and the bill was read. 
On Wednesday, January 4, after the recess, 
 by a vote of 184 to 86 the Anti-Lynching 
 Bill was taken up again. On Tuesday, Jan­
 uary 10, it was again debated. A great vic­
 tory was won on January 27 when the 
 House passed the bill by a vote of 230 to 119. 
0 n212 THE CRISIS 
The Association has kept careful recoi 
of all lynchings. It investigated 1 
burning of Henry Lowry in Arkan; 
and published the results; it urged the Gi 
e.rnor of South Carolina to bring lynch* 
to trial and to proceed against them unc 
the State Constitution. As a result of tl 
the widow of Joe Stewart who was hang 
in April, 1920, has been given a verd 
of $2,000 against the county. 
Through the activities of the Associate 
bills against lynching have been passed 
West Virginia and Minnesota. 
SINC E October, 1919, th< PEONAGE Association has been defending the 12 men sentenced to death and the 
67 others sentenced to prison terms in connection with the so-called "massacre" in 
Phillips County, Ark. These men have repeatedly been saved from execution and the 
cases of 6 of them have finally been brought 
to the Supreme Court of the United States 
by appeal on an assignment of errors. 
The other six are to be tried again in Lee 
County, Ark., at the Spring term of that 
court. To date the Association has expended $11,249.39 and is obligated to pay $2,­
500 more, besides the cost of litigation in 
the Supreme Court. 
With regard to peonage, the Association 
has brought every case reported to it to the 
attention of the Department of Justice. In 
this and other ways it encouraged the Department to investigate peonage, and thus 
was brought to light the terrible John Williams murder case in Jasper County, Ga. 
Williams is now serving a life sentence in 
the Georgia State Penitentiary. 
THE Association has also been LEGAL interested either through DEFENSE its main office or through 
its branches in the following cases: The 
defense of Maurice Mays in Tennessee; unjustly charged of murder. The defense of 
13 men accused of rape in Daluth, Minn., 
after several colored men had been lynched. 
Of the 13, one was acquitted by jury, 5 
were dismissed by order of the court, and 
6 were dismissed at the request of the 
prosecuting attorney. One man was found 
guilty. His case was appealed and is now 
before the Supreme Court of Minnesota. 
A special investigation of the Tulsa riot 
was made and the results widely published. 
Of the 88 indictments returned against alleged participants in the riots, 74 were 
against Negroes. Their cases have not yet 
come up. Meantime, we have established 
and administered a relief and defense fund 
of $3,506.24. 
DURIN G the year the As­ EXTRADITION sociation has kept up 
its work of seeking to prevent the extradition of colored men from Northern to 
Southern States when there is danger of 
their being lynched. In pursuance of this 
policy, Thomas Ray has been saved 
from being extradited from Michigan to 
Georgia. He had killed a white man and 
alleged that it was in self-defense. Governor Sleeper allowed the extradition, but 
the Association kept the matter in the 
courts until the succeeding Governor, Groesbeck, refused the extradition. The extradition of Ed Knox from West Virginia to 
Tennessee has been prevented by the 
Charleston, W. Va. branch. The extradition of Will Whitfield from New York to 
North Carolina is being fought in the 
courts. The extradition of a white man, 
H. F. Smiddy, is being opposed. He went 
from Arkansas to Kansas and is willing 
to testify that the whites were the aggressors in the Arkansas riot. Charles P . 
Smithie has so far been prevented from 
being extradited from Minnesota to Tulsa, 
Okla., where he was indicted as one of the 
rioters. He is now free on bail. Successful 
efforts were made at Kansas City, Mo., to 
prevent the extradition of two colored boys, 
Wilbur and Castoria Styles, to Arkansas, 
on the claim that they owe a white man 
eighty dollars. 
THROUGH publicity DISCRIMINATION furnished by the N. 
A. A. C. P . and upon request of the Association of Colored Railway Trainmen, steps 
have been taken to stop the murder and 
maiming of colored trainmen and two white 
men have been arrested in Mississippi on a 
charge of intimidation. 
In the Harlem Hospital, New York City, 
effoit has been made by the Association in 
conjunction with other organizations and 
prominent persons to bring about better 
treatment of patients, and representation of 
Negroes on the Board. 
THE Association during 1921 Ku KLU X continued its fight against KLA N the Ku Klux Klan, mainly 
through the publication of facts which it 213 2ii THE
collected and sent to members of Congress 
and also furnished to the New York World, 
and which were part of the proof of the 
expose which the World made of the Klan. 
At last reports the affairs of the Ku Klux 
Klan were involved in litigation. 
t P HE Association continues to 
MOVING L fight slanderous moving picPICTURES ires. We picketed "The Birth 
of a Nation" when it recently appeared in 
New York and distributed printed matter. 
Our pickets were arrested but we secured 
an opinion of the court which pronounced 
the distribution of printed matter under 
such circumstances legal. Our branches 
stopped this film in the State of California 
and helped induce the Board of Censors to 
refuse permission to exhibit it in Boston. 
TH E twelfth annual confer­ ANNUA L ence of the Association was CONFERENCE held in Detroit, Mich., June 
26 to July 1. The conference was opened 
with an enormous protest parade on Sunday afternoon. There were 4,000 persons 
in line, representing every organization 
among colored people in Detroit. In this 
parade banners were borne protesting 
against injustices perpetrated upon the 
Negro in America. The principal speakers 
at the Conference were Mr. Moorfield 
Storey, Judge John I. W. Jayne, Dr. I. Garland Penn, Rev. E. W. Daniel, Messrs. B. 
Forrester Washington, John E. Clark, Harry H. Pace, Sol Plaatje of the South African Native Congress, James H. Maurer, 
President of the Pennsylvania State Federation of Labor, Rev. R. L. Bradby; Prof. 
Robert Kerlin, who was dismissed from the 
Lexington, Va., Institute because of his appearance here, and M. Stenio Vincent, former President of the Haitian Senate, 
The Spingarn Medal was awarded to 
Charles S. Gilpin for his contribution to 
Negro art. 
HPH E First Pan- SECOND PAN - African Congress AFRICAN CONGRESS was organized and 
financed by the N. A. A. C. P. in 1919. 
The Second Pan-African Congress was organized and financed by the Association in 
the summer of 1921 under Dr. DuBois, who 
acted as secretary. The Congress was held 
in London, Brussels and Paris. It was attended by 112 accredited delegates from different countries, and by 1,000 visitors. 
 CRISIS 
Special conferences were held with the 
English Labor Party and with the Aborigines' Protection Society. The Committee 
also presented a petition to the League of 
Nations and suggestions to the International Labor Bureau. 
TH E CRISIS during the TH E CRISIS years of its publication, 
since November, 1910, has distributed 5,­
259,899 copies. The figures showing its income, average net paid monthly circulation 
and total circulation follow: 
Circulation Total Income 
per month Circulation 
1910 1,750 copies 3,500 copies $375 
1911 9,000 " 108,000 " 6,572 
1912 22.000 " 264,000 " 13,217 
1913 27,000 " 336,000 " 19,739 
1914 31,450 " 377,400 " 22,124 
1915 32,156 " 385,872 " 23,865 
1916 37,625 " 451,500 " 28,193 
1917 41,289 " 495,477 " 32,836 
1918 75,187 " 902,250 " 57,367 
1919 94,908 " 1,138,900 " 70,502 
1920 62,417 " 749,000 " 77,706 
1921 49,750 " 597,000 " 62,582 
The total income of TH E CRISIS since its 
inception, November, 1910, has been $414,­
979.75. 
H P WO main tasks were unPUBLICITY dertaken by the publicity 
department in 1921. One was the complete 
showing up of the Ku Klux Klan, the 
other was to work unceasingly to make the 
Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill a national issue. 
In the regular course of work, some 139 
press stories were sent out as compared 
with 131 in 1920. Of these, 30 were devoted either to the Dyer Anti-Lynching 
Bill or to some aspect of the lynching problem. To the Ku Klux Klan, 8 stories were 
devoted and to the Tulsa riot and the Haitian situation, and the Association's membership drive, 7 each. The Association also 
gave first publicity to the dismissal of Robert T. Kerlin from Virginia Military Institute, and stimulated strongly worded editorials in the chief New York newspapers, 
including the Times, the Evening Post, and 
several of the liberal weekly magazines. A 
book review service to the colored press was 
also begun. Special acknowledgment must 
be made of the splendid cooperation during the year by colored editors throughout 
the country. TWELVE PRESIDENTS OF BRANCHES OF THE N. A. A. C P. 
Tin n v BTNTLE Y W. H. McKINNEY REV. R. H. SINGLETON JOHN D. DRAKE 
Chicago, 111. Detroit, Mich. Atlanta, Ga. Oakland, Cal. 
T C BANKS A. H. GRIMKE JOHN L. LOVE DR. B. J. ANDERSON 
Los Angles, Cal. Washington, D. C. Kansas City, Mo. Birmingham, Ala. 
xx-nvnir W GROSS I. N. FITCH G. W. STEWART ISADORE MARTIN Denver™ Colo. Winston-Salem, N. C. Newark, N. J. Philadedlphia, Pa. 
215 THE HORIZON 
Compiled by Madeline G. Allison 
Mercy Hospital and School for Nurses 
was founde'd in 1907 in a small dwelling at 17th and Fitzwater Streets, Philadelphia. In 1919 the hospital acquired a beautiful location consisting of 6^ acres of 
ground with four large buildings at 50th 
Street and Woodland Avenue. The new 
Mercy Hospital has had a wonderful growth 
and is endorsed by the State officials. It 
has an organized staff of over 50 members, 
a training school of 37 nurses and 4 graduate nurses, and 85 beds. Dr. Henry M. 
Minton is superintendent and Fleming B. 
Tucker assistant superintendent. Dr. Henry L. Phillips, archdeacon of Pennsylvania, 
a well known colored episcopal clergyman, 
is nresident of the Board of Directors. 
Nellie Harris, a colored nurse, has won 
admittance to the Post-Graduate course at 
the. Woman's Hospital, New York City. 
When authorities at the hospital refused 
Miss Harris on account of her race, she 
brought suit under the Civil Rights Act, 
through Attorney N. B. Marshall. The 
case was settled out of court. 
By the will of the late Mrs. Calista S. 
Mayhew, a white woman of New York, 
four colored schools in the South will receive legacies: Atlanta University, Tuskegee Institute, Hampton Institute and Snow 
Hill Normal School, Snow Hill, Alabama. 
Robert G. Doggett is dead in New York 
City as the result of an operation for acute 
appendicitis. He was born in Calvert, 
Texas, 28 years ago and was educated at 
Howard University. Fo r some time he 
was associated with the late J. Leubrie Hill, 
playwright and actor. A lover of the beautiful in literature and art and himself possessed of considerable dramatic ability, Mr. 
MERCY HOSPITAL AND SCHOOL FOE NURSES, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
216 THE HORIZON 217 
A t the senior recital of the Emerson College of Oratory, Boston, Gertrude McBrown, 
a colored literary interpreter, was chosen 
among 5 students to represent the institution. Her number "Mother and Daughter", by Dickens, was well received by a 
critical audience. Miss McBrown's platform 
deportment was perfect, the interpretations 
of characters and the picturing of scenes 
showed splendid artistry and skilful technique ; the narrative links in the -play displayed the lyrical quality of her voice, while 
the interpretations of characters revealed 
her remarkable dramatic ability. 
The total native Negro population living 
in the United States on January 1, 1920, 
was 10,389,328, including 8,019 Negroes 
born in outlying possessions and 38,575 for 
whom the state of birth was not reported. 
Wesley Barry, "Sunshine Sammy" Morrison, Frank Morrison and Gordon Griffith 
DR. C. B. POWELL 
Doggett had striven to bring larger opportunities to the Negro actor and the Negro 
musician. 
Dr. Clyde B. Powell has been appointed 
to the X-ra y staff of the Bellevue Hospital 
in New York City. Objections were made on 
account of his color but the superintendent 
of the hospital refused to consider the 
complaints. 
James E. Harris of Brooklyn, N. Y., headed the list in an examination of 75 candidates fo r license as teacher of English in 
the New Yor k City high schools. There 
were four wh o passed. Mr. Harris is at 
present a teacher of Civics at Manual 
Training High School, and of English at 
the evening Eastside High School. STARS OF THE MOVIE WORLD 218 THE CRISIS 
(Prize Picture, March, 1922) 
are "stars" of the movie world. They are 
now playing in Marshal Neilan's "Penrod", 
adapted from Booth Tarkington's book. 
"Sunshine Sammy" Morrison (second from 
top) recently signed a five year contract 
calling for $10,000 per year. 
At the fourth annual convention of the 
Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, held in Indianapolis, there were more than 100 del* • 
gates and members in attendance, representing 18 chapters. Special features of 
the convention were the sending of a telegram to President Harding, uTgir.g the 
support of the administration in t) e passage 
of the Dyer anti-lynching bill, .ind an invitation to sororities and fraternities to 
meet with the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority 
in a Pan-Hellenic Conference during 1922, 
MRS. W, E. GREEN MISS L. P. MITCHELL 
AT THE CONVENTION OF THE ALPHA 
the date and place of meeting to be named 
later. Mrs. Wendell E. Green of Chicago, 
111., is National President; Miss L. Pearl 
Mitchell of Kalamazoo, Mich., is National 
Secretary. 
Many have been the tributes paid to the 
memory of Frederick Douglass, but his recent post-humous election to Omega Chapter 
of the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity was 
perhaps one of the most touching and impressive ceremonies ever held in connection 
with the life of the great Douglass. Three 
hundred young college men, assembled in 
the 14th annual convention of their fraternity, at Baltimore, made a pilgrimage 
to the Douglass Home in Anacostia, D. C, 
on December 28, and there at the shrine 
of their great leader, stood with bared heads 
in solemn silence for one minute. The ceremonies were brief but effective. Mrs. L. A. 
Pendleton, on behalf of the committee in 
charge of the home, welcomed the pilgrims. 
Professor George W. Cook of Howard University delivered the oratorical address, 
which was followed by remarks from Dr. 
George C. Hall of Chicago, and Simeon S. 
Booker, president of the Alpha Phi Alpha 
Fraternity. Oscar C. Brown, of Howard 
University, presided; George B. Kelly, one 
of the founders of the fraternity, mady 
the presentation of the shingle bearing 
witness of Douglass' membership in Alpha 
Phi Alpha. To aid with much-needed repairs and improvements to the home, the 
fraternity presented the Committee of 
Ladies with a check for $100. 
The Federal Council of the Churches of THE HORIZON 1 9 2 
PHI ALPHA FRATERNITY, BALTIMORE, MD.
Christ in America has appointed Dr. George 
E. Haynes to promote the work of its Commission on the Church and Race Relations. 
Among purposes of this Commission are: 
"To array the sentiment of the Christian 
churches against mob violence and to enlist their thorough-going support in a 
special program of education on the subject for a period of at least five years; to 
develop a public conscience which will secure in the Negro equitable provision for 
education, health, housing, recreation and 
all other aspects of community welfare." 
Harry T. Burleigh offers a new art-song, 
"Adoration", and four Negro folk-songs, 
"Oh! Rock Me, Julie", "Scandalize My 
Name", "De Ha'nt " and "Don ' Yo ' Dream 
of Turnin' Back". Musical America says: 
"In putting forward these Negro folk-songs 
Mr. Burleigh has inaugurated another department of activity in his work as a creative musician. His success both with his 
art-songs and Negro spirituals has been 
noteworthy and we would predict that he 
will duplicate it with his settings of those 
songs o f his race, the texts of which, unlike the spirituals, have no religious character; it is in this that they differ from 
them." G. Ricordi, New York, is the publisher. 
Countee P. Cullen, a Negro senior in DeWitt Clinton High School, has become recognized as the premier poet of New York's 
high schools. His poem "I Have a Rendezvous With Life " was awarded first prize 
in a contest held under the auspices of the 
Empire Federation of Women's Clubs; «i­
 (Article by Victor Daly) 
other, "In Memory of Lincoln", won second 
prize in a contest conducted by the Sorosis 
Club. He has demonstrated his ability as a 
speaker by winning the Douglas Fairbanks 
oratorical contest, and as a journalist by 
working his way to the editorship of the 
Clinton News, the high school weekly. All 
this has earned for him the highest honor 
that Clinton can bestow—the leadership of 
the Arista. He is vice-president of the 
Senior Class, First Lieutenant of the Dotey 
Squad, a member of the Clinton Club and 
of the Inter-High School Poetry Society. 
Mr. Summerson of Darby, Pa., sends us 
THE HOME OF MR. SUMMERSON 220 THE CRISIS 
Arthu Max Yerpan r A, Schomhurg 
a picture of his comfortable little home. 
This is just one of many such homes. 
Arthur A. Schomburg was born January 
24, 1874. He was educated in public and 
private schools and at the Institute Ensenanza Pcxpulair, St. Thomas College, Porto 
Rico. He has held various offices in political, Masonic and historical organizations. 
He is employed by the Bankers' Trust Company of New York as head of the Mailing 
Department. Mr. Schomburg, however, possesses rare skill as a collector of books, 
prints, engravings, etc. His library, devoted exclusively to books pertaining to the 
Negro race and by persons of Negro descent, is one of the most remarkable libraries of its kind in existence. Many of the 
items are exceedingly rare. He is constantly receiving consignments of books from all 
parts of the world, hence many of his volumes are in foreign languages, such as 
Portuguese, Spanish, French, Dutch, German, Russian, Latin, Hebrew, Amharic, 
Arabic and various other tongues. His collection of books by the celebrated Ludolph 
who wrote the history of Ethiopia and the 
Kingdom of Abyssinia, together with the 
books of reference pertaining to that subject is of exceeding great value as a source 
of Negro history. The value of Mr. Schomburg's library is attested fully by the fact 
that his home in Brooklyn, N. Y., has become the Mecca for scholars from all parts 
of the United States and many have come 
from abroad to do research work therein. 
Mr. Schomburg has immortalized himself 
in the great zeal with which he has applied 
 Edward F. Frazier Charles C. Allison, Jr. 
himself to the task of preserving the evidences of Negro culture in all ages. 
After considerable hesitancy and long 
correspondence, Max Yergan has been 
allowed to depart for South Africa to begin Y. M. C. A. work among the natives. 
This is probably an epoch-making step and 
beginning of a new effort on the part of 
American Negroes to serve their African 
brothers. It has been decided that association work in Africa is in the future to be 
done by Negro Americans and supported 
by the colored Y. M. C. A.'s. 
Mr. Yergan was born July 19, 1892, in 
Raleigh, N. C , where he attended the grade 
and high schools and was graduated from 
Shaw University in 1914 with honors. In 
1916 he enlisted for war service and sailed 
for Africa where he was mentioned in dispatches for "meritorious service on the 
field". He has served the Wa r Work Council as Recruiting Officer for colored workers for France and as Overseas Field Secretary; in the United States Army he was a 
Chaplain with the rank of First Lieutenant. 
Mr. Yergan is accompanied by his wife and 
Frederick Max Yergan, aged 5 months. 
Edward Franklin Frazier has a noteworthy record for scholarship. He was 
born in Baltimore, Md. When quite young 
he finished the elementary school as valedictorian; in 1912 he was graduated from 
high school with a scholarship to Howard 
University, from which he was graduated 
in 1916 as a Bachelor of Arts with cum 
laude rank. In 1920, through a scholarship, 
he was graduated from Clark University, THE HORIZON 221 
Worcester, Mass. where he studied sociology 
and was awarded the degree of Master of 
Arts. By competitive examination, in 
which 31 colleges participated, he won a 
fellowship of $850 to the New York School 
of Social Work, 1920-21. Through a fellowship of $1,000 awarded him by the American-Scandinavian Foundation, he is now 
studying sociology and economics at the 
University of Copenhagen. Mr. Frazier has 
been a teacher of mathematics, English and 
history in colored schools of the South; during 1918-19 he taught mathematics and 
French in the Baltimore High School. He 
plans to teach sociology and inaugurate cooperative farming among Negro farmers. 
In 1916, Charles C. Allison, Jr., was one 
of 700 men who took the examination for 
Municipal Parole Officer in New York City. 
He was certified as eighth on the list and 
received appointment July 16, 1916, being the youngest officer appointed. Mr. Allison was born in New York City, September 
26, 1889. He attended the High School of 
Commerce and in 1912 took up social service 
work with the National Urban League. 
He has served as the first colored field 
worker in the employ of the Big Brother 
Movement; in 1915 he was among officers 
invited to witness the execution of 5 men at 
Sing Sing, at which time a record was established—the 5 executions being completed in 
65 minutes; in 1916 he was the only colored 
delegate present at the International Conference of Children's Court Workers, which 
convened in Grand Rapids, Mich. Mr. Allison's duties as parole officer are to make 
investigations of all men living in the- 38th 
Precinct boundaries—the Harlem Negro 
section—who have been released from the 
penitentiary, the city reformatory and 
the work-house. Among probationers assigned to him was Luther Boddy. Mr. Allison has given supervision to almost 1,000 
men, over 70 percent of whom have "made 
good". 
Lt. E. P. Frierson, U. S. Army, retired, 
has been appointed a clerk in the Mailing 
Division of the Chicago Post Office. In the 
Civil Service examination he made a general average of 98.88 percent. 
During its first 11 months of business the 
Black Swan Phonograph Company had total receipts amounting to $104,628; disbursements, $101,327. Its income is over 
$12,000 per month. Since May 1, it has 
organized a selling force throughout the 
United States through which it supplies 
thousands of agents and dealers with a 
total of 40,000 records per month. It manufactures and distributes Black Swan records, the Black Swan needle, and Swanola, 
a phonograph. Its shipments are made to 
every part of the United States, Mexico, 
DISTRIBUTIO N SYSTE M O F BLAC K SWA N PHONOGRAP H RECORD S 
j _ 5 af ents . + = B dealers. J distributors and jobbers. Figure s refer to population.) 222 THE CRISIS 
THE PROPOSED NEW ST. MARK'S M.
the Virgin Isles, South America, the Philippines and Hawaii. Recently the company 
purchased its own building at 2289 Seventh 
Avenue, New York City, where it employs 
an executive, clerical and shipping force of 
20 people. Harry H. Pace is president of 
the company. 
The new St. Mark's M. E. Church, New 
York City, will be located between 137 and 
138th Streets, Saint Nicholas and Edgecombe Avenues. The entire cost, $400,000, 
has been secured in cash or five-year subscriptions, and no money is required from 
the Centenary. The $40,000 given by the 
Centenary assisted in paying for the lot. 
The edifice takes the form of a modern auditorium 124 feet long, 39 feet high and 53 
feet wide, covering 68 percent of the total 
lot area; the remaining 32 percent will be 
utilized for the parish-house and the parsonage. The walls and ceilings will be finished in a rough cast plaster of beautiful 
color and texture, simply decorated; the 
woodwork of the chancel and seating will 
be of oak; the floors and aisles will be of 
cork, making them noiseless; the electric 
lighting will be what is known as indirect, 
no fixtures being necessary as the lights are 
placed in reflectors. The heating and ventilating will consist of intake and exhaust 
fans which will insure warm fresh air in 
winter and thorough ventilation in the summer. The Building Committee has under 
consideration a complete vacuum cleaning 
 E. CHURCH, NE W YORK CITY 
system. There will be a seating capacity 
for 2,200, and an organ which will cost 
$25,000. Sibley & Featherston of New York 
are the architects. Last October, St. 
Mark's celebrated its 50th anniversary. Dr. 
William H. Brooks is the pastor. 
An African pageant, Asheeko, has been 
successfully presented at the Academy of 
Music, Philadelphia, by Mrs. Casely Hayford, Miss Kathleen Easmon, Madakane 
Cele, C. Kamba Simango and G. L. Taylor, 
native Africans. They were assisted by a 
generous number of Philadelphia's musical 
and dramatic people. The music of Asheeko 
was written by Mr. Taylor. Chorus singers, from the choir of Central Presbyterian 
Church and others, rendered the "Chemalebvu", native song and chant in the Chindau 
dialect; the men sang the Betrothal Song 
"Gogogo " in the Zulu tongue. Admirable 
song talent was shown by Miss Hattie Savoy, contralto, in the "Chililio" (Chindau), 
and Clarence L. E. Monroe, baritone, in the 
Invocation to the Chief. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Williamsburg County, S. C , January 8, 
two unknown men; assaulting white woman 
Eufaula, Ala., January 10, Willie Jenkins; insulting white woman 
Oklahoma City, Okla., January 14, John 
Brooks 
Mayo, Fla., January 17, unknown man; 
shooting white mail carrier THE 22 3 HORIZON 
AT THE CONFERENCE OF THE NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE, HELD IN CHICAGO 
Bollinger, Ala., January 28, Drew Conner (white), burned; reason unknown 
Pontotoc, Miss., January 29, Will Bell; 
attacking white woman 
Crystal Springs, Miss., February 1, Will 
Thrasher; attacking white teacher 
Malvern, Ark., February 2, Harry Harrison, shot. 
The Conference of the National Urban 
League held in Chicago, brought together a 
group of specialists in the economic and social problems of Negroes. Sixty representatives from 20 States attended. Mr. E. K. 
Jones, summarizing the year's work, stated 
that more than 70,000 Negroes had been 
placed in positions, and over $220,000 spent 
by various organizations of the League. 
"The Health Office of Newark, " said Mr. 
Jones, "has announced that as a result of 
Child Hygiene work conducted there at the 
instance of the League and through nurses 
appointed by it and working under its direction, the mortality among colored babie? 
dropped from 173.2 in 1920 to 106.0 in 1921." 
Two new departments have been added to 
the national organization—a Department 
of Research and Investigation and a Department of Extension. Of the latter department Mr. J. R. E. Lee, for 18 years the 
Director of the Academic Department of 
Tuskegee Institute, is in charge. 
The Association of Colleges for Colored 
Youth held its annual meeting at Wilberforce University, with the following present: Dean H. M. Tilford, Knoxville College; President John Hope, Morehouse College; Dean M. W. Adams, Atlanta University; President J. A. Gregg, Wilberforce 
University; Dean J. T. Cater, Talladega 
College; President J. L. Peacock, Shaw University; President C. H. Maxson, Bishop 
College; President W. J. Clarke, Virginia 
Union University; Dean Gilbert H. Jones, 
Wilberforce University; Dean D. O. W. 
Holmes, Howard University. 
DELEGATES TO CONVENTION OF ASSOCIATION OF COLLEGES FOR COLORED YOUTH THE RULING PASSION 
A N ESTIMATE OF JOSEPH C. PRICE 
THOSE years immediately following the 
Emancipation Proclamation startle one 
at times with their record of astounding 
achievement on the part of ex-slaves. It is 
only when we stop to realize that they represented the first outlet for centuries of the 
stifled desire and ambition of a thwarted 
people that we can understand how inevitably dynamic they had to be, a sort of metamorphosis of time into action. 
Men were single-minded in those days, 
possessing that attribute which is the first 
ingredient in the mixture of qualities that 
make for an individual success. It is 
easy to see how the 
black boy of 70 years 
ago was already beginnin g to say 
to himself , "If 
ever I am free, 
there's one thing I 
will do." And then 
when freedom unbe 
lievably, amazingly 
came he said to himself again: "If Freedom were possible, 
all things are possible. I must let 
nothing stand in my 
way." 
Th e sta r o f 
achievement to which 
Joseph Price, a black 
boy of those days, 
hitched his wagon 
was the founding of 
THE LATE JOSEPH C. PRICE versity at Oxford, 
a school for colored youth, a sort of black 
Harvard. It turned out in the course of his 
career that he was to be offered many prizes 
—a government position, a seat in the Liberian mission, a bishopric, but each of these 
he steadfastly refused in order to pursue 
his cherished dream, the establishment of 
Livingstone College at Salisbury, N. C. 
These were remarkable prizes for those 
days, but Joseph Price would none of them. 
From the day on which in 1862 he entered 
the Sunday School in St. Andrew's Chapel 
in Newbern, N. C , his heart was fixed. He 
was 8 years old then, small and black and 
barefooted, o f "stern but pleasant looks". 
That sternness of expression no doubt was 
due to the singleness, the concentration of 
purpose which was even then beginning to 
show in his face. 
From the beginning he himself must have 
felt that he was destined "to be somebody". 
Else why his eagerness to know all things? 
He beleaguered his teachers with questions. 
He answered those of other people. He 
had to have a mastery of wisdom for some 
day he meant to be a fountain himself for 
thirsty seekers after 
knowledge. 
A good teacher 
makes a good pupil. 
As young as he was 
Price realized this 
for although in 1866 
we find him a student in the St. Cyprian Episcopa l 
School, by 1871 at 
the age of 17 he was 
teaching at Wilson, 
N. C. But being a 
teacher he learned 
his own limitations 
and back he went to 
school at Shaw University (already in 
action for those eager freedmen and 
their sons) and then 
on to Lincoln UniPa. 
He had meanwhile become interested in 
religion and had connected himself with 
the A. M. E„ Zion church. After the 
fashion of those days it seemed to him to 
be the thing to combine pedagogy with theology so during his senior year in college 
he entered the junior theological department 
graduating thence in 1881. 
It was while he was at Lincoln that Congressman John A. Hyman, of Newbern, offered him a government position. The office paid $1,200 a year, a fortune in those 
days for a black man, but Joseph Price had 
224 THE LOOKING GLASS 22 5 
the artist's sense of values, he knew what 
he wanted and that was not gold. He was 
like the poet preferring to mull over his 
precious verse, starving in an attic rather 
than opulently to finger the tape in a 
broker's office. 
The gods had bestowed on him that not 
infrequent gift of his race, the art of persuasive oratory. He had already distinguished himself along this line in college. 
When he graduated in 18.79 he was valedictorian. Before he came out of the theological school he was sent as a delegate to 
the A. M. E. Zion general conference in 
Montgomery and because of his gift he 
was ordained elder before even he had obtained his degree as a minister. After his 
graduation he was sent in 1881 to the Ecumenical Conference which convened in London. 
He directed the golden flow of his gift 
into one channel only, that of interesting 
people in the project of his school. A t the 
close of the Ecumenical Conference he remained abroad to lecture in England, Scotland and Ireland. He returned with $10.­
000, with which in conjunction with another 
$1,000 given by the white merchants of 
Salisbury, he purchased the site of Livingstone College. 
Of course he did other things and met 
with other honors. He became the acknowledged orator of his day, he was acclaimed a new leader, he was delegate at 
the Centenary of American Methodism in 
Baltimore in 1884. He was chairman of 
the A. M. E. and A. M. E. Zion Church 
Commission held in those days in Washington, D. C. He was president of the AfroAmerican League. Preparations were made 
for a Grand Southern Exposition and he 
was appointed Commissioner-General. 
But the outstanding facts of his life are 
these. He was born in slavery and by the 
time he was 28 he had started a great 
school which 14 years after his death in 
1893, at its quarto-centenary, had grown to 
astounding proportions. It had real estate 
valued at $250,000. In the course of its 
existence it had enrolled 6,500 pupils from 
26 states. Its large faculty was comprised 
mainly of graduates from the collegiate, 
theological and normal departments. Among 
its alumni were numbered a bishop, presiding elders, well-known ministers, successful 
teachers and physicians, and all of these 
arose and called the name of Joseph Price 
blessed. 
W e Americans ascribe to Englishmen 
the quality of political diplomacy, to Frenchmen that of finesse and to ourselves the 
quality of grit. I like to think of Joseph 
Price, tall, majestic, superb of physique, 
of unmixed African blood as the epitome of 
his country's national characteristic. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
The Story of the Negro: Booker T. Washington, Dovbleday, Page & Co. 
Men of Mark: William J. Simmons. 
The Negro in American History: John 
Wesley Cromwell. Publications of the 
American Negro Academy. 
The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
EDMUN D VANC E COOK, in "The Un­
^—' common Commoner": 
The North! the South! the West! the East! 
No one the most and none the least. 
Each one a part and none the whole. 
But all together form one soul. 
That soul, Our country at its best, 
No North, no South, no East, No West. 
No yours, no mine, but only Ours, 
Merged in one power, our lesser powers, 
But all for each and each for all! 
* * * 
Rene Maran, whose novel "Batouala" 
brought him the Goncourt prize is, writes 
Alvan F. Sanbourne, in the Boston Evening 
Transcript, "a very close approach to a fullblooded Negro. " He was born in 1887 at 
Fort-de-France in Martinique, but left there 
at the age of three to accompany his father 
who was in the French Colonial Service, to 
Libreville in Gabon, West Africa. Persistent ill health made it necessary for him 
to go to France. Mr. Sanborn gives the 
future author's own account of his schooldays : 
I was sent to the Lycee of Taleuce which 
is an annex of the Lycee of Bordeaux for 
the "petits", in the open country. 
In 1894 a Negro was still a rarity in that 
part of France, and from the day I entered 
the school I was made to realize it. But 
after a little, thanks to my fists, I got myself respected. •226 THE CRISIS 
I learned to read in a month, and I was 
almost always near the head of my class. 
I was what is commonly styled a brilliant 
pupil, but was very capricious. 
We were ten colonials. Each one, in his 
respective class, obtained a prize in French. 
It was a point of honor with us—our revenge for railleries and the petty naggings 
of our schoolmates. 
In the fourth class, I put into modern 
French verse the chanson of Roland and 
attacked that of Guillaume-au-court-Nez 
and that of the Chevalier Griese-Gonelles. 
During nearly all of that year I read thirtytwo volumes a week on an average. I devoured Lombard, Maupassant and Zola as 
well as Hugo, Lamartine, Gautier and especially Alfred de Vigny. In fact, I read 
fantastically. 
* * * 
Dr. E. J. Dillon in his "Mexico" (Doran) 
declares that the United States has treated 
Haiti just as she did Mexico. Haiti was deliberately misrepresented, advantage was 
taken of her financial condition, and treaty 
demands were forced upon her. Her weakness was the State Department's opportunity and the latter's attitude in Dr. Dillon's opinion was tantamount to saying: 
"We care nothing about your Constitution, nor whether your President is or is 
not authorized by it to sign treaties. We 
insist on his signing a treaty and our will 
must.be done by hook or by crook". Wha t 
the United States did in Haiti "has burned 
itself into the souls of all Central Americans", declares Dr. Dillon. 
TWO LOSSES 
THE death of Colonel Charles Young in 
far away Nigeria awakens many memories of his famous "Tenth Regiment". The 
New York Sim says: 
He was that rare bird, a Negro graduate 
of West Point, and he was soaked with the 
spirit that has given the Tenth United 
States Cavalry worldwide prestige as a 
crack regiment. 
New Yorkers who saw the Black Tenth 
jingle up Fifth Avenue after their return 
from hard service in the Philippines will 
never forget the storm of joyous admiration showered upon them by city crowds, 
who were carried away by the matchless 
elan and childlike good nature of those first 
class fighting men. 
In later years, when a detachment of 
the regiment while hunting for Villa in 
Mexico was ambushed at Parral by an outnumbering Mexican force, it was Charles 
Young, then Major, who commanded the 
squad that Pershing dispatched to their 
relief. 
Pershing himself had fought Redskins as 
a Lieutenant of the Black Tenth, and like 
every other white officer that ever served 
with it, he holds the regiment in peculiar 
affection and admiration. Its supremely 
soldierly traditions have been accumulating 
for fifty-six years. Its history has been 
written in a book. Its deeds have been 
sung. Its qualities have been praised to 
the skies by European military observers. 
"They grew to be to our army what the 
Numidian horse was to the Roman legions," 
wrote Major Frank Keck, formerly of the 
Seventy-first Regiment, N. G. N. Y., when 
the Black Tenth celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in 1916. "Their life in the long 
reaches of the Western country developed 
courage, initiative and pride. Hunger, 
thirst, exposure, sudden skirmishes with 
foes fighting from ambush made the troopers of the Tenth not only first class fighting 
men individually, but shaped them into a 
military machine. 
"From post to post the Tenth was transferred through the great Western country. 
The Sioux, the Cheyennes and the Apaches 
fled before their intrepid charges. 
"A s the need for fighting grew less, the 
Tenth took on more of the function of 
mounted police, and yet, such was the pride 
of tradition, war-service was the ideal always uppermost in the mind of every member. Many of the original recruits remained 
as long as the Government would let them, 
for they hated to retire. So it was that the 
Tenth in peace had in reserve its deadly 
efficiency, and it went into the Spanish War 
with veteran officers and many a grizzled 
sergeant who was himself a tower of 
strength. 
"The achievements of the Tenth were 
the admiration of the foreign military observers who accompanied our expedition to 
Cuba, and they were impartial witnesses. 
They did not hesitate to assert their belief 
that the dismounted colored troopers were 
the very backbone of the American attack. 
Certain it was that the Tenth got the Rough 
Riders out of a very bad hole at Las Guasimas. Their timely arrival averted a greater 
disaster to the Rough Riders in the first 
land engagement near Santiago. 
"The charge of the Tenth up the steep 
and tangled slope of San Juan Hill will 
always have a place in the military annals 
of the world. It kept raw troops from firing on their comrades in the distance, for 
the Tenth was used to wars of the ambuscade." 
* * * 
Before colored Americans could recover 
from the shock of Colonel Young's death, 
they were stunned afresh by news of the 
passing away of that splendid lady Miss 
Maria Baldwin. She met her death while 
addressing a meeting in behalf of the Robert Gould Shaw House at the Copley Plaza 
in Boston. Francis G. Peabody relates the 
sad happening in the Boston Transcript: 
Everything seemed to assure a cheering THE LOOKING GLASS 227 
and profitable gathering. Then Miss Maria 
Baldwin, long the principal of the Agassiz School in Cambridge, and for the last 
six years its master, a colored woman of 
whose distinguished public service all Cambridge citizens are proud, rose to commend 
the Robert Gould Shaw House, of whose 
council she was a member, and to describe 
its congested conditions, with five hundred 
attendants, crowded classrooms and multiplying needs. Suddenly, when she was concluding this appeal, the strain of the occasion overtaxed her enfeebled heart, and 
she sank on the platform, dying almost immediately. The shock to those present was 
overwhelming, and the audience which had 
gathered to enjoy and encourage quietly dispersed to mourn. . . . 
Hundreds of parents are indebted to her 
for the discerning and discriminating education of their children; hundreds of hearers have listened with gratitude to her wise 
and brilliant addresses, in which academic 
precision was softened by the mellow accent 
of her own race. Her undisputed position 
as teacher and principal gave to her school 
distinction throughout the country. 
THE REVERSE OF THE MEDAL 
FRANCE has been pretty generally acclaimed as lacking in color prejudice 
and as therefore treating her black subjects 
just as well as her white. But what is the 
actual case? Nccrman Angell, in the Freeman paints France as a veritable Utopia for 
Negroes: 
Speaking broadly, the Negro living in 
France is all but unaware of the monstrous 
shadow that darkens every hour of the 
Negro's life in Anglo-Saxon communities. 
In France the Negro members of the Chamber of Deputies, or of the legal profession, 
or of the governmental administration, or 
of the Army and the Church, have not 
merely no official difficulties, they have no 
social difficulties in their relationship with 
their white colleagues. They dine in the 
homes of members of the Cabinet, plead for 
white clients in the Courts, and it would 
never even occur to their French colleagues 
to treat them with any sort of social exclusion- * * • 
The Negroes described by Mr. Angell 
would all seem to be the members of a black 
elite. But when it comes to the treatment 
of the common black man, in this case the 
native in French Colonial Africa, quite 
another method is employed. Rene Boisneuf, 
black deputy from Guadeloupe, scores 
Prance heavily in the Chamber of Deputies 
for her injustice to her dependents. Guy 
Hickok reports in the Brooklyn, N. Y., 
Eagle: 
"Everywhere arbitrary force, everywhere 
injustice, [said Deputy Boisneuf], everywhere blundering, everywhere ruin or the 
peril of ruin, budgets collapsing under the 
cost of government personnel, and nothing 
being done to further social or economic 
progress of the natives." 
He turned from generalizations to the exposure of abuses in particular colonies reducing to absurdity the pretension that the 
occupation of semi-civilized countries is for 
the benefit of the population. 
The black deputy revealed that in the 
great colony of Indo-China the colonial administration had forced the sale of opium 
in districts which had hitherto been free 
from the drug. When his statement was 
denied he read both orders and letters 
from the Governor-General directing that 
steps be taken to increase opium sales, and 
showed that opium paid 40 percent of the 
colonial budget. 
He emphasized the inconsistency of rigidly prohibiting the sale of opium in France 
while forcing it on one of the colonies whose 
inhabitants are, according to the French 
political theory, equal to white Frenchmen. 
"Yo u do not admit that the life of an 
Annamite or a Cambodian is worth less than 
that of a Parisian; that the life of a colonial is worth less than that of a native 
Frenchman. Therefore I cannot see how 
you can reconcile the consumption of opium 
in Indo-China, even for budgetary reasons, 
when it is rigidly prohibited in France. 
Wha t a comedy! What hypocrisy!" . . . 
Boisneuf charged that in his own colony, Guadaloupe, the white governors maintained a native military force used expressly for the purpose of defrauding the elections, and read several orders to the military bolstering up his statement. 
Still more serious, he charged that Africa had been "decimated" since the French 
regime began there; that epidemics had 
carried off many; that intensive exploitation by French concession companies of the 
native labor had intensified the mortality 
rate; that in French Congo a great part of 
the native population had fled to neighboring colonies to escape the forced labor 
regime of concession companies. 
* * * 
Rene Claparede, president of the Executive Committee of the Society for the Defence of Aborigines, sends us a list of the 
leagues formed since the days of Wilberforce for the protection of black peoples. In 
the lists of wrongs which caused the formation of these leagues he does not omit those 
of France. He mentions: 
First the "Congo Reform Association" in 
1903, then the French league in 1908, the 
Swiss in 1908, and the German in 1910, in 
Europe;—one in Sidney, Australia; in Lima, 
South America, and in the United States, 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (1909). For in the 228 THE
United States, in spite of Lincoln's effort 
of reform, "emancipation" was by no means 
worthy of that name. What Channing had 
feared was unfortunately true; the "free" 
Black remained a slave to the domination, 
spirit and haughtiness of the White. 
Leagues for the Defense of Natives must 
actually fight such abuses as these: 
Spoliation of territories (Rhodesia, etc.) 
Torture of Portage (French Congo, etc.) 
Poisoning and depopulation through alcohol (New Hebrides and all colonies in general) 
Driving of the Aborigines back into unproductive Reserves (Australia, Rhodesia, 
etc.) 
Forced labor (Kenia Colony, British East 
Africa, Mozambique, etc.) 
Indentured labor (Fiji Islands, etc.) 
Kidnapping (Oceania) 
Condemnation without judgment, and 
death sentence aggravated by tortures 
worthy of Middle Ag e customs (lynching, 
etc.) 
Unjustifiable scorn of the Whites toward 
the Blacks (color bar in South Africa, 
United States, etc.) 
Slavery for debts or peonage (certain 
South American States) 
Domestic Slavery (Africa, South America). 
CONSTITUTIONALITY 
vs. COMMON SENSE 
THE enemies of the Dyer Bill base their 
antagonism on its unconstitutionality. 
"An anti-lynching bill of this kind," cries 
the New World, "will lynch the Constitution." "But what of that?" replies the 
Charleston Neivs and Courier. 
All this talk about the anti-lyching bill 
lynching the Constitution is nonsense. We 
never heard of anybody being lynched more 
than once and the Constitution was lynched 
long ago. But maybe the constitution has 
as many lives as a cat. 
* * * 
As a matter of fact the Dyer Bill is simply a fresh interpretation of the Fourteenth 
Amendment. Representative Fess of Ohio 
gives as his exposition: 
This much I am satisfied wdth, that while 
the constitutional question will be involved, 
and while I am sensitive as to taking anything for granted that is extremely in doubt, 
I do not believe there is any serious doubt 
upon the constitutionality of this particular 
legislation. I think the authority is specific by the force of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. So far as the 
argument on authority is concerned, we can 
build up a body of authority of the highest 
judgment in the world sustaining the basis 
of this legislation as being constitutional. 
Consequently that is not disturbing me very 
much. I think there is no doubt about our 
 CRISIS 
freedom to do it in view of the specific delegation of the power therein specified and 
also because of the authority that has been 
announced by men who know the significance of the legislation. 
* * * 
Posterity a hundred years from now will 
surely be moved either to tears or to laughter that a bill to make the Constitution of 
the United States more adequate in bestowing protection could be thus bitterly debated. Surely it is only common sense to 
take such measures. If our colored citizens 
could be sure of a fair trial it is 'probable 
that the flight of Matthew Bullock from 
North Carolina to Canada would never have 
taken place. As it is we read in the Pittsburgh, Pa., Dispatch: 
The authorities of Ontario, Can., have 
refused to comply with the requisition demands of North Carolina for the surrender 
of a young Negro [Matthew Bullock], at 
present a fugitive under arrest at Hamilton. The Ta r Heel officials are pressing 
their demands through conventional legal 
channels against a growing popular sentiment in Ontario that is urging provincial 
action against delivery of the prisoner except under certain conditions. 
With the Dyer anti-lynching bill coming 
to debate in the House this week the refusal 
of a neighboring country to surrender a Negro fugitive because of the virtual certainty that he will be lynched, establishes a coincidence that will not be lost upon the 
American public, perhaps not wasted upon 
Congress. The fact that the Canadian (prisoner's brother has been lynched for his share 
in a brawl between whites and Negroes 
over a trifling business transaction, is the 
principal obstacle to a surrender by the Ontario authorities. 
The Canadian officials presume that if 
officers of the law in the North Carolina 
town where the demand for extradition 
originated would not prevent lynching of 
this man's brother there is no reason to 
suppose they would prevent a second mobbing. 
* * * 
If the Dyer Bill or its equivalent should 
be passed there would be a chance of no 
repetition of the Tulsa Riot, the effects of 
which have been so far reaching. A. J. 
Smitherson, a colored editor of Tulsa, describes in the Boston Herald, the riot's terrible aftermath: 
While some few are rebuilding their 
homes and business places with their own 
money, or money obtained outside of Tulsa 
(because there is a tacit understanding 
among those who control the money in 
Tulsa that no financial assistance will be 
given colored men with which to rebuild 
their property in the business district of the THE 229 LOOKING GLASS 
burned area), yet there are thousands who 
are not so fortunate. Hundreds of huts 
now stand where comfortable homes stood 
before June 1, and in these huts thousands 
of women and children "black in color, to 
be sure, but guilty of no other offense", are 
now huddling closely together in an effort 
to protect their scantily garbed and underfed bodies from the ravages of winter, a 
little less tolerable, perhaps, than the cold 
indifference of their white brothers and sisters, who recently paid the Rev. Billy Sunday $17,000 for preaching their sins away. 
In the wake, above the din of a one-sided 
battle with machine guns and the roar of 
flames, above the cannonading sounds of explosives dropped from airplanes, which still 
linger in the minds of many of these poor 
people, come the heart-rending cries of 
suffering women and children begging for 
clothes and food to sustain life through the 
winter—pleading for justice! 
But their cries evidently die in the distance before reaching the law-making body 
of our country, where a few days ago the 
solons were debating the constitutionality 
of a bill which, if enacted, would make effective the 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. Surely justice 
sleeps while injustice runs amuck! 
* * * 
Puzzle: Wh y is a Constitution? 
AFRICA 
AF RIC A remains the riddle of riddles, 
•f Can Europe afford to arm the blacks 
for military service? asks the German editor of the Berliner Tageblatt. The Buffalo, 
N. Y., Times translates: 
The Temps of Paris recently published 
figures showing that the French army now 
consists of 665,000 men, of whom 551,000 
were in the French continent and 218,000 
in the North African, Colonial and their 
colored contingents. Eighty-seven thousand 
men are stationed in the Rhineland, but it 
is not mentioned how many of each color. 
Now the length of military service is to be 
shortened from two years to one and onehalf, and at the same time, in order to make 
up for the decrease in population, the 
number of colored troops will be increased 
to 300,000 and the French army will consist 
of about equal parts of black and white. 
We know very well that white men are often 
anything but virtuous, and that the European skin often hides barbarian instincts. 
The last years have shown this clearly 
enough. And, after all, who can say if 
there exists no black Plato, or Raffael, or 
Shakespeare in some of the Hottentot villages. But is it indifferent to the colonial 
peoples that Afric a will soon be overrun by 
native soldiers who have been trained for 
military service in Europe? We hear so 
much of the decline in Eastern lands and it 
is a fact that the East has "cold and shrivelled up ears" and other signs which Hippocrates called signs of death, but in arming 
Africa, France, in order to stuff up a hole 
in the garden wall, is pulling down the dam 
which until now kept the Black Sea within 
its bounds. 
* * * 
The Reuter Press Agency reports that 
antagonism toward the white invader is 
rapidly increasing throughout Africa. The 
account continues: 
Reuter's informant emphasizes the growing cohesion of native races throughout the 
continent. He says the strongest factor in 
the development of antagonism to the whites 
is skillful propaganda fostered by an extreme section of American Negroes. 
Circulars coming from nationalist sources 
in India and Egypt and from Pan-African 
societies in the United States, translated 
into five of the principal African languages, 
are distributed in enormous numbers 
throughout Africa. Booklets of 25 to 30 
pages urge that the time has arrived for 
the black races to assert themselves and 
throw off the white yoke. 
It is only fair to say that these are not 
received with universal sympathy, but the 
very unsettling effect is easily to be observed. 
It has been met in the Union of South 
Africa. In French equatorial Africa and 
in a lesser degree in Uganda, in Nyasaland, 
Belgian Congo, Abyssinia and Kenia. 
It is wonderful the extent to which the 
war has produced fraternal feelings among 
natives, but in "present circumstances they 
tend to become anti-European. The main 
reason is the growth of race consciousness 
through the world. 
* * * 
If, as seems likely, Africa is destined to 
overrun Europe, the opinion in the London 
Observer of General Mangin, the famous 
French leader of black troops on the Western Front, must prove a solace to the Negrophobe: 
Potentially the black race is probably as 
good as the white. Consider for a moment 
of what recent date is our scientific civilization. We have gone ahead, and the records 
of our dealings with the black peoples, 
armed as we were with certain advantages, 
is not flattering to us. We looked upon them 
as slaves, and we continue in some sense to 
regard them as slaves. But what in the 
history of the world is an advance of a few 
hundred years? If one takes a wider view 
than Africa, if one looks at the colored peoples in general—and I have spent some 
years in the Far East, as well as in Africa 
one sees that our own civilization has its 
sources in Asia, which is yellow; in India, 
which is bronzed; and in Egypt, which is 
black. Greece and Rome are comparatively 230 THE CRISIS
late-comers. \Ve owe much to the Arabs. 
Our alphabets come from Asia, and our 
figures from Arabia, and long before Europe was settled there existed great civilizations. We , white men, are not the first, 
and we may not be the last, representatives 
of civilization. It is necessary to cultivate 
the world sense and to think in less limited 
periods of time. . . . 
We have to distinguish between moral 
progress and scientific progress. I am convinced that morally many Africans have 
nothing to learn from us. All that vast zone 
which stretches from Senegal to Abyssinia, 
from Egypt to Morocco, from Algeria to Nigeria, is filled with monuments which testify to an immemorial civilization. They are 
states which for centuries have had an excellent organization as we understand it— 
with an army, a budget, a political, a religious, and an administrative service. There 
are spiritualistic religions which have existed for thousands of years, having at their 
base the idea of the unity of God, the immortality of the soul, and punishment for 
wrong-doing—cults which are free from 
idolatry or any kind of fetichism. The 
Mossi, for example, on the Niger, with 
Whom I lived in 1890, have fine civic virtues 
and an admirable social order. 
TAKE YOUR CHOICE 
I FIND several Southerners 
whom I have asked about ART I N 
TH E SOUTH ;Gilpin's probable reception in 
the South almost equally divided in their 
opinions. Those who feel he will get the 
same more or less impartial' hearing he has 
had in the North are quite as positive in 
their opinion as those who think he will not 
be tolerated for a moment by white Southe m audiences. Exponents of the latter 
view explain that it is not the mere fact of 
a successful Negro actor, to which objection 
will be taken. It is the "glorification" of a 
Negro in the leading and only important 
role of a tilay. They assure me that a white 
man blacked up could play the part anywhere in the South without trouble.—Bruce 
Bliven, in the New York Globe and Commercial Advertiser. 
* * * 
1
A CLEVER
TO most persons baling wire 
is simply wire, but to Allen MA N Dixon, looking at all the rusty 
wire going to waste from bales of hay 
shipped into Nashville, rusty wire was rat 
traps. He pulled some wire off a bale, experimented with it and—got a patent. 
_ Hardy & Hart, No. 100 Fifth Avenue, this 
city, are negotiating for permission to sell 
the patent right. Mr. Hardy admits the 
Negro will probably make a lot of money. 
He is said to have received already an offer 
of $25,000 in cash, or $5,000 down and 5 
cents royalty on every trap sold.—New 
York World. 
 ADVERTISER 
The Negro and 
the White 
A Study in Race Relations 
Is there a growing hostility between 
the Negro and White races in the United 
States? Some careful observers think 
so. Do the teachings of Jesus furnish 
principles on which friendship between 
them could be firmly based? 
TH E WORL D TOMORRO W for 
March will take up these questions. Articles on the contribution of the Negro 
to American life; the economic cause of 
Negro subjugation: the poison of race 
prejudice; the question of racial inferiority, intermarriage, social equality, etc. 
Reading list and topics for group discussion. 
Each month TH E WORL D TOMORRO W 
discusses some single outstanding subject 
of social, economic and industrial importance. 
108 Lexington Avenue Ne w York, N. Y . 
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
TE N CENTS PE R COP Y 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
HAV E YOTJ A COPY OF 
THE CRISIS Calendar 
for 1922? 
It is our 
"Negro Homes Calendar" and contains twelve elegant pictures of beautiful and attractive homes in possession of 
Negroes in various parts of the United 
States, 
The cover carries a remarkable picture of 
"Villa Lewaro", the home of the late 
Madam C. J. Walker , at Irvington-on-theHudson, N\ Y . 
Price Fifty Cents. 
Supply limited. 
Let your orders come at once. 
Immediate attention assured them. 
SPECIAL OFFER: — 
A copy of our 1922 CRISI S Calendar will 
be sent free to any one sending us at one 
time three paid up yearly subscriptions to 
THE CRISIS . 
TH E CRISIS is $1.50 per year. 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 70 Fifth Avenue Ne w York, N. Y . 
Is there a CRISIS agent in your community? If not. will you recommend 
some energetic and reliable person who 
will serve us in your locality? Our terms 
to agents are liberal. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 231 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 36 ; enrollment, 350; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, »4. 
School farm, l,129'/2 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN , Principal, BRICKS , N . C. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. The only school of its kind in historic Northern Virginia State standard Four-Tear High School Course. Advanced Grade SchooL Business and Trade Courses. High moral standards. Prepare boys and girls to become useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
EDWAR D D. HOWE , PRINCIPA L 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS ) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladles' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Writ e for Bulletin. 
Artemisi a Bowden , Principal 
The State Agricultural and 
Mechanica l Colleg e 
ORANGEBURG , S. C. 
desires the names and addresses of 
its graduates for the 
Twenty-fifth Anniversary 
Celebration 
Kindly communicate with 
President R. S. WILKINSON . 
KINDERGARTEN DEPARTMENT 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Departmen t Atlant a University Atlanta , Ga . 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
KEGIITZ X NO W REASONABL E TE2M 1 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 2T , Wllberforce , 0 . 
A MONEY GETTER bcou"" il A CROWD GETTER 
Churches aod Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
-venlng of Side.Splitting Fun. should have 
The Slabtown Convention An entertainment \m one art; full «f wit 
• nd flood humor. Scores of churches hare cleared from Ont to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE. S0«. 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS . Author 
Lincoln Height* Washington. 0 .
 r 
IMPROV E YOURSEL F 
HELP OTHERS ! 
Easy. pleasant., dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 50c in 
stamps for membership, supNational Literary Association 
1Z30 Too Si N. W. . Wash., D . C 
Public Sentiment is changing The Stenographers' Institute to 
DUNCAN' S BUSINES S SCHOO L 
You can be an expert stenographer, bookkeeper and typist and earn a large salary. We thoroly Interpret all text books and present the subjects in such a way that a student's mind can easily grasp the explanation. Then the student takes pleasure in executing the work. It is done easily, accurately and speedily. Duncan's psychological method of training makes it easy for a student to write from 100 to 150 words per minute in shorthand and from 40 to 90 words per minute on the typewriter. Many graduates from other schools are coming to us to be better trained. New Classes organized April third. Write Edward T. Duncan, 1227 S. 17th St., i'iiii.nri"iphia, Pa. 
AGENTS ARE EARNING 100$ 
$25.00 PER WEEK, SPARE TIME 
Selling COSMOS TOILET ARTICLES 
Fine Perfumes, Extrscts, Flavor Essences, Toilet Waters, 
Cold Creams, Hair Growers, Oils, Pomades, Tonics. Fine 
business for College Students. 
Address, Chemical Cosmetic Co., Inc., Dept. C. 
P. 0. Box 204.. Newport. R. I. 
Send 2c Stamp for Agent's Confidential Price List. 
COSMO S LABORATOR Y 
C . DURHA M CAMPBELL , A . B. 
Analytical and Consulting Chemist 
Practical advice given at reasonable fee for manufacturing 
Perfumery and Toilet Preparations. 
Lot me solve your problems, perfect your formulae or 
furnish you with new formulae. 
Analysis of anything made correctly. 
Iteliable and Confidential advice given by mall. 
Address, P. O Box 204 Dept B. Newport, R. I 
ENROLL NOW! 
DERRICK BUSINESS SCHOOL ^ D&K'PA 8. ' 
ONLY SCHOOL OF ITS KIND 
SHORTHAND. TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. SAVE TIME AND MONEY DORMITORIES. $2.60 PER WEEK BOYD'S 30-DAY SYSTEM 
M. J. DERRICK, Principal and Manager 
Mention TH I CRISIS . 232 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PRESIDENT HARDING'S 
Birmingham address challenged by Prof. Kelly Miller, Dean of Howard 
University. 
Have you read President Harding's address ? Read it but by all means you 
MUS T read what Kelly Miller has to say about President Harding's statement of the "fundamental inescapable and eternal differences of the Race." 
Read his OPEN LETTER TO TH E PRESIDENT. 
Keep abreast of the times. 
In pamphlet form sent to any 
address for 25c. 
Agents Wanted 
Here is your chance to make money, everybody wants a 
copy of this great "challenge." Six copies for $1.0 0 postpaid. Be the first in your territory to handle it. 
WRIT E TODAY . Order at least one cop y anyway. 
Austin Jenkins Co. Prof. Kelly Miller, 
Autko r of "Disgrac e of 
Democracy" , o f whic h 125,­ 523 Ninth St. Washington, D. C. 000 copie s have been sold. 
Fifty Years in the Gospel Ministry =Y0UR EDUCATION- by
Theophilus Gould Steward 
Chaplai n IT S. A, , Retire d IS NOT COMPLETE Published by the 
A. M . E. BOOK CONCERN Until You Have Read 631 PIN E STREE T PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Pronounce d by ou r Editor, Dr. Wright , on e o f 
the best book s o f autobiography appearing this THE year, and on e o f the best ever written by on e o f HISTORY OF ou r race. Contains vivi d descriptions o f historic epochs. Relate s numerou s Philippine experiences. Is described b y an eminent authority THE as " a wonderfu l boo k b y a wonderfu l man" . NEGRO CHURCH Beautifully, charmingly, yet naturally, the story 
o f a varied life is honestly related. 
(illustrated—130 pp.) PRICE $2.70, Postpaid, from Publishers 
by 
CARTER G. WOODSON, Ph. D. WRITER S ! (HARVARD) Have you a Novel, Short-Stories, a Play, Poems, or other work you desire published in book or pamphlet A gripping treatise of the rise and develop­ form? Submit your literary work to us and let us ment of the greatest Negro institution—THE explain our plan of publication. Send return postage. 
CHURCH . No home should be without a copy Write: 
—no individual can consider himself informed WILLIA M M . KELLEY without an intimate knowledge of tkis great 3 Quincy St., Brooklyn, New York. book. Just off the press. 
$2.15 per copy 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
THE The only establishment dedicated to collecting ASSOCIATED and distributing the history and literature of 
PUBLISHERS the African and his descendants. Books out , INC. of print a specialty. 
1216 U Street, N. W. Washington, D. C 135 WEST 135th STREET 
NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Mention TE I CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 233 
AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND THE NEGRO ~1 
(ILLUSTRATED) By C . V . ROMA N 
. "Th e soul o f a ma n ha s gon e int o this book. " (Dial.) 
We especiall y commen d the volum e t o thos e o f colore d blood. " (Independent , Ne w Yor k ) 
Th e most comprehensiv e wor k on this subjec t writte n b y a colore d man. " (Crisis.) 
Postpai d $3.0 0 Ne t 
Address L. E. BADGER , 1303 Churc h St. , Nashville , Tenn . 
A FE W LEFT O F THA T WONDERFU L BOO K HOTEL DALE "The History of the Negro in the 
CAP E MAY , N . J . Great World War" 
Open March 15 Brilliant descriptions of battle srtnes by Colonel Haywood, Halpfa Tyler and or hers, with 150 war pictures, and poem* ALL for $1 >:> postpaid. Address 
E. A . JOHNSO N 
17 West 132nd Street, New York, N. Y. 
Agents Wanted. 
Cleota Collins, Lyric Soprano "She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming aa anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORGE LACY , Manager, Rates reduced in keeping with the times. This 156 Hamilton Avenue Columbus, Ohio magnificent Hotel, located in the heart o f the 
Most Beautiful Seashor e Resort in the world , 
is replete with ever y Moder n Improvement . 
Superlative in Construction , Appointments, E. ALDAMA JACKSON Servic e and Refined Patronage . Orchestr a 
' daily. Garage , Tennis, etc., on Premises. Graduat e of Institute of Musical Ar t 
Special attention given to ladies and children. Organist-Director of Music *»f St. Marks M. E 
Booklet. Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
Itvdlo : ISO W . 138th It. , New York, X. Y . 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
E. W. DALE , Owner. 
Quino Offers Opportunity 
Special Opportunity offered 100 Ladies—Just 100—To 
Take by Mall Our Full Courses in Beauty Culture and AGENT S WANTE D 9BLL 20 big Toilet Specialties. Courses practically 
PUKE. Big Commissions, Everything Guaranteed. Lim­ For a high grade line of Calling Cards. Business Cards, 
ited Number for Limited Time. Write. Invitations, Social Stationery, etc Big demand everywhere. Liberal commissions. Prompt deliveries. Write for samples find terms. QUINO Dept. D . Nashville , Tenn . TH E HOUS E OF CHOWNING , INDIANAPOLIS . IND . 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him («> 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A . Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 41 0 BROA D ST . JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents an d Distributor s Wante d 
Extra Larg e Profit Guarantee d 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. 
•M»*tiori TH E CRISIS . 234 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
HOME S 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L . S . REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CO AON A, N. Y . CITY 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES. Pre*. 
641 W. 9T H St. Cincinnati. Ohio 
SALES AGENTS WANTED 
Writ e for our stoc k sellin g agenc y in you r city . 
Splendi d chanc e wit h solid, growin g company . 
FLORENTINE FILM MFG. CO., INC­ 903 Yo u St., N.W. , Washington , D . C. 
YO U CA N BAN K B Y MAI L 
FIRST STANDARD BANK 
Louisville , Ky . 
Capita l and Surplus (Paid ) 
$110,000.00 
Wilso n Lovett , President 
MME . G . IV NEEDLE S 
FINE FURS FU R GARMENT S MAD E T O ORDE R 
Remodeling , Repairing , Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York , N. Y . 
Telephon e Morningsid e 7590 
icL 6417 Fort Hill Cable Addreas, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN ATTOTHL T AMD CoDNIHXO»-AT-L»W 
14 School Street Boiton, Mas. 
Mentio n 1 
ENJO Y THA T PROUD , SELFSATISFIE D FEELIN G THA T 
COMES WIT H TH E OWNERSHI P 
OF A COUNTR Y ESTATE . Prepare for your future NO W by securing a WOODVILL E ESTAT E of 1 0 
or 2 0 acres or more, on VER Y EAS Y 
TERMS , at 
$32.50 per acre Libera l reductio n on 20 acre s or more . 
SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUN T TO 
THOS E WH O AC T QUICKLY . 
A LO T FRE E wit h each 10-acr e tract. 2 
lots wit h 20 acres. Eac h trac t sol d unde r 
a MONE Y BAC K GUARANTEE . 
Th e cr y heard everywher e is "Bac k to th 2 
farm''. Peopl e are disgusted with the uncertainty o f city life, with its strikes, lay-offs, 
high cost o f living, congestion, etc., and are 
anxiou s to get out into the countr y wher e they 
can enjc y the life o f the country gentlemen. 
Th e desire fo r farm land wa s neve r greater 
than at the present time because the workin g 
man realizes how muc h better off he woul d be 
on a farm o f his ow n than grinding away the 
rest o f his life as a city laborer. 
Tha t is wh y this offer is meeting with such 
favorabl e response . Ou r Woodvill e tract is 
nicely located in the wonderfu l state o f Michigan, and is being sold unde r a plan that make s 
it very easy for, anybod y to secure 1 0 acres or 
more . 
Ou r FRE E bookle t tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to yo u o n receipt o f the 
coupo n below, properly filled in. Mail it TO ­
DAY . The bookle t will be sent to yo u promptly and w e are sure yo u will find it interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. (Coupon ) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenso n Realt y Dev'p t Corp. , 
19 S. La Sall e Street, 
Chicago , 111. 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in you r Woodvill e offer and 
woul d like to receive full details without obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Tow n and State 
CRI -3-2 2 
C RISIS . 235 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
NATIONA L CAPITA L COD E O F ETIQUETT E 
Combined with n oyd > s lowers OR STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PART i 
A Boo k absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, instructive, handsomel y illustrated. Wonderfu l pictures of 
Washington's prominent colored Society leaders o n the 
street; at the Theatre ; at Church ; in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls, Parties, Weddings, Dinners, etc., etc. Th e 
illustrations are so perfec t and natural that the well bred, 
correctly clothed me n and wome n almost speak to you . 
Learn how to dre»s and conduc t yourself o n any and all 
occasions; correct dress for men and women ; suggestions 
in colors and materials for the ladies; hints as to footwear, 
hats, appropriate combinations, etc., for both sexes. 
Wha t to serve you r guests at breakfast, lunch or dinner. 
Ho w to convers e intelligently; ho w to kno w when to talk 
and whe n to remain silent; how to make friends and gain 
popularity. 
A boo k that will help the most prominent membe r of society or the most humble . 
SILA S X . FLOY D 
Agents Wanted 
We are looking for iooo hustlers, men 
and women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 to $9 per day. One agent made 
$21 the first day. Such an opportunity comes but once in a lifetime. 
AGENTS ' SAMPL E showing specimen 
pages and the pictures and covers of book 
will be mailed to you for 25 cents. It 
represents exactly the complete book. 
Send 25 cents for agents' outfit to-day. 
Illustrating Table Manners 
STORIES 
PART 2 A wonderfu l collection of Short Stories for 
Youn g and Old. Stories that will hold you r 
attention from start to finish. By the most 
famous colored writer of Short Stories in 
America . 
Storiei of Adventure Stories of Pluck 
Stories of Bravery Stories of Success 
Stories of School Days Stories of Great Men 
Stories for Father, Mothe r or the Children. 
Funn y Stories; Stories that will bring the 
tears to you r eyes; Stories onc e started must 
be finished befor e laying aside the book. Handsomely illustrated—pictures that seem to live 
throughout the story. 
A Boo k yo u will want—Must have in 
you r home—A most excellent gift 
Ove r fifty pages of pleasing pictures taken 
from best photographs. A BI G BOOK , containing ove r 400 pages. Th e peopl e are much 
pleased with this new publication and are 
sending thousands o f orders to us. Orde r today. W e send by insured parcel post; return you r mone y if not perfectly satisfied. 
Price ONL Y $2.50. Writ e today. 
No. 523 9th STREET, 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Send for free catalog of 160 books 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 236 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A LIS T O F SACRED AN D HIGH CLASS 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
THAT WILL ADD YEARS OF ENJOYMENT 
TO YOUR PHONOGRAPH 
Made by a Negro Company Sung by Negro Singers 
AS GOO D AS AN Y RECOR D MAD E 
SACRED 
2033—CHRISTIAN S AWAK E Sun g by 
M Y TAS K Iva n H . Brownin g 
2031—JESUS I COM E Arthu r Williams and Walte r Johnso n 
TH E HOL Y CIT Y Lorenz o Wells 
2030—FLEE A S A BIR D Herbert Black 
LEA D KINDL Y LIGH T Lorenz o Wells 
2029—SILEN T NIGHT , HOL Y NIGH T Black Swan Tri o 
CHRISTMA S CHIME S Ella Thoma s and Nettie Moor e 
2028—0 COM E AL L Y E FAITHFU L Black Swa n Quartet 
I NEE D THE E EVER Y HOU R Black Swa n Quartet 
2024—SWIN G LO W SWEE T CHARIO T Sun g b y 
ONE SWEETL Y SOLEM N THOUGH T C. Carroll Clark 
CLASSICS 
2027—O H PROMIS E M E Sun g by 
SUNRIS E AN D YO U Arthu r Boxill 
2015—TH E ROSAR Y Sun g by 
SORTE R MIS S YO U Marianna Johnso n 
2013—SINCE YO U WEN T AWA Y Sun g by 
WH O KNOW S J. Arthu r Gaines 
2012—WIT H TH E COMIN G OF TOMORRO W Sun g by 
A H WONDROU S MOR N Revella E. Hughe s 
r .09—MACUSHL A Sun g by 
MORNIN G Harr y E. Delmor e 
i 06—B Y TH E WATER S OF MINNETONK A Sun g by 
NOBOD Y KNOW S D E TROUBL E I'V E SEE N C. Carroll Clark 
2002—FO R AL L ETERNIT Y Sun g bv 
DEA R LITTL E BO Y OF MIN E C. Carroll Clark 
2001—AT DAWNIN G Sun g by 
THAN K GOD FO R A GARDE N Rcvcll a E. Hughe s 
W e would prefer that you buy from your regular dealer 
every month. Ask him. He will get any of our records 
for you at once. 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
2289 Seventh Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 237 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A NEW WAY 
T O GE T YOU R CLOTHE S 
ABSOLUTELY FREE 
and a New Plan to Make Big 
Money During Your SpareTime 
Something different, better, bigger, more 
liberal than any offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes—bigger cash profits 
—express or postage prepaid on everything. 
If you are a live, wide-awake man, we 
want you to get one of our elegant suits 
made to your measure, ABSOLUTELY 
FREE. All we ask you to do is to wear 
it, show it to your friends, and take a 
few orders for our high-grade, made-tomeasure clothes. 
DOUBL E PA Y 
Free Clothes and Cash Profits Besides 
You can easily earn $30.00 cash extra, 
every week, during your spare time, taking 
orders for our made-to-measure clothes. Other houses make their 
agents use their cash profits to get their own clothes. That's 
not our way of doing business. When we say "FREE" we mean 
"FREE". OURS IS THE GREATEST OFFER EVER MADE. 
Fifty-six, real cloth samples—colored fashion plates, 
wholesale prices—everything FREE. Just drop 
us a line today and we will send you COMPLETE OUTFIT FREE. 
SPENCER MEAD COMPANY 
Wholesale Tailors Dept. C-217 Chicago 
MENTIO N T H E CRISIS . 238 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Agents Wanted 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG . CO . 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. Est, 1916. Capitalized |75,000 
$50,000 common, $25,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Film Corporation in the World Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
1121 CENTRA L AVE. , LOS ANGELES 
DRESS SHIRT FREE 
Fine Serge Pants 
BARGAI N 
No w $09 8 
Postag e 
Paid 
SEND NO MONEY Here is one of the biggest val­ ues offered to readers of this paper. Will send this splendid pair of serge pants and with it this fine negligee shirt FREE— without asking for one cent with the order. PANT S are made of extra quality blue serge, , well tailore d in every way. Extra heavy pocketing, ail seams serged, no raw edges, bar tack­ ing, strong belt straps. Waist 30 to 44, inside seam length 30 to 36 inches Be sure to give inseam length. SHIRT we give free is made of striped fine material, cut full and well made. COLORS— Blue, Lavender, Green striped. SIZES--14^ to 17. 
GET A SHIRT FRE E 
| Just send your name and address, giving size3 wanted. We'll send both pants and shirt by parcel post prepaid. You pay mailman when delivered. Your money backif not pleased. Here is positively a big 57.00 value for only $3.98. Send NO W as the number of free shirts is limited. Order by No. 291 C2 8 
HOWAR D LU X CO. , DEPT. 291 CLEVELAND, O . 
There Will Never Be a Better Time to 
BU Y 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
THA N RIGH T NO W 
whil e yo u can ge t them at the attractiv e 
pric e o f only 
$29.50 per lot 
ON VERY EASY TERM S 
Wit h the comin g o f better times come s an in­
| creased demand for lots in beautiful Orchard ' 
ville, wher e hundred s o f peopl e have already 
bought lots and wher e many, man y mor e arc 
doing so right along. Soo n the big rush for 
lots will be on in full force , and there are 
apt to be man y disappointed people because 
onl y a limite d numbe r o f lots ar e goin g to 
to be sold a t the presen t lo w price . 
Th e fact that Orchardv'.Ue is so well known 
now means much towards the increasing demand, and makes it necessary for each prospective purchaser to act as quickl y as possible . 
A s stated in previous announcements, the lots 
are sized 30 x 144 fee t and are sold unde r a 
MONE Y BAC K GUARANTE E to protect the 
purchaser against misrepresentation. Th e terms 
are only $3.00 dow n and $1.50 a mont h pe r 
lot. N O INTERES T at any time. 
Ou r FRE E BOOKLE T tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to you without any obligation on you r part. S'mply write you r name 
and address on the coupo n below and send it 
to us TODAY , befor e yo u forget it. Th e 
booklet, with other interesting matter, will be 
sent to yo u promptly. W e are sure you will 
find them interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. 
(Coupon ) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenso n Realt y Dev'p t Corpn., 
19 S. La Sall e Street, Chicago , 111, 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in you r Orchardvill e lot 
offer and would like to rece ve full deta Is without obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Tow n and State 
CRI-3-2 2 
Mention TH I CRISI ° A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONAR Y 
FORCES . (Hunton and Johnson) $2.5 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
TH E SOU L OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.0 0 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE . (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (Benjamin Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) .' 1.20 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
UNSUN G HEROES . (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.5 0 
TH E SHADOW . (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E VOIC E OF TH E NEGRO . (Robert T . Kerlin) 2.5 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G . 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
A SOCIAL HISTOR Y OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO . (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.0 0 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (Benjamin Brawley). . 1.50 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson) . . 1.50 
TH E HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGR O CHURCH . (Carter J. Woodson).. 2.1 5 
TH E UPWAR D PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
Address: TH E CRISIS, : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. Madam C. J. Walker's 
For the Hair Beauty Aids 
Hair Grower 
Tetter Salve 
Temple Grower 
Glossine 
Shampoo 
Toilettes— 
Cold Cream 
Cleansing Cream 
Vanishing Cream 
Witch Hazel Jelly 
Superfine Face Powder 
Compact Rouge 
Complexion Soap 
Dental Cream 
Floral Cluster Talcum 
Antiseptic Soap 
Made by The Mme C J Walker Mfg Co. 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
640 North West Street 