THE CRISIS 
RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACES 
Volum e Fou r MAY , 1912 Number O r 
Church Number 
Hubbard 
Colored Baptist Institutional Church, Jacksonville, Florida 
ONE DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y The BIGGEST SENSATION 
i n the shavin g worl d sinc e the first appearanc e of the 
Safety Razor. The most amazin g an d fastest-sellin g 
articl e of the age . 
Write for our FRE E sample offer and confidential terms 
and prices to agents. 
The ' Simplex " Automati c Razo r Stropper is an enconomical and practica l 
shavin g device that appeals to every man who shaves. Nothin g to wea r out, nothin g 
to get out of order; i t is absolutely guaranteed for life . An y four-year-old chil d can 
operate it wit h perfect results. It wil l positivel y sharpen and keep sharp any old 
stvle or safety razor i n the world . 
It automaticall y hones and sharpens at the same time. 
Fiftee n years of serious and 
never-tirin g experimenta l tests, 
combined wit h practica l and 
theoretical ideas and thoughts 
concentrated into one endeavor, 
evolves this sensational inventio n that has positively modernized home shaving for modern men i n these modern times. The "Simplex " solves the 
whole shavin g problem. The accuracy of this great shavin g device is remarkable . It is built 
upon scientific and mechanica l 
principle s that take into account 
every characteristi c of a razor 
edge. The absolute precision 
wit h whic h each stroke is automaticall y applied to the correct 
beve l of the blade draws that 
fine, straight, true, absolutely 
perfect edge that can be obtained b y no other know n 
method. The "Simplex " is absolutely reliable and positivel y 
correct i n design, material, construction, finish and operation; 
all agents are authorized to give 
wit h every machine a lif e guarantee whic h is backed up b y the 
"Simplex " Co. Get busy to-day 
and be the first i n your section 
to take hold of the agency. 
Writ e immediatel y for full particulars and 
free sample proposition. 
Our advertisement is appearing weekly in 
400 publications of every nationality throughout 
the United States and Canada. The returns we 
are daily receiving indicate that we will sell 
more than a million machines this year. Grasp 
the opportunity and join the real money-makers. 
HUNTE R C. HAYNE S 
The Well-know n Stropmake r 
Address Dept. A."SIMPLEX" STROPPER CO
16-18 FERR Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W. E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS. Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN . Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
J. MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W. S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
Subscription: $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Subscriptions 
to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th of the previous month. 
CONTENT S 
PAGE 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 14 
OPINIO N 17 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 21 
EDITORIA L 24 
TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N CHURC H 28 
SELF-RIGHTEOU S EUROP E AN D TH E WORLD . Correspondence 
with Professor W. M . Flinders Petrie 34 
WOMEN' S CLUB S 38 
TH E BURDE N 39 
HISTORIC DAY S I N MA Y 40 
WHA T T O REA D 41 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P. 0. at Ν, Y. City 4 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
LIFE AND WORKS 
PAUL 
LAURENCE 
DUNBAR'S 
by 
Lida Keck Wiggins 
and Introduction 
by 
W . Dean Howells 
What the late Col. Robt. Ingersoll thought 
of work: 
22 0 Madison Ave., 
April, 1896, New York City. 
My Dear Dr. Tobey: 
At last I got the time to read the poems 
of Dunbar. Some of them are really wonderful 
•—full of poetry and philosophy. I am 
astonished at their depth and subtlety. Dunbar is a thinker. 'The Mystery'' is a poem 
worthy of the greatest. It is absolutely true 
and proves that its author is a profound and 
thoughtful man. ''Ere Sleep Comes Down to 
Soothe the Weary Eyes'' is a wonderful poem; 
the fifth verse is perfect. 
I have only time to say Dunbar is a genius. 
Now what can be done for him? I would like 
to help. 
Thanking you for the book, I remain, 
Yours always, 
R. G. INGERSOLL. 
Postpaid, $2, $2.75, $3.75. 
J. G. GUILE S 
214A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA , GA. 
PUBLICATION S 
A. M. E. Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S OF PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773 ; a valuable book. 
Price, $1.00 . 
TH E NEGRO PROBLEM. An analysis: What 
It Is Not and What It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr. 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORED REGULARS . By T. G. Steward, 
Chaplain U. S. A., retired. Price, $1.50 . 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE. By Algernon B. Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Mercy Hospital. Price, 75 
"TH E NEGRO IN PENNSYLVANIA , A Study in 
Economic History, By R. R. Wright, Jr., Sometime 
Research Fellow in Sociology in the University of 
Pennsylvania. Price, Paper, $2.00 ; Cloth, $2.50. 
A. M. E. BOO K CONCERN 
631 Pine Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practical method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course in 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y. : A very practical 
little book is "Tone Placing and Voice Development," by Pedro T. Tinsley. As the preface says: 
"It is for daily practice, based upon artistic principles, including a course in the art of breathing, 
structure of the vocal apparatus, hearing the voice, 
together with a carefully prepared number of vocal 
exercises, forming a comprehensive, progressive and 
self-explained course of voice building.'' Written 
by Pedro T. Tinsley, conductor of the Choral Club 
of Chicago, and a man who has had many years' 
experience in teaching voice. It contains some very 
excellent material and vocal exercises, and should 
be in the hands of all vocal students. Price $1. 
Address the publisher: 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL. 
or Clayton F. Summy, 22 0 Wabash Avenue, and 
Lyon & Healy, Adams & Wabash, Chicago, Ill. 
The 
Quest 
of the 
Silver 
Fleece 
A NOVEL 
by 
W . E . BURG H ARD T 
DU BOI S 
Drawings by 
H. S. D E LA Y 
Here is a story of the darker world 
in the South and in Washington, D. 
C. It is dramatic in style and absorbing in interest and expresses the 
feeling of colored people about themselves and their own problems; at the 
same time it shows how both black 
folk and white are caught in the 
power of King Cotton. 
AT AL L 
PRIC E 
BOOKSTORE S 
$1.3 5 NE T 
A . C . McCLUR G & CO . 
New York Chicago San Francisco 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 5 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for Negro 
Youth which has a Military Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Army 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Banking taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Ten 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Pall term began September 19th, 1911 . 
"Write for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A. JOINER, Superintendent, C. N. I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmospher e 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Wor k 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
Presiden t R . W . McGranaha n 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
MAYERS ' INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
BOARDING AN D DA Y SCHOOL 
For the industrial, literary, moral and religious 
training of the Negro youth. 
Terms reasonable. 
For particulars address 
FLORA E. MAYERS , Principal 
606 Payne Street, Knoxville, Tenn. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
James F. Morton, Jr., A.M. , Author and Publisher. 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. An arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "The Bug 
bear of Social Equality,'' which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRICE 2 5 CENTS 
Address the Author at 24 4 West 143d Street, 
New York, N. Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
"Our Heroes of Destiny" 
Honorables Frederick Douglass, John M . Langston, Blanche K. Bruce, Paul Laurence 
Dunbar and Booker T. Washington 
This illustration is protected by copyright. Any infringement 
will be prosecuted 
"OU R HEROE S O F DESTINY " 
TESTIMONIALS 
A most unique and artistic 
grouping of these five "immortals" published in a de luxe 
edition from portraits, acknowledged to be the most faithful 
in likeness and character extant. 
A photogravure is printed 
from a hand-tooled intaglio 
plate, and consists of fine particles of ink standing above the 
surface of the paper sufficiently 
to cast minute shadows. The 
depth of the ink and shadows 
cast by it give a richness to a 
photogravure impression which 
is absolutely unattainable by 
relief or planographic printing 
as done by half-tone, photogelatine, lithographic, or other 
similar processes. A perfect 
photogravure is the acme of the 
engraver's handicraft. 
A genuine photogravure, 
printed on the finest grade of 
Japan-vellum, 20 x 25 inches in 
size, finished in Vandyke 
brown, embracing the master 
techniques of the engraver's 
and printer's crafts. 
In publishing this valuable 
edition of these five notable 
men, I have gone to large expense in an endeavor to present 
to my race a rare etching of 
the highest technique possible 
to create, without a doubt, the 
most artistic production of and 
for our people now on the 
market. Every home, church, 
school, lodge, club and business 
enterprise possessed with true 
race loyalty will adorn their 
walls with a copy. Price $1.50. 
Send in your order now to 
G. M . BATTE Y 
ARTIST and PUBLISHER 
322 Mott Ave. , N . Y . City 
Dr. Booker T. Washington, Tuskegee Institute, Ala., says: 
"I am really surprised, as well as gratified, 
at the fine piece of work you have gotten 
out. I had no idea you were going to get 
up such an artistic production, that is so 
attractive and so creditable." 
The New York Age, New York City, says: 
"Every home and classroom should honor 
one of these portraits, and into the mind of 
every child it should be grafted with the lines 
from the immortal poem of Longfellow: 'Lives 
of great men all remind us, we can make 
our lives sublime.' " 
Dr. York Russell, New York City, says: 
"Your artistic production of 'OU R 
HEROE S OF DESTINY ' is unquestionably 
the master composition which has thus far 
chronicled the advent in perpetuating faithful 
likenesses of our hero-pioneers. The other 
nine series with which you propose to follow 
this will establish a precedent that will be of 
historic value in future years for yet unborn 
generations." 
Hon, Wm . H. Bliss, New York City, says: 
"The photogravure of five eminent Americans of your race I am glad to have a copy. 
It is a most admirable and interesting composition and well calculated to ensure a 
favorable and effective acceptance wherever 
exhibited." 
Major Charles R. Douglass, Washington. 
D. C , says: 
"The likenesses and character blending in 
the selected gravure portraits of the group 
of 'Honorables' are better than any I have 
yet seen; and to those of our race who 
cherish the memories of these men they will 
be eagerly sought." 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
6 THE CRISIS 
Volume Four MAY , 1912 Number One 
ALONG 
COLOR LINE 
POLITICAL . 
THE political situation among colored 
voters is even more complicated, if 
that is possible, than among 'white voters. 
Their attitude turns very largely upon local 
issues. The result of this is that particularly in the South the colored men, having 
been excluded from participating in the 
party councils four years ago by Mr. Roosevelt's ''steam roller," are now espousing the 
Roosevelt cause as against the Taft "steam 
roller." 
<| The colored voters of Western and Central New York have organized a league of 
Republican clubs, with John W. Thompson, 
of Rochester, as president. Among other 
things, they object to the use of the word 
"Negro." 
€ | In Pennsylvania an organization of colored men has been formed to support 
Roosevelt, with representatives in every 
county. 
<| In Washington five bishops of the Zion 
Church have signed the call supporting 
Roosevelt and declaring that Taft's Southern policies have been "the most cruel and 
degrading blow ever delivered the Negro by 
any President." The Rev. S. L. Corrothers, 
who has hitherto been prominent as a 
leader of colored Democrats, has taken 
charge of the colored Roosevelt campaign. 
IJ In Maryland a poll made by the Baltimore Times is said to show that the Negroes 
are 25 to 1 for Roosevelt as against Taft. 
The colored people blame the recent advance of race prejudice, the Baltimore segregation scheme and lynching on President 
Taft's administration. 
<J The legislature of Delaware has apparently nullified the United States Constitution in the town of Georgetown by making 
qualified voters "o f every white male citizen 
of said town who shall have attained the 
age of 21 years and is a taxpayer." 
<| The colored voters of Virginia have many 
grievances. In Norfolk County, for instance, 
there is a large majority of Negro voters, 
and prior to 1891 colored men filled many 
county offices. White Republicans and 
Democrats, by a fusion ticket, got rid of 
these officers, and since then, despite the 
efforts of the whites, it has been impossible 
to get any opposition ticket, so that there 
is simply one party government, with the 
Negro disfranchised. 
<| In West Virginia the Republicans of 
Fayette County have since 1902 given the 
colored people one representative in the 
legislature. Two years ago the "Lily 
White" movement got rid of the colored 
member, and the result was the Negroes 
threw their votes to the Independents and 
defeated the Republicans. This year a colored man seems likely to be nominated. 
<J The colored voters of Raleigh, N. C , have 
sent a contesting delegation to Chicago to 
support Roosevelt. 
Cfl Colored men were completely barred out 
of the Louisiana Republican convention. In 
New Orleans there are 49,131 registered 
white voters and 757 registered Negro 
voters. There are fully 25,000 colored men 8 TH E CRISI S 
of voting age in the city. Of the white 
voters, 654 registered under the '"grandfather" clause. 
The colored men of Tennessee, who for 
the last few years have been regularly refused admission to the Republican convention, are demanding recognition strenuously 
in this campaign. 
<f In Arkansas the colored voters have their 
hands full in organizing to oppose the new 
disfranchising amendment. There are said 
to be 111,372 colored voters in the State, 
and the general election comes next September. The voters hold the balance of power 
on the liquor question and on the bond 
amendment, in which the 284,298 white 
voters are interested. Leagues are being 
organized throughout the State. The important clause in the amendment reads: 
•'Every male citizen * * » who is 
able to read and interpret, or interpret when 
read to him, if he is prevented from reading 
the same by reason of any physical disability, any section of the constitution of 
the State of Arkansas • * • shall be 
allowed to vote at any election in the State 
of Arkansas; but no person who was. on 
January 1, 1866, or at any time prior 
thereto, entitled to vote under the constitution or statutes of any State in the United 
States wherein he then resided • * • 
and no lineal descendant of such person 
* * * shall be denied the right to vote 
because of his inability to so read and interpret selections of the constitution of this 
State. • • * The judges of election 
shall enforce the provisions of this article 
and shall be the judges of the qualifications 
of electors." 
Several colored papers are voicing this 
political slogan: "Bury Roosevelt at the primaries and beat Taft at the polls!" 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
ON April 2 the United States Senate de-
^"-^ bated and finally passed the bill providing the sum of $250,000 for a Negro 
exposition in 1913 to celebrate fifty years of 
freedom. The bill as proposed by the committee of colored men was somewhat amended, 
but the essential features remained. The only 
opposition at the Senate discussion came 
from Senator Hitchcock, of Nebraska. He 
paid that expositions degenerated into 
amusement parks; that a Negro exposition 
would be an example of drawing the color 
line, as colored men had every right in 
similar exhibitions undertaken by white 
men, and that it could not be of value to 
•the race, since the colored man could "be 
benefited only by adhering to those precepts 
in life which bring success and merit success." Senator Smith, of Michigan, replied 
that it was "not beyond the realm of hope 
that the white man might be benefited 
somewhat by an exposition of the colored 
man's achievements, products and genius." 
Senator Root, of New York, said that he 
had never been more earnest than in urging 
that the Senate should avail itself of this 
opportunity "to lift a little the cloud that 
hangs over these people." Senator Newlands, of Nevada, in the course of a long 
speech, declared that hardly a Senator was 
more radical than he on the race question, 
that he believed this should be a country for 
the white race only and he believed in race 
intolerance, as it kept the races from mingling. He had been, in the beginning, 
opposed to the project of this exposition, 
but he had been so impressed by the statements and bearing of the Negro committee 
that he had concluded to vote for the measure. The two other members of the opposition who had received the committee. Senator Taylor, of Tennessee, and Senator 
Paynter, of Kentucky, had agreed with him 
in this matter. 
Senator Lodge, of Massachusetts, said he 
had generally opposed appropriations for 
expositions, but he thought this one should 
be granted. Senator Bradley, of Kentucky, 
who introduced the bill, ridiculed the idea 
that colored men had equal rights with the 
whites in ordinary expositions and said that, 
instead of crushing black people, he would 
take them by the hand and say:
 : 'Come up 
here, higher into the atmosphere of freedom." Senator Heyburn. of Idaho, also made 
a speech of some length favoring the bill. 
The discussion is printed in full in the 
Congressional Record for April 2. At the 
end of the Senate proceedings is a report of 
the hearing before the committee appointed 
to receive the colored delegates and the 
speeches of R. R. Wright. Sr.. president of 
'.he Emancipation Exposition Committee; 
R. R. Wright, Jr.. editor of the Christian 
Recorder; W. E. B. Du Bois. editor of The 
CRISIS, and the Rev. I. N. Ross, pastor of 
the Metropolitan A. M. E. Church at Washington, are given in full. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
boy, has taken the W. C. T. U. medal for the 
best composition. 
<][ A man named Kelly, who is doing a turn 
called "The Virginia Judge" on the stage, so 
angered the colored people of Montreal by 
his use of the word "Nigger" that he had to 
have police escort home. 
<]J In Hutchinson, Kan., a jury composed 
entirely of colored men has been trying a 
case. Charles Fulton, deputy probate 
judge, remarked that he never saw a finer 
set of men on a jury than those six colored 
men, one of them a doctor, another a minister and a third a law student, and all of 
them men who have good education and 
character. It attracted a lot. of attention, 
being a very unusual occurrence in Kansas 
legal circles. 
4|The Committee on Urban Conditions Among 
Negroes has been carrying on its protective 
work for women, organizing amusement and 
neighborhood clubs and securing employment. They have in mind a plan for a model 
dance hall, a detention home for girls and a 
summer playground in New York. 
CJ The colored people of Cleveland are trying in vain to get the mayor to protect colored residence districts from organized vice. 
<J Nashville colored men are organizing an 
athletic association. 
<| A young colored men's club has been 
started in Keokuk, Ia.; another organized in 
Oklahoma City; and in Dayton, O., a home 
for working girls and a day nursery are 
planned. 
EDUCATION. 
COLORE D teachers' associations have been 
meeting in Oklahoma, with an attendance of 350; at Selma, Ala., with 1,000 
teachers; at Nashville, Tenn., with 400 
teachers, and at New Orleans. 
<| Summer schools for colored teachers will 
be held at Institute. W . Va.; Durham. N. C.: 
Miles Memorial College, Ala., and Straight 
College, New Orleans. 
<J Every colored member of the board of 
education in the District of Columbia voted 
to dismiss Roscoe Conkling Bruce, the present assistant superintendent in charge of the 
colored schools. The white members voted 
to sustain him. It is suggested that this 
vote is indicative of the interests which Mr. 
Bruce serves. 
The editor of the Lyric Year, New York, 
has announced a prize competition for poems 
not exceeding 300 lines in length. The sum 
of $1,000, donated by a lover of poetry, will 
be paid in a first prize of $500 and in two 
second prizes of $250 each to the authors of 
the three poems selected by the judges, Mr . 
Edward J. Wheeler and Air. William Stanley Braithwaite, a contributing editor of THE 
CRISIS, with the editor of the Lyric Year, 
from the 100 poems selected from all manuscripts submitted. 
IJ Two striking cases of Negro heroism 
come to our attention this month. A dispatch 
from Greenville, Miss., says that a human 
dike composed of several hundred colored 
men kept the levee from being destroyed for 
an hour and a half until the sand bags 
arrived. 
One of the men killed in the Jed mine, 
near Bluefield, W . Va., was Ted Swaley. A 
local daily paper says: "This name may not 
mean much to some people, but to the miners 
who recall the explosion at Farm on the first 
of last August it will mean a great deal. Ted 
Swaley was the hero of that explosion. 
Alone he worked his way through the confined workings of that new mine, and, crawling on his hands and knees, crept to where 
six unconscious men lay dying for need of 
help. One by one he rolled them on his back 
and dragged them to the bucket at the foot 
of the shaft, and then went to the surface 
with them. Assisted by John Moore, also 
colored, who carried a safety lamp, Swaley 
went back four times into the depths of the 
mine, and it was due to his courage and 
bravery that six men were taken out, five of 
whom came out alive. Swaley continued at 
mining, because it was the only trade he 
knew." 
<J The Negro lawyers of Oklahoma have 
formed a bar association, with forty 
members. 
€f Dr. A. B. Terrell, a colored man, has been 
made assistant physician to the board of 
health of Forth Worth, Tex. He is a 
graduate of the University of Chicago and 
o f the Harvard Medical School, and has 
taken an active part in combating the epidemic of meningitis in Texas. 
<} A company of contractors who are building automobile engines in New York are 
developing a new ignition system which is 
the invention of a colored man. 
<J In Perry. Ind., Higby Morgan, a colored 1 0 TH E CRISI S 
CJ The Criterion Club is offering a scholarship to colored school graduates for study at 
Fisk University. 
CJ The Robert Hungerford School, at Eatonville, Fla., is asking funds for a hospital and 
nurses' training school. 
Cfl The Institute for Colored Youth, at Cheyney, Pa., has celebrated its seventy-fifth anniversary. 
CJ Ward Hall, the largest dormitory of 
Western University, Quindaro, Kan., has 
been destroyed by fire. The loss was $50,000, 
but the building will be immediately replaced. 
CJ Governor Blease of South Carolina sent 
the following message to the legislature: 
"I disapprove of Item 2, Section 24, because I see absolutely no use, sense or reason 
in taxing the white people of this State to 
pay for a heating plant for Negroes to get 
up and dress by when the white children 
themselves, many of them, have to get up 
and make their own fires, and even in some 
of our schools. 
"And for the same reason I disapprove 
Item 3, same section. This is $1,000 for 
repairing the heating plant at colored 
college." 
In the discussion in the legislature which 
followed this veto it is reported that "Mr. 
Ashley made a severe arraignment of the 
legislature voting money for a heating plant 
for a lot of 'Niggers.' " He thought it outrageous to provide heating plants for Negroes when thousands of poor white children 
have to sit around fireplaces. The legislature, 
however, made the appropriation. 
Cfl The State of Maryland is asked to appropriate $600,000 for a new normal school 
for whites. It already has one at Frostburg 
which cost $40,000 a year. The colored State 
normal school, at Bowie, receives $5,000 a 
year. One-fifth of the population of the 
State is colored. 
CJ In Elizabeth City County, Va., which 
contains the town of Hampton, there are 
2,202 white children and 2,232 colored children. They are provided for as follows: 
White. Colored. 
Teachers 49 20 
Cost of schools $62,700 $5,000 
Salaries of teachers. . . 23,343 4,041 
School taxes assessed on 
taxpayers 24,000 4,000 
In addition to this, $40,000 from fines and 
corporation taxes go wholly to the white 
schools. 
A. M. C. Russell, candidate for State 
superintendent of public instruction in 
Florida, has been favoring free textbooks for 
school children. He replies to an objection 
that this will mean free textbooks for colored school children by saying that the white 
school population exceeds the colored school 
population in thirty-eight counties. He then 
adds: "Shall this multitude of white children 
be deprived of the many advantages and 
benefits and their parents the great economy 
and money saving of the free-book system? 
We say not. Give every white child a 
chance. 
"But what will be done for the white children in the counties where the Negroes outnumber them ? For their protection and for 
the protection of all, we are in favor of the 
enactment of a law that will invest the 
county school boards with sufficient discretion to enable them to operate the free-book 
system so as to adapt it to local conditions." 
CJ Mr. George Foster Peabody has resigned 
from the board of trustees of Tuskegee 
Institute. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE colored Masons of Alabama report 
that $75,949 have been received during 
the year. The Odd Fellows of Louisiana 
have paid $3,000 for a new building in New 
Orleans. The United Brothers of Friendship have erected a $20,000 building at 
Louisville, Ky. This order collected in Texas 
during the year $67,459. The Masons of 
Mississippi are reported to have spent 
$1,300,000 for endowment benefits, and have 
a balance of $19,000 on hand. The Odd Fellows of that State spent $507,000 in two 
years, and have a balance of $78,000 on 
hand. 
CJ The treatment of Negro laborers by the 
Fertilizer Trust operating in North Carolina 
is a continual scandal. The Negroes have 
struck repeatedly in the last ten years, but 
have been intimidated by the sheriffs and 
police. One hundred and fifty struck last 
month at Wilmington, N. C , and were 
promptly arrested. 
Cf Colored people pay taxes on nearly 
$1,000,000 worth of property in Savannah, 
Ga. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
•fl A dispatch from Washington says that 
the Department of Agriculture is getting 
visible returns from its work among the colored farmers. There are 681 white demonstrators and 40 Negro demonstrators working for the department. 
<| Within the last two months there have 
been established by the colored people in 
Nashville, Tenn., a millinery store, a drug 
store and a theatre. There were already in 
operation two banks, two large publishing 
plants, four printing concerns, numerous 
drug stores, grocery stores, three undertaking establishments, shoe-shining and repairing shops, confection stores, ice cream and 
soda fountains. There is also a church supply company in the city, manufacturing 
everything from a hymn book to church 
altars of the finest make. 
Q New Negro towns are springing up continually in the South. University City has 
been planned in Oklahoma, so called because 
30 per cent, of all the proceeds from the 
sale of lots is to go toward the building of 
a university. Fidelity, a new laboring colony, is to be opened near Houston, Tex., by 
white capitalists. 
<| Georgia colored people are now paying 
taxes on an assessed value of $34,022,379 
worth of property. This is an increase of 
nearly $2,000,000 over last year, and represents a real value of over $60,000,000. 
COURTS. 
SEVERA L cases of discrimination have 
come before the courts recently. 
In Norfolk, Va., a colored man is testing 
the segregation ordinance. In New York a 
colored servant in Flushing was accused of 
stealing and held as a prisoner in the house; 
afterward the mistress found her rings in a 
pill box, and the servant sued for damages. 
She lost her case. In Brooklyn Andrew 
Hubert recovered $150 as penalty against a 
keeper of an eating house who refused to 
serve him. In Boston W . W . Bryant had a 
bartender of Rich's Grill fined" $25 for refusing to serve him. 
CRIME. 
THE record of lynching for the month is 
as follows: 
At Fort Smith, Ark., a colored man was 
lynched for shooting a deputy constable; 
the police made no attempt to interfere, and 
a large part of the force has been dismissed 
on this account. At Marianna, Ark., three 
Negroes were killed by a young farmer on 
account of labor troubles and "insulting 
remarks." At Blacksburg, S. C , two 
Negroes were hanged for forcing a white 
man to drink whiskey and, as was alleged, 
for robbing him. At Olar, S. C , three 
Negroes were taken from officers and shot to 
death; they were accused of burning the 
mayor's home. It seems that the colored 
men had been working for the mayor and 
had quarreled with him. At Cochran, Ga., 
a convict was lynched for killing a guard. 
At Shreveport, La., a colored man was killed 
for "insulting a white man." At Starksville, Miss., a colored man was lynched 
because a woman was frightened at seeing 
him approach. At Shelbyville, Tenn., one of 
the victims of the mob, which shot several 
prisoners, is dead; the Chattanooga News 
publishes details of the way in which the 
lynching was planned. A colored man in 
Hoisinger, Kan., who had wounded two 
white men, was lynched, and another stealing 
a ride on a train in Brook Haven, Miss., 
killed the officer who was trying to arrest 
him, and was himself shot to death. At 
Salisbury, Md., to prevent a lynching, a colored man accused of attacking a woman was 
sent to the penitentiary for ten years after 
a five-minute trial. In Birmingham, Ala., a 
man killed a Negro who was prowling about 
the window. 
<| There are the usual number of murders 
of Negroes by white men and officers: At 
Columbus, Ga., two men are held for 
severely whipping a Negro who had testified 
against them. At Middleburg, Md., a Negro 
was dragged at the rope end for becoming 
"impudent" when asked a question. At Benton, Ark., five men charged with killing a 
member of a Negro minstrel troupe were 
acquitted. Negroes have been killed by officers of the law at Hazelhurst, Ga., and 
Franklin, Tenn. White men were killed by 
Negroes at Atchison, Kan., and Roanoke, Va. 
IJ Women and children are now aiding in 
lynching and murdering Negroes. A woman 
led a lynching mob in Jacksonville, Fla., but 
was unsuccessful. The man was accused of 
murdering a family. In Goldsboro, N. C , a 
14-year-old boy killed an old Negro who 
owed him 5 cents. In Savannah, Ga., Samuel Simms, white and 10 years of age, killed 
a colored boy about the same age for kicking 
his dog. 
<J It is now charged that the assailant of the 1 2 TH E CRISI S 
prominent New York society woman, Mrs. 
Beach, at Aiken, S. C , was her husband, 
and not the "strange colored man," as 
accused. 
CJ President Taft, in a speech to the alumni 
of Howard University, made his first declaration against lynching. He said: "It is not 
any less a murder because 400 men take part 
in it than because one man does. Ordinarily 
it is accompanied by a good deal more cowardice because 400 are in it instead of one. 
The only way by which it can be suppressed 
is that some time we shall have men as sheriffs and as governors and as prosecutors and 
as jurors who will see to it that the men who 
are engaged in pulling the rope under those 
conditions shall themselves swing by the 
rope." 
MEETINGS . 
AN anti-lynching meeting has been held 
in Boston. Darius Cobb, the artist, 
Albert E. Pillsbury, formerly attorneygeneral, and Bishop Walters took part. 
CJ A general conference of social-service 
workers among the colored people of St. 
Louis was attended by 200 white and colored workers. 
CJ Mr. George E. Haynes spoke before the 
Ethical Culture Association of New York, 
on "Problems of City Life Among Colored 
People." 
CJ A conference on the application of industrial education to problems in Africa has 
been held at Tuskegee Institute. 
THE GHETTO. 
THE members of the Ohio Constitutional 
Convention have achieved a characteristic act of American courtesy. By a vote in 
which each member's name was carefully 
recorded, Mr. W . H. Lewis, Assistant Attorney-General of the United States, was asked 
to address the convention. On the nest day, 
by an unrecorded viva voce vote, the invitation was rescinded. 
CJ A wealthy Japanese druggist has been 
compelled by popular clamor to give up a 
piece of property which he had bought in a 
popular Sacramento, Cal., residence district. 
CJ The Lincoln University Glee Club were 
booked to sing at the white Y. M. C. A., 
Westchester, Pa. When they arrived and 
found that the town had been placarded, 
"Yo u must hear dem darkies sing," they 
went home without giving the concert. 
CJ The following touching dispatch comes 
from Chattanooga: " A veritable sensation 
was unearthed here this afternoon when it 
was discovered that the bodies of white persons who died in the Hamilton County Poorhouse were being buried by G. W . Franklin, 
a Negro undertaker. The body of a white 
woman who died at the institution was found 
in the Negro's establishment in a rough pine 
coffin by charity workers this afternoon. 
Public sentiment is aroused." 
CJ The various churches of Des Moines elect 
directors for the local Y. M. C. A. A colored attorney, S. J. Brown, represented a 
local colored church, and finding that he was 
not allowed to vote, left the meeting. 
CJ A mass-meeting to protest against unjust 
discrimination in the Nurses' Training School 
at Los Angeles, Cal., has been held. 
CJ Mr. Carnegie is considering a donation of 
colored libraries in Savannah and Muskogee. 
It is difficult, however, to get local city councils to promise appropriations. 
CJ In New Orleans a white children's playground has been erected in the midst of the 
colored district. The superintendent is now 
threatening to arrest Negroes who loaf in 
the vicinity. 
CJ The case of the right of colored people to 
use the name Knights of Pythias for a secret 
organization has been argued before the 
Supreme Court of the United States. 
CJ A remarkable case came up at Oxford 
University lately. Malcolm Orr-Ewing and 
Mohammed El Abd were fined for fighting. 
El Abd testified that he went to a performance at the East Oxford Theatre. Orr-Ewing 
sat behind him, he said, and began calling 
him abusive names because he was a foreigner and was of a black complexion. The 
witness said he heard the words "You Nigger with the big cigar." 
MUSI C AN D ART. 
A NE W concerto for violin has been composed by Mr. Samuel Coleridge-Taylor and will be heard for the first time at 
the Norfolk Festival, Norfolk, Conn., in 
June. 
Mrs. Maud Powell, the distinguished 
American violinist who is to play the work, ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 1 3 
says: ''Its history has an interest of its 
own. Mr. Coleridge-Taylor agreed to furnish me a new concerto for last season's 
Norfolk Festival, and he did so. He sent 
me a work, dedicated to me, based on American Negro melodies. He is an extremely 
modest man, however, and perhaps my letter of thanks was not as warm as it might 
have been. At any rate, in the course of a 
month or two he wrote and asked me to 
return the concerto, that he had reconsidered 
it, and decided never to publish the work or 
to have it performed. He also said that he 
was writing a new work at white heat, 
which he would send me as soon as it was 
completed. I wrote him at the time to preserve the slow movement. And in the new 
concerto he has also incorporated the first 
theme of the other work. It is melodious 
music—like a bouquet of flowers. That is 
the comparison that comes to my mind." 
At the festival two years ago, in June, 
Mr. Coleridge-Taylor conducted "Hiawatha's 
"Wedding Feast" and "The Death of Minnehaha," which were presented by the Litchfield County Choral Union, in addition to 
conducting his latest orchestral work, "Bamboula Rhapsodic Dance," which was composed for the occasion and dedicated to 
Mr. and Mrs. Stoeckel. 
Ifl At the request of the influential citizens 
of Wellington, New Zealand, Mr. Hamilton 
Hodges, the American baritone who has 
settled in Auckland, has opened a large and 
finely equipped studio in Wellington for 
pupils in vocal training. 
<| On March 22, at the Howard Theatre, 
Washington, D. C , a saengerfest was given 
by the chorus of the Washington Conservatory of Music, conducted by Mr. Harry A. 
Williams, director of the vocal department. 
<JThe Lucretia Mott Mothers' Club, composed of public-spirited colored women of 
West Medford, Mass., inaugurated this .year 
a series of open meetings at which are given 
addresses on instructive topics supplemented 
by musical programs. 
At the meeting in March Mrs. May Hallowell-Loud spoke on "Art in the Home," 
prefacing her address by interesting personal 
reminiscences and anecdotes of her greatgrandmother, Lucretia Mott, the abolitionist, after whom the club is named. 
IJ Mme. Anita Patti-Brown, coloratura 
soprano of Chicago, Ill., after a successful 
tour in Cuba, is being heard in concert 
throughout the State of Texas. 
AFRICA. 
A GREAT native college is to be established in South Africa, says the 
Sierra Leone Weekly Neivs. £22,500 has 
already been subscribed in Europe and 
£17,500 by native Africans, leaving only 
£10,000 to be subscribed to complete the 
£50,000 required. 
Cfl Dr. Abdurahman, president of the African political organization at Capo Town, 
S. A., at the annual congress in Johannesburg condemned the oppressive character of 
recent and prospective legislation affecting 
the political rights of the colored population 
and the failure to meet their legitimate 
demands in regard to education. 
<][ Mr. G. Debayo Agbebi, of Lagos, West 
Africa, recently graduated with high honors 
from the University of Birmingham, England, standing third in a class of fifty-seven. 
He has been elected a fellow of the Geological Society and a member of the Royal 
Sanitary Institute. Young Agbebi is a civil 
engineer and a nephew of Dr. Mojola 
Agbebi. 
ASIA . 
MR. KAWAKAMI , author of a recently 
published work on American-Japanese relations, counsels the abandonment of 
independent Japanese schools in Hawaii and 
on the Pacific Coast, for by fostering the 
Oriental language and culture they tend to 
retard the Americanization of the children 
and to arouse the suspicions of the Asiophobes. 
<| The Chinese Assembly has granted woman 
suffrage under the same educational and 
property qualifications as for men. Yik Yuk 
Ying, who has been called the Mrs. Pankhurst of China, has been elected to the 
assembly. 
CJ The Argentine government has prohibited 
the landing of a shipload of East Indian 
immigrants. 
<f A Democratic bill for Philippine independence is now before the House of Representatives. The bill proposes to grant probationary independence to the islands for a 
period of eight years, beginning July 4, 1913. 
During this period the president of the 
islands would be appointed by the President 
of the United States and the United States 
would defend the islands against foreign 
invasion, and, upon request of the local government, against popular violence. In 1921 
the Filipinos are to have full autonomy. ABDU L BAHA , TH E PERSIA N TEACHE R OF BROTHERHOO D 
MEN OF THE 
MONTH ME N O F TH E MONT H 15 
A PERSIA N TEACHER . 
ON April 12 Abdul Baha, the head of 
the religious movement known as 
Bahaism, arrived in America to visit his 
rapidly increasing band of followers. His 
coming is of particular interest to those 
of us who believe in the brotherhood of 
man, for that is the doctrine the Bahais emphasize above all other things. Because they 
have taught it, their first leader was put to 
death, their second died in prison, while 
Abdul Baha, their third head, has spent all 
his life, until a few years ago, in the Turkish prison at Acca, in Syria, the "new holy 
city" of the Bahais. 
It is only seventy years since the movement of. which he is the leader originated in 
Persia; to-day it numbers 10,000 disciples 
and is growing at an amazing rate. It is 
not, properly speaking, a "new religion." It 
does not ask a Christian to cease professing 
Christianity or a Mohammedan to give up 
his Mohammedanism. It does, however, 
demand that each person shall follow the 
spiritual truths of his religion, and it pays 
little attention to dogma. 
The movement presents in many respects 
a striking parallel with the early growth of 
Christianity. Like Christianity, it began as a 
protest against the corruption of established, 
untolerant, unspiritual religion, and also like 
Christianity it drew on itself the most inhuman persecutions. The number of martyrs 
is estimated at about 50,000. They have 
been burned alive, beheaded, torn in pieces, 
hanged and tortured in all the ways official 
cruelty could devise. There has not been an 
instance of recantation. The records of the 
Bahais speak of the victims as "athirst for 
the draught of martyrdom," and it is indeed 
true that they died with songs on their lips. 
There were persecutions and martyrdoms 
so recently as nine years ago, but the great 
time of trial was in the years 1848 to 1852, 
when the movement was beginning and the 
Persian government saw, in the growth of 
this enthusiasm for brotherhood, a menace 
to its arbitrary power. Perhaps twenty 
thousand men, women, and even children, 
died during these years of persecution. 
It was in 1844 that a young Persian 
named Mohammed Ali began to preach a 
doctrine of simplicity and spirituality. He 
called himself "the Bab," which in Persian 
means "the gate." It was not uncommon 
for teachers to adopt this title, signifying 
that wisdom did not originate with them, 
but came from heaven, using them as the 
gate by which to approach humanity. The 
Bab was only 25 years old, but he soon won 
a large number of followers, so soon that the 
great persecution began when he had 
preached but four years. 
The accusations brought against the followers of the Bab were very similar to those 
brought against the early Christians. They 
were charged with being "bad citizens," because they taught love to all men of all 
races, and of immorality, because they practised a kind of community of goods, like 
that of the early Christians. 
The Bab found martyrdom in the course 
of time, being hanged from the wall of a 
prison and shot; so, in the words of the 
chronicle, did "that holy spirit escape from 
its gentle frame and ascend to the supreme 
horizon." But, like John the Baptist, he 
had continually spoken of someone to follow him and perfect his work, and soon 
after his death a man arose who was generally received as the head of the movement. This was Baha Ulla, the father of 
Abdul Baha. 
Baha Ulla was a man of great wealth and 
high rank. He did not long keep either, for 
the Persian government, afraid perhaps to 
kill him, confiscated his goods and exiled 
him. "Thank God, I am now free," cried 
Baha Ulla when he heard that all his wealth 
was lost. With the greatest suffering he and 
his family, with a band of followers, made 
their way from Persia toward the coast. No 
sooner had they arrived than the Turkish 
government arrested them and threw them 
in prison at Acca. Baha Ulla never left the 
prison again, and Abdul Baha grew up and 
spent all his life there, until the "Young 
Turks" seized the government a few years 
ago and gave him his freedom. 
At first the family suffered greatly, but 
by degrees, as the jailers saw that they were 
kindly and gentle people, they were given 
some privileges, so that friends could see 
them and the work could be carried on from 
the prison. Baha Ulla did a great deal to 
simplify the somewhat complicated and Oriental teachings of the movement. His son 
was accepted by all as his successor, 
although there is no theory of a priestly 
family which is to rule the Bahais. 
At Abdul Baha's house in Acca all men 
are welcomed. Persian, African, Frenchman, American—they all meet as brothers 
before the master. He is the most generous 1 6 TH E CRISI S 
TH E LAT E DAVI D H. FERRI S 
and hospitable of men, and all are welcome 
to bis table. He follows literally the Scriptural injunction to give his goods to the 
poor; the coat he wears is usually all he has. 
Naturally, he is interested in the question 
of race prejudice in this country, where he 
has so many disciples. Recently he sent this 
message to one of them, Mrs. M. L. Botay, 
who has sent it to THE CRISIS: 
"Give Mrs. Botay my greetings and love 
and tell her she must greatly endeavor 
through the assistance of heaven to cast 
light among the colored people, so that they 
may become as our brothers, no blacks, no 
whites, both as one. By this means you 
shall free America from all prejudice. Because in the Kingdom of God all are the 
same, whether black or white. The greater 
the faith of either, the more acceptable is 
he in the Kingdom. A faithful colored believer is a child of the Kingdom, while a 
white unbeliever is deprived. God looks 
upon hearts, not upon colors. He looks 
upon qualities, not upon bodies." 
m 
THE LAT E DAVI D H. FERRIS 
ON March 9 Mr. David H. Ferris, one 
of the well-known colored men of New 
Haven and a veteran of the Civil War, died 
of heart failure. For many years he had 
interested himself in the welfare of his people, and the tributes paid to his memory 
came from all classes of society. He was 
born in New York City sixty-seven years 
ago, and was the son of a Methodist 
preacher. His grandfather had escaped 
from slavery. David Ferris was only a boy 
when the war broke out, but be enlisted as 
soon as he could be received, and went 
South with a New York regiment. He was 
a man of great strength, as well as courage, 
and distinguished himself on several occasions. He served for some time in the far 
South, and after the close of the war did 
duty in suppressing the guerrillas. His son, 
William H. Ferris, is a graduate of Yale and 
Harvard Universities. 
THE MILITAR Y ATTACHES TO LIBERIA. 
THE military attaches of the United 
States legation who are to reorganize 
the Liberian constabulary have just sailed. 
They are headed by Captain Young, of the 
United States army, and with him go Dr. 
Wilson Ballard, who will rank in the Liberian army as major, and Mr. Richard H. 
Newton and Mr. Arthur A. Browne, who 
will rank as captains. 
CAPT. A. A. BROWN E CAPT. B. H. NEWTO N 
MAJOR W . BALLAR D W. J. Northern, exGovernor of Georgia, 
has been saying a great 
many good words for the Negro lately. We 
have just received in pamphlet form the address he delivered before the Evangelical 
Ministers' Association of Atlanta, in which 
he did not hesitate to say that the churches 
of the South had "greatly neglected" their 
duty toward the Negro. 
"Bishop Haygood, a Christian minister 
whom I honored and greatly loved, was far 
in advance of his generation when he wrote 
'Our Brother in Black,' " said Governor 
Northern. "Is the spirit and the matter of 
the book acceptable to the people at this 
day ? Are we really related to the Negro as 
our brother in black, or our brother at all? 
It is up to the leaders of our spiritual life 
to bring us into a clear understanding of the 
brotherhood of man and teach us how to do 
unto others as we would they should do 
unto us, remembering, if we forgive not men 
their trespasses against us, neither will God 
forgive our sins. Here lies the whole trouble in the solution of the problem of the 
races, and I do not hesitate to say there is 
no class of our citizens better equipped to 
remove the difficulty than the Christian ministers I now have the honor to address. The 
problem is yours, and to you the spirit of 
the South must appeal." 
Mr. Northern spoke of the economic service the Negro had rendered the South for 
generation after generation and of the effort 
to-day to drive him out of various lines of 
service. "Negroes in livery and Negroes 
without livery have been coachmen for 
white people at the South for hundreds of 
years," he said. "Since we have come into 
the higher elegance of automobiles, a neighboring city has declared that no car will 
have the advantage of garage keeping if 
driven by a Negro. In our own city, I understand, there is a strong combination 
determined to eliminate the Negro from 
this place of service. Let me say openly, in 
this high Christian presence, if we live in 
peace and prosperity, this forty-seven per 
cent, of our community life must _be guaranteed protection in the lawful pursuit of 
such industries as will secure for them 
needed maintenance and an honest support, 
and comers and goers should not be allowed, 
in open and brutal violation of law, to force 
them to robbery and pillage for a living. 
"I am in the profoundest sympathy with 
the efforts of organized labor to secure its 
legitimate rights in the government and in 
the community. No man in Georgia will go 
further than I to help to this end, but I am 
absolutely opposed to any open effort on the 
part of any body of people to destroy the 
rights of any other citizen or body of citizens simply to secure their own good. It 
seems we are no longer a government by the 
people, seeking the greatest good for the 
greatest number, but we are a government 
by classes, seeking the greatest good for our 
class, while we are absolutely regardless of 
whatever evil may befall all other classes. 
Capital is arrayed against organized labor 
and organized labor is arrayed against capital; organized labor is arrayed against unorganized labor, and both these against 
Negro labor, and so with all classes of our 
community life. Walton county farmers 
have now been notified that they will be 
allowed to keep their Negro labor for the 
gathering of their present crops, but that 
they must hire no Negroes for another year. 
"Vagrancy is now one of the most dangerous tendencies of the times. Vagrancy is 
the breeder of crime. What will we do when 
one million Negroes in Georgia are driven 
into enforced idleness and loitering and 
A N EX-GOVERNOR OF 
GEORGIA SPEAKS. 1 8 TH E CRISI S 
denied the opportunity to make an honest 
living in legitimate service? Such condition 
will multiply criminals beyond our power to 
punish or our inclination to reclaim." 
Turning to the subject of lawlessness and 
the severity with which Negroes are treated 
in the courts, Mr. Northern said: 
"During my recent canvass of the State 
in the interest of law and order, a prominent 
State official told me this story. He said, in 
a county not far from the place at which we 
stood, a Negro convict was unexpectedly 
discharged from a chain-gang sentence, and 
he promptly returned to his home in search 
of his wife and his children. The woman 
had been employed by a nearby white man 
as cook, and subsequently used by him as his 
mistress. When the Negro in his search appeared upon the scene, the white man 
promptly ordered him off the premises with 
the additional injunction to stay away. 
Later the Negro appeared in the cabin of 
his wife, and was observed by the white 
man. A difficulty ensued and the white man 
was wounded. The Negro escaped, but he 
was pursued by a mob and brutally lynched. 
Nobody ever challenged the gross immorality of the white man, nor did any officer 
of the law ever attempt to bring to punishment the murderous mob that slew the 
Negro for daring to protect his home against 
the assault of a degenerate white man. 
"What body of men has ever made any 
attack upon the deadly pestilence shadowing 
the State and the Nation, because of the 
lecherous living and life habits of white men 
and Negro women? Suppose you count the 
mulattoes as they pass you upon the streets, 
or serve you in your homes, and you will 
then have some conception of the enormity 
of this awful and damning sin. 
"When did the ministers of our city 
ever denounce this brazen iniquity? 
"Our law has two distinct and successful 
methods for making criminals of Negroes— 
both negative in character, but forcefully 
positive in action. 
"The first is the denial of an industrial 
institution or workhouse for young Negroes. 
The idle among them, with the incorrigible 
and the vicious, should be taken by the 
State and confined at some helpful service 
and kept there until they become fit to be 
put on the community again. The city of 
Atlanta is rearing a generation of young 
Negroes, both girls and boys, that will give 
great trouble at no distant day in criminal 
and vicious living. 
"The second method is the entire absence 
of all effort at moral reform in our whole 
penal system. Our penitentiary is nothing 
more or less than an institution supported 
by the State for the graduation of its inmates as criminals. All the environment and 
management are hardening and damning 
rather than bringing to repentence and the 
desire for a better life. It is not a matter of 
surprise that criminals in Georgia return 
many times to the penitentiary when they 
have been confined there once. 
"If the newspapers are to be credited, 
every Negro lynched or burned in Georgia 
makes from one hundred to one thousand 
murderous white men. The crowds doing 
these savage deeds have been estimated from 
one hundred to two thousand and five hundred strong. If during the last half century we have averaged twenty lynchings 
annually, and the average crowd doing the 
savage work should be estimated at two 
hundred, we have the appalling condition of 
one hundred thousand murderous white men 
loose in Georgia, not one of whom has ever 
been brought to trial and punished for the 
crime of murder. This statement may furnish one further means for determining the 
criminal population of our criminal State, 
as between Negroes and white men as to 
numbers." 
DR. ABBOTT Dr. Lyman Abbott's 
AND THE pronouncement that the 
GOOD SAMARITAN, parable of the Good 
Samaritan was designed to teach social 
exclusiveness was noticed in last month's 
CRISIS. Dr. Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta University, writes to the 
New York Evening Post about it and says: 
"Dr. Lyman Abbott, in replying to an 
unknown friend in charge of a school, in a 
recent number of the Outlook, advises the 
exclusion of a Negro pupil, whose presence, 
on account of color, is objectionable to the 
other pupils. The peace and harmony of 
the school must not be imperilled by a quixotic attempt to vanquish race prejudice. 
"In connection with Dr. Abbott's advice, 
it may be instructive to recall how Prudence 
Crandall met the same problem thirty years 
before the Civil War, in Canterbury, Conn. 
This young Quaker woman was conducting 
a girls' boarding and day school when OPINIO N 1 9 
application was made for the admission of 
a colored girl, the daughter of a worthy 
and prosperous farmer of the neighborhood, 
and herself a member of the church in the 
town. No objection seems to have been 
raised on the part of the other girls, some 
of whom had already been her classmates 
in the district school, but the parents 
objected to having their daughters 'taught 
with a Nigger' in a private school, and 
threatened their withdrawal. Miss Crandall, 
after careful deliberation, decided to give up 
her white pupils, admit the colored applicant, and open the school to other colored 
girls.' The town was stirred to indignation. 
Teacher and pupils were insulted on the 
streets. The school was boycotted at the 
village stores. Its well was polluted with 
filth. An attempt was made to burn the 
house. Finally, the legislature of the State 
passed its infamous 'Black law,' under 
which Miss Crandall was prosecuted and 
imprisoned and the school broken up. 
"Quixotic? Yes, according to Dr. Abbott's 
teaching, and, judged by its immediate 
results, it may have been. But we must 
remember that Jesus has not escaped a similar charge, and that there are some reasons 
for still believing that— 
'They win who with Him lose.' 
Prudence Crandall won. The example of 
her moral heroism was a potent factor in 
making Windham County, where the incident occurred, the banner county in Connecticut in the subsequent struggle for 
human rights. 
"Time has done much toward softening 
and removing racial and religious prejudice, 
but only because, in every age, some people 
have been willing to speak and act about 
it, instead of postponing its cure to an indefinite future. Jesus and Peter and Paul began 
2,000 years ago. Yes, and the Good Samaritan, too, in spite of Dr. Abbott's remarkable 
suggestion that this traveler in Judea took 
the half-dead victim of the robbers to an inn 
—not, as we should have supposed, because 
the man might have been wholly dead if he 
had jolted him 'on his own beast' all the way 
to bis Samaritan home, but—because he 
feared to disturb the peace of his family by 
exciting their racial and religious prejudice! 
It is difficult to believe that Dr. Abbott 
could have intended such a suggestion to be 
taken seriously." 
ABOUT The Charleston Mes-
"UNLAWFUL senger, a colored paper 
TOLLS." of Charleston, S. C , 
quotes a remark from the News and Courier 
in regard to the effect that the Negro, 
"undisciplined and with a code of morals 
that is no code at all, levies his unlawful toll 
here, there and everywhere." 
To this the Messenger returns: "If this 
charge is true, it is terrible no less for the 
white man than for the Negro himself. The 
question comes then what is to be done? 
And who is to do it? What is the 
strong race which the News and Courier 
represents doing to better the condition of the hopeless Negro? Here are some 
of the things: In Charleston, a city of thousands of Negro children, the most rudimentary school facilities are supplied for a few 
hundreds. A few weeks ago a colored clergyman of the city, realizing it to be his duty 
to do all in his power to relieve the conditions complained of, asked the city council 
to give him a beggarly sum of money and 
piece of land to start a school for Negro 
children of the city. Of course, he was 
promptly turned down. During the session 
of the last legislature a measure to appropriate a pitiful $1,000 to install a heating 
plant in the one so-called 'college' that the 
great State of South Carolina inadequately 
maintains for the instruction of all her 
Negro youths only passed by the skin of its 
teeth. So it goes ad infinitum, but what is 
the use of multiplying instances?" 
The New York Evening 
LYNCHING. Post thus sums up the 
month's lynchings: 
" 'Dismissed in Court— Lynched'— thus a 
headline in to-day's news. Judge Lynch 
wanted to shed blood at Shreveport, La., and 
so another innocent Negro was killed. But 
that is not the only place where the innocent 
suffer. The Memphis Commercial-Appeal 
tells of a case at Starkville, Miss., where an 
hysterical woman was 'frightened without 
cause' by seeing a Negro, who promptly 
went to a white neighbor and protested his 
innocence. That neighbor, like the coroner's 
jury, was satisfied of it, but 'eight prominent 
citizens' shot him to death while he was 'cutting timber in the woods.' Strange as it 
may seem, they are to be arrested for murder. At Nashville Governor Hooper has 
just pardoned a Negro who has served a 
year on a charge of rape, because the attor-20 TH E CRISI S 
ney-general of Tennessee has 'learned that 
the testimony upon which the conviction was 
had was wholly unreliable.' He is now fully 
convinced that the prisoner is innocent. 
Blacksburg, S. C , is again reported 'quiet 
after lynching two Negroes' who forced a 
white man 'to drink whiskey'— not usually 
an indictable offence. In Marianna, Ark., a 
planter killed three Negroes in a dispute as 
to when they should return to the plantation 
from town. Unfortunately, he also shot a 
white man in the leg, and so he is under 
arrest. But why should he be prosecuted for 
wanting to be Judge Lynch all by himself?" 
Some comment has followed the victory of the 
New York Vigilance 
Committee of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People in 
securing the conviction of a theatre-ticket 
agent who refused to admit a colored man 
and woman to the orchestra seats. "The 
decision of three Special Sessions judges 
yesterday that a Negro buying seats in the 
orchestra of a theatre is entitled to use them 
is significant," says the New York Evening 
Post, "chiefly because it is in line with an 
effort—strongly urged by Miss Jane Addams 
among others—to secure the enforcement of 
the civil-rights laws on the statute books of 
this and other States. These laws, expressly 
passed to insure their rights to the freed 
slaves, are being deliberately violated, with 
the usual result that they are brought into 
contempt. The district-attorney's office has 
apparently not for years appreciated that 
discrimination of this kind violates the law." 
The New York Times takes a different 
view. "Probably the theatrical managers," 
it remarks, "would admit Negroes to orchestra seats as readily as white persons, if it 
were found profitable. It is a matter of 
business with them, not of prejudice. But, 
if compelled to admit Negroes, they would 
find that the prejudice of white patrons 
deprived them of their profits. This would 
amount to confiscation and an invasion of 
the rights of private business." 
The Macon Telegraph, before the case was 
finished, hoped it would be admitted that it 
would "ruin business" to admit colored persons to orchestra seats, and that they would 
be frankly "not allowed" downstairs in New 
York playhouses. "It is time to end dishonest subterfuge," it says. 
The Ladies' Home 
A BLAC K MADONNA . Journal publishes a 
letter of Mark Twain 
in which he praises a picture of Joan of 
Ar c and speaks of artists who spoil the 
Virgin Mary by making her fair "and white, 
which she wasn't." 
His daughter Jean saw the letter before 
it was posted and withheld it, telling her 
father that he must change something in it. 
Mark Twain inquired as to the change: 
"You have said the Virgin Mary was not 
white. 
"Very well! 
"But it's shocking. The idea of saying the 
mother of the Saviour was colored. It is 
sacrilegious." 
"Nonsense" laughed the father. "In 
Mary's day only one-tenth of the world was 
white, and to-day over one thousand of the 
fifteen hundred million are colored." 
But the daughter insisted that her father 
must change the "revolting" statement. 
Mark Twain answered: 
"My dear, I won't. To my mind one color 
is just as respectable as another; there, is 
nothing important, nothing essential about 
a complexion. I mean, to me. But with 
God it is different. He doesn't think much 
of white people. He prefers the colored." 
The passing by the Senate of the bill providing for a Negro exposition in 1913 leads the Atlanta Constitution 
to point out that it has always favored the 
project. "Our one reservation was that the 
exposition should stress the practical, and 
not the theoretical, side of Negro achievement and the Negro's need. Of those things 
which revolve around hypothesis, and which 
help a scant 10 per cent, of the race, there 
is a surplusage. There is little enough said 
and done touching the factors that may fit 
the great unequipped 90 per cent, for the 
tasks that now go begging." The Chicago 
Record-Herald thinks that there should be 
no opposition to a celebration of the downfall of slavery—"from the ruins of that 
wrong institution the new South has 
emerged, thriving, contented and purified," 
while the Philadelphia Inquirier remarks, 
patronizingly: "The Negro has been improving right along, is gaining everywhere 
insofar as he uses industry and such intelligence as he possesses." 
COLORE D FOL K 
I N THEATRES . 
TH E EMANCIPATIO N 
EXPOSITION . THE question of the election of Mr. W. 
H. Lewis to the American Bar Association is still under tire. Learning that Mr. 
John Harsen Rhoades, a prominent New 
York banker, had protested to the American 
Bar Association against the action of the 
executive committee, we secured Mr. 
Rhoades' permission to print his letter. It 
runs as follows: 
"March 15, 1912. 
"Stephen S. Gregory, Esq., 
"President American Bar Association. 
"Dear Sir: 
"If I am correct in assuming that the 
American Bar Association aspires to deserve 
public esteem, and since its act may establish a doubtful precedent, on the basis of 
broad citizenship I feel it my privilege to 
protest against such an extreme example of 
race prejudice as that involved in the rescission of the membership of Mr. William H. 
Lewis. Such discrimination is obnoxious to 
lovers of fair play, alien to the American 
spirit, and from the humanitarian standpoint indefensible. 
"I can appreciate why objection might be 
raised to Mr. Lewis' membership in a purely 
social organization, but it passes understanding why he should be excluded from such a 
body as the American Bar Association, a 
professional league of semi-public character 
and national scope. 
"Were Mr. Lewis a banker, I would welcome him to membership in the American 
Bankers' Association, because I believe the 
real purpose of such an organization to be, 
not social, but utilitarian. Too much diversion and too little attention to achievement 
is the weakness in all such organizations 
to-day. 
"It would be humiliating indeed were we 
forced to concede that the American Bar 
Association is so narrow as to ostracize an 
W . E. MORRIS, OF MINNEAPOLI S 
Member of the American Bar Association 
individual because he happens to be oneeighth black. I do not ask for social comradeship, but for interprofessional courtesy 
in recognition of attainment. 
"The American Bar Association would 
lose nothing by maintaining in membership 
one who has succeeded in his profession 
against tremendous odds, and by bis exclusion misses a golden opportunity to exhibit 
a keen sense of justice. 
"Yours very truly, 
"JOH N HARSE N RHOADES. " 22 TH E CRISIS 
The April CRISIS contained an article on 
Richard Lonsdale Brown, the young colored 
artist of whom the association is justly 
proud. The article was written for THE 
CRISIS and the New York Times, and the 
Times printed it at a most opportune 
moment, just before the artist's exhibition of 
his paintings. During the week of the 
exhibit, March 18 to 23, the gallery of Ovington Brothers Company was crowded every 
day, so crowded on some of the afternoons 
as to make a view of the pictures difficult. 
It is estimated that 2,500 persons saw them. 
Twenty-six pictures were for sale and sixteen were sold, besides a number of little sky 
sketches which many persons bought as souvenirs. Among the purchasers were Mr. 
Jacob H. Schiff, Mr. Warburg, Mr. Coster 
and Miss Mary Garden. The young artist 
received $1,000 for his work. He plans to 
remain in New York for a year, but will put 
aside a part of this fund for study abroad. 
H 
M . C. Ames Brooks, acting for the Legal 
Aid Committee of the National Association, 
sends us the following report from Baltimore: 
"April 1, 1912. 
"Gentlemen: 
"After numerous conferences relative to 
the Baltimore segregation ordinance had 
to-day with Mr. W . Ashbie Hawkins, representative of the prosecuting attorney, and 
Judge Elliott, of the Criminal Court, I have 
to present the following report: 
"Mr. Hawkins has now on hand two cases 
involving the constitutionality of the above 
ordinance, and so far as he knows they are 
the only cases now pending in Baltimore. 
The first of these cases is of a civil nature, 
involving a petition by a colored resident 
for an injunction to restrain the police department from enforcing certain parts of 
the ordinance. This case has now gone too 
far to permit the raising of the direct question of invalidity before the writ issues. 
"The other case is a criminal one, and 
arises out of the arrest of a colored man for 
an alleged violation of the ordinance. This 
is the case upon which Mr. Hawkins is relying to make a test case. No proceedings 
have yet been taken, but we have decided 
to move the case for trial at once and raise 
the constitutional question of invalidity at 
the opening by a motion to quash the indictment. The prosecuting attorney states that 
this course will be satisfactory to him, as 
they are anxious here to have a decision soon 
one way or the other. The case will probably be tried before Judge Elliott, of the 
Criminal Court, who enjoys a high reputation here as an excellent and unprejudiced 
judge. 
"An alternative method of procedure presented itself, which was to have the proceedings in the court below merely formal 
and have the matter passed on by an immediate appeal to the highest court of the 
State. W e have dismissed this alternative 
after due deliberation, on the ground that 
the appeal could not be heard before next 
October, thus causing great delay, and on 
the further ground that a carefully considered decision by a local judge immediately 
would have a much more beneficial effect, as 
the issue is purely a local one. This result 
would be reached by concentrating our 
efforts on the argument in the trial court, 
and should the outcome be unfavorable, we 
can then resort to an appeal in any event. 
"Regarding the ordinance itself, we are 
of the opinion that the spirit of it is repugnant to the Constitution, though it is very 
cleverly drawn. Before any fair-minded 
court it would probably meet the fate of its 
predecessor. In the meantime, citizens, both 
white and colored, are coming to look upon 
it with disfavor, as, while it affects the 
rights of the Negroes directly, it is also having a bad effect upon real-estate values in 
large sections owned by whites, who formerly rented to Negroes, and who are now 
unable to do so under its provisions. 
"Yours very truly, 
"C. AMES BROOKS." 
m 
During the past month the assistant secretary has spoken at meetings in Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington. In Philadelphia the Rev. K. E. Evans arranged that 
she should speak at the Girard Avenue (formerly Spring Garden) Unitarian Church. 
At this meeting Dr. Mossell was present and 
gave an interesting account of the fight 
against segregation in the public schools. 
She spoke, also, before the Sunday school of 
the Kenneth Israel Congregation. 
As a result of the splendid Washington 
meeting, reported in the Easter CRISIS, preliminary steps were taken on March 20 to TH E N. A . A . C. P. 23 
form, a District of Columbia branch, with 
the following officers: 
President, Rev. J. Milton Waldron. 
Vice-President, Mrs. Mary Church 
Terrell. 
Secretary, Mr. B. G. Brawley. 
Treasurer, Prof. George M. Cook. 
Chairman of the executive board, Mr. 
L. M. Hershaw. 
The branch will send its constitution to the 
national board of directors, to be voted 
upon by them; then it will be admitted to 
membership. The net proceeds of the meeting, amounting to $9 8 besides THE CRISIS 
subscriptions, the organizer of the meeting 
generously forwarded to the headquarters of 
the National Association. Professor Spingarn, whose stirring account of the work of 
the New York Vigilance Committee aroused 
tremendous enthusiasm, spent the next day 
in Washington, speaking in the various departments of Howard University and also at 
the M Street High School. 
In Baltimore a small but deeply earnest 
group of people met the assistant secretary 
and discussed with her the work of the association. On April 2 their constitution, modeled after the constitution of the Boston 
branch, was submitted to the board of directors of the National Association and was 
accepted by the board. Baltimore is now 
a regular branch of the association. Its officers are: 
President, Dr. F. N. Cardoza. 
Vice-President, Mr. J. Clarence 
Chambers. 
Secretary, Prof. Thomas W. Turner. 
Treasurer: Mr. E. B. Taylor. 
The members of the executive committee 
are: Mr. Garnett R. Waller, chairman; Mr. 
W. Ashbie Hawkins, Dr. Thomas S. Hawkins, Prof. George B. Murphy, Dr. H. J. 
Brown and Mr. W. L. Fitzgerold. 
On April 11 a public meeting was held in 
the Rev. Harvey Johnson's church, under 
the auspices of the Baltimore branch. Every 
seat was taken and many stood throughout 
the meeting. Mr. W . Ashbie Hawkins presided, and the speakers were Dr. Du Bois, 
Miss Ovington and Dr. J. O. Spencer, president of Morgan College, Baltimore, a school 
for Negroes. The two representatives of the 
National Association gave a full account of 
its scope and work, and Dr. Spencer, in a 
ringing speech, expressed his admiration for 
the Negroes' achievements and his sympathy 
for them in their struggle for human rights. 
The next morning twenty prominent Baltimore colored women met the association's 
secretary at the house of Mrs. Hawkins, 
and passed a resolution, to be presented 
at the next branch meeting, that a committee 
on education be at once appointed by the 
branch. This committee should at once investigate and strive to improve conditions in 
the public schools and should endeavor to 
secure entrance for colored students in the 
city's private colleges. The discussion 
brought out the fact that two of Baltimore's 
famous institutions of learning violate the 
wills of their founders in drawing the color 
line. It is evident that the Baltimore branch 
will assist the National Association by 
obtaining a large membership and will do 
valuable and aggressive local work. 
Nineteen members joined the association 
in March, paying $51 in memberships. Six 
were from New York, three from Massachusetts, three from Pennsylvania, and one 
each from Arkansas, District of Columbia. 
Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey and 
Tennessee. 
The last week of March the director of 
publicity and research made a short Western trip, speaking before large audiences at 
Painesville and Lorain, O., and in Indianapolis. 
The News, of Bangor, Me., says of the 
chairman of our association's board of directors: "Oswald Garrison Villard, the publisher of the New York Evening Post and a 
grandson of William Lloyd Garrison, the 
famous abolitionist, is traveling through the 
North and organizing local societies in the 
big cities for the protection of the colored 
race against lynchings, burnings at the stake 
and other lawless outrages committed 
against the innocent blacks in this country. 
He contends that the black is the equal of 
the white before God and under the laws of 
most States. To hear Mr. Villard was to 
sympathize with him and indorse his position fully. The national association stands 
primarily for truth and knowledge, for simple justice to the colored population, for 
defense and protection against lynching and 
outrage. There is not a city of any size in 
the country which does not need a branch 
of this association. The branches should 
have their legal aid features and should be 
liberally supported by men and women who 
really believe in the principles of the 
American republic." TH E NEGRO CHURCH. 
IT happens that during this 
month, in the North, 
West and South, there 
are meeting the ruling 
Methodist ecclesiastical 
bodies representing a 
membership of 1,175,000 colored Americans. Later, in midsummer, the Baptist 
conventions, which represent 2,300,000 
members, will meet. These three and 
a half millions of people represent the 
great middle class of colored Americans. 
The lowest class of outcasts have never 
been reached; the highest class of the 
educated and thoughtful are being gradually lost. The great middle mass 
remains, and in 35,000 churches holding 
$57,000,000 worth of property they form 
a peculiar organized government of men. 
Under some fifty powerful leaders and 
thirty thousand salaried local preachers 
they raise and expend over seven millions of dollars a year. 
Before such an organization one must 
bow with respect. It has accomplished 
much. It has instilled and conserved 
morals, it has helped family life, it has 
taught and developed ability and given 
the colored man his best business training. It has planted in every city and 
town of the Union, with few exceptions, 
meeting places for colored folk which 
vary from shelters to luxurious and 
beautiful edifices. 
Notwithstanding this, all is not well 
with the colored church. First, its fifty 
leaders are in too many cases not the 
men they should be. This is not peculiar 
to the Negro church, but it is true to a 
larger degree than is healthful. We 
can point to pure-minded, efficient, unselfish prelates like the late Bishop Paine, 
the present Bishop Lee and J. W. White. 
We have men of scholarship and standing like Bishop J. Albert Johnson, and 
we have efficient men of affairs like John 
F. Hurst, M. C. B. Mason and 
R. H. Boyd. 
The trouble is, however, this: there 
are too few such men. The paths and 
the higher places are choked with pretentious ill-trained men and in far too 
many cases with men dishonest and 
otherwise immoral. Such men make the 
way of upright and businesslike candidates for power extremely difficult. 
They put an undue premium upon 
finesse and personal influence. 
Having thus a partially tainted 
leadership, small wonder that the $30,000 
colored ministers fall as a mass far below 
expectations. There are among them 
hustling business men, eloquent talkers, 
suave companions and hale fellows, but 
only here and there does one meet men 
like Henry L. Phillips of Philadelphia— 
burning spiritual guides of a troubled, 
panting people, utterly self-forgetful, 
utterly devoted to a great ideal of 
righteousness. 
Yet this is precisely the type for which 
the church—the white church as well 
as the black church—is crying. This 
is the only type which will hold thoughtful, reasonable men to membership with 
this organization. To-day the tendencies 
are not this way. To-day the church is 
EDITORIA L EDITORIA L 25 
still inveighing against dancing and 
theatregoing, still blaming educated 
people for objecting to silly and empty 
sermons, boasting and noise, still building churches when people need homes 
and schools, and persisting in crucifying 
critics rather than realizing the handwriting on the wall. 
Let us trust that these great churches 
in conference, remembering the leaders 
of the past and conscious of all that the 
church has done well, will set their faces 
to these deeds: 
1. Electing as bishops and leaders 
only men of honesty, probity and efficiency and rejecting the noisy and 
unclean leaders of the thoughtless mob. 
2. "Weeding out the ministry so as 
to increase the clean apostles of service 
and sacrifice. 
3. Initiating positive programs of 
education and social uplift and discouraging extravagant building and mere 
ostentation. 
4. Bending every effort to make the 
Negro church a place where colored men 
and women of education and energy can 
work for the best things regardless of 
their belief or disbelief in unimportant 
dogmas and ancient and outworn creeds. 
TH E CONFERENCE A T CHICAGO. 
IT looks as though the 
Fourth Annual Conference of this association 
at Chicago would be 
the greatest of any yet 
held. This is as it should 
be. At last the colored people of the 
land and their friends are going to have 
a free annual forum where they can 
speak like men, confer, and plan movements looking toward eventual emancipation from the galling slavery of the 
present. 
Several times this has been attempted. 
Beginning in Philadelphia in 1830, there 
were a series of conferences up until 
about 1836, in which colored people and 
friends like William Lloyd Garrison discussed their ills. Then there was a lull 
until the conventions of 1847 at Troy, 
of 1852 at Rochester and 1856 at Chatham, Ontario. These were stirring meetings, where Frederick Douglass, John 
Brown and the great leaders of the day 
discussed emigration and revolt. 
After the war came a series of meetings North and South, at Syracuse, at 
Nashville and at Washington. Then the 
mists of reconstruction discouragement bowed the millions down until 
1890, when the Afro-American Council was born. This was a worthy 
organization, but after a struggle of 
fifteen years it was done to death 
in Chicago by a shameful conspiracy 
engineered by black men who were 
paid to make their fellows stop 
protesting. There were feeble attempts 
at resuscitation at St. Paul and Louisville, but the real revivification came 
when the Niagara Movement, a small 
group of determined men, met at Niagara 
in 1905 and voiced a stinging protest 
which is still echoing in the land. In 
vain was the movement slandered and 
misrepresented. It had to be listened 
to and it had large influence in the call 
for the Negro Conference in New York 
in 1909. Out of that conference grew the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
To-day we meet a fourth time. We 
meet to protest, but not simply to protest. We can point to deeds done, to 
plans carefully laid, to widespread cooperation and to TH E CRISIS. We can 
point, too, to the word of Phillips: 
The proper time to maintain one's 
rights is when they are denied; the 
proper persons to maintain them are 
those to whom they are denied. 
EDUCATION. 
THE fifteenth annual Conference for Education 
in the South was held in 
Nashville on April 3, 4 
and 5. As usual, the colored people were not 
represented, save on the opening night, 
when, mirabile dictu, a delegation from 2 6 TH E CRISI S 
Fisk University occupied seats on 
the floor of the great convention hall, 
the gallery of which was crowded by at 
least 1,500 white students of the various 
educational institutions located in Nashville. This admission of Fisk in itself 
was a step forward, but no colored 
orator had an opportunity to plead for 
his race, and the Middle Tennessee Colored Teachers' Association met in the 
city simultaneously without a single 
representative of the conference appearing before these colored men and 
women. 
But while the conference did not permit a representative of thirty per cent, 
of the people in whose behalf it is laboring to appear before it—there was considerable ill-feeling among the colored 
people in Nashville prior to the convention when this became known—it is 
undeniable that there was greater freedom of speech allowed at this conference than at any other. The plea for 
universal education for all children, 
black or white, was heard at almost 
every session, and there were two very 
interesting subconferences on the education of the Negro, presided over by 
Dr. James H. Dillard, the executive secretary of the Slater Fund and Jeanes 
Foundation, whose work on behalf of 
the Negro deserves the highest praise. 
He stated, among other things, that 
while it was the fashion in the South, 
and rightly so, to praise the old-time 
Negro mammy, he thought that the 
splendid devotion of the colored women 
now working in the schools for their 
race was still more worthy of recognition and praise. 
The national association was represented at this conference by its executive chairman, and Dr. Dillard agreed 
to co-operate with the association and 
other agencies in compiling a list of the 
worthy, and also another of one of the 
unworthy, schools for the Negro in the 
South of the college or industrial type. 
It was interesting to note the eagerness to discuss the question of Negro 
education by the Southern white men 
and women who participated. One of 
the ablest of the latter made a plea that 
if an organization for the supervision of 
the Negro schools were established the 
colored men should have equal participation with the white. For, she said, 
being herself disfranchised and belonging to a sex whose interests in public 
matters such as schooling had heretofore 
been administered by men who did not 
represent her sex, she could sympathize 
with any colored man who felt that he 
ought to have a hearing where the interests of his race were being discussed and 
managed. 
-One of the most significant addresses 
of the main conference was delivered on 
the last evening by Mr. W. D. Weatherford, of the national committee of the 
Y. M. C. A., on the education of the 
Negro in the South. It is so admirable 
a statement of the ease that the national 
association expects to reprint it as one 
of its leaflets. His statement that young 
college men in the South in increasing 
numbers are devoting themselves to the 
work among the colored people was 
most encouraging to hear. Indeed, the 
whole tone and nature of the conference, despite the exclusion of Negro 
delegates, showed that in the South, too, 
progress is being made in the right 
direction. Ten years ago nobody dared 
advocate universal Negro education 
without apologizing for it. Any Southerner who advocated educating the 
Negro had to apologize for doing so. 
Nobody thought of apologizing at Nashville, and fifteen years hence, we trust, 
it will seem perfectly natural to have 
colored men speaking for their race at 
all these gatherings. 
THE BAR A T TH E BAR. 
IN seeking to defend their 
indefensible position the 
executive committee of 
the American Bar Association has declared that 
the election of a colored 
man to membership was a new and EDITORIA L 2 7 
unprecedented action. This is flat 
untruth. 
There are to-day Negro members of 
the American Bar Association and there 
were such members before Mr. Lewis 
was elected. We present in our columns 
this month the picture of a gentleman 
who is a member of the Bar Association 
and whose name appears printed in 
their reports. Mr. Morris is a darkbrown man whose identity with the 
Negro-American is as unquestionable as 
is his high standing at the Minnesota 
bar. 
Not only has Mr. Morris been a member of the Bar Association for some 
years, but another colored man, Mr. Butler Wilson of Massachusetts, was elected 
to membership at the same time with 
Mr. Lewis and was a member of the 
local entertainment committee that welcomed the association to Boston. 
Attorney-General Wickersham has 
brought these facts to the notice of the 
secretary of the Bar Association and also 
pointed out some peculiar discrepancies 
in the printed record of members. Does 
this perturb the nimble Mr. George 
Whitelock? Not in the least. The same 
gentleman who wrote originally "N o 
person whatever of another race (i. e., 
than the white race) has been elected 
to membership," with great dignity 
says " I shall investigate the facts." 
Three weeks later he has "confirmation 
of your recent statement,'' but—and we 
commend this severe and subtle logic to 
the groundlings—'' I do not understand 
that you claim to represent Messrs. 
Wilson and Morris, but that in connection with your espousal of the cause of 
Mr. William H. Lewis you direct attention to them, upon the theory that there 
has been undue discrimination against 
Mr. Lewis. His status has induced the 
series of your letters to me beginning on 
January 24, 1912. You are already 
aware that there was no declaration in 
the Lewis instance of ineligibility of 
colored men to membership in the association, but only a recision of the particular election by the committee, which 
had occurred without knowledge on its 
part of the candidate's race—regarded 
as a material consideration in electing.'' 
We are free to say that this logic seems 
to us unanswerable. 
g| 
LYNCHIN G AGAIN . 
IN another column we quote 
from ex-Governor Northern a statement worth 
repeating, that there 
may be "one hundred 
thousan d murderous 
white men loose in Georgia, not one of 
whom has ever been brought to trial 
and punished for the crime of murder. 
This statement may furnish one further 
means for determining the criminal population of our criminal State, as between 
Negroes and white men as to numbers.'' 
Despite this wretched state of affairs 
our appeal to President Taft brings this 
reply from the United States Department of Justice: 
"Through reference from the President the Department is in receipt of your 
letter of the 16th instant transmitting 
copy of resolutions concerning mob violence adopted by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People at a mass meeting held in New 
York City November 15, 1911. 
"There is no authority in the United 
States Government to interfere because 
the parties committing such crimes violate the laws of the State where the 
offense is committed and are punishable in its courts having jurisdiction of 
the offense. The Federal authorities 
are not authorized to intervene unless it 
be for the purpose of protecting a citizen in the exercise of rights which he 
possesses by virtue of the Constitution 
and laws of the United States." 
Well, in the name of justice, what 
rights does an American possess "b y 
virtue of the Constitution and laws of 
the United States" if it is not the right 
not to "be deprived of life, liberty or 
property without due process of law" 
as the Fifth Amendment guarantees? 28 TH E CRISI S 
JOINT BOARD OF BISHOPS OF TH E THREE COLORED METHODIS T DENOMINATION S 
WHIC H MET A T WASHINGTON , 190 7 
THE NEGRO-AMERICAN CHURCH 
THE editors of TH E CRISI S 
have asked four leading 
churchmen representing the 
four largest denominations 
among colored people to 
give TH E CRISI S a statement of the present condition of these churches. All have complied 
except in the case of the Zion Church; the 
notes concerning that church and the smaller 
denominations were prepared in this office. 
The Christian Church did but little to 
convert the slaves from their Obeah worship 
and primitive religion until the establishment 
of the Society for the Propagation of the 
Gospel in Foreign Parts, in 1701; this 
society and the rising Methodists and Baptists rapidly brought the body of slaves into 
nominal communion with the Christian 
Church. No sooner, however, did they 
appear in the church than discrimination 
began to be practised which the free Negroes 
of the North refused to accept. They therefore withdrew into the African Methodist 
and Zion Methodist Churches. The Baptists 
even among the slaves early had their separate churches, and these churches in the 
North began to federate about 1836. In 1871 
the Methodist Church, South, set aside their 
colored members into the Colored Methodist 
Episcopal Church, and the other Southern 
churches drove their members into the other 
colored churches. The remaining Northern 
denominations retained their Negro members, TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N CHURC H 29 
but organized them for the most part into 
separate congregations. 
Practically, then, the seven-eighths of the 
whole Negro population is included in its 
own self-sustaining, self-governing church 
bodies. Nearly all of the other eighth is economically autonomous to a very large degree. 
THE AFRICAN METHODISTS. 
The most compact and powerful of the 
Negro churches is the African Methodist 
Episcopal Church. Its membership has 
grown from 42 members in 1787 to 200,000 
members in 1876 and 494,777 members in 
1906. It is governed by a board of bishops, 
fifteen to eighteen in number, over whom the 
senior bishop, at present the Rt. Rev. Henry 
M. Turner, presides. 
The church has 7,000 local organizations, 
with property worth over $11,000,000. It 
raises about $2,000,000 a year; of this about 
$800,000 goes to pastors, $200,000 to bishops 
and presiding elders, and the other million 
to schools, missions and general expenses. 
There are two publication houses, weekly 
papers and a quarterly magazine and some 
publication of books. The church supports 
over forty schools, of which the largest and 
oldest is Wilberforce University, in Ohio. 
The church, however, is chiefly noteworthy on account of its board of bishops. 
These bishops are elected for life by a general conference meeting every four years. 
The membership of the general conference 
consists of ministerial and lay delegates; the 
clerical delegates are elected from the annual 
conferences, one for every thirty ministers. 
Two lay delegates for each annual conference are selected by the representatives of 
the official church boards in the conference. 
Thus we have a peculiar case of Negro government, with elaborate machinery and the 
experience of a hundred years. How has it 
succeeded? Its financial and numerical success has been remarkable, as has been shown. 
Moreover, the bishops elected form a remarkable series of personalities. Together the 
assembled bishops are perhaps the most 
striking body of Negroes in the world in personal appearance: men of massive physique, 
clear-cut faces and undoubted intelligence. 
Altogether the church has elected thirty-five 
bishops. These men fall into about five 
classes. First, there were those who represented the old type of Negro preacher—men 
of little learning, honest and of fair character, capable of following other leaders. 
Perhaps five or six of the African Methodist 
Episcopal bishops have been of this type, 
but they have nearly all passed away. From 
them developed, on the one hand, four men 
of aggressive, almost riotous energy, who by 
their personality thrust the church forward. 
While such men did much for the physical 
growth of the church, they were often men 
of questionable character, and in one or two 
instances ought never to have been raised to 
the bishopric. On the other hand, in the 
case of four other bishops, the goodness of 
the older class developed toward intense, 
almost ascetic piety, represented pre-eminently in the late Daniel Payne, a man of 
almost fanatic enthusiasm, of simple and 
pure life and unstained reputation, and of 
great intellectual ability. The African 
Methodist Episcopal Church owes more to 
him than to any single man, and the class of 
bishops he represents is the salt of the 
organization. Such a business plant naturally has called to the front many men of 
business ability, and perhaps five bishops 
may be classed as financiers and overseers. 
The rest of the men who have sat on the 
bench rose for various reasons as popular 
leaders: by powerful preaching, by pleasing 
manners, by impressive personal appearance. 
They have usually been men of ordinary 
attainment, with characters neither better 
nor worse than the middle classes of their 
race. Once in office, they have usually grown 
in efficiency and character. On the whole, 
then, this experiment in Negro government 
has been distinctly encouraging. It has 
brought forward men varying in character, 
some good and some bad, but on the whole 
decency and ability have been decidedly in 
the ascendancy and the church has prospered. 
The General Conference, which meets in 
Kansas City, Mo., May 6-27, is a quadrennial meeting having the highest legislative 
and judicial authority. Meeting as seldom 
as it -does, it is necessarily a body of great 
importance. Its membership will be 522. 
consisting of the bishops, heads of general 
departments, presidents of colleges and ministerial and lay delegates representing American and African conferences. The revision 
of the discipline and the election of bishops 
and heads of departments will be the chief 
business of the session. In the former will 
be the provision for pensioning superannuated preachers, widows and children of 3 0 TH E CRISI S 
deceased ministers and support of missionaries. There are upward of 1,000 dependents who must be adequately provided for. 
The publishing interests of the church will 
be brought up in a resolution to combine the 
management of the Nashville and Philadelphia houses. 
The missionary work in West Africa will 
call for readjustment, while the home work 
will call for more definite attention. 
The distribution of the "dollar money," 
i. e., the $1 per year required of each member, will be so readjusted as to allow a larger 
percentage to preachers' aid. Preparation 
for the celebration of the centennial of the 
church will occupy some attention. This will 
probably be held in Philadelphia, where the 
church was founded. An effort will also be 
made to relieve the various editors of church 
publications of business responsibilities and 
also to create a position of general editor 
of Sunday-school literature, as distinct from 
secretary of the Sunday School Union. 
Five bishops will probably be elected. For 
election to the bishopric there are not less 
than fifty men who are mentioned, representing varied degrees of culture, education, 
moral character, Christian piety, executive 
ability and successful pastoral records. 
Those who seem to be in the lead are: M. 
M. Ponton, president of Campbell College, 
Mississippi; D. P. Roberts, of Illinois; John 
Hurst, financial secretary, of Maryland; J. 
M. Conner, of Arkansas; T. N. M. Smith, of 
Georgia; W . W . Beckett, missionary secretary, and Dr. H. T. Kealing, president of 
Western University, Kansas. For heads of 
departments most of the present officers will 
be re-elected. 
THE METHODISTS. 
One of the largest Protestant denominations of America is the Methodist Episcopal 
Church. It has missions in all parts of the 
world, and its membership aggregates three 
and one-half million. As an integral part 
of this great church there are three hundred 
and twenty-five thousand American Negroes. 
These colored members have constitutional 
rights and privileges equal with the white 
members, and the basis for representation 
in the General Conference is the same for all 
races. 
At the forthcoming General Conference, 
besides the white and colored American 
races, there will be Japanese, Koreans, Chinese, Europeans, East Indians and Mexicans. 
The Negro conferences, twenty in number, 
will have ninety-two delegates out of a 
total of eight hundred and twenty. The 
standing committees, which have about two 
hundred and fifty members, include forty 
Negroes. In several of the committees 
Negroes serve as secretaries. Indeed three 
of the assistant secretaries of the General 
Conference are Negroes and upon every 
important committee, save one, the Negroes 
have representatives. 
The three hundred and twenty-five 
thousand colored members, mentioned above, 
are organized into twenty conferences, with 
two thousand one hundred and seventy-nine 
ministers. The twenty conferences have, 
church property valued at $6,347,727 and 
parsonages, with a value of $860,221; a total 
wealth in probable 'property values alone 
aggregating $7,200,943. 
Nine Negroes of the church are general 
officers of the General Boards. These are 
Bishop I. B. Scott, Dr. M. C. B. Mason, 
secretary of the Freedmen's Aid Society, 
Dr. R. E. Jones, editor of the Southwestern 
Christian Advocate, and six others. These 
men receive an average salary of $2,233.33 
and traveling expenses. Besides these officers 
there are eleven university, college and 
academy presidents and principals, and 
two hundred Negro professors and teachers 
in twenty-three schools. The enrollment of 
these schools for 1911 was seven thousand 
one hundred and thirty and the twenty-three 
colored conferences contributed $26,785.50 
to education, besides $134,086.10 paid in by 
the students for tuition, board and other 
expenses. 
Many and varied problems will face the 
General Conference when it meets at Minneapolis this month. Among the questions to 
be discussed will be the amusement problem 
and the time limitation of the pastorate. 
The question, however, which overshadows 
all others is that of the Episcopacy. There 
is a sentiment in favor of increasing the 
effective bishops; indeed some have advocated 
an increase by the number of twelve. In 
the discussion of the Episcopacy the question of a colored bishop must necessarily 
be considered. Since 1872 the Negro members of the church have contended for a 
bishop of their own race, and the General 
Conference by resolution in 1896 and 1900 TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N CHURC H 31 
DR. M. C. B. MASO N REV . E. M. JONES DR. ROBERT E. JONES 
Prominent Candidates for the M. E. Bishopric 
"recognized the need of such an officer" and 
added that "the time has come when such an 
officer might wisely and safely be elected." 
The whole question is an exceedingly "live 
wire." The Southwestern Christian Advocate, the official organ of the Negro constituency, has spoken strongly in favor of 
a Negro bishop, while four other influential 
church papers with white editors are advocating the election of a Negro to the 
bishopric. 
In a recent editorial the Northwestern 
Christian Advocate, published in Chicago, 
says: 
"It is to be hoped that the coming General 
Conference will show itself superior to the 
prejudice of race or color. The Negroes 
have, to our mind, three indisputable claims 
to consideration in the matter of their 
demands for bishops of their own race: 
"First, the problem of the Negro is a 
problem by itself. 
"Second, naturally the problem can be best 
interpreted by a capable Negro. 
"Third, there are capable Negroes to interpret the problem." 
Should a Negro be called to the Episcopacy of the Methodist Episcopal Church he 
will, in all likelihood, be Dr. M. C. B. 
Mason of the Freedmen's Aid Society, Dr. 
R. E. Jones of the Southwestern Christian 
Advocate, or Dr. P. O'Connell of Howard 
University. 
TH E COLORE D METHODIS T EPISCOPA L CHURC H 
Before the Civil Wa r Negro Methodists in 
the South were members of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church South. In many instances 
slaves and slave owners worshipped in the 
same churches, and in those cases where 
separate church buildings were provided for 
the slaves the pastors and Sunday-school 
teachers were white. Negroes of exceptional 
gifts were sometimes ordained as local 
preachers, and allowed to administer the 
sacraments under the direction of their white 
pastors. Noteworthy among those white 
pastors of Negro congregations was Bishop 
William Capers of South Carolina, who 
walked from plantation to plantation establishing missions for the slaves, and counted 
that the greatest work of his long ministry. 
This inscription is on the modest shaft that 
marks his resting place: 
"WILLIA M CAPERS , FOUNDE R O F 
MISSION S T O TH E SLAVES. " 
After the sudden and sweeping changes in 
the social and political relations of the races 
following the war it became necessary to 
organize a separate church for the more 
than 100,000 Methodist freedmen. Accordingly the General Conference of the Methodist, Episcopal Church South which met at 
Memphis, Tenn., in May, 1870, appointed a 
committee to confer with certain colored 
leaders with a view to organizing the col-32 TH E CRISI S 
ored churches into annual conferences and 
ultimately into a General Conference. In 
December of the same year, after the organization of five annual conferences, a General 
Conference was called. Bishop Robert 
Paine of the Methodist Episcopal Church 
South presided. The organization was named 
the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church. 
Two bishops were elected— R. H. Vanderhorst of South Carolina and W . H. Miles of 
Kentucky. Bishop Paine administered the 
right of ordination. By due process of law 
all church property that had been devoted to 
the exclusive use of the colored people was 
deeded by the Methodist Episcopal Church 
South to the Colored Methodist Episcopal 
Church. 
According to the statistics of 1911, the 
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church ranks 
twenty-first in the order of churches of 
America, fifth in the order of Methodist 
Churches and third in the order of Negro 
Methodist Churches. It has two hundred 
and thirty-four thousand seven hundred 
and twenty-one members, two thousand 
eight hundred and fifty-seven churches, 
two thousand nine hundred and one ministers, five general officers and seven bishops. 
It has church property valued at $2,525,000, 
school property valued at $300,000, and a 
publishing plant worth $75,000. 
The educational work of the church has 
experienced remarkable growth in recent 
years. The church supports four colleges 
and a number of secondary schools, and cooperates with the Methodist Episcopal 
Church South in the support of Paine College. 
When Governor Vardaman abolished the 
colored high school at Holly Springs, Miss., 
several years ago, Bishop Cottrell organized 
a church school in the same city, and has 
since collected from the Negroes of Mississippi more than $130,000 for buildings and 
running expenses. In a single rally in 
Alabama Bishop Williams raised $11,000 for 
Miles Memorial College, and in a few weeks 
after that Bishop Phillips raised more than 
$12,000 in Texas for Texas College, Tyler, 
Texas. Bishop Lane, who is now 78 years 
old, is still pushing the claims of Lane College, Jackson, Tenn. Because of the very 
poor public-school system for Negroes in 
Georgia, Bishop Holsey is urging the 
church to maintain a chain of preparatory 
schools. The Methodist Episcopal Church 
South contributes $20,000 a year to the 
educational work of the Colored Methodist 
Episcopal Church. Considerably more than 
half o f this amount goes to Paine College, 
Augusta, Ga., the school founded by the 
late George Williams Walker, and unique in 
that it has a faculty composed of colored 
and Southern white teachers, who work 
together harmoniously on terms of absolute 
equality. 
Previous to the General Conference of 
1910 the missionary work of the church was 
confined to the home field. At that conference a communication was received from 
the General Conference of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church South, in session at the 
same time, proposing that the two churches 
co-operate in establishing a mission post in 
Africa. It was further proposed that a 
committee of two, consisting of a representative from each church, be sent to Africa 
as soon after the conference as possible 
for the purpose of finding a suitable location for the mission. Bishop W . R. Lambuth of the Methodist Episcopal Church 
South and Dr. J. W . Gilbert of the Colored 
Methodist Episcopal Church were appointed 
to make this trip. They sailed for Africa 
last October, and are now in the Congo 
Beige, where in all probability the post will 
be established. 
The General Conference does not convene 
until 1914; therefore there are no well-defined 
issues before the church at this time, 
but there is deep interest throughout the 
church in the issues that will come before 
the General Conferences of other Methodist 
Churches this year. 
m 
THE ZION CHURCH. 
The A. M. E. Zion Church represents a 
revolt of the colored people of New York 
City against the discrimination in the 
Methodist Church. The revolt began late in 
the eighteeenth century, but did not become 
complete until the election of the first bishop 
in 1820. The quadrennial session of the 
church takes place in Charlotte, N. C , May 
1. The church has at present about one 
hundred and eighty thousand communicants, 
which is a falling off from its former membership. There seems to be a strong feeling 
that there is need of a radical reform within 
the church in several departments, especially 
with its financial affairs. Instead of having 
a central depository for all church funds, 
out of which the various departments receive 
their income, there has been in vogue a TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N CHURC H 33 
system by which the church taxes go directly 
to the different departments. This involves 
a great deal of additional expense and great 
difficulty of supervision, and a large element 
in the church wishes to establish a central 
board. The support of the widows, orphans 
and superannuated preachers is another 
pressing matter which calls for attention. 
It is also thought that some forward steps 
will be taken along the line of missionary 
enterprises. The educational work is perhaps the most satisfactory part of the work 
of the organization. Under the leadership 
of Mr. S. G. Atkins, the various schools and 
Livingstone College have increased in efficiency and strength. 
There are eight bishops on the full board; 
the vacancies in the board will be filled and 
there is some demand for an increase in 
number. Probably this will not take place, 
as the church can scarcely afford it. Besides 
the bishops, there are to be chosen the editors 
of the weekly paper, the Star of Zion, and 
of one or two other periodicals. 
m 
OTHER DENOMINATIONS. 
Outside the five main denominations 
mentioned above there are one hundred and 
fifty thousand colored members of the Catholic, Protestant Episcopal, Presbyterian and 
other white denominations. 
The status of the colored Catholic in the 
United States is not yet thoroughly settled, 
•but it is improving. After the unsuccessful 
attempt of Father Slattery of Baltimore to 
push the cause of the colored people, the 
subject was dropped, but has been recently 
revived by the interest of Sister Katherine 
Drexel and others. There are now four 
colored priests, several schools and a growing number of churches. 
The Episcopal Church has never been 
able to emerge from the slough of despond 
on this question into which its strong Southern constituency plunges it. Here is an old 
unusually intelligent colored membership 
with fifty or more well-educated priests. 
Over them are white bishops who (with a 
few exceptions) do not or cannot sympathize 
with their black membership or encourage 
their growth and development. A way out 
of this difficulty would be to have black 
bishops or at least black suffragan bishops. 
This is being urged, especially by Bishop 
Guerry in South Carolina, but the rector of 
St. Paul's, Charleston, says: 
"A member of an inferior race to be bishop 
of the Church of God would detract from 
the prestige of every bishop, the authority 
of every priest, the confidence of every layman, and would lessen respect for the church 
on the part of every man, white or black, 
on the American continent. The victory of 
Johnson over Jeffries demoralized the Negro 
race in a noticeable degree: the White 
House-Washington incident created hopes 
that can never be realized, yet the honors 
accorded the Negro race in both of the 
above incidents are trivial and negligible 
compared with the delusive ambitions which 
would be inspired by the elevation of a 
Negro to the company of the Holy Apostles. 
The Presbyterians as well as the Episcopalians have practically segregated all the 
colored members into separate churches; 
but the latter being largely self-governing 
have quite a number of virile churches, 
some splendid ministers, and considerable 
educational work in the South. 
The Twentieth Century, a magazine published in Boston, has an earnest article on 
the race situation, and says: "The present 
relations of the races are intolerable; justice 
to both demands that the Negro be allowed 
to become the best possible Negro. This 
cannot be done where a dominant race 
demands servility. Negroes who wish to 
colonize should be assisted; and the impulse 
might be given where these crimes are permitted. When a proved assault on a white 
woman occurs, the Negro population could 
be compelled to move to a Negro settlement. 
Where an unmistakable assault on a Negro 
occurs, the white population could be transported to a white settlement. The States 
would soon learn to co-operate, because only 
a few applications of this remedy would be 
necessary to induce very different relations, 
and subsequent emigrations could be entirely 
voluntary. In a nutshell—bind each race to 
keep the peace!" SELF-RIGHTEOU S EUROP E 
AN D TH E WORL D 
Correspondence with 
W. M. FLINDERS PETRIE, D.C.L., Litt. D., LL.D., F.R.S. 
Professor of Egyptology in the University of London 
DEA R SIR: I write to thank 
you for having said all you 
have in "The Souls of 
Black Folk." I have long 
wanted to grasp the Negro 
problem, and your prudent, 
balanced statement is very 
helpful As I am a stranger, I must say what 
my point of view is. It is as an anthropologist 
and historian; my work for over thirty 
years has been digging up the civilization of 
Egypt. Many years ago, when president of 
the Anthropological Section, North British 
Association, I made native races the subject of that meeting, insisting on the iniquity of crushing lower civilizations by 
Europeanizing natives. Later I did the Huxley lectures on migrations, mapping all the 
movements from 0—1,000 A. D. in Europe. 
The subject of race mixture is of special 
interest to me, and only this autumn I was 
addressing London journalists on the subject by request. Excuse my saying so much, 
just to show you my standpoint: It is that 
of native culture and rights, without European uniformity. 
Now I think it will be helpful to look at 
other cases which have some parallelism to 
the U. S. A. problem. Here in Egypt we 
have contact of many races. I will here only 
compare the native and the English. The 
difference of color is not much, a pure-bred 
Copt living indoors is lighter than I am living out of doors. There is no question of 
slavery giving a sense of inequality. There 
is no fear of yielding too much in a racial 
familiarity. All of these points are in favor 
of intercourse more than in U. S. A. 
Yet the veil is almost as complete as you 
find it to be. There is practically no social 
intercourse. I only know of one house, long 
since closed, where an educated native could 
meet socially with educated Europeans. 
Officials of high standing may be invited 
just as officials, or very wealthy cosmopolitan natives because of their influence, but 
the well-educated native gentleman is unknown outside of his office. All English 
officials are required to travel first class to 
avoid even sitting with natives. 
I only know of three mixed marriages 
with Christians. I doubt if the English 
partner was at all in the rim of society of 
her or his equals. Broadly, I should say that 
any marriage of English east of Greece 
would be a social bar; a Greek would be 
quite on the border line, depending on if 
they were brought up in England. 
Now this being the case round the Mediterranean, how can you expect any better 
state of society in U. S. A. ? The echo of 
slavery, the great difference of race and the 
pressure of the mulatto multitude must 
naturally make a thicker veil than even that 
of the Old World. I am not speaking personally in the least. I have had a black 
Indian parson living in my London house, 
for weeks, with the greatest pleasure to us 
all. I am just inviting a Japanese professor 
to stay. But, as Berkeley said, "The facts 
are as they are, and the consequences will 
be what they will be." The facts are that 
the English race all over the world insists 
on the veil; and, least of all in U. S. A., 
can you expect to find a more liberal 
exception. So much for our faults or 
peculiarities. 
Now let me turn to the Englishman's objections to the native. These will not necessarily apply in any case to the U. S. A. 
difficulties, but they will show what over here 
gives substance to this veil. I write from 
thirty years of close intercourse with my 
own workmen, of whom I am personally 
very fond, and who will come and join me 
anywhere to work with us. 
No Egyptian trusts another. Cheating 
over every transaction is the rule; an illiterate native expects to be cheated over every SELF-RIGHTEOU S EUROP E 3 5 
railway ticket he takes, over any telegram 
he sends. I have constantly found gross 
imposition going on. You must be hammer 
or anvil; and the native official of the smallest kind will bully when he can, or else 
cringe. Honest, self-respecting men are rare 
to meet. As soon as a native thinks that 
you have any kindness or consideration for 
him he at once tries to turn it into solid 
benefits, without the least notion that his 
doing so destroys the bond. I have learned 
to keep two entirely different manners for 
my men; as helpful and friendly as can be 
outside of the work, but on work the disobedience or any lie or cheating means 
instant dismissal, and no man dares to plead 
for another. This is the only road to respect and popularity. 
Education of book and memory sort is an 
injury in most cases. It depends on ancestry; the Arab is generally spoiled by it, the 
Copt, with a hundred generations of literary 
ancestors, is generally benefited. I should 
say that some technical and trade teaching 
and hygiene would benefit all. Not more 
than 5 per cent, would be the better for 
reading and writing, just to supply the 
minor official staff, but no useless subjects 
should be taught. Not more than one in 1,000 
would really benefit by higher education. 
To give more only produces a moral deterioration. Little ignoramuses, who are far below the ability of a small shopkeeper in 
England, will generally assume a complete 
equality, if not superiority, with a well-educated Englishman. It is their hopeless ignorance, which a little unfit schooling has only 
fostered. I often think that in England and 
elsewhere we most need in colleges a professor of ignorance, whose sole business 
would be showing the vast void in general 
knowledge, making students know how little 
they know, running over all the subjects 
that are not taught and making it felt how 
vast they are. 
Perhaps you know that there is a profound unbelief in all our educational routine 
in England. Those who can detach themselves enough feel that much of the aim and 
more of the method is wrong. It is all constructed for easy examining wholesale. The 
head of one of our great universities said, 
after a talk about some cases: "Well, X 
makes one doubt whether education is of any 
good, after all." Education in the formal 
lines will no more clear the Negro problem 
than freedom or voting, and to hold it 
up as a certain panacea will only end in 
another collapse of deception. 
Allow me to say—as a follow teacher— 
what lines Egyptian experience would suggest. It may have a bearing on your 
problem. 
Apart from reading the principles and 
underlying reasons of agriculture, elementary mechanics and the basis of political 
economy—that the maximum production 
must benefit all, and that production is more 
honorable than trading. For towns, mechanical teaching, instead of agriculture. 
With reading, biography and history, 
rather than literature; lives such as Livingston and the engineers; later, Plutarch; 
of course, Bible is taken for granted. Later, 
history of nations, not politics or constitutions, but social and economic. An admirable book would be part of Martin Hume's 
"The Spanish People," 1901, showing how 
false economics, pride and bigotry utterly 
ruined Spain. Parts of Mommsen's "History 
of Rome," showing the hopeless decay of 
parties and the inevitableness of economic 
change, would be equally good. English history is less useful, because it does not yet 
cross such great economic collapses as those 
of Spain and Italy, and the lessons which 
are most needed are not so obvious. All 
political ideals and figureheads should be 
kept in the background. We want men to 
make the most of the earth, before they are 
fired to waste themselves and their fellows 
in vain vaporings by reading of Gracchus 
or Washington. I doubt if any political 
agitation has ever gained as much as it has 
wasted. 
Now another line as to what may perhaps 
be the ultimate result of the Negro problem. 
In Europe all migration for a thousand 
years was from the East; yet the color map 
of Europe shows an even grading from the 
tow-haired blonde of the North to the curly 
black hair and black eyes of the South. Climate has completely conquered race. In no 
land have two different races existed side by 
side for 1,000 years without fusion. I cannot therefore doubt that a thousand years 
hence there will be an evenly graded American, from a white North to a black South. 
The only rational course is to help nature 
and make it easy for inevitable changes to 
take place. How can this be done? 
First the whites must be bought out, beginning with a State where there are fewest. In Ireland the policy of the last ten 36 TH E CRISI S 
years has largely succeeded, of a government loan to buy out landlords (at twentytwo years net rental), and to let to the tenant under government at a rental which will 
give proprietorship to the next generation. 
The educated men accustomed to business 
that are needed to carry out the details of 
management should be the successful Negroes of the North. Such a policy steadily 
carried on at every opportunity that offers, 
without any violence, would soon transform 
a State; the more were bought out the more 
would wish to leave. Looking at the rate 
of change in Ireland, I expect that the whole 
change in U. S. A. might be got through in 
a century, perhaps quicker. 
Of course, all land acquired thus must be 
inalienable, especially to Russian Jews. A 
law that no colored man can raise money 
on security of land or stock would settle 
that. In Egypt the money lender was an 
awful curse. It was the extortions of Greek 
usurers that caused the Arabi rebellion. 
Mommsen gives an awful picture of the 
wreck of the world caused by Roman usurers. 
Here the matter has been set pretty 
straight by a government agricultural bank, 
which lends at low interest on land or crops. 
If the borrower fails, another native gets in, 
and the foreign leech is kept away. You 
would need such an agricultural bank to get 
rid of "furnishing" and "cropping." 
In short, the example of other countries 
points to the policy of securing a State or 
a part of a State, solid black, no profits 
going to white men. Put all the pride of 
the Negro people into bringing that into the 
most successful economic condition possible. 
Make the prosperity of it the ambition of 
every Negro in U. S. A. ; extend this system by land purchase and agricultural 
banks as quickly as it succeeds, but never 
in advance of the solid economic stability of 
what is already in hand. Leave polities 
entirely alone until economic success is 
assured. When such a State is in flourishing 
order, then its black leaders will take their 
seats at Washington like any other State 
representatives. To concentrate the Negro 
aspirations on steady economic success in 
their own hands seems—from the example 
of other lands—to be the real solution of 
the miserable result of past crimes. 
I trust that you will forgive this intrusion 
o f one who can only look on from a distance; but the comparison with proven conditions in other cases may have its uses. The 
one great lesson which all history seems to 
me to teach is that character and economics 
are the only real forces. No laws or politics 
can stop their action; and the hindrances 
which false legislation may impose for a 
time are less loss in the long run than the 
economic waste of any violent action. 
Believe me, 
Yours truly, 
W . M. FLINDERS PETRIE. 
My Dear Sir: 
I thank you very much for your letter of 
January 3 and for your kind words concerning my book. Yo u will also permit me, 
I know, to comment on some of the matters 
upon which you have touched in your letter. 
The Englishman's objection to the native 
sounds very familiar to me. I can see nothing in the objection except the very human 
dislike for cheating and ignorance and lack 
of self-respect. This objection is worldwide and age old. The great point is, however, how to meet it, and I am sorry to see 
that apparently you sympathize with methods of meeting it which have been, to my 
mind, only too much in vogue during the 
world's history—the stern driving of men, 
the denial of education, and the general 
assumption that men must remain as they are 
for an indefinite time. To all these I take 
very serious exception. 
The direction of human beings in their 
work and development calls for ability and 
firmness, but does not call for that attitude 
which the white European and the white 
American take toward colored races. That 
attitude does not in the long run succeed in 
getting out of colored labor anywhere near 
the best that is in it. It engenders hatred, 
it leads to caste and disaster, and while it is 
based on a difference of character, it very 
easily is used on occasions when the only 
difference is a difference of color or form 
of nose. 
In the matter of education, again I think 
you make a mistake in common with the 
modern white world. What you say concerning the spoiling of primitive peoples by 
education is exactly the same thing that was 
said and is said in the United States. To 
educate the Negro was to spoil the plough 
hand. Educated Negroes never could 
amount to anything, etc. I know distinctly SELF-RIGHTEOU S EUROP E 3 7 
in my own case that there was strong advice 
given my parents and my people against 
educating me, and if your ideas had been 
carried out in the United States—and there 
are many people trying to carry them out— 
I should not be having the pleasure of communicating with you now. On the contrary, 
I should probably be the victim of that 
''manner" which you use to your underlings 
in Egypt. Whenever one tries by form of 
education to raise a people the percentage 
o f failure and mistake is going to be large, 
but such failure is no argument against the 
attempt, and, on the whole, it has been possible in the past, and it is possible to-day 
by means of education, to enable a group 
to take a short cut across a thousand years 
o f human culture and do in a generation 
what their fathers did in three or ten. 
I have seen in the Negro race here in 
America a good many cases of moral deterioration arising from education. It has been 
proverbial in the United States, not simply 
with colored people, but with white people, 
that the "second generation" is very apt to 
be spoiled, sometimes utterly ruined. But 
this is no argument against education. I 
know, of course, that the people in England 
are revolting against the English method of 
education, and in that they show their sense. 
There is a large revolt in the United States. 
Our methods of education have got to be 
improved undoubtedly, but that does not 
mean that the basis of education will not be 
in the future, as it has been to some extent 
in the past, the training of thought and 
ability by means of the truth. 
As to the course of study which you lay 
down for Egyptians, and which is quite similar to that which some people would lay 
down for my people in the United States, 
I object to it. I do not believe that "production" is more honorable than trade. 
Trade is production. I do not believe that 
any agricultural caste should be trained, and 
I do not believe that politics should be left 
out of the course of training. My thesis is 
proven, it seems to me, by applying it to 
the future of the Negro of the United 
States. 
You believe that the best thing would be 
a sort of segregation of the black population in a few States, so that from this population would have a chance to develop to its 
best unhampered, and yet you wish that 
population to have no education in politics 
and to leave politics alone. This seems to 
me a most remarkable prediction. How is 
this State to support itself, to think its 
way through its great social problems, to 
supply itself with a governing class, and do 
the thousand and one things that a modern 
State ought to do, if its folks have no education in politics? Moreover, if this people 
do all these things, what is going to keep 
them from becoming the victims of the 
greed of their white neighbors just as soon 
as they have anything that those white 
neighbors want? Or, in other words, you 
suppose on the part of white people an 
unselfishness and a desire to guide and help 
other races which white people have never 
exhibited, save in very exceptional and individual cases. On the whole, their conduct 
with other people has been about as disgraceful a chapter in history as history 
affords. 
Almost everything that you propose 
should be done for the colored people in 
this segregation they are already doing for 
themselves. They are buying land, and 
buying it without Government intervention, 
although Government intervention would 
greatly help them. They already have some 
forty banks which are supplying capital in 
small amounts, and they have, thank God, 
in spite of advice, too much sense to let 
politics alone, and it is their political power 
alone that keeps them from sinking to the 
state of the Egyptian fellahin. 
I know you will pardon this frank expression of my views. 
I beg to remain, 
Very sincerely yours, 
W. E. B. Du Bois. 
• • • Now, you propose to quote 
some of my letter. So far as you may agree 
with any of it, pray do so. But I should be 
very sorry to appear as if defending a state 
of feelings and relations which I was only 
describing to you in order to point out that 
it is general, and not peculiar to your difficulties. I do not wish, therefore, to be put 
forward as opposed to any of the activities 
which you so earnestly desire. With my 
sincerest wishes for your progress in the 
great cause, 
Believe me, 
Yours very sincerely, 
W. M. FLINDERS PETRIE. MRS MAR Y B. TALBER T 
President of the New York Federation 
THE work of the New York Federation 
A
 of Colored Women's Clubs is well 
worth noting. For many years there has 
been club work among colored women of the 
State. The Woman's Loyal Union has 
worked for twelve years or more under the 
leadership of Miss S. E. Frazier. The clubs 
have been federated for four years; for 
three of these years Mrs. F. R. Keyser. 
superintendent of the White Rose Home, was 
president. 
These clubs have been engaged in work of 
various sorts. When the needs of Harriet 
Tubman, the heroine of the Civil War. became known, the federation appropriated 
$25 a month to pay for a nurse, in addition 
to furnishing a room. The White Rose Home 
for Working Girls was founded by the late 
Victoria Earle Matthews, and is now eonducted by Mrs. Keyser. In the last fourteen MBS . M. JACKSON STUAR T 
Secretary of the New York Federation 
years it has sheltered over 5,000 young 
women. The Dorcas Home Missionary 
Society, under Mrs. Alice Wiley Seay, has 
done a great deal of local charitable work. 
The Susan B. Anthony Industrial Association, of Yonkers, N. Y., maintains a girls' 
friendly club, with classes in sewing and 
cooking, and gives a prize each year for the 
best essay on race history. The Y. W . C. A. 
is also a member of the federation, and provides a home for girls and religious service. 
It is hoping to erect a modern building soon. 
The Geneva clubs have been helping Southern education by sending clothing and maintaining scholarships. The Phillis Wheatley 
Club, of Buffalo, is working among neglected 
children and holding mothers' meetings. It 
has been active in placing books by Negro 
authors in the public library, and has the 
nucleus of a fund for establishing an old 
folks' home. TH E BURDE N 39 
The president of the federation is Mrs. 
M. B. Talbert, who has long been identified 
with every movement in Buffalo tending 
toward the advancement of her race. 
She is a member of the Association of Collegiate Alumnae, an officer of the Graded 
Teachers' Union, and president of the Christian Culture Congress, all of these being 
white organizations. Mrs. Talbert was a 
member of the first committee, appointed fifteen years ago, for the suppression of vice in 
Buffalo, and succeeded in sending a woman 
officer to the police station to be present 
every day. She has twice represented the 
National Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs before the National Council of 
Women. Under her administration the 
Empire State Federation has made notable 
progress. 
Mrs. S. E. Wilkerson is vice-president of 
the State federation and is interested in 
charities in New York and Brooklyn. Mrs. 
M. C. Lawton, the State organizer, has done 
much to establish clubs and is correspondent 
on one of the Brooklyn daily papers. The 
secretary of the federation is Mrs. Marie 
The White Rose Society Meeting Travelers 
Jackson Stuart, who is also a dramatic reader 
of genuine ability. 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITHOU T 
TRIAL. 
1S85 78 1899 84 
1886 71 1900 107 
1887 80 1901 107 
1888 95 1902 86 
1889 95 1903 86 
1890 90 1904 83 
1891 121 1905 61 
1892 155 1906 64 
1893 154 1907 60 
1894 134 1908 93 
1895 112 1909 73 
1896 80 1910 65 
1897 122 1911 63 
1898 102 
Total 2,521 
I N A "JI M CROW " CAR . 
General Passenger Agent, So. Rwy., 
Dear Sir: 
I write to inform you of the very disgraceful conduct of one of your conductors, 
and to illustrate to you the almost helpless 
condition of colored female travelers over 
your line. 
At 9:25 last Monday. December 18, I left 
Jacksonville for Washington, D. C. There 
were only two passengers in the colored 
compartment—a girl about 15 or 16 
years of age and myself. As the train 
left Jacksonville I fell asleep, but was awakened by the voice of the girl, just before the 
train reached Walthonville station. To my 40 TH E CRISI S 
astonishment, I found the conductor sitting 
beside the colored girl, who was crying 
"Stop ! Stop! " I was behind them, and 
walked up to the seat before the conductor 
saw me. I told him he ought to be ashamed 
of himself, being an old man and a white 
man, to say nothing of his position as conductor of the train. He replied, "Ashamed 
of what?" I said, "The way you were treating that girl " He merely said he "was just 
trying to tease her." 
The girl said that the man came to her 
uninvited and asked her if she had a sweetheart. She said he was a white man and 
she thought she had to answer him, and so 
told him "No. " Then he said, " I'll be your 
sweetheart," and sat down and tried to hug 
her. She said she turned her head toward 
the window and cried to him to stop. "But," 
she said, "he was so much stronger than I 
that I could not keep him off." It was her 
cry that awakened me. 
I report this to you with the hope that 
you will investigate it and give this man 
proper punishment. This is not, I am sorry 
to say, the first case of this sort I have witnessed over your road, though I confess 
never to have witnessed anything similar 
over any other road. 
Very respectfully, 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S RESENTMENT . 
SOME sort of a street quarrel occurred 
recently in Atlanta in which a white 
man and a colored woman were the principals. J. E. McJenkins, the man in the 
case, who had apparently gone to collect a 
bill, took offense at the Atlanta Journal's 
account of the disturbance and wrote a letter to the editor about it. "I approached the 
woman," he says, "and asked for what was 
due my company. She was very insulting 
from the beginning, and finally cursed me, 
using words not fit for publication. I did 
just as I believe any other white man would 
have done, resented the insult by striking 
her with the first thing I got my hands on." 
HISTORIC DAYS IN MAY 
1. Order given to create the Corps 
d'Armee of colored troops, 1863. 
5. Congress declared slave trade piracy, 
1820. 
6. South Carolina put duty on the importation of slaves, 1703. 
7. Toussaint L'Ouverture surrendered to 
the French, 1802. 
8. Thaddeus Stevens began debate in Congress on the Fourteenth Amendment, 1866. 
9. General David Hunter issued emancipation proclamation, 1862. John Brown 
born, 1800. 
10. Resolution proposing Fourteenth 
Amendment passed the House of Representatives, 1866. 
11. Slaveholders' convention at Vicksburg, 
Miss., favored the reopening of slave trade, 
1859. 
12. Louisiana adopted a revised constitution, 1898. 
13. Robert Smalls took the Confederate 
steamer "Planter" to the Union fleet, 1862. 
14. Total abolition of slavery in Brazil, 
1888. 
15. National Convention of France gave 
civil rights to mulattoes in Haiti, 1791. 
18. Abraham Lincoln nominated for 
President, 1860. 
19. Charles Sumner delivered in the 
Senate the speech entitled "The Crime 
Against Kansas," 1856. 
20. Toussaint L'Ouverture born, 1743. 
21. General Ulysses S. Grant nominated 
for President, 1868. 
22. Bureau to supervise organization of 
• colored troops established, 1863. 
23. Assault made on Port Hudson, 1863. 
24. William Lloyd Garrison died, 1879. 
25. William C. Nell, Negro anti-slavery 
worker and author, died, 1874. 
26. Boston town meeting favored abolition of slavery, 1701. 
27. Toussaint L'Ouverture won his first 
battle, 1795. 
28. Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Colored 
Regiment embarked for the South, 1863. 
29. President Johnson announced his 
plan of reconstruction, 1865. 
30. Employment of slaves as laborers in 
the Union lines authorized, 1861. 
31. John A. Andrews, war governor of 
Massachusetts, born, 1818. 
L. M. HERSHAW. The Testing Fire. Alexander Corkey. The 
H. K. Fly Company. 
This book is noteworthy for two reasons. 
First because it illustrates again how the 
race problem is furnishing material for 
modern literature, and, secondly, because it 
presents the point of view of a white nonAmerican toward the color question in the 
United States. Mr. Corkey even after living 
some years in the South is still unable to 
justify the attitude of the white Southerner. 
Here is a little anecdote in connection 
with tin's book. The reviewer happened the 
other day to be sitting in a car next to a 
young white girl who was deeply interested 
in a novel which proved to be "The Testing 
Fire." The following conversation ensued: 
Reviewer—"May I ask you a question?" 
Young White Girl—"Of course." 
Reviewer—"Did you get that book in a 
public library, or did you buy it? " (This 
to find out how the book was selling.) 
Young White Girl—"One of the girls in 
the store lent it to me. All the girls are 
reading it." 
Reviewer (tentatively)—"Do you like it?" 
Young White Girl—"Oh! I think it's 
grand!" (Hesitating a second.) "I think 
things would be a great deal better if everybody should read it." 
Suppose all "the girls in the store" hold 
the same view. Great things have their rise 
in small beginnings. 
The book is for sale in the book department of TH E CRISIS . 
m 
The Curse of Race Prejudice. James F. 
Morton. Published by the author at 244 
West 143d St., New York. 
This pamphlet is the last word on the 
baselessness and silliness of race prejudice. 
The author does not deal simply with the 
discriminations made against colored people, 
but with the injustices which all peoples 
under the ban have to endure in this enlightened age. It is surprising to find how many 
of these peoples there are. It would be 
encouraging, if the results were not often 
so tragic, to realize that causes other than 
color are responsible for the unpleasant 
attitude of the so-called superior race. 
Sometimes it is race and sometimes it is 
religion and sometimes it is caste. The 
queer thing is that what arouses prejudice 
in one community produces no effect whatever in another. Mr. Morton's keen mind 
and trenchant tongue do not fail to make 
the most of the absurdities of this condition. 
Ridicule that is based on fact constitutes a 
very effective weapon. 
The Lower Animal. Norman Duncan. Harper's Magazine, April, 1912. 
Whoever reads this story, be he white or 
black, must wince, though for widely different 
reasons. One shrinks from the roles of both 
master and man. To be a pitiful, abject, 
grovelling creature, or to be the force that 
transmutes human beings into this state— 
which is worse ? There's a problem! 
SI 
The Negro In Cleveland, Ohio. Frank U . 
Quillin in the Independent for March 7, 
1912. 
Mr. Quillin's little study is decidedly 
encouraging, even though a trifle patronizing. 
He shows that black and white Americans 
can live side by side in peace and comfort, 
and mutual self-respect. This article is 
one of a forthcoming series of articles on 
the condition of Negroes in Northern-cities. 
It is pleasant to note that the Independent 
in this same number voices its protest 
against the discrimination of the membership 
committee of the American Bar Association. 
WHA T T O REA D 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
HELP WANTE D 
WANTED—First-class stenographer with reference. 
Address C. B. Bailey, Box 371 , Charlotte, N. C. 
•Phone: Harlem, 637 0 
Middlesex Employment Agenc y 
Offers you the benefit of its experience, gained by 
years of actual conduct of business and the prestige 
that comes from a large clientele of satisfied 
patrons. 
Our rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standard high. Mail orders solicited. 
222 9 Fifth Avenue, near 136th Street, 
New York. 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the moat discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated. 
Address: 
MIS S I. L. MOORMA N 
46 3 Lenox Avenue New York 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
PATENTS 
L. H. LATIMER 
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEER 
and 
SOLICITOR OF PATENT S 
5 5 John Street New York 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machines Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone 34 3 John Boom 60 4 
MUSIC 
HELEN ELISE SMITH 
CONCERT PIANIST 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musical Art 
Pupil of Sigismund Stojowsky 
Teacher of Piano, Theory. Ear-training, etc. 
224 EAST 86T H STREET, NE W YOR K CIT Y 
INSURANCE 
Telephone 1393 Worth 
E. O. BUSSING 
Fire, Life, Plate Glass and Casualty 
Insurance 
320 BROADWA Y New York City 
Suite 723 
AGENTS WANTE D 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
40 0 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.2 5 net. 
Address: 
E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street New York 
AGENTS—$60 IN 6 DAYS 
This is the report of Mr. Edw. 
Carney, one of our Agents. 
Ton can do as well selling our 
Daisy Safety Razor. Sample 
by mail 25 cents. Per d02en 
$2.00—12 New Sharp Keen 
Blades 35 cents. All postpaid. Guaranteed. Money back 
if not as represented. Territory going fast. Start at once. Other money makers as well. 
Particulars free. 
BUSSING- WHEATON CO., Inc.. Dept. C 
23 Park Row New York 
WANTED—Me n and women to sell our hair goods 
and complexion creams. Olive Oil Pomade for the 
hair is a whirlwind seller; big sales assured; exclusive territory; few dollars to start; samples, 
50 cents; terms for 2-cent stamp. Writ e to-day. 
The SUMMERSETT-STARK COMPANY 
P. O. Box 34 3 Montclair, N. J., U. S. A. 
Folding BATH TUB 
Costs little, n o plumbing, requires little water. 
» Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lasts for 
years. Write for special agents offer and description. ROBINSON 
Mfg. Co.. -205, Adsms St .Toledo, 0. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
AGENTS WANTE D for the most rapid-selling Negro 
sheet pictures on earth; every man and woman 
will buy on sight—no talking—the pictures sell 
themselves. Write toda y for free sample and 
circulars. 
CRESCENT NOVELT Y CO. 
423 E. KING ST. BEDFORD CITY, VA. 
AGENTS make big money selling our Negro pictures, size 16 x 20. "Jesus Died for Both," 
' 'Clinging to the Cross," * 'Protecting Angel,'' 
' 'Booker T. Washington," "Heavenward," " A 
Mother's Joy,'' ' 'Inspiration,''
 1 'Mama, I Love 
You,' ' ' 'Jack Johnson.' 1 Catalog free. Peoples 
Portrait Co., 71 0 W . Madison St., Dept. C, 
Chicago, Ill. 
The Power of Womanhood 
By Joseph Wellington 
PRICE 20 CENTS 
Sold by 
THE STANDARD NEWS COMPANY 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENTS WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 4 3 
COPYING 
Have your sermons, addresses, etc., typewritten. 
5 0 cents for first copy, 25 cents for each additional 
oopy. Essays, etc., criticised and corrected. Mail 
orders given prompt atention. Address: 
MIS S C. E. BRIC E 
1001 School Street Darby, Fa. 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
REAL ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Large tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. W e have 
for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses ana barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
City property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Large 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities: 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. For any investment in Texas property, write T. B. Madison Real 
Estate Company, 241 5 Elm Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE—W e have houses from $1,00 0 to 
$30,000 . Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Can sell you a 
house for $50, $10 0 to $50 0 down, balance like 
rent. For investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,00 0 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Farm land prices from $1,00 0 
to $10,00 0 up. Any of these are in good locations. 
Write for further information. 
THI S I S A COLORED ENTERPRISE. 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Real Estate 
121 8 1/2, Mt. Verno n Ave . Columbus . Ohi o 
Telephone 421 4 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPING 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C 
Formerly Manager Virginia Transfer Company 
45 9 SEVENT H AVENU E New York City 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PER MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V. B. A. 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New York City 
Tel. 622 2 Cortlandt Cable Address, Juduwet 
FREDERIC K L. McGHE E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
102 0 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Office: Room 502, Eberly Block, Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia. Pa 
Tel. 202 6 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and CounseUor-at-Law 
34 SCHOOL STREET Boston, Mass. 
No . 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD, OHIO 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 44 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
$5 to $10 A DAY 
One Good hustling Agent Wanted in every community to take orders for our celebrated made-to-measure clothes. You make big 
WE START YOU FREE 
We furnish you with everything and place you in a business of your own that will mean from $1,500 to $3,000 a year to you. Easiest 
PANTS
 $
2.50 up 
SUITS
 $
9.00 up 
We prepay express. Every garment cut and made to measure in the latest city style, perfect fit guaranteed. money refunded if goods are not sat
Agents—Big Money 
Twelve Beautiful Post Cards for 10 Cents 
CONSISTS OF LOVE, BIRTHDAY, MOTTO, COMIC AND FLORAL DESIGNS. ALL DIFFERENT. SEND 10 CENTS IN SILVER AND RECEIVE TWELVE MOST B
CRESCEN T NOVELT Y CO. , 
423 E. King Street Bedford City, Va . 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
The original front stroke visible writing 
typewriter. 
A mechanical masterpiece and universal 
favorite. 
Underwood sales exceed those of any 
other machine. 
"The Machine You Will 
Eventually Buy" 
Underwood Typewriter Co. 
UNDERWOO D BUILDIN G NE W YOR K 
Selling our seven-piece combination kitchen set, 
made up of articles absolutely needed in every 
household- They sell on 
sight. Mr. Jarvis sold 
fifty sets in one day. 
Send $ 1 for sample. 
Sent prepaid so any address in United States 
or Canada. Also our 
improved Slidewel l 
Casters for chairs, which 
sell to everybody everywhere. Set of four sent 
postpaid for 15 cents . 
BUSSING-WHEATO N CO . 
23 PARK-RO W DEPT . A NE W YOR K 
Afro-American 
Correspondence 
School 
Offers a full Normal Preparatory Course, consisting of thoro
Afro-American Correspondence School 
280 8 St. Ann Street New Orleans, La. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Ten Years with Dr. D. C. White 
Telephone 7189 Morningside 
DR . JAME S A . BANK S 
DENTIST 
20 4 WES T 133d STEEET, NEW YOR K 
Porcelain, Crown and Bridge Work a Specialty 
Pure Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
26 6 West 53d Street New York, N. Y. 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 135th and 136th Streets 
Real Home Cooking; Meals Served at All Honrs. 
REASONABLE RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-Made Rolls Served Hot 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 45 
A PAGE OF ADVERTISEMENTS FOR WOMEN 
KELSEY'S 
Human Hair Goods and 
Hair Preparations 
Have stood the test for years. All 
the latest styles in Braids. Transformations, Puffs, Toupees, Wigs, etc., 
carefully matched to a sample of your 
hair, and beautifully made. Only the 
best hair used in manufacturing. 
KELSEY' S Hair Grower and Dressing, made of the purest Hair and 
Scalp foods, relieves the Scalp of all 
of the many diseases for which it is 
subject, causing the Hair to become 
soft and healthy, and POSITIVEL Y 
prevents its failing out. 
Puffs, Braids and Transformations, 
$1 up. 
Hair Grower and Dressing, $1. 
Send sample of hair for price quotaS . A . & A . C KELSE Y 
32 8 Leno x Avenu e Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Sunlight at Night 
Our new inverted gas burner, 300-candle-power light, made of steel enamelled white, with white crystal globe, burns 3 1.4 cubic feet of gas per hour. Perfect combustion, never smokes if properly regulated. Also our Sun-Ray Kerosene Mantle burners, 200-candle-power light. one quart of kerosene lasts 16 hours. Money back if not as represented. Particulars free. 
Simplex Gaslight Co.. Dept. C. New York 
Telephone 3253 Harlem 
CARPET CLEANING 
Cleaners and Renovators 
For Particular People 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets. rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the warld, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOING CARPETS AN D 
SPECIALT Y 
RUGS OUR 
Odessa Millinery 
41 W . 135th Street Ne w York 
Started as the first; still leading 
in all advanced Parisian Millinery. 
Telephone 62 4 Harlem 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cora Van Schoick is conduction a sale and 
exhibit of unusual interest at the WHIT E ROSE 
MISSION, 217 East 86th Street, New York. 
There is on sale hand-painted china and pillow 
tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive for 
gifts and interior decorations. 
SOMETHING NEW 
Our buffet lamp, all brass, burns 
kerosene. Suitable for all social functions. Repousee. brass shade. Linen 
cuirass lining with silk fringe in six 
colors; makes a beautiful gift. Useful as night lamp. Stands 11 inches 
high and is weighted at bottom so 
as to stand. A very fine table decoration. By mail, postpaid, 60 cents 
each. Per dozen. $6. 
GASLIGH T COMPAN Y 
NE W YOR K 
S. A. KELSEY , Pres. DR. WM . J. CARTER, Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KEI.SEY . Gen'l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Lenox Avenue, New Yor k City 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Beauty Culture, Hair Making and Chiropody scientifically taught. Day and night sessions. Instructions given to pupils in 
their own homes if desired. Diplomas awarded. Send for booklet-directory of recently 
graduated students. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
SIMPLE X 
DEPT . A. 46 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Too , Too ! Too , Too ! Too , To o 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
For particulars write G. W . BLAND , H . S. P. 
COMFORT—Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE—I n the hotel and dining room the "Marshall" service is an exceptional 
feature, which assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating. 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon, 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinner Every Sunday and Holidays. 50c. 
Telephones 4693-4694 Columbus J. L. MARSHALL , Proprietor 
GOO D COMMISSIO N PAID T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOIN NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
110 1/2 Colfax Ave. , South Bend, Ind. 
A limited number of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Other ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Private rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.0 0 to $30.0 0 per 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Five thousand dollars endows a freebed. 
Andrew F. Stevens 
President 
Nathan F. Mossell, 
M. D. 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 4 7 
The National Religious Training 
School and Chautauqua 
extends a cordial greeting to the ministers of all denominations 
to be the guests of the School for one week, beginning July 
6, 1912 , for the purpose of discussing the following and 
kindred questions: 
Wha t is the moral condition of the people in your community? 
Is crime on the increase? If not, what was the cause of its 
reduction ? 
Wha t is the sanitary condition? Wha t effort, if any, has 
been made to improve the sanitary condition? 
Is the death rate increasing? 
T o what extent do you co-operate with the Civic Improvement 
Leagues? 
Ha s settlement work been conducted to any extent in your 
community, and with what results? 
Wha t has been the effect of Temperance Organizations, and 
have you co-operated with them? 
T o what extent has the work of the Y . M . C . A . and 
Y . W . C . A . been effective in your community? D o 
you approve them? 
Wha t is the general fitness of the city and country school 
teacher? 
Wha t has been the attitude of the day-school teacher toward 
the Church and Sunday School? 
Wha t is the real religious condition of your people? Revivals, 
how conducted? 
Al l ministers who intend attending this Conference should 
make it known at an early date, addressing the President, so 
that reservation can be made for them. 
Th e Summer School and Chautauqua of the National 
Religious Training School will open July 3 , 1912 , and 
continue for six weeks. The most complete and most up-todate Summer School for the Colored Rac e in the United 
States. For particulars and terms address 
Presiden t JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
DURHAM , N . C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 4 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Publishers' Chat with Readers 
NE W DRES S 
W e trust our readers will like our new dress, with its larger type and improved 
arrangements. Naturally, we feel a trifle unfamiliar to ourselves, but we are sure 
we shall like ourselves better in the end. 
OFFICES—Th e new offices are busy with painter and carpenter, and we 
have solemn promises for the first of May. Remember, 2 6 Vesey Street. 
TH E JUN E CRISIS—Th e June CRISI S will be devoted primarily to the 
Fourth Annual Conference of our Association at Chicago, with articles by Oswald 
Garrison Villard, Abdul Baha, I. W . Rubinow, late of the Russian Civil Service, 
and Jane Addams. 
BOOKS , ETC . —D o not forget our book and mail-order departments. 
W e can buy for you any book for sale on any subject at a price as low as 
anyone and often lower, also anything else buyable. 
ADVERTISING—"Wh y do you not run the advertisements of the 
large advertisers of safety razors, talking machines, soaps and the like?" This 
we are often asked. W e answer frankly—these advertisers require two things: 
A large circulation and honest methods. The first requisite we are getting slowly 
but surely. W e expect a circulation of 50,00 0 before next Christmas. 
The second requisite we already possess. N o dishonest advertisement shall 
find its way into our columns if we know it. Sometimes, indeed, we unwittingly 
start to refuse our friends. A n investment corporation in Mississippi sent us a new 
proposition at which we looked askance. W e were about to ask references when 
bank references of satisfactory sort came to hand. The advertisement went in. 
When we can add a hundred thousand of circulation to an honest policy, we 
expect the big advertisers to call us up. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 4 9 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMENT of COLORED PEOPLE 
OFFICES: Suite 311 . 2 0 Vesey Street. New York. Incorporated May 25 . 191 1 
OFFICEES 
National President—Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr . John E. Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters. New York. 
Rev. Garnet B. Waller, Baltimore, Md. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E. Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W . E. B. Du Bols, New York. 
Secretary— Miss Mary W . Ovington, Brooklyn, 
N. Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Martha Gruening, 
New York. 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
W e want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO E TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in 
Class paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. Class i. Contributing Members, paying 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. $10, $5 or $2 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 
per year. per year. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
Members paying $5 or more will receive TH E CRISIS on signifying their wish 
that $1 of their dues be devoted to that purpose. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOB TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
OF COLORED PEOPLE, 20 VESE Y STBEET, NE W YOR K CITY. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
MEMBERSHI P 
4 6 7, APRI L 1, 1912 
50 0 
JOI N U S 
100 0 
200 0 
1500. 
OUR 
CLOCK 5 0 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Make Your Spare Moments 
Profitable 
IJ Th e continued growth of Th e CRISIS necessitates the extension of 
our field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish 
sub-agencies and look after renewals. 
•J If you can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
in your city, we can make you a proposition that will interest you. Th e 
work is dignified as well as profitable. 
^ ==== = ADDRES S BUSINESS MANAGE R ^^ === ^^^ = 
THE CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NEW YORK 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
YOUR LOCAL PRINTER 
may be able to do your ordinary printing, but your business and 
personal stationery, wedding invitations, calling cards, pamphlets, etc., 
require that particular attention which our experience and facilities 
afford you. 
A s first-class printers in Ne w Yor k City, we are subject to the 
most exacting demands, since new designs and type formations must be 
constantly originated to satisfy a large clientele of most discriminating 
patrons. 
W e refer you to Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print Th e Crisis. 
Writ e for samples and special quotations. 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T - NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox "HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New Yor k 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Wit h a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapter I. How the colored people won their civil and political rights. 
Chapters II. and III. The Negro tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV. and V . How the colored man earns his living, with a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . The colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivid description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapter VIII. The Negro in politics in New York. 
Chapter IX. The author's personal views on the race question. 
•Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS , GREE N & CO., Publishers, NE W YOR K 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of The Crisis, 26 Vesey St., Ν. Y . 
The TESTING FIRE 
By ALEXANDE R CORKE Y 
Author of "The Victory of Allan Rutledge" 
Is the Sanest Story Eve r Written on the Race Problem 
It is the first story ever written on the race 
question, by a white man, that is not antagonistic 
to the colored race. 
EVER Y FREEDMA N SHOUL D REA D IT 
Through its pages runs a sweet romance, but 
it is more than a love story. It is a novel of 
uplift, accomplishment and promise. 
N o One Interested in the Rac e Question Should Miss It 
Pric e $1.25 Net ; Postage 10 Cents Extr a 
The H . K . FL Y COMPANY , Publishers 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of TH E CRISIS , 
26 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS. This magnificent hotel, replete with every modern improvement, claims distinction for its 
location; direct Southern exposure. Superlative in construction, appointments, service 
and refined patronage. Endorsed by leading representative citizensConcerts daily by the Abyssinia orchestra. Garage, bathhouses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. Literature and information mailed upon 
request. 
E . W . DALE , Cape May , N . J. , Owne r and Proprietor 
Invest Your Money in Mound Bayou 
Many fortunes have been made in Mound Bayou during its twenty-year 
growth. Not only those who had plenty of money to invest, but also the small 
investor who had staked his savings on his confidence in Moun d Bayou's future. 
It is therefore true that the city of Moun d Bayou, where the scope of Negro 
enterprise is unlimited, offers the investor reasonably sure returns on his money. 
In financing and promoting the PEOPLE' S BRIC K COMPAN Y of this 
city, we believe we can offer investors an opportunity as certain of returns as 
honest, experienced management can make it. Fo r in manufacturing brick there 
is no great expense and no danger of overcrowding the market with a perishable 
stock, and we were fortunate in securing land suitable for making brick near the 
Y . M . & V . Railroad, which affords us an inexpensive outlet to the market. 
Th e Stock Books of the PEOPLE' S BRIC K COMPAN Y are now open for 
a limited time, as we need money for operating expenses. 
W e invite the most careful scrutiny into our experience and integrity. 
Writ e to-day for testimonials and prospectus. 
Security Investment and Enterprise Corporation 
Reference : Bank of Mound Bayou MOUN D BAYOU , MISS . 
Mention THE CRISIS. 