The CRISIS 
Vol. 10—No.2 JUNE, 1915 Whole No. 56 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENTS A COPY A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silver Fleece, " "Select Bibliography of 
the Negr o American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 5 0 cents net—By mail 5 6 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new boo k is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new book s with which everybod y should become acquainted. 
These books may be obtained from The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r 50c. net 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sol d separatel y -
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc B y G K Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
94 volumes now ready. Send for a list 
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY 34 W. 33d Street New York 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE . A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Busineaa Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Anociation for the Advancement ol Colored People 
Contents for June, 1915 
PICTURE S 
COVER. "Summer." Photograph from Life. By C. M. Battey Page 
CARTOON . "The Next Colored Delegation to the White House" 
By Lorenzo Harris 96 
ARTICLE S 
TH E ZEITGEIST. A Poem. By Leslie Pinckney Hill. Illustrated 
By The Art Department of Wilberforce University 
FIGHTING RAC E CALUMNY . Part II 
BIRDS AN D MANUSCRIPTS. By May Effie Lee .. . 
TH E GOLDEN-HAIRED MAIDEN. A Story. By Sidney E. Dickinson 
THF CIRCULATION OF TH E CRISIS 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLOR LINE 59 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 65 
OPINIONS 69 
EDITORIAL 78 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 85 
LETTER S 94 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 
82 
87 
89 
92 
97 56 TH E CRISIS 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the folowing departments: 
Colege, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KN(1XVT1.LE . TEMN . 
State Summer School 
Sixteenth Annual Session 
will begin July 5, 1915 at 
the Agricultural and Technical College, (formerly 
A. & M. College) and continue five weeks. 
Write for catalog. 
Secure lodging in advance. 
Address 
J. H. BLUFORD, Director 
STATE SUMMER SCHOOL 
GREENSBORO, NORTH CAROLINA 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , President 
Mention T 
ADVERTISE R 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St 
Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
AVOID BA D SCHOOLS 
Educate your children at home under our expert teacher* 
Course s fo r Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Writ e to 
EDUCATIONAL EXTENSION School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
C. W. Morrow, Acting President. 
E CRISIS 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A, 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
ml successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 57 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV. DR. C HARLE S H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-dav 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school will not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but will open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuition is free. 
Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal 
Mention THE CRISIS 58 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACING AND 
VOICE- DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25 , 1912: 
"Dear Mr . Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y. : "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W. , Washington, D. C. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, Ill.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill, 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS* AGENCY 
Through us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B. F. BOWLES , MANAGER. 
2739 CONVERSE AVENUE EAST ST. LOUIS, Ill. 
PUBLISHER'S CHA T 
The July number of The CRISI S will be the annual Education Number. All news of Negro colleges, and of colored students winning distinction 
anywhere will be welcome if received before June 5
E. ALDAM A JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
CONCERT SOLOIST 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES, Soprano 
For terms write 126 West 134 Street, New York City 
Statement of the Ownership, Management, Etc. 
of 
THE CRISIS 
Published monthly at 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, 
required by the act of August 24, 1912. 
Editor: W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Managing Editor: W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Business Manager: Augustus Granvile Dill, 70 
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Publisher: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fifth Avenue, New 
York City. 
Owners: The National Association for - the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation with no 
stock. 
Moor field Story, President. 
May Childs Nerney, Secretary. 
Joel E. Spingarn, Chairman Board of Directors. 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Treasurer. 
Known bondholders, mortgagees and other security holders, holding 1 per cent or more of total 
amount of bonds, mortgages or other securities: 
None. 
A. G. Dill, Business Manager. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 29th day 
of March, 1915. 
Edward J. Breden, 
Notary Public. 
Kings County No. 101. 
New York County No. 113. 
New York Register No. 6233. 
School Teachers Wanted 
We can place 3000 school teachers who wish to 
be pleasantly and profitably employed during their 
vacation time. 
Write us today for full information and free circular reproductions of our specialties. 
We will appoint you our representative and show 
you how to make from $2.00 to $10.00 per day and 
be your own boss. 
Agents wanted everywhere. Special offer for 
ministers. 
DOUGLAS SPECIALTIES CO. 
3548 Vernon Ave. (Dept. K) Chicago. Ill. 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 10 -No . 2 JUNE, 1915 Whole No. 56 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
MISS RACHE L WALKER , soprano, of Cleveland, Ohio, who has 
spent several years in musical activity in 
Paris and London, was heard in a Song 
Recital at Lincoln Temple, Washington, 
D. C , early in March. Her numbers 
included songs from Rossini, Schumann, 
Rogers, Burleigh and Coleridge-Taylor. 
The sympathetic accompaniments played 
by Miss Mary L. Europe, added to the 
pleasure of the evening. Miss Walker 
has sung before and been complimented 
by Her Majesty, the Queen of Spain; 
H. R. H., the Duchess of Albany; The 
Gaekwar of Baroda and Massenet and 
Saint-Saens, the great modern French 
composers. 
<T The Nalle Jubilee Singers, formed "to 
perpetuate in all their original simplicity 
and beauty, the old plantation melodies 
as sung by the Fisk singers," gave a 
concert at the First Congregational 
Church, Washington, D. C , on April 27. 
Mr. Harry A. Williams is the Director 
and Miss Mary E. Nalle of Washington, 
D. C , the efficient manager. 
C Of the lecture-recital given before 
the "Woman's Book Review Club" of 
Dorchester, Mass., on April 19th, the 
Boston Transcript says: 
"Miss O'Hara, chairman of the music 
committee, presented Mrs. Maud CuneyHare, lecturer and pianist. Mrs. Hare's 
lecture dealt with the history of 'African and Afro-American Music,' in the 
illustration of which she was assisted by 
Mr. William H. Richardson, baritone; 
her charming personality, her simple 
manner of speaking, combined with her 
artistic performance as a pianist both in 
solo work and as an accompanist, won 
the admiration of her audience. Mr. 
Richardson's rendering of 'Steal Away' 
and 'Pauvre Petite Lolotte,' a Creole 
love song, was full of pathos and sympathy." 
C In a contest to represent the State of 
Massachusetts in the National competition for an appearance at the meeting of 
the National Federation of Music Clubs, 
to be held at Los Angeles, CaL, Mr. 
Roland W. Hayes, Boston, had the honor of being the chosen tenor. The selections were made by such judges as 
Dr. Karl Muck, conductor of Boston 
Symphony Orchestra; Arthur Foote, 
composer; Charles Adams White and 
Wendell H. Luce. 
flT 'The Atonement," an 'Oratorio, by 
Coleridge-Taylor, was presented on 
March 31, at the Fifteenth Presbyterian 
Church, Washington, D. C , for the benefit of the N. A. A. C. P. 
| [ Of the performance of Handel's 
"Messiah," by the People's Choral Society of Philadelphia, under the directorship of Mr. Alfred Hill, at Music 
Fund Hall, in March, the Philadelphia 
(daily) Ledger says: 
"For sympathetic musical understanding and intrinsic vocal appeal, there are 
few organizations that offer better in 
this city." 
f[ The Elijah Chorus of Boston, Mass., 
gave Mendelssohn's "Elijah" at its first 
concert in Jordan Hall on April 13. The 
Boston Herald says of the concert: 
"Mr. Harry T. Burleigh of New York, 
baritone soloist, sang Elijah with splendid feeling and power." 
C Among important recent publications 
Along the Color Line 60 TH E CRISIS 
of Ricordi & Co., are "Five Songs of 
Laurence Hope," for solo voice with 
piano accompaniment, by Harry T. Burleigh. In a prefactory note, Mr. H. E. 
Krehbiel, music critic of the.. New York 
Tribune, writes that—"They are artists' 
songs, in which singer and pianist are 
paired in a lovely union and engaged in 
a mission calculated to warm the feelings of those who contemplate it." 
(I An incident to be deplored is the accidental death by drowning, of Leon 
Laviaux, the young Creole poet, who 
was drowned off Martinique on April 
7th. Mr. Laviaux was the author of 
two books—"The Ebon Muse and Other 
Poems," published in 1908 and Englished by John Myers O'Hara in 1914, 
and "Poemes En Noir," published in 
1914. 
([ The Mozart Society, the celebrated 
organization of Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn., recently rendered the "Elijah" with Harry T. Burleigh and Ro ­
land W. Hayes as soloists. 
([ The classes in English of Wilberforce 
University have given two "Evenings 
with Sir Walter Scott," under the direction of Miss Hallie Q. Brown. 
([ Miss Carriebel Cole gave a physical 
training exhibition in her school in 
Brunswick, Ga., which was highly commended. 
([ Mr. Harry T. Burleigh, Clarence C. 
White and Mr. Melville Charlton appeared in concert under the auspices of 
the People's Forum of the A. M. E. 
Zion Church. York, Pa. 
([ Lynden H. Caldwell, of Syracuse 
University, gave a piano recital at 
Cleveland. qjej 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
A BILL to prohibit the marriage of 
•*• white and colored Americans has 
been defeated in the committee in the 
Illinois legislature. 
([ William Hale Thompson, the newly 
elected Mayor of Chicago, attributes his 
nomination and election to the efforts of 
the colored voters. In this same election 
Oscar DePriest, a colored man, and formerly county commissioner, was elected 
to the board of aldermen. He is the 
first colored man to sit in that body. 
ftT In Muskogee. Okla., for the first time 
Negro and white ministers have met in 
joint session and appointed joint committees for charity work and church 
work. 
([ The "Elimination of Prejudice" will 
be a subject of discussion at the Bahai 
congress in San Francisco. 
([ A colored man has, for the first time, 
received a license to operate a moving 
picture machine in Savannah, Ga. 
([ Social dances have been prohibited in 
the Chicago public schools on account of 
the segregation of white and colored 
pupils. 
([ At the breaking of ground for the new 
colored Y. M. C. A. building at Cincinnati, Ohio. Congressman S. D. Fess was 
the principal speaker. 
([ Lieutenant-Governor T- A. Burnquist 
denounced discrimination against the 
Negro before a woman's club in St. 
Paul, Minn. 
C I The Secretary of Wa r has sent the 
following letter to the Ninth Cavalry: 
By direction of the President, I take 
great pleasure in expressing to the officers and enlisted men of the 9th Cavalry 
his appreciation of their splendid conduct and efficient service in the enforcement of the United States neutrality 
laws at Naco, Arizona, during November, December, and January, last. 
([ The Grand United Order of Odd Fellows is raising a fund to help the destitute families of their white English 
brothers who have been killed in the 
war. 
([ The new excursion steamer "Starlight" has made its initial trip for the 
season at Baltimore on the Captain 
Brown. 
([ The colored retail grocers of southeastern Virginia have formed a trade as" 
sociation. 
([ The Hon. Charles W . Anderson, former Collector of Internal Revenue in 
New York City, was given a large testimonial dinner at Manhattan Casino. 
Many prominent persons of both races 
were present. juej 
MEETINGS 
PRESIDEN T FALLOW S of the ILlinois Emancipation Commission 
objects to The Crisis' criticism of their 
preparations. He says that the exposition will be held in the Chicago Coliseum, August 22nd, 1916; that the Na-ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 61 
tional Medical Association, the Elks, the 
Illinois Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs and several other organizations 
will meet the same time. There will be 
several congresses including the National Baptist Convention together with tableaus and song festivals. He incidentally informs us that it will be "the greatest exposition of its kind in the world's 
history." 
C The State Negro Business League of 
Alabama has met in Birmingham. 
([ The Tri-State Dental Association of 
the District of Columbia, Maryland and 
Virginia has held its second annual session at Buckroe Beach, Va. The association is the largest in the United States 
among colored people. 
EDS 
EDUCATION 
f~\ ONE hundred and thirty colored doctors were recently graduated from 
Meharry Medical College. Nashville, 
Tenn. 
C The colored people have been complaining of the conditions in the Atlanta 
public schools. 
"Our Negro grammar schools are 
badly crowded. As an illustration we 
have— 
In Gray street school, 455 seats for 
708 pupils. 
In Mitchell street school, 514 seats for 
847 pupils. 
In Pittsburg school, 331 seats for 560 
pupils. 
In Roach street school, 442 seats for 
748 pupils. 
In Summer Hill school, 516 seats for 
846 pupils. 
In Houston street school, 693 seats for 
794 pupils." 
As a reply to this the eighth grade has 
been entirely cut out of the colored public schools! 
([ The Governor of Arkansas has closed 
the Branch Normal School, a colored institution. The students struck because 
it was charged that the white superintendent insulted one of the colored girls 
with indecent proposals. 
C The Arkansas Negro Teachers' Association has issued a school journal— 
"Arkansas School News " to be published monthly. Its first appearance was 
in February. 
C The New Orleans property of the 
Southern University, a colored institution, recently removed from New Orleans to Baton Rouge, has been bought 
by the Catholic Church and will be conducted as a Negro school. 
C The colored teachers' association of 
Alabama held a three days' session in 
Birmingham. 
CI A conference on colored school children in New York City has been held by 
the Public Education Association. 
C Ex- President Taft presided at the 
forty-seventh anniversary of Hampton 
Institute. 
C More than 500 colored teachers attended the annual meeting of the Middle Tennessee Colored Teachers' Association. 
C The New Orleans School Board will 
hold a summer normal school of colored 
teachers from June 14th to July 23rd. 
C Fifteen hundred colored farmers attended the twenty-first annual closing 
exercises of Snowhill Institute, Ala. 
C The city school board has refused to 
appoint colored medical inspectors for 
the colored schools of Norfolk, Va. 
C The interscholastic debate between 
Bluefield, Storer and Christiansburg was 
won by Christiansburg. The subject 
was the fortification of the Panama 
Canal. 
C Howard University College Dramatic 
Club has presented Shakespeare's "Merchant of Venice." 
C Atlanta University and Fisk University have both been defeated by Howard 
University in debate. The subject was 
"Resolved that the United States should 
guarantee immediately independence to 
the Philippines." 
C Virginia Union University is planning 
to celebrate her fiftieth anniversary, or 
rather the fiftieth anniversary of its two 
constituent schools, Wayland Seminary 
and Richmond Institute. 
C The Kentucky Negro Educational Association has held its thirty-sixth annual 
meeting in Louisville. Among the 
speakers were the United States Commissioner of Education, President H. T. 
Kealing, Dean L. B. Moore and Mrs. 
Mary B. Talbert. 
C The Louisiana State Colored Teachers' Association met in Baton Rouge. 62 TH E CRISIS 
TH E CHURCH 
' I ' THE great annual meeting of the 
Baptist Sunday School Congress 
will be held at Birmingham, Ala., June 
9th. Thousands of delegates are expected and special trains will be run. Mr. 
Henry A. Boyd of the National Baptist 
Publishing House is in general charge. 
C The African M. E. Church is feeling 
the stress of war times in its income. 
During the fiscal year which ended 
March 31st, 1914, it collected $221,277. 
The receipts during the last year were 
$208,000. 
C The colored Episcopal clergy of South 
Carolina who asked for a Negro suffragan bishop last year have withdrawn 
their request which the white bishop had 
endorsed. The reasons for this withdrawal are not clear. 
C A white church at Mesick, Wexford 
County, Mich., has called the Rev. Nathan Pritchard, a colored man, to be its 
pastor. It has a membership of nearly 
100 and belongs to the Free Methodist 
denomination. 
m 
ECONOMICS 
rT"v
 THE United States Industrial Commission has been investigating the 
wages of Pullman porters. They receive $27.50 a month and buy their own 
uniforms. This means that they must 
depend largely upon tips for support. 
Robert T. Lincoln, son of Abraham Lincoln, explained that the company was 
doing much "to uplift colored men." The 
commissioners referred to the porters as 
"coons" and in general the investigation 
was most informing. 
([ The colored Forsyth Savings and 
Trust Company of Winston-Salem, N. 
C , has paid in capital of $12,000 and deposits of $40,000. It has done a business of three million dollars since 1907. 
CO f the total number of 7,317,922 Negroes 10 years of age and over, enumerated in 1910, 5,192.535, or 71 per cent, 
were reported as gainfully employed, the 
percentages for males and females being 87.4 and 54.7 respectively. The corresponding percentages for native whites 
were 77.9 and 19.2. Of the gainfully 
employed Negro males, 30.9 per cent— 
almost one-third—were farm laborers, 
and 25 per cent were farmers. The 
other leading occupation groups for Negro males, with the percentage of the 
total represented by each, were as follows: laborers, building and hand 
trades, 5.2; laborers, saw and planning 
mills, 2.9; laborers, steam railroad, 2.7; 
porters, except in stores, 1.6; draymen, 
teamsters, and expressmen, 1.6; coal 
mine operatives, 1.2; laborers, porters, 
and helpers in stores, 1.2; waiters, 1.1; 
laborers, road and street building and 
repairing, 1.1; cooks, 1.0; deliverymen, 
stores, 1.0; carpenters, 1.0. 
For females, the leading capacities in 
which employed, with the percentage 
represented by each, were as follows: 
farm laborers, 48.1; laundresses (not in 
laundry), 17.9; cooks, 10.2; farmers, 
3.9; dressmakers and seamstresses (not 
in factory), 1.9; school-teachers, 1.1. 
CTh e recent census bulletin on the Negro shows five important facts: 
First. An increasing tendency toward 
home ownership among the Negroes. 
Second. A marked increase in the percentage of school attendance. 
Third. A pronounced decrease in the 
percentage of illiteracy. 
Fourth. A decrease in the mortality 
rate. 
Fifth. An increase in the proportion 
of church membership. 
C The Philadelphia Tribune says: 
"Philadelphia ought to be a pleasant 
place in which to live after some 45,000 
people have been converted in a short 
time, and those 45,000 are working for 
the conversion of others. 
"The Philadelphia Traction Co., awakening to the fact that colored people help 
to swell their daily income, decided as a 
matter of business fairness, to employ a 
few of them as motormen. The white 
conductors and motormen say they will 
'strike,' if colored men are employed. 
They fulfill their threat. But some cars 
are runnng, manned by colored conductors and motormen. 
"The next step? A mob is formed to 
prevent the cars from moving. Colored 
men who attempt to take the cars out 
from the barns are dragged off and beaten in the most brutal fashion, in spite 
of the presence of the public. But who 
are among the leaders of this mob, proving that the right to run one's business 
in his own way may exist as 'a scrap of ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 63 
paper' in theory, but not in practice? 
The late converts of the Rev. Mr. Sunday !" 
PERSONAL 
Vf MR. BOOKE R T. WASHINGTO N 
i ™ i
 delivered an address before the 
Bloomington Normal School in Illinois 
to a large audience, and several addresses in New York City. 
C Dr. A. P. Camphor is the only colored 
man among 80 delegates appointed by 
the Governor of Alabama to the Fourth 
Annual Convention of the Southern Sociological Conference held at Houston, 
Texas. 
([ Harris Barrett, cashier of Hampton 
Institute, died recently. He was the 
founder of the People's Building and 
Loan Association in which Negroes invested over $100,000 and bought over 
490 homes. 
C The flag of the Kansas State House 
was put at half mast on the death of the 
colored janitor, Tolliver Bird, who had 
served for thirty years. 
C Lawrence Johnson, of Portsmouth, 
Ohio, has been appointed night turn-key 
at the City Hall. 
C Mrs. Ann Dickson, mother of Dr. R. 
H. Boyd, of the National Baptist Publishing Board, died recently at the age 
of ninety-five. • She was the mother of 
ten children with hosts of grand children. 
C Quartermaster Sergeant Isaac Bailey 
has been retired after thirty years service in the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry. 
C George W. Blackwell has been appointed assistant prosecuting attorney in 
the city of Chicago. 
C Scipio A. Jones was appointed special 
judge in the Little Rock, Ark., Municipal Court in an assault case. 
C The American Magazine has in its 
May number an article on Mrs. Dismukes, the head laundress of Fisk University who gave a thousand dollars toward the music building of that institution. 
C Mr. G. F. Richings. a white man widely known among colored people as a lecturer on Negro progress, has recently 
died. 
C More than one hundred women of 
Boston and vicinity recently met at Dr. 
Hale's church to honor Mrs. Charlotte 
Hawkins Brown, the founder of Palmer 
Memorial Institute, Sedalia, N. C. Miss 
Brown has built up a school with 350 
acres of land and property valued at 
$35,000. 
C Alonzo R. Jones, at one time one of 
the wealthiest colored men in Florida, 
recently died in New Haven. He lost 
much of his property in the Jacksonville 
fire. In 1892 as major of militia he 
martialed the colored soldiers and prevented a lynching in Jacksonville. 
([ Hannibal Beatty, one of the best 
known colored men in York County, S. 
C , is dead. He had been janitor of the 
courthouse since 1874. 
C Alonzo J. Bowling, a colored man, 
formerly a member of the Moving Picture Censor Board of Chicago, has been 
reinstated by the Civil Service Commission. 
C Benjamin Allen, son of Dr. J. A. 
Allen, of Lexington, Ky., won first place 
over five contestants in the annual oratorical contest at Oberlin College. 
C Mrs. McKeel, a colored lady of 
Brooklyn, won the first prize for whole 
wheat bread in the Housewives' League 
Contest in New York City. The daughter of President Wilson is one of the 
Vice-Presidents of this association. 
C Will Marion Cook, the well known 
colored musician, is dangerously ill with 
tuberculosis. 
C Mrs. Mary Church Terrell is convalescing from an operation recently undergone at the sanitarium of the famous 
Mayo Brothers of Michigan. 
C Mrs. Annie Fisher, a colored woman 
of Columbia, Mo., has made $10,000 
from selling beaten biscuit at fifteen 
cents a dozen. She lives in a fourteen 
room brick modern residence. 
C Arthur M. Murray, a Pullman porter, 
was given a verdict of $14,000 from the 
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania for injuries received on the Reading Railway. 
C Roscoe C. Bruce, Assistant Superintendent of schools in the District of Columbia, his secretary and two teachers 
were painfully injured in an automobile 
accident recently. 
C Bishop Alexander Walters has been 
put upon the administrative committee 
of the Federal Council of the Churches 
of Christ in America. 64 TH E CRISIS 
TH E GHETT O 
REV. E. M. MITCHEL L and his 
trustees have been to court for alleged violation of the segregation ordinance of Richmond, Va. This was done 
in the face of the fact that they are worshipping in their own church and had 
changed the entrance of the church from 
Leigh Street to Fifth street which is 
supposed to be "colored." They were 
fined $25 each. 
C The newly appointed postmaster, 
Weaver, has dismissed all the colored 
letter carriers in the local post office in 
Oklahoma City, Okla. 
C For the first time in the history of the 
service white and colored soldiers were 
segregated at. the graduating exercises 
of the class in equitation held at Fort 
Leavenworth, Kan. 
C The latest Baltimore segregation law 
has at last reached the Court of Appeals. 
C E. V. Moxley, of California, writes 
us that Collier's Weekly accepts Negroes 
on the installment plan of subscription 
in her city and wonders why it discriminates in Ohio. We do not know. 
C The Richmond, Va., Planet says: 
"The number of citizens entitled to 
vote, if qualified in this city, is 32,335. 
Of this number 10,382 are colored and 
21.953 white. Of the total number only 
9,386 had paid their poll-tax and had become qualified to vote up to Saturday, 
April 17, 1915. The usual vote in this 
city is only about 8,000 out of a registered vote of over 32,000. As a result, 
the city of Richmond is being operated 
by a minority electorate and the politicians are in 'high feather' at the City 
Hall." 
C Albert J. Berot and three others are 
sueing Albert Porte of New Orleans for 
$50,000 damages because he referred to 
them as of Negro blood. He claimed 
that their great-great-grandmother was 
colored, and they assert that this statement has caused them "mental anguish, 
humiliation, social ostracism and odium." 
C A bill, so framed as to put the chiropodists, facial massage operators, etc., of 
Ohio, entirely at the mercy of a white 
association which refuses to admit colored operators, has been amended so as 
to be satisfactory to colored people. 
C A Disfranchisement Bill is pending in 
the Florida legislature. 
C A strong Civil Rights Bill has passed 
the Lower House of the Pennsylvania 
legislature. 
C A white woman of Indianapolis has 
been shown by the police to have lied in 
saying that she was attacked by three 
colored men. 
m 
COURTS 
THE Tennessee courts have upheld a 
judgment of $500 against the 
Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis 
Railroad and in favor of John and 
Emma Cole. The Coles sued the railroads on account of the unchecked profanity and excesses of colored section 
hands in the Jim Crow cars in which 
they were compelled to ride. 
C Miss Emma Wathrous, a white 
woman, was compelled to ride in a "Jim 
Crow" car in Oklahoma. She sued for 
damages and was paid $1,000. 
C The test case of the colored Richmond 
church which is accused o f violating the 
segregation ordinance has come up in 
the police court. 
C The United States Supreme Court has 
denied the appeal of John B. Gaskill 
against the Forest Home Cemetery 
Company. Gaskill was denied permission to bury members of his family in 
the lot which he had purchased. 
CRIME 
C The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Albert Wells, Macon, Ga., insult; Joel 
Green, Pinewood, S. C, robbery; 
Daughter of Smith Briley, Prescott, 
Ark., killed by mob ; Tom Brooks, Somerville, Tenn., murder; Caesar Sheffield, 
Valdosta, Ga., theft; Jesse Hatch, Mo ­
bile, Ala., assault; Booker Mosby, 
Chickasaw Co., Miss., no reason given. 
C Jim Lee, a Negro convict with a ten 
days' sentence was whipped to death by 
an overseer in Montgomery, Ala. A 
strap four inches wide and studded with 
tacks was used. 
C At Lafayette, La., a mob tried to 
lynch the wife and daughter of an accused colored murderer. They were 
spirited away. MEN of the MONTH 
A FIRE COMPAN Y 
CHEMICA L Engine Company No. 1, 
of Pittsburgh, Pa., Fire Department, was organized June 11th, 1897, 
with five colored men and one white 
captain. A colored captain, L. O. Phillips, was appointed in 1906 and is still at 
the head of the company. 
The company has a fine record and 
has made many thrilling rescues. 
m 
AN INSURANCE PROMOTE R 
HEMA N E. PERR Y is a type of the 
A A new Negro business man who is 
trying to obtain the results in business 
which have been obtained by white business men by following out the method 
which they followed. His conception of 
the Standard Life Insurance Company 
on a legal reserve basis, with a paid-in 
capital of $100,000, and with a working 
surplus in cash, is probably the biggest 
business idea that any Negro has attempted to follow, during this generation. The remarkable fact is, that his 
idea has proven successful. Single-handed and almost alone he sold the entire 
issue of 1000 shares of stock in the company at a price averaging $150.00 per 
share, and succeeded in establishing the 
first old line legal reserve life insurance 
company ever established by colored 
people. His work was marked by discouragement and hardship. After working for two years on his proposition, he 
was obliged, under an existing statute of 
the State of Georgia, to refund to the 
CHEMICA L ENGIN E COMPANY , N O 1, PITTSBURG , PA . 66 TH E CRISIS 
MR . H. E. PERR Y 
subscribers to the stock every dollar they 
had paid in with four per cent, interest, 
amounting to nearly $80,000, because he 
had failed to raise the required $100,-
000.00 within the time limit of two 
years. He immediately undertook the 
proposition again, and later succeeded in 
establishing the company. 
The Standard Life Insurance Com 
pany is now two years old and has in 
force insurance amounting to nearly a 
million and a half dollars, with gross 
assets of $136,127. It had cash income 
during 1914 of $69,000, and paid to its 
policyholders over $8,000 in death 
claims. 
Mr. Perry was born in Texas about 
40 years ago. Before attempting to organize the Standard Life, of which he is 
President, he wrote insurance for a 
number of white companies both in 
Texas and in Georgia. 
m 
A POPULA R SECRETAR Y 
JAMES F. BUND Y who died recently 
•* in Washington, D. C , was born in 
Rappahannock County, Virginia, September 23rd, 1863. 1 He came to Washington when five years of age, was educated 
in the public schools and at Howard 
University where he was graduated in 
1884. He was married that same year 
and is survived by a widow and two 
daughters. 
While studying law Mr. Bundy worked 
in the city post office. In 1890 he became secretary and treasurer of the law 
department and held this position until 
his death. During this time he served 
for six years as member of the Board of 
Education. Much of the success of 
Howard University Law School is due 
to Mr. Bundy's devotion and his 
methodical habits. 
m 
A SOCIAL WORKE R 
MISS ISABEL EATON , for the last 
four years head worker at the 
Robert Gould Shaw House, Boston, resigned some months ago and under her 
physician's orders is taking a year's much 
needed rest. 
Miss Eaton is a white woman born 
near Portland, Maine and comes from 
an old New England family related to 
the family of Daniel Webster. Her 
TH E LAT E J. F. BUND Y ME N OF TH E MONT H 67 
MIS S ISABE L EATO N TH E LAT E F. J. MOULTRI E . 
father was associated with General O. 
O. Howard and lived on Howard University Hill in Washington, D. C. 
Miss Eaton was graduated from 
Smith College in 1888 and became 
Master of Arts at Columbia University 
in 1898. She worked at Hull House, 
Chicago and on the East side in New 
York and was associated with Dr. W. 
E. B. DuBois in the compiling and writing of the "Philadelphia Negro." In 
1903 she became executive secretary"of 
the Society for Ethical Culture in New 
York City and held this position for 
seven years. She was associated in the 
forming of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People and 
in the fall of 1910 went to Robert Gould 
Shaw House. 
The work here was pioneer work and 
especially difficult because of the unrighteous attitude of all other Boston 
settlements toward colored people. Here 
Miss Eaton worked for four years seeking to solve the problem of adjustment 
and administration and doing much toward bringing this settlement to its present successful condition. 
Miss Eaton hopes with the restoration 
of her health to be able to give many 
years to the work of social uplift and 
education among Negro Americans. 
A CATERER 
FRANCI S J. MOULTRI E who died 
at Yonkers, New York, in March, 
was born in Charleston, S. C , August 
22nd, 1842. He came to Yonkers in 
1869, arriving with fifty cents in his 
pocket. He worked for several years as 
butler and porter and finally in 1878 
opened a restaurant and catering business. For almost thirty-seven years he 
has numbered among his patrons the 
most representative families of Yonkers 
and vicinity. 
He took active interest in the city life 
and served for a number of years on the 
Republican Central Committee. He was 
one of the founders of the local A. M. 
E. Zion church and organized a Men's 
Sunday Club, the Colored Co-operative 
Company and other organizations for 
uplift. 
The Yonkers Daily News says that 68 TH E 
TH E LAT E SERGT . F. A . ROBINSO N 
Mr. Moultrie was "perhaps better 
known to more people than any other 
man in the city." 
M 
A POLICE SERGEANT 
WHEN the late Sergeant of Police, 
* * Frederick Arthur Robinson, was 
buried at Cambridge, Mass., his funeral 
was attended by the Mayor of the City, 
Police Commissioner, the heads of the 
police department, a state senator and 
many other distinguished persons. 
Mr. Robinson was born in Nova 
Scotia and came to Cambridge when a 
young man. He was appointed to the 
police force by Mayor Fox and promoted to sergeant in 1894. After thirty 
years service on the force he was retired 
last October because of poor health. 
M 
AN INSURANCE AGEN T 
MR. W. H. KING was for eleven 
^ years one of the best carriers in 
the Atlanta, Georgia, Post Office. 
With a natural aptitude for business, he 
had gone into the Government service, 
CRISIS 
MR . W . H . KIN G 
as do so many other young men, as offering the quickest and most certain support for his family. When the Standard Life Insurance Company was in 
process of organization, Mr. King became interested in life insurance from 
frequent talks with Mr. Heman E. Perry, who was making efforts to get the 
company on foot. Walking into President Perry's office one day in April, 
1914, he announced his intention to resign from the Post Office and give his 
whole time to writing insurance. It was 
so unusual a statement that the officers 
were surprised. A short talk was sufficient to convince them that he was in 
earnest and that he knew the responsibility that he was assuming in giving up 
an assured salary of $1,200 a year to 
work on commission in a new field of 
endeavor hitherto untried by the race. 
He has justified his faith in himself and 
demonstrated his worth to the company. 
In eight and a half months he wrote 
nearly two hundred thousand dollars 
worth of insurance, leading the entire 
agency force and earned a sum double 
bis previous salary in the Post Office. Opinions 
" TH E BIRTH OF "A NATION " 
some strong It is undoubtedly true that 
words the agitation carried on by 
our organization and by 
other organizations and individuals have 
helped to advertise Dixon's wretched 
film play. At the same time it is also 
true that to an unusual extent the 
friends of the Negro race and of fair 
play in general have been rallied to the 
side of justice, and this is no easy thing 
to accomplish. Even the New York 
Outlook which loses few opportunities to 
get on the inhuman side of most problems says: 
"The difficulty which Mr. Dixon as a 
purveyor of history is that he is not a 
historian. A historian not only presents 
true incidents from the past, but, if he 
is fair-minded and impartial, takes care 
that the incidents are representative and 
typical. Many o f the most effective and 
most misleading scenes in 'The Birth of 
a Nation' doubtless occurred some time, 
somewhere, in the South. Chosen as the 
whole picture of the Reconstruction period, however, they are unfair and vicious. Mr. Dixon has 'a single-trackmind,' and the track leads only through 
a very unpleasant country. He is a 
partisan, and a dangerous one. He can 
see questions only in broad splotches of 
black and white. He knows but one 
side of Southern life, the sex problem 
of 'Aryan and African.' 
"As Mr. Dixon rightly believes and 
dramatically shows, the American Nation was born from the travail of civil 
war and the injustice of the Reconstruction period, and therefore, his photo 
drama threatens no reopening of the 
wounds of the white North and the 
white South. The evil in 'The Birth of 
a Nation' lies in the fact that the play 
is both a denial of the power of development within the free Negro and an 
exaltation of race war." 
The film has been defended on the 
ground that while it may portray unpleasant things it is historically true. 
That even this defense is unwarranted 
has been shown in a number of cases. 
The Hon. Albert E. Pillsbury, of Boston, says in the Boston Herald: . 
"The play, like the book, 'The Clansman,' on which it is founded, is a gross 
perversion of a period of our history 
about which the people have been persistently lied to for a generation. Even 
the most eminent historians suppress the 
truth about it, in the interest, I suppose, 
of national harmony. I mean the reconstruction period ; the leading purpose of 
the book, "and presumably of the play, 
being to instill the belief that the reconstruction acts of Congress were not only 
foolish but wicked, as inspired by malice 
or revenge or a determination to perpetuate the power of the Republican party 
by humiliating the white people of the 
South. 
"There is not, and never was, a shadow of truth in this pretence. On the 
contrary, the southern whites brought 
upon themselves the misfortunes of the 
reconstruction era as unmistakably as 
they brought upon themselves the calamities of the war on .which reconstruction 
followed. No sooner were they reinvested with political power than they 
made their first use of it to nullify 
emancipation and restore the Negro to 
virtual slavery. The proofs of this are 
in the statute books of the southern 
states, they are familiar to all who have 
even tried to learn the truth, and they 
are innumerable. This it was, and this 
alone, that compelled Congress, in order 
to secure to the Negro even his personal 
liberty, to interfere with President Johnson's reconstructed state governments; 
and all the grievances of reconstruction 
followed upon this single circumstance, 
for which the white South was as directly responsible as it was for the rebellion." 
The New York Evening Globe continues : 
"To present the members of the race 
as women chasers and foul fiends is a 70 TH E CRISIS 
cruel distortion of history. Bad things 
occurred, but what man will say that the 
outrages of black on white equalled in 
number the outrages of white on black ? 
Which race even to the present day has 
the better right to complain of the un ­
fairness and brutality of the other? 
"The very name of 'The Birth of a 
Nation' is an insult to Washington, who 
believed that a. nation, not merely a congeries of independent states, was born 
during the common struggles of the Revolutionary War, and devoted himself to 
cementing the union. It is an insult to 
Lincoln and the great motives inspiring 
him when he was called on to resist the 
attempt to denationalize a nation. This 
nation of ours was not born between 
1861 and 1865, and no one will profit 
from trying to pervert history. 
"White men in this country have 
never been just to black men." 
Ex-Congressman Samuel W. McCall 
says in the Boston Advertiser: 
"As to the Ku-Klux-Klan, if one is 
ignorant of its criminal character and of 
its murders, burnings and other detestable crimes, let him read the reports of 
the trials in the U. S. Circuit Court at 
Columbia, at the November term of 
1871. It is a gross offense against the 
idea of government by law that the 
order responsible for them should be 
glorified or represented to-day in any 
part of the country in any favorable 
light." 
Albert Bushnell Hart, of Harvard 
University, perhaps the foremost living 
teacher of history declares in the Boston Journal: 
" A prime objection to the whole thing 
is its caricature of the Union army and 
Union soldiers; and particularly its absolutely unfounded series of pictures intended to leave upon the mind the conviction that in Reconstruction times 
Negro soldiers freely plundered and 
abused the white people of the South, 
and were encouraged so to do by their 
white officers. 
"No such thing ever occurred in the 
whole history of Reconstruction." 
The Boston Traveler quotes from the 
records of the official investigation of 
the Ku-Klux-Klan and says: 
"Every witness of 'The Birth of a 
Nation,' no matter how well he may 
know the historical falsity of its action, 
throbs with sympathy for the men who 
defied an armed and enraged Negro 
militia, for the protection of the women 
of the Southland. Yet the hired attorneys defending the men of the Ku-KluxKlan in court in 1871 pleaded, 'In making these remarks, it is simply to express 
the desire that a wise and merciful discrimination should be made in favor of 
those who have been led, seduced or 
forced into an organization guilty' of 
such inhuman atrocities.' 
"In another case the Hon. Reverdy 
Johnson, attorney for the Klansmen, 
said: T have listened with unmixed horror to some of the testimony which has 
been brought before you. The outrages 
proved ar e shocking to humanity; they 
admit of neither excuse nor justification: 
they violate every obligation which, law 
and nature impose on men ; they show 
tha t the parties engaged were brutes.' 
"The purpose of the organization is 
revealed in the testimony of members of 
the Ku Klux Klan. One Klansman told 
the court, 'It wa s for the purpose of 
putting down radical rule and Negro 
suffrage.' Another swore that 'They 
wer e going to carr y this into effect by 
killing off the white radicals and whipping an d intimidating the Negroes, so 
as to keep them from voting for any 
ma n who held radical office.' 
" A member of Wesley Smith's Klan 
testified that the head of the organization had said, T can kill and whip more 
damned niggers with my Klan than all 
the rest of Yor k county.' Another said 
the chief activity of his Klan was 'whipping those me n who belonged to the 
Union League.' This witness told of a 
raid organized against a man because he 
'taught a nigger school and voted the 
radical ticket.' 
"Not in all the 832 pages of testimony 
an d argument in these York county cases 
is an y crime against a white woman 
mentioned. Quite in passing, and as 
though it were the commonest thing in 
the world, witnesses speak of the murder or mistreatment of Negro women 
and girls by members of the Klan. These 
crimes, the records indicate, were not 
prompted by the low desires that are 
mirrored on the animal face o f the Negro 'Gus' in 'The Birth of a Nation.' OPINIONS 71 
They were committed as a punishment 
on husbands and fathers who had .voted 
the wrong ticket. 
"This is the sworn testimony of a colored woman who had refused to tell a 
party of raiding Klansmen where her 
husband could be found: 'Well they 
were spitting in my face and throwing 
dirt in my eyes, and when they made me 
blind they bursted open my cupboard; I 
had five pies in my cupboard, and they 
ate all my pies up, and then took two 
pieces of meat; then they made me blow 
up the light again, cursing me; and 
after a while they took me out of doors 
and told me all they wanted was my old 
man to join the Democratic ticket; if 
he joined the Democratic ticket they 
would have no more to do with him; and 
after they had got me out of doors, they 
dragged me into the big road and they 
ravished me out there." 
To this testimony as to facts we mayadd strong opinions of distinguished 
men. The Rev. Dr. Crothers says, "it is 
not a work of art for art's sake to be so 
enjoyed; it is not history as an impartial 
historian understands history; it is a deliberate and skillful bit of treachery." 
Jacques Loeb calls the play an "insult" 
and a "glorification of homicidal mania." 
Joseph Lee writes in the Survey: 
"Is lynching Negroes immoral? That 
seems to be the question raised by the 
approval of the Ku-Klux and anti-Negro features of the Birth of a Nation 
film. Appealing to the strongest race 
prejudice in the most vivid possible way 
at the precise point where it has led to 
wholesale murder in the South is, of 
course, an incitement to continued murder. One only possible point of doubt 
is whether murder is wrong. Or no— 
that is not the only point. Safe, coldblooded incitement to murder is a meaner and more cowardly offense." 
LYNCHING 
southern Every once in a while the 
protests South speaks out against 
shame of lynch murder. 
Bishop Gailor, of Tennessee, writes to a 
Memphis paper: 
"One of our Memphis evening papers 
had the following account yesterday of 
the lynching of a Negro man, who was 
being taken for trial from Memphis to 
Somerville: 
'"Hundreds of kodaks clicked all morning at the scene of the lynching. People 
in automobiles and carriages came from 
miles around to view the corpse dangling 
from the end of a rope under the Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis Railway 
bridge. Picture card photographers installed a portable printing plant at the 
bridge and reaped a harvest in selling 
postcards showing a photograph of the 
lynched Negro. 
" 'Women and children were there by 
the score. At a number of country schools 
the day's routine was delayed until boy 
and girl pupils could get back from viewing the lynched man. 
" 'Brooks was hanged from the tresslework of the railroad bridge. His body 
dangled over the public highway, and 
was suspended low enough for travelers 
along the road to-day to reach up and 
spin the corpse around.' 
"What do the Christian people of 
Shelby and Fayette counties think of this 
for an advertisement of our civilization? 
Where is the respect for law, the refinement of feeling, the decent humanity, 
which differentiates us from brutes and 
savages? According to the newspaper 
report two white men, disregarding the 
forms and processes of law, undertook 
to inflict punishment upon a Negro man 
—taking the law into their own hands, 
and when the Negro defended himself, 
without appeal to law and the white men 
suffered for their daring, the Negro is 
put to death without the form of law; 
and, according to the report, 'women and 
children by the score' crowded to look at 
the 'dangling corpse'—dangling 'so low, 
that travelers could reach up and spin 
it around!' What age is this in which 
we are living? Is it possible that 200,000 
respectable, law-abiding, kind-hearted— 
not to say Christian—men and women in 
this end of the state are going to sit 
still and let their institutions of government (which are the safeguards of their 
liberty) be wantomly insulted and outraged, and their own good name dishonored over the country without making 
any protest? God forbid." 
The Columbia State in an editorial 
writes: 
"In a Southwest Georgia county the 72 TH E CRISIS 
other day a Negro was taken from jail 
and lynched. He had robbed a smokehouse. ; 
"Each of these lynchers is not less deserving of death than is Leo Frank, the 
convicted Atlanta murderer. 
"The Supreme Court of the United 
States has decided that Frank was .not 
the victim of unjust treatment by the 
Georgia courts. The highest court in 
the land now stands between the Georgia 
courts and the efforts of a number of 
newspapers to mob them, so to say, with 
abuse. {_ \ 
"The Supreme Court of the United 
States has declined to permit the group 
of New York newspapers to usurp the 
province of the Atlanta jury. The vindication of Georgia justice is in this case 
complete. 
"But if the commonwealth of Georgia 
is incapable of punishing a gang of men 
who take from jail a defenseless prisoner 
who stole a side of bacon or a ham and 
murdered him, what, after all, is Georgia 
justice worth?" 
And yet these things as Hashimura 
Togo's friend says in Life are not atrocities : 
"An atrocity are something committed 
in Belgium. 
" I must learn new dictionaries!' This 
from me with iron eyebrows. 
" 'Sippose again. When troop of 
Death Head Dragoonies drag Belgium 
family, including lady-peasant and child, 
from bed and hang some to telegraph 
because of racial peev, that are called 
Atrocity, are not?' 
" 'Undoubtlesslv it are,' Nogi say it. 
" 'But when company of Midnight 
Riders go marching through Georgia 
and elevate niggero family by similar 
rope, what you call it then ?' 
" 'That are christened Social Unrest?' 
Nogi define, 'or perhapsly it are not 
mentioned at all because newspapers is 
clogged by too much excitement from 
Russian attack on Lake Bjwrrkll.' " 
m 
NEGRO COLLEGES 
A de- George Johnson, Dean of Linfense coln University, takes up in the 
New York Nation cudgels of 
defense of the Negro colleges. He 
quotes the General Education Board as 
protesting against the traditional Negro 
curriculum and advocating curricula 
adapted to the '.'needs, environment and 
capacity" of the Negro student. Mr. 
Johnson then says: 
"The initial statement of the General 
Education Board calls for no comment 
because, in the first place, the 'traditional 
college curriculum' is obsolete; in the 
second place, to say that 'the mere attempt to deliver it does not constitute a 
higher education' is so obvious that it 
hardly requires affirmation; and, in the 
third place, no Negro college in the 
country is even attempting it. Exception, however, may be taken to the second statement because, if it means what 
it seems to mean, it is a virtual recommendation that the usual college curriculum should be modified to meet the 
current estimate of the needs, environment, and capacity of the Negro. 
"For obvious reasons the great majority of the Negroes who desire a higher 
education must be prepared in Negro 
high schools and educated to graduation 
in Negro colleges and professional 
schools. The definition of standards has 
made great progress in the United States 
during recent years owing to the work 
of such bodies as the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancemnt of Teaching, 
the American Medical Association, the 
Association of American Universities, etc. 
Reasonably accurate definitions of what 
constitutes a standard high school, college, university, and professional school 
have been arrived at; and, furthermore, 
these standards have been legalized in 
most of the States. Hence, unless a 
man has pursued such a standard course 
he cannot practice either as physician, 
dentist, or lawyer, and in education he 
will be denied certificates except for the 
most elementary work. Double standards of professional efficiency are impossible in a country like ours, and thus, 
if the recommendation of the General 
Education Board is adopted, it means 
the closing of the door of opportunity to 
all but the favored few among Negro 
youth. 
"This also puts the Negro college in 
a critical position. It it deviates from 
the standard college in subjects taught 
and time given and preparation required, 
it is ipso facto excluded from the bene-OPINIONS 73 
fits of the Carnegie Foundation for the 
Advancement of Teaching; the General 
Education Board and the other benevolent foundations can only help it by 
breaking their own rules; the educational departments of the various States 
must at once withhold from it and its 
degrees all legal recognition. 
"Surely, in view of past and present 
services, the institutions that are attempting the difficult task of maintaining adequate higher and professional 
education for Negro youth deserve better treatment. The 5000 Negro college 
men and women are doing more than 
their proportionate share in social work. 
Indeed, how great would be the loss if 
the college man should cease to find a 
place in the present faculties of the industrial schools? When the Atlanta 
Constitution a few months ago lamented 
that so much money was being used in 
teaching the Negro 'useless things' and 
so little in preparing him vocationally, 
that was a mistake in fact easily corrected by consulting the last report of 
the United States Commissioner of Education. When President W. H. P. 
Faunce says in his book 'The Social Aspects of Foreign Missions' that 'the Negro race in America was, for the first 
decades after the Civil War, largely misled by its ambition to get free from manual labor and acquire Latin, Greek and 
mathematics,' he is merely repeating a 
myth which has been disproved many 
times. These are excusable mistakes. 
That one of the great benevolent agencies 
of the country should depreciate the 
work of the Negro colleges and advocate 
a course which would virtually eliminate 
them as recognizable factors from our 
educational system is not so easily explained. I regret that the Nation should 
see fit to agree heartily with such a proposal." jjjEj 
SEGREGATION 
poe and The second and most dangerothers ous member of the Dixon anti" 
Negro firm is Clarence Poe of 
North Carolina. Poe has recently been 
speaking at the University of Virginia 
and boasting of the spread of his rural 
segregation idea. The Columbia State 
replies: 
"Sometimes an ignorant Negro is energetic and thrifty. Sometimes in spite 
of handicaps he ceases to be ignorant. 
The Negro of that description, living at 
half the cost of his white neighbor of 
the same industrial condition, can acquire land in, say half the time that the 
white man can. So long as land is lowpriced (and there are and will be for 
years vast areas of such land), the exceptional Negro will emerge from the 
tenant into the land-owning class and it 
must be recognized that the exceptionally thrifty and industrious Negro will 
outstrip the thriftless and indolent white 
man. 
"But does Mr. Poe imagine that legislatures can repeal economic laws ? Why 
palter with questions of this nature? 
Soon or late, the man, white, black or 
yellow, who establishes himself industrially will have to be reckoned with." 
The Elizabeth City, N. C. Independent (white) replies: 
"Dr. Poe thinks that to effectively 
block this increase of Negro landowners 
we should have laws restricting the sale 
of property in the white neighborhoods 
to white people only. While we have 
got the nigger even half-way down, for 
God's sake let's keep him down! Give 
the black half a chance and he will own 
his land where the white man will continue to rent. We can't keep the Negro 
from saving his money and getting a 
foothold on the land, so lets stop selling 
him good land. So argues Dr. Poe and 
I for one have no sympathy with his 
propaganda, though all the Farmers' 
Unions in 48 states are backing him. 
"If the Negro's standard of living is 
low, so much lower than that of the 
white man, then who made it low? 
"If the standard of living of the white 
tenant class in the South is higher than 
it should be, then who made it so high? 
"When the foregoing questions have 
been answered we can discuss Dr. Poe's 
segregation scheme somewhat intelligently. Without an answer to these 
questions we can not discuss the scheme 
intelligently or begin to deal honorably 
with it. The answer to both questions is 
found in the land-owning aristocracy of 
the South. This land-owning aristocracy has forced the lowest possible 
standard of living upon the Negro and 
attempted to keep him in subjection by 74 TH E CRISIS 
starvation wages. On the other hand it 
has ever encouraged the white tenant 
class in the South to live beyond its 
means that it might hold this white tenant class in subjection by keeping it overloaded with debts. This land-owning 
class is as much the enemy of the poor 
white as it is the enemy of the black. 
But in endeavoring to keep the black 
down by low wages, it thoughtlessly kept 
him down to a low standard of living by 
teaching him to subsist upon the scraps 
from the white man's table. The Negro 
has lived upon scraps and saved his 
money while the white tenant has gone 
to his landlord's store and run himself 
into debt and bad health by paying exorbitant prices for adulterated food-stuffs. 
"Again, in the cities the white propertied class has in its zeal to line its 
own pockets with dirty cash, thoughtlessly given the Negro a lift, in its 
methods of exploiting the poor white 
tenant class. The cotton mill owners 
send their agents into the farming countries everywhere to lure the poor white 
tenant farmer and his brood of children 
into town. The result is a continual depopulation of rural communities. Every 
white tenant farmer who has a number 
of bright and active children old enough 
to stand at a machine, is the prey of the 
cotton mill owners. And here we have 
the poor white sending his children into 
the mills to become physical, mental and 
moral perverts, while the Negro who has 
been taught to subsist upon a crust contents himself with his crust and sends 
his children to school. 
"The trouble with the Southland is not 
that the Negro is making too much progress, but is that the poor whites are 
making too little progress. The trouble 
is not that the Negro is rising in wealth 
and power, but that the poor whites are 
kept backward in culture and oppressed 
on every hand by the wealthy classes exploiting them. Refusing to sell a hard 
working Negro your land is not going to 
help the situation a bit. No country can 
succeed by keeping any part of its population clown. Permanent success built 
upon a foundation of righteousness can 
only come through a patient and intelligent exercise of that virtue as yet so 
little understood— JUSTICE! " 
It is astonishing to find a bourbon 
sheet like the Charleston News and 
Courier recognizing some evident facts 
as to segregation. It says : 
"It is all very well in Charleston to 
urge the colored people to get rid of all 
the trash and dirt about their premises. 
Last year they joined splendidly in the 
cleaning up campaign. But the Negro 
does not make his surroundings. They 
are fixed for him in the majority of 
cases; and they will continue to be 
squalid and unsanitary just as long as 
the white people allow them to remain 
so. Here and there a colored man may 
succeed in buying his own place; but 
these are and must remain the exceptions 
as matters now stand. The wages of the 
colored people are fixed on the basis of 
what the average colored man or woman 
can afford to work for; and these wages 
are not such as to permit the average 
Negro to get very much ahead, unless he 
were possessed of far more thrift than 
he has displayed or is generally believed 
to possess. If the shacks in Charleston 
were made unremunerative and in consequence disappeared the rentals of property occupied by Negroes would necessarily rise. This would mean that the 
cook and the washerwoman would have 
to be given more pay in order to make 
ends meet. But at the same time the 
servants would live under far better surroundings, they would be less exposed to 
disease, less likely to contract disease 
themselves and to convey it to those for 
whom they work. They would be 
healthier, more energetic and alert." 
Mirabile dictu! And this from the 
News and Courier! 
In Chicago we have an extraordinary 
case concerning which most of the 
American papers were silent or apologetical but the German Freie Presse 
says (the translation is ours) "Here in 
Chicago a Negro is employed as post 
office clerk, a proof that he is intelligent, 
moral and honorable. Also a colored 
woman is employed as teacher, a proof 
that she is educated and of good character and is filling the most important calling in the gift of a nation. Both of 
-these people are consequently useful 
members of society, more useful than 
many thousands who are born to the 
world without a dark skin. The colored 
official and the colored teacher got mar-OPINIONS 75 
ried and lived happily and contentedly. 
Moreover, having saved a sum of money 
they invested it in a small home. On 
Saturday they attempted to move in but 
they had left out of account their cultured, more moral and educated white 
neighbors. These had taken it into their 
heads not to allow any colored people to 
live in their neighborhood even if the 
colored folk were educated, blameless 
people and holding decent places in 
society. The colored people were, therefore, refused entrance into their own 
house and the whites called in the police 
to keep them out. * * * We confess 
that most Americans including Mr. Wilson and Mr. Bryan who are regarding 
the Germans as barbarians on account of 
their violation of Belgium's neutrality 
will have nothing to say against this 
brutal piece of injustice and indeed will 
regard it as something to be taken for 
granted." ^ 
TH E DISCOVERY OF TH E NEGRO 
some Now and then the South 
southern discovers Negroes who are 
testimony not criminals. The Jackson 
(Tenn.), Sun is "happy in 
the belief that the Negroes of Jackson 
are the peers of any in the South in intelligence, honesty and civic pride; that, 
as a whole, they are public spirited, industrious, honest and deserving; that, 
with few exceptions, they entertain high 
ideals of citizenship and morals and that 
most of them will do as much, their 
ability and opportunity considered, for 
the welfare of Jackson as the average 
white citizen." 
What the Columbia (S. C.) Record 
"Has been pleased to observe is the 
fact that the Negroes have been taking 
so much interest in civic beterment. The 
doctors and preachers in Columbia are 
putting forth every effort to get the 
Negroes to keep their homes in good, 
sanitary condition." 
The Tampa (Fla.), Times: 
"The Times publishes today a most interesting bulletin of the United States 
census bureau, which details the remarkable and pleasing progress made during 
the past ten years by the Negroes of this 
country, which progress is undoubtedly 
appreciated to an even greater degree by 
southern people than by those of other 
sections. The peqple of the south have 
always had the interests of the descendants of their old slaves at heart, and have 
been showing this interest with increasing emphasis since that section began recovering from the ravages of the Civil 
war and became financially able to display greater activity in educational 
work." 
The New Orleans Daily States speaks 
of the welcome which Mr. Booker T. 
Washington received in Louisiana and 
says: 
"It was hardly to be expected that 
any other response would be forthcoming. Nowhere in the South is there less 
racial prejudice than in Louisiana. Nowhere is there better spirit between 
whites and blacks. Nowhere is there 
heartier sympathy with the colored population in its effort to better its material 
condition." 
This we confess would sound a bit 
more like the truth if it was not for the 
editorial in the same paper concerning 
the utter failure of the investigation in 
the brutal lynching and burning a few 
months ago. 
"The failure of the Caddo grand juryto return any indictments in connection 
with the recent lynchings near Shreveport, will be generally disappointing. It 
seems a miscarriage of justice when in 
the course of a few days five persons 
can be put to death unnecessarily in 
broad day light and an inquisition fail to 
hold anyone responsible for so great an 
outrage." 
"Unnecessarily" is exquisite! 
TH E GREAT WA R 
two "It is assumed that the dark 
articles skinned people, who are now 
classed along with the Slavs 
as inferior peoples, will infallibly imitate 
the example of the superior races; that 
they will plot and plan and secretly contrive means for overcoming those who 
stand above them, meanwhile interpreting every action of their rivals in the 
worst possible light and unconsciously 
employing every possible means to incite fear and hate, so that at last, when 
their hour finally strikes, the lesser peoples will be ready and willing to rise up 
and throw off the protection which the 76 TH E CRISIS 
stronger races have imposed upon them. 
In that case the fear and hate which they 
have cherished secretly in their hearts 
will give them courage to be as ruthless 
in their rebellion as the superior races 
are likely to be in suppressing it. And 
they will do this in order to convince 
themselves and the rest of the world that 
they are really not inferiors, but the 
equals, if not the superiors, of the white 
races. 
"Such seems to be the programme 
which it is generally presumed that those 
who are now regarded as inferior races 
—though of course they do not regard 
themselves so—will pursue with regard 
to the superior races, the races in control. 
This is, I have no doubt, an attractive 
programme to some persons, particularly 
agitators, and as there seems to be even 
more agitators among white people than 
among colored, I have no doubt there 
are many white people to whom this 
seems a perfectly proper and natural 
method of procedure. For one thing, 
the very general belief that it is the natural course to take under the conditions 
in which the white and the dark races 
now live, is the excuse for the harsh 
measures that it seems necessary to use 
now and then to keep the lesser peoples 
in their lesser places. 
"There is, however, for races and 
nations, as well as for individuals, more 
than one way to be superior. One race 
may, for example, be superior to the 
other-by the simple process of getting on 
top and holding the other down. It may, 
however, become superior by learning to 
do some one thing better than any one 
else in the world. And this may be a 
very simple thing; it may be raising catton or it may be writing a book. 
"There is only room for one race, one 
group, and finally one individual to be 
superior, if superioritv consists in holding a place on top with every one else 
somewhere between that place and the 
bottom. On the other hand, there is opportunity for almost every one to be superior if superiority consists in performing some kind of useful service in an 
exceptional manner. Almost every race 
and almost every individual possesses 
some gifts that make it or him exceptional. There is almost certain to be 
some directions in which an individual 
or a race may be of greater service than 
in others. To seek and find that place is 
to be successful. To fill that place in an 
exceptional way is to be superior. 
"Superiority in the future will depend 
more upon excellence in some service 
for the common good and less upon success on the field of battle. I look forward to a time when no individual and 
no race will be considered superior to 
another merely because, being on top, he 
or it is able to hold that other race or 
the other individual down."—B. T. 
Washington in the North American 
Review. 
Dr. W. E. B. DuBois writing in the 
Atlantic Monthly on "The African 
Roots of War " says: 
"The present world war is, then, the 
result of jealousies engendered by the 
recent rise of armed national associations of labor and capital whose aim is 
the exploitation of the wealth of the 
world mainly outside the European circle 
of nations. These associations, grown 
jealous and suspicious at the division of 
the spoils of trade-empire, are fighting 
to enlarge their respective shares; they 
look for expansion, not in Europe but in 
Asia, and particularly in Africa. 'We 
want no inch of French territory,' said 
Germany to England, but Germany was 
'unable to give' similar assurances as to 
France in Africa. 
"The difficulties of this imperial movement are internal as well as external. 
Successful aggression in economic expansion calls for a close union between 
capital and labor at home. Now the 
rising demands of the white laborer, not 
simply for wages but for conditions of 
work and a voice in the conduct of industry, make industrial peace difficult. 
The workingmen have been appeased by 
all sorts of essays in state socialism, on 
the one hand, and on the other hand by 
public threats of competition by colored 
labor. By threatening to send English 
capital to China and Mexico, by threatening to hire Negro laborers in America, 
as well as by old-age pensions and accident insurance, we gain industrial peace 
at home at the mightier cost of war 
abroad. 
"In addition to those national warengendering jealousies there is a more 
subtle movement arising from the at-OPINIONS 77 
tempt to unite labor and capital in worldwide freebooting. Democracy in economic organization, while an acknowledged ideal, is today working itself out 
by admitting to a share in the spoils of 
capital only the aristocracy of labor—the 
more intelligent and shrewder and cannier workingmen. The ignorant, unskilled, and restless still form a large, 
threatening, and, to a growing extent, 
revolutionary group in advanced countries. 
"The resultant jealousies and Bitter 
hatreds tend continually to fester along 
the color line. We must tight the Chinese, the laborer argues, or the Chinese 
will take our bread and butter. We 
must keep Negroes in their places, or 
Negroes will take our jobs. All over 
the world there leaps to articulate speech 
and ready action that singular assumption that if white men do not throttle 
colored men, then China, India, and 
Africa will do to Europe what Europe 
has done and seeks to do to them. 
"On the other hand, in the minds of 
yellow, brown, and black men the brutal 
truth is clearing: a white man is privileged to go to any land where advantage 
beckons and behave as he pleases; the 
black or colored man is being more and 
more confined to those parts of the 
world where life for climatic, historical, 
economic, and political reasons is most 
difficult to live and most easily dominated by Europe for Europe's gain." 
Commenting on this article the Evening Telegram (Phil.), calls it "the most 
stimulating contribution to recent literature on world politics." 
The Boston Herald agrees that after 
this war: 
"There will be no lasting or satisfactory peace unless measures are also 
taken to safeguard the rights of races." 
And the Washington (Pa.), Observer, 
says: 
"One of the most notable essays upon 
the underlying causes of the present 
world war is that of W. E. Burghardt 
DuBois, editor of The Crisis, a magazine devoted to the interests of the colored race of America, in the current Atlantic Monthly. Perhaps it is not going too 
far to describe it as the most profound 
of all the controversial articles on the 
subject which has yet appeared for it is 
characterized by a broadness of view 
and a wideness of scope truly remarkable, and it deals with the race problems 
involved in the question from an entirely 
new angle. It looks at the question partly 
from the Socialistic, partly from the imperialistic and partly from the commercial standpoint, subordinating none 
of these to the race question-which the 
writer frankly and avowedly has uppermost in his mind." 
!Si 
MISCELLANEOU S 
"Some time ago a Negro man sued a 
white man in Granville county for alienating the affections of his wife and the 
jury gave the Negro a verdict for $8,000. 
Don't get excited. A similar case is 
pending in this county right now, but it 
is understood to be in a fair way to be 
compromised and the names have not 
been divulged, though the complaint is 
on file in the clerk's office."—Greensboro, N. C , Record. 
"Despite the fact that he has been invited and urged to attend a Y. M._ C. A. 
conference of employes of the organization, Theodore Pettyjohn, physical director of the colored branch, was asked 
into the kitchen when the call for dinner 
sounded. Following his guide from the 
main dining room prepared for the other 
conferees back to the kitchen, Mr. 
Pettyjohn politely informed the lady that 
he would not eat. He turned his back 
on the victuals prepared for him and 
walked out. He then looked up the gentleman who had insisted on his being at 
the conference and told him a few 
things. 
"The gentleman tried to defend himself by telling Pettyjohn that he ought 
to want to eat with his own people, and 
that Booker T. Washington ate in kitchens. Mr. Pettyjohn, seeing that the 
'Christian' could not understand the 
principle of the matter, left the conference, and walked five miles on an empty 
stomach. When he reached the city 
limits he boarded a car. At this conference all present sat in the same room, 
read the same Bible, declared that Christ 
and his teachings were the salvation of 
all men; yet when the dinner bell rang 
Christ and his teachings were forgotten." —• Louisville Correspondence 
Cleveland Gazette. Editorial 
AN OPEN LETTE R 
O the People of the United 
States: 
This is an appeal not 
for any privilege, indulgence or preference of 
any kind, but for simple 
justice. 
For many years the people of the 
Southern States have claimed that they 
understand better than any one else 
what they call the "Negro problem,'' and 
have insisted that they must be allowed 
to deal with the colored people in their 
communities as they think best. The 
same claim was made during the days of 
slavery, and the rest of the country, 
largely from indolence and the wish for 
a quiet life, weakly yielded and closed its 
eyes and ears to the horrors of slavery. 
To save themselves trouble the people of 
the United States allowed this iniquity 
to live and grow powerful, until four 
years of civil war brought upon them 
many times the trouble which they had 
tried to avoid during the years which 
preceded it. 
Determined to root out for all time 
the injustice which had been punished 
by such a terrible penalty and after 
"every drop of blood drawn by the lash" 
had been "paid by another drawn by the 
sword," the people of the United States, 
so far as the Constitution could do it, 
secured to every citizen of the country 
his equal rights before the law. For the 
first time since the Declaration of Independence was published its "self-evident 
truths" were recognized in practice, and 
a new day seemed to have dawned on 
this republic. 
Unwarned by the experience of our 
fathers we are now repeating their folly. 
We acquiesce while the colored people of 
this country, entitled equally with ourselves to every legal right, are oppressed, 
insulted and degraded. Instead of opening wide the door of opportunity and offering them encouragement and help in 
their attempt to climb from slavery to 
independent manhood, instead of trying 
to make them a body of useful, intelligent citizens, we ignore our responsibility for their condition and put every 
obstacle in their way, permitting men 
whose views are warped by the traditions and prejudices o f slavery to dictate 
our policy. 
What are the consequences? If our 
colored fellow-citizens wish to cast their 
votes they are met by every legal and 
illegal obstacle, and in large sections of 
the country the colored vote is suppressed. Not only can they not vote for 
what they want, but their white neighbors cast the votes of the colored men 
for what the colored men do not want. 
As they count in the basis of representation and yet are denied the ballot, they 
are not only not represented but they are 
misrepresented, and the power of those 
who would perpetuate injustice is 
doubled. 
The Southern leaders say that the 
Negroes are ignorant and degraded, but 
they will not give them the education 
that they need. It is notorious that the 
schools provided for the colored children EDITORIA L 70 
are far worse than those enjoyed by the 
Whites in large sections of the country, 
and it is also true that the path of those 
who would teach them is beset with difficulties and often serious dangers. In 
Florida no white man is allowed to teach 
in a colored school, and the supply of 
competent teachers is therefore largely 
reduced. The spokesmen of the South 
openly avow their purpose to keep their 
colored neighbors ignorant and fitted 
only for employment as laborers. 
If Negroes would acquire property 
and make themselves useful citizens, 
they find in one place an agitation to 
prevent their buying farms, in others 
violent attempts by nightriders and like 
ruffians to drive them from the farms 
which they have bought, and to prevent 
their laboring in the fields. Segregation 
ordinances are proposed in many cities 
to restrict their places of residence, and 
this movement derives support from the 
action of the Federal Government which 
undertakes in the public offices, the property of us all, to separate white from 
colored in the service of the United 
States, deliberately changing conditions 
which have continued without objection 
for fifty years. 
If Negroes are suspected of crime 
their lives may be taken by mob violence 
without trial, and the men who murder 
them, nay more, torture them with barbaric cruelty, whether in Springfield, 
Illinois, in Coatesville, Pennsylvania,, or 
in countless southern towns and villages, 
go absolutely unpunished though perfectly well known, while their action is 
approved by the communities where 
these cruelties are committed. 
If colored men or women acquire an 
education, positions are denied them because they are colored. Banks and 
offices will not receive them. If they 
would travel, hotels and restaurants are 
closed to them, and public corporations 
offer them grossly unfit accommodations. 
Laws are proposed to control their marriage with white persons though intercourse between the races has always prevailed, and the result of such laws must 
be to put colored women at the mercy of 
white men, and to deprive them of the 
very slight protection which the law now 
gives them, while a generation of innocent children is degraded and stigmatized. Many labor unions will not admit 
them, nor let them work as non-union 
men. 
In Miami, Florida, a Negro chauffeur 
who presumes to drive his master's car 
from Palm Beach is nearly killed by a 
mob of white chauffeurs. The theatres 
admit plays grossly misrepresenting 
colored folk and appealing to race prejudice and passion. Public parks and 
places of amusement are largely closed 
to them. In Northern schools and colleges they are often unwelcome. At 
every turn and in every attempt to rise 
they are met by this wicked prejudice. 
The man in whose veins flows only a 
trace of Negro blood, who inherits from 
his white ancestors their ambitions and 
their tastes, is treated as if he were hopelessly degraded, and all over the country 
the attempt is made to hold them down 
as an inferior class, denied those equal 
rights and equal opportunities which are 
the birthright of every American citizen. 
This state of things is absolutely intolerable and it cannot continue without 
bringing upon this country the most serious calamities. No community can treat 
any considerable body of citizens unjustly without suffering the consequences. The attempt of the French Government to hold Dreyfus in undeserved imprisonment nearly overthrew the republic. 
The problem before this country is 
not a Negro problem only but far more 
a white man's problem. We all suffer, 
white and colored alike, and as there are 
more white, so they suffer more while 80 TH E CRISIS 
the present conditions continue. It is 
time for all who believe in justice and 
humanity to organize and to resist race 
prejudice wherever it lifts its head. 
W e appeal to the people of the South 
who profess to be civilized and Christian, and ask how long they will allow 
their fair name to be blackened and degraded by unpunished lynching, and the 
attempt to keep the Negroes down. 
While it continues the Southern states 
cannot rank among civilized communities. Are they content to hold this position? 
We appeal to the Christian church and 
ask where in the teachings of its Founder 
it finds any warrant for treating human 
beings with cruelty and injustice. 
We appeal to the lawyers whose mission it is to enforce the law and secure 
to everyone his just rights, and ask them 
if they are content to see lynch law take 
the place of proper judicial procedure. 
W e appeal to the judges who hold the 
scales of justice, and urge them to keep 
the balance true between men, no matter 
what their race or color. 
We appeal to the colleges and schools 
whose teachers so largely control the 
future of this country not to deny education to any one who seeks it. 
W e appeal to every warm-hearted, 
high-minded man or woman in this country, and urge them to organize a new 
anti-slavery movement. We beg them by 
voice, vote and example to rouse their 
neighbors and to make our public men 
feel that their political careers are not to 
be advanced by yielding to the advocates 
of discrimination. We must organize 
our political, our religious, our educational, nay all our forces to the end that 
our country may be relieved from the 
influence of all who believe that they 
help themselves up by keeping others 
down. Our motto is "All men up" and 
that spirit must conquer, or terrible disaster awaits the country which we all 
love. 
Moorfield Storey. 
m 
A N AMAZIN G ISLAN D 
JAMAIC A is a most amazing island. I have seen 
something of the earth, 
more especially Europe 
and America whic h 
leave, to be sure, much 
unseen; but of the lands that I have 
looked upon hitherto Jamaica is the most 
startling. The ride from Spanishtown 
to the northwestern sea is one of the 
great rides of the world to be likened to 
the Horse Shoe Bend or St. Gotthard. 
The Wa g Water is a beautiful stream 
and Montego Bay is the bay of Naples. 
The whole island is a mass of gray, 
green mountains thrown on the face of 
the sea with gash and shadow and veil. 
The rain of Jamaica is the maddest, 
wildest and wettest of rains and the sunshine is God's. There in Jamaica the 
world is met. Africa and Asia and 
Europe all meet which may mean little 
and yet may be the most fateful meeting 
the world ever saw. In Jamaica for the 
first time in my life I lived beyond the 
color line—not on one side of it but beyond its end. There in strange places I 
could sense its curious paths stopping 
and wavering and fading into uncertain 
threads. Of course, I was ever looking 
for it. That is my inborn nature. I 
saw that the moving picture films, for 
instance, were "approved" by "His 
Worship, the Mayor," and when I sat 
beside His Worship, the Mayor at dinner, behold, His Worship was colored. I 
almost hesitated at the barber shops but 
the barbers did not hesitate. It was a 
strange sort of luxury to ride on railways where engineers, firemen, conductor and brakemen were black. The 
smart, dark Constables in their gleaming EDITORIA L 81 
white hats and coats gave me a double 
sense of security. In the stores there 
was usually a curl or a tint in the clerk 
that proclaimed the most ancient of 
blood and it was the same in the post 
office, the telephone exchange and the 
government buildings. In fact, though 
somewhat of an expert in knowing mine 
own, I confess that in Jamaica it was 
quite impossible for me to pick out the 
alleged 15,000 white people out of the 
900,000 of population. 
The peasants—a great mass of hard 
working black laborers—were to me perhaps more alluring. I can see now those 
black, straight and strong and fullbosomed forms, supple of hip and thigh 
and lithe of limb, sinewy yet fine and 
calm, treading their silent miles like fate. 
Soft of word and slow but sweet of 
smile and uncomplaining, of the blood 
and tears of such as these was built 
Jamaica. Threaded through all this curious beauty, with palm and mahogany, 
the scent of orange blossoms and the 
gleam of bananas, threaded through all 
this is the tragedy of a poverty almost 
incomprehensible. Think of a woman 
carrying sand all day, twelve endless 
hours in a Jamaica sun, for eighteen 
cents ! Think of able-bodied men working for twenty-five cents and less a day. 
Think of walking fifty miles and carrying a hundred pound burden for forty 
cents. Think of raising and selling 
oranges at two cents a hundred! 
Here is an island rich beyond dream; 
out of it for three centuries and more 
the white world has reaped its millions. 
Yet today the island lies poverty-stricken 
but facing the world proudly with one 
great gift, the gift of racial peace, the 
utter overturning of the barbaric war of 
color, with a chance for men to lift themselves regardless of the complexion of 
their grandfathers. It is the most marvelous paradox of this paradoxical western world. 
LUSITANIA 
THE last horror of a horrible war is come! It 
puts a period to what we 
have alread y said: 
European civilization has 
failed. Its failure did 
not come with this war but with this war 
it has been made manifest. Whatever 
of brutality and inhumanity, of murder, 
lust and theft has happened since last 
summer is but counterpart of the same 
sort of happenings hidden in the wilderness and done against dark and helpless 
people by white harbingers of human 
culture. But when Negroes were enslaved, or the natives of Congo raped 
and mutilated, or the Indians of the 
Amazon robbed, or the natives of the 
South Seas murdered, or 2,732 American citizens lynched—when all this happened in the past and men knew it was 
happening and women fatted and plumed 
themselves on the ill-gotten gains, and 
London and Berlin and Paris and New 
York flamed with orgies of extravagance 
which the theft of worlds made possible, 
when all this happened, we civilized folk 
turned deaf ears. We explained that 
these "lesser breeds without the law" 
were given to exaggeration and had to 
be treated this way. They could not understand "civilization but as for the 
White World, there humanity and Christianity and loving kindness reigned. 
This was a lie and we know it was a 
lie. The Great War is the lie unveiled. 
This world is a miserable pretender toward things which it might accomplish 
if it would be humble and gentle and 
poor and honest. It is a great privilege 
in the midst of this frightful catastrophe 
to belong to a race that can stand before 
Heaven with clean hands and say: we 
have not oppressed, we have been oppressed ; we are not thieves, we are 
victims; we are not murderers, we are 
lynched! TH E ZEITGEIST 
By LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL 
"Where is the wise? where is the 
scribe? Where is the disputer of this 
world? Hath not God made foolish the 
wisdom of this world? . • • But God 
hath chosen the foolish things of the 
world to confound the wise: and God 
hath chosen the weak things of the 
world to confound the things -which are 
mighty; and base things of the world, 
and things which arc despised, hath God 
chosen, yea, and things which are not, 
to bring to naught things that are; that 
no flesh should glory in his presence."— 
Paul. 
"What is all this but a wild fermentation of the spirit, wherefrom, the fiercer 
it is, the clearer product will one day 
evolve itself."—Carlyle. 
Before the whirlwind and the thundershock, 
The agony of nations, and this wild 
Eruption of the passionate will of man, 
These tottering bastions of mighty states, 
This guillotine of culture, and this new 
Unspeakable Golgotha of the Christ, 
My heart declares her faith, and, undismayed, 
I write her prompting—write it in that 
poise 
Of judgment undisturbed to which our 
Head 
Admonishes the nation. 
But have I 
A certain warrant? Does the cannon 
roar 
Above the mangled myriads washed in 
blood 
Upon a hundred fields embolden me 
To vent the doctrine of a private heart! 
Nay, ask it not; for God hath chosen 
still 
The weak thing and the foolish and the 
base, 
And that which is despised to do His 
will; 
And humble men are chartered yet to 
run 
Upon his errands round the groaning 
sphere: 
Not many of the mighty ones are called, 
Not many that dispute, not many wise; 
And evermore the Scripture is fulfilled. 
Among the least of men of many strains 
Whose origins outdate the pyramids, 
Uncherished of my country—though the 
blood 
Of all my fathers ran to make her free; 
Known by a name that typifies the slave, 
Synonymous with darkness, and by that 
Set in the ranks of mortals least esteemed, 
I claim no merit save the love of truth, 
And care to find for her a lodging-place. 
Nor comes it more of choice than of the 
stern 
Duress and cold inhospitality 
Of that environment which prejudice 
Fills consciously with bane, that I have 
sought—• 
Blessed be the God of Mercy!—at the 
shrine 
Of thought inviolate the wells of peace. 
There, fortified and unmolested, long 
Have I in contemplation rued the plight 
Of all my kind, and reverently aspired 
To ponder out our mission, unconvinced 
That we are born the dupes of Providence, 
To be a nation's burden and her taunt, 
Or Ishmaels of an unchosen land. 
My quest has been to know the good of 
life, TH E ZEITGEIST 83 
An d wh y a rac e should be, and what 
endure s 
But looking in upo n my stricken peers 
I saw beyon d uncomliness o f form 
O f that whic h me n have called Society, Th e nobler lineaments o f hope new-bor n 
And , high amon g the guerdon s o f my 
toil, 
T o learn wha t perfec t service, born o f 
throes 
Dreadful but purgative , w e yet might 
dare 
T o offer thee, O country o f ou r hope . 
An d from these musings—thanks again 
to Hi m 
Whos e citadels are stars, with time and 
space 
Their pylons, but wh o builds his favored 
home 
Upo n the docil e trust o f lowl y hearts— 
Proceede d comfort , longanimity 
An d strength increasing o f a faith sublime 
Whic h neither infidelity in arms, 
No r all the bitter usage o f the worl d 
Can e'er avail to tarnish o r impair. 
Fo r lookin g out upo n the worl d I saw 
Small help fo r future man in those wh o 
stand 
Upo n the heights o f power, save in the 
tales 
Transmitted o f their long decline and 
fall. 
Becaus e they spurn the heart o f brotherhood , 
An d trade in life, and moc k the living 
Go d 
By lofty scorn o f His dishonored sons, 
Th e strong battalions o f eternal truth 
An d Nature's law make their discomfort 
sure. 
The y prov e the error o f that pride o f 
race 
An d nation whic h has been the world's 
despite, 
An d unloosed Mammo n fo r a thousand 
years. 
No t all their transient lordship o f the 
earth, 
Their cunning in the traffic o f the world , 
Th e condescensio n o f their patronage, 
O r thundering proclamations o f their 
might. 
Fo r people s yet to be. (J scorn it not, 
Y e mighty of ou r land, all ye that mount 
T o glory on the necks o f trampled men ! 
If ye have ears and hearts, O hear and 
heed ! 
Fo r no w within you r midst are multitudes 
Puissant though despised, meek men o f 
prayer, 
Dar k shackled Knights o f Labor, clinging still, 
Amidst a universal wrec k o f faith, 
T o cheerfulness, and foreigners to hate. 
Thes e kno w y e not, these have ye not 
received, 
But these shall speak to yo u Beatitudes. 
Aroun d them surge the tides o f all you r 
strife, 
Abov e them rise the august monuments 
O f all you r outward splendor, but they 
stand 
Unenviou s in thought, and bide their 
time. 
Becaus e ye schooled them in the arts o f 
life, 
An d gave to them you r God , and poured 
you r bloo d 
Into their veins to make them what they 
are, 
The y shall not fail yo u in the hou r o f 
need. 
The y ow n in them enough o f yo u to feel 
All that has mad e yo u masters in you r 
time—• 
Dea r art and riches, unremitting toil, 
Prou d types o f beauty, an unbounded 
will 
T o triumph, wondrou s science and old 
law— 
Thes e have they learned to cove t and to 
share. 
But deeper in them still is something 
steeled 
T o hot abhorrenc e and unmeasured 
dread 
O f you r undaunted sins against the 
light -
Re d sins o f lust, o f envy and o f hate, 
O f guilty gain extorted from the weak, 
Can chec k the springs o f pity, whil e ou r O f brotherhoo d traduced, and Go d 
denied. 
All this have they beheld without revolt, 
prayers 
Besiege the Thron e o f Merc y fo r their 
weal. An d borne the brunt in agonizing prayer. 84 TH E CRISIS 
For other strains of blood that flow 
from times 
Older than Egypt, whence the dark man 
gave 
The rudiments of learning to all lands, 
Have been a strong constraint. And 
they have dreamed 
Of a peculiar mission under heaven, 
And felt the force of unexampled gifts 
That make for them a rare inheritance— 
The gift of cheerful confidence in man, 
The gift of calm endurance, solacing 
An infinite capacity for pain, 
The gift of an unfeigned humility, 
Blinding the eyes of strident arrogance 
And bigot pride to that philosophy 
And that far-glancing wisdom which it 
veils, 
Of joy in beauty, hardihood in toil, 
Of hope in tribulation, and of wide 
Adaptive power without a parallel 
In chronicles of men; and, over all. 
And more than all besides, the gift of 
God 
Expressed in rhythmic miracles of song. 
O these are gifts. I said a thousand 
times, 
Richer than Ophir, stronger than the 
might 
Of armament to conquer and to cure. 
Gifts destined yet to permeate the earth. 
To heal it of its mighty heresies, 
And all its brutal blasphemies of war. 
So viewing all my brothers in distress, 
Hindered and cursed and aliens. I have 
wept 
And prayed for them in solitude apart— 
That they might know themselves a 
chosen folk 
Unrecognized but potent, chastened still 
But chartered to be ministers of truth. 
To search the depths of spirit, to go 
forth 
As heralds of religion and belief, 
To sing the sorrow song of deathless 
faith. 
To woo and win a perfect self-control. 
To breed strong children exercised in 
prayer, 
Shunning as they would death the patterns set 
By those who hold the kingdoms and the 
sway. 
So might they with the pregnant years 
become, 
Despite their bleeding under whips and 
scorns, 
New arbiters of social destiny, 
New health veins in the body politic, 
A high-commissioned people mingled 
through 
With all the bloods of man, and, counselling 
Peace, and the healing grace of brotherhood, 
"Have power in this dark land to lighten 
it, 
"And power in this dead world to make 
it live." 
When through my being, like some lyre 
strung, 
These wands of temporal occurrence 
sweep, 
I hear a kind of music, high and low. 
And ranging from the tortured earth to 
heaven, 
Throbbing in tragic cadence to express 
The passing and the coming life of man. 
And though the tempests rage and earth 
is stirred 
To her foundations, though the lucid air 
Becomes a menace, and the beauteous 
world 
Is bathed in fire, I am undismayed. 
The cataclysmic travail prophesies 
The dawn of one world conscience for 
all men, 
The breaking up of caste and race and 
creed, 
The warfare of all war against itself. 
And hence in my low place this living 
peace 
That grows and deepens, while the staggered frames 
Of ancient kingdoms reel beneath a 
weight 
Of crimes so vast that genius strives in 
vain 
To compass them in thought; for out of 
this, 
The Spirit saith, shall issue other breeds 
Soul-wounded like my brothers, and like 
them 
Despised and trammeled, but sent forth 
to teach 
That nothing in the changing world endures 
But truth, and love, and brotherhood 
and God. MEMBERSHIP 
The membership of the Association is 
now over seven thousand. During the 
month of April 687 new members were 
added. The greater number of these 
came in from the following branches: 
Northern California, District of Columbia, St. Louis, Columbus, O., and Pittsburgh, Columbus leading with 221. 
m 
MEETINGS 
Speakers from the Membership Committee of the National Association have 
addressed the Interdenominational and 
Baptist Ministers' Conferences in New 
York and meetings in the Zion A. M. E. 
and Fleet Street Churches in Brooklyn, 
and the Fourth Moravian Church in 
New York. Speakers from the same 
committee were also heard at the Tents' 
Convention which was held in Brooklyn, 
May 12-14. 
Mrs. Florence Kelley, of the Board of 
Directors, addressed a meeting in St. 
Mark's M. E. Church, Montclair, N. J., 
Dr. F. H. Butler, pastor, on March 21. 
On April 28 she spoke at the Bethel A. 
M. E. Church, New York City, at a 
meeting held under the auspices of the 
Department for the Suppression of 
Lynching of the Northeastern Federation of Women's Clubs. 
On February 14 Mr. Villard spoke on 
the race question at Spuyten Duyvil at 
the Union Church to the regular parishioners, and on February 22 he addressed 
the Brooklyn Congregational Club at the 
Arbuckle Building of Plymouth Church, 
the subject being "The Attitude of the 
South toward the Negro." Mr. Villard's address was challenged by an enthusiastic champion of the South and received considerable comment in the 
local press. [ua 
BRANCHES 
Boston: 
Following the protests of our Association in Los Angeles, San Francisco and 
New York the Boston Branch took up 
the light against "The Birth of a Nation" and immediately aroused public 
opinion against it, which was reflected in 
pulpit and press. Representative citizens united in condemning the play, including the Governor and Lieutenant 
Governor of the State, Dr. Eliot, Dr. 
Mann, a Southerner and rector of Trinity, Dr. Crothers, Hon. Samuel W. Mccall, Mr. Garrison, and many others. 
Protests to the Mayor and Governor 
were made and meetings held everywhere, culminating in a mass meeting in 
Tremont Temple with an overflow meeting on the Common. 
Buffalo: 
At a meeting of the members of the 
Christian Culture Congress, on March 
27, held in the Michigan Avenue Baptist Church, under the auspices of the 
Buffalo Branch of the N. A. A. C. P., 
the Rev. Houghton Fosbroke, pastor of 
St. Andrew's Church, addressed four 
hundred members present and said : "It 
is not the Negro who needs educating 
but the white man who is ignorant of 
the wrong that has been done the colored 
race." Dr. Fosbroke, in defining the 
three dangers which confronted colored 
people, said: "You are guilty of segregation, snobbishness, lack of unity and 
contempt born of discouragement in the 
fight for right against might." Mrs. 
William H. Talbert presided. 
Chicago: 
At the annual meeting of this branch, 
which was held in the Abraham Lincoln 
Center, the three speakers were Judge 
Brown, Judge McMurdy and Mr. Isaac 
Fisher, editor of the Negro Farmer. 
This branch presented to the new Mayor its objections to the moving picture 
play based on the "Clansman," which is 
announced for production in Chicago in 
the summer. The press reports that the 
play was passed by the wife of the 
National Ass'n for the Advancement of Colored People 86 TH E CRISIS 
former Mayor, Mrs. Harrison, and by 
his secretary. In a letter to the press 
Mrs. Harrison, a Southern woman, now 
condemns the picture. 
Cleveland: 
This branch continues to increase its 
membership, its enrollment now being 
254. It has held a series of parlor meetings and a public meeting at which the 
speakers were Mr. A. H. Martin, Mr. 
D. G. Gibson and Mr. Charles W. Chesnutt. 
District of Columbia: 
A campaign for a thousand new members has just been started. During April 
one hundred joined. The Committee of 
Fifty and More is energetically at work 
and has just sent to headquarters a 
check for two hundred and fifty dollars. 
The Juvenile Committee launched their 
work with a children's mass meeting on 
April 18 at the Howard Theatre. A 
varied program, given by children and 
including race songs, orations and 
stories, aroused fresh interest in the 
committee and its plans. The Chairman of the committee is Mrs. Carrie W. 
Clifford. 
Des Moines: 
The membership of this branch has 
grown in four months to one hundred 
and thirty-three and includes the Governor of the State, the Attorney General, the editor of the Register and 
Leader, one of the leading white papers, 
and other representative citizens. In addition to its vigorous cooperation with 
Headquarters, in working against hostile legislation in Congress, this branch 
materially aided in defeating the antiintermarriage bill introduced into the 
Iowa Legislature. A brief was prepared 
by the President and the Legislative 
Committee of the branch and sent to 
every member of the Legislature. Largely as a result of these efforts, action on 
the bill was indefinitely postponed. 
Two successful public meetings have 
been held, a Lincoln anniversary meeting and an educational meeting. In connection with the fight, the National Association has been carrying on in different sections of the country against the 
moving picture play, "The Birth of a 
Nation," it is interesting to note that a 
city ordinance drawn by the President 
of this branch, Mr. S. Joe Brown, was 
passed by the City Council in 1907. This 
ordinance prohibits the production of 
any play tending to stir up race prejudice. The Secretary of the branch is 
Mrs. Jessye E. McClain and the Chairman of the Executive Committee, Mr. 
Harvey E. Ingham, editor of the Register and Leader. 
Harrisburg: 
This branch, with the Philadelphia 
and Pittsburgh Branches, has succeeded 
in getting a new Civil Rights Bill 
through the lower branch of the Legislature by a vote of 138 to 34. 
Howard Chapter: 
A course of lectures on Race Contact 
and Inter-Racial Relations, to be given 
under the auspices of the Howard Chapter of the N. A. A. C. P., is announced 
to begin Tuesday, April 27. These lectures will be given in the Library Hall 
of the University by Prof. Alain Leroy 
Locke, formerly Rhodes scholar at Ox ­
ford. It is hoped that another year 
these lectures may be given in other 
universities. The course will be conducted by syllabus and will include the 
following lectures: The Historical and 
Scientific Conceptions of Race ; The Political and Practical Conceptions of 
Race; The Phenomena and Laws of 
Race Contact; The Fallacies of Modern 
Race Creeds; Race Progress and Racial 
Culture. 
Los Angeles: 
This branch enters on the second year 
of its work having held its first annual 
meeting at the Providence Baptist 
Church with officers of the branch as 
speakers. 
Toledo: 
At the request of this branch, the 
Mayor of the city suppressed the moving picture play called "The Nigger," 
which is running in some cities under 
the title of "The New Governor." On 
May 10 a John Brown day meeting was 
held with Wilbur E. King, formerly 
First Assistant Prosecuting Attorney of 
Franklin County, as speaker. In its 
membership this branch includes not 
only the Mayor but also three judges of 
the Court of Common Pleas, a probate 
judge, a police court judge and other 
prominent white citizens. FIGHTING RAC E CALUMN Y 
Part II 
We gave last month a chronology of 
the fight of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People 
against Tom Dixon's latest libel. This 
is a continuation of that narrative. 
"The Birth of a Nation" is now being 
shown in New York, Boston, Los 
Angeles, San Francisco, and is booked 
for Chicago for the summer. In each 
place our branches have protested. In 
Los Angeles they got no results. In San 
Francisco a few objectionable scenes 
were eliminated. 
In Des Moines, Iowa, the play cannot 
be presented because of the fact that 
Mr. S. Joe Brown some years ago introduced an ordinance which was passed 
prohibiting plays arousing race feeling. 
In Ohio, Cleveland and Toledo 
branches and other agencies co-operating, kept out the play, "The New Governor," and think they can keep this out 
of the State. 
The center of the fight has been Boston. 
April 6: 
The film interests attack The Crisis 
as an "incendiary" publication. They 
explain Jane Addams' criticism by declaring that she saw only half the film, 
which is absolutely false; and they declare that the film had the endorsement 
of the President of the United States, 
George Foster Peabody, Senator Jones 
of Washington and others. 
April 9: 
A hearing was held before Mayor 
Curley. Many prominent persons took 
part. A letter to us saying: "When the 
hearing was over a little bout occurred 
between Moorfield Storey and Griffith. 
It seems in the Boston papers that Griffith had promised Mr. Storey $1P,000 
for any Charity he would name if he 
could find a single incident in the play 
that was not historic. Mr. Storey asked 
Mr. Griffith if it was historic that a 
colored lieutenant governor had locked 
a white girl into a room in the Capitol 
and demanded a forced marriage in 
South Carolina? Mr. Griffith only answered, 'Come and see the play' and 
held out his hand to Mr. Storey. Mr. 
Storey drew back and said, 'No sir,' refusing to shake hands with him." 
April 15: 
George Foster Peabody, in a public 
letter, calls the film unfair to the Negro and to the white equally and a 
traversity on sound peace principles." 
Senator Jones writes: "I never endorsed 
it," and continues, "the character of the 
second part of the play became evident 
before it began and I did not stay to see 
it." The Rector of Trinity Church, 
Boston, calls the film "untrue and unjust." Persons unconnected with this 
organization threw rotten eggs at the 
screen in New York City. 
April 17: 
A new feature is added to the film in 
Boston "portraying the advance of Negro life." A prominent New York lawyer informs us that this was done at the 
suggestion of Mr. Booker T. Washington. Colored citizens of Boston are refused tickets to the first exhibition of the 
film. The colored people persist in demanding tickets and eleven of them are 
arrested including Mr. W. M. Trotter, 
editor of the Guardian, and the Rev. 
Aaron Puller. All were discharged except the two mentioned. 
April 19: 
Great protest meeting in Faneuil Hall 
presided over by Frank B. Sanborn. 
Governor Walsh of Massachusetts promised to advocate a law which will enable 
such films to be suppressed. 
April 20: 
The state police of Massachusetts refuse to permit "The Birth of a Nation" 
to be exhibited on Sunday. 
April 21 : 
The Massachusetts court orders elimination of the rape scene in the film. 
Large hearing before the legislature. 
April 28: 
Mrs. Carter II. Harrison, wife of the 
former mayor of Chicago denies that 
she ever approved the film. "It is the 
most awful thing I have seen. It would 88 TH E CRISIS 
arouse racial feeling-. I am a southerner 
and you naturally would expect me to 
oppose such pictures as this." 
April 29: 
Clergymen representing six Protestant 
denominations protest against the film. 
April 30: 
The secretary to the President of the 
United States replying to W . H. Lewis, 
of Boston, and to Bishop Walters, writes : 
"Replying to your recent letter and 
enclosures, I beg to say that it is true 
that 'The Birth of a Nation' was produced before the President and his family at the White House, but the President was entirely unaware of the character of the play before it was presented 
and has at no time expressed his approclared that Dixon had told him that the 
object of the film was the ultimate deportation of 10,000,000 Negroes from 
the United States, and the repeal of the 
war amendments, President Eliot said 
that this proposal was "inconceivable 
and monstrous" and "an abominable 
outrage." He continued: 
" A more dangerously false doctrine 
taught by the play is that the Ku-KluxKlan was on the whole a righteous and 
necessary society for the defence of 
Southern white men against black Legislatures led by Northern white men. 
This is the same sort of argument being 
used by the Germans to-day, that a contract may be destroyed as a military necessity. Undoubtedly, grievous condiTH E PROTES T O N BOSTO N COMMO N 
Courtesy of Boston Post 
bation of it. Its exhibition at the White 
House was a courtesy extended to an old 
acquaintance." 
A committee of the Massachusetts 
legislature reports a bill which is a compromise between several proposals. This 
bill places unlimited powers of censorship in the bands of the Mayor, the 
police commissioner and the chief justice of the municipal court. This bill 
has passed the lower House and is before the Senate. 
May 2 : 
Mass meeting of 2,500 persons at Tremont Temple to protest against the film. 
Ex-President Eliot, Dr. S. M. Crothers, 
Dr. F. M. Rowley, Miss Adelene Moffat 
and Mr. Ralph Cobleigh were among the 
speakers. A mass meeting was also held 
on Boston Common. Mr. Cobleigh detions existed in the South, but they did 
not justify the utter lawlessness and 
atrocities which marked the trail of the 
Ku-Klux. There can be no worse teaching, no more mischievous doctrine than 
this, that lawlessness is justified when 
necessary." 
May 5:' 
The Rev. A. W. Puller was discharged by the court while Mr. Trotter 
was fined for assault on a policeman, 
but entered an appeal. The judge 
blamed the ticket seller chiefly for the 
disturbance. 
May 15. Telegram from the Chicago 
Branch, N. A. A. C. P.: 
Mayor Thompson has unqualifiedly 
refused license to the photo-play "Birth 
of a Nation." C. E. Bentley, 
Treasurer, N. A. A. C. P. and 
Manuscripts 
By May Effie Lee 
You have the wrong idea of composition," declared the blue-penciled criticism on one of my first two 
themes. "It is not a fantastic, lawless 
thing, but is orderly and responsible." 
On the second paper had been penciled, 
"This goes out of bounds by no means 
to the same extent as the other, nevertheless the note of the whole is frankly 
forced." I looked at both papers and 
sighed. So, tireless devotion to composition for composition's own dear sake 
had brought me to this, a realization 
that I was creator of pen chameleons, 
narrow, wriggling color studies that 
spent their time shifting shades. I felt 
wounded. 
"Good writing," conceded the blue 
pencil, on work of a week later, "but 
not improved by the forced note in it. 
Why will you use the exaggerated style 
in all that you do? " I must start again. 
I tried describing a visit to a settlement 
house. "This"—the blue pencil in my 
third week of agony—"is mere hard 
cataloguing of detail. If it marks the 
swing of the pendulum from the exaggerated style it is in that case, of course, 
as bad as the extreme it would avoid." 
Evidently every pigment of that blue 
pencil was concentrated upon my ruin. 
I must say something. 
Outside of class I had scarcely exchanged a dozen words with my instructor. During the lecture period his 
talks were sufficiently brilliant to dispel 
foreshadowings of blue pencil disapprobation. And the flash of his wit was 
bound to draw one's attention from 
waiting theme piles on the desk. But 
after class, when the work submitted a 
week before was returned, criticized, 
then truly came my moments of misgiving. "I'm sure he imagines me obstinately adherent to old mannerisms. If I 
am improving, I'm improving so slowly," were my thoughts when, in desperation, I lingered one evening after others 
of the class had gone, and said to the 
man at the table, "You think I don't try. 
But I do." 
"You ought to write simply." Now 
any one with a moderate amount of stupidity is possessed of sufficient presence 
of mind to feel disconcerted in the society of clever people. And because I 
was excited, perhaps, I blurted out a request that cool thought may never have 
prompted, "May I choose my own subject?" He consented. The fact that the 
one colored member of the class might 
hereby be further establishing herself as 
a peculiarity troubled me little then. 
Away I hurried joyously, only to 
pause outside and watch some fussy 
sparrows traveling backward and forward between the vines on the old hall 
and a green privet hedge of the university. I felt grateful toward even the 
sparrows, so relieved I was, and glad. 
Birds 90 TH E CRISIS 
A T ROBIN' S BUILDIN G TIM E 
Now seemed my opportunity for removing eternal minus signs from beside blue 
"G's." 
1 went home and eagerly wrote of a 
mocking bird in honeysuckles. The blue 
pencil changed tone like a Maeterlinck 
blue bird. "I like this. It has the 
naivete of a folk-tale." And with joy I 
realized that my best of friends were 
likely to prove nature and her birds. 
From mocking birds in reeds by Florida lagoons; white herons on white 
oyster bars; cardinals swinging amidst 
scarlet cassenas, I could bring the 
scenes home, to where, in spring, the 
brave lark utters but one minor hint of 
all its winter warring with snow and 
wind. I could, from intimate viewpoint, picture our winter whistlers, the 
chickadee and the titmouse, gold of good 
cheer in his heart, treasure of gold beneath each wing. 
From the coming of the first gray 
robin to the crowning of spring, with 
the gold oriole, there was to be recorded 
from our village a wealth of bird-land incident; if nothing better than a tale of 
how I chased an illusive chewink to her 
brush-pile home; or how I found blue 
birds complacently watching me from a 
hole in a post; or how, for instance, a 
cow bird audibly gloated when she, left 
a snuff-flecked egg in my song sparrow's 
dainty nest; how an April storm destroyed a catbird home and two beryline 
eggs. I could tell, too, of the mourning 
dove's pitiful nest of weeds; her colorless eggs; her plaint, "Here's another 
new-u-u-found woe-o-o. " 
But long before the writing of the 
saddest as well as the brightest of these 
resulted in "Distinguished" marks for a 
year's effort, had I discovered what good 
friends birds are. "Nothing here is for 
me," sometimes I've found myself saying when picturesque places seemed only 
for the rich. "The flowers he planted. 
He set out the trees—" perhaps at that 
moment, from among live-oak, maple or 
cotton-wood boughs, flutters reassurance 
in the form of our impartial friend, 
the bird. I watch small sweet Sonora 
doves flitting from the Phoenix rich 
man's olive groves to the pepper trees of 
my humble stopping-place. I see desert 
song sparrows go out toward the Apache 
huts. I hear kildeer's trilling far up on 
bald Monkey Hills, where no man. but 
the Hopi camps. The birds befriend us 
all. 
I would have for teachers the robin 
and the oriole, symbols, respectively, of 
hardihood and subtility. The robin has 
courage to build in tempestuous young 
spring. The oriole chooses silk to interweave with nest fabric. Courage and 
care. "I cannot see that failure to realize yourself could be interpreted otherwise than quite wilful neglect. Use your 
abilities. It is all that is necessary," BIRDS AN D MANUSCRIPTS 93 
fa 
I 
A BLUEBIRD'S FRON T DOO R 
read a final message from the wielder of 
the blue pencil. "Much patience ! Much 
labor! Much hope, too !" the rust-brown 
Carolina wren has caroled at my window 
all winter. I heed the message of both 
critic and bird. 
Though I lack the robin's farsightedness to discern May in March; oriole 
clearness of vision to select silk from 
silt, the message of my springtime 
friends, this year seems more fully than 
ever fraught with meaning for me. 
After many months of living as much as 
possible for it alone, I have all but finished my book on the out-of-doors. 
Still—blue egg merged into speckled 
fledgling; spotted breast ripened to red 
—what awaits the robin ? God send 
such springtime as the oriole finds. 
"WAITIN G FO R TH E ORIOLES ' TH E GOLDEN-HAIRE D MAIDE N 
By SIDNEY E. DICKINSON 
SUMME R night was stealing across 
the bottom lands and wooded 
wastes of Alabama. The last bell of 
evening had died on the still air. Far 
off in the west—in the west of long ago 
—a- soft light glowed, pale, ashen, and 
dim, and then went out. Warm breezes 
came out of the south, and in the upper 
air was heard the rushing of a great 
wind. The trees swayed and the leaves 
sang a song of evening. Then all was 
calm, for the night had come. Distant 
sounds as of a people in trouble came 
out of the vast 
reaches o f th e 
land—wails and 
songs and amazing ecstasy. 
A youth and a 
maiden — a fairformed yout h 
an d a goldenhaired maiden— 
were walking together alone. 
"Yes, yes," the 
maide n sobbed, 
"but your heart 
seem s cold to 
me." 
"And yours is 
much too warm, 
1 think." 
"Never was heart too warm," she 
sobbed "for without warm hearts the 
world were very cold indeed." 
"What a silly notion," laughed the 
cold-hearted boy. "And now we're home 
again. Good night." 
He turned to speak as he went away. 
"Sit on the steps," he said, "and listen 
to the black folks singing. That will 
cool your heart. Damn their racket, say 
I." 
"That will warm my heart," she said. 
And so she sat alone—this gentle 
maiden of long ago—and the tears came 
to her eyes and she marveled at the 
beauty of the far-away voices and she 
thought not of the youth who had passed 
from her life forever. 
Her dog came to her side and looked 
into her face. She spoke kindly to him 
and he nestled close beside her. But he 
was uneasy and soon was away baying 
as only a hound can bay on a summer 
night in Alabama. From far and near 
came answers to his barking. 
"What's wrong with the dog? " called 
out a voice from within the house. 
"I do not know, father," replied the 
maiden. 
"Come in, my girl." 
"The night is lovely, father. I will 
stay out if you please, dear father." 
"Very w e 1 1. 
Good night." 
"Come in, my 
dear," chimed in 
the hollow voice 
of a woman. 
"The night is 
warm. Aunt Caroline. I will stay 
out if you please." 
"Wh y must they 
be ever after me ?" 
brooded the girl. 
"They do no t 
know me." 
"No good will 
c o m e of this," 
said the father. 
"She is a headstrong girl," said 
the aunt. 
A hush had come over the land. The 
dogs had ceased their barking. The 
voices of sorrow were no longer heard. 
Only the drone of myriad insects broke 
the silence. 
"I seem hardly myself tonight," mused 
the maiden. "I am unhappy and happy 
at once. Surely this is strange. Yes, 
my heart is too warm." 
And while she sat thus in reverie, 
great preparations were going on in the 
quarters down back of the mansion— 
preparations she knew not of, for the 
preparations were carried on with wondrous stealth. But so still was the night 
that she heard at length the murmur of 
muffled voices, and great fear came over 
her, for the hour was well past ten. TH E GOLDEN-HAIRED MAIDE N 93 
"Father is very cruel to them. What 
can it be? " she thought. 
She called her dog, but no dog came. 
All was very still. 
"They love me. I will go clown." 
Out into the night she ventured, atremble. Quiet reigned at the quarters. 
"Aunt Janey," she called; but her 
voice echoed in an empty room. 
"Sammy May," she called. Again no 
answer. 
She felt her way inside. A rat scurried across the dirt. Yes, the slaves had 
gone. 
"Oh dear!" wept the golden-haired 
maiden, and would have fainted there, 
no doubt, had not her heart been warm. 
She feared to return to the house and 
knew not what to do. 
"I hear them," she cried. "I hear 
them. Down in the swamp they are 
singing. They have stolen away to meet 
with their God." Her face turned 
ghastly white. "What if father hears 
them?" she gasped. "But the swamp is 
far away and father will not hear them, 
I know." 
A sudden thought came to her, bringing back with it the color to her face. 
"I am going to the swamp, and why I 
am going I do not know. Is it because 
my heart is warm?" 
Once the resolution was made and 
once the wild escapade undertaken, 
nothing could have stayed her. She 
knew the road to the grist mill, dared 
the path through the sighing pines, and 
ere the time when night meets morning, 
had come to the edge of the brake. A 
volume of song issued from the depths 
of the ghostly swamp. Quavering notes, 
higher and higher and yet higher, blended with the booming of the bases and 
the swell and rocking of altos and sweet 
tenors. And through it all came the 
frenzied screams of men and women in 
the throes of religious passion. The 
golden-haired maiden fought her way 
through the tangled underbrush and 
through the mud and through inky pools 
of water, till, undetected, she found herself almost upon this midnight scene so 
passing strange. A lull had come in the 
singing. There was no light. Some one 
was praying for deliverance from bondage, more fervently, thought the maiden, 
than ever she had heard man pray before. 
"I wonder why I am here?" she pondered. "I am very tired, and I am not 
well. My breath comes short. But my 
heart is warmer than ever before, and 
I am happy. I seem to be meeting my 
lover, and my lover's heart is warmer 
than mine." 
The prayer continued with increasing 
fervor till all were swaying and weeping 
with emotions varying from keenest 
terror to most exalted bliss. 
Out of such passion something must 
be born, and ere the prayer was well 
completed the silvery voice of a man in 
anguish rose above the weeping, singing, 
"I was way down a-yonder a-by myself. 
I was hunting a-fo' some a-bosom afriend." 
Scarcely had the exquisite melody 
burst upon the night when another 
voice, born of the African wilderness, 
had joined in with a throbbing accompaniment—"Dum a la dum a lum a dum 
a lum." 
The assembled slaves took up the 
monotonous chant, only to hear the wailing tenor peal out again in perfect ecstasy. "An' O Lord de angel done 
change my name, my brudder' an' I don' 
know where my leader's gone. Good 
Lord my Jesus done died one time, my 
brudder"—here, all, feeling the common 
inspiration, sang out, "an' he never 
'tends to die no mo'." 
"My heart is a-flame with love," wept 
the golden-haired maiden. 
On toward the hours of sunrise, when 
fancies, not signs, are astir to tell of the 
coming day, the meeting had burned itself out. Exhausted, the Negroes prepared to return by stealth, as they had 
come, and there among them they found 
their golden-haired maiden. 
The doctor said the golden-haired 
maiden could not live, and so, when she 
was about to die, the rough father, with 
tears rolling down his cheeks, and the 
heartless aunt, and others were assembled about her, and she said, "My 
heart is warm with love." 
"It is a good thing," said the heartless 
aunt to herself, when all was over, "for 
sooner or later the girl would learn our 
secret, and then the story would out, 94 TH E CRISIS 
Outside the Negroes wept as a lover 
weeps for his lost one. 
The cold-hearted youth said, "I do not 
understand." 
AN APPEAL 
Dee. 10-1914. 
R No. 4 Box 62 Cordele Ga 
Dear Editor. Will you Please allow me to 
Beg you to help just one hard Working man 
here in Georgia. By giving me Space in 
your Paper, to get a home in That Part of 
the Word Where Probly a Working man can 
get a Wa y to make a Living if Nothing else: 
I am a hard Working man and of a very 
small family. Bread Born and Raised on a 
farm and has a Good Rep among all White 
& Black. Not too yong to Work. Nor too 
old. Not sickly at all: age 34: Wif e 28: 
W e made and Gathered 100 Bushels of Com 
and 21 good Bales of Cotton, on one horse 
farm, and Now. W e are Panic stricken. 
With Nothing to eat. and Very Little to 
ware. W e Need help. Badly. There is Nothing in this Country to Do Wherein W e might 
make a Living. If there is any concern 
That Will feed and clothe us I Will Serve 
all Nex year: 12 months to Pay for Same. 
I can furnish Good Reference to my self 
among Some of the Best White People here. 
No one in family has ever Been arested. No 
had any cause for such, these Words can 
easly Be proved. Will you Please help us to 
get in the Republic part of the World enstead of the Dimacratic and help one honest 
Colord man to get wher T can Live : Please 
answer your most humble 
Servant 
J. F. Wright. 
Of course, we hope that our children 
are the finest that appear in The Crisis 
and. therefore, proud for the world to 
see them for they are as fine as they 
look. W e think quite seriously, and 
shiver when we think of it, and agree 
with you in speaking of the disgrace, 
"that the foremost republic on earth 
should be directing its greatest battle not 
against war and poverty and prejudice, 
but against these dark babies. On with 
The Crisis." 
Chicago, Ill. 
Atlanta. Ga. 
Congratulations on this editorial on 
the war in the new Crisis, and on the 
one about the Women's Clubs as well. 
Some criticise us for a chip-on-theshoulder attitude. I myself, however, 
become more and more intolerant of any 
suggestion of patronage. 
B. G. Brawley. 
New York City. 
I want to express my warm satisfaction with the manly and skillful way in 
which The Crisis handled the TrotterWilson affair. Your paper is simply 
splendid in this and in other ways of 
fighting the good fight. 
Moses Oppenheimer. 
Washington, D. C. 
The Crisis improves with age, and it 
alone justifies the existence of the N. A. 
A. C P. 
E. C. Williams, 
Principal Colored High School. 
and I would be disgraced—a nigger for 
a niece!" 
"God be merciful!" cried the father. 
"It is very sad," said the others. LETTERS 95 
Calhoun, Ala. 
I am enclosing my check for subscription to The Crisis with my heartiest congratulations. 
Even when you show a spirit, semioccasionally, only, that makes your most 
devoted adherents cringe a trifle,—I believe that the existence of such bitterness of spirit is a scientific fact which 
should be known by all who are intelligently interested in the welfare of the 
people of both races. 
But is the present state of things due 
to the patient waiting policy of one section of the colored people? Is it not 
rather due to the constantly increasing 
number of able, educated, cultured men 
and women of the race, who must of 
necessity bring a new demand for recognition and give the question of social 
justice new prominence and new meanings,—with a temporary increase of difficulties ? 
Jessie E. Guernsey. 
St. Louis, Mo. 
I was glad to learn that a committee 
is protesting against the AnheuserBusch Company's posters. 
Under date of December 24th I sent 
the company a protest. Among other 
things in their reply they claimed to 
have hesitated a long while but finally 
decided to let the caricature appear in 
their name; and that decision was 
reached after consulting several Negroes 
who said it would be looked upon as 
comical and in no way offensive! 
I had begun to think I was possibly 
alone in taking exceptions. I am glad 
to find that I have company. 
Minnie T. Shores. 
Edmonton, Canada. 
I want to thank The Crisis for showing me how to vote for principles 
rather than parties. 
G. T- Jones. 
Washington, D. C. 
Thanks for splendid articles and editorials on recent White House incident 
and Oklahoma car case, especially the 
latter. It took bravery to say what was 
said in The Crisis, but it ought to have 
been said and repeated. The continual 
carrying of these cases up to the higher 
courts improperly prepared is a disgrace 
and positive injury to our cause, however good the intentions of the inadequately trained men who persist in doing it. May The Crisis have a prosperous year. 
F . H . M. Murray. 
New York City. 
With my heartiest wishes for the success of The Crisis, (it is the one paper 
whose editorials I never miss reading) 
now and in the future. 
Amy Spingarn. 
(Mrs. J. E. Spingarn.) 
Irvington, N. J. 
The examples I have given of various 
poets and their lives goes to show that 
their minds reach the magnitude of its 
power at different times of life regardless of their genius. With all due respect to the editors of The Crisis, the 
reading of Palgrave's collection, Braithwaite's anthology and Max Eastman's 
enjoyment of poetry may give a young 
aspiring writer a clearer perception of 
his true mission in life, but if he has not 
the divine spark in his soul, the gift of 
the Gods, his efforts in expressing himself in true poetic terms will be of no 
avail for poets are born, not made. 
Chas. A. Biot. 
Warren, Ark. 
Negroes assembled in Emancipation 
Celebration instructed us to wire their 
thanks to you, Mr. Spingarn and the 
Association for the manly fight you 
made to secure a part of the SmithLever appropriation for the farmers 
and your leadership. 
James W . Eichelberger. 
Pine Bluff, Ark. 
The Arkansas Teachers' Association 
express their appreciation and thanks to 
you and your organization for your 
stand and work on the Smith-Lever 
Bill. 
C. P . McLurkin, 
W . W . Welsh, 
J. G. Robinson, 
Committee. 96 TH E CRISIS 
Yes, indeed, I read The Crisis from 
cover to cover. I think it is one of the 
best edited magazines that I have ever 
seen. It is a rare blend of virile conviction and literary quality, a combination seldom found. 
Henry Moskowitz, 
Chairman, Civil Service Board, 
New York City. 
New York City. 
I wish to express my appreciation for 
the splendid editorial on Woman Suffrage, published in the April number of 
The Crisis. I am greatly touched with 
its generous patience and foresighted 
idealism. 
Viva Boarman Whitehouse, 
Chairman, Press and Publicity Council. A Statement of the Circulation of THE CRISIS, a monthly maga 
zine, published at 70 Fifth Avenue, New York City 
Average monthly circulation, 1914 31,450 
JANUARY 1915 28,198 
FEBRUARY 1915 27,201 
MARCH 1915 28,661 
APRIL 1915 33,921 
Issue of April, 1915 (in detail) 
By geographi c divisions I U. S.) 
New England States 1,804 
Middle Atlantic States 6,903 
East North Central States 7,730 
West North Central States 2,925 
South Atlantic States 6,006 
East South Central States 1,885 
West South Central States 4,056 
Mountain States 797 
Pacific States 933 
Foreign* 
33,039 
. 882 
By States (U. S.) 
Alabama 558 
Arizona 166 
Arkansas 725 
California 579 
Colorado 254 
Connecticut 409 
Delaware 172 
District of Columbia 997 
Florida 799 
Georgia 903 
Idaho 6 
Illinois 3,388 
Indiana 1,134 
Iowa 517 
Kansas 665 
Kentucky 363 
Louisiana 1,121 
Maine 8 
Maryland 645 
Massachusetts 1,152 
Michigan 345 
Minnesota 387 
Mississippi 453 
Missouri 1,188 
Montana 116 
Nebraska 140 
Nevada 15 
New Hampshire 9 
New Jersey 1,160 
New Mexico 100 
New York 2,382 
North Carolina 587 
North Dakota 21 
Ohio 2,745 
Oklahoma 866 
Oregon 70 
Pennsylvania 3,361 
Rhode Island 223 
South Carolina 718 
South Dakota 7 
Tennessee • • 511 
Texas 1,344 
Utah 117 
Vermont 3 
Virginia 844 
Washington 284 
West Virginia 341 
Wisconsin 118 
Wyoming 23 
A. G. DILL, Business Manager. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 12th day of May, 1915 
EDWARD J. BREDEN, 
Notary Public, Kings Co., No. 101. 
Notary Public, N. Y. Co., No. 113. 
* Including 263 to insular and territorial U. S. 
Total 33,921 
By agents and news stands 26,269 
Subscribers 7,652 
Incorporated places in the United States 
Less than 1,000 population and 
miscellaneous 1,901 
1,000 to 
5,000 to 
10,000 to 
20,000 to 
30,000 to 
40,000 to 
. 50,000 to 
5,000 1,893 
10,000 2,478 
20,000 2,737 
30,000 3,332 
40,000 ...-. 1,776 
50,000 1,429 
75,000 2,655 
75,000 to 100,000 1,402 
100,000 to 200,000 2,406 
200,000 to 500,000 3,404 
500,000 and over 7,8 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
What Will You be Doing 
Five Years From Today? 
What will you be doing five years from today? What will be your earning capacity? Wil l 
the work you are doing now, today, and the work you will probably take up this fall, be fitting 
you for a larger earning capacity five years from now? 
To the man who has his own business, or who has finished his profession and who has 
settled down to practice, these questions do not apply. But to the other man—young or 
old—the man who has gone through school and who came out without any definite idea of what 
his life work is to be; to the man who left school early, attracted by the lure of the tips on 
a Pulman car, or at a beach resort, and who never afterwards seemed able to do anything else, 
this question is directed: What will vou be doing five years from today? Will you always be 
a belman, or a waiter, or a porter? There is no disgrace in being either. All labor is honorable 
and some of the finest souls in America today exist beneath a waiter's jacket or a porter's 
uniform. 
But you, young men and middle-aged men, with ambition and inteligence,_ who have never 
had a chance to rise, and who have wondered if there was not some other line of work into 
which you could go where your worth would be appreciated, and where you could make a 
decent living; these questions are directed to you. 
Hav e yo u eve r thought of the wonderful opportunity whic h the selling of life 
insurance offers ? Ther e are ove r Te n Million of our folks in this countr y ; there 
are not Te n Thousan d wh o hav e ove r Five Thousan d Dollar s insurance on their 
lives. Certainly no on e can say there are not Te n Thousan d colored me n able to 
carry that muc h or more . Ther e are. as a matter of fact, Te n Thousan d wh o are 
able to carry Twenty-fiv e Thousan d Dollars on their lives; there are On e Hun ­
dred Thousan d me n wh o are able to carry Five Thousan d Dollars on their lives; 
and On e Million wh o could pay for On e Thousan d Dollars in insurance. Thes e 
are stupendous figures, but they are TRUE . Yo u are living ove r a gold mine , 
youn g man. Yo u are stubbing your toe on a diamond and kicking it out of the 
way . Th e amount of life insurance in old-line companie s carried b y our peopl e is 
so small, comparatively, that insurance book s mak e n o record of it. But this 
condition is changing. Colored people are awakening to the fact that it is just as 
necessary to protect one's wif e and child with life insurance as it is to protect 
one's household good s with fire insurance. Th e organization of this Compan y 
wa s undertaken to mee t this growin g need. Th e fact that in less than tw o years 
w e have, in a small area, with a handful of untrained me n written ove r On e and a 
Half Million Dollars worth of insurance, show s that there is a DEMAND . 
There is a golden harvest awaiting the trained solicitor; there is a lifetime of remunerative 
high class work in the insurance business. Life insurance soliciting is the best paid hard work 
in the world. Prepare yourself and make life insurance YOUR life work. It takes preparation 
and constant study and thoughtful work to make good. But the pay—on the commission basis 
entirely—is the highest in the world. If we had the MEN, competent, capable, earnest, we 
could enter actively every state in the Union where there are sufficient of our people to 
solicit business. 
Prepare now and connect yourself with the only regular old-line legal reserve life 
insurance company owned and operated entirely by colored people. 
Please 
send me 
particulars \ 
about 
insurance. STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Amoun t $ •.. 200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Sex "• 
Ag e
 Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Weight *• . Over One Million and a Half Insurance in Force 
Occupation \ ^ Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
Name \ 
Address \ HEM A N E. PERRY, President 
(C. June, 1915) \ HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 99 
Normal Work at Wilberforce Approved by the State 
EXTENSIVE IMPROVEMENTS T O BE MAD E 
Summer Term 1915 to be Omitted 
T
H E Normal and Industrial Department at Wilberforce is now one of the institutions in the state of Ohio approved by the Superintendent of Public Instruction 
for the training of teachers for elementary and special work. 
Teachers graduating from this department will, without examination, be entitled to a 
state certificate good in Ohio and recognized in thirty other states. 
To better equip the department for its work, extensive improvements and additions to 
buildings will be made; shops for the mechanical trades; a hospital building; gymnasium and additional accommodations for teachers. 
The Summer Term will be omitted during the present summer while these improvements are being made. In future, summer students will have advantage of these 
improvements and summer work will have full value, entitling graduates to certificate 
without examination. 
N O SUMME R SESSIO N 19I S 
REGISTE R NO W FO R SESSIO N 191 6 
aiMiwiMiui 
"THE LIFE AN D WORK S OF PAU L 
LAURENC E DUNBAR " 
Containing his COMPLET E POETICA L WORKS , his best short stories, 
numerous anecdotes and a complete 
biography by Lida Keck Wiggins. This 
great book should be in every Negro 
home. Dunbar was the World's Greatest Negro Poet and his work stands in 
a class alone. Contains 430 pages—60 
full-page illustrations Price $1.75 net. 
Postage extra 15c. AGENT S WANTED . 
TEXA S COLORE D TEACHERS ' 
AGENC Y 
Book Department, Desk D 
1025 Boll St. Dallas, Texas 
Note to Teachers—A post card will 
bring information concerning our teachers' placing agency. W e recommend 
competent teachers to positions all over 
the South. Address inquiry to Registration Department. 
FOOTWEA R FI T T O WEA R 
FRE E 
T O EVER Y WOMA N 
who writes, one copy of "Ladies 
Cyclopedia of Healt h and 
Beauty." This book contains information indispensable to every 
woman; on every subject women are most interested 
in. Tells how to cultivate health and beauty, what 
to use and how to use it. 
LOUI S MCCREAR Y 
131 2 FA R NA M STREE T OMAHA , NEB . 
FRE E DELIVER Y FRO M FACTORY TO BUYE R B Y 
PARCE L POST . 
GUARANTEE D MEN' S AN D WOMEN' S LINE IN ALL 
STYLES AN D LEATHERS. FRO M $3.5 0 TO $5.00 . 
Send for Catalog 
TH E FRE D DOUGLAS S SHO E CO. , INC . 
Department A LYNN, MASS. 
Mention THE CRISIS 
f FREE 
TAILO R 
BOO K Jg 
MakeS35 to$65aweek show-> 
ingthisgreatTailor-Book. t 
GoodseomuchfinerandprioeBK 
Rn much lower, everyone BOOS 1 
the difference at a glance. 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
To prove ourunoqualledqiiaHty, 
we will let you ordor at the 
wholenale price, a Sample Suit or 
even a pair of pants aa low a«$2.25 
—and no extra charges even t~~' 
biggest peg top Rt.ylen. Yo 
now make moro quick mnu-y and In 
own fine tailored c I"thee cheaper than you ever thought posoihle 
We prepay the charges on every oritur ami don't keopacont of 
any customer's money unleoe ho iB well pleased. Lctuaoond you 
thin flriGHunn.le •nillit. unci HIIOW ynu how to take the mnet perfect 
lu.-iiniii uu fur the finoattailoring on themarket. Write ua today. 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
P.PT . 357 . VAN BUREN AND MARKET Sit,. , CHICAG O 
i»$2.Z5 I ! ; ! .I K 
fnrtl.e Hit i 'J 
SIV? ™ P!IIR.LL;;JF 
AIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIBI II I IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIII [I IIIII [IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii I III I MINI I I M A 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
Without a Cent of Cost to You 
I giv e you a very fine pure 
wool sweater ; double collar 
and cuffs.your choice of color. 
Just handle for me your club'S 
spring order for basebal l 
goods — at special discount, 
and this jersey is yours. Send 
for complete catalog of my beat 
grade sporting goods at wholesale prices—baskethall, baseball, 
tennis, golf. etc. Write me now. 
JAC K SHANNO N CO . 
Dept-25,54 E.Monroe ST CHICAGO 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. Yon can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, Ill. 
Make Extra Money Each Week 
Light, pleasant and very profitable work. Take 
orders for our high grade calling cards at 50 for 25 
cents with name and address. Big demand everywhere. Large commissions. Exclusive territory. 
Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIING . Indianapolis. Ind. 
Wealth is Power 
The Union Development Company's 
stock is a wealth producer. $40,000.00 
of stock for sale at $10.00 per share. 
Stock is now paying 7%. Every dollar 
invested in first class improved business 
property, located in the heart of the city ; 
no risk, no failure. Company duly 
chartered under the laws of Georgia; is 
composed of some of the most successful 
and influential business men and women 
of the city and has great earning possibilities. Send at once for free circular 
giving full information. 
Union Developmen t Co . 
45 8 West Broa d Stree t Savannah , Ga . 
r BEAUT Y 
CULTUR E 
An art every woman should cultivate to retain the transparent, 
velvety complexion of youth. 
There's no secret or mystery 
about it, just use 
REJUVENATIN G CREAM ' 
for cleansing and massage 
DELUX E POWDE R 
for a beautiful complexion. Rejuvenating Cream, 20 cent jars. DeLuxe Powder, white, pink, or high 
brown, 50 cent boxes. 
As a profession Beauty Culture offers a dignified and lucrative employment for young wom, 
en. Most completely appointed Beauty Culture Parlors and School In the east. All 
branches taught. Special terms for a limited 
l>v time. 
HJ MADAM BARREAU 
BRISTOL BUILDING 
f L NE W BEDFORD , MASS . 
d? 
Pianos-Player pianoS 
Factory to Hom e 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
TEACHER S The new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
00 110 BY MY PLAN 
of selling direct from factory to home, I can save you 
from $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Mode l Pianos. 
Two to Four Years to Pay 
The' Easiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
All middlemen , jobbers, dealers and agents 
profits cut out. No charge for salesroom expense for m y 
office Is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
why I can sell the Evans Artist Mode l Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons Writ e today. 
3 0 Days Free Trial 
We allow all freight charges, let you use the 
beautiful Evans Artist Mode l Piano for thirty days 
free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we wilt take 
It back without any cost to you—you are the sole 
Judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you may 
do so on our low factory wholesale price on 
most convenient terms. j&y** 
Free Music Lessons 
F. O. E. piano Co. 
Dept. 81 Chicago 
TO EVERY CUSTOMER 
we win give a two year COURSE of piano 
Instruction free. Ask about our Insur 
ance plan and our method of saving 
you money. Write today. 
F. O Evans Piano Co. 
Dept. Chicago, Illinois 
Please send me your wholesale 
Price list and catalogue of the Evans 
Artist Model pianos 
A Base Ball 
Jersey TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 101 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 7 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :i ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:- New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Ten poems by 
EFFIE T. BATTLE. A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual rift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : OKOLON A INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
SILVER CHORD POEMS 
By one of the leading poets of the race, 
ADOLPHUS JOHNSON. 
Printed on fine Aberdeen book paper, highly glazed, and handsomely bound in Olive 
green cloth. A book for every home. In dialect and English. Start the buy a book movement. Agents wanted. 
Pric e 75c. Postpai d 
TH E GRA Y PUBLISHIN G CO. 
420 South 11th St., Philadelphia 
IN NEW YORK AT 
The Crisis. 70 5th Ave. Young'' Book Exchange, 135 W. 135th St. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
Mention 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
(George Young) 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colored Authors and Books on Race Problems 
a Specialty. 
135 W. 133th Street New York City 
The Ocean House 
Better 
known as 
SE A ISLE CIT Y 
N . J . 
Personally managed by Mrs. Lucy Lee. This is 
the only property we own on the Atlantic Beach 
front. Every room opens on the ocean. Bathing, 
boating, fishing, music, dancing. A beautiful view of 
the ocean while dining from our new conservatory 
dining room. 
Special rates to school teacher, for July. 
Writ e for rates. Address: 
MRS. LUCY LEE, 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, N. Y. 
Afte r July 1st, Th e Ocean House, Sea Isle, N . J. 
Season, June 1st to September 30th 
MILLER'S COTTAGE, Luray, Va. 
In the heart of the mountains; an ideal resort 
uniting all city gayeties with the quiet of the country. Every summer comfort; cool, airy rooms; within five minutes' walk of the great Luray Caverns; 
tempting table, tennis courts, fishing, music, dancing. 
Booklet on request. 
MRS . ALDIN A HAWKIN S HAINE S 
Luray, Virginia. 
HOTE L LINCOL N 
(American or European Plan) 
Opens May 15th under new managment 
Combines the restful 
quiet of the country and 
sea shore with the gayeties of a great city Only 
a few minutes' ride by 
train separates Ne w 
York City from this delightful spot. HOTE L 
LINCOLN is within 
three minutes walk of 
the beach where there 
are bathing, boating and 
fishing. 26 magnifi 
cently appointed rooms, 
single or en suite. Every 
convenience to suit the 
most exacting. 
EXCELLENT CUISINE—MODERATE RATES—BEST OF SERVICE 
For information write C. A . BRECKENR1DGE. Prop. 
Telephone 1417 Hammels Arvene. Long Island 
WANTE D 
Colored men and women to become manufacturers 
and make a fortune preparing hair tonics, hair oil, 
face powders and creams, shoe polishes, chewing gum 
and 20 money making plans. $1.50 brings plans telling how these formulas made many rich. You can 
do the same. Do it now. 
IRVIN G R. THOMPSO N 
1118 West l8th Street, Lorain, Ohio. 
$6 0 WEEKLY 
Robinson Foldin Bobi g Bath Tub. Big seller. Costs little, 
no plumbing, little water. Weight 15 pounds, 
folds into small roll. Full length baths, far better 
than tin tubs. Guaranteed 10 years. $10 a day easilv made, Write 
for free tub offer. Robinson Cabinet Mrg. Co., 334 Factories Bldg.,Toledo, O. 
TH K CRISIS 
Opens July 1 
Closes Sept. 15 
The Gordon Sea View, 102 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J. E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits System, 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25 , Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
REGALIA 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
/Centra l 104-W 
\ Main 61 Telephones: 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
160 7 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone S277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
11 3 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
SYLVANU S H . HART , JR . 
Attorney and Counsellor at Law 
Practice in all Courts Jacksonville, Fla. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
3 4 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F, McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LA W 
2 1 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Street New York City 
WILLIAM L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
30 0 Odd Fellow Bldg. ATLANTA , GA . 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Ohio 
LADIES ! 
$2.4 0 — Pe r Day-$2.4 0 
Selling our high-grade Food Flavoring. 
Saucepan Free with each order. 
W . HENR Y ELMORE , JR . 
51 0 Carolina Street Chattanooga, Tenn. 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R B H 
| W . T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 9 0 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 
For Scalp, Hair and Skin 
P. O . Box 102 , WILMINGTON , DEL . 
WANTE D 
Agents fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignified work . 
7 0 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York . 
Rogers Silver State Seal 
Souveni r Spoo n 
Get this genuine, guaranteed 188 1 
ROGER S A 1 State Seal Souvenir 
Spoon of your own state. They certainly are beauties. Yo u never saw 
anything lovelier. The pattern is simply exquisite. They embody the new 
idea of smooth, large, bowl and the 
elaborately decorated handle. The kind 
women love. A heavy deep cut state 
seal design; noble, modern and elegant. 
The quality of the spoon is the very 
best, solid, substantial and rich. They 
are spoons you will be proud to own. 
The illustration gives you only a faint 
idea of the exquisite loveliness of the 
whole effect. These spoons are made 
and guaranteed by the time honored 
firm of Wm . A . Rogers, which stands 
for finest designing, highest grade of 
workmanship and longest wear. Every 
spoon is wrapped in the original guarantee certificate. These spoons retail 
from 50c to 75c each. Special introductory price 15 cents each, 3c additional for postage on one spoon and lc 
for each additional spoon. W e need 
ambitious, energetic and reliable men 
and women to represent us. Exclusive 
territory. This is a high grade clean 
proposition. Your opportunity; grasp 
it; address 
« 
a 
u 
•d 
#> 
a 
| 
Rogers Souvenir Spoon Co. 
225 2 South Sacramento Avenue 
Chicago, Ill. Attention, Masons! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORGE W . CRAWFORD, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale, formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of New Haven and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr. 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENTS 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A. & A. Scottish Rite : 
" 'Prince Hall and His Followers,' written by a scholarly Afro-American, presents to the Masonic world a treatise on the legitimacy of Negro Masonry that 
should be in the hands of every Mason seeking for Truth. The information 
contained in the chapter devoted to Prince Hall is alone worth to the young 
Mason the price of the book. Brother Crawford's easy and pleasing style 
creates in the reader a desire to complete the volume before putting the book 
out of his hands." 
From Henry A. Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York: 
"The book fills a long-felt want among intelligent Masons of our Race. 
To know that we are right, and to substantiate that fact by intelligent research 
and logical statements, is worth more to us than what the other fellow may 
say. This is what Brother Crawford's book does; and it should be in the hands 
of every Mason of our Race." 
From Jose H. Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners : 
"A very strong brief, setting forth plainly the legitimacy of Prince Hall 
Masonry, and, as well, a stern call to all Negroes to assume full pride in the 
. happy possession of a Rite which can show such clear proofs of its contentions." 
From William H. Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of "A History of Colored Freemasonry": 
"I have read with great pleasure 'Prince Hall and His Followers.' The book 
is well written, containing clear and convincing diction. The impartial accuracy 
with which the facts are marshalled makes the book a very valuable asset 
to Masons." 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENTS WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e :: :: Ne w Yor k 
Mention Tn Crisis A Selected List of Book s 
Thes e price s d o no t includ e postage . Postag e extra . 
HOUSE BEHIND THE CEDARS. (Charles W. Chesnutt) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 10 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRICS OF LOWLY LIFE. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARROW OF TRADITION. (Charles W. Chesnutt) 1.5 0 
TH E SPORT OF THE GODS. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.5 0 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W . E . B. Du Bois) 1.25 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B . G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D OF PRIMITIVE MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.5 0 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E . B. Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.5 0 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T. Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICAN ABROAD. 2 Volumes. (William H . Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
TH E COLORED INVENTOR. (Henry E. Baker) 1 5 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. (Julia L. Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenu e :: :: Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E Crisis 