THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACES 
Volume Four JULY , 1912 Number Three 
EDUCATIONA L NUMBE R 
ON E 
DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENTS A COPY Avery College Training Schools 
NORT H SIDE, PITTSBURGH, PA. 
A superior training school for young colored women, thoroughly instructing 
its students as a means of self-support in dressmaking, cutting and drafting, domestic 
science, music, nurse training, millinery, and an intermediate English course. This 
institution is under the influence of no religious denomination, is the oldest endowed 
chartered Negro institution in America. The accommodations in its dormitory, 
which is in charge of a competent matron, are excelled by no colored institution 
in this country. 
The hospital department offers the same course as the large hospitals of the 
State of Pennsylvania, fully equipped with its operating rooms, diet kitchen and 
ambulance service. The course requires three years' lectures on general nursing, 
anatomy, ethics, surgery, obstetrics, asepsis, antiseptics, gynecology, pediatrics, eye, 
nose, throat, materia medica, therapeutics and dietetics under a staff of white and 
colored physicians. Catalogues now ready. 
Address all communications to 
JOSEPH D. MAHONEY , Secretary 
Box 154 North Side, Pittsburgh Pa. 
PLAY BALL, BOYS! 
Last half of the ninth; bases full; score tied and "Casey" at the bat. 
Get in the game, boys. Organize a baseball team in your city. 
Baseball is the most popular sport in this country. In every hamlet, town 
and city may be seen the future "Rube Fosters" and "Willia m Matthews" romping 
over corner lots, batting, pitching and learning to play the game. 
Organize your team and get our great baseball outfit for a few hours' work. 
Our outfit includes 
10 Spalding baseball suits with name of club (any color). 
10 caps to match. 
10 pairs baseball stockings. 
1 catcher's mit. 
1 first baseman's glove. 
3 infielders' gloves. 
3 outfielders' gloves. 
FOR INFORMATION WRITE THE : 
Business Manage r of TH E CRISI S 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention THΕ CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
26 Vesey Street, New York City. 
CONTENT S FO R JUL Y 
PAG E 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 111 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 118 
OPINIO N 121 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COL ­
ORE D PEOPL E 12S 
EDITORIA L 129 
TH E YEA R IN COLORE D COLLEGE S 133 
TH E MONTESSOR I METHOD . By Jessie Fauset 136 
TH E FAITH S O F TH E TEACHERS . By G. S. Dickerman 139 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . Poem. By Charles S. Nutter, D. D 142 
GENERA L EVARIST O ESTENOZ . By Arthur A. Schomburg 143 
PROTECTIO N 144 
WOMEN' S CLUBS . A Social Center at Hampton. By A. W. Hunton 145 
HISTORI C DAY S IN JULY . By L. M . Hershaw 146 
TH E BURDE N 147 
"I ME T A LITTL E BLUE-EYE D GIRL." Poem. By Bertha Johnston... 147 
LETTE R BO X 148 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P. O. at N. Y. City 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS. Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN . Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manage r 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
J . MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W. S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
Subscription: $1.00 a year; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Subscriptions 
to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th of the previous month. 108 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practical method of singin g for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared numbe r of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course i n 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N. Y.: A very practical 
little book is "Ton e Placing and Voic e Development/ ' by Pedro T . Tinsley. A s the preface says: 
"It is for daily practice, based upon artistic principles, including a course in the art of breathing, 
structure of the vocal apparatus, hearing the voice, 
together with a carefully prepared number of vocal 
exercises, forming a comprehensive, progressive and 
self-explained course of voice building." Written 
b y Pedro T . Tinsley, conductor of the Choral Club 
of Chicago, and a man who has had many years' 
experience in teaching voice. It contains some very 
excellent material and vocal exercises, and should 
be in the hands of all vocal students. Pric e $1. 
Address the publisher: 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO, IL L 
or Clayton P. Summy, 220 Wabash Avenue, and 
Lyo n & Healy, Adams & Wabash, Chicago, Ill. 
" A noteworthy book of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
B y W. E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
Eighth Editio n 
"It is one of the noteworthy books, 
not merely of a year, but of the epoch. 
Its every page is filled with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality." — Boston 
Transcript. 
" A stripping bare of the moral and 
mental anatomy of the African in America so as to reveal the naked soul in its 
primitive simplicity, seared and scarred 
by ages of suffering."—New York Age. 
Wit h Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
A t book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAG O 
The NEGR O AN D TH E 
ELECTIVE FRANCHISE 
No. 11. Occasional Papers 
AMERICA N NEGR O ACADEM Y 
A n Opinion Worth While. 
"I find more patriotism and statesmanship 
in this pamphlet by colored men than in 
all the contributions made on the subject 
by white men since the Civil War." 
A. E . Pillsbury. 
Inclose 35 cents to 
J . W . C R O M W E L L 
1439 Swans Street. N. W . Washington. D. C. 
PUBLICATION S 
A M . £ . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TE E POEM S O P PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price . $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; b y R . R . Wright, Jr . 
I n pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . O. Steward, 
Chaplain U. S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 75 
cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study in 
Economi c History . B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , Sometime 
Research Fellow in Sociology in the University of 
Pennsylvania. Price , Paper , $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pine Street. Philadelphia, P a 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A , G . DIL L 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
GREA T CALAMIT Y I N 
PHILADELPHIA SOCIETY 
"Who's Who in Philadelphia" 
Latest and greatest book of the season. 
Biographi c sketches and cuts of leading 
colored citizens, with illustrations of their 
principal institutions, and other valuable 
information. 208 pages. B y Charles Fred. 
White , author of "PLE A O F TH E NEGR O 
SOLDIER " and a hundred other poems. 
Introduction by Dr . R. R. Wright, Jr . 
PRICE, $2.00 
Chas. Fred White 
1508 Lombard Street, Philadelphia 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 109 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for Negro 
Youth which has a Military Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Ten 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term begins September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N. I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta, Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA . GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-helpFall Term Begins September, 1912. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
The largest colored college in the South. 
A new department of sociology and social 
service. A notable equipment in land and 
buildings. Endorsed by the General Education Board. For information address 
GEORGE A. GATES, President 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 110 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"Our Heroes of Destiny" 
Honorables Frederick Douglass, John M . Langston, Blanche K. Bruce, Paul Laurence 
Dunbar and Booker T. Washington 
I desire to thank the readers 
This illustration is protected by copyright. Any infringement 
will be prosecuted 
"OU R HEROE S O F DESTINY " 
of TH E CRISI S and my large 
number of friends for their 
very enthusiastic support and 
appreciation of the Special 
Edition of "OU R HEROE S O F 
DESTINY. " 
POPULA R EDITIO N 
Whil e the orders for the 
Special Edition have been most 
gratifying, there has been a 
constant demand for a cheaper 
one. 
In response to these numerous requests I am glad to announce that a Popular Edition 
is on the press. In producing 
this Edition there is neither a 
sacrifice of quality nor workmanship, as I was fortunate in 
securing a specially processed 
paper, which will defy even the 
eyes of an expert in distinguishing it from the Special Edition. 
The price of the Popular 
Edition is fifty cents, postpaid. 
The Specia l Edition , which is on 
JAPA N VELLUM , will, by no 
means, be discontinued, and those 
of th e particular sort who desire 
may have one forwarded to them for 
On e Dollar , postpaid . 
INDIVIDUA L PORTRAIT S 
The Individual Portraits are 
beautiful gravures, 11 by 14 
inches, handsomely mounted 
and ready for framing. Price, 
fifty cents. 
A partial list of those now 
ready includes: 
Frederic k Douglass 
Booke r T . Washingto n 
Mrs . Booke r T. Washingto n 
Blanch e K . Bruc e 
Joh n M . Langsto n 
W . E . B . D u Boi s 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 
Rev . C T . Walke r 
Judso n W . Lyon s 
T . Thomas Fortun e 
TESTIMONIALS 
children of their homes the meaning of the 
lives of these five men." 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
Rev. Dr . R. C. Ransom, New York City, says: 
"Your splendid production of 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' marks the era of perpetuating 
characteristic and faithful likenesses of the 
famous men and women of our own race, to 
be handed down to younger generations, inspiring them with ideals which if carefully nurtured 
in their young lives will in their mature ages 
prove excellent examples of pure and dignified 
manhood and womanhood. 
"No home where there is a child should be 
without a copy of this excellent work, and no 
parent that feels the love and loyalty of higher 
race development should fail to teach the 
Mrs. B. K . Bruce, Washington, D. C , says: 
"I am indeed glad to say that 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' is the most creditable work of 
art that has yet been produced of and for our 
people. The life likeness of the entire group 
is exceedingly good. It is a fitting memorial 
worthy to be in every home. 
"If we are to perpetuate the memories of 
our own great men, it must be by keeping 
their portraits ever before our youth, and 
familiarizing them with the true meaning of 
their lives." 
AGENTS — Her e is a proposition that will net you a substantial monthly income, 
whether you devote all or spare time to it. M y extensive advertising; creating a demand for these pictures, insures quick sales, and their superior quality 
makes each purchaser a satisfied customer. YO U would be interested to 
know how I train my agents by correspondence and make them successful 
salesmen. Writ e for particulars. 
C.M. Battey Artist and Publisher 322 Mott Avenue New York City TH E CRISI S 
Volume Four JULY , 1912 Number Three 
ALON G 
COLOR LINE 
EDUCATION. 
J. PIERPON T MORGA N has offered to 
give the last $25,000 of the endowment 
fund which Fis k University is endeavoring to 
raise. About $135,000 remains to be 
subscribed. 
*I I n Philadelphi a a citizens' committee 
charges that the 2,000 colored American 
children of school age are discriminated 
against and segregated i n the public schools. 
They say that not only are colored children 
refused admission to certain schools and 
made to walk long distances, but even i n the 
same school some colored children have not 
a proper supply of the text books. Some, 
while i n the same room with other children, 
are placed on one side of the room by themselves ; others i n the same building are placed 
i n a separate room, where one teacher attempts to teach several grades; i n other in ­
stances the colored children are placed i n 
an annex which is badly located, unsanitary 
and overcrowded, while the parent building 
is large and well ventilated, with unoccupied 
rooms, sufficient to accommodate colored 
children who have been taken out of this 
building and placed i n said annex. The 
colored people are threatening to take the 
matter to court unless their request for a 
colored member of the school board is 
granted. 
<I The commencement honors i n Northern 
colleges include two colored doctors of philosophy mentioned elsewhere, a commencement speaker, Joh n Arnett Mitchell, at Bowdoin, and numbers of athletic honors. 
•J I n the grammar schools' oratorical contests at Hillburn , N . Y. , out of seven contestants Cecelia E . Gunner, a colored girl, 
won first prize and Ir a Smith, a colored boy, 
won second prize. 
fl A chorus of twenty-six Hampto n students 
is making a summer trip for the purpose of 
raising money for the institution. They wil l 
camp i n tents and will tour eight States. 
«3 One hundred and eighty-four graduates 
were awarded diplomas and certificates at 
the thirty-seventh anniversary exercises at 
Tuskegee Institute. Majo r R. R. Moten delivered the address and several thousand 
people were present. 
Twenty thousand people saw the annual 
competitive drill of the Washington Colored 
Hig h Schools. Company A , Captain A . C. 
Logan, of the M Street Hig h School, was 
declared the winner. 
Dr. W . P. Thirkield has resigned the presidency of Howar d University to become a 
bishop of the Methodist Episcopa l Church. 
Amon g those who have been spoken of to 
succeed him are Kell y Mille r and George W . 
Cook. Durin g Dr. Thirkield's incumbency 
of the presidency he has secured four large 
buildings, a central heating plant, increased 
equipment for all departments and large 
appropriations from Congress. 
<J Amon g the summer schools for colored 
teachers to be held during vacation are those 
at Hampton , Knoxville , Manassas and 
Nashville. 112 TH E CRISIS 
^ Representative Jones, of Virginia , has 
been seeking to have the appropriation o f 
$15,000 fo r the support of Indian pupils o f 
Hampto n restored to the appropriation bill . 
H e said among other things: " I have heard 
it whispered around that there were Negroes 
educated at the Hampto n school as well 
as Indians. I wish to say i n respect to 
this that whilst this is true, it is also true 
that the Negro students and the Indians 
occupy different dormitories and are not 
even brought together i n the mess halls. 
"The Indians have never objected to the 
presence of Negroes at this school. N o 
complaint has ever come from the white 
inhabitants of Hampto n and the State o f 
Virgini a has never withheld from this school 
her bounty because Indians and Negroes met 
together i n the lecture halls and shops and 
on the experimental farms. Moreover, i n 
the space of a third of a century this is the 
first time this argument has been advanced 
here i n support of the proposition to take 
from the Indians the very best educational 
facilities they have ever enjoyed. There has 
never been the slightest friction between the 
two races in all these years at Hampton . 
They are not brought together in the dormitories or in the dining rooms, and there 
has never beeen complaint on the part of 
any Indian because of the fact that they 
meet i n the classrooms, the shops an d the 
fields." 
The amendment was lost, however. 
POLITICAL. 
AT the second annual session of the Ar -
kansas Suffrage League nearly 800 colored men were i n attendance. They elected 
J . E . Bus h president and G. W . Hayma n 
secretary. 
Col. Joh n R. Lynch , a retired paymaster 
of the United States Arm y and former member of the United States Hous e of Repre ­
sentatives from Mississippi, availed himself 
recently of his right to a seat on the floor 
at the House. The Georgia doorkeeper 
wished to prevent him, but Speaker Clark 
admitted him. 
*3 The Iowa papers are conceding that 
George H . Woodson, a colored lawyer of 
Buxton will probably go to the legislature. 
V There was a single colored delegate at the 
Socialist National Convention held i n In ­
dianapolis i n May , Mr . S. C. Garrison of 
Montpelier, Ind. Mr . Garrison's career as a 
Socialist has been an interesting one. H e 
joined the party i n 1897, while a minister 
i n the A . M . E . Church. Whe n holding a 
charge at Muncie, Ind., he held Socialist 
meetings in the Baptist and Methodist 
PRESIDENT TAFT VISITING TH E GEORGIA STATE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
He Is Shaking Hands with President R. B. Wright, Sr. ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 113 
Churches. This, however, proved displeasin g to the white employers of colored labor 
i n the town, and the colored men, becoming 
fearful of losing their positions, compelled 
him to desist. H e was asked to take charge of 
a small colored congregation i n Montpelier, 
Ind., an d when, owing to economic changes, 
his congregation moved away from the place, 
the white Socialists, whom he had organized 
into a local, begged him to remain. They 
made him an organizer and he was then able 
to devote his whole time to Socialism. H e 
is organizer i n the States of Ohio, Indiana 
an d Illinois, and he was sent as a delegate 
to the convention chiefly by white Socialists. 
4 Atlanti c Cit y has decided to adopt the 
commission form of government. A t a recent primar y election ten candidates for the 
five commissionships were nominated. Dr. 
N . L . Hawkins, a colored physician, was 
second on the list. 
<I Bot h Houses of Congress have finally 
agreed to submit to the States an amendment 
to the Constitution providing for the direct 
election of United States Senators. The attempt to forbid the control of these elections 
by the United States was defeated. It wil l 
be remembered that a year ago this question 
aroused discussion i n regard to Negro disfranchisement, the South fearing that i f the 
United States has the right to control elections colored men might be allowed to vote. 
9 A t the Democratic primaries i n the District of Columbi a it is charged that colored 
voters were debarred from voting. 
TH E CHURCH. 
AT the General Conference of the M . E . 
Church steps were taken to lay before 
the annual conferences a proposition permitting racial bishops to be elected. The colored 
delegates, being unable to elect a Negro 
bishop at present, threw their strength to 
the election of President W . P . Thirkield of 
Howard . I. Garland Penn was elected secretary of the Freedmen's Ai d Society to succeed Dr. M . C. B . Mason, who has held that 
position for the last sixteen years. The 
General Conference adopted resolutions commending Dr. Mason's services i n the highest 
terms. 
<J A t the conference of the Zion Church no 
new bishops were elected, but considerable 
constructive legislation was passed. 
«I A t the General Conference of the A . M . E . 
Churc h four bishops were elected: Rev. 
Joh n E . Hurst of Washington, D . C , formerly financial secretary; Rev. J . M . Conner 
of Arkansas, Rev. Joshua H . Jones of 
Ohio and Rev. W . D . Chappelle of South 
Carolina . Rev. R. C. Ransom was made 
editor of the Review and R . R. Wright, 
Jr., editor of the Recorder; J . L . Hawkins, 
financial secretary; J . W . Rankin , missionary secretary; J . I. Lowe, manager of book 
concern, and Ir a Bryant, manager of the 
Sunday-school Union . Bishop H . M . Turner, 
the veteran senior bishop, was retired. 
<I The Rev. D . L . Ferguson, colored rector of 
the Church of Our Mercifu l Saviour, at 
Louisville, Ky. , has been selected to preach 
the annual sermon before the Episcopa l 
Council of the Diocese of Kentuck y next 
year. Nearly all the ministers of this council 
are Southern white men. 
<1 The thirty-eighth annual convention of the 
New Englan d Baptist Missionary Association 
was held i n Orange, N . J. , June 11 to 13. 
One thousand delegates attended. 
MEETINGS . 
THE national board of the Y . W . C. A. , 
under the direction of Mrs. W . A . Hun -
ton, held its first conference of colored workers 
in New Yor k Cit y last month. Amon g the 
speakers were Mrs. B . K . Bruce, Mrs. Betty 
Francis and Miss Halli e Q. Brown . Plans 
for a new building i n New Yor k to cost 
$100,000 were announced. 
*i The eighth biennial meeting of the 
National Association of Colored Women's 
Clubs wil l convene at Hampto n Institute 
Jul y 23 to 27. Miss Elizabeth C. Carter of 
New Bedford is president and Miss Ida R. 
Cummings, 1234 Drui d Hil l Avenue, Baltimore, Md. , is secretary. Report blanks can 
be had of the secretary. A large attendance 
is expected. 
•I The annual meeting of the Iowa Federation of Colored Women's Clubs was held in 
Des Moines. 
(| A Y. M . C. A . conference of colored students, with delegates from twenty-eight leading schools, was held for ten days at King s 
Mountain, N . C. 
•I The seventeenth Atlant a conference for 
study of Negro problems was held at At ­
lanta University. The printed volume of last 
year's report on the "Common School and 
the Negro-American, " a volume of 140 pages, 114 TH E CRISIS 
TW O SCENE S FRO M 1 'MIDSUMMER' S NIGHT' S DREAM ' 
was distributed at the conference. This year 
the subject of the "Negro Artisan " was 
taken up. 
Q The third annual session of the Pan -
Missouri Colored Medica l Association was 
attended by sixty-five colored physicians. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
ON Ma y 19 the gangplank of the steamship "Flyer " broke while she was 
moored at her dock i n Seattle, and sixty persons were thrown into the water. A little 
black boy who was on the wharf polishing 
shoes rushed down to the ship 
when he heard the cries and, 
throwing off his clothes, 
plunged overboard without a 
moment's hesitation. 
" I declare to you, " said one 
of the passengers who saw the 
thing, " I never saw such a 
beautiful sight i n my life as 
that black - skinned little 
shaver making himself ready 
to save those struggling, helpless women and babies i n the 
water. Everybody cheered 
him when he made his first 
dive, and when he made his 
second there was another 
cheer — but a cheer that 
sounded like a choking prayer fluttering 
fearfully out of a hundred appalled hearts. 
H e was not the only hero, of course, but some 
way, when I hear of heroes after this, 'I 
shall always have a picture i n my mind of a 
black youngster stripping himself and diving 
into the water after drowning women and 
children." 
The boy, whose name is Newton Johns, 
saved four persons who were about to drown 
and was "the conspicuous hero" of the disaster. The mayor sought him out and 
warmly congratulated him. 
<J The Louisville Nationa l Medica l College, 
after twenty-four years' existence, has been 
closed, not being able to come up to the 
requirements of the Kentuck y State Boar d 
of Health. 
<i The Washington Dramati c Club, of which 
Mrs. Ann a J. Cooper is director, recently 
gave Shakespeare's "Midsummer's Night's 
Dream" at the Howar d Theatre. Mrs. Juli a 
Wormle y McAdo o and Miss Louise Europe 
helped i n the production. 
9 The Southern Sociological Congress at its 
Nashville meeting declared that the congress 
should plan among other 
things "the solving . of the 
race problem i n a spirit of 
helpfulness to the Negro and 
with equal justice to both 
races." Amon g the speakers 
was one colored man, Dr. 
George L . Haynes, of Fis k 
University. 
The University Commission of Southern Race Questions, composed of eleven 
representatives of Southern 
white State universities, has 
been permanently organized, 
with Professor C. H . Brough, 
of the University of Arkansas, 
as chairman. 
•I Cleveland Evans, a colored man, nearly 
lost his life in rescuing a white woman from 
drowning at Augusta , Ga . 
ECONOMICS. 
A COLORE D man is about to build a $5,000 
restaurant on Drui d Hil l Avenue, 
Baltimore. 
«J The colored Y . M . C. A . building of 
Washington, D . C , which cost $100,000, has 
just been opened on 12th Street. Secretary 
of Wa r Stimson delivered the dedicatory 
NEWTO N JOHN S ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 115 
A S GIVE N B Y TH E WASHINGTO N DRAMATI C CLU B 
address. The cornerstone was laid by exPresident Roosevelt i n 1907. The building 
is four stories high with a basement; i n the 
basement is a barber shop, swimming pool 
and Turkish bath; on the first floor are the 
reading rooms and parlors, lodge rooms, 
committee rooms and gymnasium; on the 
second floor is an assembly hall, boys' department, classrooms and offices; the third 
and fourth floors are occupied by forty-four 
dormitories. 
PERSONAL. 
HOWAR D DREW , the young colored athlete who defeated Craig, the Michigan 
sprinter, at the 100-meter distance i n the fast 
time of ten and four-fifth seconds, hails from 
Virginia , and now lives i n Springfield, Mass. 
Drew is a good baseball and football player, 
and was captain of last year's track team 
and this year's track team at Springfield 
Hig h School. H e won for his high school last 
year the New Englan d interscholastic championship at the Harvar d Stadium, and this 
year won three first places i n the scholastic 
meet at Dartmouth, two firsts at Yal e scholastic games, and was. timed nine and four-fifth 
seconds for the 100-yard dash at Amherst. 
Representing the South Boston Athletic 
Club last year i n the New Englan d A . A . U . 
championships, Drew won the 100-yard dash 
i n ten seconds and the 220-yard dash i n 
twenty-one and four-fifth seconds, a new 
record for the games. Runnin g for New 
England, at the A . A . U . national championships at Pittsburgh, he won the junior 
championship of the United States i n the 
100-yard dash, and also a place i n the 
Canadian championships at Montreal, after 
being put one yar d behind scratch for false 
starting. 
Drew has been chosen on the American 
Olympi c team for the Stockholm games. 
Theodore Cable, the champion hammer 
thrower of Harvard , stands a chance of bein g elected captain of the varsity track team. 
<I Jackson Gordon, for fourteen years messenger i n the offices of the board of assessors 
in Chicago, is dead. 
<I Mrs. Emeline Jones, who died June 9, was 
a well-known New Yor k caterer. President 
Arthu r offered her the position to cook at the 
Whit e House, but she refused; she was patronized by the rich people of New Yor k and 
was the originator of "Saratoga chips." 
*& Thomas McKnight , once collector of the 
port of Tampa, Fla. , is dead. 
<I Richard Allen , for twenty-six years an 
employee of the First National Ban k of 
Kansa s City, Mo. , has carried millions of 
dollars of the bank's funds. H e is commissioned as deputy policeman and has the absolute confidence of the bank. 
9 Mr . Caseley Hayfor d Barrister, at Law, 
Gold Coast, Africa , who has been i n England 
for the past two months on important business i n connection with native affairs i n that 
colony, is returning home to begin work on 
a "Lif e of Dr. Edwar d Wilmo t Blyden. " 
This duty was imposed on him by Dr. 
Blyden, when he visited the coast some years 
ago. Mr . Hayfor d will be grateful to any 
friends of Dr. Blyden, i n America , who can 
furnish him with reminiscences or any data 
for this work. Mr . Hayford's address is 
Anon a Chambers, Sekondi," Gold Coast, 
Africa . 
TH E GHETTO. 
THE movement to keep Negroes from buying property i n desirable sections in 
cities is moving pn apace. I n Mooresville, 
N . C , Mr . A . Coble, who had been owning 
land on McLellan d Avenue for four years, 116 TH E CRISIS 
started to build a house. Immediately the 
town passed the following ordinance: 
. "Ordinance No . 62, of the town of Mooresville, N . C. It shall be unlawful for any 
person or corporation to move or cause to be 
moved any colored person or family into any 
house i n the town of Mooresville, N . C , 
within the boundaries hereinafter set out, 
which is not at this time occupied by persons 
of the colored race, and any violation of this 
ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, 
and upon conviction such person or persons 
or corporation so offending shall be fined $50 
for each offense, and each and every day 
such colored person or persons shall be allowed to occupy any house i n said boundaries 
as above specified shall constitute a separate 
offense." J. E . BROWN , Mayor. 
E . C. DEATON , Clerk. 
Ma y 1, 1912. 
*3I I n Greenville, S. C , Goldsmith Brothers, 
colored grocers, bought property on Nort h 
Mai n Street for $65,000. Immediately the 
city council passed an ordinance to forbid 
the ownership of property by Negroes i n 
white districts. I n Richmond, Va. , Henr y 
Bake r was fined $100 and costs for occupying a dwelling on Ashlan d Street, where 
white residents predominate. Bake r has 
appealed. I n St. Louis, Mo. , the West En d 
Association are tryin g to have a city segregation ordinance passed. Denver, by means 
of mass meetings, is tryin g to stop the sale 
of property to colored people i n certain 
sections. 
•J I n Jonesborough, Ark. , and Clovis, N . M. , 
attempts have been made to drive out Negro 
laborers. 
*3 A t Charlotte, N . C , the employment of a 
Negro foreman over a squad of Negro workers caused forty-five white employees to 
strike. 
*I Colored railway mail clerks i n the South 
are objects of jealousy and attack. Recently 
such a clerk was run away from Clarkesdale, Miss., another was assaulted at 
Meridian, Miss., and later W . A . McAlpin , 
a colored man, was beaten by fifteen white 
men on his first run to Laurel, Miss. 
«I The colored soldiers of Fort Russell, 
Wyoming , have been protesting against the 
language used by certain' theatrical companies ; the manager of the theatre has promised to be careful. 
COURTS 
THE United States Supreme Court has set 
aside the decree of the Supreme Court of 
Georgia, which enjoined colored men from 
incorporating a lodge i n that State under 
the name of the Knights of Pythias. Chie f 
Justice Whit e announced the opinion. This 
decision is fa r reaching i n its effect, as there 
has been a general movement throughout the 
Southern States to restrain the Negroes from 
using the names or emblems, of the white 
orders. 
The Georgia court based its decision on 
the rules of law which protect the public 
against unfair trade methods. Justice 
Holmes and Justice Lurto n dissented. Chie f 
Justice Whit e held that there was no evidence to show that the colored lodges had 
injured their white namesakes i n any way, 
and inasmuch as the Negroes had maintained 
their organization without complaint from 
the whites for more than twenty years, their 
membership having • attained 300,000, the 
white lodges were guilty of laches and could 
not be heard to complain i n a court of equity 
under such circumstances. 
«J The Court of Appeals of the State of 
New Yor k has decided that the colored 
order of Elk s cannot use the name "Elks, " 
but may use the insignia, colors and ritual. 
<I I n Shreveport, La. , Cit y Judge Blanchard 
announced from the bench that the sworn 
testimony of a Negro would not be given 
credence i n preference to that of a white 
man, whether the white man was on tria l or 
not. 
*I The colored citizens of Shreveport, La. , i n 
a public meeting set forth the following 
recent cases of murder and oppression: 
"The half-witted man taken from the officers i n the West En d at high noon, and 
lynched, not quite two years ago. The man 
who for years had worked for the city, 
sweeping its streets, and bore the reputation 
of a peaceful and law-abiding citizen, was 
clubbed to death by a peace preserver of the 
law. The man killed by a conductor on the 
street car. The two innocent men shot down 
by officers i n the West End . The man Miles, 
lynched only a few weeks ago, said to be 
by unknown parties. The indiscriminate 
shooting by officers for any and every cause 
and the wilfu l violation of the Hunsicke r 
law. ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 117 
"Ho w long can we follow the pursuits of 
lif e wit h safety or shall we seek safety i n 
flight ? W e have waited patiently to see the 
men committing these crimes brought to 
justice, and their guilt or innocence established. Our people are so often beaten and 
clubbed by the officers that they are afraid 
and have a horror of being arrested, and 
invariably break to ru n and are shot down. 
There is nothing left for us to do but appeal 
to our white friends and fellow citizens for 
better consideration." 
CRIME. 
THE following lynchings have occurred 
since our last report: 
Dan . Davis burned at the stake at Tyler, 
Tex.; he was accused of criminal assault on 
a white woman. This is the fourth Negro 
lynched i n Tyle r i n the last few years. A t 
Valdosta, Ga., a Negro, Emanuel, is said 
to have been killed and thrown into the river 
for shooting at a white man who was not 
killed. A t Nashville, Tenn., J . Samuels, a 
colored man charged with attacking a white 
woman, was shot to death. A t Salisbury, 
Md. , a number of curious stories have been 
sent out. A colored farmhand was accused 
of attacking the daughter of a farmer; then 
the charge was that he had attacked her 
several times, but the fact had not been 
reported. A n attempt was made to lynch 
the man, but he was taken by the sheriff to 
Baltimore. A well-known white citizen of 
Baltimore writes us as follows: " I find that 
the extent and excitement of the mob was 
greatly exaggerated. A gentleman from the 
county says that the case of assault Was not 
very clear; you can see for yourself there 
is something a little peculiar about it. " 
<J Three Negroes hanged i n Florid a declared 
to the very last that they were not guilt y of 
the crime charged against them. Richardson, 
who killed two white men i n self-defense, and 
whose story was told i n the last December 
number of TH E CRISIS, has been sentenced 
to be hanged. 
<I Negroes have been killed by policemen at 
New Orleans, Savannah, Louisville, Memphis, 
Florence, Ala. , and Des Moines, Ia. 
«I Whit e men have killed Negroes at Oxford, 
N . C , Rock y Mount, N . C , Memphis, Tenn., 
Beaumont, Tex., and Winston-Salem, N . C. 
«J There have been two attempts at lynching 
i n New Yor k Cit y and another i n New Yor k 
State. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
A CONCER T took place Ma y 29 at the 
** • New Twelfth Baptist Church i n Boston, Mass. Mr . Mellvill e Charlton, the 
organist of New York , presented an effective 
program. Mrs. Jessie E . Shaw, a pianist, 
assisted Mr . Charlton. 
<I On Ma y 17 the Chaminade Musi c Club, 
composed of amateur and professional musicians . of Boston, Mass., presented the 
operetta " A Nautical Knot. " The production was under the direction of Miss Mar y 
Page, a colored vocal student at the Ne w 
Englan d Conservatory of Music . 
<I A t the ceremonies connected with the placing of his bust i n the opera house at Cairo , 
Egypt, Camille Saint-Saens, the Frenc h 
composer, conducted his symphonic poem 
"Africa. " The themes of the composition, 
written for piano and orchestra, show the 
unusual scale progression and origina l 
rhythms of the Negro folk song. 
«I On Ma y 27, i n Chicago, Ill., the Chora l 
Study Club of Chicago, before a large audience, presented S. Coleridge-Taylor's "Blin d 
Gir l of Castle Guille " and Cowan's "St. 
John's Eve, " under the direction of Mr . 
Pedro T. Tinsley, conductor. 
The soloists were Mrs. Virgini a Greene 
and Mrs. Marth a B . Anderson, soprani; Mrs. 
Clar a K . Williams, contralto; Mr . George L . 
Johnson, tenor; Mr . T. Theodore Taylor, 
baritone. 
The Music News of Chicago gives credit 
to the soloists for their excellent work, and 
to the accompanists, Mrs. Pelagie Blair and 
Miss M . Gertrude Jackson, who assisted the 
orchestra. The reviewer writes: "The chorus 
and soloists seemed to enter thoroughly into 
the spirit of this cantata and the bright an d 
tuneful music, as well as the more seriouschoruses, were sung with fine effect. Espe ­
cially impressive was the closing chorus with 
its sombre coloring 'a l a cortege,' emphasized by the majesty of the organ accompaniment." 
It is to be regretted that Mr . Tinsley, who 
has been il l this spring, wil l be unable to 
continue as conductor of the Choral Study 
Club next season. 
<J Miss Helen Eugeni a Haga n of New 
Haven, Conn., who finishes her course this 
year at the Yal e School of Music , was 
awarded on Ma y 24 the Samuel Sanford 
fellowship, which provides for two years' 
study abroad. CHARLES L. MITCHEL L 
THE colored race lost a famous fighter i n 
the month of May , when Charles L . 
Mitchell died at his home i n Roxbury, Mass. 
Bor n i n Hartford , Conn., i n 1829, of a wellknown colored family, he went to work as a 
TH E LAT E CHARLE S L . MITCHEL L 
printer i n Boston, in 1853, and found congenial employment on Willia m Lloy d Garrison's Liberator. H e worked with the great 
abolitionist until the Civi l Wa r broke out, 
but he enlisted with the Fifty-fifth Massachusetts Regiment as soon as the colored men 
were called on. 
H e had a remarkable record for bravery in 
the war. H e was camp printer for a time; 
he begged, however, to be sent to the firing 
line and took part i n the battle of Honey 
Hill , in which one-third of the force engaged 
was killed. His foot was taken off by a 
cannon shot, but they told the story of how, 
when he was being carried bleeding from 
the field, he sat upright on the stretcher to 
cheer a regiment that went by to make anMEN OF TH E 
MONT H 
other charge. The incident was widely commented on at the time and shortly afterward 
he received a second lieutenancy, one of the 
few colored men to be thus honored. 
Returning to Boston with what Wendell 
Phillip s called "that added grace, the halting 
which is the stateliest step of the soldier," he 
was elected to the legislature by a handsome 
majority, and he was also given a post i n 
the customs house, which he held for fortythree years. H e took a prominent part i n the 
life of the city and was i n close touch with 
all movements for the betterment of his race. 
H e was one of the pallbearers at the funeral 
of Mr . Garrison, and served as one of the 
five members of General N . P . Hallowell's 
staff when the Robert Gould Shaw monument 
was unveiled. Whe n the Cuban Wa r broke 
CHARLE S BURROUGH S MEN OF TH E MONTH 119 
GEORG E E. HAYNE S 
out he was so active i n organizing the colored Company L of the Sixt h Massachusetts 
that his injured leg sent him again to the 
hospital and he suffered another amputation, 
so that he was as truly wounded i n Cuba's 
cause as he had been when he fought for the 
freedom of the slave. 
Mr . Mitchell married Miss Nellie Brown of 
Dover, N . H. , who is well known as a musician and who survives him. 
CHARLES BURROUGHS. 
MR. CHARLE S BURROUGHS , who was 
born i n Galveston, Tex., i n 1875, has 
a unique record. Fo r three years he has 
lectured on Shakespeare under the New 
Yor k Boar d of Education, speaking to 
audiences i n every borough of the greater 
city and achieving a remarkable success. 
Mr . Burroughs had to leave school at the 
age of fourteen, but that did not incline him 
to give up thoughts of further education, and 
he managed to enter Wilberforce University 
and graduate from it i n 1897. B y that time, 
however, he had become convinced that his 
future lay i n the field of vocal expression, 
and he entered the Boston School of Expression where he studied for a year. A t the 
beginning of his career as a public reader he 
followed the lines of the familia r dramatic 
type, but i n 1906 he determined to emphasize the interpretative and educational phases 
of his work, and i n recent years his appearances have been largely before college and 
academic audiences. Mr . Lewis F . Mott, of 
the department of English i n the College of 
the Cit y of New York , has lectured together 
with Mr . Burroughs, and he wrote to the 
department of education that he found the 
audience, which had listened to him with 
patience, got what it wanted when Mr . Burroughs rose. "His readings of many passages I cannot easily forget," he said, i n 
speaking of Mr . Burroughs' interpretation 
of "Macbeth. " "They were, i n my humble 
judgment, superb." 
TWO DOCTORS OF PHILOSOPHY. 
THE commencements of 1912 have seen 
two colored men receive the degree of 
doctor of philosophy, Columbia University 
conferring it on Mr . George Edmun d Haynes 
and Harvar d on Mr. C. G. Woodson. 
Mr . Haynes was born i n Pine Bluff, Ark. , 
in 1880. H e attended the Richard Alle n In ­
stitute i n his native town, the Agricultura l 
and Mechanical College at Normal, Ala. , and 
then entered the preparatory school at Fis k 
University. H e received his A . B. degree 
from Fis k in 1903. H e had worked nearly 
every step of his educational way, but he 
determined to go on and won a tuition 
C. G. WOODSON 120 TH E CRISIS 
scholarship at Yale , earning the money necessary for his board and lodging i n various 
ways. H e received an A . M . • degree from 
Yal e i n 1904. Fro m 1905 to 1908 he was a 
traveling secretary for the International 
Committee of the Youn g Men's Christian 
Association; from 1908 to 1910 he held a 
fellowship of the Bureau of Social Research 
o f the New Yor k School of Philanthropy 
an d studied at Columbia University, where 
.he has now taken his doctorate with a thesis 
o n "The Negro at Wor k i n New Yor k City, " 
a subject on which he is an authority. 
Since 1910 Dr. Haynes has been professor 
o f social science at Fis k University and 
director of the Nationa l League on Urba n 
Conditions Amon g Negroes, with headquarters i n New Yor k City . The league is composed of white and colored persons, and has 
various purposes uniting, indeed, three organizations i n one. It seeks to promote and 
to do constructive and preventive social work 
for improving the social and economic conditions among Negroes i n cities; to bring coordination and co-operation among existing 
agencies, and to develop other agencies when 
necessary; to make such studies i n urban 
centers as may be necessary for the objects 
mentioned, and last, although perhaps most 
important, to train social workers. The 
training of such workers i n the best theory 
and practice of social work is, i n the opinion 
of the league and its director, "the very 
foundation stone for work among the Negro 
people." 
C. G. Woodson, the second doctor of 
philosophy, was born i n Virgini a i n 1875, 
but he grew to manhood i n West Virginia , 
working i n the coal mines to purchase a 
home and to defray the expenses of his secondary education, which poverty had delayed. I n 1896 he finished the course of the 
Douglass Hig h School of Huntington, W . Va. , 
and entered Berea College the following 
academic year. Afte r doing a little less than 
three years of work at this institution he 
left college to teach, and i n 1900 was chosen 
principa l of the high school, of which he 
had been a student four years earlier. Avail ­
in g himself of the opportunities for summer 
work, he completed his college course at the 
University of Chicago, receiving the degree 
of bachelor of arts. His professors testify 
that he did his work with distinction and 
praise him for his honorable career. "H e 
has never held a position," says one, "which 
he could not get again, i f it were vacant." 
Dr. Woodson is a man of unusual experience. I n 1903 he was appointed supervisor 
of schools i n the Philippines, where he 
served three years. Setting out from the 
Philippines, he completed his tour around 
the world, traveling i n Asia , Afric a and 
Europe . I n 1907 he was a student at the 
Sorbonne, i n Paris, workin g i n the department of history. Whe n he returned to the 
United States he entered the graduate 
.school of the University of Chicago, from 
which he received the degree of master of 
arts i n 1908. H e next went to Harvar d to 
continue his graduate work i n history and 
political science as a candidate for the degree of doctor of philosophy. Havin g by 
1909 completed the work i n residence required fo r this degree, he accepted the 
position of instructor i n modern languages 
i n the Washington Hig h Schools, that he 
might have access to the Librar y of Congress 
to write a doctor's dissertation. His thesis 
is "The Disruption of Virginia, " a study i n 
the economic and constitutional history of 
that State from its founding as a colony to 
its dissolution i n 1861. It is a careful in ­
quiry into the peculiar geographic conditions 
of the State, the heterogeneity of its people, 
and the influence of slavery as factors i n 
causing the estrangement of Western Vir ­
gini a from the other portion of the Ol d 
Dominion. 
a 
The Cleveland Plain Dealer of Marc h 26 
had the following editorial: 
"One of the honor pupils at East Hig h 
School, just announced, is the same colored 
girl who won the spelling victory at the 
Nationa l Educational Conference i n this 
city i n 1908: It wil l be remembered how 
scandalized certain Southern contestants were 
because a girl of Negro blood was permitted to compare her talents with theirs. 
Some of them were inclined to believe that 
Cleveland put the girl upon the program 
primaril y for the purpose of embarrassing 
visitors from the South. 
"The publication of the honor list shows 
that Miss Bolden is not only a good speller, 
but a capable all-round student. The prominence attained four years ago was won on 
merit and the struggle did not end with that 
triumph. The South ought to read the new 
chapter of Miss Bolden's career." 
W e have honored our cover page with a 
picture of this charming young lady. "THIEVES, " "LIARS "
 Readin g tha t
 section of 
AN D so FORTH .
 th e
 Republican press 
which demand s the 
nomination of President Taft, one is interested to discover that tens of thousands of 
dollars are being spent by Roosevelt to buy 
up the colored delegates to the national convention at Chicago. Reading the section of 
the press which maintains that Roosevelt 
alone can save the country, it is thrillin g to find that by the reckless expenditure of money Taft is securing the co-operation of the same delegates. N o sooner has 
one made up one's min d as to the source 
of corruption than another newspaper arrives wit h convincing proof just the other 
way. 
Mr . McKinley , the Taft chairman, declares 
that Roosevelt got the colored vote of Mary ­
land by open purchase. The Roosevelt men 
say this is " a diabolical lie, " and that anyone 
who repeats it is "an •unqualified liar. " The 
Charleston News and Courier, looking on at 
the fight, remarks: "Bot h Roosevelt and 
Taft are now exerting their efforts to convince the black politicians that the one is the 
greater friend to them than the other. The 
purchasable and corrupt delegations, which 
represent nothing but themselves, have i n 
the course of events become the arbiters of 
the convention fight. On them the issue of 
the contest wil l depend." 
The Charlotte (N . C.) Observer, which is 
a progressive paper and frequently fair to 
colored men, sums up the anti-Roosevelt side 
thus: "Comes the word from Washington 
that the friends of Colonel Roosevelt at the 
national capital were elated to-day (Saturday) over the report from South Carolina 
that Fran k J . Young , a Negro tailor of 
Spartanburg, and a delegate to the Republican National Convention, had declared that 
he and five other Negro delegates i n his 
State, who were supposed to be pledged for 
Taft, would vote for Roosevelt. A dispatch 
from Washington to the New Yor k World, 
under date of Ma y 4, says that a report is i n 
circulation there that 'Roosevelt's backers 
offered Representative Slemp, chairman of 
the Republican State Committee of Virginia , 
$25,000 for the delegates from his State to 
Chicago.' The World correspondent adds 
that 'the vestibule of the Roosevelt headquarters here at times has looked like a 
Negro meeting house i n the South. Eleven 
colored preachers from one State were there 
one day. They came i n a body to learn at 
first hand about the new Moses who is to 
lead their people out of the political wilderness.' 'It is estimated,' says the World correspondent again, 'using the alleged offer to 
Representative Slemp as a basis, that Roosevelt workers have offered over $375,000 for 
Southern delegates i n Maryland , West Vir ­
ginia, Virginia , Kentucky, Tennessee, Nort h 
Carolina, South Carolina , Georgia, Florida , 
Alabama , Mississippi, Louisiana, Oklahoma 
and Texas.' " 
Then, on the other hand, Collier's Weekly, 
which is ardently championing the cause 
of Roosevelt, goes into details about 
the corruption of the Republican "machine" 
i n the South and makes specific charges 
against the so-called leaders, white and colored, i n the State of Georgia. Henr y S. 
Jackson, collector of internal revenue, is 
president of the State League of Taft Clubs 
of Georgia, and has been sending letters to 
Republicans to raise what Collier's calls a 
"slush fund. " The magazine insists that 
these letters are i n direct violation of the 
law. "Fo r writin g these letters Mr . Jackson 
can be dismissed from office. Wit h a sensitive Department of Justice, it is entirely possible that an indictment would be only the 
preliminary to further proceedings. The 
criminal code deals with such a letter as the 
first one." 
Mr . Jackson calls on the leaders, white and 
colored, to go around among those "who are 
under some obligation to the party and 
solicit from all of them," then to distribute 122 TH E CRISIS 
the sums among the county chairmen i n 
each district "i n proportion to their needs." 
His chief lieutenant, according to Collier's, 
is a colored man, Benjamin J . Davis. 
Collier's goes into the matter of some indictment brought against him awhile ago and 
says: 
"Si x indictments were found against 
Davis, and he is still out on bond. Fo r 
years he has obtained a series of 'continuances'—that is, postponements of trial. 
These postponements amount to granting 
this criminal immunity. H e is the most 
valuable asset which the Republican party 
of Georgia possesses. Wit h these indictments held as a club over his head, he can 
be forced into line, he and all his State-wide 
power." An d the magazine also describes 
his "abject flattering of those white men he 
is shaping to his own clever purposes." 
A s the campaign drew nearer to the great 
day at Chicago, a discussion of the manners 
and morals of the colored delegates filled columns of newspapers which ordinarily close 
their pages to all mention of the black man 
unless he has been very spectacularly 
lynched. Manager McKinle y said he had 
"proof " that Ormsby McHarg , Roosevelt's 
campaign manager, had bribed colored delegates who were pledged to support Taft. I n 
retaliation the Roosevelt headquarters gave 
out a letter from Charles Banks of Mississippi, i n which he returns to McKinle y 
money given him "to defray traveling expenses of some of the delegates." Mr . Banks 
says he has turned to Roosevelt as a protest 
against conditions i n his State. 
"Whe n I was i n Washington a few weeks 
ago looking after the new Federal Court bill 
from Mississippi, " he writes, "and called at 
your headquarters, your assistant, without 
any suggestion from me whatever, brought 
up the matter of expenses for delegates from 
my State. I told him then and there, i n 
your presence, that so far as I was concerned 
I would not accept any expense money for 
me whatever. Yo u then proposed that I 
take enough for the rest of the delegates. 
I stated to you that they were all men who 
could get to Chicago, and you could look 
after the matter; here both of you, however, 
proposed that the matter be closed then, to 
which I agreed. 
"O n my arriva l at Chicago Wednesday, I 
found that you, or someone connected with 
you, had informed the delegates that you had 
given me a lot of money for them as well as 
myself. I am only confirmed i n what I 
suspected then, and I am returning you herewith the money, and you can do as you 
see fit. 
"The insinuations that I can be or have 
been bought are known to be untrue and 
unfounded by no one better than those connected with your campaign as well as those 
of four years ago. I have never asked any 
of you for one cent, and never applied for 
an office." 
The Roosevelt managers regard this letter 
as "proof " of their contention while the Taft 
men say it is "proof " of theirs. To pay 
the traveling expenses of delegates who could 
not afford to defray them out of their own 
pockets has, apparently, been a political 
custom on both sides. 
Whil e this merry recrimination went on 
the colored delegates for the most part 
proved to be an unusually high class of men 
and for the most part unbribable. The 
only weak part about them is that the mass 
of their constituents remain disfranchised 
and are helpless, of their own initiative, to 
remedy such evils as exist. 
TH E LOGICAL 
WHITE MAN . 
The Rev. Horace Bumstead, who lived i n the 
South for thirty-five 
years teaching black boys and girls, reviews 
i n the Congregationalist Raymon d Patterson's "The Negro and His Needs," a work 
commended i n a "Foreword " by President 
Taft. Dr. Bumstead finds sincerity of purpose i n the volume and then points out a 
few of Mr . Patterson's contradictions, which 
are so typica l of the muddle-headed condition of even the average well-intentioned 
man i n regard to the Negro question that 
we cannot forbear to quote them: 
"Amon g his conclusions," says Dr. Bumstead, "are such as these: 'Pu t a little black 
schoolhouse within sound of every plantation bell,' and yet, 'stop Negro education 
with the grammar school'— forgetting that 
it is the high schools and colleges that have 
furnished nearly all the competent Negro 
teachers for the elementary schools and have 
never been able to furnish enough. 'Stop 
the colored university just where it is,' and 
yet, 'plant industrial schools of the Tuskegee and Hampto n type i n every black 
county'— ignoring the dependence of such 
schools on the higher institutions for their 
teachers and managers, to say nothing of the 
proper preparation of pupils fitted to enter OPINIO N 123 
industrial schools. 'Keep the Negro out of 
politics i n the South'—without the ballot, 
educational and economic opportunity are 
inevitably restricted— 'until the average of 
the race is at least equal to that of the 
European immigrant of to-day'— unaware of 
the fact that in the Louisiana sugar district, 
where Negroes and Italians work together, 
the work demanding the highest efficiency is 
given not to the immigrants but to the Negroes. 'Do this by any means satisfactory 
to the rough and ready Anglo-Saxon mind 
and patch up the constitution afterward'; 
and 'lynch no Negro for anything except 
crimes against women, and then be sure you 
have the right Negro;' and then, on the same 
page with the foregoing prescriptions of 
lawlessness for the dominant race to practice, 'teach him morality and justice by the 
example of the white man!' " 
TH E GENTLEMA N 
FRO M GEORGIA . 
The Hon . S. A . Rod -
denbery of Georgia 
nobly waved the banner 
of the Empir e State of the South, where 
Negroes pay taxes on over $34,000,000 worth 
of property, on the occasion of a recent 
debate i n Congress. The question before 
the House was whether Spanish Wa r pensions should or should not be increased, but 
the gifted Roddenbery did not become really 
eloquent until he struck the Negro question. 
Then he said, as reported in the Congressional Record: "I f you really want to do 
something for these good Spanish Wa r boys 
joi n with me and go down here to this 
Pension Office and take out the Africans, 
turn them out of their jobs, and give the 
places to our Spanish Wa r soldiers, and 
keep them there as long as they are able 
to work and labor. Le t them administer a 
Caucasian government supported by Caucasian taxpayers. Whe n they get too old, 
i f they are indigent, then consider pensioning them; then go down Pennsylvania Ave ­
nue to this massive Wa r and Nav y Build ­
ing, walk up and down the aisles, and take 
those black sons of the cocoanut region who 
sit there with big brown drops of sweat 
coming out of their foreheads, kick them 
out, and put these old veterans of the Civi l 
Wa r there by those tables, at those telephones under those electric fans, and as 
long as they are able to labor let them have 
the benefit of the nation's offices and gratitude. Le t not the old pioneer of this country at 90 years of age be felling a tree in 
the forest, where by reason of his infirmity 
he drops dead beneath its shock. Give him 
and his kind a quiet and easy position now 
enjoyed by a 'kink y head.' 
"Pu t the Anglo-Saxon in. They are honorable; they are our blood. They helped 
save this country, i f saved it was. They 
have made this country and will perpetuate 
it. .Do something for them now. Tur n 
Afric a out and let Americ a in . Go down 
to the Bureau of Printin g and Engravin g 
where there stands a pure white girl working day by day and next to her a black 
Negro working day by day 
"The Speaker. 'The time of the gentleman has expired.' 
"Mr . Roddenberry. 'Fir e them out! 
Fir e them out! Fir e them out! (Laughter.) 
I f you have got Caucasian blood in your 
veins- kick them out.' " 
"Wit h an Indian first in 
the Olympi c Pentathlon 
trial, " remarks the New 
Yor k Evening Post, "Theodore Cable, Jr., 
Harvard's colored athlete, the individual star 
of the Harvard-Yal e track meeting, and 
Drew, the colored sprinter of the Springfield 
Hig h School, carrying off the honors i n the 
Yale interscholastic meet at New Haven, all 
on Saturday last, it is plainly time to draw 
the color line i n athletics. Ho w else will it 
be possible to maintain that the darker races 
are totally lacking in stamina and strength? 
Then these colored athletes have a bad habit 
of becoming prominent later i n life. 
"Fo r instance, Willia m H . Lewis, the 
Assistant Attorney-General, whom the officials of the mighty American Ba r Association are now laboring to expel from membership, used to be a star athlete at Amherst, 
and was later the 'brainiest' center rush that 
the Harvar d football team ever possessed. 
Mr . Matthews, who has now succeeded him 
as Assistant United States District Attorney 
i n Boston, was a remarkable end rush, and 
an equally conspicuous baseball player at 
Harvard . Wh o knows what Theodore Cable, 
Jr., may not aspire to, and what trouble he 
may not make for us all in the future? 
Let us scotch him now by ruling that he 
should not take part in any further intercollegiate competitions—to discourage the 
others. Since athletic gatherings, are distinctly social events, the reason to be given 
WHAT' S TH E MATTE R 
WIT H WHIT E MEN ? 124 TH E CRISIS 
is apparent; the safety of the white race 
demands it. W e are sure that the officials of 
the Ba r Association wil l agree to this." 
TH E SADDEST OF 
REBELLIONS. 
The New Yor k Evening 
Mail, which has often 
stood for justice to the 
black men, calls the Cuban insurrection the 
saddest of rebellions. "The Negroes of that 
island had a bright dream when Cuba became independent. They were to be on an 
equal level with white men forever. It was 
chiefly their blood which had been shed for 
the country's liberty. The revolution's 
greatest hero and martyr, Antonio Maceo, 
was a black man. 
"Bu t little by little they have seen their 
equal position frittered away, until lately 
they were forbidden by law to organize a 
political party among themselves. Their 
veterans were put out of the public offices 
and white men of Spanish birth—even the 
hated Spanish guerrillas, who fought them 
i n the jungle—were put i n their places. 
"Doubtless, we can in no way encourage 
this black rebellion. It will be necessary to 
repress it. Misguided and deluded, the in ­
surgent blacks ravage American plantations. 
Their insurrection spells anarchy and barbarism. Bu t there is a streak of sadness i n 
their case, just the same. The words of the 
white orators of freedom, addressed to them 
—'compatriots, comrades, brothers'—are still 
ringing i n their ears. They belong to a 
brave race, that has always known how to 
die. An d for those of them who fall before 
their poor revolution is suppressed, we may 
drop the tear that has ever fallen upon the 
tomb of him who has preferred death to 
degradation." 
There is a possibility of a summer normal 
school for colored teachers i n New Orleans, 
which leads the New Orleans Item to say 
that the teachers have been neglected 
hitherto. "They have no institute for such 
work as the white summer normal schools 
carry on, and are given few opportunities 
for lectures and association i n study. The 
Negro i n the South needs industrial and 
agricultural training above all things, but 
there is also need of well-trained Negroes i n 
the professions and i n general business for 
the service of their own race. Naturally, at 
this stage of development, there is a very 
great need of the good teachers. There is 
really no valid reason why the best white 
teachers should not take up this work, but 
there is greater need o f well-trained colored 
teachers." 
The Chicago Defender, a colored paper, 
says that not since the remarkable series 
of conferences at the World's Fai r has 
Chicago seen such a significant and successful 
convention as that of the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
"It is safe to go even further," it continues, 
"and say that never i n this country has a 
conference concerning the welfare of the 
American Negro been attended by such brilliant results or been participated i n by people 
of such power and attainment. Al l lines of 
creed, race and class seemed forgotten and 
all men stood as such before the world ; and 
an amount of enthusiasm has been aroused 
i n the people of Chicago and vicinity which 
fa r exceeds the hopes of the most optimistic." 
The St. Louis Advance (colored) makes 
some pertinent remarks about an appeal for 
funds from an industrial school i n Missouri: 
"Such an institution is praiseworthy," it 
says, "but i n a great State like Missouri, with 
its ample school fund, such appeals should 
be made to the legislature. Education i n 
literary and practical directions is a duty of 
the State and not a charity of the citizens." 
"I n a Marylan d community," says the 
Philadelphi a Inquirer, " a young man accused 
of a heinous offense was arrested, tried immediately, confessed his guilt and was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. The 
offense was committed on Monda y and the 
tria l took place the same day under extraordinary conditions to prevent a lynching. 
Justice is avenged. The people of the community are satisfied. There is no race war. 
The members of the race to which the 
offender belonged are upholding justice as 
administered. This is the sort of action 
which would save this country many black 
marks and would enhance its reputation 
abroad." 
Eg 
I n an editorial the June CRISIS mentioned 
"the corresponding secretary" of the 
Woman's Suffrage Association as writing to 
gloss over the action on the "color line " at 
Louisville. W e should have said that Miss 
Bertha Coover, corresponding secretary of 
the Ohio Suffrage Association, was the writer, 
and not Mrs. Mar y War e Dennett, corresponding secretary of the National Association. Mrs. Dennett is a staunch friend of 
justice, even for black folk. NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE 
ONE of the best meetings the association 
has ever held was i n Indianapolis on 
Ma y 15, under the auspices of the Colored 
Women's Civi c Club of that city. The speakers were Mr . Charles Edwar d Russell, Mr . 
Alexande r Irvine and Miss Ovington. The 
beautiful little Christian church was filled 
to the doors with earnest colored people who 
were impressed with the sincerity of the 
speakers and the aggressive work that the 
association has been doing. Mr . Russell, 
whose opening address at the last session of 
the association's first conference wil l never 
be forgotten by those who heard it, made 
again a noble appeal for human brotherhood. Whe n he had finished, the president 
of the club, Mrs. Mar y Cable, voiced the 
feeling of the audience by rising to "thank 
God for Charles Edwar d Russell. " 
Mr . Irvine told of his experiences i n the 
South when he went as a laborer to study 
conditions among the workers, black and 
white. H e was sent i n the interests of a 
magazine, and his story of the white laborer's 
poverty and suffering met with ready acceptance by his publisher, but the full story 
of the black laborer he was unable to place 
i n print. 
It was an impressive and never-to-be-forgotten gathering, and it wil l probably result 
i n an Indianapolis branch. Two smaller 
meetings were held, at which Miss Ovington 
explained fully the objects of the association 
and the work it is undertaking. 
This month the association welcomes a 
sixth branch, that of Detroit, Mich . The 
branch comes i n with 41 members and the 
following officers: President, Mr . Willia m 
Osby; vice-president, Mr . Charles Webb ; 
corresponding secretary, Mr . Leonard C. 
Thompson; recording secretary, Mr . A . J . 
Bass; treasurer, Mr . Walte r D . Johnson. 
I n January of this year the secretary of 
the association visited Detroit and met a 
group of enthusiastic, militant colored men, 
who, i n a number of cases, had stopped race 
discrimination i n their city. They were 
anxious to learn of the work of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, and it is these men who are the 
nucleus of the Detroit branch. The association is fortunate i n securing the co-operation 
of so public-spirited and self-respecting a 
group o f colored citizens. 
On June 4, at its regular meeting, the 
board of directors accepted Miss Ovington's 
resignation as secretary of the National Association. "W e express," it said, "our lasting appreciation of her services and devotion 
and our deep sense of obligation for the 
year of voluntary work which she has given 
to the association and to the cause it represents." Miss Ovington was unanimously 
elected a vice-president of the National 
Association. 
Miss Ma y Childs Nerney was appointed to 
the secretary's position. Miss Nerney has 
had large experience i n executive work, having served as secretary to the State Libraria n 
at Albany , and later as head of the order 
department. She comes to the association 
from the Newark Publi c Library , where she 
has been reference librarian. 
Fro m time to time we have reported the 
progress of the Boli n case against the Palisades Amusement Park. Last summer Mr . 
Pau l C. Bolin , organist at St. Phillip's, together with his brother, Mr . L . W . Bolin , his 
wife and some friends, went to Palisades 
Park, where several of them were refused admittance. The association became interested in 
the case and tried to get a criminal indictment. The local district attorney was dilatory 
and nothing was done. Then on advice of our 
attorneys a civil suit was brought. The com-126 TH E CRISI S 
Lif e members pay $500. Donors pay $100, sustaining members $25 , and contributing 
members $10, $5 or $ 2 per year. Associate members pay $1 per year. The subscription 
to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $ 5 or more, who signify their wish 
that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
Checks should be made payable to the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, 2 6 Vesey Street, New Yor k City. Al l members in good standing have 
the privilege of attending and of voting at the annual conference of the association. 
pany saw no escape, and having no defense 
promptly came to terms by paying the Bolins 
$300 cash for damages, and giving the family 
D u Bois. There seems to be a good chance 
of starting a branch of the association i n 
Cleveland. 
We have brought the clock this month from 
our advertising pages to our association 
notes that all may see our progress i n securing new members and the road we have to 
travel before January 1, 1913. Wil l not our 
friends throughout the United States help 
our minute hand to move more rapidly from 
month to month? 
Afte r this, look for the clock in the advertising- section. 
TH E BANNE R O F VICTOR Y 
a free pass for the season. If there is any 
further color discrimination at Palisades 
Par k we should be glad to hear of it. 
A t the National Conference of Charities 
and Correction at Cleveland our association 
occupied an afternoon. Engineers' Hal l was 
filled with 500 listeners who heard President 
Thwing, of Western Reserve University, 
Judge Mack, president of the conference, Mr . 
Charles W . Chesnutt, Miss Ovington and Dr. 
On Ma y 8 the chairman of the board of 
directors sent the following telegram to the 
governor of Louisiana : 
New York evening papers report that Negro 
flood refugees are being compelled to work on 
the levees by your order without pay. May we 
ask you to confirm, deny or explain this report? 
If true, will you explain under what law this 
action is taken? 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Chairman of the 
Board of Directors. 
OU R 
150 0 
CLOCK 
2000 
MEMBERSHIP 
500 
640 , JUNE 15,191 2 
JOIN US TH E N. A. A. C. P. 127 
The governor replied as follows: 
Baton Rouge, La. , Ma y 9, 1912. 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Chairman Board of 
Directors, National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, 20 Vesey 
Street, New York: 
In reply to your telegram of eighth, all ablebodied men in refugee camps, regardless of 
color, are given the option of working and eating 
or doing neither. Thousands of citizens, including myself, are working day and night, 
actually on the levees, voluntarily without pay, 
trying to hold the flood area down to a minimum. The resources of the State are being 
strained to their utmost to save lives and property and care for the refugees, nine-tenths of 
whom are Negroes. New homes are being provided for all refugees' families who care to 
take advantage of the opportunity. 
J . E . SANDERS, 
Governor of Louisiana. 
Considerable publicity was given the two 
communications, and the chairman of the 
board received some severe censure from the 
Southern press. The Houston (Tex.) Daily 
Post says: 
The situation in Louisiana is one that is 
taxing all the resources of the people to save 
the State from further disaster. Already the 
property and crop losses are tens of millions 
of dollars and tens of thousands of people are 
rendered homeless. The majority of these are 
Negroes. Their homes are gone, they are without money and they are dependent upon public 
funds and charity for food. In the strenuous 
effort to save the State from' additional loss, 
the governor and those in charge of the work 
have the right to expect and demand the aid of 
every able-bodied man, and the able-bodied 
Negro or white man who refuses to work ought 
to be compelled to work under the circumstances. 
There are times when men must work with 
no thought of pay. Immediately following the 
Galveston disaster there was work to be done 
which involved the lives of the men, women and 
children who survived the flood, and the men 
who were being cared for were required to do 
it, just as able-bodied refugees are required to 
work in Louisiana in a crisis, just as acute. 
Under the circumstances, we think Mr . 
Villard's inquiry of the governor of Louisiana 
was insolent. 
The New Orleans State gives the following account of Baton Rouge conditions : 
Baton Rouge has been confronted with a 
flood of unprecedented proportions and has been 
making a supreme struggle to hold the river 
within bounds. Al l the available convicts of the 
State have concentrated there to aid in it. But 
the task has been of such magnitude that the 
university cadets, public officials and citizens of 
every station in life have also had to contribute 
their services, both day and night, and have 
done so cheerfully and enthusiastically. Many 
of the refugees have gladly taken their posts 
for the good of all. It would be a mockery 
if others, of a thriftless character, were permitted to enjoy the hospitality of the community without rendering some service in the crisis 
or if they were put on payrolls while the great 
bulk of the people worked for nothing. 
The governor is well within the bounds of 
truth when he says that nine-tenths of the 
refugees are of the colored race. The submerged sections of the State are chiefly those 
of cotton and sugar plantations on which large 
forces of Negroes are employed, parishes in 
which the colored population is many times that 
of the white, and most of Federal and local 
relief has been to relieve the distress of the 
race Mr . Villard is seeking to advance. 
Louisiana has made no distinction of color 
in its relief or rescue work. When Selma levee 
broke 5,600 people were rescued in a few days 
by the expeditions organized by leading citizens 
of Louisiana and Mississippi. Many were in 
great peril. Unusual heroism was, in many 
instances, displayed by the rescuers. Yet, over 
5,000 of the number who were removed to 
safety in the first few days and then clothed 
and fed were colored people. 
Any attempt, therefore, to represent 
Louisiana as harsh or unjust to the unfortunate 
Negro victims of these flood conditions is slanderous, and local members of the race ought to 
take it upon themselves to present the true facts 
to Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard and his perturbed associates so that the American people 
may know the true facts. 
On the other hand, information of a different character has come to the association 
fro m colored people. W e quote in part 
three letters: 
EDITO R O F TH E CRISIS : 
I shall do my best to furnish you with all 
the information I can gather about the flood 
situation, and if it is possible I shall secure 
pictures of the refugee camps of both the white 
and colored sufferers. I fear, however, it will 
not be an easy task, in view of the fact that the 
Louisiana authorities are discouraging, if not 
actually by order forbidding, the giving out of 
the whole truth of the situation, especially as 
concerns the colored people. * * * The 
authorities do not like the idea of letting the 
outside world know what the Mississippi floods 
do at times to people living in the delta 
of the State—it being regarded as ' ' bad 
advertisement.'' 
An d a later letter of Ma y 15, from the 
same correspondent, goes on to say: 
There are probably 50,000 people driven 
from their homes by the Torras crevasse, and 
the refugees of the flooded lands, from all accounts received from trustworthy sources, are, in 
the eases of the colored people, a piteous lot. 
In the camps of the colored flood sufferers in 
the city of Baton Rouge, where there are in the 
neighborhood of 6,000 of them, in many cases 
without enough clothes on to present themselves 
in public, the shame and suffering of the 
refugees cannot be described. They are camped 
in the colored churches, colored halls and, in a 128 TH E CRISIS 
word, in any place that will give them shelter 
at night. Hundreds are together in buildings 
with nothing to lie upon but the bare floors, 
and nothing to cover with but the scanty clothes 
they are in all day. Their food is scant and 
many of the children are often crying for something to eat, while their fathers are away working for their own rations on the levees under 
the rule, '' no work, no ration,'' which has been 
made strict, especially in the case of the colored refugees in the camps. 
Many of the refugees will never return to 
the flooded territory. It is declared that the 
floods have been '' blessings in disguise" to a 
large number of the refugees, in that the waters 
brought them where they had no easy way of 
coming in safety otherwise, on account of the 
opposition any attempt on their part to leave 
for better conditions always met. They could 
not get away before the flood came, and, as it 
were, rescued them; but now that they are away 
and the old '' debt charge'' cannot restrain 
them, they intend never to go back. 
The white refugees in Baton Rouge are being cared for in the asylums, public buildings 
and the best places obtainable for their comforts, and the work done by the men folk consists mainly in overseeing the working Negroes 
and acting as guards on the levees in place of 
the militia which has been withdrawn. 
Man y of the colored churches and societies 
in New Orleans are making appropriations for 
the relief of the Negro flood sufferers, the 
amounts varying from $5 to $25. The colored 
people hope in this way to alleviate much of the 
suffering of the unfortunates. In Alexandria 
and other towns of the State the colored people 
are taking- the same kind of steps to help the 
sufferers. After the floods, when all will be 
free to talk, will be the best time to get the 
whole truth of the present flood situation. Rev. 
E . D. Sims is chairman of the colored flood 
committee, the other members being Rev. A. 
Hubbs, A . Richard, J . Johnson and J . Grandison. Altogether, they carried 10,000 garments 
to the flood sufferers at Baton Rouge. 
N . B.—If you make use of this, do not let 
my name appear, as it might be used to annoy 
me. 
The third letter runs as follows: 
MR . VILLARD : 
I am sending this letter to New York to be 
mailed to you from there. Should you speak of 
this letter through the papers please don't mention my name, as I am even afraid to mail it to 
you from here, as it would be opened as soon as 
they saw your name, as publications are censored before printed in regard to the conditions 
here. 
MR . OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
DEA R SIR : 
I noticed in the afternoon paper published 
here that you have been making inquiries in 
regard to the working of the refugees who have 
sought safety here from the flooded parishes of 
this State. I am truly glad that some have 
interested themselves enough to venture thus far 
in the matter, and perhaps I can give you some 
information, as I am a resident here and know 
the conditions that exist. Now, so far as the 
working of colored men is concerned, they have 
been working any colored man they saw in the 
streets several days before a single refugee came 
to Baton Rouge. Men were arrested and put 
to work without pay, and any man—I mean 
colored man—who had no work was taken to 
the levee gang captain, and made to work without pay or food; while white men who never 
worked were crowding the river banks acting 
as guards to keep them there. Now these poor 
unfortunate refugees, who have come here famished and exhausted from exposure, from battling with the flood, half naked and sick, are 
immediately put in charge of a guard with a 
gun and sent to work throwing up embankments 
and levees, given some salt meat and corn bread 
which the United States Government provides 
for them. They toil until exhausted and are 
taken back to camp for a few hours and then 
brought back again to work. 
Not only here in Baton Rouge does this 
exist, but at For t Hudson, Shreveport, Natchez 
and all along the river men are made to do this 
same work that the Government has made appropriations for. Colored men are forced to do 
it for nothing at the point of a bayonet; boys 
ranging from 15 to 18 years old have charge of 
gangs of men. They carry a gun to intimidate 
and scare them, and they are driven like so 
many beasts. Don't believe any of that rot 
about white men being put to work there; they 
are driving ' ' Niggers,'' as they say it here. 
Something should be done, if possible, for 
these unfortunate creatures, who have lost home 
and all their belongings, and in many cases 
their families. The colored people here have 
responded very generously and have given shelter to several thousands; every available hall 
and place of shelter has been turned into a 
camp for them. On Monday night, at Wesley 
Chapel, in thirty minutes $12 0 was taken up for 
the relief of the babies and larger children, 
there being something over 30 0 of them in the 
various camps. Everything possible is being 
done for the comfort of the women and children, 
while the men must slave on the levees for 
nothing. I guess I have written about as much 
as I can at present, so I shall close. 
Baton Rouge, La . 
P. S.—Should you answer this, address me 
in plain envelope. 
f ! 
TH E CRISIS FLOOD FUND. 
The publishers of TH E CRISIS will be glad 
to receive contributions for the victims of the 
flood and to see to it that this relief is distributed to those most in need. W e do not 
pretend to know the whole truth in regard 
to this situation, but we are certain that the 
real story of the wretchedness, suffering and 
oppression is yet to be told. EDITORIA L 
POLITICS. 
H E Souther n delegates to 
the nationa l Republica n 
nominatin g conventio n 
ar e causin g the quad ­
rennia l hurrah : "The y 
represent nothing; " 
"the y ar e venal; " "the y ough t to be 
eliminated; " al l this we hea r o n ever y 
side . Bu t o f the one natura l remed y we 
hea r little . Tha t remed y is: let the blac k 
delegates represent i n realit y the blac k 
disfranchise d million s who m no w the y 
represent o n paper. Th e wonde r is toda y tha t the fifty colore d delegates are 
as good a bod y o f me n as the y are wit h 
so few o f the heelers an d gangsters. 
Ye t the disreputabl e are amon g them, as 
we al l know , an d to get ri d o f them let us 
have rea l democrac y i n the South . En ­
franchis e the black s an d let them lear n 
to weed out the rascals who m whit e politician s no w appoin t to represent the 
Negr o race. 
Bu t Souther n Negroe s do vote, say 
some. 
T o the honest seeker fo r ligh t the 
puzzlin g thin g about the Souther n 
situatio n is the absolutel y contra ­
dictor y statements tha t are often made 
concernin g conditions. Fo r instance , 
the Ne w Yor k Evening Post was some 
time ago take n to task b y the Nor ­
fol k (Va. ) Landmark fo r assumin g tha t 
Souther n colore d me n are largel y disfranchised . Th e Virgini a pape r says: 
' ' N o Negr o i n Virgini a ca n be kep t from 
voting , provide d he measure s u p to the 
same requirements fo r the exercisin g 
o f tha t righ t tha t the whit e ma n must. 
Th e laws o f the Stat e wil l protec t hi m 
i n the righ t shoul d election officials den y 
it him . Tha t Negroe s i n this Stat e ma y 
freel y qualif y to vote is full y attested 
b y the fac t tha t thousands o f them do 
vote. " Agai n the Ne w Orlean s Picayune 
declare d wit h regar d to the complain t 
o f disfranchisement : "Th e arran t an d 
absolute falsit y o f the specificatio n i n 
regar d to the ballo t is seen i n the fac t 
tha t ever y lega l ba r to the exercise of 
the ballo t applie s to white s an d Negroe s 
alike . Ever y elector (voter) must 
eithe r be able to rea d an d writ e or, i n 
case o f illiteracy , he must pa y taxes o n 
ordinar y assessable propert y o f the mini ­
mu m valu e o f $300. These laws are 
strictl y i n accordanc e wit h the require ­
ments o f the Constitutio n o f the Unite d 
States, an d have been so pronounce d 
b y the courts. " 
Just so i n earlie r day s before lega l 
disfranchisemen t pape r afte r pape r an d 
orato r afte r orato r declare d tha t the 
Negr o coul d an d di d vote withou t let o r 
hindrance . 
Despit e this ever y intelligen t perso n 
i n the Unite d State s knows tha t these 
statements are false. Th e Souther n 
testimon y to this is itself open an d convincing . No t onl y have we Mr . Till ­
man's fran k an d picturesqu e testimon y 
o n the past, bu t the Richmon d Leader 
says tha t al l is wel l i n Virgini a "sinc e 
we disfranchise d the Negro; " Congressma n Underwoo d o f Alabam a says the 
Alabam a Negr o ' ' does not coun t fo r anythin g politically' ' i n tha t State ; a promi ­
nen t judg e o n the Mississipp i bench 
says: "Th e Negroe s i n Mississipp i do 
not vote an d shoul d not; " an d i n 
Louisian a it is a matte r o f plai n official 
recor d tha t o f ove r 150,000 Negr o male s 130 TH E CRISIS 
at least 21 years o f age, o f who m nearl y 
70,000 coul d rea d an d write , ther e wer e 
i n 1908 onl y 1,743 registere d as voters 
an d these wer e disfranchise d b y the 
"whit e primary " system. I n the face 
o f these facts does i t pa y deliberatel y to 
misrepresen t the truth ? 
"Oh , well, " sighs the reader, "i t is 
too ba d fo r colore d folk. " Bu t is i t 
ba d fo r colore d fol k only ? Th e St. 
Louis Globe-Democrat sai d i n 1911 : 
"I n electin g last fal l nin e congressmen, 
al l Democrats, accordin g to the automati c system, Alabam a cast a tota l vote 
o f 96,303, a n average o f about 10,700 
votes to a district . Th e last census give s 
Alabam a a populatio n of 2,138,093. 
Onl y one Alabama n i n twenty-two goes 
to the polls. I n Norther n State s the 
average o f voters i n proportio n to popu ­
latio n is one i n five. A n examinatio n o f 
the vote o f the Alabam a congressiona l 
districts i n detai l is interesting . I n sis 
o f the nin e districts the Democrati c can ­
didat e ra n withou t opposition , an d i n 
one of these less tha n 6,800 votes wer e 
cast. I n the distric t o f Mr . Underwood , 
Democrati c leade r i n the House , the tota l 
o f votes was bu t 10,114. I n Mr . Under ­
wood's distric t also the proportio n o f 
voters to populatio n is onl y one i n 
twenty . Wh y the grea t preponderance of absentees? Th e disfranchise d 
colore d vote accounts fo r onl y a part. 
Mor e tha n half the whit e voters 
of Alabam a also are disfranchise d somehow, o r else disfranchis e themselves. " 
O f suc h materia l are the foundation s 
of this republic . 
ffl 
FRAUD AND IMITATION. 
S the colore d peopl e become mor e an d mor e 
a self-conscious, selfdirectin g group , wit h 
organs o f intelligenc e 
an d movin g representa ­
tives, it is becomin g difficult to deceive 
them as to me n an d movements. O n the 
othe r hand , ther e is stil l opportunit y fo r 
unscrupulou s colore d me n to pla y o n the 
ignoranc e o f the whit e worl d as to wha t 
is goin g o n i n the colore d group . I f a 
ma n announce s himself to be o f a certai n positio n i n the whit e world , he is 
immediatel y looke d u p carefully . Bu t 
trie colore d imposto r is take n o n blin d 
fait h an d his lie s an d peculation s whe n 
discovere d are credite d to the whol e 
blac k race. I n Atlant a ther e is a colore d preache r wh o is makin g a livin g 
an d some notoriet y b y vilifyin g his 
people ; he has been repudiate d b y his 
ow n churc h an d school, bu t has a n institutio n of his ow n whic h he is promoting . 
Hi s latest bi d fo r whit e Souther n sup ­
port is this: 
' ' Ou r trainin g i n the college , universit y 
an d gramma r schoo l has been too muc h 
o f the theoretical, show y kind , mor e fo r 
name tha n reality . Ho w man y o f ou r 
boys an d girls, wh o are sai d to be wel l 
educated, are almost helpless fo r the 
reason tha t the y ca n do nothin g tha t 
reall y pay s o r tha t somebod y wants 
done. This is illustrate d b y the larg e 
arm y to be seen at ou r depots, poolrooms an d street corners i n the red-ligh t 
districts o f the communitie s an d citie s 
wher e we are so largel y congested. " 
This is a contemptibl e lie . Th e grad ­
uates o f Souther n Negr o schools an d 
colleges are not loafin g i n the ' ' red -
light " districts an d this ma n know s it . 
Bu t wha t difference does tha t mak e so 
lon g as the whit e worl d o f Atlant a 
praise s him , uses his word s to traduc e 
an d crippl e worth y colore d schools, an d 
gives hi m letters wit h whic h to rais e 
mone y fro m gullibl e Northerners fo r 
a n institutio n tha t exists chiefly o n 
pape r ? 
Anothe r metho d of deceptio n has been 
discovere d i n promotin g conventions. 
Ther e is a Nationa l Associatio n o f 
Teachers i n colore d schools, whic h is 
no w nin e years old . Seein g its success, 
some colore d me n i n Kansa s Cit y hav e 
been promotin g i n the last two years a 
"Negr o Nationa l Educationa l Con ­
gress. " The y have advertise d widely , EDITORIA L 131 
induce d governors to appoin t "dele ­
gates " an d sough t to mak e i t appea r 
tha t the y ha d the support of some bod y 
o f worth y teachers. 
I n fac t the y ar e nothin g bu t a privat e 
set o f promoters, man y o f who m are sai d 
to be o f doubtfu l reputation , an d not one 
of them of an y considerabl e standin g 
i n the colore d educationa l world . Thei r 
"convention " at Denve r last yea r barel y 
missed bein g a fiasco, an d we trust tha t 
the worth y colore d citizen s o f St. Pau l 
wil l see to i t tha t this "convention " 
does no t parad e i n tha t cit y unde r 
false colors, an d brin g te n millio n 
peopl e int o contempt. 
m 
ORGANIZE D LABOR . 
cutter, carriag e maker, plasterer,.mason , 
painter—o r at an y othe r decent trade , 
unless he work s as a "scab, " o r unless 
i n some localit y he has secure d suc h a 
foothol d tha t the whit e unio n me n are 
not able easil y to oust him . 
This polic y is no t alway s avowe d 
(althoug h there are a dozen union s affiliate d wit h the America n Federatio n o f 
Labo r wh o openl y confine admissio n to 
"white " men), but it is perfectl y wel l 
understood . Some unions, lik e the 
printers an d the carpenters, admi t a lone 
colore d ma n here an d there so as to 
enable them the mor e easil y to tur n 
dow n the rest. Others, lik e the masons, 
admi t Negroe s i n the Sout h wher e they 
must, an d ba r them i n the Nort h wher e 
the y can . 
Whateve r the tactics, the result is the 
same fo r the mass of whit e workingme n 
i n America ; beat o r starve the Negr o out 
of his jo b i f yo u ca n b y keepin g hi m 
out o f the union ; or, i f yo u must admi t 
him, do the same thin g insid e unio n 
lines. 
Wha t then must be the attitud e of the 
blac k ma n i n the event of a strik e lik e 
tha t o f the whit e waiters of Ne w York " 
Th e mass of them must most naturall y 
regar d the unio n whit e ma n as their 
enemy. The y ma y not kno w the histor y 
of the labo r movement, bu t they kno w 
the histor y of whit e an d blac k waiters 
i n Ne w York , an d whe n they take back 
the jobs out of whic h the whit e waiters 
have drive n them, they do the natura l 
an d sensible thing , howsoeve r pitiabl e 
the necessity o f suc h cutthroa t policie s 
i n the labo r worl d ma y be. So lon g as 
unio n labo r fights fo r humanity , its missio n is divine ; bu t whe n it fights fo r a 
cliqu e of Americans, Iris h o r Germa n 
monopolists wh o have cornere d o r are 
tryin g to corne r the marke t o n a certai n 
typ e of service , an d are seekin g to sell 
tha t servic e at a premium , whil e othe r 
competent workme n starve , the y deserve 
themselve s the starvatio n whic h they 
pla n fo r their darke r an d poore r fellows. 
H E CRISI S believes i n organize d labor. It realizes tha t the standar d of 
livin g amon g workers 
ha s been raise d i n the 
last half centur y throug h 
the efforts an d sacrifice o f laborers 
bande d togethe r i n unions, an d tha t al l 
America n labo r to-day, white , blac k an d 
yellow , benefits fro m this grea t move ­
ment. 
Fo r suc h reasons we carr y o n ou r 
fron t cove r the printer's unio n labe l to 
signif y tha t the printin g an d bindin g of 
this magazin e is done unde r condition s 
an d wit h wages satisfactor y to the 
printers' union . 
"We do this i n spit e o f the fact, as wel l 
know n to us as to others, tha t the "con ­
dition s satisfactory " to labo r me n i n 
this cit y includ e the deliberat e exclusio n 
fro m decent-payin g jobs o f ever y blac k 
ma n who m whit e workingme n ca n exclud e o n an y pretense. W e know , an d 
al l me n know , tha t unde r ordinar y circumstance s no blac k artisa n ca n to-day 
wor k as printer, baker, blacksmith , carpenter, hatter, butcher, tailor, street o r 
railwa y employee , boilermaker, bookbinder, electrica l worker, glass blower, 
machinist , plumber, telegrapher, electrotyper, textil e worker, upholsterer, stone 132 TH E CRISIS 
TH E THIRD BATTL E OF BUL L BUN. 
T is just sout h o f Manassa s 
wher e Beauregar d ha d 
his supplies, an d east o f 
the first two battlefields, 
wit h their ghastl y relie s 
an d cal m an d guardia n 
mountains. 
This thir d battlefiel d is dotte d wit h 
budding s gree n an d red . A littl e flyin g 
engine pants continuousl y wit h its wate r 
burden , an d to an d fro pass dar k gracefu l girls an d sturd y brown-face d boys. 
Ther e are green lawn s an d littl e trees, 
an d westwar d i n a hidde n grotto, a grove 
green golden , echoin g wit h the voices o f 
new graduate s lon g gone. Th e dul l 
crimso n buildin g i n the midst—How -
lan d Hall—stand s sturdil y wit h a certai n quietude , flinging a long , lo w win g 
modestl y behin d it, wher e sprite s an d 
gnome s an d fairie s dart i n an d out an d 
to an d fr o i n bus y work . 
Southwar d the girls are clustered , 
northwar d the boys, an d roun d about 
are teachers' familie s often new founde d 
wit h new an d cunnin g babies, albeit one 
an d the prettiest ha d fled, suddenly , an d 
left a sorrow underneat h the trees. 
Teachers there are, varicolored , sunn y 
an d sad, bu t quie t all , bus y an d happy , 
eager an d glad . Wit h them an d not 
above them is the principa l wit h his boy 
face an d his wif e wh o has wings—wing s 
finely fraye d wit h beatin g at the bars o f 
life—bu t wing s withal , an d i n he r eyes 
dreams. 
Bu t the battle ? Ah , yes, the battle , 
the thir d an d blood-bought battl e o f this 
windin g brook tha t whimpers 'twix t the 
mountain s an d the sea ; the bloo d o f 
wounde d souls lies alon g the gol d green 
of tha t campus—th e hai l of the iro n 
that enters thud s throug h the thic k dar k 
skins. No w an d the n the bitte r stifled 
wai l o f the dyin g break s the sudde n 
stillness, the n the rank s close an d the 
schoo l moves on. 
It's costly, this fighting. Costl y i n 
bloo d an d men , costl y i n money , costliest 
i n worr y an d apprehension . Eac h year, 
each month , the Forage r goes North : 
" A ma n to see you , sir. " 
"Who? " snorts Wal l Street, wheelin g 
i n his chair. 
"Colore d man—begging , I think , sir.' ' 
"Anothe r Nigge r school! Giv e hi m 
$5 an d sen d hi m on. " 
An d the Forage r pockets his shame 
an d move s wearil y to the West . 
""Yes ? Well , I' m givin g so muc h to 
colore d peopl e already—wha t is this 
schoo l ?' ' 
"Manassa s Industria l School ? Yes. 
An d fo r colore d youth ? Yes ? I neve r 
hear d of it. I giv e to thing s I hea r of— 
Battle ? I though t the wa r wa s over; 
it isn't . Ho w sad. Good-day.' ' 
Thu s i n dripping s o f the ric h an d 
pennie s o f the poo r each yea r $18,000 
is raise d to di g the trenc h an d fire the 
fuse an d strengthe n the sou l i n this thir d 
struggl e at Manassas. 
Wh o is fighting? Nort h an d South , 
blac k an d white , ric h an d poor ? Oh , n o 
—mor e primal , mor e stupendou s is this 
struggl e of worlds; ligh t an d leadin g an d 
industr y against darkness an d hate an d 
the Devil-of-things-that-be . An d wh o 
wins ? Go d wins—o r is eve r abou t to 
win , i f onl y the Forage r staggers home 
wit h the foo d to feed the wear y watchers 
i n the trenches, the black-sweate d fighters i n the fields. Pit y the Forager, m y 
brothers, an d hol d u p his hands! 
Sunse t o n the battlefield, an d the har d 
breathin g of them tha t rest fro m their 
labors; to the West , glory ; to the East , 
the moon ; between, shadows o f thing s 
tha t wer e an d are to be ; around , a rosegrow n porch , the patte r o f littl e feet, 
Woma n - wit h - wings, Ma n - wh o - is -
ever-young , an d laughter. 
U p fro m the eart h come voices, heav y 
wit h sorrow : 
"O brothe r yo u must bow so low, 
"O brothe r yo u must bo w so low, 
"Fo r lon g is the wa y to the ever 
brigh t world , 
''Le t the Heave n ligh t shin e o n me! " 
An d so o n til l we sleep ; i n ou r 
ears the soft lo w pantin g o f the engine 
catchin g its breath ; i n ou r eyes the everlastin g stars. The Year i n 
Colored 
Colleges 
With portraits of their 
honor students 
REPORT S to TH E CRISIS 
from twenty colored in ­
stitutions of higher training 
reveal some interesting facts. 
They represent $4,997,800 
worth of property and land, 
but they have only $1,664,000 
i n invested endowment. In 
these colleges there were last 
year 991 students of full college rank, and of these 163 
graduated i n June with the 
bachelor's degree. 
Si x of the colleges have finished new 
buildings during the year: the new engineerin g building at Howar d which cost $23,000; 
the new Hubbar d Hospita l at Walden costin g $45,000; at Atlant a Baptist College a 
chapel and office building, costing $40,000; 
at Wilberforce a girls' cottage, costing 
$40,000; a dormitory at $28,000 and a dining 
hall at $14,000 at the State College of South 
Carolina , and a small administration building at Hartshorn. 
Lincoln has a newly endowed professorship 
of physics, and has been recognized as an 
accredited college by the State of Pennsylvania. Talladega has a new professor of 
social extension work; Benedict, a new president ; while Mr . B . G. Brawley leaves the 
chair of English at Howar d to become dean 
of Atlant a Baptist College. 
Afte r all, our interest in these institutions 
is personal and centers most in the student 
body. We have asked all these colleges to 
ACADEMI C PROCESSION , HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 134 TH E CRISI S 
JAME S BOND , Knoxvill e MIS S F . JONES , Knoxvill e J . M . SAMPSON . Virgini a Union 
send us the photographs of the ranking' 
scholars of their graduating college class. 
The result is the group of faces looking out 
on the reader from these pages; strong, bright 
young folk who have demanded the light 
and received it i n spite of the opinion of 
President Taft. Here are the "spoiled plowhands" of Southern tradition and the topheavy "educated-out-of-their-place" youth of 
newspaperdom! A s a matter of fact here 
are a group of healthy, bright-eyed, clearbrained young folk of Negro descent, who 
are going to make the cheating, lynching and 
oppression of black folk more difficult in the 
future than in the past. Hinc illae 
lacrimae! 
These are the leaders who i n scholarship 
head the colored college host: David, of 
Wilberforce ; Latson, of Atlant a Baptist College: Douglass, of Lane ; Ric e and Miss 
Bothwell. of Atlant a University; Jessell and 
Miss Hamilton, of Talladega; Sampson, of 
Virgini a Union ; Berry, of Lincoln ; Bond 
and Miss Jones, of Knoxville ; Lovette and 
Miss R. Jones, of Fisk . W e add Edit h 
Louise Wright, who is valedictorian i n the 
West Hig h School for 100 classmates, all 
white, and Isabella Vandervall, who gained 
the $50 freshman prize at the New Yor k 
Medical College. If the photographs had 
arrived in time, we should have added to 
these Miss Brown , of Morgan ; Miss Floyd , 
of Spelman; Pinson and Miss Thomas, of 
Benedict; Miss Gray, of Paine, and several 
others. 
Besides the twenty colleges mentioned 
above, there are twelve other institutions that 
give college training to colored students, 
making thirty-two in all, enrolling 1,200 
students. 
In former days the argument against 
such students and such training was that 
colored people could not assimilate such 
training. That argument has passed, but in 
J . W. RICE , Atlanta ALBER T B. LOVETTE , Fisk D . J . JESSELL , Talladega TH E YEA R IN COLORE D COLLEGE S 135 
T. G . DOUGLASS , Lane MIS S S. E . HAMILTON , Talladega E . O. BERRY . Lincoln 
so much criticism and inueudo? Apparently 
because white Americans fear them. We do 
not fear Negro criminals—rather we encourage them. We do not fear ignorance—we 
invite it. But trained knowledge and efficiency in this subject race is instinctively 
dreaded by a large number of people. President Taft said yesterday at Hampton : 
"Although education along scientific lines is 
useful, vocational education for the Negro 
is better, for the present at least ;" but "vocation" is a large word. Wha t vocations does 
the President have in mind ? The vocation 
of citizen, voter, molder of public opinion? 
Probably not. H e is thinking with the 
Memphis News-Scimitar. which says: 
"Highe r education fads find no place in 
the curriculum of the Memphis Hig h School 
for Negroes. The whole policy is to train 
the Negro youths of both sexes in occupations which the South has accorded almost 
entirely to the race." , 
In other words, the principal vocation in 
E . W . LATSON , Atlanta Baptist MIS S A. L . BOTHWELL , Atlanta G. F . DAVID , Wilberforce 
its place is a widespread belief that there 
is no "demand" for such persons, and that 
they are unable to earn a living. 
There have been, in the years 1523-1912. 
over 5.000 Negroes graduated from college. 
Returns for a thousand livin g graduates 
indicate the following occupations: 
Teachers 54 % 
Preachers 20 % 
Physicians 07% 
Lawyers 04% 
Business and other occupations.15% 
A s teachers the college-bred Negroes have 
made the Negro industrial school possible. 
Tuskegee is directed by them in nearly all 
positions of importance, from the wife of the 
principa l (Fisk . '89) down. A t Hampton. 
Calhoun, Kowaliga . and a score of other 
schools, the colored college man has given 
invaluable service. A s leaders in social uplift the Negro collegians have been especially 
valuable.. Why , then, are they the object of 136 TH E CRISIS 
MIS S B. L . JONES , Fisk MIS S EDIT H WEIGH T 
Cleveland Hig h School 
MIS S ISABELL A VANDERVAL L 
New Yor k Medica l College 
mind is that of general mudsill to society— 
dumb, faithful, disfranchised and cheap. 
I f this is not what is meant then let young 
people like those pictured on these pages 
have a chance for such higher and fuller selfdevelopment as wil l enable them to compete 
with modern men under modern conditions. 
Is it fair to educate a race of scullions and 
then complain of their lack of proven 
ability? 
TH E MONTESSORI METHOD-IT S 
POSSIBILITIES 
By JESSIE FAUSET 
O one probably arrives at his 
majority without beginning 
that habit of retrospection 
which is to be with him 
more or less for the rest of 
his life. It is at times like 
these that he is brought face 
to face with the realization of the years it 
has taken him to get, so to speak, on his 
mental feet. Such an appalling waste, and 
even yet he is lumbering! His judgment is 
not always stable, his mental acts somehow 
lack co-ordination, his self-control is at best 
dependent on environment, and his initiative 
is often entirely lacking. 
Indeed, when one considers the pitiful 
brevity of the allotted span of years, the 
amount of time generally deemed necessary 
to fit an individual to become a useful member of society seems totally disproportionate 
and ridiculous. Twenty-one years—one-third 
of a man's whole life. The lower animals, 
especially cats and dogs, seldom live beyond the age of ten years. Suppose it took 
a kitten three years to learn to co-ordinate 
its movements to the catching of a mouse, to 
learn to control its body and its faint mentality ! One is amused at the idea. 
It is not hard to place the faults i n the 
development of human beings. There are 
many. Bu t surely these are the two most 
obvious. The child is trained from infancy 
to abject dependence on his elders. Secondly, 
he is girt about with rules and precedents 
which stifle originality and initiative. H e is 
simply smothered by too much and wrongly 
applied care and kindness. 
Now it is exactly this condition of affairs 
that the Montessori system is seeking to obviate. Doctor .Montessori, i n a long and 
scientific study of childhood, has arrived at, 
among many others, the following important 
conclusions: First, that the child is naturally independent; secondly, that he is ambitious to prove this; thirdly, that he will , i f 
his small feet are once set upon the way, TH E MONTESSOR I METHO D 137 
spontaneously arrive at a given point; and 
fourthly, that his powers of initiative are 
tremendous. 
Wit h these views i n mind, Dr. Montessori 
set about the development of that system 
which bids fair to revolutionize the educational schemes of the world. He r slogan is 
"Liberate the personality of the child, permit him his natural manifestations; let him 
choose his activities, for it makes very little 
difference what he does, as long as he does 
no harm. " 
Agai n she says: "W e cannot know the 
consequences of suffocating a spontaneous 
action at the time when the child is just 
beginning to be active; perhaps we suffocate 
life itself." 
Al l this sounds very simple ; so simple, 
one may say, that it scarcely needs exploiting, but wait. Consider our modern schools 
and their methods. There one sees row after 
row of little children, and in the higher 
schools big children, too, seated i n clampeddown benches that cannot possibly allow 
freedom to all. Everybody, except i n very 
rare cases, is subject to the same rules; 
everybody has his facts presented i n the 
same general manner; everybody is engaged, 
particularly i n the lower schools, i n about 
the same activities. 
Now i n the Case dei Bambini, the Children's Houses i n the quarter of San Lorenzo 
i n Rome, all this is different. Here the 
children sit, when they are sitting, i n small, 
comfortable, portable armchairs. Here, 
while one child fingers the wooden letters 
of the alphabet and unconsciously learns 
to distinguish between them, another is 
absorbed i n touching pieces of silk and velvet 
and sandpaper, and so learning the difference between "rough" and "smooth." A 
third is interested i n a wooden frame on 
which are mounted two pieces of cloth or 
leather to be fastened and unfastened by 
means of the buttons and buttonholes, hooks 
and eyes, eyelets and lacings, or automatic 
fastenings. 
That little girl will get up some morning, 
and before she realizes it will begin to fasten her little garments herself. Whe n she 
does realize her ability, think of the eagerness with which she wil l try to manipulate 
all the strings and bows and buttons she 
possesses. She wil l have attained independence. 
Naturally enough, the question arises: 
How, in a school of this order, is discipline 
maintained? I f by discipline is meant the 
stolidity, the utter silence, the rigidity maintained by or rather forced on pupils i n the 
ordinary schools, the answer, of course, must 
be, there is no discipline. An d yet no one 
could call the pupils i n the "Children's 
Houses " disorderly. The point is that the 
child is taught here that good and immobility, evil and activity, are not necessarily 
synonymous. A s a result, there is generally 
to be found in these classrooms the pleasant 
bustle of intense preoccupation. 
The children i n one group are helping a 
teacher to put away the didactic material, 
and their services are never refused. Because 
the child is trusted he does his best. I n a 
few days—at most i n a few weeks—he is 
able to carry one of the little armchairs from 
one place to another, without coming i n contact with anything. H e gathers up the cardboard letters and arranges them i n their 
boxes just as he sees the teacher do it. Gradually, unconsciously, he acquires the habit of 
keeping his own things i n order. Sometimes 
a child who has been working at some selfimposed task attains perfection with unexpected celerity and utters an exclamation of 
joy. Bu t this does not interfere. Eithe r the 
other children, attracted by his pleasure, 
group themselves around him and he tries 
to show them how he met his success, or else, 
incited by his example, they bend to their 
own tasks with renewed energy. 
Most important of all, very few of these 
children are persistently naughty. They 
have no occasion to be. For, as Dr. Mon ­
tessori says, naughtiness is very often the in ­
stinctive effort of the child to assert a repressed personality. Since these children's 
activities are not repressed, but are simply 
directed into safe channels, and there allowed full play—there is no need for such 
assertion. Thus, these tiny children, ranging 
i n age from three years upward, acquire a 
discipline which will be theirs when hard and 
fast laws and restrictions fail. 
One of the most important aims of the 
Montessori system is the direct training of 
the senses. W e have already spoken briefly 
of the deliberate development of the sense of 
touch, whereby the child is enabled to distinguish between rough and smooth, thick 
and thin, heavy and light. Indeed, the 
children finally grow to look upon their ten 
fingers as their "other eyes." The sense of 
sight, however, particularly i n regard to 
colors, is also given careful attention. 138 TH E CRISIS 
I n this connection Dr. Montessori makes 
use of the three periods into which the lesson, according to Seguin, is divided: 
"First period—The association of the sensory perception with the name. 
"Fo r example, we present to the child two 
colors, red and blue. Presenting the red, we 
say simply 'This is red,' and presenting the 
blue, 'This is blue.' Then we lay the spools 
of colors upon the table under the eyes of 
the child. 
"Second period—Recognition of the object 
corresponding to the name. W e say to the 
child, 'Give me the red,' and then, 'Give me 
the blue.' 
"Thir d period—The remembering of the 
name corresponding to the object. W e ask 
the child, showing him the object, 'Wha t is 
this?' and he should respond, 'Red.' This 
process is reiterated many times." 
One day the child, who has been drawing 
little trees and coloring them all blue or 
green, or red, as strikes his fancy, voluntarily draws a tree with a brown trunk and 
green leaves. H e has observed a tree, and 
has found, with great pleasure, that he can 
recognize its colors. Undoubtedly this voluntary observation wil l have a more lasting 
effect upon him than knowledge received at 
second hand. An d i n addition to the mere 
possession of this knowledge, note the coordination of the visual impression with the 
execution of the hand. 
The most noteworthy result, however, of 
Dr. Montessori's method has been obtained 
i n the matter of teaching children to write 
and read. B y her system children of four, 
five and six have been taught to write i n a 
manner equal to that obtained i n the third 
elementary grade. These eases are not 
exceptions. 
To obtain these results she used small 
wooden tables, metal insets, outline drawings 
and colored pencils. The child takes the 
metal frame, places it upon a sheet of white 
paper, and with a colored pencil draws 
around the contour of the empty center. 
Then he takes away the frame, and upon the 
paper there remains the geometric figure. 
This the child fills in . I n this wise he learns 
to practice the vertical and horizontal 
strokes required i n penmanship, and also the 
co-ordination of the mental concept with the 
manual action, because i n filling i n he tries 
not to go outside the border line. Gradually 
he becomes master of the pencil. 
Next the children are given cards upon 
which the single letters of the alphabet are 
mounted i n sandpaper; also larger cards containing groups of the same letters. H e becomes familia r with the outline of these by 
the means of touch, then he traces them, 
then he draws them, and lastly, he learns 
how to compare and recognize the figures 
when he hears the sounds corresponding to 
them. 
A t last, some fine" day, he begins to copy 
words which contain letters that have impressed him, though not yet conscious that 
he is writing, and still later he learns that 
a word may be written at any time to convey 
an idea. Thus his reading follows swiftly 
on the heels of his writin g and he has practically accomplished it himself. 
It is easy to see how ric h may be the 
future of children equipped thus early with 
sharpened sense perceptions, with independence and judgment and growing self-control. 
Fo r them everything i n the world takes on a 
more vivi d coloring, avenues hitherto unsuspected are open, and the sheer joy of 
livin g is keener and stronger. Such a child 
gets practically an extension of the years of 
his life. 
O f course we do not want prodigies, 
though, after all, the quality of prodigyship 
is relative. Fo r i f all the eleven-year-old 
boys i n a given radius can work problems 
i n differential calculus, which one of them, 
then, is remarkable? The FAITHS OF TEACHER S 
By G. S. DICKERMA N 
' N occupation means much or 
little, according to the way 
it is taken. I n almost any 
pursuit that can be named 
you will see some who go 
through its forms mechanically and without interest, 
having in mind merely to meet requirements 
and draw the pay ; and alongside of them 
others who seize on every task with avidity, 
grapplin g its difficulties with a sort of joy, 
trying experiments,' making ventures, incurrin g heavy risks and looking for returns beyond any stipulated wages. The latter do 
honor to their occupation and are likely to 
be honored by it. 
The teacher's occupation is no exception. 
Think of the teachers you have known, some 
without aim and drifting into their places 
as floating sticks drift into the pool by the 
side of a mountain brook, to circle around 
there in the still water for awhile til l a 
freshet comes to throw them out; and then 
another, so unlike these, who began i n his 
early schooldays to set the teacher's calling 
before him as a goal of ambition to be 
diligently prepared for by years of serious 
study, and finally entering on it, put into 
its duties bis best and holiest service as for 
ends the highest to be found in all the 
world. 
Now that which makes the difference in 
these, is the difference i n their faiths. Be ­
hind achievements are faiths. Great teachers are men and women of great faiths. An d 
there are certain faiths that they all hold 
in common. Let me mention some of these: 
1. Faith in the pupil's worth—and in the 
worth of all pupils. 
There are pupils whose worth none ever 
question, unusually attractive boys and girls, 
gifted i n mind and sunny of disposition; of 
course these should be educated, for anyone 
can see that there is something in them. Bu t 
there are others of whom people are not so 
sure; perhaps their fathers and mothers hope 
that something can be made of them, but 
the neighbors say: "No , all the pains taken 
with their education is just so much thrown 
away; there is nothing there to build on." 
It takes the clear-eyed teacher to see the 
deeper things in that child ; those latent 
powers which are waiting to be called into 
exercise. 
Eighty years ago people thought that nothing could be made of a blind mute. Then a 
teacher arose and gathered about him a little 
group of blind children and began to try 
what could be done for them. W e know 
now the story of Dr. Samuel G. Howe and 
of the little speechless, vacant-minded, sightless Laur a Bridgman, whom he trained into 
an intellectual and accomplished woman, and 
with whose development was established the 
Perkins Institution for the Blind . An d at 
that time, eighty years ago, a similar hopeless feeling prevailed about other children 
unfortunate for a different cause, when this 
same great teacher began to try his experiments on these also, and straightway there 
grew up a second wonderful school, the 
Massachusetts School for Idiotic and Feebleminded Children. There was faith in the 
unpromising pupil and we see that it was 
not in vain. 
Ever y school has its unpromising pupils; 
but i n these the true teacher wil l search for 
promise and will find it. I know a teacher, 
a brilliant, highly educated woman, who for 
a number of years has devoted herself to a 
class made up of the backward children 
i n a public high school, the children too 
dull to keep i n the ranks of the regular 
classes, and she delights i n her work because 
she is able to discover in those stupid pupils 
unsuspected capabilities and to kindle i n 
them a flame of self-respect and of ambition. 
She has had repeated invitations to other 
positions, but she declines them as less interesting than this. 
Not long ago I visited a school in which 
the principa l talked with me very freely 
about his methods and called to the office a 
number of boys for personal conversation. 
Amon g these was one for whom he showed 
especial solicitude, and this was on account 
of his inferiority. Out of a low family and 
from bad home influences, he was what might 
be called a hard case, dull-witted, whiffling 
and unreliable, without ambition and unresponsive to his teachers' best efforts—what 
was to be done with him? The principa l 140 TH E CRISIS 
said he had been advised to get ri d of him 
as a hindrance to the other pupils, but he 
would not. Because there was no other such 
boy i n the school this one had become his 
most fascinating problem and he was giving 
to him more intense thought than to any 
other. H e was studying every trait, every 
movement, every whim, to get at some hidden spring of wish or inclination which might 
offer solid ground for the improvement of 
conduct and the rebuilding of character. A s 
I went away from that school I felt that 1 
had seen a real teacher, real because he was 
groping for the good things i n his worst 
boy. 
2. Faith in effort—effort for the pupil 
and by the pupil. 
Whe n Dr. Howe took i n charge those unfortunates i n Boston he began by playing 
with their impulsive and aimless movements 
till he had shown them that one thing was 
unlike another and had taught them to choose 
between the two, then to remember, to think 
and to learn simple lessons, from which they 
were led on step by step to a wider intelligence. Dr. Howe was a man of eminence 
and had already done great service i n many 
lands, but I suppose that he never had put 
into any undertaking such intense and tireless exertion as he bestowed on these poor 
children. It required such effort to bring 
their sleeping powers into exercise and 
exertion. 
This is the spirit for dealing with the 
unpromising pupil in any school. The others 
are likely to do well without the teacher's 
taking extra pains, but here is a task to try 
his patience and his resources. Ho w can he 
wake up the dunce? It is a case for expedients and experiments. Wha t is the key? 
Wha t does the boy care for? I f he dislikes 
reading he may take to figures, or to drawing 
or music. I f he has no interest in these he 
may be attracted by the tools in a shop or 
the plants and flowers in a garden. H e may 
be brought to love the trees i n the woods and 
to learn their names and uses, to watch the 
birds and catch their notes, to study the 
bees hanging on a thistle blossom and follow 
them to their hive, to look at a mosquito under a glass and to hunt for his breeding 
places. Other things all failing, doubtless he 
may be made to take an interest i n the playground and to do some vigorous thinking, 
as well as pitching, batting and running i n 
a baseball game. I have i n mind a man 
who has in a certain city a night school into 
which he wants to attract the boys and 
young men that no other good influences are 
reaching, the very vagabonds and desperadoes 
who are on the road to a penitentiary or 
the gallows; and one of the things that he 
does is to teach his pupils boxing—boxing 
with gloves, but rough and bloody. He is 
ready to dril l them i n the rules and manners 
of the prize rin g as the only drill that they 
can appreciate, and he hopes thus to get a 
foundation of discipline on which later they 
can be taught the higher lessons of obedience 
to the laws of the State, self-control, manliness and honorable industry. 
Endeavors such as these mean effort by 
the teacher, constant and untiring, and it is 
i n this way that the greatest teaching is 
done. B y such courses the tightly locked 
doors of many a darkened lif e are opened to 
the light of intelligence, ambition and growth 
into a noble manhood or womanhood. 
3. Faith in personal example. 
The teacher's greatest power is not i n what 
he says, but i n what he is; i n the illustration 
he gives from day to day of a strong, true, 
winsome life. The Divine Master said to his 
pupils: "Take my yoke on yo u and learn 
of me," and again, " I have given you an 
example, that ye also should do as I have 
done to you. " The apostle Pau l on more 
than one occasion said: "Be ye imitators of 
me." This is the law of all the highest 
teaching. 
Pu t the lazy, listless child under a teacher 
of animation and energy; it wil l do more for 
him than many lectures on laziness. Give 
to a selfish child an example of thoughtful 
care for the happiness of all around you ; to 
the deceitful an example of transparent sincerity; to the vicious and lawless an example 
of spotless purity and superiority to every 
unworthy self-indulgence. The teacher who 
keeps himself under healthy discipline will 
make this the most effective discipline for 
his school. 
But what of the teacher who is lax with 
himself? One has said: "You r conduct 
speaks so loud I cannot hear anything you 
say." Wha t is the use of lecturing on sincerity i f one is himself insincere? Wha t will 
talk about self-denial and the control of appetite and freedom from debasing habits 
amount to i f the very breath with which one 
speaks is odorous from his own self-indulgence? A n example which does not re-TH E FAITHS OF TEACHERS 141 
inforce instruction is apt to nullify it. That 
is why certain injurious practices are so prevalent among the boys and young men of our 
times. Wha t else could be looked for when 
so many who axe supposed to be eminent in 
morals and religion habitually indulge themselves i n these practices? 
Wit h all these forces in opposition the 
clear-eyed teacher guards his own example 
with unwavering constancy. Wha t better can 
he do for his boys? An d however those boys 
may go on their way and perhaps vary from 
the path laid out before them, it wil l not be 
without value that they have once known so 
fine an illustration of the higher things of 
life . The power of such a teacher does not 
cease with graduation day; it goes on with 
each pupi l into all his future story. 
4. Faith in the unfoldings of character 
through processes beyond our knowledge. 
The processes of all life are concealed. W e 
do not understand the life of the seed from 
the commonest herb nor how it sprouts and 
grows. Bu t anyone who plants a seed expects it to grow. It is the same with the 
life of the spirit. Wha t happens i n the 
schoolroom is to be remembered; habits there 
formed are to continue; standards of right 
and wrong, of truth and duty, of honor and 
shame, pass into the inmost texture of the 
soul and abide there. Bu t the outcome of it 
all, how, when and where, is beyond our 
forecast. A word, a glance of the eye, a 
trifling incident, may work a radical change 
i n character; it may do this at once or it may 
be years about it. So unfathomable are the 
deeps of influence that go into the long 
courses of experience through which every 
human life is borne on to its completion. 
An d this is where the teacher works, putting 
i n his impressions from moment to moment, 
from day to day, from year to year, to grow 
character and to determine destiny. 
It might be wise for people to give more 
thought than they are doing to the part 
which teachers are playing i n the world's 
progress. Take the story of the colored people i n the United States during the last fifty 
years—many are surprised at the reports 
which are given out from time to time. It 
is a record of rapidly advancing intelligence, 
energy and wealth. Let me refer to a few 
well-known figures of the United States census. I n 1860 the number of colored children 
attending school was 32,639, of whom 29,906 
were in the Northern Fre e States. I n 1870 
the number had risen to 180,372, of whom 
58,808 were in the Nort h and 131,564 i n the 
South. Now leap over a period of forty 
years to 1910, and we find the number of 
colored children enrolled in the public schools 
of the South alone, as reported by the Commissioner of Education, to be 1,748,853, with 
an average attendance daily of 1,105,629, and 
with over 30,000 teachers; we find also 150 
public high schools containing 11,662 pupils; 
and besides these some 260 schools for advanced training, designated as universities, 
colleges, normal schools or institutes, i n which 
are fully 75,000 students.* 
This development is the more impressive 
if we bring before our minds the colored people as they were forty or fifty years ago. 
W e can find those who wil l describe the 
colored schools of that time—the old army 
barracks at Nashville, Hampton, Atlant a and 
other places which served for schoolrooms, 
very unlike the commodious buildings and 
attractive grounds of the colored schools i n 
those same places to-day. A comparison of 
the pupils is even more striking, that wil d 
horde of unkempt boys and girls, men and 
women of uncertain age, many of them clad 
i n rags, unwashed and with the tight knobs 
of hair on their round heads wound thick 
with cotton strings—what a contrast to those 
you wil l see now i n a thousand schools, not 
i n cities only but often i n sparsely settled 
districts, children and youth clean i n person, 
neatly attired i n becoming garments, orderly 
i n behavior, and frequently giving evidence 
of a careful training i n the home. The 
colored teachers i n these schools, numbering 
over 30,000, all grown and trained within so 
short a time from a race without educational 
traditions, how much they mean! Not all 
model teachers, indeed, but far superior to 
what might have been expected, and approved 
most heartily by those Southern superintendents and intelligent observers who know the 
most about their work. 
These facts tell of a new intelligence 
awakening on a vast scale. An d this brings 
other developments of great moment. O f 
course there is increase of wealth, a multiplication of prosperous farms, of banks, 
stores, comfortable homes and substantial 
churches. Organizations for religious effort, 
for insurance and mutual aid have their net-
*"A n Er a of Progress and Promise," W. N. 
Hartshorn, pp. 369-371. 142 TH E CRISIS 
work of operations covering the whole country. Several hundred newspapers are owned 
and published by colored people. Several 
thousand colored physicians are engaged i n 
a lucrative practice, and individuals here and 
there are winnin g distinction from time to 
time as authors, speakers, musicians, artists 
and inventors. 
Ho w has all this come about? Ar e these 
simply the spontaneous phenomena of the 
new atmosphere of freedom? Such developments do not come i n that way. There have 
been intelligent causes behind them. The 
explanation lies i n the work of the teachers. 
Starting with those who began their service 
i n the old barracks, at first only a few but 
soon increasing to many hundred—they 
planted i n the eager pupils who gathered i n 
their schools the strong seeds of a new life. 
They were no ordinary teachers. Usually of 
superior parentage, brought up i n Christian 
homes of rare privilege, educated i n the best 
schools and colleges of the United States, 
they went to their service as to a sacred 
ministry, and they met its hard tasks with a 
fidelity and devotion not often surpassed. 
It has been the fashion i n certain quarters 
to disparage the endeavors of these teachers 
who came down from the North, and to say 
that their instructions were il l adapted to 
the necessities of such a people, that too 
much use was made of books and too little 
of things that could be grasped with the 
hand. Such criticisms overlook the conditions and circumstances that had to be dealt 
with. Those teachers attacked the desperate 
situation that confronted them i n the only 
way they could. They taught i n the manner 
they had been taught themselves, i n the 
manner other teachers were doing their work 
i n schools all over the country, Nort h and 
South. They used such methods and text 
books as they had to use; how could they 
employ such as had not yet been thought of ? 
Bu t the vita l thing i n a teacher is not 
methods or artificial devices of any kind ; it 
is an indefinable power of spiritua l personality. Man y of these teachers had this 
quality i n large measure. They had those 
faiths of which I have been speaking. They 
believed i n the worth of their pupils, however unattractive, and however others might 
laugh at their faith ; they believed i n effort 
to bring out dormant faculties and made 
their schools hives of industry; they believed 
i n example and lived a good life, the best of 
all lessons and the one to be longest 
remembered; they believed i n the unfoldings of character, to come how 
and when they could not tell, and they were 
content to wait. There is a mysterious contagion i n faiths like these, and those who 
gave themselves to this service fifty years 
ago have not wanted for successors. The 
score of names has gone on increasing from 
year to year and it is increasing still ; and 
their pupils following with steadfast purpose 
the standards of life and character instilled 
into them have grown to be like their teachers til l they have reproduced their faith and 
service i n every town and village of the 
land. 
I f the teachers i n the many thousand colored schools of to-day would have incentive 
to their hope and inspiration for their service they can do no better than to look back 
to those first schools, recall the spirit of those 
pioneer teachers, and reflect on the harvests 
that have ripened from their seed sowing. 
"TH E WHIT E MAN S BURDEN " 
By CHARLES S. NUTTER. D. D. 
Hast thou a Saxon face? N o fault of thine, 
No virtue, too. Th y brothers nearly all . 
Ar e brown of various shades. Rar e man, 
reflect, 
Is merit i n the hue? Boast not; pray God, 
H e bleach thy soul to match thy pallid face. GENERA L EVARISTO ESTENOZ 
By ARTHU R A. SCHOMBURG 
H E cable has flashed over the 
world the news that in 
Cuba General Evaristo 
Estenoz has taken up the 
gage of battle for the rights 
of his dark fellowmen, and 
that a crisis in Cuba is the 
result. General Estenoz was born at Santiago de Cuba, the birthplace of revolutionary 
conspiracies. H e is a builder by occupation 
and a soldier who has won fame by bis record 
i n many bloody engagements. 
Soon after the close of the Cuban Wa r 
and the establishment of the republic, he 
associated himself with Rafae l Serra, the 
lamented Negro philosopher, who wrote a 
book, "Fo r White s and Blacks, " a collection 
of essays, arguing that since both races had 
fought to make the republic possible, they 
should enjoy i n common the burdens and the 
benefits of the country. These two gentlemen, the lawmaker and the warmaker, visited 
New Yor k i n the summer of 1905. Though 
different i n temperaments and political affiliations they had one object, namely, to study 
conditions with the view to submitting the 
result of their observations to their compatriots i n Cuba and improving matters at 
home. 
Serra died soon after their return and the 
work of the pen fell on the shoulders of 
Estenoz. The new Independent Colored 
Part y was formed and incorporated; its object being to promote the interests of the 
colored race, to urge the government to recognize their rights as citizens and taxpayers, 
and to accord them a fair proportion of the 
elective and appointive offices. 
The Independent Colored Part y was looked 
upon i n its infancy as one of the many 
booms started by Negroes which would soon 
die, but as time grew it gathered into its 
fold men who were veterans of two and three 
wars, and clubs sprung up like mushrooms 
all over the island. I n a year there was a 
club for every city, and the party had a 
membership of over 60,000 Negro voters— 
an organization, i n short, capable of thwarting the prearranged plans of the whites. It 
became a matter of political expediency at 
first to belittle and finally to crush the attempt of the Negro leaders. The organ of 
the Negro party, called Prevision, was a 
weekly newspaper of eight pages, ably edited 
by Estenoz. So great was the demand for 
this publication that the press could not turn 
out enough copies to supply the thousands 
of readers. 
The new party was a success and it 
augured no good to President Gomez. Whe n 
the government found that it could not deal 
with the situation, it turned to the late 
Negro senator, M . Moru a Delgado, the president of the senate. It persuaded him to 
introduce i n that body his notorious "Amend ­
ment No . 17" of the electoral law, which, 
i n effect, forbade the formation of any political party along racial lines. Fo r this 
perfidy Delgado was rewarded with the appointment to the portfolio of secretary of 
war, but he was ever afterward looked upon 
by the Negroes of Cuba as a Judas to his 
race. Although he did not, like Judas, go 
out and hang himself, he died, it is said, of 
a broken heart. 
Nothing could have been more exasperating 
to the Negroes of Cuba than the Moru a law. 
Fro m the moment of its adoption to the present period they have consistently opposed 
its enforcement. General Estenoz, whose 
money and influence had contributed to the 
election of President Gomez, was hailed as 
the man of the future. 
The Negroes began to realize, when their 
leaders were thrown into prison on the eve 
of election, that the white Cubans had determined that they should not have any 
representation save what was bestowed on 
them as a charity. The Cuban Negroes are 
sensitive and well informed; but for them 
the revolutions through which Cuba has 
passed would have been impossible. But 
to-day an unconstitutional law, as infamous 
and despicable as the American Dred Scott 
decision, which declared that "Negroes had 
no rights which white men are bound to respect," deprives the Negroes of Cuba of 
political character and independence. They 
are hunted by spies, threatened with imprisonment and misrepresented in the press 
whenever they attempt to assert their rights. 
Durin g the colonial days of Spain the 
Negroes were better treated, enjoyed a greater 
measure of freedom and happiness than they 144 TH E CRISIS 
do to-day. Negroes were esteemed for their 
talents and respected for their industry and 
integrity. Man y Cuban Negroes curse the 
dawn of the Republic. Negroes were welcomed i n the time of oppression, i n the time 
of hardship, during the days of the revolution, but i n the days of peace and of white 
immigration they are deprived of positions, 
ostracized and made political outcasts. The 
Negro has done much for Cuba ; Cuba has 
done nothing for the Negro. 
The black men of Cuba have taken to the 
woods because conditions are intolerable, because, as my friend, the late Jose Marti, the 
apostle of Cuban freedom, said : "So long 
as there remains one injustice to repair in 
Cuba the revolutionary redemption has not 
finished its work. " 
PROTECTIO N 
MUS T you surely leave the place, 
mother?" 
The questioner was a Negro sailor. H e 
and his mother stood before the fireplace i n 
the one-room cabin i n which he had been 
born. Above the fireplace was a picture of 
Lincol n and an American flag. 
"E f dey means ter turn me out. dey will , 
son," the woman answered. "Lor d knows 
I'se paid fo' de 
place. We has worked 
here, ehillen an' all, 
you knows dat, an' 
I'se give money fo' 
de cabin an' de lan', 
bit by bit. Dey gib 
me bits ob papers, 
but dey say now de 
trouble is I ain't got 
a deed. Der trouble 
is all dis lan' roun' 
about is sol', an' I 
ain't wanted here." 
"Bu t that isn't 
law. Yo u ought to 
go to the justice of 
the peace." 
"De justice ob de 
peace, son, were my 
landlord, an' he sol' 
de lan'. " 
" I wish I could 'DE E TROUBL E IS I 
help you i n this trouble, mother," the sailor 
said, "but I must hurry to my ship. We 
sail i n two days." 
"Wha r to? " the woman asked. 
"Why , to Cuba, mother; I told you that. 
We're ordered to Cuba at once." 
"Wha t you goin' dar fo'? " 
"To protect American interests." The man 
strutted across the room to where his bag 
lay. "We've got a heap of money i n Cuba. 
I tell you our navy'll blow the Cubans off the 
earth i f they touch America n property. It's 
a great thing to be an American. Wherever 
you go the flag follows you and protects you 
in your rights." 
The old woman 
turned to the mantelpiece, and taking the 
flag from its place 
dropped it into the 
flames. 
"Yo u go about yer 
duty, an' serve yer 
country," she said, 
"but that flag ain't 
fo' me. They can 
steal from my kin' , 
an' there ain't a 
jedge down here, or a 
man up i n Washington, or one ob dem 
delegates dat goes 
screamin' up an' 
down de country 
about human rights, 
as ud gib a moment 
ter pertectin' me. 
Me an' my kin ' ain't 
_.. „ _ _ _ wanted, unless it's 
AIN' T WANTE D HERE " „ , ' 
fo' slaves. 
She turned back to the mantel and laid 
her hand tenderly upon the picture of the 
great emancipator. 
"Thank der Lor d you ain't Live ter see it, " 
she said. 
M . W . O. A SOCIAL CENTER A T HAMPTON, V A 
B y A . TV. HUNTON . 
IN many cities and towns clubs of colored 
women are making successful efforts for 
social betterment. I n some instances these 
clubs have not yet realized the fact that 
they, too, are being influenced by the great 
spirit of social service which is revealing 
itself to the hearts of men i n a more positive and practical way than ever before. 
MBS . JANI E PORTE R BARRET T 
These clubs have realized the need of 
things being done; and, for want of trained 
leadership, have taken the initiative i n 
doing them. There has been much experimentation and some blunders, but results 
have been certain and valuable; the more 
so, perhaps, because although lacking i n a 
severely systematic jurisdiction, this effort 
for social betterment among colored clubwomen has ever had an overflow of loving 
sacrifice and enthusiasm to encourage it. 
The Social Center, at Hampton , Va. , probably takes first rank among our clubs in 
this line of endeavor. This is not true 
because it is one of the oldest efforts, but 
for the reason that Mrs. Janie Porter 
Barrett, the able woman to whom was given 
the vision of the work for Hampton, has 
given twenty years of personal supervision 
to its development and has studied and 
traveled meanwhile to learn the best there 
is in this new movement for social betterment. 
The object and growth of the work are 
best told i n Mrs. Barrett's own words. She 
says: "The center was begun twenty years 
ago i n the home of the present head worker, 
with the definite aim of improving the 
homes and the moral and social life of that 
community. The aim has not changed 
through the years. This work began with a 
few girls of the immediate neighborhood, 
has reached out i n every section of the community, and now there are clubs and classes 
every afternoon and evening i n the week, 
eight months of the year. These clubs 
and classes include boys, girls, mothers and 
grandmothers, classified according to age 
and needs, and through these many other 
people are reached. The work grew too 
large for the house i n which it was started 
nearly ten years ago, and now has a clubhouse, which it has already outgrown, but 
which is still the center of all the activities 
of the settlement. 
"The Woman's Club, known as the Home 
Makers' Club, has several departments, all 
of which work for some phase of home 
improvement. Each woman works i n the 
line i n which she has greatest interest. Al l 
come together at intervals to work out and 
discuss common problems." 
Visitin g the center at Hampton, one 
would hardly believe that such a variety of 
work, by so large a number of people, could 146 TH E CRISIS 
be done i n such small space. Bu t here the 
resourcefulness and ingenuity of the leader 
is seen at its best. Just one room seems 
used for the same purpose at all times. This 
room is the kitchen where, under the direction of the cooking department, work of 
inestimable value to the community is being 
done. The best i n preserving and canning, 
in cake and breadmaking and i n the preparation of ordinary foods may be learned 
there, as well as something of food values, 
etc. 
The parlor witnesses many transformations. Sometimes it is a music room for a 
singing class; another time a closet door is 
opened and games of all descriptions appear 
to the satisfaction of a group of boys or 
girls. Another hour and it is a quiet reading 
room or a lecture room for a group of 
mothers. 
Bu t it is i n the upper room that one 
sees the real workshop. There are to be 
found products of the needle, of embroidery, 
knitting, basket weaving, chair caning and 
woodwork. I f the real woman does not 
thrill as she observes the girls and women 
develop beautiful things here, she is certain 
to do so i f she is permitted to examine the 
finished embroideries, rugs, baskets, etc., 
that are ready for the purchaser. Muc h 
support for the work is derived from 
articles sold, but the chief benefit is i n 
giving the boys, girls and women the ennobling touch with the beautiful together 
with the power to earn a penny. 
There is the large well-kept yar d with 
much more room for its activities. Poultr y 
raising, home gardening and flower culture 
could all be written about with profit. Last 
year more than three thousand cuttings and 
plants and three hundred packages of seed 
were distributed to the community through 
this center. The remainder of the grounds 
is given over to well-directed play and 
exercise. There are "teams" of various 
kinds for both boys and girls and tennis and 
croquet grounds. 
Still another chapter could be written on ' 
the child-welfare department, which, along 
with other things, has done much to save 
juvenile offenders from prison cells. 
HISTORIC DAY S IN JUL Y 
1. Slavery abolished i n the Dutch West 
Indies, 1863. 
2. Vermont declared slavery a violation 
of natural rights, 1777. 
3. Prince Hal l established first lodge of 
Negro Freemasons in North America , 1775. 
4. Booker T. Washington opened school 
at Tuskegee, Ala. , 1881. 
5. Joseph B. Foraker, defender of the 
discharged battalion of the 25th Infantry, 
born, 1846. 
6. Hawaiia n Islands made United States 
Territory, 1898. 
7. General B . F . Butle r discharged from 
the army a Negro, enlisted as a white man, 
1862. 
S. Right of suffrage given Negroes in 
District of Columbia, 1867. 
9. Negroes massacred at Hamburg , S. C , 
1875. 
11. Ac t of Congress to effect treaty for 
the final suppression of the slave trade approved, 1862. 
13. Draft riots i n New Yor k City , 1863. 
16. Danie l Hand , philanthropist, born, 
1801. 
17. Ac t of Congress authorizing the armin g of Negroes approved, 1862. 
18. Lemuel Haynes, celebrated Negro 
minister, born, 1753. 
Fort Wagne r assaulted and Col. Robert 
G. Shaw killed, 1863. 
19. Tennessee ratified the Fourteenth 
Amendment, 1866. 
20. The Fourteenth Amendment proclaimed, 1868. 
21. General Davi d Hunter, first Union 
commander i n Wa r of Rebellion to enlist 
Negro troops, born, 1802. 
27. Anthon y Burns, whose rendition as a 
fugitive slave caused riots in Boston, died, 
1862. 
29. Bethel, Philadelphia , the mother of 
A . M . E . Church, dedicated, 1794. 
30. Massacre growing out of politics in 
New Orleans, 1866. 
31. Slavery ceased i n Egypt, 1881. 
L . M . HERSHAW . THE BURDE N 
COLORED ME N LYNCHE D WITHOUT 
TRIAL. 
1885 78 1899 84 
1886 71 1900 107 
1887 80 1901 107 
1888 95 1902. 86 
1889 95 1903 86 
1890 90 1904 83 
1891 121 1905 61 
1892 155 1906 64 
1893 154 1907 60 
1894 134 1908 93 
1895 112 1909 73 
1896 80 1910 65 
1897 122 1911 63 
1898 102 
Total 2,521 
DELINQUENT GIRLS IN MISSOURI. 
MRS . ID A A . WALKER , president of 
the Missouri State Federation of 
Colored Women, has a strong letter i n the 
"I MET A LITTLE BLUE-EYED GIRL." 
A certain element in the South takes pains to rear the children of the family 
faithfully in the doctrines of Blease and Vardaman. "A Negro had been lynched 
in the neighborhood" said a recently returned traveler, "and crowds went out to see 
what was left of his body. The people I was staying with went with the rest and 
took their children—all but one, who had been naughty and was kept home as a 
punishment." 
I ME T a little blue-eyed girl — 
She said she was five years old ; 
"You r locket is very pretty, dear; 
An d pray what may it hold? " 
An d then—my heart grew chill and sick— 
The gay child did not flinch— 
" I found it—the tooth of a colored man— 
M y father helped to lynch. " 
"An d what had he done, my fair-haired 
child? " 
(Lif e and Death play a fearful game!) 
"Oh , he did nothing—they made a mistake— 
Bu t they had their fun, just the same!" 
BERTHA JOHNSTON. 
U. B. F. Searchlight, the official organ of 
the Missouri State Teachers' Association, 
urging the men, by their votes, to demand 
that the State make some provision for delinquent colored girls. 
"D o you know, " she writes, "that more 
than three-fourths of the women in the 
penitentiary are young colored women? 
Wh y does this condition exist? Ar e our 
women greater criminals than the women 
of other races? No . The Industrial Home 
at Chillicothe is overcrowded. An d it can 
readily be seen that the percentage of criminality is not greater among our girls than 
among the white girls, but it is because we 
have no other place to send our delinquent 
girls save to the penitentiary. It is the duty 
of every church, fraternal organization, 
newspaper and race-loving man to assist the 
Negro clubwomen of the State in doing 
something for our girls who are crying to 
us from the lowest depths, and in keeping 
them out of the penitentiary." LETTE R BO X 
I am pleased to know that we have such a 
paper as TH E CRISIS. I f the whole family 
of colored newspapers were more like it, 
how much better it would be for our race. 
Her e in the community we have settled the 
"Race Problem, " and some of our people, in 
fact most all, are shortsighted enough to 
think it is settled everywhere. There is 
some friction here, but it amounts to just 
the same as if they were all one—in fact, 
there is more trouble between colored and 
colored and white and white than between 
colored and white—a quarrel or fight between the two races being rare. The farmers i n each race do not hesitate to exchange 
work and sit at each others' tables, and they 
trade as freely as i f each were all white or 
al l colored. I have no complaint at home, 
but let me travel away, then I find that there 
is a "Race Problem, " and that "Race Problem" will have to be settled in some way. 
ESAU HARRIS, 
Cutler, Ohio. 
m 
The Januar y number is splendid. I enjoyed it greatly. I wish those pictures of 
lynching could be put upon the movingpicture roll. That way, and that way only, 
will they speak to the multiplied thousands 
their sad truth. W e often see upon the 
canvas the pictures of Indian cruelty to the 
white man ; can't we turn it around and 
show them the white man's brutishness to 
the Negro ? W e suffer almost anything 
(except lynching) right here in the beautiful 
land of sunshine. Civi l privileges are here 
unknown. Yo u can't bathe at the beaches, 
eat in any first-class place, nor wil l the 
street car and sight-seeing companies sell us 
tickets if they can possibly help it. I am 
speaking from experience. 
MRS. LOUISE MCDONALD, 
Los Angeles, Cal. 
m 
I have read and kept every issue of your 
most interesting magazine since its first publication, and I am as pleased to get each 
fresh copy as a child with its Santa Claus. 
The covers are always pretty, and I adore 
those like the "Quadroon, " with that bit of 
delicious verse, and February's, displaying 
the flowers of our race, the most Its pages 
fill a long-felt want. This, with the problem books and plays, wil l do much to lift 
the "awfu l burden." 
MATTHEW BENNETT, 
New Yor k City . 
m 
I ought also to tell yo u of the great satisfaction with which I read TH E CRISIS. It 
is an admirable publication; I don't see how 
it could be better. It fills the bil l exactly, 
and I think we ought to thank yo u for it. 
I do every month. 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL, 
New Yor k City . 
(In answer to a request for pictures.) 
I am thoroughly i n sympathy with what 
you are doing, but find that I cannot arrange to supply you with all that you wish. 
I consulted our one colored photographer 
here, and he does not think it possible, or 
at least practicable, for him to secure any 
of the photographs except those of the 
schools and the churches. Yo u know what 
conditions are i n this section, and can readil y understand the position this photographer takes. H e could hardly get some of 
those pictures without exciting comment or 
suspicion, or even being the object of violence. I f yo u wil l let me know whether you 
would like to have pictures of the churches 
and schools I shall notify the photographer, 
and he wil l communicate with you. 
m 
I enclose a letter I received from the 
Canadian Superintendent of Immigration 
in reply to an inquiry about colored people 
in Western Canada. I think you wil l find it 
interesting. 
Ottawa, Canada , Marc h 29, 1912. 
Sir : I have had referred to me by H . M . 
Williams, our agent at Toledo, your letter of 
the 23d inst, and I beg to say i n reply that 
I do not think there are good openings for 
your people in Western Canada. W e have 
had to send back to the United States quite 
a number of those who failed to succeed in 
the West, and on account of this it has been LETTE R BOX 149 
found necessary to make a very careful 
medical examination of all colored people 
applying for entry, with the result that a 
great many have been rejected. I do not 
think it would be advisable for you to come, 
as I am quite sure that the opportunities 
for your people are better in the warmer 
climate. 
Your obedient servant, 
(Signed) W. W. SCOTT, 
Superintendent of Immigration. 
PUBLISHERS' CHA T 
The August number of TH E CRISIS will be Vacation 
Number. It will tell where to rest, and what it will cost, with 
some consideration of the end and meaning of rest. Then 
there will be a short story and the pictures will be unusually 
striking. 
CITIE S WITHI N TH E VEIL—W e shall begin in 
the September number a series of articles on the various cities 
of the world which have a large colored population. They 
will treat of the life of these thousands in an interesting way. 
BABIES—Th e October number of TH E CRISIS will be 
Children's Number. This is the month of school beginnings and 
family reunions. W e want pictures of colored children of 
eight years of age or less, especially babies. W e shall give 
three prizes to the three most interesting pictures. Pictures must 
reach us not later than September 10th. 
AGENTS—Som e of our agents in returning unsold 
copies forget to put their names and addresses on the package. 
Please be careful; remember that TH E CRISIS has now 315 
agents distributed in every State in the Union and in several 
foreign lands. They are a picked lot, taken only on careful 
recommendation. 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A professional man advertised in TH E CRISIS for a partner with capital The 
profession is one that offers little encouragement to colored men and yet he writes: 
' ' Kindl y stop the advertisement in TH E CRISIS, as my want 
has been filled. We appreciate the very good results (from 
TH E CRISIS) and will forward check on the 15th." 
A large corporation advertised in TH E CRISIS for a general manager with 
capital. The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those 
with capital and experience. They write: 
' ' We believe that one of the parties is really interested in 
our proposition and will close with him in a few days." 
They ' ' closed'' with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
There is our story in a nutshell. 
Those who require high-grade help should use our "Hel p Wanted " columns, 
and those who are trained or experienced as high-grade helpers should advertise 
their services where they may reach the largest number of possible employers. 
HELP WANTE D 
TEACHER S WANTE D 
Music , lady, unmarried; voice, violin and piano. 
Bookkeeper and stenographer. 
Far m manager. 
Good Salaries. 
Mutual Teachers' Agency 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington, D . C . 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIX E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y GO . 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla . 
AGENTS — Represen t reliable house, 400 per 
cent, profit. Selling GORDON' S Photo Pillow 
Tops. High grade work. Easy sales. Bi g money. 
Samples and catalogue free. 
Luthe r Gordon Co. 206 N. Fifth Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated. 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Lenox Avenue New Yor k 
AREN' T YOU TIRE D O F WORKIN G A T "so much 
per " piling up profits for somebody else! Would 
you consider a proposition of going in business for 
yourself without any investment but your time and 
talents? If so write and get our proposition. 
Young and old can make money with our proposition. 
TH E NELSO N SUPPL Y CO. , Harrisburg , Pa . 
AGENT S make big money selling our Negro pictures, size 16 x 20. ' 'Jesus Died for Both, *' 
"Clingin g to the Cross," "Protecting Angel, " 
' 'Booker T . Washington," "Heavenward, " ' ' A 
Mother's Joy,'' ' 'Inspiration,' 1 ' 'Mama , I Love 
You, " "Jac k Johnson." Catalog free. Peoples 
Portrait Co., 710 W . Madison St., Dept. C, 
Chicago, HI. 
FOR SAL E 
A n automatic addressing machine. Ad ­
dresses envelopes, newspaper wrappers, 
fills in statements, letters, etc. A child can 
operate it. Wil l address 800 per hour. 
Invaluable in publishing house, insurance 
office or any business which handles a large 
correspondence. Address 
Addressing Machine , care TH E CRISI S 
26 Vese y Street, Ne w Yor k 
MUTUA L TEACHERS ' 
AGENC Y 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N . W. Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 151 
BOOKS I REAL ESTATE 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
James F . Morton, Jr , AM. , Author and Publisher. 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Bead the chapter on 'The Bug 
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable eye 
opener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Author at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York, N . Y . 
The Power of Womanhood 
A Speech by Joseph Wellington 
PRIC E 20 CENT S 
Sold by 
TH E STANDAR D NEW S COMPAN Y 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
PATENTS 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R OF PATENT S 
55 John Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machines Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone 343 John Room 604 
MUSIC 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCERT PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musical Art 
Pupil of Sigismund Stojowsky 
Teacher of Piano, Theory, Ear-training, etc. 
224 EAS T 86TH STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Composer ART . NAYLO R Playwright 
Original songs and acts written to order. 
Music set to words, words set to music. 
Acts and songs revised. Correspondence solicited. 
Terms reasonable. 830 S. 3d St., Springfield, Ill. 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Large tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. We have 
for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses an ' barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
City property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Large 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. For any investment in Texas property, write T. B . Madison Real 
Estate Company, 2416 Elm Street, Dallas. Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Oar city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Can sell you a 
house for $50. $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. For investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Farm land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. Any of these are in good locations. 
Write for further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estate 
1218 1/2, Mt. Vernon Av e Columbus. Ohio 
MOVING 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C 
Formerly Manager Virgini a Transfer Company 
459 SEVENT H AVENU E New York City 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V . B . A . 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York, N . Y . 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
SCHOOLS 
Lear n Algebr a or 
Shorthand Writin g 
During your spare time. Complete course: either 
one by mail, $14.00; book furnished. $2.00 down 
and then $1.00 a month until paid. We can accommodate 200 by mail. 
PERKIN S SEMINAR Y 
320 S. 10th Street Birmingham, Ala . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 152 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
This Beautifully Ornamented 
Fifteen-Year Guaranteed 
Gold-Filled Pencil and Box 
of quality A leads sent to any 
address, postage prepaid, on receipt 
of 
ONE DOLLAR 
W e also have the same pencil at 
the same price in guaranteed sterling 
silver. 
Fo r the lady's purse or chatelaine. 
Fo r the gentleman's watch charm 
or guard. 
Fifteen-year guaranteed gold or 
silver for $ 1. Writ e 
Shippar-Nowell Co. 
Bo x 25, Statio n J Ne w Yor k Cit y 
KELSEY' S 
Human Hair Goods and 
Hair Preparations 
Hav e stood the test for years. Al l 
the latest styles in Braids, Transfor ­
mations, Puffs, Toupees, Wigs, etc., 
carefully matched to a sample of your 
hair, and beautifully made. Onl y the 
best hair used in manufacturing. 
KELSEY' S Hai r Growe r and Dressing, made of the purest Hai r and 
Scalp foods, relieves the Scalp of all 
of the many diseases for which it is 
subject, causing the Hai r to become 
soft and healthy, and POSITIVEL Y 
prevents its falling out. 
Puffs, Braids and Transformations, 
$1 up. 
Hai r Growe r and Dressing, $1. 
Send sample of hair for price quotation. 
S. A . & A . C. KELSE Y 
328 Leno x Avenu e Ne w Yor k Cit y 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
Whit e Ros e Workin g Girls' Hom e 
Be t 
217 East 86th Street 
Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: . 
MRS . FRANCE S E . KEYSER , Supt. 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cor a Va n Schoick is conducting a sale and 
exhibit of unusual interest at the WHIT E BOS S 
MISSION , 217 East 86th Street, New York . 
There is on sale hand-painted china and pillow 
tops, hand-made opera bags, pi n cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive for 
gifts and interior decorations. 
Telephone 3253 Harle m 
CARPE T CLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture ; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D 
SPECIALT Y 
RUG S OU R 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHIO 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbac h Block Omaha , Neb. 
PATTERNS ! PATTERNS! ! 
Exclusive creations of Madame M . Beck, the wellknown Dressmaker and Designer. 
Particular dressers and dressmakers will wait to 
see these new designs, which will be one of our 
new features beginning with the August number. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 153 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
The regular correspondence machines. 
Models No. 4 and No. 5. are the same in 
all respects except Model No. 5 has four 
extra keys for fractions and special characters. The UNDERWOO D is the most 
popular correspondence typewriter in the 
world. Its sales exceed those of any other 
machine. 
"The Machine You Will 
Eventually Buy." 
Underwood Typewriter Co. 
INCORPORATED 
Underwood Buildin g Ne w Yor k 
PAMPHLET S 
Published by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. African Civilization: By M . D . Mac ­
lean. Price 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
B y Bur t G. Wilder . Price 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: By Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Price 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: By Briga ­
dier-General Burt, U . S. A . Price 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Price 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Price 2 cents. 
Address 
Th e Crisi s Boo k Departmen t 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Ten Years with Dr . D. C. Whit e 
Telephone 7189 Morningside 
DR. JAME S A. BANK S 
DENTIS T 
204 WES T 133d STREET . NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crown and Bridge Wor k a Specialty 
Pure Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
Office: Room 502, Eberl y Block, Columbus. O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
CRISIS. 154 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
GOOD COMMISSION PAID TO 
ORGANIZERS. JOIN NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
110 1/2 Colfax Ave., South Bend, Ind. 
Too , Too ! Too , Too ! Too , To o 
SOMETHING NEW 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduate d Scale of Endowmen t 
For particulars write G. W. BLAND , H . S. P. 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing , Beauty Culture, Hai r Makin g and Chir ­
opody scientifically taught. Da y and night sessions. Instructions given to pupils in 
their own homes if desired. Diploma s awarded. Send for booklet-directory of recently 
graduated students. 
Make Your Spare Moments 
Profitable 
tjl Th e continued growth of TH E CRISIS necessitates the extension of 
our field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish 
sub-agencies and look after renewals. 
f l If you can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
in your city, we can make you a proposition that wil l interest you. Th e 
work is dignified as well as profitable. 
==== = ADDRESS BUSINESS MANAGE R ' 
TH E CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS. The TESTING FIRE 
By ALEXANDE R CORKE Y 
Author of "The Victory of Allan Rutledge" 
Is the Sanest Story Ever Written on the Race Problem 
It is the first story ever written on the race 
question, by a white man, that is not antagonistic 
to the colored race, 
EVERY FREEDMAN SHOULD READ IT 
Through its pages runs a sweet romance, but 
it is more than a love story. It is a novel of 
uplift, accomplishment and promise. 
No One Interested in the Race Question Should Miss It 
Price $1.25 Net; Postage 10 Cents Extra 
The H . K . FL Y COMPANY , Publishers 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of TH E CRISIS, 
26 Vesey Street, New York 
YOU R LOCA L PRINTER 
may be able to do your ordinary printing, but your business and 
personal stationery, wedding invitations, calling cards, pamphlets, etc., 
require that particular attention which our experience and facilities 
afford you. 
As first-class printers in New York City, we are subject to the 
most exacting demands, since new designs and type formations must be 
constantly originated to satisfy a large clientèle of most discriminating 
patrons. 
We refer you to Mr. Condé Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS. 
Write for samples and special quotations. 
ROBERT N . WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAST 99th STREET NEW YORK 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS. This magnificent hotel, replete with every modern improvement, claims distinction for its location; 
direct Southern exposure. Superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. 
Endorsed by leading representative citizens. 
Concerts daily by the Abyssinia orchestra. Garage, bathhouses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special 
attention given to ladies and children. Literature and information mailed upon request. 
E. W. DALE , Cape May, N. J., Owner and Proprietor 
HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapter I. How the colored people won their civil and political rights. 
Chapters II. and III. The Negro tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV. and V . How the colored man earns his living, with a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . The colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivid description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapter VIII. The Negro in politics in New York. 
Chapter IX . The author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of The Crisis, 26 Vesey St., Ν. Y . 
Mention THE CRISIS. 