THE CRISIS 
RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Four SEPTEMBER , 1912 Number Five 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y Ou r Heroes of Destiny" 
Honorables Frederick Douglass, John M . Langston, Blanche K. Bruce, Paul Laurence 
Dunbar and Booker T. Washington 
I desire to thank the readers 
of TH E CRISI S and my large 
number of friends for their 
very enthusiastic support and 
appreciation of the Special 
Editio n of "OU R HEROE S O F 
DESTINY. " 
POPULA R EDITIO N 
Whil e the orders for the 
Specia l Editio n have been most 
gratifying, there has been a 
constant demand for a cheaper 
one. 
I n response to these numerous requests I am glad to announce that a Popula r Editio n 
is on the press. I n producing 
this Editio n there is neither a 
sacrifice of quality nor workmanship, as I was fortunate in 
securing a specially processed 
paper, which wil l defy even the 
eyes of an expert in distinguishing it from the Special Edition . 
The price of the Popula r 
Editio n is fifty cents, postpaid. 
The Special Edition, which is on 
JAPA N VELLUM , will, by nο 
means, be discontinued, and those 
of the particular sort who desire 
may have one forwarded to them for 
One Dollar, postpaid. 
INDIVIDUA L PORTRAIT S 
The Individua l Portraits are 
beautiful gravures, 11 by 14 
inches, handsomely mounted 
and ready for framing. Price , 
fifty cents. 
A partia l list of those now 
ready includes : 
Frederick Douglass 
Booker T. Washington 
Mrs. Booker T. Washington 
Blanche K. Bruce 
John M. Langston 
W. Ε. B. Du Bois 
Pau! Laurence Dunbar 
Rev. C. T. Walker 
Judson W. Lyons 
T. Thomas Fortune 
This illustration is protected by copyright. Any infringement 
will be prosecuted 
"OU R HEROE S O F DESTINY " 
TESTIMONIALS 
Rev. Dr. R. C. Ransom, New Yor k City, says: 
"You r splendid production of 'Our Heroes 
of Destiny' marks the era of perpetuating 
characteristic and faithful likenesses of the 
famous men and women of our own race, to 
be handed down to younger generations, inspiring them with ideals which if carefully nurtured 
i n their young lives will in their mature ages 
prove excellent examples of pure and dignified 
manhood and womanhood. 
"N o home where there is a child should be 
without a copy of this excellent work, and no 
parent that feels the love and loyalty of higher 
race development should fail to teach the 
children of their homes the meaning of the 
lives of these five men. " 
Mrs. Β. K . Bruce, Washington, D . C , says: 
" I am indeed glad to say that 'Ou r Heroes 
of Destiny' is the most creditable work of 
art that has yet been produced of and for our 
people. The life likeness of the entire group 
is exceedingly good. It is a fitting memorial 
worthy to be in every home. 
"I f we are to perpetuate the memories of 
our own great men, it must be by keeping 
their portraits ever before our youth, and 
familiarizing them with the true meaning of 
their lives. " 
AGENTS — Her e is a propositio n that wil l net yo u a substantia l monthl y income , 
whethe r yo u devote all or spare time to it. M y extensive advertising ; creatin g a demand for these pictures, insures quick sales, and their superior quality 
makes each purchase r a satisfied customer. YO U woul d be interested to 
kno w how I train m y agents b y correspondenc e and make them successful 
salesmen. Writ e for particulars. 
C. M . BATTEY , 
ARTIS T AN D PUBLISHE R 
322 Mott Avenue New York City 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
26 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W. E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Subscription: $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Subscriptions 
to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th of the previous month. 
CONTENT S FOR SEPTEMBER 
PAGE 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 21S 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 223 
OPINIO N 225 
EDITORIA L '234 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 237 
HISTORI C DAY S I N SEPTEMBER . By L . M . Hershaw, 239 
A SUFFRAG E SYMPOSIUM . By Fanny Garrison Villard, Adella Hunt 
Logan, Mary Church Terrell, Martha Gruening and Rosalie Jonas 240 
TH E BURDE N 248 
WHA T T O REA D 249 
LETTE R BO X 250 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P . O. at N . Y . Cit y 
Contributing 
Editors 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W . S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 212 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located i n the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School. Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1912. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virgintia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high, standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
The largest colored college in the South. 
A new department of sociology and social 
service. A notable equipment in land and 
buildings. Endorsed by the General Education Board. For information address 
GEORGE A. GATES, President 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O Wilber
Th e only school in the country for Negro 
Yout h which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed Unite d States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L 
COMMERCIA L 
CLASSICA L 
TECHNICA L 
THEOLOGICA L 
MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Te n 
Buildings, Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in par t by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term begins September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 213 
Aver y College Training Schools 
NORT H SIDE, PITTSBURGH , PA . 
A superior training school for young colored women, thoroughly instructing 
its students as a means of self-support in dressmaking, cutting and drafting, domestic 
science, music, nurse training, millinery, and an intermediate English course. This 
institution is under the influence of no religious denomination, is the oldest endowed 
chartered Negro institution in America. The accommodations in its dormitory, 
which is in charge of a competent matron, are excelled by no colored institution 
in this country. 
The hospital department offers the same course as the large hospitals of the 
State of Pennsylvania, fully equipped with its operating rooms, diet kitchen and 
ambulance service. The course requires three years' lectures on general nursing, 
anatomy, ethics, surgery, obstetrics, asepsis, antiseptics, gynecology, pediatrics, eye, 
nose, throat, materia medica, therapeutics and dietetics under a staff of white and 
colored physicians. Catalogues now ready. 
Address all communications to 
JOSEPH D. MAHONEY , Secretary 
Box 154 North Side, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Daytona Educational and Industrial 
School for Negro Girls 
Daytona, Florida 
It reaches, by reason of its location, a 
large territory of Negro children deprived 
of educational privileges. 
Its comfortable home life and Christian 
influences insure a certain individual attention and superior training impossible in 
larger institutions of its kind. 
Mrs. Frances R. Keyser, formerly in 
charge of the White Rose Home for Working Girls, in New York City, has been 
elected Principal of the Academic Department. Write for catalog and detailed 
information. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUN E 
Founder and Principal 
Lear n Algebr a or 
Shorthand Writin g 
Durin g your spare time. Complete course; either 
one by mail, $14.00; book furnished. $2.00 down 
and then $1.00 a month until paid. We can accommodate 200 by mail. 
PERKIN S SEMINAR Y 
320 S. 10th Street Birmingham, Ala . 
SE E 
MME . BECKS ' PATTERN S 
O N PAG E 253 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
Open all the year round. For 
males only. Strong, practical and 
theoretical courses leading to 
degree of Bachelor of Science in 
Agriculture, and Bachelor of 
Science in Mechanics. Board, 
lodging and tuition, $7.00 per 
month. Write to-day for catalog 
or for further information. 
JAS. B. DUDLEY, President 
GREENSBORO , N . C. 
Mention T H E CRISIS . 214 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing fo r 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared, numbe r of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course i n 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choi r of Chicago, Ill, whose choir has 
just received the first priz e awarded at the Singing Contest held i n Paris on Ma y 25, 1912: 
"Dea r Mr . Tinsley : 
"I take great pleasure i n commending your 
very useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone -
Placing and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a simple system, 
"Cordiall y yours, 
"Fathe r WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P. , 
"Directo r Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
Pric e 31. Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO, ILL. 
or Clayton F . Summy, 64-66 E . Va n Bure n St. 
(Steinway Hal l Bldg.;, and Lyo n & Healy , Adams 
and Wabash Sts., Chicago, Ill. 
The NEGR O AN D TH E 
ELECTIVE FRANCHISE 
No . 11. Occasional Papers 
AMERICA N NEGR O ACADEM Y 
A n Opinion Worth While. 
"I find more patriotism and statesmanship 
in this pamphlet by colored men than in 
all the contributions made on the subject 
by white men since the Civil War." 
A . E . PILLSBURY. 
£ y Inclose 35 cents to 
J . W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
PUBLICATION S 
A. M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLIS WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price . $1.00. 
TH E NEGRO PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; b y R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . G. Steward, 
Chaplain U. S. A . retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 75 
cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANI A A Study in 
Economi c History . B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , Sometime 
Research Fellow in Sociology in the Universit y of 
Pennsylvania. Price , Paper , $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A M . E . BOOK CONCER N 
631 Pine Street. Philadelphia, Pa . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
I5 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-.Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York , N. Y . 
The Power of Womanhood 
A Speech by Joseph Wellington 
PRIC E 20 CENT S 
Sol d by 
TH E STANDAR D NEW S COMPAN Y 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
" A noteworthy book of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
B y W . E . BURGHAED T D U BOI S 
Eight h Editio n 
"I t is one of the noteworthy books, 
not merely of a year, but of the epoch. 
Its every page is filled with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality. " — Boston 
Transcript. 
" A stripping bare of the moral and 
mental anatomy of the African in America so as to reveal the naked soul in it 3 
primitive simplicity, seared and scarred 
by ages of suffering."—New York Age. 
Wit h Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
At book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAG O 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS 
Volume Four SEPTEMBER . 1912 Number Five 
ALON G 
COLOR LINE 
WOMAN' S SUFFRAGE. 
AMONG the most active workers for suffrage i n New Yor k Cit y is Dr. Verin a 
Morton-Jones. Dr . Jones is president of 
the Brookly n Equal- Suffrage League of the 
King s County Suffrage Association, the 
organization for which Mrs. Garnett worked 
so faithfully until her death. The league 
was the banner club i n the State fair of 
1911. 
<I I n Boston Mrs. Josephine Ruffin has given 
many years to active service i n the suffrage 
movement. Miss A . L . T. Wayte s of that 
city tours the country i n the interests of 
votes fo r women. This campaign she has 
been speaking i n Wisconsi n and Ohio. 
•J Muc h work is being done for suffrage by 
the colored women of Ohio. Mrs. Halli e 
Q. Brow n of Wilberforc e has given many 
years of devoted service to "votes' for 
women," and Mrs. Blanche A . Gilmere of 
Cleveland is an ardent advocate and is working diligently i n the present State campaign. 
*J The State secretary i n Wisconsin writes 
that "Miss Carri e Horto n is president 
of the Colored Suffrage League of Mil ­
waukee, and when she returns from her 
vacation we believe she wil l take up the 
suffrage wor k wit h enthusiasm. W e hope 
to poll the entire colored vote of Mil ­
waukee." 
•J The Equa l Suffrage League of Indiana 
has seven branches i n Indianapolis, one being 
the colored branch. This was organized i n 
July , 1912, and has as its president Miss 
Carri e Barnes, a young woman reared i n that 
most progressive State, Colorado. It has 
forty members—thirty women and ten men. 
Al l are active workers. Once a month it 
meets wit h other branches to go over matters 
of general importance. "Ou r meetings," the 
president writes, "are well attended, and both 
the men and the women are enthusiastic. 
W e all feel that colored women have need 
for the ballot that white women have, and 
a great many needs that they have not." 
<I On the resolutions committee at the 
National Association of Colored Wome n at 
Hampto n was an Alabama woman who is a 
life member of the Nationa l Woman's Suffrage Association. She is active i n the 
present campaign for the enfranchisement of 
women i n Ohio, and has exercised the taxpayers' suffrage i n Louisiana . 
POLITICAL . 
MR. ANDRE W B . HUMPHRE Y estimates the effective Negro vote i n the 
next presidential election to be 600,000, 
divided as follows: 
Massachusetts 
Rhode Island. 
Connecticut . . 
New York . .. . 
New Jersey. .. 
Pennsylvania 
Marylan d . . 
Delaware . . . 
W. Virginia . . 
Kentuck y .. . 
Missouri 
20,000 
. 3,500 
. 6,000 
.50.000 
.30,000 
.70,000 
.65,000 
.10,000 
.24,000 
.75,000 
. 30,000 
Ohio 
Indiana . . 
Illinois 
Michigan 
Iowa ... . 
Kansas 
Nebraska 
Oklahoma 
Colorado . . 
California 
Washington 
45,000 
25,000 
50,000 
7,000 
7,000 
20,000 
4.000 
40,000 
5,000 
10,000 
3,500 216 TH E CRISIS 
9 A t the convention of the Progressive 
party Negroes from the South were 
denied seats. In ' Mississipp i the delegates 
had been elected i n a convention which was 
confined to white men. I n most o f the other 
Southern States Negroes were excluded. I n 
the case o f Florid a both the white and colored delegations were excluded. South 
Carolin a was not represented because only 
colored men offered to organize the party. 
A plank was lai d before the convention 
affirming the right of the Negro to take part 
i n government. This, after long debate, the 
platform committee refused to adopt. A 
few colored delegates sat fo r the Northern 
States and made a hard fight for justice. 
Three directors of the Nationa l Association 
fo r the Advancement of Colored People, 
Mr . J . E . Spingarn , Mr . Henr y Moskowit z 
and Miss Jane Addams, worked strenuously, 
but without avail, to change the attitude of 
the convention. 
* l I n the September election Ohio wil l vote 
on two proposals touching the colored people. Proposa l number 23 is to enfranchise 
women and to strike from the constitution 
the prohibition against voting by other persons than white .men. Proposa l number 24 
does not enfranchise women, but does drop 
the wor d "white. " 
<J The question of Negroes voting i n Southern "white " primaries continually comes to 
the fore. I n Virgini a the new Byr d law 
apparently does not exclude the colored people from primar y elections. I n Texas the 
State attorney-general has handed down an 
opinion that Negroes may be prohibited 
from voting i n such elections. 
<I A determined effort was made by colored 
officeholders to have Dr . U . G . Maso n of 
Birmingham appointed as internal revenue 
collector i n Alabama i n the place of Col . 
Thompson, a white man, who has just been 
displaced. The attempt was, however, unsuccessful. Sim. T. Wright , a white man, 
was appointed by President Taft. 
*J Mr . T. B . McAlliste r has been reappointed 
receiver of public moneys at Jackson, Miss. 
H e has held this post for eight years and 
is the only important Negro federal officeholder i n the State. Mr . Charles Banks, with 
the endorsement of Mr . Booke r T. Washing ­
ton, was a prominent candidate fo r the 
position. A s Mr . Taft di d not appoint 
Mr . Banks, this is said to have had much to 
do wit h Mr . Banks' advocacy o f Roosevelt 
i n the Republica n convention. 
<I Several delegations o f colored men have 
waited on Governor Wilson , the Democratic 
nominee fo r President. The first delegation 
reports the result o f their interview as follows: "Mr . Wilso n assured us, first of all , .. 
that i f elected he intended to be a President 
of the whole nation—to know no white or 
DE . V . MORTON-JONE S (See page 215) 
black, no North , South, East or West, and 
no home-born or foreign-born, but that he 
would treat every citizen according to the 
law—not only the letter, but according to 
the spirit of the law—an d that he would 
discharge his obligations, his duties of office, 
i n the spirit of Christ, and wit h justice and 
fairness to all. I n the second place, even 
i f the President and both houses of Congress 
should be Democratic, he di d not believe that 
any measures inimica l to colored people 
would be passed. H e said that it was the 
understanding wit h the party leaders that 
this should be the case, but i f by any accident such a measure or measures should be 
passed he woul d veto them. I n the third 
place, he gave us to understand that so fa r 
as patronage was concerned he could assure 
us that the colored people woul d fare as ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 217 
well under his administration as President as 
they had fared under Republican administrations. I n the fourth place, he promised as 
soon after his forma l notification as possible he woul d get out a statement over his 
own name to the entire country refuting the 
falsehoods which are being so indiscriminately circulated against him by most of the 
colored newspapers and by many o f the 
white papers and magazines of the country 
relative to his enmity to and hatred of the 
colored man. W e called the governor's attention to the fact that it had already been 
repeatedly stated that i f he became President 
he would use his power to spread 
'Ji m Crow' and disfranchisement acts 
against the colored man and to abolish the 
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. 
H e said that these were false statements; that he had no intention of doing 
any such thing and would frown upon the 
efforts of any who undertook to promote 
such acts. I n short, he expressed himself as 
feeling the need of and desiring the colored 
vote and stated that he was willin g to do 
anything that was right and legal to secure 
that vote, and that i f elected President of 
the Unite d States the colored people would 
have no occasion to regret having voted for 
him. " 
A second delegation of colored men which 
has waited on Mr . Wilso n enlisted his sympathy and aid fo r the passage of the 
emancipation celebration bill now before the 
House of Representatives. 
*9 I n South Carolin a an astonishing politica l 
fight is going on between the white aristocrats, led by Jones, and the poor whites, led 
by Governor Blease. Bot h agree i n malignin g the Negro. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE colored people of Pennsylvani a and 
New Jersey are busy arranging for the 
exposition which they are to hold next year 
aided by State appropriations. Other celebrations are being planned i n Spokane, 
Wash. , the Distric t of Columbi a and elsewhere. 
<J It is reported that there are 4,113 colored 
men i n the navy receiving a total yearly 
salary of $2,168,000. 
«J The new colored Y . M . C. A . i n Washing ­
ton, D . C , is now i n ful l workin g order. 
The secretary is Louis E . Johnson. 
Helen Collins left i n her wil l recently 
$10,000 to the Tuskegee Institute, a part of 
her residual estate to the Snow Hil l Institute, $5,000 to the New Yor k Colored Mission and $1,000 to the Lincol n Hospital. 
<I A civil-service examination for the $1,200 
position of organizer of the Emancipatio n 
Proclamation Commission of New Jersey has 
been held. Fourteen persons passed the 
test, and among these A . L . Locke , formerly 
a Rhodes scholar, Solomon P . Hoo d and 
E . R. Hayn e stood highest. 
<J The colored Peki n Theatre of Chicago 
has, on account of the death o f its proprie ­
tor, passed into the hands of white people. 
<J Ming o Saunders, one of the dismissed 
men of the Brownsvill e battalion, has been 
given a civil-service position, and it is said 
that legislation wil l be attempted to restore 
him and his fellows to the army. 
9 The cornerstone of the new colored 
Y . M . C. A . i n Chicago has been laid. The 
cost wil l be $180,000. 
9 A large colonization scheme involvin g 
4,700 acres has been started by the Liberia n 
Lan d Company i n the State of Washington. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE Metropolitan Realty Investment 
•» Company of Ocala, Fla. , have just 
bought $18,000 worth of property i n that 
city. 
<J I n Georgia a bill is before the legislature 
providin g certain qualifications for locomotive firemen which is framed to discriminate 
against Negro firemen. 
<5 It is said that the Pullma n porters are not 
provided for i n the employers' liability and 
workmen's compensation act now before 
Congress. 
Q Large farmers' conferences have been held 
at Lawrenceville, Va. , at Harrisburg , Pa. , 
and at Prairi e View , Tex. 
<J L . B . Jeffries, a colored man, has been 
awarded the contract fo r erecting a fourroom primar y school at Greensboro, N . C. 
Man y of the contractors refused to submit 
plans because Negroes were allowed to 
compete. 
<J There are twelve cities i n the Unite d 
States wit h more than 40,000 colored people, 
according to the census of 1910; the figures 218 TH E CRISIS 
follow, together wit h the percentage of colored to total population : 
Washington, D . C 94,446, or 23.5%;, 
Ne w York , N. Y 91,709, or 1.9% 
Ne w Orleans, L a 89,262, or 26.3% 
Baltimore, M d 84,749, or 15.2% 
Philadelphia. P a 84,459, or 5.5% 
Memphis, Tenn 52,441, or 40.0% 
Birmingham. Al a 52,305, or 39.4% 
Atlanta , Ga 51,902, or 33.5%, 
Richmond, V a 46,733, or 36.6% 
Chicago. Il l 44,103. or 2.0% 
St. Louis, M o 43.960, or 6.4% 
Louisville , K y 40,522, or 18.1% 
<J The 91,709 Negroes i n Ne w Yor k Cit y are 
divided as follows: 
Manhattan Borough 60.534 
Bronx Borough 4,117 
Brooklyn Borough 22,708 
Queens" Borough 3,193 
Richmond Borough 1,152 
*I There are twenty-seven cities i n the Unite d 
States which had. i n 1910, between 10,000 
and 40,000 colored inhabitants: 
Nashville, Tcnn : 36,523 
Savannah. Ga 33.246 
Charleston. S. C 31,056 
Jacksonville, Fl a 29,293 
Pittsburgh, P a 25,623 
Norfolk, Va 25,039 
Houston. Tex 23,925 
Kansas City, Mo 23,566 
Mobile , Al a 22,763 
Indianapolis, Ind 21.816 
Cincinnati, O 19,623 
Montgomery, Al a 19,322 
Augusta, Ga 18.344 
Macon. Ga 18.150 
Dallas,' Tex 18,024 
Chattanooga, Tenn 17.924 
Littl e Bock, Ar k 14,339 
Shreveport. L a 13,896 
Boston. Mass 13,564 
Fort Worth, Tex 13,280 
Columbus, O 12,739 
Wilmington. N . C 12,107 
Charlotte, N . C 11,752 
Portsmouth. V a 11,617 
Columbia, S. C 11,546 
Lexington, K y 11,011 
San Antonio,Te x 10,716 
*J Negroes constitute more than half thepopulation of Charleston, Savannah. Jacksonville and Montgomery ; and one-fourth or 
more of the population of twenty-seven 
principa l cities. 
EDUCATION. 
THE illiteracy statistics as issued by the 
tenth census give the following figures 
for the whole of the Unite d States and for 
the South : 
Negro population 10 years of age and over, 1910. 
Division and State Numbe r Pe r 
Continental Unite d Tota l of Illiterate. Cent. 
States 7,318,502 2,228,087 30.4 
Southern Divisions: 
South Atlantic...2,986,936 969,432 32.5 
East So. Central. 1,960,898 681,507 34.8 
West So. Central. 1,460,705 483,022 33.1 
•I The figures fo r specific Southern States 
are as follows: 
Numbe r Pe r 
of Illiterate. Cent. 
Delaware 6,345 25.6 
Marylan d 42,289 23.4 
District of Columbia 10,814 13.5 
Virgini a 148,950 30.0 
West Virgini a 10.347 20.3 
North Carolina 156,303 31.9 
South Carolina 226,242 38.7 
Georgia 308,639 36.5 
Florid a 59,503 25.5 
Kentuck y 57,900 27.6 
Tennessee 98,541 27.3 
Alabama 265,628 40.1 
Mississippi 259,438 35.6 
Arkansas 86,398 26.4 
Louisiana 254,148 48.4 
Oklahoma 17,858 17.7 
Texas 124,618 24.6 
^ Andrew Carnegie has sent $8,000 i n part 
payment of his pledge of funds to build 
a new girls' dormitory at Wilberforc e 
University. 
^ Lieut. Joh n E . Green, of the Unite d States 
Twenty-fifth Infantry, wil l be at the head of 
the militar y department at Wilberforc e 
Universit y for another year. 
Q George F . P . Cook, for thirty-six years 
superintendent of the colored schools of the 
District of Columbia , is dead. 
«3 There are i n the Unite d States 5,516,693 
illiterate persons ten years of age and over, 
of which less than one-half are colored. 
•3 Georgia has established agricultura l 
schools for white youths i n every county i n 
the State. A bill has now been introduced 
to establish one such State school for colored 
people. 
•3 The Mississipp i Association of Teachers i n 
Colored Schools, which held its sixth annual 
session lately, reported the case of a city 
i n Mississipp i where the principa l of the 
white school receives $20 per month more for 
his services than all the teachers i n the colored school combined, and where the Negro 
children are compelled to use for their educational home the condemned schoolhouse 
given up by the whites! I n this county a ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 219 
former superintendent advertised as very 
good reasons fo r his re-election the fact that 
he had decreased Negro salaries to a minimum. had increased white salaries to a 
maximum, and that durin g his term of office 
nor a single Negro school had been erected. 
*? The colored people of Louisiana are tryin g to prevent the removal of the Southern 
University from New Orleans out into the 
country. This university is at present the 
only place where New Orleans children can 
get State instruction above the sixth grade. 
f I n Kentuck y hereafter the colored teachers wil l be elected by the division boards of 
education instead of by the county boards, 
and a colored school visitor wil l be elected in 
each of the districts of the State. 
C The annual Hampto n conference discussed 
colored schools i n Virgini a and Negroes i n 
city life . Some attention was given to efforts 
to introduce prope r dancing among the 
youth. 
? Gammon Theological Seminary- and Clar k 
University at South Atlanta , Ga., have had 
a single president, but next year will revert 
to the older plan of two presidents. Dr. 
S. E . Idleman, a white man. was the former 
president, and there has been much dissatisfaction with his work. 
C I n the final settlement of the Peabody 
School Fund , $1,500,000 goes to the white 
normal school at Nashville , about $300,000 
to other white schools, and $350,000 to the 
Joh n F . Slater Fund , which is for colored 
people. 
C The Nationa l Association of Teachers in 
Colored Schools met i n Chattanooga under 
the presidency of W . T. B . "Williams. The 
organization was welcomed to the city by 
the mayor, and heard during its session 
papers by H . L . Keith , of Nashville ; J . H . A . 
Brazzleton. of Oklahoma ; Dr. L . B . Moore 
and Dr. G. E . Haynes. M . W . Dogan of 
Wile y Universit y was elected president for 
the ensuing year. 
f I n Boston .2 per cent, of the teachers and 
1.6 per cent, of the pupils i n the public 
schools are of Negro descent. 
C Juliu s Rosenwald has promised to give 
$1,250 annually to Meharr y College, provided 
$5,000 is raised elsewhere. H e has also given 
$25,000 to Mr . B . T. Washington for colored 
schools. 
MEETINGS. 
TH E Nationa l Independent Politica l 
League has divided into two leagues, 
one supporting Roosevelt and the other supporting Wilson . 
<I The Nationa l Association of Colored 
Women's Clubs held its eighth biennial session at Hampto n Institute. It reported a 
club membership of 10,908, and a total of 
$82,424 collected in two years by the constituent clubs. 
Resolutions protesting against "Ji m Crow' ' 
cars, race segregation, lynching and declarin g i n favor of full woman suffrage were 
adopted. The next convention wil l meet at 
Wilberforce University i n 1914. 
€ The Nationa l Medica l Association of colored professional men met at Tuskegee on 
August 27-2S-29. 
<5 This month the national Baptist convention wil l meet at Houston, Tex.: 10,000 
colored people are expected. 
C The Nationa l Negro Business League has 
held its thirteenth annual session i n Chicago. 
d The colored citizens of Columbus wil l occupy a day art the Ohio-Columbus centennial 
celebration. Amon g the speakers wil l be 
Assistant Attorney-Genera l W . H . Lewis, 
Joh n Mitchell of Richmond and E . H . 
Morris of Chicago. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
THE colored people of Atlant a and 
vicinity are givin g their third annual 
music festival and with it a pageant. 
The Londo n (Eng.) Musical Times says: 
"Musicians are much indebted to Sir Herbert 
Tree for quite a considerable quantity of significant and charming music resulting from 
the actor-manager's commissions to composers to write for his sumptuous productions 
of Shakespearian and romantic plays at His 
Majesty's Theatre. Prominent among these 
composers is Mr . S. Coleridge-Taylor, who 
provided the incidental music for 'Herod ' 
(1900); 'Ulysses' (1901); 'Nero' (1902) and 
Faust ' (1908). To this list is now added his 
score for the production of Shakespeare's 
'Othello.' A distinguishing feature of Mr . 
Coleridge-Taylor's music to all the abovementioned plays is the melodious character 
of the principa l themes, and this is particularl y marked i n his latest contribution to the 
stage. 220 TH E CRISIS 
•I Mr . Pedro T. Tinsley has published a 
practica l method of singing which has received considerable praise. 
*J Miss Laur a Wheele r of Hartford , Conn., 
was among the prize winners at the Ameri ­
can Academy of Fin e Arts i n Philadelphia . 
1 Statues of Alexande r Dumas' father, himself and his son, wil l soon adorn the Place 
Malesherbes, Paris. The name of the square 
wil l probably be changed to "Plac e des Trois 
Dumas. " 
<I Mr . Ro y Wilfre d Tibbs of Lexington , Ky. , 
was among those graduating i n the class of 
1912 from the Oberlin (O.) Conservatory 
of Music . Durin g the school session Mr . 
Tibbs was heard i n an admirably planned 
musical program. 
•J A t New Orleans, La. , an initia l concert 
by the St. Katharin e orchestra, Mr . Louis 
Tio, conductor, was given i n June, under the 
management of Mr . S. C. Baumann . The 
orchestra, which is composed of thirty-five 
capable musicians, was warml y greeted by a 
large audience. 
<J The annual music festival at Peterboro, 
N . H. , i n honor of the composer, Edwar d 
MacDowell, was held late i n August. The 
festival opened on the pageant stage with 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha, " by the 
MacDowell Chora l Club and an orchestra, 
and was followed by a fete representative of 
the court of Provence. 
*I The Thompson Musi c Company, wellknown publishers of Boston, Mass., have 
published a berceuse for violi n with piano 
accompaniment, written by Mr . Clarence C. 
Whit e of Boston. A violi n recital was given 
by Mr . Whit e on Jul y 13 at Lenox, Mass. 
H e was heard also at Portsmouth, N . H. , and 
Portland, Me., durin g the month of August. 
«J Miss Myrtl e Ma e Williams of St. Paul , 
Minn. , has charge this year of the pianoforte 
classes of the West En d Branc h of the 
Y . W . C. A . i n St. Paul. Miss Williams is 
a former graduate of the New Englan d Con ­
servatory of Musi c of Boston, Mass. 
«J A "fol k festival " of the Indian, Zulu 
and Negro students from the Hampto n Institute of Virgini a was lately held in Beverly, 
Mass. Mrs. Willia m Howar d Taft and other 
prominent society women acted as patronesses of the interesting event. The program 
included soli, choruses, wa r and love dances, 
tableaux by the students and speeches by 
Majo r Henr y L . Higginson , Dr . H . B . 
Frissell, principa l of the institute, and 
students. 
• A newly published composition for orchestra by Henr y F . Gilbert, the America n composer who has so often presented the Negro 
folk music i n artistic form, was played i n 
New Yor k on the evening of Jul y 16. 
The work "Americanesque " is a symphoni c 
and humorous treatment of three old Negro 
tunes. 
Musical America says: "The composer 
has managed the familia r melody wit h genuine poetical effect. The work should produce 
an invigoratin g and jollifyin g effect, interesting to the trained musical mind, while 
pleasing the casual listener." 
PERSONAL. 
BER T FLINT , a colored private i n the 
Unite d States Twenty-fifth Infantry, 
saved four young children from death near 
Plumbwater, Wash . 
• Catherine Lealtad ranked first among 
seventy-nine graduates of the Mechanica l 
Arts Hig h School of St. Paul , Minn . She 
is seventeen years old and wil l attend the 
University of Minnesota . 
• S. F . Boston, the colored editor of the 
West Virgini a Register, saved a white man 
from death recently at a railwa y crossing i n 
Huntington , W . Va . 
f§ Miss Viol a Smit h has won a medal for 
declamation over seven white contestants at 
the Lak e County convention of the W . C. 
T. U. , Mentor, O. 
^ Mrs. Id a Sharp Bourne , a colored missionary to Africa , is dead. She was teacher 
and instructor of music at the College of 
Musi c i n West Africa , Liberia , and on her 
return home i n 1905 made a lecture tour 
through the United States. She had traveled 
extensively and met many distinguished 
personages. 
•I Mr . George E . Wibeca n is dead at the 
age of eighty-one years. H e was a prominent figure among colored New Yorkers for 
many years. 
<I Dr . R. F . Boyd , a well-known colored 
physician i n Nashville , Tenn., is dead at the 
age of sixty. H e was a man who stood high 
i n his profession and owned considerable 
property. 
1 L . W . Livingstone , Unite d States Consul 
at Cape Haytien , Hayti , is spending his 
vacation i n Europe . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 221 
*3 Jackson, a colored student at Oxfor d 
University , won the 1,500-metre race at the 
Olympi c games. The credit of this victory 
goes to Englan d and the Negro race has 
scarcely been mentioned. 
Parke r N . Bailey, a colored Harvar d graduate and teacher i n the M Street Hig h 
School, Washington. D . C , is dead. 
CRIME. 
ONE or two Negroes were lynched at 
Hall's Station, Ala . They had killed 
a white man named Tutt. 
<3 Leonard Potts, who had killed Sheriff 
Stevens near Clarkesville, Tex., was shot to 
death. 
<I John Williams was lynched in Plummerville. Ark. , for shooting an officer. 
*J T. Z. Cotton, a sixteen-year-old colored 
boy of Columbus, Ga., killed a white boy. 
H e was tried and sentenced to three years' 
imprisonment for manslaughter. H e was 
then taken from the guards by a mob and 
shot to death. 
A race wa r arising over the "chastisement" of a Negro has been going on at 
Plainville , near Rome, Ga . Seven Negroes 
have been killed and eleven Negroes and 
four whites severely wounded. The Negroes 
were killed without mercy, two of them havin g been placed on a railroad track and a 
train allowed to pass over their bodies. 
*J A t Corpus Christi, Tex., in a race riot, a 
colored woman and a white man have been 
killed, and one colored man injured. 
<3 In Maryland , after six months' secret 
search, directed by the governor, four men 
have been arrested for the lynching of Kin g 
Johnson on the night before last Christmas. 
The Burn s Detective Agency is responsible 
for the arrests. It is said that Governor 
Goldsborough personally paid for the cost of 
the investigation. 
<1 Colored men have been killed by policemen i n Paducah, Ky. , Dallas, Tex., Louisville, Ky. , Fayetteville, N . (.'., and Fort 
Worth , Tex. 
<I A t Fordyce , Ark. , a company of State 
militi a invaded a Negro neighborhood and 
injured fourteen colored people, two of 
whom wil l die. The governor has publicly 
reprimanded the soldiers and dishonorably 
discharged the captain. 
«I Si x white men are under arrest i n Wash ­
ington charged with murdering a Negro 
for $2. 
<J Two fourteen-year-old white boys shot and 
killed a twelve-year-old colored boy near 
Dayton, 0 . 
<!l A white man at Mobile . Ala. , has been 
arrested for interfering with a colored mail 
clerk. 
<J Two white men have finally been hanged 
i n Tennessee for the murder and burning of 
Ben . Pettigrew, a colored land owner, and 
bis two children. 
^ Fran k Richardson, whose case has been 
spoken of before i n TH E CRISIS, has been 
hanged i n Alabama . H e killed a white man 
i n self-defense and several others in tryin g 
to escape the mob. 
COURTS. 
IN Florid a a colored man at Plant Cit y 
was awaiting an early train when he was 
accosted by a policeman. H e threatened the 
policeman with a revolver and escaped. H e 
was followed by officers and bloodhounds 
and finally shot the dogs and both of the officers. One of them died. The colored man 
was tried and received the light sentence of 
only one year. 
«1 I n Los Angeles, Cal. , G. O. Cochran, a 
colored man, brought a case against the 
proprietor of a theatre for refusing him 
admittance to the first floor on the ground 
of color. Afte r a stubbornly contested trial 
Mr . Pau l N . Nash, the attorney for the 
complainant, secured a decision for his client 
of $50 damages and costs. This is the first 
time that the owner or manager of a place 
of public amusement has been punished in 
Southern Californi a for violating the civil 
rights law of the State. 
1 Judge Lewis Fawcett of Brookly n declares that the proportion of black criminals 
in relation to the population is much smaller 
than among the whites. 
<J B y reversing the decision of the lower 
court i n the case of S. A . Bayliss against the 
Phoenix Boar d of Education, the Supreme 
Court of Arizon a upheld the constitutionality 
of the State law to segregate colored children 
in the schools. 222 TH E CRISIS 
* l A penalty of $500 was recovered by Mrs. 
Minerv a Miller, a colored woman, who was 
excluded from a Paterson theatre because of 
her color. The Supreme Court has upheld 
the decision. 
The colored people of Oklahoma are continuin g to fight the grandfather clause in the 
courts. They suffered one reverse i n the 
Okmulgee County case, but have filed exceptions. 
<I Joseph Butt, a colored man of Fanni n 
County. Ga., is suing the registrars for disfranchising him under the new law of the 
State. H e is being helped by colored secret 
societies. 
• TH E GHETTO. 
PROPERT Y owners i n Harlem, this city, 
have been attaching the following proviso to all sales of property : 
"Eac h of the parties hereto, for himself, 
or herself, his or her, and each of his or 
her heirs, legal representatives, successors 
and assigns, does hereby covenant and agree 
to and with each of the other parties hereto 
and his, her and their and each of their 
legal representatives, successors and assigns, 
that neither of the parties hereto nor his, 
her or their, or either of their heirs, legal 
representatives or assigns, shall or wil l at 
any time hereafter, up to and including the 
first day of June, 1925, permit or cause to 
be permitted, or suffer or allow or cause to 
be suffered or allowed either directly or in ­
directly, the said premises or any part 
thereof, to be used or occupied i n whole or 
i n part by any Negro, mulatto, quadroon, or 
octoroon of either sex, whatsoever, or any 
person popularly known and described as a 
Negro, mulatto, quadroon, or octoroon of 
either sex as a tenant, subtenant, guest, 
boarder or occupant, or i n any other way, 
manner or capacity, whatsoever, excepting 
only that any one family, occupying an entire 
house or an entire flat or an entire apartment, 
may employ one male and one female Negro 
or Negress or two Negresses or one male and 
one female mulatto or two female mulattoes 
or one male and one female quadroon or two 
female quadroons, or one male and one female 
octoroon, or two female octoroons, as household servants to perform only the duties 
ordinarily performed by a household 
servant." 
Such agreements, however, are not stoppin g the spread of the colored population, 
which is continually invading new streets. 
<I I n certain Chicago hotels colored waiters 
are compelled to sign this agreement: 
" I understand that my services may be 
terminated at any time without prio r notice, 
salary to be pai d to time of discharge. I 
also agree to pay for all breakages or fines 
imposed on me by the head of my department. An d should I be caught eating while 
on duty or takin g provisions away from 
kitchen or dinin g room I agree to pa y $5 as 
fine. I further agree that if, at any time 
during my employment or withi n sixty days 
after the termination of same, my employers 
shall desire to search my person, room, trunk, 
clothing or effects, I wil l gladly submit to 
such examination without objection, and 
hereby waive all claims for damages on account of such search or examination. " 
The wages pai d are $25 a month. 
* A t the Federa l prison i n Atlanta , Ga., 
white and colored prisoners are now separated i n the dinin g room. "Formerly, " the 
Atlant a Constitution says, "the men were 
seated i n rows on benches at long, desklike tables, and there was no discrimination 
as to color. 
"Believin g that the new system would conduce more largely to the individua l prisoner's 
self-respect and aid i n establishing a new 
viewpoint as to his obligations, the warden 
succeeded i n providin g the small tables." 
<1 A t Broke n Bow, Okla., white citizens are 
tryin g to drive out the colored employees of 
local lumber mills. 
<J The legislature of Louisian a has passed a 
law authorizing towns to segregate colored 
homes by refusing buildin g permits at will . 
*I Charleston, S. C , is tryin g to separate 
the races on the street cars. 
<& A t the Alabama State Ba r Association 
George Huddleston, a white lawyer, said that 
only five per cent, of the population of Ala ­
bama was voting. 
"It is foolish of the people of Alabama 
that they have denied suffrage to such a 
large part of our population, " said the 
speaker; "the Negro is here to stay, and when 
you deny him suffrage yo u have taken away 
from him the greatest factor toward making 
him a good citizen. " 
H e was violently opposed bv Governor 
O'Neil. 
1 I n Indianapolis colored children wil l not 
be allowed to play on the courthouse playgrounds which are i n the center of the city. ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
SUFFRAGE WORKERS. 
WE present the pictures this month of 
several colored women interested i n 
"Vote s for Women. " Mrs. Mar y Church 
Terrell has long been an advocate of woman's 
suffrage and is well known to readers of TH E 
CRISIS. Mrs. Margaret M. Washington was 
elected president of the Nationa l Association 
of Colored Women's Clubs at the Hampto n 
meeting, where the association took strong 
MRS. MARY CHURCH TERRELL 
ground in favor of woman's suffrage. Other 
officers are Miss Ida R. Cummings, corresponding secretary, and Miss Elizabeth L . 
Davis, national organizer. 
A FLYING MACHINE. 
Mr. JAME S MARSHALL , a young colored man of Macon . Go., has just 
patented a novel flying machine, a picture of 
which we present. Marshall was born i n 
1884, studied at the Ballar d School, and has 
for years been employed in machine shops 
until he has acquired considerable knowledge 
and skill. Whil e workin g as second engineer 
for the Mount Vernon Railwa y Company he 
became interested in the Hying experiments 
at Fort Myers. Afte r several experiments 
he has introduced the "circumplanoscope," 
which he maintains is a safe liver, because it 
cannot capsize, can stand still in the air, can 
ascend or descend from any spot without 
special devices and, finally, if the engine 
stops the machine will still maintain its 
equilibrium. The further development of this 
promising invention will be watched with 
interest. 224 TH E CRISIS 
A JOURNALIST. 
FEW colored people themselves know 
what members of their race are daily 
accomplishing. Whe n the news came that 
one of the editors of the Buffalo Times was 
TH E LAT E EDWAR D W. CROSB Y 
dead few people knew that Edwar d Williams 
Crosby was a colored man. It was, too, i n 
a sense a delicate compliment that none of 
the obituary notices mentioned the man's 
color. Fo r after all he was a man and a 
writer and not simply "colored." We mention his Negro descent here only as a reminder, incentive and warning. Her e was a 
man who rose to a position of importance 
because the unimportant fact of his race 
was not used to shut the door of opportunity 
in his face. H e came to Buffalo as a young 
man, over thirty years ago. H e was about 
thirty-six years old and was educated in 
New Yor k and Albany , having been born 
i n the eastern part of the State. Afte r coming to Buffalo he acquired considerable fame 
as a public speaker, his elocutionary gifts 
being more than ordinary. He took a leadin g part in the organization of the old-time 
Buffalo Lincol n Birthda y Association, in cooperation with the late Julius Francis, the 
father of the movement, leading to 
the general observance of Lincoln's 
birthday. O f a poetic temperament and 
possessing rare literary talent, Mr . Crosby 
naturally drifted into the newspaper business, and for many years, up to the time he 
was forced to relinquish labor because of his 
failin g health, he was connected with the 
Times as telegraph editor, editorial writer, 
and the author of the "Juniu s Letter " and 
"Sna p Shots."' 
A n obituary notice in the Times says: 
" 'Ed ' Crosby was one of Buffalo's bestknown and most esteemed 'men about town.' 
made many friends and knew how to retain 
them. H e was of a warm-hearted, genial, 
true-blue nature, entirely free from guile, 
honest to the core, trusting and trustworthy. 
H e bore the vicissitudes of lif e easily and 
well. His bodily sufferings were likewise 
borne with fortitude and Christian resignation. Ma y his eternal sleep be calm and 
sweet." 
Whe n the Niagar a movement was first 
formed in Buffalo i n 1905, Mr . Crosby was 
the chief instrument whereby the meeting 
MRS. MARGARE T M . WASHINGTO N 
(See page 223.) 
was given wide newspaper publicity. Whil e 
he did not give matters concerning his race 
undue prominence, yet he was deeply interested in the mass of his people. TH E BULL 
MOOSE PARTY. 
The action of the Bul l 
Moose party i n Chicago 
has brought forth an 
avalanche of editorials. The Negro question 
was by fa r the greatest question before 
the party, and the New Yor k Journal reports 
Mr . Roosevelt himself as saying : 
"It looked for a time as though we would 
break on the Negro issue. I don't mean 
that our party was i n danger of going to 
smash, but that it seemed as i f some of our 
supporters could not be reconciled." 
The matter was precipitated by Mr . Roosevelt's letter to Julia n Harris of Georgia, a 
Democrat who had been selected to lead the 
third party i n that State. The gist of 
Mr . Roosevelt's letter is i n the followin g 
paragraph : 
" I earnestly believe that by appealing to 
the best white men i n the South, the men of 
justice and of vision, as well as of strength 
and leadership, and by frankl y putting the 
movement i n their hands from the outset we 
shall create a situation by which the colored 
men of the South wil l ultimately get justice, 
as it is not possible for them to get justice 
i f we are to continue and perpetuate the 
present conditions. The men to whom we 
appeal are the men who have stood for 
securing the colored man in his rights before 
the law, and they can do for him what 
neither the Northern white man nor the 
colored men themselves can do. Ou r only 
wise course from the standpoint of the 
colored man himself is to follow the course 
that we are followin g toward him i n the 
Nort h and to follow the course we are followin g toward him i n the South. " 
This paragraph Mr . Roosevelt explained 
before the convention; among other things 
he said : 
"I n Republican national conventions hitherto there has been a large representation 
of colored men—all from non-Republican 
States, the virtue of Republicanism i n the 
Republican States takin g only the form of 
tryin g to make the Democratic States be 
good. See what I mean"? 
"The colored delegates all came from,the 
States that never cast a Republican electoral 
vote, that never elected a colored man to 
office, where, largely owing to the action 
persisted i n for forty-five years by the 
Republican party, the colored man as a 
matter of fact gradually has lost all his 
politica l lights, so that the old policy of 
attempting to impose on the Southern States 
from without a certain rule of conduct 
toward the Negro has, in fact, broken down. 
And , friends, I regret to say that every man 
who has ever been to a national convention 
knows that the character of the great 
majority of the colored delegates from the 
South was such as to reflect discredit upon 
the Republican party and upon the race 
itself. 
" I am givin g you the explanation as 
minutely as I know how. 
"No w as soon as the Progressive partywas formed I at once set about, as mainother men i n different States did, securing 
from the Northern States themselves an 
ample recognition of the colored man in 
these States, so that as a matter of fact 
there is i n this convention a representation 
from the Republican States of colored men 
such as there never has been before anything 
like i n any convention i n the country. * * * 
"Tha t is what the Progressives have finally 
succeeded in doing i n the North . W e have 
done it by simpl y encouraging' the best men 
in the Nort h to act squarely by the colored 
men as they would by the white men. We 
have not done it by tryin g to dragoon the 
white men into that action. The other system 
of tryin g to force i n the far Southern States 
conditions that we cannot make exist there 
has failed. I propose to take toward the 
Southern States the exact attitude that we 
take to West Virgini a and Maryland. " 
Mr . Harris replied as follows to 
Mr . Roosevelt's letter: 226 TH E CRISIS 
"The South has reached the point, however, where an intelligent discussion of vita l 
issues must take the place of narrow pleas 
of factionalism. An d the greatest stimulus 
the South has ever received i n this direction 
is you r decision to give us the opportunity 
to build a real opposition party to the politics burdened Democracy. I n this you will 
have whatever help my earnest co-operation 
can lend you, and I cannot but believe there 
are hundreds of thousands of others i n the 
South who will gladly joi n i n the acceptance 
of this joyous deliverance the Nationa l 
Progressive party promises to afford. Yo u 
have i n effect said to the South 'Go ahead 
and form your new party organization on 
your lines and as yo u see fit. Yo u are the 
best judges of the best methods i n your 
own section.' That is all the South has 
ever asked." 
The convention refused to seat any Negro 
delegates from the South i f their seats were 
disputed. The most obvious interpretation 
of this action is made by the New Have n 
Register, which says: 
"It amounts to just this, cleared of all 
fog and nonsense: Theodore Roosevelt 
wants the votes of the Negroes, a great 
many of whom he undoubtedly got i n the 
Ma y primaries i n such States as Massa ­
chusetts, Marylan d and Ohio. . H e proposes 
all consideration for the Negroes i n States 
where their full voting strength is counted 
at the polls. I n Southern States, where the 
full strength of the Negro does not count at 
the polls, he has no use for them. H e slaps 
the latter i n the face, thereby to gain the 
favor of the white population. " 
The Washington (D. C.) Herald adds: 
"Mr . Roosevelt, i n deciding to ignore the 
request of the colored man south of the 
Mason and Dixo n line for recognition i n 
Progressive politics has employed his gift 
as a master of sophistry to a larger extent 
than ever before. His fertility i n 'whys' and 
'wherefores' is amazing. A t any rate, he is 
determined that the color line is to be 
sharply drawn i n the South and that only 
white men wil l be sought i n that section." 
m 
The New Yor k Evening Post in a long editorial on "The Deserted 
COMMEN T OF TH E 
EVENING POST. 
Negro " declares that: 
"Mr . Roosevelt had his way in Chicago. 
Despite the protests of Jane Addams and 
many others, the party of 'progress,' which 
bases its hopes fo r success on its program 
of social justice, committed the injustice of 
throwing out the Negro delegates from the 
South, declaring for a lily-white ' policy 
there, and adopted its platform without a 
single reference of any kin d to the colored 
man. The terrible injustice done him the 
country over; the denial of civic and politica l 
rights guaranteed to him ; his practically 
complete disfranchisement i n the South—all 
of these things were forgotten because the 
apostle of justice herself hopes, wit h what 
Jane Addams herself called 'statesmanlike 
(!) policy,' to break u p the solid South. So 
the Negroes, even those who worked for 
Roosevelt i n the Taft convention, were flung 
aside—just as he would fling aside any body 
or set of men when it served his purpose 
to do so. The Jews, themselves, to whom 
he has toadied and whom he has flattered by 
high appointments, he would discard as 
readily as he has Mr . Taft, Mr . Root, and 
his other tried friends and Cabinet associates, 
should there be politica l profit to be gained 
by takin g an anti-Semitic position. I f there 
is any one group of men and women i n this 
country suffering from oppression, it is the 
colored people; but the party of social justice is to think only of wrong's done to 
whites! 
"Undoubtedly Mr . Roosevelt is certain 
that before the campaign is fa r along he 
wil l wi n back the disaffected Negroes. H e 
has beyond question achieved what seemed 
the impossible i n regaining the affections 
of many disgruntled whites i n the South 
after the Booke r Washingto n luncheon, and 
of the Negroes after the Brownsvill e episode. 
His friends wil l not hesitate to use money 
i n his behalf and the Negro himself, slow 
to anger and easy going, may recall those 
many handsome actions of Roosevelt i n the 
Whit e House, and those manly and just 
letters on the Negro question, the hypocrisy 
of which he has now so clearly demonstrated. 
Perhaps the Negro wil l be fooled again as 
he has been so many times before. Ye t we 
cannot think this so likel y this time ; for 
there is increasing independence of thought 
among the educated colored people and a 
growing realization of their latent politica l 
power. A s Mr . Andrew B . Humphre y 
pointed out the other day, 600,000 Negroes in 
twenty-two States may elect the next President. They would, i f they could but stand 
together, i f they had but the group con-OPINIO N 227 
sciousness and solidarity so marked among 
others i n our cosmopolitan population. • * * 
"Tha t the whole episode wil l embitter the 
unhappy lot of the Negroes of the country, 
let no one doubt. It is difficult for those 
who are enfranchised and socially free to 
realize how terrible the burden this race 
bears; how staggering the handicaps, and 
how helpless it is without the ballot to rectify 
its wrongs. Two recent happenings i n the 
South are especially ominous. Ou r readers 
wil l recall how Mr . Roosevelt and the leading 
white men of the South have applauded 
Booke r "Washington's advice to the Negro 
to acquire property, to be industrious and 
law abiding as the true way to racia l and 
civic happiness. Well , i n Mooresville, N . C , 
a self-respecting colored carpenter bought 
real estate some years ago i n a decent section 
of the city ; when he began to build his own 
home on it this sprin g the city council passed 
an ordinance forbidding it. I n Greensville, 
N . C , two brothers were prevented by a 
segregation ordinance from purchasing a 
$65,000 piece of property they had contracted for. The representatives of Anglo -
Saxon culture who owned the property refused to return the $150. pai d for the purchase option on the ground that the 
brothers had broken their contract! . 
"I n Georgia, last June, Ann e Bostwick, 
a Negress who had been previously declared 
insane, killed the white woman who employed 
her. She was shot to death by a mob of 
white men, defenders of Anglo-Saxo n superiority. It is, of course, impossible for the 
colored population to hold the officials responsible or to participate i n the election of 
others who wil l uphold them i n their constitutional rights as to the owning of property 
or guarantee them the protection of the law 
when accused of crime. They are helpless 
and hopeless, for they are without remedy. 
An d the Progressive party, according to its 
leader, says that, because there have been 
venal Negro delegates at Republican conventions i n the past (by whose votes he has 
hitherto been only too glad to profit), this 
oppressed race shall have no representatives 
i n the party of social justice! A distinguished Russian professor, recently visiting 
i n this country, on learning that ten millions 
of people suffer all the hardships of both the 
Russian peasant and the Russian Jew, exclaimed: 'Heavens, how can they stand it? ' 
The answer is that they must not stand it. 
Mr . Roosevelt's falsity to them wil l be of 
genuine value i f it but stimulates them to 
further efforts in their own behalf, and 
strengthens their growing determination to 
stand as a solid phalanx on behalf of their 
rights—life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness." 
§9 
NORTHER N THE NEW Yor k World calls 
COMMEN T Roosevelt's action 
"mocking a race: " 
" 'Wh y is man a reasoning being,' asked 
Benjamin Franklin , 'i f he cannot find reasons for what he wants to do?' Mr . Roosevelt wants the white vote at the South and 
the Negro vote at the North , and he reasons 
it out i n a letter to the successor of 'Uncle 
Remus' on a moral plane as elevated as any 
highwayman ever adopted i n forwarding a 
desperate enterprise on the road. 
"His new and origina l solution of the race 
problem is that i n the Northern States, where 
in some eases colored voters hold the balance 
of power, they are to have ful l political 
rights and some honors, but i n the Southern 
States, where no one who hopes for white 
votes can advocate the equality of the Negro 
before the law, they are to be cast out as 
hopelessly ignorant and corrupt." 
The Hartfor d Courant is even more 
pointed: 
"The Theodore Roosevelt who has just told 
the Negroes of the Southern States that 
they must not try to butt into the conventions of his new party is the same Theodore 
Roosevelt who ten years ago—when he appointed a Negro to the collectorship of the 
port of Charleston—told remonstrating 
white men that he wouldn't shut the door of 
hope and opportunity i n any worthy citizen's 
face because of that citizen's color. H e 
wrote on that occasion: 'It has been my 
consistent policy in every State where their 
numbers warranted it to recognize colored 
men of good repute and standing in making 
appointments to office; I am unable to see 
how I can legitimately be asked to make an 
exception for South Carolina.' He's also 
the same Colonel Roosevelt who might never 
have lived to appoint anybody to office but 
for the timely arriva l on a certain Cuban 
hillside, fourteen years ago, of some Negro 
regulars who knew their business." 
The Springfield Republican calls 
Mr . Roosevelt's letter "shifty and tortuous" 
with passages "which attempt to befog the 228 TH E CRISIS 
essential question. It is represented that the 
Progressive party could not rest its future 
upon the black race, when, i n truth, the 
question is wh y the new party could not 
make its appeal to both races and thus ignore 
the color line, as the Constitution does. Dust 
is also thrown about by Mr . Roosevelt's irre ­
levant dilation upon the welcome his party 
gives to the Negro i n the North , where the 
color line i n polities is negligible. Bu t no 
one can fail to see the essential point of this 
humiliating performance, which is nothing 
but the bi d of an audaciously opportunist 
politician fo r white men's votes by showing 
the black man the door. 
"The feeling of disgust at the spectacle 
is necessarily strong for two reasons. Whe n 
he was President Mr . Roosevelt paraded 
himself as the defender of the black race's 
politica l rights i n the South by forcing upon 
the remonstrating whites of Indianol a a 
Negro postmistress, and by forcing upon the 
remonstrating whites of Charleston, S. C , 
a Negro collector of customs. The 'door of 
hope' for the black race he preached most 
zealously in his eloquent letters to Southern 
citizens at that time. The Rooseveltian conviction that Southern communities like the 
city of Charleston should be compelled to 
accept a colored collector of the port was so 
unshakable that Dr. Crum was kept i n office 
throughout the second Roosevelt administration. But those were the days when 
Mr . Roosevelt was not looking for white 
men's votes i n South Carolina . 
"The second reason wh y a feeling of disgust overcomes one is that Mr . Roosevelt's 
new party is proclaimed to be peculiarly 
one of ideals. I f it were not for his holierthan-thou attitude i n formin g a party without bosses, a part y without the withering 
touch of big . business and crooked polities, 
a party which should respond to every heart 
beat of humanity and every human aspiration for the noble, the good and the true, his 
present attitude would be less exposed to the 
derision of the ungodly and the tears of the 
saints." 
The Springfield Morning Union says: 
"Strippe d of its sham and hypocrisy the 
Roosevelt declaration of the third-term 
party's attitude toward the colored voter is 
simpl y this: It is catering to the colored 
voters i n the North , where the Negro has 
always been secure i n his political rights, and 
to the white voters i n the South, where under 
Democratic State rule the white men have 
been able to deprive the Negro of his rights 
by wholesale disfranchisement, intimidation 
and other devices. I n a word, the colonel 
is riding two horses i n his pretended solution of the race problem. H e professes to 
be for the colored man i n the North , but is 
decidedly 'agin him' i n the South. Colored 
voters Nort h and South, we believe, wil l see 
through this shallow artifice. W e believe 
that few, i f any, wil l desert the part y that 
has been their staunch friend for more than 
fifty years to cast their lot wit h the party 
that places the interests and rights of the 
Southern Negro i n the hands of such 'men 
of justice and of vision' as the leaders of 
the third-term party i n Louisian a and other 
Southern States." 
The Boston Transcript thinks that the 
attitude of the colored delegates i n the 
Republica n convention has had much to do 
wit h Mr . Roosevelt's state of mind . 
"Certainl y no one believes that that clause 
would have been written had the colored 
delegates at the Chicago convention yielded 
to the tempting persuasiveness of Ormsby 
McHarg , and betrayed their trust i n sufficient numbers to give Roosevelt the Repub ­
lican nomination for President. They 
showed a much keener sense of honor than 
his lieutenants who attempted to debauch 
them; but to make his point he marks himself ungrateful as well as illogical. It is 
only another instance of his readiness to 
sacrifice anybody, friend, well-wisher or 
benefactor, who fo r the time being seems 
to be an obstacle to the fruition of his 
incorrigible obsession." 
Whe n the Bul l Moose party started, colored people of South Carolin a hastened to 
offer assistance. They received a letter from 
Colonel Roosevelt's secretary Jul y 16, saying 
that Mr . Roosevelt "feels very much encouraged by your support and wishes to say 
that he is going to make the hardest kin d 
of a fight that he knows how, and he hopes 
that you wil l continue to back him up. " 
When, however, Mr . Roosevelt found that 
there were no South Carolin a white men who 
could organize the party, Mr . Roosevelt refused to let the Negroes organize on the 
ground that he could not buil d up his party 
there "i n antagonism to local usages," South 
Carolin a was not represented i n the 
convention. OPINIO N 229 
The New Yor k Tribune notes that "less 
than 25 per cent, of the New Yorkers who 
stand at Armageddon and battle for 'the rule 
of the people' felt it safe to say that 'distinction of race or class i n politica l lif e has 
no place i n a democracy' and that the 
Negroes 'deserve and must have justice, opportunity and a voice in their own government.' Mr . Timothy L . Woodruff explained 
that he approved the resolution, but could 
not support it. An d other heroic souls took 
the same ground, apparently fearing that 
incautious loyalty to principl e might, as a 
special dispatch to the personal organ of 
Mr . Roosevelt puts it, 'prove embarrassing 
to Colonel Roosevelt.' 
"S o the 'door of hope' i n the third-term 
movement closes on the Southern Negro. I f 
he looks back, puzzled to the brave days of 
the championship of Dr. Crum, just let him 
realize that the voice of the people does not 
find him a convenient or useful instrument 
at the present moment." 
The Tribune continues: 
"Mr . Roosevelt has shut the 'door of hope' 
i n the face of the Negro with a bang, but 
the Negroes and all others who would be 
endangered i f this lawless man, wit h his 
hostility to courts, his disregard for constitutions, should have his way, may rest content. The colonel's opportunity for mischief 
has passed; the door of hope has been closed 
upon him ; and all good Americans can be 
thankful that the derided Constitution remains as a bulwark. " 
The Washingto n Herald thinks that: 
"Mr . Roosevelt's attitude toward the colored man i n this particula r instance is 
thoroughly in accord with his past record. 
There would never have been a wholesale 
dismissal of soldiers at Brownsvill e i f the 
companies had been composed of white men, 
and every one knows that Mr . Roosevelt's 
recognition of the Negro during his administration was infrequent and not spontaneous. It is a pity, of course, that he has 
gone to the extent of arousing race prejudices i n a section where, during the past 
few years, there has been at least an outward 
show of harmony. Desperate conditions, 
however, demand desperate remedies and the 
sacrifice of the colored brother in the South 
is to be made complete." 
The Hartfor d Courant is suspicious of 
Mr . Roosevelt's love for the South. "I n the 
lexicon of Theodore Roosevelt's youth, " it 
says, "the gray-clad soldiers of the South 
were rebels and traitors; it is remembered 
that on one occasion he was insultingly rude 
to the aged and broken Jefferson Davis. 
Afte r his arriva l at the Whit e House, all 
that was changed; the country began to hear 
about his Georgi a mother and his two uncles 
Who fought in the Confederate army ; he 
made a young Lee one of his Whit e House 
aides. This summer the two Confederate 
uncles have reappeared i n his writings and 
discourses. Whe n the Republican party denied him the third term he clamored for, and 
when he, thereupon, instantly decided that 
the country must have a new party right 
away, he announced that he wanted i n his 
new party not only 'progressive' Republicans, but also 'progressive' Democrats, and 
not only the sons and grandsons of the 
soldiers of the Union , but also the sons and 
grandsons of the soldiers of the Confederacy. 
It was at that very inopportune moment that 
some Negro citizens down South embarrassed the colonel greatly by electing delegates of their own race to his convention. 
• Wha t was to be done? 
"H e has wriggled out of his quandary after 
a fashion and with a most lavish expenditure 
of language. The language boils down to 
this: N o Negro delegates from the South 
are wanted, and none need apply . O f course 
he has plenty of fine words for the citizens 
of Africa n descent; he wants them to think 
of him as their truest and best friend as 
fa r as circumstances permit. Bu t i n politics 
fine words butter no parsnips. The Southern 
Negroes have learned where they stand with 
the colonel." 
The Boston Record calls the action of the 
convention "the most" discordant note struck 
i n connection with the new party, " and continues : "It was avoided as long as possible. Lon g thought did not clarify the 
mind of Colonel Roosevelt, who shifted and 
sidled i n his Julia n Harris letter i n a way 
painful to his friends and displeasing to 
many who would carry the abstract principles of absolute democracy and a voice for 
everyone right through to practical applica ­
tion everywhere. Jane Addams, whose mind 
works as clearly, as sanely, and as close to 
Christian principles as any i n the land, 
warned the new party to stop and look before disfranchising the Southern Negroes. 
He r vision and her statesmanship are clearer 
than Colonel Roosevelt's on this point. " 230 TH E CRISIS 
ROOSEVELT Man y papers cannot refrain 
AND from drawing comparisons 
between Roosevelt and LinLINCOLN . 
coln, a comparison of which 
Mr . Roosevelt is very fond. 
The New Yor k Globe says that Mr . Roosevelt is not suggestive of Lincoln : 
"The Negro question is not now gravely 
pressing, and Willia m H . Taft and Woodrow 
Wilson , no more than Theodore Roosevelt, 
utter no protest against the notorious viola ­
tion of the Fifteenth Amendment; nevertheless, the Negro question so relates to funda ­
mental issues that the treatment of it is 
definitely indicative of spirit. It is a most 
extraordinary thing fo r a new national 
politica l organization, pretending to be 
specially progressive and to be greatly devoted to human rights, to begin its career 
by espousing the most reactionary of doctrines. This doctrine implies recognition of 
sectionalism; it is i n square violation of the 
Democratic principle s that Colonel Roosevelt 
declared for i n his Carnegie Hal l speech; it 
fosters lawlessness by assuming that it is 
permissible to select what parts of the Con ­
stitution are to be obeyed and what disobeyed. 
"Abraham Lincoln , whose name and memory have so often been invoked durin g the 
parturition of the new party, was too clear i n 
min d and too sound i n morals to have 
authorized or .consented to such action as 
that at Chicago to-day and yesterday. The 
new Progressive party has not made a progressive start." 
The New Yor k Times is sure that: 
"Wha t Mr . Lincol n would say about this 
can be imagined but not expressed; but the 
reincarnated should have pondered long and 
seriously before determining thus to cut up 
by the roots the men who have been so loya l 
and useful to him all these years, and who 
were watered and attended to so carefully 
by McHar g i n his recent wanderings i n the 
South. O f course, McHar g has had nothing 
to do wit h this latest ukase, so that he wil l 
be absolved by his colored friends i n the 
South of any disposition to count them only 
when they would come. H e is entitled at 
least to credit fo r playin g the game 
straighter than that, and even the head of 
the Bul l Moose herd should revise his proclamation to the extent of noting exceptions 
i n the case of the colored delegates who, i n 
his behalf, went as fa r as they could go at 
the Republica n convention to disregard their 
instructions. " 
The Battl e Creek Enquirer makes this 
comparison: 
"The Negroes asked Lincol n fo r bread and 
they were given bread. The Negroes, fa r 
more intelligent fifty years later, asked 
Roosevelt for bread and he gave them a 
stone. 
"Lincoln's heroic treatment of the Negro 
question—his emancipation proclamation— 
was issued a year prio r to his coming before 
the people for second election. Roosevelt's 
craven attitude toward the Negro is taken 
on the eve of his coming before the people 
for a third term as President. Lincoln's 
course was as fa r as the antipodes from a 
popula r appeal; Roosevelt's course is so 
patently a bid for the electoral votes of the 
South that the simplest may understand." 
There is, of course, much speculation as to 
what the attitude of the Negro is going to 
be toward the new party. 
The Philadelphi a Enquirer thinks that: 
"It is not difficult to predict the outcome. 
The South wil l stand solidly by Wilson , and 
the colored voters everywhere wil l stand 
solidly by Taft. N o man, white or colored, 
is going to kiss the hand of the man who 
knocks him down and kicks him. " 
The Wilmingto n Every Evening thinks 
that Mr . Roosevelt may have solidified the 
Negro vote against himself, and the Bidde -
for d Journal says: 
"I n spite of the charge made by certain 
Negro leaders that the Republica n party has 
failed to justify its pledges for a strict enforcement of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution, the hope of 
the race, so fa r as that hope has a foundation 
i n national politics, lies with the party to 
which Abraham Lincol n belonged. The Ne ­
groes can expect nothing from the Democratic 
party ; it is hardly possible, having been 
smitten on one cheek by the new party as 
soon as it was born, that they wil l be i n a 
mood to tur n the other before the pai n 
caused by the first blow has been alleviated." 
"It is already apparent that the attitude 
of the colonel toward colored support i n the 
South wil l be vigorously resented by the 
Negro voters of both that section and the 
North, " says the Philadelphi a Record. 
"The y would be more than human, indeed, 
if they should overlook such a gratuitous 
affront upon their race. Whethe r this OPINIO N 231 
scornful attitude wil l have any influence i n 
weakening the traditional adherence of the 
Negroes to the G . O. P . is a matter that only 
time can determine. Durin g the Baltimor e 
convention a demonstration was made i n that 
city by a number of colored Democrats, and 
it is not unlikely that the campaign wil l 
bring to the front more of this class." 
SOUTHER N 
COMMENT. 
This trend toward the 
Democratic party is 
even echoed by some 
Southern papers. The Richmon d Journal, 
for instance, says that "the only friends of 
the Negro are the people of the South and 
the only place left for him to go is i n the 
Democratic party, and he wil l only be admitted there when he asks to come, shows 
that he has been purified of Republican 
heresies, and that he is qualified by education 
to appreciate the privilege of the ballot." 
On the whole, the Southern papers are 
either gleeful or contemptuous. 
The Galveston News declares that 
Mr . Roosevelt's remarks are not "highly 
illuminating. " 
The Ashevill e Citizen regards the Negro as 
"kicked out." 
"Meanwhil e the big chief of the moose 
tribe is heading what must now be known 
as the party of the 'lil y whites' and the 
regenerated Northern Negro. Fo r the duskyhued son of the South there is no opening. 
It is a hard blow when one considers what 
Troja n service the tribe of Ha m has performed i n the Southern Republican trenches. 
I f there was any unusually heavy digging 
to be done, any subterranean lines to be 
laid, it was always 'my dark brother' of the 
South that the Republicans called upon. I n 
the various flights of the Bul l Moose for 
fame and office it was always the Southern 
delegate who held the balloon. An d now— 
but let us drop the curtain on the harrowing 
tragedy." 
Most of the Southern papers agree that 
there is little chance of Roosevelt's breaking 
the solid South. 
The Shreveport (La.) Times declares that 
"the colonel has fooled nobody i n this part 
of the country. His bid fo r Southern support is about as cheap a piece of demagogism 
as the country has witnessed i n forty years." 
The Birmingham Age-Herald says that 
"the colonel wil l get no Southern electoral 
votes, no matter what position he takes on 
the Negro question or the boss-picked delegates. The solid vole of the South, including 
Maryland , West Virginia , Kentuck y and 
Missouri, wil l be cast for Wilso n and Mar ­
shall. Eve n sugar-raising Louisian a wil l 
cast her electoral votes for the Democratic 
nominees. The sage of Oyster Ba y is dreamin g when he thinks he can wi n even one 
electoral vote in the South. H e cannot, and 
his grand standing wil l deceive no one i n 
this section of the country. 
"H e will , however, secure as many electoral votes i n the South as Mr . Taft will. " 
"Mr . Roosevelt seems to think, " says the 
Charleston News and Courier, "that the in ­
telligence of the South is as low as its 
resources were at the time he found it 
politic to insult the section and the section's leaders. H e believes that the people 
down this way are very gullible, very stupid, 
wholly lacking i n penetration. Southern 
Democrats need not mingle with blacks i n 
their own States, but when they get Nort h 
they must receive Northern blacks as brothers. Geography is to be the test of politica l 
qualification. Isn't that clever? Wh y didn't 
anybody happen to think about it before? 
"Dow n South the lizard is considered a 
curious enough thing, but nobody pays very 
much attention to it. Youngsters sometimes 
watch its antics with delight, but grown men 
devote no time to it. Mr . Roosevelt as a 
politica l lizar d wil l be no more than a 
curiosity. " 
Unite d States Senator Newlands hastened 
to approve of Mr . Roosevelt's dicta and 
adds: 
"H e wil l come out all right i n the end, and 
wil l reach the inevitable conclusion that the 
blacks, as a race, must everywhere i n this 
country be deprived of sovereignty; and that 
is what black suffrage means. The same 
reason that justifies disfranchisement of the 
blacks i n party justifies it i n government. If 
we ought to have a white man's party, we 
should also have a white man's government. 
"The colonel complained of black domination at Chicago. Bu t what does he think of 
black domination at Washington, maintained 
by the black vote i n five pivota l Northern 
States, where they have the balance of 
power? Does not the same reasoning which 
demands the Negro's disfranchisement i n 
parties demand his disfranchisement i n 
government?" 232 TH E CRISIS 
The Hoboke n Observer thinks that "Joh n 
Brown's Body " was not an appropriat e song 
for the Bul l Moose convention, since Brow n 
was the man who undertook to give Negroes 
their freedom by starting a revolution which 
cost him his life ; and the Boston Record, 
quoting Colonel Roosevelt's declaration that 
"the question is disposed of now," says wit h 
prophetic insight "that it cannot be disposed 
of so easily. H e cannot do offhand with a 
few words what others have not done 
through many weary years. N o question is 
settled on a basis of favors for some and 
postponement fo r others. Colonel Roosevelt's 
attitude i n this matter raises sharp questions 
as to his ideas i n attacking 'sectionalism.' 
It is sectionalism emphasized, givin g to one 
section a code of ethics not applicable by 
him to another." 
One interesting result is a rather spirited 
defense of Southern Negroes by the white 
South, as when, for instance, the Montgomery Advertiser declares that: 
"I n the South the thinking white man 
knows that the third-term candidate's attempt to draw the line between the Northern 
Negro and the Southern Negro, because the 
Northern Negro is a better citizen, is mere 
buncombe. The only difference between the 
Negro of the Nort h and the South is a 
difference i n numbers, and the more progressive Negroes i n the Nort h are not 
weighed down by an immense mass of 
ignorant Negroes, as are the more progressive Negroes of the South. A s a matter of 
fact, the leaders of the Negroes i n the South 
are perhaps superior i n education, common 
sense and practical experience to the Negro 
of the North. " _ 
KING'S DAUGHTERS AND INJURED NEGROES. 
The Corpus Christi Caller is a paper pub-lished in a thriving 
Texa s town on the 
Gulf. It has been advocating the establishment of an emergency hospital for Negroes 
who are injured workin g on the piers and 
urged the King's Daughters, who are i n 
charge of the town's hospital arrangement, 
to take up the matter. These ladies, who 
bear the badge of the silver cross "I n Hi s 
Name, " refused, and the Caller comments: 
"The King's Daughters have said they do 
not care to take upon themselves the providin g of an emergency ward or hospital 
under any circumstances for Negroes. So 
be it. 
"Goin g back then to the main question, 
that of providin g fo r the injure d darkey 
who gets a leg smashed or his back 
crushed, we find we are just where we 
started and the incident of the Negro, Fran k 
Henderson, who la y two or three hours in 
a well-known physician's office and was 
finally carted off to the depot and then sent 
to New Orleans, is likel y to be repeated any 
day, and does happen not infrequently. 
"The matter can be looked at from several standpoints. One is from the standpoint of common humanity and the decent 
treatment of a badly injured person. An ­
other is from the standpoint of expediency, 
convenience and the general welfare of the 
public. To use a ladylike phrase, it isn't 
'nice' to have smashed up and bloody colored men lyin g around in physicians' offices 
fo r several hours nor i n the publi c waitin g 
station. 
"Perhaps the solution lies i n part with 
the colored people themselves. They are 
prone to organize benevolent and protective 
associations i n considerable numbers fo r 
their mutual protection. I f they were to 
form an association for the buildin g and 
equipping of a small emergency hospital, 
located and operated with the approva l and 
supervision of some of the white people, 
they would be doing their own people a 
great service." 
Joseph Fels says i n the Philadelphi a 
Evening Ledger: "Comparativel y few 
Philadelphians i n comfortable circumstances 
realize the extent to which a most merciless 
kin d of rack renting prevails i n this alleged 
'city of homes.' The worst sufferers from 
this predatory system are the colored people. 
Race prejudice is a great help to landlords 
i n enabling them to practice the worst kin d 
of extortions. This is a fact well enough 
known to those whose business enables them 
to get accurate information about rent paid 
by those dealing with them, and information 
nearly as accurate about wages received. 
One of these men was able to figure from 
information contained i n his records that 
the average wage received by his colored 
customers is $9.90 a week and the average 
rent paid by them is $18.40 a month. It 
appears from this that our colored fellow 
citizens pa y nearly 43 per cent, of their 
wages to Philadelphi a landlords fo r the 
privilege of livin g and workin g i n the city. " OPINIO N 233 
Thomas Jesse Jones gives the following 
statistics from the census of 1910 i n the 
Southern Workman: 
Negro farm laborers and Negro farmers 
o f the South cultivate farms whose area is 
approximately 100,000,000 acres. Negro 
farmers cultivate 42,500,000 acres of Southern land. 
Fort y per cent, of all agricultura l workers 
i n the South are Negroes. 
There are i n the South approximately two 
and a third million Negro agricultura l workers, of whom almost one and a half million 
are farm laborers and 890,000 are farmers 
owning or renting their farms. 
O f the 890.000 Negro farmers i n the South 
21S,000, or 25 per cent., are owners. I n 
Virginia , for example, 67 per cent, of all 
Negro farmers are owners. 
Negro farm owners of the South own and 
cultivate 15,702.579 acres, which they have 
acquired i n less than fifty years. Ad d to 
this sum the land owned, but not cultivated 
by the Negroes of the South and the land 
owned by the Negroes of the North , and the 
total land ownership of the Negroes of the 
Unite d States undoubtedly aggregated 
20,000,000 acres i n 1910. 
The total value of land and buildings on 
farms owned or rented by the colored farmers of the South is almost $1,000,000,000. 
Negro farms of the South have increased 
20 per cent., while Negro population- has 
increased 10 per cent. Whit e farms, on the 
other hand, have increased only 18 per cent., 
while the white population increased 24 per 
cent. 
m 
*J Eve r since Mr . Roosevelt invited Mr . 
Booke r T. Washington to stay for luncheon 
we have wondered, i n view of the hurrah it 
stirred up. just what part of the sequent 
indignation was pose and what part sincerity. A few Sundays ago a team made up 
of members of the New Yor k Giants was 
booked to play an exhibition game i n Jersey 
Cit y against a nine called the Smart Set. 
Whe n it transpired that the Smart Set team 
was an organization of Negro players, many 
of the Giants were outraged and threatened 
to leave the grounds. Bu t the attendance 
was large and the money was guaranteed, 
so the Caucasian ball players, fletcherizing 
their pride, decided to play.-
B y fa r the wildest-eyed, most aggrieved, 
most insulted playe r of all was Mr . Louis 
Drucke of Texas, seh, who was slated to 
pitch for the Giants. Mr . Drucke's Southern 
blood went to 212° i n no time. Pla y with 
niggehs? A Texas gentleman? 
So Mr . Drucke said no, he wouldn't pitch. 
Leastwise not under the name of Drucke . 
"Pu t my name i n the papers as O'Brien, " 
said Mr . Drucke of Texas, "and I'l l pitch. " 
Whic h was agreed to, and Mr . Drucke , alias 
O'Brien , pitched the game. 
The incident made us wonder again just 
how sincere were most human prejudices. 
Pitchin g against the black brothers was 'to 
be borne, but to have it known—that, Maw -
russ, is something else again.— The Metropolitan Magazine. 
m 
<! The Negro may be looked down upon by 
the white man, but it is a significant thing 
that the white man is now getting his 
musical inspiration from the Negro. The 
ragtime rhythm which comes so natural to 
the shuffling feet of the Africa n is the 
rhythm by which the world is singing and 
dancing to-day. Whil e much of the ragtime 
music which is put out is villainous stuff, 
the fact remains that a mine of musical 
wealth has been opened up i n the form of 
this peculiar and very catching movement. 
It wil l leave its stamp on music for all time, 
and not only popula r music, but music of 
the very highest class. W e find some examples of ragtime i n the music of the older 
composers, but they are only sporadic. It is 
clear that the possibilities of this hitchy 
syncopated time were not appreciated until 
within the last few years. Now the America n 
composers have got hold of the idea and i n 
truth ragged it to a frazzle. It would be 
interesting to hear what the master musicians 
of a generation or two from now wil l make 
of ragtime, when it is developed to its fullest 
scope. This country is moving ahead musically with great rapidity. True, we are not 
producing many great masters of composition as yet, but our time is coming. The 
field is being cultivated and i n due course 
the fruits wil l be gathered. Americans have 
an insistent taste for music. So far it has 
been satisfied i n the main with rather crude 
products; but all this is educative, remember. 
Afte r a while better things will come. A 
great and growing young nation should not 
be i n a hurry to achieve; its work is 
preparation.— The Pathfinder, Washington, 
D . C. EDITORIA L 
VOTES FO E WOMEN . 
WHY should the colored 
voter be interested in 
woman's suffrage? There 
are three cogent reasons. 
First, it is a great human 
question. Nothing human must be foreign, uninteresting or 
unimportant to colored citizens of the 
world. "Whatever concerns half mankind concerns us. Secondly, any agitation, discussion or reopening of the 
problem of voting must inevitably be 
a discussion of the right of black folk 
to vote in America and Africa. Essentially the arguments for and against are 
the same in the case of all groups of 
human beings. The world with its tendencies and temptations to caste must 
ever be asking itself how far may the 
governed govern? How far can the responsibility of directing, curbing and 
encouraging mankind be put upon mankind? When we face this vastest of 
human problems frankly, most of us, 
despite ourselves and half unconsciously, 
find ourselves strangely undemocratic, 
strangely tempted to exclude from 
participation in government larger and 
larger numbers of our neighbors. Only 
at one point, with disconcerting unanimity, do we pause, and that is with 
ourselves. That we should vote we cannot for a moment doubt even if we are 
willing to acknowledge, as most of us 
are, that we are neither all wise nor 
infinitely good. 
This fact should give us pause; if we 
in our potent weakness and shortcomings see the vast necessity for the ballot 
not only for our own selfish ends, but 
for the larger good of all our neighbors, 
do not our neighbors see the same 
necessity? And is not the unanswerable cogency of the argument for universal suffrage regardless of race or sex 
merely a matter of the point of view? 
Merely a matter of honestly putting 
yourself in the position of the disfranchised, and seeing the world through 
their eyes? The same arguments and 
facts that are slowly but surely opening 
the ballot box to women in England and 
America must open it to black men in 
America and Africa. It only remains 
for us to help the movement and spread 
the argument wherever we may. 
Finally, votes for women mean votes 
for black women. There are in the 
United States three and a third million 
adult women of Negro descent. Except 
in the rural South, these women have 
larger economic opportunity than their 
husbands and brothers and are rapidly 
becoming better educated. One has only 
to remember the recent biennial convention of colored women's clubs with 
its 400 delegates to realize how the 
women are moving quietly but forcibly 
toward the intellectual leadership of 
the race. The enfranchisement of these 
women will not be a mere doubling of 
our vote and voice in the nation; it will 
tend to stronger and more normal 
political life, the rapid dethronement of 
the "heeler" and "grafter" and the 
making of politics a method of broadest 
philanthropic race betterment, rather 
than a disreputable means of private 
gain. We sincerely trust that the entire 
Negro vote will be cast for woman suffrage in the coming elections in Ohio, 
Kansas, Wisconsin and Michigan. EDITORIA L 235 
MR. ROOSEVELT. 
WE are glad that at last 
there can be no doubt in 
any colored man's mind 
concerning the attitude 
of Theodore Roosevelt 
toward his race. There 
were many of us who were disposed, 
after time had dimmed the bitter 
memory, to attribute the unjust dismissal of hundreds of colored soldiers 
who were not even charged with wrongdoing, because of the suspected but far 
from proven guilt of a few—there were 
some of us who wished to attribute this 
official Brownsville "lynching" to the 
mistaken but sincere impulse of a strong 
personality rather than to meaner 
motive. 
Since then, however, Theodore Roosevelt has been put to a greater test. To 
explain the action of his progressive 
convention one must realize Mr. Roosevelt's attitude toward black men. 
He does not respect them. It is doubtful if ever in his life he has really known 
a colored man whom he thought was 
wholly a man. The colored men with 
whom he has come in contact have 
executed his orders, have taken his commands and his money, but his association with them has been essentially that 
of master and servant, not of man and 
man. Even when he has defended colored men his motive may have been 
stubborn determination to have his own 
way rather than a desire for real justice. 
For this reason Mr. Roosevelt has 
been unreasonably irritated against 
Negroes several times. It would be 
impossible for him to explain his own 
feeling or altogether account for it. It 
has in it a certain Southern flavor and 
is perhaps something like what one 
would feel if one's cat should insist on 
argument and rights instead of purring 
obedience. How else can we explain 
Mr. Roosevelt's irritation at the black 
soldiers who saved his regiment in 
Cuba? His violence at Brownsville? 
His evident deep resentment at the 
action of the colored delegates at Chicago? With thousands of his white 
fellow Americans Mr. Roosevelt shares 
that half-conscious contempt for black 
men which arises because of an almost 
absolute lack of contact between the 
races on planes of equality and mutual 
respect. 
Starting then with this there can be 
little doubt but that the mission of 
Ormsby McHarg to the South was based 
on the assumption that the buying up 
of Negro delegates was simply a matter 
of money. The sixty-six colored delegates in the Republican convention held 
the balance of power; if the bulk of 
them had been purchasable they could 
have sold their votes for large sums of 
money, and there is little doubt but that 
Mr. Roosevelt's agents offered them 
large sums. 
There was, too, historic reason for 
Mr. Roosevelt's assumption: There has 
always been a disgracefully large purchasable element among the black delegates from the South. It has been a 
shame, but a shame the cause of which 
is perfectly plain, and for which the 
Negro race could not in justice be 
blamed. 
Moreover, it happened that precisely 
that reform for which Mr. Roosevelt and 
others had sometimes but not always 
asked was gradually coming; never before had a Southern Negro delegation 
to the Republican convention contained 
so large a proportion of self-respecting 
men who could not be bribed. This fact 
Mr. Roosevelt and his agents discovered, 
but the discovery seems again to have 
irritated rather than pleased; just as in 
Reconstruction times, the one thing that 
the white South seems to have feared 
more that bad Negro rule was good 
Negro rule, and it was the reform governments of South Carolina and Mississippi that led to the overthrow of Negro 
rule just at the moment when reform 
seemed about to succeed. 236 TH E CRISIS 
So here is repetition of history: the 
sixty-six Negro delegates had many 
politicians and "grafters," but it had 
also merchants, lawyers and physicians, 
honest, straightforward, unpurchasable 
men, a body of encouraging promise for 
better things. Not only that, but in the 
new Progressive party sat several black 
delegates of high calibre, quite fit, we 
are told by Mr. Roosevelt himself, to 
stand beside their white fellows. 
It was such men, who for themselves 
and as solemn trustees for the rights 
and hopes of 10,000,000 human beings— 
10,000,000 men, women and children who 
have been wronged as few modern 
peoples have been wronged—asked the 
adoption of this plank by the New 
Crusaders: 
"The Progressive party recognizes that 
distinctions of race or class i n politica l life 
have no place i n a democracy. Especially 
does the party realize that a group of 
10,000,000 people who have i n a generation 
changed from a slave to a free labor system, 
re-established famil y life, accumulated 
$1,000,000,000 of real property, including 
20,000,000 acres of land, and reduced their 
illiteracy from 80 to 30 per cent., deserve 
and must have justice, opportunity and a 
voice i n their own government. The party, 
therefore, demands for the America n of 
Negro descent the repeal of unfair discriminatory laws and the right to vote on the 
same terms on which other citizens vote." 
This is the exact wording of the 
original plank which was written in TH E 
CRISIS office. 
Such was the meagre declaration that 
black men asked. They did not get this. 
Not only was this refused, but every 
suggested modification, refinement and 
watering down was rejected, and the 
platform of the new Progressive party 
of human rights appears absolutely 
silent on the greatest question of human 
rights that ever faced America! 
Furthermore, lest there should be any 
misinterpretation of this silence, the 
party proceeded to bar practically every 
representative of 8,000,000 Southern 
Negroes and to recognize delegates 
chosen by Southern conventions open 
"to white people only." To seal this 
compact these Hosts at Armageddon 
stood and sang: 
"Mine eyes have seen the glory 
of the coming of the Lord!" -
Selah! 
Now, Mr. Black Voter—you with 
600,000 ballots in your hand, you with 
the electoral vote of Illinois, Indiana, 
Ohio and New York in your pocket— 
WHA T AR E YO U GOING TO DO 
ABOU T IT? 
m 
VIRGINIA CHRISTIAN. 
VIRGINIA CHRISTIAN 
was a product of Virginia far more than of 
the colored race. It 
was the social organization of white Virginia 
that made this girl what she was 
and then brutally killed for it. The 
State pushed her down into poverty 
despite the hard-earned pennies of her 
father; the State refused to educate her 
or even to let Northern philanthropy 
do it; the State put her as a servant, 
body and soul, into the hands of her 
mistress and constituted that mistress 
judge and jury over this ignorant, wayward child. At the age of sixteen—• 
and, despite the attempt of Governor 
Mann to becloud the fact, the testimony 
as to the girl's tender age is incontrovertible—this child was convicted of 
murder, when there is not a white man 
in the nation who after impartial 
review of the facts would not have to 
admit that every circumstance shows 
lack of premeditation with a strong 
case for self-defense. Make this child 
as brutal, immoral and irresponsible as 
you will and the black fact remains 
that a civilized community made her 
and then murdered her for being herself. 
And that community was Christian 
Virginia! NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORED PEOPLE 
TH E MONTH'S WORK. 
THE association now numbers 755 members. A t the last board meeting the 
Indianapolis branch was admitted to intermembership. 
Readers of T H E CRISIS learned i n its last 
issue of the death of the managing editor, 
Mar y Dunlo p Maclean. A t the meeting of 
the board held Tuesday, August 6, a motion 
was unanimously carried that "immediate 
steps be taken to raise a memorial fund to 
Mrs. Mar y Dunlo p Maclean, who had given 
herself so untiringly to the association's 
work. " The question of the exact disposal 
of the fund, whether it should constitute 
the beginning of an association endowment 
or should be used for some special piece of 
work, was to be left to a future date. The 
formation of a memorial fund committee is 
now i n progress. Mrs. Maclean was known 
to many of those most interested i n the 
success of TH E CRISIS and the work of the 
association. It grieved her deeply when 
she was obliged to absent herself, even for 
a few days, from her CRISIS desk. Shall we 
not now, i n the only way possible to us, 
perpetuate her work ? Contributions to the 
memorial fund should be sent to the association's treasurer, Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, 
60 Wal l Street, New York . 
CHRISTIAN VIRGINIA 
vs. 
VIRGINIA CHRISTIAN. 
On August 1 we received a communication from representatives of the 
Nationa l Association of Colored Women, 
which had just convened i n Hampton , requesting that a lawyer be sent to Virgini a to 
investigate the case of a colored girl condemned to death August 16. It was impossible for the association's counsel to go, so 
the secretary was sent instead. 
Virgini a Christian, a young colored girl 
of Hampton , was accused by Mrs. Belote, for 
whom she had washed for several years, of 
stealing a skirt. She denied the charge, but 
expressed her willingness to pay to the 
amount of $5. She refused, however, to 
return to Mrs. Belote's to work. Mrs. Belote 
sent her daughter for Virgini a who was not 
at home. Upo n her return, her mother told 
her Mrs. Belote wanted her to go at once 
to her house, and persuaded the girl to do 
so against her will . 
Pro m this point we have only Virginia's 
story of the crime. She says Mrs. Belote 
took her into a bedroom, closed the door and 
again accused her of stealing the skirt, 
threatening to have her sent to jai l for six 
months i f she did not return it. Angered 
at Virginia's persistent denial of the charge, 
Mrs. Belote threw a cuspidor at the girl, 
hitting her on the shoulder and hurting her 
so she was unable to raise her arm the next 
day. The cuspidor fell and broke and then 
Mrs. Belote began throwing the pieces of 
broken crockery at Virginia . The girl by 
this time was in a blind rage. Grabbing a 
piece of broomstick from the window, she 
struck Mrs. Belote over the forehead, felling 
her instantly. Stil l infuriated, and also to 
stop the woman's screams, she thrust a towel 
down her throat. She then crossed the room 
to get her hat and stopped to pick up Mrs. 
Belote's pocketbook, which lay on the floor 
by the bureau. It contained several dollars 
and a ring . The girl went home and busied 
herself about the house, telling nothing of 
the affair, because, in her own words, she 
"was afraid. " Whe n questioned as to 
whether she thought the woman was dead, 
she said "No, " she never thought she would 
die, she had not meant to kil l her, she was 
"just mad. " She admitted that, although 
Mrs. Belote was in front of the door, she was 
such a small woman that she (Virginia ) 
could easily have left the house had she not 
been scared and had the woman's attack not 
angered her. She further said they were 238 TH E CRISIS 
alone i n the house. The woman's body was 
not discovered for some hours. Later, when 
the officers came to Virginia's squalid home, 
they found her busy with household tasks. 
Whe n they told her she must go wit h them 
she simpl y said : '"May I wash my hands?" 
Feeling i n Hampto n ran high. Man y 
people think a lynchin g was barely averted. 
The case was tried two weeks after the 
murder, while there was still great excitement. This, together with the girl's uncouth 
appearance and her rude way of telling of 
her deed, decided her counsel, two colored 
lawyers, not to put her on the stand. The 
difficulties of the case were greatly increased 
by the girl's utter ignorance. She permitted 
herself to be questioned and weighed before 
she had counsel, and after being sentenced 
confessed to a colored minister i n the presence of newspaper men, without the knowledge of her lawyers. Space forbids a recital 
of the legal history of the case. Two reprieves were secured. Whe n the last one 
of two weeks was granted, i n order to enable 
the girl's counsel to produce new evidence, 
they wrote the Governor that they had given 
up the case. It was at this point, August 
5, eleven days before the date set for execution, that the association's representative 
arrived in Hampton . • 
Afte r careful investigation of the facts, 
the clear grounds for executive clemency 
seemed to lie i n the girl's youth, her 
wretched environment, her dubious mental 
responsibility, and the fact that many people, 
both white and colored, believe the murder 
was not premeditated. That the girl's attorneys, friends and the ministers to whom she 
confessed believe her to be without morals and 
a thief should have helped rather than prejudiced her ease, particularly with anyone 
who had seen her and the miserable surroundings i n which she had grown up. He r 
mother, an untruthful and dishonest woman, 
became paralyzed three years ago, when 
Virgini a had to interrupt her slight schooling 
to help eke out the family's living . There 
are eight children—one is married and one 
beside Virgini a is old enough to work. The 
father, an industrious hard-working man, 
who walks four miles daily to save carfare, 
has $1.25 a day on which to support his 
family. Still he had managed to save 
several hundred dollars through a building 
and loan association to pay for his house, 
all of which had to go to the lawyers whom 
he asked to defend his child. 
I n addition to the efforts made i n Rich ­
mond and Hampto n to influence the Governor 
i n the girl's favor, many letters were sent 
him by members of the Nationa l Association, 
including some of the most representative 
lawyers i n the country. H e steadfastly refused to be shaken i n his view that the crime 
was premeditated, saying that he believed the 
girl went to the house with the express purpose of stealing the pocketbook. Late r he 
seems to have wavered on this point. H e also 
insisted she was at least nineteen, basing his 
opinion upon medical examination. Some of 
the arguments he advanced were entirely outside the evidence on which the case was 
judged and so could not justly be taken into 
consideration. I n a letter to one of our 
members Governor Man n says that Mrs. 
Belote was "seventy years old " and a press 
dispatch makes her seventy-two. The sworn 
testimony of Mrs. Belote's married daughter 
is that her mother was "fifty-one years of 
age." 
A n effort was made to show him that the 
premeditation theory was weak, since persons premeditating violence do not have to 
be persuaded to go to the house of the in ­
tended victim. Eve n the most ghastly feature 
of the crime, the forcing of the towel down 
the victim's throat over five inches, could 
have been explained by an act of brutal 
strength i n a moment of mad passion. The 
prosecution, however, claimed through medical opinion that this towel was forced down 
with the window stick, and must have taken 
sufficient time to constitute premeditation, 
which under the Virgini a law need only be 
of a few minutes' duration. On this point 
the girl's denial was not shaken, and her 
story is believed by most of the colored people and by a large number of white people. 
Moreover, it must be remembered, Virgini a 
did not take the stick wit h her to the victim's 
house, but seized it i n a paroxysm of rage 
after being attacked. I n the absence of vita l 
statistics, the evidence as to the girl's age 
depends on her parents' assertion, the testimony of neighbors, and particularly the 
records of the Whittie r School connected 
with Hampto n Institute, where the girl was 
entered as born August 15, 1895. 
Afte r careful examination of the facts and 
an interview with the prisoner, the association's representative decided that an effort 
should be made to save this girl's life on 
the ground of her age, lack of premeditation, 
doubt as to moral responsibility, and because of the increasing general belief that it is a 
disgrace to civilization for any modern State 
to put to death a mental child, whatever her 
color or race, when that child has been the 
product of adverse conditions for which 
society is to blame. It was Christian Vir ­
gini a against Virgini a Christian—a Christian 
Virgini a which does not even provide a 
reformatory fo r colored girl delinquents. 
Afte r failin g to get the sentence commuted 
an attempt was made to secure a further reprieve in order to gain time to have the case 
reconsidered. The most eminent crimina l 
lawyers i n the State were consulted, but they 
all refused to touch the matter, alleging as 
their reasons that they had been called in 
too late, and that the defense did not now 
have a case. They said they could not consider undertaking a case for the association 
which they would be sure to lose. Some of 
them admitted, however, that they aid no: 
believe it premeditated murder and that it 
was a cryin g shame that the great State of 
Virgini a had no reformatory for colored 
girls. 
Publi c sentiment, which was absolutely 
necessary, i f anything was to be accomplished for the girl, had been colored by an 
unfriendly press. The political situation 
also made it impossible just now to crystallize favorable opinion. Whit e and colored 
people of prominence were willin g to express 
themselves as individuals, even personally to 
write the Governor for clemency, but positively refused to he quoted or to permit their 
names to be used. 
Virgini a Christian is a sacrifice to society. 
Fro m the unfortunate girl's tragedy the 
great commonwealth, whose name by a bitter 
irony of fate she bears, should read its lesson. 
Wh y has not Virgini a a reformatory for 
colored girls ? Wh y has it not a law forbidding the execution of children of sixteen"? 
Ho w many more legalized murders must be 
committed before civilization receives an 
answer to these questions and grapples with 
those social conditions which produce Vir ­
ginia Christians i n a race which obtains 
neither justice nor fair play i n so many 
States of this Union ? 
HISTORIC DAYS IN SEPTEMBER 
2. James Forten, abolitionist and friend 
of Willia m Lloy d Garrison, born, 1766. 
3. Frederick Douglass escaped from 
slavery, 1838. 
4. Willia m E . Dodge, friend of Negro 
education, born, 1805. 
7. Fort Wagne r evacuated by Confederates, 1863. 
9. Compromise of 1850 became a law. 
10. Convention i n Alabama to abolish 
slavery, 1865. 
11. Henr y G . Bowen, founder of The 
Independent, born, 1813. 
12. Samuel J . May , abolitionist, born, 
1797. 
15. Texas passed decree against slave 
trade. 1827. 
17. Dre d Scott died, 1858. 
<J A colored man of Sumter, S. C , borrowed $5 from a loan agent and gave i n 
return an $8 mortgage on a cow. H e then 
paid in all $7.35, but the loan agent 
demanded $5.15 in addition with interest, 
and finally seized the cow under the mort18. Second fugitive slave act passed, 
1850. 
19. Bishop Gilbert Haven , humanitarian, 
born, 1821. 
21. General Andrew Jackson issued proclamation to colored men of Louisiana , 1814. 
22. Abraham Lincol n issued notice of 
intention to proclaim emancipation, Janu ­
ary 1, 1863, unless rebellion ceased before 
that date, 1862. 
23. Fifty-fourt h Massachusetts Regiment 
mustered out, 1865. 
27. First Louisiana Native Guards mustered in , 1862. 
2S. Davi d Walke r born, 1785. His 
"Appeal " against slavery issued, 1829. 
29. Battle of New Marke t Heights, 1864. 
L . M . HERSHAW . 
gage. The case was brought to court and 
false entries in the books of the agent were 
proven. Finall y a verdict was brought i n 
for the colored man. who was given possession of the cow and damages amounting to 
$15. 
TH E N. A. A. C. P. 239 A 
Woman's 
Suffrage 
Symposium 
GARRISON AN D WOMAN' S SUFFRAGE 
By FANN Y GARRISO N VILLAR D 
THE invitation given me to 
contribute an article to the 
Woma n Suffrage Numbe r 
of TH E CRISIS, and i n it 
refer to the part that my 
father, Willia m Lloy d Garrison played i n the movement, brings to min d the fact that there 
are many people who are ignorant of 
the close relation that existed between the 
anti-slavery agitation and the one for 
"woman's rights, " i n both of which my 
father bore his share of the burdens. The 
very first lesson that I learned was one of 
sympathy for the poor little slave child who 
was torn away from its mother's arms, and 
the second was the need of the help of 
women i n the struggle to free the cruelly 
oppressed colored people from bondage. 
A t that time custom did not permit women 
to address audiences of both men and 
women; the only exception being that of the 
Society of Friends. Thus, when two women 
who had an intimate knowledge of the horrors of slavery desired to speak i n churches, 
i n order to reach a larger number of people 
and wi n adherents to the abolition cause, 
they were sternly rebuked for their temerity. 
These women were Sarah and Angelin a 
Grimke , daughters of a distinguished judge 
of Charleston, S. C , both remarkably gifted 
speakers and able writers on this all-absorbin g topic. Thereupon, the Genera l Associa ­
tion of Massachusetts, having the Orthodox 
Congregational Churches under its care, 
issued i n July , 1837, a pastoral letter. Its 
aim was to close the doors of churches to 
anti-slavery lecturers, and to diminish the 
audiences of the Grimk e sisters, who during 
the month of June had aroused intense in ­
terest i n Eastern Massachusetts by their 
eloquent appeals on behalf of the slaves. 
Attention was called to dangers now seeming 
"to threaten the female character wit h widespread and permanent injury. " The NewTestament clearly defines "the appropriat e 
duties and influences of women. " "The 
power of woman is i n her dependence. 
* * * Whe n she assumes the place and 
tone of man as a publi c reformer our care 
and protection of her seem unnecessary; we 
put ourselves i n self-defense against her; she 
yields the power which Go d has given for 
her protection and her character becomes 
unnatural. " The conduct of those, the letter 
continued, is sadly mistaken "who encourage 
females to bear an obstrusive and ostentatious part in measures of reform, and coun-A WOMAN' S SUFFRAG E SYMPOSIU M 241 
tenance any of that sex who so far forget 
themselves as to itinerate i n the character of 
public lecturers and preachers." 
The Grimk e sisters then asked for permission to speak on the anti-slavery platform 
and were warml y welcomed by my father, 
who said that he owed a greater duty to 
women who were half the human race than 
he did to the slaves who were, happily, only 
a small part of it, and that he must be true 
to both. Some of the few adherents he had 
won left him. saying that he could free the 
slaves alone i f he intended to allow women 
to speak at anti-slavery meetings. 
Miss Catherine Beecher's newly published 
"Essa y on Slavery 
and Abolitionism, with 
Reference to the Dut y 
of American Females," 
addressed to Miss 
A . E . Grimke . was 
really the beginning 
of the woman's rights 
agitation in America . 
Sarah Grimk e said in 
a letter to H . C. 
Wright : "The Lor d 
* * * has very unexpectedly made us 
the means of bringing 
up the discussion of 
the question of woman's preaching and 
all we have to do is 
to do our duty. " An ­
gelina Grimke's forceful reply to Miss 
Beecher was published 
i n thirteen articles i n 
the Liberator. M y 
father said : "Ar e we 
enough to make a 
revolution? No, but we are enough to begin 
one, and once begun it never can be turned 
back." This seems peculiarly applicable in 
the case of these devoted sisters. 
H e had an opportunity presented to him 
i n Londo n i n 1840 to serve the woman's 
rights cause which he did not fail to embrace. 
H e had journeyed there for the express purpose of attending a world's anti-slavery 
convention, which met on Friday , June 12, 
with about 500 delegates. His ship had 
been delayed by fog and adverse gales, and 
he arrived five days too late. The convention had but three days more to sit, and 
having learned that his women codelegates 
MRS . FANN Y GARRISO N VILLAR D 
sent by the Massachusetts and Pennsylvani a 
Anti-slavery Societies were denied admission 
to it because of their sex, my father took his 
seat with them i n the gallery and refused 
to take part in the proceedings in order to 
do so. 
H e was i n the company of such women as 
Harrie t Martineau, Mrs. Wendell Phillips, 
Mrs. Mari a Weston Chapman, Mrs. Lydi a 
Mari a Child , Mrs. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, 
Miss Abb y Kelley , afterward Mrs. Stephen 
Foster, Miss Emil y Winslow, Miss Abb y 
Southwick, Mrs. Lucreti a Mott, and still 
others; certainly with his peers. This act, 
says X . P . Rogers, was decisive i n its effect, 
"Hama n never looked 
more blank on seeing 
Mordeca i sitting i n the 
king's gate with his hat 
on than did this 'committee in conference' 
on seeing us take the 
position we did. Garrison was besought to 
come down. They tried 
every means i n their 
power to seduce him 
down. Ever y time he 
was mentioned that 
whole conferenc e 
would, applaud as i f 
they though t they 
could clap him down. 
* * * Bu t they 
might as well have 
expected to remove the 
pillars upon which the 
gallery stood." It was, 
indeed, a singula r 
world' s convention 
from which the leader 
of the greatest antislavery movement of the age had to abstain 
from taking part in order to vindicate the 
principl e of human equality. B y so doing 
he called attention in a remarkable way to 
the disabilities under which women labored 
even when devoting themselves to so noble 
a cause as that of the aboltion of slavery— 
and the convention marks an important era 
i n the woman question rather than that of 
abolition. 
It wil l ever be instructive and interesting 
to dwell upon the steady progress of the 
woman's cause, i n spite of deep-seated prejudice, ridicule and ostracism. Democracy 
itself is but a name where women have no 242 TH E CRISIS 
part i n it. Ca n it be that it is expedient 
to shut out from its benefits any part of the 
human race? Most assuredly not. Negro 
women need the franchise, all foreign women 
need it, and no one of us can afford to 
be deprived of it any more than men. Wha t 
more forcibly points the moral of the imperative necessity of the franchise for each 
and every human being than the heartbreakin g conditions existing to-day i n the South 
among the oppressed colored people? 
Largely deprived, as they are, of the franchise i n the South, who cares for their rights ? 
I n truth, they can only be safeguarded when 
the ballot is theirs; without it they are 
helpless. 
I n conclusion, let me again quote my 
father's words: "The people may err—they 
often do ; they may be badly deceived—they 
often are; but the people as such are never 
wilfull y deceived, nor are they hostile to 
their own interests. They may be deceived, 
but they wil l by and by understand the deceptions and deal wit h the deceivers; but you 
cannot possibly have a broader basis for any 
government than that which includes all the 
people, wit h all their rights i n their hands, 
and with an equal power to maintain their 
rights. " 
COLORE D WOME N AS VOTER S 
By ADELL A HUN T LOGA N 
MOR E and more colored women 
are studying public questions and civics. A s they 
gain information and have 
experience i n their daily 
vocations and i n their efforts for human betterment 
they are convinced, as many other women 
have long ago been convinced, that their 
efforts would be more telling i f women had 
the vote. 
The fashion of saving " I do not care 
MIS S ID A E . CUMMING S 
(See page 223.) 
to meddle with politics " is disappearing 
among the colored woman faster than most 
people think, for this same woman has 
learned that politics meddle constantly with 
her and hers. 
Good women try always to do good housekeeping. Buildin g inspectors, sanitary in ­
spectors and food inspectors owe their 
positions to politics. Wh o then is so well 
informed as to how these inspectors perform 
their duties as the women who . live i n in ­
spected districts and i n inspected houses, and 
who buy food from inspected markets? 
Adequate school facilities i n city, village 
and plantation districts greatly concern the 
black mother. Bu t without a vote she has 
no voice i n educational legislation, and no 
power to see that her children secure their 
share of public-school funds. 
Negro parents admit that their own children are not all angels, but they know that 
the environments which they are helpless to 
regulate increase misdemeanor and crime. 
They know, too, that officers, as a rule, recognize few obligations to voteless citizens. 
Whe n colored juvenile delinquents' are 
arraigned, few judges or juries feel bound to 
give them the clemency due a neglected class. 
Whe n sentence is pronounced on these mischievous youngsters, too often they are 
imprisoned with adult criminals and come 
out hardened and not helped by their punishment. Whe n colored mothers ask for a 
reform school for a long time they receive 
no answer. They must wait while they 
besiege their legislature. Havin g no vote 
they need not be feared or heeded. The A WOMAN' S SUFFRAG E SYMPOSIU M 243 
"right of petition"' is good; but it is much 
better when well voted in . 
Not only is the colored woman awake to 
reforms that may be hastened by good legislation and wise administration, but where 
she has the ballot she is reported as using it 
for the uplift of society and for the advancement of the State. 
I n Californi a the colored woman bore her 
part creditably i n the campaign for equal 
suffrage and also with commendable patriotism i n the recent presidential nomination 
campaign. 
The State of Washington, new with 
its votes-for-women law, has already had a 
colored woman juror. Wh y not"? She is 
educated and wealthy and wants to protect 
the best interests i n her State. 
Colorado has never had better school officials than her women have made. Judge 
Ben . Lindsey is as popula r with colored 
women voter's as he is with white women 
voters. The juvenile court over which he 
presides gives the boy a square deal regardless of color. A majority of mothers and 
fathers can be counted on every time to support such an official. 
Wyoming . Uta h and Idaho, the other full 
suffrage States, have few colored women, but 
these few are not hurt by. but are being 
helped by. their voting privileges. 
I n the States that are now conducting 
woman suffrage campaigns the colored 
woman is as interested and probably as 
active as conditions warrant. This is notably 
true of Ohio and Kansas. 
A number of colored women are active 
members of the Nationa l Woma n Suffrage 
Association. They are well informed and 
are diligent i n the spread of propaganda. 
Wome n who see that they need the vote see 
also that the vote needs them. Colored 
women feel keenly that they may help i n 
civic betterment, and that their broadened 
interests i n matters of good government may 
arouse the colored brother, who for various 
reasons has become too indifferent to his 
duties of citizenship. 
The suffrage map shows that six States 
have equal politica l rights for women and 
men, and that a much larger number have 
granted partia l suffrage to women. I n all 
these the colored woman is taking part, not 
as full y as she wil l when the question is 
less of an experiment, not as heartily as she 
will when her horizon broadens, but she bears 
her part. 
This much, however, is true now: the 
colored America n believes i n equal justice 
to all, regardless of race, color, creed or 
sex. and longs for the day when the United 
States shall indeed have a government of 
the people, for the people and by the 
people—even including the colored people. 
The JUSTICE OF WOMA N SUFFRAGE 
By MAR Y CHURC H TERREL L 
IT is difficult to believe that 
any individua l i n the United 
States with one drop of 
Africa n blood i n his veins 
can oppose woman suffrage. 
It is queer and curious 
enough to hear an intelligent colored woman argue against granting 
suffrage to her sex, but for an intelligent 
colored man to oppose woman suffrage is 
the most preposterous and ridiculous thing 
i n the world. Wha t could be more absurd 
than to see one group of human beings who 
are denied rights which they are tryin g to 
secure for themselves workin g to prevent 
another group from obtaining the same 
rights'? • Fo r the very arguments which are 
advanced against granting the right of suffrage to women are offered by those who 
have disfranchised colored men. 
I f I were a colored man, and were unfortunate enough not to grasp the absurdity of 
opposing suffrage because of the sex of a 
human being, I should at least be consistent 
enough never to raise my voice against those 
who have disfranchised my brothers and myself on account of race. However, the intelligent colored man who opposes woman suffrage 
is very rare, indeed. Whil e on a lecture tour 
recently I frequently discussed woman suffrage with the leading citizens i n the communities in which I spoke. It was very 
gratifying, indeed, to see that i n the majority 
of instances these men stood right on the 
question of woman suffrage. 
Frederick Douglass did many things of 
which I am proud, but there is nothing he 
ever did i n his long and brilliant career in 
which I take keener pleasure and greater 
pride than I do in his ardent advocacy of 244 TH E CRISIS 
equal politica l rights for women, and the 
effective service he rendered the cause of 
woman suffrage sixty years ago. Whe n the 
resolution demanding equal politica l rights 
for women was introduced i n the meeting 
held at Seneca Falls, N . Y. , i n 1848, Fred ­
erick Douglass was the only man i n the 
convention courageous and broad minded 
enough to second the motion. It was largely 
due to Douglass's masterful arguments and 
matchless eloquence that the motion was 
carried, i n spite of the opposition of its 
very distinguished and powerful foes. I n 
his autobiography "Douglass says: "ObservMIS S ELIZABET H L . DAVI S 
(See page 223.) 
in g woman's agency, devotion and efficiency, 
gratitude for this high service early moved 
me to give favorable attention to the subject 
of what is called 'woman's rights' and caused 
me to be denominated a woman's rights 
man. I am glad to say," he adds, "that I 
have never been ashamed to be thus designated. I have been convinced of the wisdom 
of woman suffrage and I have never denied 
the faith. " 
To assign reasons i n this day and time 
to prove that it is unjust to withhold from 
one-half of the human race rights and privileges freely accorded the other half, which 
is neither more deserving nor more capable 
of exercising them, seems almost like a 
reflection upon the intelligence of those to 
whom they are presented. To argue the 
inalienability and the equality of human 
rights i n the twentieth century i n a country 
whose government was founded upon the 
eternal principle s that all men are created 
free and equal, that governments get their 
just powers from the consent of the governed, seems like lavin g one's self open to 
the charge of anachronism. Fo r 2,000 years 
mankind has been breaking down the various 
barriers which interposed themselves between 
human beings and their perfect freedom to 
exercise all the faculties with which they 
have been divinely endowed. Eve n in monarchies old fetters, which formerly restricted 
freedom, dwarfed the intellect and doomed 
certain individuals to narrow, circumscribed 
spheres because of the mere accident of 
birth, are being loosed and broken one by 
one. 
Wha t a reproach it is to a government 
which owes its very existence to the loved 
freedom i n the human heart that it should 
deprive any of its citizens of their sacred 
and cherished rights. The founders of this 
republic called heaven and earth to witness 
that it should be called a government of the 
people, for the people and by the people; 
and yet the elective franchise is withheld 
from one-half of its citizens, many of whom 
are intelligent, virtuous and cultured, and 
unstintingly bestowed upon the other half, 
many of whom are illiterate, degraded and 
vicious, because by an unparalleled exhibition of lexicographical acrobatics the word 
"people" has been turned and twisted to 
mean all who were shrewd and wise enough 
to have themselves born boys instead of 
girls, and white instead of black. 
Bu t why grant women the suffrage when 
the majority do not want it, the remonstrants 
sometimes ask with innocent engaging 
seriousness. Simpl y because there are many 
people, men as well as women, who are so 
constructed as to be unable to ascertain by 
any process of reason what is the best thing 
for them to have or to do. Unti l the path 
is blazed by the pioneer, even some people 
who have superior intellects and moral courage dare not forge ahead. On the same 
principl e and for just exactly the same 
reason that America n women would reject A WOMAN' S SUFFRAG E SYMPOSIU M 24 5 
suffrage, Chinese women, i f they dared to 
express any opinion at all, would object to 
having the feet of their baby girls removed 
from the bandages which stunt their growth. 
East India n women would scorn the preferred freedom of their America n sisters as 
unnatural and vulga r and would die rather 
than have their harems abolished. Slaves 
sometimes prefer to bear the ills of bondage 
rather than accept the blessings of freedom, 
because their poor beclouded brains have 
been stunted and dwarfed by oppression so 
long that they cannot comprehend what 
liberty means and have no desire to enjoy it. 
TW O SUFFRAGE MOVEMENTS 
By MARTH A 
THE woman suffrage movement 
i n Englan d and Americ a 
really dates from the beginnin g of the anti-slavery 
struggle. It was not only 
contemporaneous with it, 
but it owes its existence i n 
a large measure to this phase of the struggle 
for human rights. Fo r it was i n the abolitionist ranks that the early suffragists received their training, both as thinkers and 
propagandists. It was impossible for them 
to agitate continually for the freedom of the 
Negro without desiring freedom for themselves, or realizing the parallel between his 
situation and their own. Fo r i f the Negro 
was a slave the married woman of that day 
was no less a chattel. She was no longer 
openly bought and sold.* but she had no 
more than he, a separate legal existence. If 
the Negro slave belonged to his master, she 
belonged no less, absolutely, to her husband 
as did her property, her earnings, and even 
her children. Bot h were disfranchised. Both 
were deprived of education and subject to 
economic disabilities which they shared with 
no other class. Eve n the constitutional right 
of free speech was not extended to woman 
when it meant public speech, as she found 
when she wished to joi n i n the protest against 
slavery", and even among the abolitionists her 
presence on platforms and committees caused 
serious dissensions. 
The most strikin g instance of this was 
offered at the World's Anti-slavery Convention held in London in 1840, when the 
credentials of the American women delegates 
were refused for no other reason than that 
they were women. They were, indeed, allowed to be present, but not to have any part 
i n the proceedings. Wit h this they had to 
be content, as their fellow delegates apparently were, the only exceptions being Willia m 
Lloy d Garrison and Nathaniel Rogers, the 
•The- sale of wives was a legal transaction in 
England well into the nineteenth century. 
GRUEN1NG 
editor of the Herald of freedom. O f all 
the men present these two alone seemed to 
realize that a principl e was at stake, and 
rather than compromise on a point they felt 
to be vital they resigned their seats in the 
convention, remaining merely as spectator's 
in the gallery. 
This was one of many bitter experiences 
that taught women the lesson of their own 
impotence. To many of those rejected delegates, among them Lucreti a Mott and Eliza ­
beth Cady Stanton, it brought an overwhelming realization that they were still something 
less than human in the minds of most men 
and a conviction that their first duty was 
to free themselves from the artificial restraints imposed on them because of their 
sex; that then and then only they could 
work with men as equals. I n these two 
women, at least, the action of the convention 
kindled a profound resolve to work toward 
this end, resulting in an agitation which 
culminated i n the women's rights convention 
of 1848 and its now famous "declaration of 
rights." This convention held at Seneca 
Falls, N . Y. , and attended by about 100 
men and women, was denounced by the press 
of that date as "the most unnatural and 
shocking incident in the history of humanity, " while the declaration excited almost 
universal derision. This document slated the 
belief of its framers i n the equality of men 
and women and demanded for women education, the liberty of entering all trades and 
professions, the right to appear in public, 
the right to "work with men in any good 
cause," reminiscent of the anti-slavery 
convention, and, finally, the ballot. 
It is significant that of all the resolutions 
offered at this convention this one alone was 
not unanimously adopted. It was finally 
carried by a small majority, but throughout 
the discussion only two of those present. 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Frederick 
Douglass, warmly favored it. They alone at 
this stage seem to have grasped the fact 24 6 TH E CRISI S 
that all rights and privileges go back to this 
most fundamental right. Throughout the 
storm of ridicule and abuse which broke out 
after the convention Douglass maintained his 
position and brilliantl y defended the convention i n his paper, The North Star. 
The early history of the suffrage movement 
abounds wit h like incidents showing the help 
given to the cause by colored people. Perhaps none is more strikin g than the story of 
Sojourne r Trut h at the Akro n convention, 
quoted from the "Reminiscences of Mrs. 
Frances D . Gage" : 
"The second day the work waxed warm. 
Methodist, Baptist, Episcopal, Presbyterian 
SOJOURNE R TRUT H 
and Universalist ministers came in to hear 
and discuss the resolutions presented. One 
claimed superior rights and privileges for 
man, on the ground of 'superior intellect;' 
another because of the 'manhood of Christ;' 
another gave us a theological view of the 
'sin of our first mother.' Through all these 
sessions Sojourner Truth , quiet and reticent, 
sat crouched against the wall, on the corner 
of the pulpit stairs, her elbows on her knees, 
her chin resting on her broad, hard palms. 
Agai n and again, timorous and trembling 
ones came to me and said with earnestness: 
'Don't let her speak, Mrs. Gage, it wil l rui n 
us.' * * » 
"There were very few i n those days who 
dared 'speak i n meeting,' and the august 
teachers of the people were seemingly getting 
the better of us, while the boys i n the gallery 
and the sneerers i n the pews were hugely 
enjoying the discomfiture as they supposed 
of the 'strong minded.' Some of the tenderskinned friends were on the point of losing 
dignity and the atmosphere betokened a 
storm, when slowly from her seat i n the 
corner rose Sojourne r Truth . 'Don't let 
her speak,' gasped half a dozen i n my ear. 
She moved slowly and solemnly to the front 
and turned her great speaking eyes to me. 
There was a hissing sound of disapprobation, both above and below, as I announced 
'Sojourner Truth ' and begged the audience 
to keep silence for a few minutes. A t her 
first words there was a profoun d hush. She 
spoke i n deep tones, not loud, but which 
reached every ear i n the house, and away 
through the throng at the doors and 
windows. 
" 'Wall , chilern, wha r dar is so much racket 
dar must be somethin' out o' kilter. I 
reckon dat 'twixt de Niggers i n de Sou f and 
de women i n de Norf, de white men wil l be 
in a fix pretty soon. Bu t what's all dis 
here talkin ' about? 
" 'Da t man ober dar say dat women needs 
to be helped into carriages, and lifted ober 
ditches, and to hab de best place everywhar. 
Nobody eber helps me into carriages or 
ober mud puddles, or gibs me de best place! 
An d ain't I a woman? Loo k at me! Look 
at my arm' (and she bared her tremendous 
arm showing her great muscular power). I 
have ploughed, I have planted and gathered 
into barns and noone could head me—and 
ain't I a woman ? I could wor k as much 
and eat as much as a man—when I could 
get it—an d bear de lash as well, and ain't I 
a woman? I have borne thirteen chilern 
and seen most of dem sold off into slavery, 
and when I cried out i n my mother's grief, 
none but Jesus heard me ; and ain't I a 
woman? 
" 'De n dey talks 'bout dis tin g i n de head. 
Wha t dey call it? ' ('Intellect,' someone whispered.) 'Dat's it. honey. What's dat got 
to do wit h Nigger's rights or women's rights? 
If my cup won't hold but a pint and yours 
holds a quart, wouldn't yo u be mean not to 
let me have my little half measure full? ' 
(An d she sent a keen glance at the minister 
who made the argument. The cheering was 
long and loud.) A WOMAN' S SUFFRAG E SYMPOSIU M 24 7 
" 'De n dat man ober dar, he say women 
can't have as much right as men 'cause Christ 
wan't a woman ! Wha r did your Christ 
come from? ' (Rollin g thunder couldn't have 
stilled the crowd as did those deep wonderful 
tones as she stood with outstretched arms 
and eyes of fire.) 'Wha r did your Christ 
come from? Fro m Go d and a woman. Ma n 
had nothin' to do with him!' Wha t a rebuke 
that was to the little man ! 
"Lastl y she took up the defense of Mothe r 
Eve . eliciting almost deafening applause at 
every word, and finally returned to her 
corner, leaving many of us with streaming 
eyes and hearts beating with gratitude. She 
had taken us up i n her strong arms and 
carried us safely over the slough of difficulty, turnin g the whole tide i n our favor. 
I have never seen anything like the magical 
influence which turned the sneers and jeers 
of an excited crowd into notes of respect 
and admiration. " 
I f such incidents have been- less frequent 
i n recent years it is not because the profound 
and close connection between the Negro and 
women movements no longer exists. The 
parallel between their respective situations is 
as clear to-day as it was i n 1848, but it is 
too frequently ignored by the reformers on 
both sides. Bot h have made some progress 
toward complete emancipation, the gains of 
women i n the direction of enfranchisement 
being seemingly the more lasting. Both, 
however, are still very largely disfranchised, 
and subject to those peculiar educational, 
legal and economic discriminations that are 
the natura l results of disfranchisement. An d 
finally, both are being brought wit h every 
onward step nearer to the identical temptation 
—to sacrifice the principl e of true democracy to the winnin g of a single skirmish. So 
when one sees a national body of suffragists refusing to pass a universal suffrage 
resolution, one is compelled to wonder at the 
logic of those who, knowing so well what 
disfranchisement means, would allow it to 
be inflicted on others. "Le t us not confuse 
the issue," these suffragists plead, some i n 
good faith. Ye t the confusion, i f any, exists 
only i n their minds. Her e are not two 
distinct issues at stake, but merely the vital 
principl e of democracy. Others insist that 
the granting of the ballot to women must 
precede all other reforms because "women 
have waited long enough" and recall the 
fact that women were forced to stand aside 
and see Negro men enfranchised at the close 
of the Civi l War. This is undoubtedly true 
and was quite justly a source of bitter disappointment to the suffrage leaders of that 
day—a disappointment we should not underestimate—but merely to reverse the principals in an unjust occurrence is not to work 
justice. It is strange to see so many suffragists who point with pride to the action 
of Garrison i n withdrawing from the antislavery convention, blind to the larger significance of that action. Stranger still to 
see them following, not Garrison's lead, but 
that of the convention i n their attitude 
toward colored people, and forgetting that 
no cause is great to the exclusion of every 
other. This Robert Purvis, a noted colored 
leader, understood, as is shown by his noble 
reply to the suffragists' appeal: " I cannot 
agree that this or any hour is specially the 
Negro's. I am an anti-slavery man. Wit h 
what grace could I ask the women of this 
country to labor for my enfranchisement and 
at the same time be unwillin g to put forth a 
hand to remove the tyranny i n some respects 
greater to which they are exposed?" This 
is what all suffragists must understand, whatever their sex or color—that all the disfranchised of the earth have a common 
cause. 
BROTHE R BAPTIS' O N WOMA N SUFFRAGE 
By ROSALI E JONA S 
When hit come ter de question er de female 
vote, 
De ladies an ' de cullud folks is in de same 
boat. 
E f de Boss feelin' good, an ' we eats out his 
han', 
We kin shout fur freedom, an ' foller de ban'. 
We kin play at freedom, so long's we play. 
But ef we gits thinkin', an ' comes out an ' say: 
Case one's borned a female, an ' one's borned 
black, 
Is dat any reason fur sottin' way back? 
Is dat any reason fur sottin' da-put? 
You kin betcher bottom dollar dat de Boss's 
fut 
Gwine ter sprout big claws, till dey comes 
clar thoo, 
An ' he climps hit heavy on bofe us two. 
Case de tears er de mudder, nur de sign, er de 
cross, 
Ain' t shame all de debbil yit, outen de Boss! COLORED ME N AN D WOME N LYNCHE D 
WITHOUT TRIAL. 
1885 78 1899 84 
1886 71 1900 107 
1887 80 1901 107 
1888 95 1902 86 
1889 95 1903 86 
1890 90 1904 - 83 
1891 121 1905 61 
1892 155 1906 64 
1893 154 1907 60 
1894 134 1908 93 
1895 112 1909 73 
1896 80 1910 65 
1897 122 1911 63 
1898 102 
Total 2,521 
AUTO-DA-FE IN TYLER , TEXAS . 
THER E was some disappointment i n the 
crowd and criticism of those who had 
bossed the arrangements because the fire was 
so slow i n reaching the Negro. It was really 
only ten minutes after the fire was started before smoking shoe soles and a twitching of the 
Negro's feet indicated that his lower extremities were burning, but the time seemed much 
longer. The spectators had waited so long 
to see him tortured that they begrudged the 
ten minutes additional before his suffering 
really began. 
The Negro had uttered but few words. 
Whe n he was led to where he was to be 
burned he said quite calmly : " I wish some 
of you gentlemen would be Christian enough 
to cut my throat," but nobody responded. 
Whe n the fire was started he screamed: 
"Lord , have mercy on my soul, " and that 
was the last he spoke, though he was conscious for fully twenty minutes after that! 
His exhibition of nerve aroused the admiration even of his torturers. 
A slight hitch i n the proceedings occurred 
when the Negro was about half burned. 
His clothing had all been stripped off and 
burned to ashes by the flames, and his black 
body hung nude in the gray dawn light. The 
flesh had been burned from his legs as high 
as the knees when it was seen that the wood 
supply was runnin g short. 
There was a call fo r volunteers to go 
after more wood, but there were no responses. XNne of the men or boys were 
willin g to miss an incident of the torture. 
Al l feared something of more than usual 
interest might happen, and it woul d be embarrassing to admit later on not having seen 
it on account of being absent after more 
wood. 
Something had to be done, however, and 
a few men from the edge of the crowd ran 
after more dry-goods boxes, and by reason 
of this "publi c service" gained standing room 
i n the inner circle after having delivered the 
fuel. Meanwhile, the crowd jeered the dyin g 
man and uttered shocking comments suggestive of a cannibalistic spirit. Some danced 
and sang to testify to their enjoyment of the 
occasion. 
[Special correspondence of the St. Louis 
Post-Dispatch.] 
TH E SCAPEGOAT. 
Mobile . Ala. . June 19.—Tom Jackson, a 
Negro, seventy years old. who shot and 
killed Deputy-Sheriff Coate. of Clarke 
County, was taken by masked men from 
Clarke County officers, near Jackson. Wed ­
nesday morning, and has not been heard 
from since. 
Jackson was charged wit h the theft of a 
goat. To arrest the Negro. Deput y Coate 
went to Jackson's house, five miles from 
the town of Jackson. Tuesday night. A s 
Coate was forcing the door the Negro fired 
and killed him. 
Althoug h mortally wounded, Coate shot 
and seriously injured Jackson. The Negro 
was also struck by another officer's bullet, 
but he crawled from his house into the garden, and there lay all night. Officers found 
him Wednesday morning, but did not get to 
the town of Jackson with him. 
TH E BURDE N Conducted by JESSIE FAUSE T 
Wendell Phillips. The faith of an American. 
B y George Edwar d Woodberry. Printed 
for the Woodberry Society, 1912. 
The tribute which Mr . Woodberry pays i n 
this speech to Wendell Phillip s is as beautifu l as it is sincere. Bu t for us the chief 
interest must lie i n the expression of the 
author's ideas on the old familia r "problem.' ' 
Her e is a man who thinks and, thinking, 
speaks. " I say nothing,' ' he declares, "o f 
the denial of Negro rights by lynching. 
That is a mere brutality. W e are shamed i n 
the face of civilized nations as no other of 
the group, except Russia, has been shamed 
for centuries. * * * I note, too, the extension of lynchin g to white men and the 
spread of the habit of burning Negroes to 
Northern States. Yo u cannot calmly watch 
a fire i n your neighbor's house; it wil l leap 
to you r own roof. You cannot win k at 
crime i n your neighbor's dooryard; it will 
soon be i n your own. The denial of Negro 
rights by the nullification of the constitutional amendments is a graver matter. I 
have only this to say, that no student of 
history can be surprised at a diminishing 
respect for a Constitution that does not 
maintain itself as the supreme law of the 
land honestly abided by. Phillip s stated the 
true principle : "The prope r time to maintain one's rights is when they are denied; 
the prope r persons to maintain them are 
those to whom they are denied.' I devoutly 
hope that the Negroes wil l so grow i n manhood as to be their own saviours i n the fulness of time, as our own fathers long ago 
wrenched from the hands of unwillin g masters the rights that are now our dearest 
possession." One has to think here of Mr . 
Phillips' own remark: "Peace, i f possible; 
but justice at any rate." 
Agai n listen to Mr . Woodberry : "It may 
be that the Negroes, considered with a view 
to their social utility, like all other masses 
of men, are capable only of an economic 
service. That is the main task of mankind. 
But beware of closing the gates of mercy on 
those young ambitions, those forward in ­
stincts, the prayers and struggles of the 
wakin g soul of a race! Give the Negroes a 
true university—a white man's university. 
The trials and discouragements of genius are 
an old and sad story i n our own annals. 
Think what the burden must be that rests on 
Negro efforts." 
The Negro at Work i n New York City . A 
study in economic progress. George 
Edmund Haynes. Columbia University 
Publications, 1912. Longmans, Green & 
Co., agents. 
This work affords us an exhaustive and 
interesting account of the manner i n which 
colored citizens earn their livin g i n New 
York . Incidentally one learns a great deal 
also of their sanitation and morality. There 
are many references and diagrams and a 
summary. I n this summary is to be found 
the creed of the whole ''Negro Problem. " 
The passage reads as follows: 
"The problem of the Negro as an urban 
dweller is made more acute because he has 
greater handicap due to his previous condition of servitude and to the prejudiced 
opposition of the white world that surrounds 
him. His health, intelligence and morals respond to treatment simila r to that of other 
denizens of the city, i f only impartia l treatment can be secured. Doubtless, death rate 
and crime rate have been and are greater 
than the corresponding rates for the white 
populations of the same localities, for both 
crime and disease are a reflection of the 
urban environments and are solvable by 
methods simila r to those used to remedy such 
conditions among whites i f prejudiced presuppositions, which conclude without experiment or inquiries that Negroes have in ­
nately bad tendencies, give place to openminded tria l and unbiased reason. Snapshot. 
WHA T T O REA D 250 TH E CRISIS 
opinions should be avoided i n such serious 
questions, and statesmen, philanthropists and 
race leaders should study the facts carefully 
and act accordingly.' ' 
The Black Pawn. B y Norman Duncan. Harper's for July, 1912. 
Once i n a rare while some one points out 
that the wron g done the black man by 
slavery was not only physica l and material, 
but something much more subtle and fa r 
reaching. It is this whic h Mr . Dunca n wit h 
fa r more insight than is usually accorded 
the Negro points out when he writes : 
"Bill y Brow n had been bullied fo r a long 
time. H e yielded to the ancient compulsion. 
It was the same as it had always been. His 
spirit had been broken before he was born. " 
"His spirit had been broken"—there it is— 
the spiritua l hurt, the maimin g of the essential quality of manliness—the accursed heritage which the America n Negro must fling 
behind him. 
LETTE R BO X 
Edito r of TH E CRISIS : 
Tou r journa l supplies a long-felt want. 
Yo u must continue to publish the truth of 
the brutal America n condition, and the more 
of the horrors yo u describe the greater usefulness you wil l accomplish. You r paper 
each month can never become as bitter as 
are the daily humiliations of millions of your 
oppressed, suffering race. The pictures of 
lynchings which yo u put on your pages are 
inadequate to tell the fiendish stories of barbarities which our own eyes have seen i n the 
Southland. Abou t ten years ago i n a Southern State we saw the officers arrest seven 
black boys, in ages from 14 to 22 years, and 
put them i n an old storehouse to await a 
hearing the next day. The magistrate said 
they would be committed to jai l the following day if they were living . That night six 
of them were strung to a lone oak, their 
bodies mutilated and the clothing on their 
bodies saturated with oil and burned. They 
were buried under the oak i n one large hole. 
No one was ever arrested for the crime. 
You r list of the lynched is not as big as 
it might be. W e believe you have not half 
the number. A SUBSCRIBER. 
New York . 
m 
DEA R SIR : 
I feel more or less at liberty to make a 
comment regarding TH E CRISIS, since for 
many years I have been deeply interested, 
and have done many things for the advancement of the Negro race in America . 
Fo r several months I have been a subscriber to your magazine, have looked it 
over carefully each issue, and put it into 
the hands of my maid as an interesting thing, 
perhaps, fo r her to read i n a leisure hour. 
An d I hav e watched its effect, which has not 
been a good one. 
Now I want to say this, and from the bottom of my heart; you are makin g a grave 
mistake i n pointing out the woes of the 
Negro race which are no greater—if as grea t 
—as the woes of the white man. Besides, to 
point them out is not the way to remedy the 
evil that exists, i f evil there does exist. * * * 
A SOUTHER N WHIT E WOMAN . 
Mor e of TH E CRISIS are sold to Hindoos. 
Japanese and whites than to colored people. 
DORA GULLIFORD. 
Vancouver. B. C 
m 
I read TH E CRISIS from cover to cover and 
eagerly look for it each month. 
WILLIA M STEVENSON , 
Cincinnati. O. 
Everywher e I have been I hear the highest 
praise for TH E CRISIS. Everyone feels that 
at last we have the kin d of race paper which 
has long been needed. 
E . AZALI A HACKLEY . 
Jacksonville, Fla . 
m 
This month's edition of TH E CRISIS is a 
"gem. " I read with inspiration and profit 
every word of it last night. Go d bless you 
in this work. J . W . BARCO, 
Richmond, Va . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 251 
Publishers' Chat 
TH E CHILDREN' S NUMBE R 
Little Gir l looked up from her stewed beans: 
"Wil l it have a children's story?" she asked. 
The Editor looked down at her. 
"Really, I hadn't planned " 
"But who ever heard of a Children's Number without 
a story for children?" persisted Little Girl. 
"Why—to be sure," surrendered the Editor. 
So the Children's Number in October will have a 
children's story to go with the baby faces. 
By the way, we have some of the 'cutest baby faces 
you ever saw. 
Is your baby's face there? 
If not, rush the picture to us. W e want it Besides 
there's a prize, you know. 
COMIN G NUMBERS—Th e November number is 
our second anniversary. Then will come the finest number 
of the year for Christmas—together with a Richard Brown 
cover. 
SCHOO L TALK—I n a few weeks schools all over 
the country will begin to open. It is often quite a problem 
for parents to decide which school to select for their 
children. 
The curriculum, location and advantages of one school 
may be suited to the disposition and previous training of one 
child while the same school would not be suitable for 
another. 
The schools advertised in TH E CRISIS are all reliable, 
and while the range of choice is limited the quality is 
decidedly superior to any similar collection. 
If you are perplexed with a last-minute decision 
between two schools for your children or yourself, perhaps 
we can help you out of your difficulty if you write us. 
Our suggestions are FREE . 252 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF [BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY' S 
328' Leno x Avenue 
Telephone Harle m 1896 
126th Street, NEW YORK . 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l War ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc , scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice i n parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey, Gen' l Intr.; Dr . Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
GOO D COMMISSION PAID T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOIN NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
110 1/2 Colfax Ave., South Bend, Ind. 
Too, Too! Too, Too! Too, Too 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
For particulars write G. W. BLAND , H . S. P. 
Good Talcum 
Powder 
is a hot weather 
necessity. You r 
choice of odors: 
French Bouquet 
Corylopsis 
Carnation 
Violet 
Lilac 
Pink Blossom 
(Flesh Color) 
Maile d postpaid for 15c. 
per box. Agents wanted. 
ALEXANDE R 
SPECIALT Y CO. 
494 Highland Ave. 
Passaic, N. J. 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
White Rose Working Girls' Home 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. Th e Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S E . KEYSER , Supt. 
Telephone 3253 Harle m 
CARPE T CLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture ; 
we also vacuum clean in the . home. W e are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the warld, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D 
SPECIALT Y 
RUG S OU R 
WANTED— A copy of No. 29 (issued 
June 16, 1906) of the "Moon," a weekly 
magazine published in Memphis, Tennessee. 
A liberal price will be paid. Address: 
TH E CRISIS 
FOLDING BATH TUB 
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water, 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lasts for 
years. Write for special agents offer and description. ROBINSON 
Mfg. Co., Adams St., Toledo, O. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 253 
Another One of Those Decidedly 
Smart Designs from Mme . Becks 
635 8 
Mme. Becks, who is 
regarded as an authority on 
styles and fashions, has agreed 
to design exclusive patterns 
for TH E CRISIS. 
A real dressy street dress 
for late summer and early 
fall. 
Can be made of chiffon, 
serge, taffeta or broadcloth. 
Material Required: 
4 yards, 40 inches wide, or 
6 yards, 36 inches wide. 
3 yards of lace, 4 inches 
wide. 
1/2 yard of net for yoke and 
collar. 
1/2 yard ball fringe. 
1/2 dozen buttons. 
Patterns are cut 36, 38 and 
40 bust measure. Price, by 
mail, 17 cents. Patterns cut 
to measure, 50 cents. 
Address: 
Pattern Department, TH E CRISIS 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 254 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A professional man advertised in TH E CRISIS for a partner with capital The 
profession is one that offers little encouragement to colored men and yet he writes: 
"Kindly stop the advertisement in TH E CRISIS, as my want 
has been filled. We appreciate the very good results (from 
TH E CRISIS) and will forward check on the 15th." 
A large corporation advertised in TH E CRISIS for a general manager with 
capital The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those 
with capital and experience. They write: 
"We believe that one of the parties is really interested in 
our proposition and will close with him in a few days." 
They "closed" with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
There is our story in a nutshell 
Those who require high-grade help should use our "Help Wanted" columns, 
and those who are trained or experienced as high-grade helpers should advertise 
their services where they may reach the largest number of possible employers. 
HELP WANTE D 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSITIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO . 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ame s Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS—Represen t reliable house, 400 per 
cent, profit. Selling GORDON' S Photo Pillow 
Tops . Hig h grade work. Eas y sales. Bi g money. 
Samples and catalogue free. 
Lathe r Gordon Co. 206 N . Fifth Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
AGENTS —Bi g money. Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted Negr o pictures. Portraits. Pillo w Tops. Catalog 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U, Chicago, Ill. 
WANTED —Reliabl e men with references 
to handle the best Stock Investment on 
the market. An y good solicitor can earn 
from $50 to $100 per month. 
Ou r reference: Th e Bank of Moun d 
Bayou . 
TH E S. I. & E . CORPORATIO N 
Mound Bayou, Miss. 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
PATENTS 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
66 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technica l Translations. 
Telephone 343 Joh n Roo m 60 1 
EVERYBODY'S GUIDE 
By mail, 50 cents postpaid 
12 mo.; 410 pages; paper cover. 
Comprising valuable information and more than 
3,000 recipes and tables, for all classes of workers, 
from the household to the factory. Agents wanted. 
Quick seller. 
H . E . CLAR K 
309 East 119th Street New York, N . Y . 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 255 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. We have 
for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses an ' barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
Cit y property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Large 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
'N o investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Land s are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. Fo r any investment in Texas property, write T . B . Madiso n Real 
Estate Company, 2415 El m Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
*• $30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing centers—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Ca n sell you a 
house for $50, $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. Fo r investment and - speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Far m land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. An y of these are in good locations. 
Writ e for further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Real Estat e 
1218 1/2, Mt Verno n Ave . Columbus . Ohi o 
Canada, Province of 
British Columbia 
WANTED — T o hear from one hundred 
respectable colored families who desire to 
settle in Britis h Columbia, where I have 
four hundred acres of rich black loam 
garden land, all cleared, that I will subdivide into five-acre blocks, build good 
comfortable homes of two to ten rooms, 
barns, sheds, etc. This property is near 
Vancouver , with railway, electric lines and 
water transportation conveniently near; 
located on the best salmon-fishing stream in 
the world; an abundance of game, wild duck, 
pheasant, quail, deer, etc. The section around 
is well populated and very rich and valuable. 
Maps with plans, etc., now ready. Be 
prepared to make your selection upon receipt 
of same, for the number of these blocks is 
limited. A very small cash^payment will be 
required, balance to ru n five years. Fo r full 
particulars, etc., write me at once. 
ANDREW J . NAPIER 
Real Estate and Insurance 
736 Nelson St., Vancouver, B . C. 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 8985 Open Al l Night 
RODNEY DAD E & BROS . 
Undertaker s and Embalmers 
Notary Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 West 63d Street New York , N . Y . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
MOVING 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
Formerl y Manage r Virgini a Transfe r Company 
169 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Orders by mai l or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V . B. A . 
INVESTMENT S 
Invest You r Money 
in Mound Bayou 
We are promoting and financing The 
People's Brick Company, one of the 
most-needed and best-paying enterprises in the town. 
OU R REFERENCE : TH E 
BAN K O F MOUN D BAYOU , 
O R AN Y CITIZEN . 
YOU R MONE Y will earn 7 per 
cent, from the time it is invested, and 
much more in the very near future. 
For complete information address 
The S. I. & E. Corporation 
MOUND BAYOU, MISS. 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
Mention. TH E CRISIS. 256 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 2 6 Vesey Street, New York. Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911 
OFFICERS 
National President—Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland, New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Directo r of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bols, New York . 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Childs Nerney, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Marth a Gruening , New 
York . 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
2000 
OUR 
CLOCK 
MEMBERSHIP 
1500 • 500 
755 August 15,1912, 
•JOIN US 
100 0 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
.: paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors^ paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 
per year. 
Class 4. Contributing Members, paying $10, 
$5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members,, paying $1 per 
year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annua l 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O • NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 257 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Te n Year s with Dr . D . C. Whit e 
Telephone 7189 Morningside 
DR. JAME S A. BANK S 
DENTIS T 
204 WES T 133d STREET , NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crow n and Bridg e Wor k a Specialty 
Pur e Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k Cit y 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Unio n Block, Fourt h and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counselor-it-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probat e Matter s a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Office: Room 502, Eberl y Block, Columbus, O 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
PAMPHLET S 
Published and sold by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. African Civilization: B y M . D . Mac ­
lean. Pric e 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
B y Burt G. Wilder. Pric e 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: B y Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Pric e 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: B y Briga ­
dier-General Burt, U . S. A . Pric e 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Pric e 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Pric e 2 cents. 
7. Disfranchisement: B y Joh n Hayne s 
Holmes. Pric e 5 cents. 
8. Contribution of the Negro to Human 
Civilization: B y Dr. A . F . Chamberlain. 
Pric e 15 cents. 
9. The Relation of the Negroes to the 
Whites in the South: B y W . E . B. D u Bois. 
Pric e 15 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 258 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
B y 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapter I. Ho w the colored people wo n their civil and politica l rights. 
Chapters II. and III. Th e Negr o tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living , wit h a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . Th e colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivi d description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. .' 
Chapter VIII . Th e Negr o in politics in Ne w York . 
Chapter IX . Th e author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Department of The Crisis, 26 Vese y St., N . Y . 
Make Your Spare Moments 
Profitable 
€fl The continued growth of TH E CRISIS necessitates the extension of 
our field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish 
sub-agencies and look after renewals. 
If you can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
in your city, we can make you a proposition that will interest you. The 
work is dignified as well as profitable. 
=== ^ == ^^ =
 ADDRESS BUSINESS MANAGER == ^ === ^ = 
TH E CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS . BES T BOOK S 
Fo r students of the Negr o Proble m and genera l readers. You r librar y wil l 
be incomplet e withou t a selection from this up-to-date list. 
Thes e are book s produce d by the best writers and most able authoritie s o n 
the problems affecting the races. B y mai l at followin g prices: 
ESSAY S 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . 
Kell y Mille r $2.15 
SOUL S OF BLAC K POLK . 
W . Ε. B . D u Bois 1.35 
CURS E 0Γ RAC E PREJUDICE . 
Jas. P . Morton , Jr 27 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y STUDIES 
Th e Atlant a Universit y Studie s are an 
annua l study of decennially recurrin g sub 
jects, covering every phase of Negro-American life. 
No. 7 — TH E NEGR O ARTISA N $ .75 
No. 8 — TH E NEGR O CHURC H 1.50 
No . 9—NOTE S O N NEGR O CRIME. . .50 
No . 10 — BIBLIOGRAPH Y OF TH E 
NEGRO-AMERICA N 25 
No. 11 — HEALT H AN D PHYSIQU E 
O F TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N 1.50 
No . 12 — ECONOMI C CO-OPERATIO N 
AMON G NEGRO-AMERICAN S 1.00 
No . 13 — TH E NEGR O - AMERICA N 
FAMIL Y 75 
No. 14 — EFFORT S FO R SOCIA L 
BETTERMEN T AMON G NEGRO -
AMERICAN S 75 
No. 15 — TH E COLLEGE-BRE D NEGRO -
AMERICA N 75 
No . 16 — TH E NEGR O COMMO N 
SCHOO L 75 
FICTION 
QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE . 
W . Ε. B . Du Bois $1.50 
FLOWE R Ο' TH E PEACH . 
Perciva l Gibbo n 1.15 
MARRO W O F TRADITION . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.65 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E WIF E O F HI S YOUTH . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E CONJUR E WOMAN . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.40 
SPOR T OF TH E GODS . 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.65 
TH E TESTIN G FIRE . 
Alexande r Corkey - 1.35 
WISDOM' S CALL . 
Sutton E . Griggs 60 
POEMS 
LYRIC S OF LOWL Y LIFE . 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r $1.40 
LYRIC S OF TH E HEARTH-SIDE . 
Pau l Laurence Dunba r 1.40 
LYRIC S OF LOV E AN D LAUGHTER . 
Pau l Laurence Dunba r 1.40 
LYRIC S OF SUNSHIN E AN D SHADOW . 
Pau l Laurence Dunba r 1.40 
POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . . . . 1.10 
HISTORICA L AN D SCIENTIFIC 
NEGR O I N TH E SOUTH . 
Washington and D u Bois $1.10 
NEGR O I N TH E NE W WORLD . 
Sir Harr y Johnston 6.30 
MIN D OF PRIMITIV E MAN . 
Fran z Boaz . 1.65 
INTER-RACIA L PROBLEMS . 
Official Record, Univ . R. C. . . . 2.55 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGR O RACE . 
E . A . Johnson 1.40 
NEGR O EXPLORE R A T TH E NORT H 
POLE . 
Matthew A . Henson 1.10 
SUPPRESSIO N O F TH E SLAV E 
TRADE . 
W. Ε. B . D u Bois 1.65 
BIOGRAPHIES, ETC . 
JOH N BROWN . 
W . Έ . B . D u Bois $1.40 
FREDERIC K DOUGLASS . 
Booke r T. Washington 1.40 
LIF E OF HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE . 
B y her son and grandson 1.65 
U P FRO M SLAVERY . 
Booke r T. Washington 1.65 
AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX -
COLORE D MAN . 
(Anonymous) 1.40 
SOCIAL STUDIES 
HALF-A-MAN . 
M . W . Ovington $1.12 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . 
W. A . Sinclair 1.65 
SOUTHER N SOUTH . 
Albert B . Hart 1.65 
RAC E PREJUDICE . 
J . Fino t 3.25 
NEGR O AN D TH E NATION . 
G . C. Merriam 1.92 
FRE E 
Shoul d yo u at any 
time require specia l in ­
formatio n concernin g 
books, authors or publishers, WRIT E US . 
Ou r locatio n give s us 
the opportunit y to 
rende r this service to 
our man y patrons. 
This service is FREE . 
SPECIAL OFFER Ad d 75 cents to the 
regula r pric e quoted 
for any of these book s an d we wil l send yo u TH E 
CRISI S for one yea r an d one CRISI S cove r design, 
printe d o n plai n paper, for framing . Siz e 8 1/2 χ 11. 
Address all orders to the 
MAI L ORDE R DEPARTMEN T 
TH E CRISI S 
26 Vesey Street New Yor k City 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. This magnificent hotel, replete with every modern improvement, claims distinction for its location ; 
direct Southern exposure. Superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. 
Endorsed by leading representative citizens. 
Concerts daily by the Abyssinia orchestra. Garage, bathhouses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special 
attention given to ladies and children. Literature and information mailed upon request. 
E . W . DALE , Cap e May , N . J„ Owne r an d Proprieto r 
PRINTIN G IS AR T 
It is not expensive machinery and high-grade paper stock alone, 
but it is those things plus correct type formations and artistic blending 
of colors with textures combined with superior workmanship. 
Progressive business men appreciate the busmess-buildmg qualities 
of stationery, catalogues and printed things produced in our shop. 
Mr . Condé Nast, of Vogue, Dr. W. Ε. B . D u Bois, of T H E 
CRISIS, and Prof. J. E . Spingarn are among our satisfied patrons. 
Write for samples and quotations. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 