VACATIO N NUMBE R 
TH E CRISIS 
Volume Four AUGUST , 1912 Number Four 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y Ou r Heroes of Destiny" 
Honorables Frederick Douglass, John M . Langston, Blanche K. Bruce, Paul Laurence 
Dunbar and Booker T. Washington 
I desire to thank the reader s 
of TH E CRISI S an d m y large 
numbe r of friends for thei r 
ver y enthusiasti c suppor t and 
appreciation of the Specia l 
Editio n of "OU R HEROE S O F 
DESTINY. " 
POPULA R EDITIO N 
Whil e the order s for the 
Specia l Editio n have been most 
gratifying , there has been a 
constant deman d for a cheape r 
one. 
I n response to these numer ­
ous requests I am glad to announc e that a Popula r Editio n 
is on the press. I n producin g 
this Editio n there is neithe r a 
sacrifice of qualit y no r workmanship, as I was fortunat e i n 
securing a specially processed 
paper , which wil l defy even the 
eyes of an exper t in distinguishing it from the Specia l Edition . 
Th e pric e of the Popula r 
Editio n is fifty cents, postpaid. The S
JAPA N VELLUM , will, by no 
means, be discontinued, and those 
of the particular sort who desire 
may have one forwarded to them for 
One Dollar, postpaid. 
INDIVIDUA L PORTRAIT S 
Th e Individua l Portraits are 
beautiful gravures, 11 b y 14 
inches, handsomel y mounted 
and ready for framing . Price , 
fifty cents. 
A partia l list of those now 
ready include s : 
Frederick Douglass 
Booker T. Washington 
Mrs. Booker T. Washington 
Blanche K. Bruce 
John M. Langston 
W. Ε. B. Du Bois 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 
Rev. C. T. Walker 
Judson W. Lyons 
T. Thomas Fortune 
This illustration is protected by copyright. Any infringement 
will be prosecuted 
"OU R HEROE S O F DESTINY " 
TESTIMONIALS 
Rev. Dr . R . C . Ransom, Ne w Yor k City , says: 
"You r splendid production of 'Ou r Heroe s 
of Destiny' marks the era of perpetuating 
characteristic and faithful likenesses of the 
famous men and women of our own race, to 
be handed down to younge r generations, inspiring them with ideals which if carefully nurtured 
in their young lives will in their matur e ages 
prove excellent examples of pure and dignified 
manhood and womanhood. 
"N o home where there is a child should be 
without a copy of this excellent work, and no 
parent that feels the love and loyalty of higher 
race development should fail to teach the 
children of their homes the meaning of the 
lives of these five men." 
Mrs. Β. K . Bruce , Washington, D . C , says: 
"I am indeed glad to say that Ou r Heroe s 
of Destiny' is the most creditable work of 
art that has yet been produced of and for our 
people. Th e life likeness of the entire group 
is exceedingly good. It is a fitting memorial 
worthy to be in every home. 
"If we are to perpetuate the memories of 
our own great men, it must be by keeping 
their portraits ever before our youth, and 
familiarizing them with the true meaning of 
their lives. 
AGENTS — Her e is a propositio n that wil l net yo u a substantia l monthl y income , 
whethe r yo u devote all or spare time to it. M y extensive advertising ; creatin g a deman d for these pictures, insures quick sales, and their superior qualit y 
make s each purchase r a satisfied customer. YO U woul d be interested to 
kno w ho w I trai n m y agents by correspondenc e an d mak e them successful 
salesmen. Writ e for particulars. 
C
. M. BATTEY, ARTIS T AN D PUBLISHE R 
322 Mott Avenue New York City 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS , TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
26 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W. E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS, Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertising Manager 
Subscription: $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Subscription! 
to begin with current issue or changes of address must reach us before the 15th of the previous month. 
CONTENT S FO R AUGUS T 
PAGE 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 163 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 170 
OPINIO N 174 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 177 
EDITORIA L 180 
WHA T T O REA D • 183 
MAR Y DUNLO P MACLEA N 184 
VACATIO N DAY S 186 
TH E SERVANT . By Fenton Johnson 189 
LESSON S FRO M RUSSIA. By I. M . Rubinow 191 
TH E BURDE N 196 
HISTORI C DAY S IN AUGUST . By L. M . Hershaw 197 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. Entered as second-class matter in the P. 0. at N . Y. City 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
r. . * i J . MA X BARBE R 
Contributing J CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
cditors W.S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practical method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course in 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choi r of Chicago, Ill., whose choir ha s 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 20, 1912: 
"Dea r Mr . Tinsley : 
"I take great pleasure in commending your 
very useful and succinctly written hook on 'Tone -
Placing and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of th e psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the ar t you have cleverly reduced to a simple system. 
' 'Cordially yours, 
"Fathe r WILLIA M J . FINN , C. S. P.. 
"Directo r Paulist Choristers of Chicago."' 
Price $1. Address th e publisher: 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
or Clayton F. Summy, 64-66 E . Va n Buren .St. 
(8teinway Hall Bldg.), and Lyo n & Healy, Adams 
ami Wabash Sts., Chicago, Ill. 
The 
Quest 
of the 
Silver 
Fleece 
A NOVEL 
by 
W. E . BURGHARD T 
DU BOIS 
Drawings by 
H . S. D E LA Y 
Her e is a story of the darker world 
in the South and in Washington, D. 
C. It is dramatic in style and absorbing in interest and expresses the 
feeling of colored people about themselves and their own problems; at the 
same time it shows how both black 
folk and white are caught in the 
power of Kin g Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORE S 
PRIC E $1.3 5 NE T 
A . C . McCLUR G & CO . 
New York Chicago San Francisco 
The NEGR O AN D TH E 
ELECTIVE FRANCHISE 
No. 11. Occasional Papers 
AMERICA N NEGR O ACADEM Y 
An Opinion Worth While. 
"I find more patriotism and statesmanship 
in this pamphlet by colored men than in 
all the contributions made on the subject 
by white men since the Civi l War. " 
A . E . PlLLSBURY . 
Inclose 35 cents to 
J . W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann Street. N . W . Washington. D . C. 
PUBLICATION S 
A. M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price. $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: What 
It Is Not and What It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T G. Steward, 
Chaplain U. S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . Jackion, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price, 75 
cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study in 
Economic History. B y H . R. Wright, Jr. , Sometime 
Research Fellow in Sociology in the University of 
Pennsylvania. Price , Paper, $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pine Street. Philadelphia. Pa . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A G . DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta. Ga. 
GREA T CALAMIT Y I N 
PHILADELPHI A SOCIET Y 
"Who's Who In Philadelphia" 
Latest and greatest book of the season. 
Biographic sketches and cuts of leading 
colored citizens, with illustrations of their 
principa l institutions, and other valuable 
information. 208 pages. B y Charles Fred. 
White , author of "PLE A O F TH E NEGR O 
SOLDIER " and a hundred other poems. 
Introduction by Dr. R. R. Wright, Jr. 
PRICE , $2.00 
Chas. Fred White 
1508 Lombard Street, Philadelphia 
Mention TH E CRISIS, TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 161 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for Negro 
Youth which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve Industries, 180 Acres of beautiful campus, Ten 
Buildings. • Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough -training of teachers. 
Fal l term begins September, 1012. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM. A. JOINER. Superintendent, C. N. I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Qa . 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA , OA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
'Fall Term Begins September, 1912. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, 
modern curriculum. 
of high standards and 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. • 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
The largest colored college in the South. 
A new department of sociology and social 
service. A notable equipment in land and 
buildings. Endorsed by the General Education Board. For information address 
GEORG E A . GATES , President 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 162 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man 
============ = ANONYMOU S ===== = 
A book unique in the annals of the Negro race. A s a document it 
reads more strangely than fiction. 
Professor Charles Alexander, the well-known lecturer, says of the 
book: 
"It should have a wide reading among the Negroes of this country because it 
tells the story of a soul-life of the race in an inimitable manner, by a member of 
the race who has lived two lives, or in two worlds, the black and the white." 
Although just off the press, the book has already created much interest and the attention of the press, secular and religious, Negro and 
white, has at once centered upon it. W e quote briefly three well-known 
papers: 
" A unique publication of surpassing interest to our people."—Cleveland Gazette. 
"A n intensely interesting and exceedingly able portrayal of the experiences of a 
man in an exceptional situation, and with very unusual opportunities to observe 
the condition of the colored race in this country."—Zion's herald. 
"The most wonderful story of self-revelation, either in fact or fiction, that has 
been published in many years."—Springfield (Mass.) Union. 
210 pages; handsomely bound in cloth; $1.30 postpaid 
SHERMAN , FRENC H & COMPANY , Publishers 
6 BEACO N STREET, BOSTO N 
Avery College Training Schools 
NORT H SIDE , PITTSBURGH , PA. 
A superior training school for young colored women, thoroughly instructing 
its students as a means of self-support in dressmaking, cutting and drafting, domestic 
science, music, nurse training, millinery, and an intermediate English course. This 
institution is under the influence of no religious denomination, is the oldest endowed 
chartered Negr o institution in America . Th e accommodations in its dormitory, 
which is in charge of a competent matron, are excelled by no colored institution 
in this country. 
Th e hospital department offers the same course as the large hospitals of the 
State of Pennsylvania, fully equipped with its operating rooms, diet kitchen and 
ambulance service. Th e course requires three years' lectures on general nursing, 
anatomy, ethics, surgery, obstetrics, asepsis, antiseptics, gynecology, pediatrics, eye, 
nose, throat, materia medica, therapeutics and dietetics under a staff of white and 
colored physicians. Catalogues now ready. 
Address all communications to 
JOSEP H D. MAHONEY , Secretary 
Bo x 154 Nort h Side , Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Volume Four AUGUST , 1912 Number Four 
ALON G 
COLOR LINE 
ECONOMICS. 
ACCORDIN G to the Coming Nation, at 
the second annual convention of the 
Brotherhood of Timber Workers, nearly one 
hundred delegates were present, representing 
local unions i n the States of Texas, Louisiana, 
Arkansa s and Florida . Fraterna l delegates 
representing the Farmers' Unio n and the 
Industrial Workers of the Worl d were present. On every issue the convention was progressive to the core, and was an epoch-making event i n the history of the Southern 
working class. 
No longer di d the bugaboo of "nigger 
domination" disturb the workers, and they 
seemed to have forgotten entirely that such 
a thing as a "damned foreigner" ever existed. Native-born whites, Italians, Mexicans and Negroes all stood together i n one 
solid phalanx of workers fighting against 
the peon kings of the South, who are among 
the worst exploiters of labor on the face of 
the globe to-day. 
Fro m a trustworthy source we learn that 
colored and white timber workers have been 
organized i n mixed locals, and this despite 
the fact that i n some of the Southern States 
the laws prohibit public gatherings of black 
and white. 
<J Despite the law prohibiting "night ridin g 
and other riotous conspiracies," written 
notice was given the Negroes employed by 
J . H . Whippl e and Joe Stidham, planters 
i n Craighead County, Ark. , to leave the 
county. 
The residents objected to the Negroes being brought into the community to work, and. 
boldly signed their names to notices that 
were served upon them to depart "instanter 
and never return." The Negroes reported 
the matter to Whippl e and Stidham, who 
laid the proposition before the prosecuting 
attorney, being determined, i f possible, to 
protect their labor from unlawful intimida ­
tion. Forty-six arrests followed. 
The farmers say they were unable to obtain white labor, and i n order to protect 
their interests imported Negro labor. The 
officers announce that they wil l see to it that 
the Negroes are not harmed "so long as they 
attend to their own business." 
Nine of the forty-six men arrested were 
released by the justice of the peace to whom 
the case was referred, it having been proven 
that a few names were signed by persons 
without authority, while others signing were 
mere boys. O f the thirty-seven bound over 
in $500 bail to await the action of the grand 
jur y i n November, two are ministers, one a 
deputy sheriff and one a constable. Al l the 
defendants gave bond. 
C Secretary of Agricultur e Wilso n announces that during the present year the 
farmers' co-operative demonstration work of 
the Bureau of Plant Industry wil l have 
thirty-two Negro agents i n the field. 
<& The United Garage Company, capitalized 
at $15,000, is the name of a new corporation 
which has recently been organized in Boston. 
Its object is to build, maintain and lease 164 TH E CRISIS 
buildings for the storage and keeping and 
repairing of automobiles and other motor 
vehicles, and also to sell and operate the same. 
A tract of land has been purchased on 
Mino n Street, Back Bay , at a cost of 
$0,000, on which to put the necessary buildings of the plant. 
9 Another recent financial institution added 
to the fifty-odd banks already i n successful 
operation among the Negroes of this country 
is the Lincol n State Savings Bank , corner 
of 31st and State Streets, Chicago, Ill. It 
opened its doors for business the morning 
of -May 6 under very favorable conditions. 
<J One thousand four hundred Negroes are 
employed in the Treasury Department, receiving salaries that aggregate more than 
$1,000,000 yearly. 
<J The thirteenth annual meeting of the 
Nationa l Negro Business League wil l be held 
in Chicago Wednesday, Thursday and Fri ­
day, August 21, 22 and 23. The local 
Negro Business League of Chicago has secured the Seventh Regiment armory for the 
sessions. 
EDUCATION. 
THE Hampto n Negro conference took 
place on Jul y 17 and 18 at Hampto n 
Institute. The needs of Negro rura l life, 
progress in hygiene and sanitation, the minister and the community were among the 
subjects discussed. 
<J The problem of health and the decreasing 
birth rate were thoroughly discussed at the 
Tuskegee summer school conference. 
<J The summer school at Nashville, Tenn., 
of the Agricultura l and Industrial State 
Norma l School recently erected by the State 
of Tennessee for the benefit of Negroes is 
proving popular with the colored people of 
the State and country. Full y 250 teachers 
from all sections of this State and from 
Alabama , Mississippi, Arkansas, Georgia, 
Oklahoma, Nort h Carolina and Missouri are 
attending the summer school. 
«J The thirteenth annual session of the State 
summer school for Negro teachers at the 
Agricultura l and Mechanical College, Greensboro, N . C , opened with the largest and 
most representative attendance of Negro 
teachers ever assembled at the college. 
<J Dr. W . E. B . D u Bois lectured during 
Jul y at the summer school at West Virgini a 
Institute and at the Nationa l Religious 
Trainin g School at Durham, N . C. 
•I Dr. Charles H . Parkhurst of New Yor k 
spoke at the commencement exercises of the 
National Religious Trainin g School at Durham, N . C. H e laid great emphasis upon 
vigor and robustness of character, which he 
declared were "made, not born. " Hundreds 
of teachers are attending the Chautauqua at 
Durham, and Dr. James H . Dillar d and 
Professor Kell y Mille r have been among the 
lecturers. 
<I The Negro Teachers' Institute which met 
at Montgomery, Ala. , is obligatory for teachers i n the public schools of the city and the 
county. Al l such teachers must attend for 
four days or have their State license withdrawn. 
A t the thirtieth annual meeting of the 
Georgia Association of Teachers i n Colored 
Schools, Professor P . C. Parks, director of 
agriculture at Clar k University, made a 
strong plea for agricultural education. 
"Wher e the people are most prosperous and 
agriculture is at its best," he said, "the 
farmers own the land they till . I n Denmark 
eighty-nine out of every one hundred of the 
farmers own the land they cultivate; in 
Germany eighty-seven out of every hundred 
own the land they cultivate; and in Belgium 
eighty out of every hundred of the farmers 
own the land they till. Bu t the reverse is 
true with the farmers i n Georgia ; sixty-five 
out of every hundred farmers rent their land, 
and eighty-five out of every hundred of the 
Negro farmers rent the land they cultivate, 
and seventy-five out of every hundred of 
these renters move every year. A man cannot be a good farmer i f he moves every 
year because it takes two years, and sometimes three, to grow some of the profitable 
crops." 
Professor Park s told of the formation of 
the Atlant a Federation of Schools for the 
Improvement of Negro Country Life . "The 
schools which are thus fa r i n this movement," 
he said, "are Atlant a University, Clar k Uni ­
versity, Atlant a Baptist College, Spelman 
Seminary, Gammon Theological Seminary 
and Morris Brow n College. 
" A twofold purpose is stated i n the constitution of this organization: First, to ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 165 
stimulate and encourage self-help among the 
Negroes; second, to co-operate with the people of the State and of the South in the improvement of farms and farm life. 
"One immediate line of procedure determined upon is the forming of corn clubs 
among the Negro boys of the State. The 
results of only a few weeks' work show nine 
counties definitely organized with an enrollment of 322 boys as active contestants and 
three or four more counties i n the process of 
organization with good promise of success. 
"It is further proposed as a result of this 
work that a corn show be held this fall i n 
Atlant a as a demonstration of the results 
secured by this movement. The federation 
has provided $200 to be given i n prizes to 
the boys who are successful contestants i n 
producing the largest amount of corn on an 
acre of ground. " 
Q Another large industrial school for colored 
boys and girls, modeled closely after Tuskegee Institute, has been started near St. Louis. 
Its president is Dr. W . Alexande r D . 
Venerable, a colored graduate of the University of Kansa s and the Kansa s Agricultura l 
School. The board of trustees is composed 
of well-known white business men i n St. 
Louis. Afte r investigating the plans for the 
new school, the Carnegie Foundation, it is 
reported, has promised to give $100,000 to 
the school when it has raised its first 
$100,000. Mr . Adolphu s Busch of St. Louis, 
Mr . Julius Rosenwald of Chicago and others 
have contributed generously toward its 
endowment. 
Mother Superior Katherine Drexel, 
founder of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament for Indians and Colored People, and 
a member of the Drexe l family of Phila ­
delphia, wil l establish a parochial school for 
Negro children i n the Harlem Negro colony 
in New York . The school is to be on 132d 
Street, between Lenox and Seventh Avenues, 
and wil l be ru n by Mother Drexe l out of the 
income of $6,000,000 left to her by her 
father. 
<J Afte r a lengthy and at times acrimonious 
debate, the House of Representatives recently passed a bill conveying to the board of 
education of New Hanove r County, N . C , 
thirty-four acres of land i n the city of Wil ­
mington for the erection of an industrial 
school for Negroes. 
POLITICAL. 
i SENATO R FRANCI S G. NEWLAN D of 
Nevada submitted to the committee on 
resolutions at the Democratic convention at 
Baltimore a constitutional amendment that 
would disfranchise the Negro, and bar the 
yellow races from entrance to the country, 
except for temporary purposes. 
"Experience having demonstrated," reads 
the plank, "the folly of investing an inferior 
race with which amalgamation is undesirable 
with the right of suffrage and the folly of 
admitting to our shores peoples differing in 
color with whom amalgamation is undesirable, we declare that our constitution should 
be so amended as to confine the right of 
suffrage i n the future to people of the white 
race and we favor a law prohibiting the 
immigration to this country of all peoples 
other than those of the white race, except 
for temporary purposes of education, travel 
or commerce." 
1 Charles Edwar d Russell is nominated for 
governor of New Yor k on the Socialist 
ticket. Mr . Russell is one of the founders of 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a contributing 
editor of TH E CRISIS. 
•J The delegation to the Nationa l Independent League i n Philadelphi a refused to adopt 
the report of the executive committee condemning Theodore Roosevelt and President 
Taft as unfriendly to the true interests of 
the colored race, and asking the colored population of the United States "to stand back 
of the presidential candidate most available 
to the defeat of the ex-President and the man 
who was his Secretary of Wa r at the time 
of the Brownsville affair." ; 
Upon this refusal a number of the delegates bolted. 
The bolters are made up of some of the 
charter members of the league and hold 
offices i n the organization. Amon g them are 
J. M . Waldron , Washington, the first president of the league, and its national organizer 
for three terms; Willia m M . Trotter, Boston, 
editor of the Guardian, the official organ of 
the league; Willia m D . Johnson, second vicepresident; Byro n Gunner, New Yor k State, 
fourth vice-president; Emor y T. Morris, 
Cambridge, Mass., national committeeman. 
They are all charter members. 
The league has decided to appoint a committee to wait upon the three presidential 166 . TH E 
candidates and to put the following questions to them: 
''Ar e yo u i n favor of equal rights and 
opportunities for colored citizens, and will 
you contend for them i f elected?" 
''Ar e you opposed to lynching and lawlessness, and wil l you, i f elected, labor to 
make lynching a crime against the national 
constitution punishable by the federal government ?" 
"Wil l you use every effort to have Ji m 
Crow car laws and disfranchisement amendments to the State constitutions abolished?" 
<I Representatives of the Nationa l Colored 
Democratic League, an organization of colored Democratic clubs, with members as fa r 
west as Colorado, and as far south as Mississippi, met i n conference at Baltimore June 
25, and remained i n the city until the adjournment of the national Democratic convention. Bishop Alexande r Walters of the 
A . M . E . Zion Church, president of the 
league, presided. 
A t the national Democratic convention 
Bishop Walters and Mr . Robert N . Wood , 
representing the New Yor k members, and the 
Rev. J. Milto n Waldron , representing the 
National Independent Politica l League, presented the following resolution from the 
Democratic platform of 1872, asking that it 
be inserted, as a plank i n the present 
Democratic platform: 
"We recognize the equality of all men before the law, and hold that it is the duty 
of the government in its dealing with all the 
people to mete out equal and exact justice 
to all, of whatever nativity, race, color or 
persuasion, religion or politics." 
Bishop Walters, who read the resolution, 
was received with every mark of courtesy 
by the resolutions committee. H e spoke for 
five minutes, urging the necessity for a really 
Democratic government and the breaking 
down of all barriers which would keep the 
two races from a common effort to uplift 
humanity. 
Rev. Mr . Waldro n said that the colored 
men he represented realized the time was ripe 
for a Democratic victory and urged the in ­
sertion of a plank in the platform deploring 
lynching. 
Mr . Woo d prefaced his remarks by saying 
that he was not speaking for the colored man 
but for his country. H e addressed himself 
especially to the Southern members i n his 
CRISIS 
effort to show them that by retarding the 
colored man's progress they were really 
working an injur y to themselves. H e emphasized the point that the colored America n 
wanted no favors, no privileges, simply 
"justice." 
PERSONAL. 
HOWAR D P . DRE W of Springfield, 
A
 Mass., owing to a sprained thigh 
muscle, was unable to run in the finals of the 
100-metre flat race at the recent Olympi c 
games. 
HOWAR D P. DRE W 
Hopin g against hope that he might be 
able to start, Drew donned his running togs 
and went out to the starting post, but had 
to be helped back. 
"Tough luck, " said a well-known American, standing nearby, and many who heard 
him answered: "It is. " 
Drew was a warm favorite i n this event. 
Michae l J. Murphy , official trainer of the 
American Olympi c team, said: "It was unfortunate that the little colored boy Drew 
broke down. But for that unfortunate happening I believe he would have proven 
America's greatest sprinter since the days of 
Wefers. I say this without underestimating 
Craig's fine running. " ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 167 
The Reverend Henr y L . Phillips, D . D. , 
of Philadelphia , has been appointed archdeacon for church extension among the colored race i n the diocese of Pennsylvania, the 
first appointment of its kind north of Mason 
and Dixon's line. 
Dr. Phillips' entire ministry has been spent 
in Philadelphia . 
TH E GHETTO. 
TO protest against the placing of a 
Negro woman i n the city jai l of Topeka, 
Kan. , the white occupants of the cell set 
fire to a mattress i n the middle of the room 
and nearly suffocated themselves with the 
smoke before the warden heard their outcry 
and opened the door. 
<J A great deal of discussion has been going 
on i n St. Louis relative to the proposed 
segregation of Negroes, and an ordinance 
confining the colored people to certain sections of the city and excluding them from 
other parts wil l be submitted shortly to the 
municipal assembly. 
9 A t Luling , Tex., a number of Negroes received notice warnin g them either to vacate 
their buildings or to leave the town permanently. The notices were all written on the 
same kin d of paper, i n the same handwriting 
and signed A x Man , Majorit y and Gamge 
No . 25. Some of the Negroes began to move 
out of their buildings immediately. The officers have the matter under investigation, but 
have failed to find any clue as to who are 
the guilty parties. 
•1 The Dominican Congress of San Domingo 
has passed an immigration law which admits 
only white persons as settlers. Other immigrants may enter only with the consent of 
the government. 
CRIME. 
ON June-25 a colored woman was lynched 
at Pinehurst, Ga . A n account is given 
under "The Burden. " 
«J The lynching of the Negro woman who 
killed her white mistress at Pinehurst, Ga., 
was deplored by President Taft. H e believes 
all implicated i n the lynching should be 
punished. 
" I cannot speak too strongly of my utter 
detestation of the crime of lynching, " said 
the President. " I do not know the circumstances of the lynching of the Negro woman 
at Pinehurst, Ga., but I greatly deplore it. 
" I do not know any remedy for such lawlessness except a better general enforcement 
of the crimina l law and the punishment of 
those engaged i n the lynching. " 
9 On June 13, near Rochelle, i n Wilco x 
County, Ga., McHenry , a Negro who 
wounded a planter, C. S. Ritchie, was 
lynched. 
McHenr y was a tenant of Ritchie's and the 
two quarreled, the Negro shooting Ritchie, 
but not inflicting a serious wound. 
McHenr y was taken to the Ritchie home 
and identified by the wounded man. Then 
the mob of "leading citizens" hanged the 
Negro to a tree near the Ritchie home and 
cut the body to pieces with bullets. 
Whe n Ritchie was shot he was attacking 
the Negro because the latter was tardy in 
going to work. 
•I A Negro who has been i n prison i n Con ­
necticut for twenty years has just been 
pardoned, it having been discovered at this 
late day that he was innocent of the crime 
of which he was convicted. H e was convicted on circumstantial evidence. 
<J Dan . Kirk , a Negro, was set upon by six 
white men at the junction of the Edenborn 
and Baton Rouge and Hammon d Railroads, 
north of Baton Rouge. Kir k says the men 
were all under the influence of liquor and 
announced that they did not propose to let 
any Negroes prowl around at that time of 
night. They beat Kir k severely and shot him 
i n the neck as he fled. 
<I H . C. Matthews, a convict guard i n Robeson County, N . C , shot and perhaps fatally 
wounded an unknown Negro whom he 
thought to be an escaped convict. 
<J Because he testified against white liquor 
sellers i n this section, which is prohibition 
territory, Forest Boland, a Negro well known 
i n Lucedale, Miss., was shot to death by 
vigilantes. 
This testimony was given before the grand 
jury , and the sheriff's office is working upon 
the theory that the crime was due to this 
cause. The Negro, who was a prosperous 
small farmer until recently, when he moved 
into the town of Lucedale, generally was 
regarded as a good citizen, and had given 
liberally to help members of his race. It is 
stated that he used every effort to prevent 168 TH E CRISIS 
their being the victims of the "blin d tigers," 
so common i n this section. 
It is known that he went before the grand 
jur y with evidence against certain of these 
liquor dealers. Circumstances tend to show 
that late at night a message called Bolan d 
out i n front of his house. Neighbors heard 
a number of shots. Whe n Boland's body was 
found it was on the back gallery of his 
house, through which ran a trail of blood. 
<I Joh n Clark, a Negro i n the county workhouse near Marshall, Tenn., was beaten to 
death by the guard. Clar k was passing rocks 
and because he was slow i n his movements 
the guard struck him on the head with a 
hickory stick, dealing terrific blows. Clar k 
after this severe beating became dazed, and 
an hour later was beaten again by the guard. 
The second beating resulted i n his death. 
<J The San Francisco Bulletin tells the full 
story of the Negro murderer, Delhante: 
"Whe n white men, mad with race hatred, 
dragged an unoffending Negro lad from a 
grocery wagon on the streets of Joplin , Mo. , 
i n a riot nine years ago, and stamped on his 
head until they crushed it into a well-nigh 
shapeless pulp, they did more than mutilate 
a human being. They made Edwar d Delhante what he is to-day. They changed him 
into an irresponsible brute, nursing a dull 
hatred which, whenever the recurrent pains 
in his distorted head became unbearable, 
flamed into a passion for crime. 
"Society has not dealt kindl y with this 
broken man. A Negro-hating mob's heels 
ground out the human from his brain and 
made him akin to the beasts. Povertystricken, friendless, colored and marked with 
the brand of a felon, Delhante has been just 
something to kick and curse—something to 
loathe and abuse for over nine years of his 
wretched existence. 
"An d now Delhante has come to the end. 
H e is sentenced to be hanged, and, strange 
to say, he seems relieved. 
" A convict i n San Quentin, sent there for 
an unspeakable offense, he was shunned as 
a degenerate, and the bitterness of his ostracism poisoned what was left of his manhood. I n a delirium of hate he broke from 
the ranks i n the prison yard, leaped upon 
Willia m Kauffman and stabbed him to death. 
Then he turned his murderous weapon upon 
Willia m Peterson and wounded him so 
severely that, for a time, it was expected 
that he, too, would die." 
MEETINGS. 
THE fourth annual session of the Empir e 
State Federation of Women's Clubs was 
held the first week i n Jul y in New York . 
The sessions were largely attended. Amon g 
the speakers were Dr. George E . Haynes, of 
the Urba n Committee; A . L . Holsey, of the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, and others. The president, Mrs. Mar y B . Talbert, delivered her 
annual address. Wit h the exception of the 
treasurer, the officers were all re-elected for 
the ensuing year. 
9 The eleventh ^annual convention of the 
Ohio Federation of Colored Women's Clubs 
met i n Cleveland Jul y 3, 4 and 5. Delegates 
from all parts of the State • were i n 
attendance. 
The twelfth annual session of the Federation of Colored Women's Clubs of Kansa s 
was held i n Topeka June 19 and 20. Mrs. 
L . B . Harris, a former vice-president of the 
federation, was made president. 
*i Meetings to be held during the months of 
August and September are as follows: 
The Knights and Daughters of Tabor at 
Louisville, Ky. , August 27; the Nationa l 
Negro Business League at Chicago, on 
August 21 ; the Odd Fellows at Atlanta , Ga., 
September 10, and the Baptists at Houston, 
Tex., September 11. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE Negro fresh-air committee of New 
Yor k is raising $10,000 for a fresh-air 
and convalescent home for colored people. 
In its appeal it says: 
"There is no place where a large party of 
colored boys or girls between 6 and 12 1/2 
years may go for an outing, nor where a 
colored patient of any age, discharged from 
a hospital, may go at any time." 
«I The New Yor k Urba n Committee of the 
Nationa l League on Urba n Conditions 
Amon g Negroes is about to open an employment bureau. 
<I Headley Par k has been formally dedicated 
to the Negroes of Nashville, Tenn. 
*J The board of county commissioners recently decided that unless the city of Indianapolis and Harr y D . Tutweiler, playground 
commissioner, permit colored children 'to ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 169 
play i n the newly opened playground in the 
courthouse yard, the playground wil l have 
to go. 
''We do not believe i n showing any discrimination against colored children, " said 
Commissioner Kitley . "The playground is 
for all of the children and the city has no 
right to exclude colored children." 
MUSIC AND ART. 
ONE of the most significant musical events 
of the year, the annual music festival 
of the Litchfield County Chora l Union , 
was held at Norfolk , Conn., early i n June. 
Madame Mau d Powell, the distinguished 
violinist, played S. Coleridge-Taylor's new 
violin concerto, givin g the first public performance of this work. O f the concerto 
Musical America says: "It contains interesting melodic material and piquant 
rhythms." 
Anothe r contribution to the program was 
the cantata " A Tale of Ol d Japan, " written by Coleridge-Taylor. 
<J Miss Clarice A . Jones of Washington, 
D . C , was among the pianoforte pupils who 
graduated i n June from the Ithaca, N . Y. , 
Conservatory of Music . Miss Jones took a 
prominent part i n the Ma y recital. 
<J J . Elme r Spyglass, baritone, of Toledo, 
0., sailed June 15, from Rotterdam, Holland , 
to America . Afte r his graduation from the 
Toledo Conservatory of Music , Mr . Spy ­
glass went abroad, where he has* spent a 
number of successful years as a singer.-
<J Miss Sinclair Whit e of Chicago, Ill., who 
graduated June 18 from the Chicago Musica l 
College, took part i n the commencement program, playin g the first and second movements of Sitt's concertina i n A minor. Miss 
White , who is a violinist, was the winner of 
the diamond medal awarded i n the "teachers' 
certificate class." Accompanied by her 
mother she leaves shortly for Russia, where 
she is to have the advantage of five years' 
study. 
<J The graduating class of the New Englan d 
Conservatory of Music , Boston, Mass., in ­
cluded three colored students—Miss Beatrice 
Lewis, pianist, Washington, D . C. ; Miss 
Mar y R. Page, soprano, Langston, Okla., 
and Mr . Willia m Speights, tenor, Charleston, S. C. 
Miss Page an d Mr . Speights are the first 
colored students to graduate from the vocal 
department of the conservatory; both have 
done excellent work. Miss Page is a former 
graduate of Langston University, Oklahoma, 
an institute of which her father, Prof. Inman 
Page, is president. The colored schools of 
Chickasha, Okla., have secured Miss Page 
as instructor i n vocal music. 
Mr . Speights, who entered the conservatory as a graduate from the Edwar d Waten 
College i n Florida , wil l be engaged this fall 
i n concert work. 
<J Miss Helen Hagan, who graduated this 
year at the Yal e University School of Music , 
has for the third time won scholarships from 
this school. She has been awarded the Samuel Simons Sanford Fellowship, which provides for two years' study abroad. The 
fellowship was given for the best original 
composition. A t the concert given i n Ma y 
i n Woolsey Hall , Miss Haga n played her 
concerto i n C minor for piano and orchestra. 
She was accompanied by the New Haven 
Symphony Orchestra. 
Besides the prize concerto, Miss Haga n has 
to her credit a group of songs, pianoforte 
pieces, violin and piano sonatas and string 
quartets. 
<J A lecture and recital was given i n June 
i n Pittsburgh, Pa., at Carnegie Musi c Hall , 
by Madame E . Azali a Hackley, the wellknown soprano. 
Mrs. Eugeni a L . Prioleau is taking a postgraduate course at the New Yor k Conservatory of Music . Mrs. Prioleau conducts a 
school of music at Sumter, S. C. 
fll Durin g the month of June there was an 
exhibition at the Veerhoff art gallery i n 
Washington, D . C , of a bust of Dr. W . E . 
B . D u Bois, the work of Mrs. Ma y Howar d 
Jackson. 
Leil a Machlin , art critic, speaks of the 
bust i n the Washington Star. '"It has been 
pronounced an excellent likeness and is undoubtedly well modeled. The head is well 
placed on the shoulders, the expression is 
vital and good,.and the play of muscle, the 
turn of surface, the intimation of mobility 
are well rendered. Mrs. Jackson studied 
some years ago i n Philadelphi a under capable masters. He r work shows good teaching 
and, on the artist's part, real promise." JOANN A P. MOORE 
ONE of the figures prominent at the 
^"•^ Nationa l Association's Chicago conference was Miss Joanna P . Moore. Bor n i n 
1832 i n Clarion County, Pennsylvania, Miss 
Moore, from 1863 to the present day, has 
devoted herself to the uplift of the Negro 
race. She tells the story of her life of selfsacrifice and toil and deep spiritua l jo y i n 
a little book published by the Women's 
Baptist Home Missionary Society of Chicago, 
entitled "I n Christ's Stead." One sees i n 
it, as one sees i n her face, undiminished vigor 
and purpose. 
The most distinctive note i n Miss Moore's 
work has been her emphasis upon the trainin g of the parents i n the home. Before the 
Chautauqua movement she had a Chautauqua 
among the black people, of the South. 
He r Fireside Schools, as she called them, 
grew out of her experience as a teacher 
among the former slaves. She saw that in ­
struction must not stop with the school, the 
ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
church or the Sunday school, but must be 
continued about the fireside. So i n each 
place that she visited, through Alabama , 
Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi, Tennessee, 
she organized the parents i n associations and 
instructed them i n the fundamental ethics of 
the home. They promised to teach their 
children household work, to tr y to spend 
their money to make the home beautiful with 
books, pictures and music, rather than to 
use it i n outside pleasures. They were to 
study the Bibl e with their children, and 
prayerfully to strive to practice its precepts. 
A little paper entitled Hope, published 
first i n 1885, and continuing to the present 
time, keeps the various Fireside Schools i n 
touch with their founder. Through many 
vicissitudes this noble and courageous woman 
has continued her difficult task, and thousands of virtuous colored homes of the 
South owe their being to her influence. 
Besides her Fireside Schools she founded 
in New Orleans the Fait h Home for the Age d 
Colored. I n Bato n Rouge she conducted a 
boarding school for young colored girls, 
future "fireside mothers," but the vicious 
among the whites, jealous of the educated 
Negro, practised such horrible methods of 
intimidation that this school, for which she 
had received over $2,000 i n money, a great 
sum i n those early days, had to be given 
up. She opened a reading room when teachin g i n Morga n City , La. , placing it between 
two disreputable saloons, and brought many 
colored men into her home of temperance. 
Wherever she worked for the people she so 
dearly loved she gave them the highest that 
she knew. 
I n a recent letter to the editor of TH E 
CRISIS she says: 
"Send i n appeal and appeal against in ­
justice to those i n authority so intense and 
so urgent, and by so great a number, that 
they must needs listen to you. It seems to 
me that, comparatively speaking, only a very 
few care for those who suffer. They have ME N O F TH E MONT H 171 
not the courage to stand for the right and 
suffer. I have been i n the dark places and 
I know the neglected and suffering ones. 
The half has never been told, but it is far, 
far better than i n the days of slavery. There 
is a bright side; we must keep it in view 
or we will lose heart. The light has dawned, 
thank God! " 
STEPHE N MORREL L NEWMA N 
'T'H E presidency of Howar d University 
has been filled by Dr. Stephen Morrell 
Newman. Dr. Newman was born in West 
Falmouth, Me., i n 1845. H e graduated from 
Bowdoin College i n 1867 and from Andove r 
Theological Seminary i n 1871. Seventeen 
years later Bowdoin College conferred upon 
him the honorary degree of doctor of 
divinity. H e was pastor of the Congregational Church of Taunton, Mass., of the 
First Church at Ripon , Wis. , and of the 
First Congregational Church at Washington, 
D . C. I n 1906 he was elected to the presidency of Eastern College at Fort Royal, Va . 
H e resigned this position i n 1907 to become 
president of Ke e Ma r College for Women, 
Hagerstown, Md . 
Fro m 1880 to 1882 he was professor of 
mathematics and biology at Ripo n College, 
Wisconsin, and is a member of many 
scientific societies. 
A N INVESTIGATOR IN BIOLOGY. 
PROFESSO R ERNES T E . JUST , associate professor of biology in the 
College of Arts and Sciences of Howar d 
University, is attracting wide attention as 
an investigator. H e has just published in 
the Marc h number of the Biological Bulletin, the organ of the Marine Biological 
Laboratory of Wood's Hole , Mass., a paper 
on "The Relation of the First Cleavage 
Plane of the Entrance Point of the Sperm. " 
This article is illustrated by a number of 
drawings made by the author from livin g 
specimens and is the first of a series of 
studies of biological topics upon which Pro ­
fessor Just is engaged. Authorities i n this 
field believe that his investigations have settled the long standing dispute on the issue 
involved. 
Professor Just was born in Charleston, 
S. C. f i n 1883. H e received his early 
education i n private schools and at 
the Orangeburg State School. H e was 
ERNES T E . JUS T 
graduated from Dartmouth College i n 1907 
and at once entered the service of Howar d 
University as instructor, becoming later assistant and then associate professor. H e is 
on the list of authorized investigators o f the 
Wood's Hol e Laboratory, where he spends 
his vacations in research work. 172 TH E CRISIS 
THEODOR E CABL E 
THEODOR E CABL E graduated from the 
Shortridge Hig h School, Indianapolis, 
1908,, and from Phillips-Exete r Academy, 
1909. 
H e entered Harvar d i n 1909 and made the 
freshman team i n throwing the hammer and 
220-yard dash. H e won the Yal e freshman 
meet with a throw of 117 feet. Durin g his 
sophomore year he broke Harvard's record 
with a throw of 150 feet at the spring games 
and won against Yal e with 148 feet. H e 
was then chosen to go abroad, and that summer won third place against Oxford and 
Cambridge. 
I n his junior year he won the 56-pound 
championship for height i n Madison Square 
Garden, New York . A t the Dartmouth 
meet he made a throw of 154 feet 11 2/ 5 
inches, which not only set a dual-meet record 
but established a new Harvar d record. This 
Ma y i n the Yal e meet he won i n the hammer 
throw, 154 feet 11 1/4 inches, and also the 
broad jump of 22 feet 101/2 inches, and on 
June 1 he won first place i n the intercollegiates at Philadelphia , with a throw of 
162 feet 4 inches. 
H e is 21 years old and weighs 180 pounds. 
Cable counts as his staunch guide and 
friend Coach Quinn, whose sympathy and 
patience, combined with Cable's own tenacity 
and endurance, have brought such extraordinary success. 
Theodore Cable's mother, Mrs. Mar y E . 
Cable, is principa l of one of Indianapolis's 
most attractive grammar schools. She is a 
woman of splendid energy, good sense and 
keen knowledge of the needs of children. 
She has given her son every advantage at 
college. ME N O F TH E MONT H 
TH E LAT E EDWI N CLARENC E HOWAR D 
EDWI N CLARENC E HOWARD , M . D., 
who died at his home i n Philadelphia, 
Ma y 10, 1912, had a unique and useful 
career. H e was a native of Boston, as were 
his paternal forbears for several genera173 
tions. On bis mother's side he was a member 
of the well-known Turpi n family of New 
York . H e was born in 1846 and his school 
life was spent in his native city. In 1861 
he went to Liberi a and there studied under 
Alexander Crummell and Edwar d W . Blyden. 
H e returned to the United States i n 1866 
and entered the medical department of Harvard University, from which he graduated in 
1869. Upo n receiving his degree he was made 
surgeon in the Massachusetts militia , but he 
soon left for Charleston, S. C , where he 
practised at his profession, for three months. 
A t the close of the summer of 1869 he went 
to Philadelphia, where he remained, a practising physician, until his last sickness and 
death. 
Dr. Howar d ranked high i n his profession, and paved the way for the many successful physicians of his race in Philadelphia to-day. I n 1870, during a terrible 
smallpox epidemic, he never lost a case. I n 
1872 the great Dr. Gross, confirming Dr. 
Howard's diagnosis of an extremely difficult 
and complicated case, sent the colored physician a commendatory letter and a copy of 
his works. H e was a member of his county's 
medical society, and represented it at the 
physicians' national convention i n 1898. 
Dr. Howar d was one of Philadelphia's 
best citizens. H e was on the school board, 
a committeeman of the city's peace jubilee 
i n 1898, a founder of Mercy Hospital, an 
organizer of the Frederick Douglass Hospital, and ex-president and founder of the 
Citizens' Club. H e served at his profession 
faithfully and well for forty-three years. 
TH E LOVE R OF HIS COUNTR Y 
The following lines were written by James Russell Lowell in 1874 when justifying 
to a friend his years of bitter attack upon the institution of slavery: 
"I loved my country so as only they 
Wh o love a mother fit to die for may ; 
I loved her old renown, her stainless fame— 
Wha t better proof than that I loathed her shame?" "JI M CROW" " TH E
 NEGROES DOW N in 
MATTERS.
 THI S PAR T
 ° F TH E LAN D OF 
the free," writes the St. 
Luk e Herald of Richmond, Va. , "i f they do 
any traveling i n these hot days must feel 
deep resentment at the way i n which they 
are treated by nearly every road i n the 
South. It is a burning shame to compel 
Negroes to pay the same fare as that paid 
by white passengers, and then give them 
cattle-car accommodations. 
"I n these warm and perspiring days 
.•.Negroes are cooped up i n the smallest possible space i n one end of the baggage car. 
Bu t they are not even allowed to occupy 
this limited space", for the news butcher • 
comes along and occupies two seats i n the 
'Ji m Crow' corner and the conductor generally occupies two seats with his belongings 
usually just across from the newsboy. 
"The smoking compartment on the C. and 
O. trains is a stifling, narrow affair, into 
which four persons may squeeze and stifle 
should they desire to smoke. Usually one 
toilet of the narrowest dimensions and primitive appointments serves both male and female travelers. Dirt y tin cups are sometimes 
furnished for drinking purposes, while 
the car just i n the rear, or the car beyond 
the white smoking car, generally has a 
lavatory with soap and towel and a glass for 
drinkin g purposes. The aisles i n the white 
coaches are generally carpeted-, while the 
aisles i n the 'Ji m Crow' car are as innocent of carpet as the floor is of cleanliness. 
"Whe n the few seats i n the Negro compartment are filled, notwithstanding the law 
provides that the Negro passengers may 
then be seated i n the car for the whites, the 
Negroes regardless of numbers and regardless of heat and all inconveniences crowd the 
aisles and stand on the platform until leaving 
passengers make room for them. 
"The picture is a most unpleasant one; 
and these conditions will continue and get 
worse with the increase of Negro travel, until 
the Negro begins a systematic organized protest to the railroad authorities, to the State 
corporation boards and to the Interstate 
Commerce Commission at Washington. " 
Whil e we read much i n our own papers 
of the white American's distaste for the 
Negro, it may not be amiss for us to learn 
the 'attitude of the foreigner toward the 
white American . I n this connection the 
London Standard publishes the following : 
"I n the course of visiting many of our 
great coast resorts to inquire into the question why more America n visitors are not 
attracted during the winter, sprin g and 
autumn seasons, it was found that i n several 
prominent towns a surprising prejudice 
exists with respect to America n visitors. 
"One found Frenchmen and French 
women, Germans, Austrians and Russians 
very welcome visitors, but the feeling against 
the American was quite general. 
"One hotelkeeper said—and his words are 
given exactly as uttered: 
" 'I do not want these Yankees in my place. 
They may be wealthy, but they are excessively mean and want their money's worth 
every time. Afte r the Americans we have 
had, I don't think they are any sort of 
advertisement. I n fact, I believe a hotel 
which is notedly frequented by Americans 
loses or is avoided by the best class of Eng ­
lish and other visitors. 
" 'American visitors of wealth have the 
most barbarous manners. The men throw 
their shaving papers on the bedroom floors, 
spit indiscriminately about the stairs and 
vestibules, drown conversations i n the drawing and reception rooms, swagger about and 
dress i n such a fashion that one really would 
be il l paid by raising the tariffs 100 per cent, 
to them. Then again they are difficult because other guests cannot help commenting 
and laughing outright. 
" 'Whe n Americans arrive here we like to OPINIO N 175 
know something about them before we state 
that we have accommodations, and under such 
circumstances can you blame us?' 
"A t another resort the same question arose. 
There the leading authority i n town said: 
" 'We welcome Frenc h and Germans but not 
Americans. They are always talking money, 
thinking money, dreaming money, but only 
under compulsion are they spending it. 
They invade the place and act as i f they 
had bought it. Their method of addressing 
servants reminds one that they insult Negroes 
whenever they get a chance on principle. I 
know of no hotelkeeper who could refuse an 
American, but I know of few who are delighted to see them.' " 
TH E GOVERNOR 
OF ARKANSAS . 
The governor of one of 
the States of the Unio n 
pledged to uphold the 
Constitution of the United States has given 
out the following statement: 
" I am i n favor of the passage of the 
grandfather clause amendment to the State 
constitution. Fro m every viewpoint it is 
better to eliminate the Negro from politics. 
I n the South racia l conditions wil l not permit 
of his engaging i n politics. Several States 
i n the South have the grandfather clause. It 
is better for the Negro, because when he 
does not engage i n politics he will cease to 
antagonize the white man, can look better 
after his own affairs and i n every other way 
obtain a better recognition. 
"Then, so long as we do not permit the 
Negro to vote anyway, why not do it legally 
instead of by the process of elimination? It 
is true that there are a few Negroes who 
ought to be permitted to vote, but as a race 
it would unquestionably be bad policy to 
permit their voting by the wholesale. 
"Statistics show there are i n the neighborhood of 100,000 Negroes of voting age i n 
Arkansas. I f one of them is entitled to a 
vote all are. This number would be sufficient 
to carry any election i n the State. I n Jefferson County alone there are about 6,000 
Negroes of voting age and 3,000 white 
voters. The same ratio exists i n many other 
counties of the State. 
"B y all means let us pass this amendment 
to the constitution, and then let us have 
absolutely fair elections between white men. 
Let every white man's vote be counted just 
as he votes it. A s the matter now stands, 
the State board of election commissioners is 
worried to death all the time just prior to 
elections by committees and factions from 
the black districts of the State wanting the 
appointment of certain election commissioners, the excuse being that the Democratic 
ticket is imperilled because of the excessive 
number of Negroes in those districts. A s a 
matter of fact, the real purpose is to deny 
the Negro the legal right which he now has 
to vote. 
"Again , this practice has been carried on 
until it has not stopped with the Negro, but 
has been extended by the dominant factions 
to the counting out of white men's votes. 
"Le t us be sincere and honest i n what we 
are doing; be open and fair, and state openly 
what we intend to do." 
AMERICAN S 
AN D CUBAN S 
The Montreal Witness 
gives the following 
searching criticism of 
our attempts at intervention in Cuba : 
"The hatred between man and man that 
has sprung up recently i n Cuba, and is now 
manifesting itself i n war, is pitiable and 
the greatest disaster that could have befallen 
the island. Ha d this hatred been caused by 
some greed, such as a boundary dispute or 
the uneven distribution of wealth, some compromise would have finally laid it to rest. 
A hatred based on the ineradicable color distinction between the races has a base as deep 
i n the savage nature of the black as well as 
the white as is their mutual antipathy to 
a crawling snake. Fo r many years it has 
lain dormant, and the Cuban with his Indian 
blood, the Negro and the Spaniard have 
dwelt together with no social quarrel, treatin g each other, i f not with mutual respect, at 
least with mutual toleration. The seed of 
the tree that grew the apple of discord was 
a discrimination i n the distribution of 
patronage by the government of the republic. 
The Negroes were given very little, and so 
started to form themselves together as a 
political force. Afte r some years of steady 
growth the fruit of the tree took concrete 
form in a bill passed by government making 
it an offense to form a political party on 
racial lines. This was a measure designed 
to prevent the natural effect of a cause, and 
not as it should have been, one designed to 
uproot the cause. The whites have taken 
the stand that to them, and they wil l be, at 
least for another couple of generations the 
governing race, belong the spoils and so 176 TH E CRISIS 
have raised a dispute that wil l long smoulder. 
"The United States is, one would think, 
the last government on earth capable of in ­
terfering for good i n such a dispute. Only 
last year President Taft had the daring to 
appoint a very capable Negro lawyer, of 
Boston, as first assistant to his AttorneyGeneral. This was the highest appointment 
ever given to a colored man, giving him 
almost Cabinet rank. The appointment was 
so resented by the white people that the 
association of the bar met and disbarred 
him. Though the Negro population number 
approximately ten millions i n the United 
States, and though they have proved themselves splendid soldiers, they are not even 
allowed government employment as privates 
(the lowest class of all i n public employment) i n proportion to their numbers. Intervention by the United States i n Cuba can 
only be on behalf of the whites, and can 
only aggravate and make permanent the 
racial division. A s 'the population of the 
island is divided almost equally between 
white and colored, every one wil l be touched 
by it. Some, indeed, very intimately, for 
the races have lived so long together and 
intermarried so freely that it is hard to see 
where the line between white and black can 
be drawn. It can never now take the example of the Southern States and account every 
one with a trace of colored blood black, as 
this would place President Gomez himself 
and some of his cabinet on the black side. 
"The United States might far better seek 
to have the difference arbitrated at the Hague, 
than to interfere by landing troops, and so 
nullifyin g the responsibility not only of the 
present but of any succeeding Cuban 
government." 
AS RUSSIA 
SEES US. 
The Literary Digest has 
an account of a meeting 
i n Russia to protest 
against the action of the United States i n 
revoking the treaty of 1832, because Russia 
discriminated against American Jews. The 
Digest shows that the speakers were well 
informed. One of them, a man named 
Lavnov, said: 
"The complaint of the United States that 
the Jews are oppressed i n Russi a is a piece 
of monumental hypocrisy. To understand 
the hypocrisy of the United States, remember the condition of the Negroes there. The 
Negroes in the United States are full citizens, 
but no Negro can obtain the right, no matter 
how much money he may be willin g to pay, 
to ride i n a first-class railway coach. I n the 
State of Virgini a a few years ago a Russian 
was arrested and "put i n jai l for a month 
because, as a mark of protest, he sat i n a 
Ji m Crow car and talked i n a comradely 
way with the Negroes. A s for lynching, I 
need only mention the news published i n 
to-day's St. Petersburg papers telling of a 
case of three who were shot by the mob at 
the very time they were on tria l i n court." 
TH E SOUTH'S 
AWAKENING. 
Current Literature remarks that there is an 
almost lyri c rapture in 
the accents of Southerners these days when 
they write of the growth of the South, and 
quotes some of the rhapsodies. One of them 
comes from the pen of Phili p R. Kella r in 
Uncle Remus' Home Magazine: 
"N o longer," he proclaims, "may we speak 
of the South as 'a lazy man's land. "The 
South, " he assures us, "comprises approximately one-third of our entire population. 
Foreign exports from Southern ports amount 
to 36.4 per cent, of the total from the country, or $747,448,478 worth ; $944,000,000 
worth of exports, or nearly 47 per cent, of 
the total for all the United States, originate 
either directly or indirectly in the South. 
"To-day the- South annually produces 
$2,600,000,000 worth of grain, live- stock, 
vegetables, fruit, etc., on her farms; $2,690,-
000,000 worth of manufactured goods i n her 
factories; $440,000,000 worth of forest products, and $280,000,000 worth of minerals; 
a total of $6,010,000,000 added each year to 
the wealth of the nation. 
"Forty-si x years ago few men or women 
i n the South were producing enough to live 
even half comfortably. To-day, for every 
man, woman and child, white and black, there 
is a production of $217.75 annually, and the 
once bankrupt South has $1,160,000,000 of 
deposits in her banks, $2,120,000,000 invested 
i n her manufactures and $21,500,000,000 
worth of property. " 
The history of the human race, the same 
writer goes on to say, has no record of such 
a quick and complete recovery from such a 
state of desolation. Si x billion dollars, he 
muses, is twice as much as all the slaves i n 
the South were valued at when the Civi l 
Wa r began. NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE 
THE Nationa l Association for the Ad -
*• vancement of Colored People was one 
of the affiliated associations meeting with 
the Nationa l Conference of Charities and 
Correction at their thirty-ninth annual conference i n Cleveland i n June. A meeting was 
held on the afternoon of June 17, which was 
well attended. President Charles T. Thwin g 
of Western Reserve University presided. The 
speakers were Dr. D u Boise, Mrs. Florence 
Kelley, Hon . Julia n W . Mack, Mr . Charles 
W . Chesnutt and Miss Mar y Whit e 
Ovington. 
The citizens' committee of Philadelphia, 
of which mention was made i n the last number of TH E CRISIS, is considering becoming 
a branch of the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. On 
June 19 Prof. J . E . Spingar n addressed the 
committee. I n the afternoon of the same day 
he addressed the graduating class of the 
Frederick Douglass Memoria l Hospita l and 
Training School. 
The association is to be congratulated upon 
the addition to its legal committee of Mr . 
Charles A . Boston, of the firm of Horn -
blower, Mille r & Potter, of New York . Mr . 
Boston is a Baltimorean and a graduate of 
Johns Hopkin s University. His conspicuous 
ability as a lawyer and his earnestness and 
success i n advancing the cause of justice are 
too well known to need more than a mention. 
The association sent a telegram to the 
governor of Georgia protesting against the 
lynching of Ann e Bostwick. A representative was also sent to the scene of the crime, 
but was unable to secure any facts i n addition to those given under "The Burden " i n 
another part of this issue. 
The association is printin g a new pamphlet, "The Objects of the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, " by Oswald Garrison Villard . This 
was published i n the June number of TH E 
CRISIS and formed part of Mr . Villard's 
address at the Chicago conference. The following pamphlets are being reprinted: 
"Leavin g It to the South," by Charles 
Edwar d Russell; "Socia l Control, " by Jane 
Addams; "Disfranchisement of the Negro, " 
by Rev. John Haynes Holmes. 
Legal counsel for the association, after 
investigation, reported on the following 
segregation cases: 
In Greenville, S. C , Goldsmith Brothers, 
mentioned under the "Ghetto" i n the Jul y 
number of TH E CRISIS, had been prevented 
from purchasing a $65,000 piece of property 
by the passage of the "customary form of 
segregation ordinance." Since the property 
could not be conveyed, owing to the passage 
of this ordinance, they also lost the $150 they 
paid down to bind the bargain. This they 
cannot recover because they "broke their 
contract." 
I n Mooresville, N . C , Mr . Coble, also 
mentioned i n the Jul y number of TH E CRISIS, 
plans to test the segregation ordinance by 
commencing to build. 
In Winston-Salem, N . C , the sentiment 
is so bitter that i n case the present ordinance 
is held invalid the white community has declared its intention to pass one even more 
stringent. 
Progress i n the Baltimore case is indicated 
by the following letter from our attorney: 
June 27, 1912. 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, 26 Vesey Street, New York 
City. 
GENTLEMEN : 
Acting under your instructions, and at the 
request of Mr. Hawkins, the local attorney, I 
had an interview, together with Mr. Hawkins, 
on June 20, 1912, with Judge Elliott of the 
Criminal Court in Baltimore, and a representative of the district-attorney's office. Since 178 TH E CRISIS 
we arranged, some two months ago, for the 
prosecution of this case, Mr. Hawkins has been 
doing his utmost to have it brought on for 
argument, but owing to various reasons the 
district-attorney's office has procured repeated 
adjournments. The result of the conference 
above mentioned was that the case should be 
set down for argument without fail on August 
26 next, the reason for the delay being that 
Judge Elliott, before whom the case will come 
up for hearing, goes away on his vacation this 
week and will not be back until August 21. 
Very truly yours, 
C. AME S BROOKS. 
In Richmond the association's counsel reported as follows: 
A test case is now before the courts, having 
been brought by a Mr. W. L . Waring, a property owner, on behalf of certain colored tenants 
of his who have been prosecuted under the 
terms of the segregation act. The case we 
think is a very good one, as the question both 
of the ownership and tenancy of property is 
involved, four of the people whom Mr. Waring 
represents being tenants, the fifth having purchased a piece of land from Mr. Waring. The 
case is being handled by Mr. William L . Royall, 
of Richmond, and will come up for final disposition early in the fall. 
Durin g June 102 new members were 
added to the association. 
The Lewis matter, reported from time to 
time i n TH E -CRISIS, wil l come up for decision at the annual meeting of the American 
Ba r Association at Milwaukee this month. I n 
June the National Association, over the signature of Mr . Villard , sent circular letters 
of protest to many prominent members of 
the American Ba r Association. The followin g is a copy of the letter sent to members of 
the committee on increase of membership: 
June 3, 1912. 
M Y DEA R SIR: 
Noting that you are on the committee on 
increase of membership of the American Bar 
Association, I am taking the liberty of laying 
before you the views of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in 
regard to the cases of the three colored lawyers, 
Messrs. William H . Lewis, William R. Morris 
and Butler R. Wilson, who are members of the 
American Bar Association. We have a direct 
personal interest in this controversy because one 
of these gentlemen, Mr. Butler R. Wilson, is 
secretary of the Boston branch of our organization which is formed to fight against any such 
exhibition of un-American and race prejudice 
as is endorsed by the action of the officers and 
executive committee of the American Bar Association. The board of directors of our organization wishes to express to you its profound 
regret at the action of the executive committee 
and believes this action to be illegal and contrary to the principles of justice for which your 
association must stand. We cannot think that 
it reflects the opinion of the body of highminded intelligent men who make up your 
membership. 
There is a growing criticism to-day of the 
attitude of the courts in the United States 
toward colored men. We ourselves have found 
numerous cases of discrimination solely because 
of color. If an organization pledged ' ' to advance the science of jurisprudence,' to promote 
the administration of justice, " shows its race 
prejudice by excluding a man regularly elected 
into its membership when it finds that he is 
colored, this criticism will be justified; and it 
will be justified as applied to men high in the 
legal profession, whom we have had a right 
to believe stood for the impartial administration 
of the law to black and white alike. We wish 
to express to you our profound conviction that 
the effort to dismiss from your membership, 
because of their color, men of merit and high 
attainment is a denial of justice and a blow at 
democracy. 
Very respectfully, 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, 
Chairman of the Board of Directors. 
I n acknowledgment of this letter Mr . Louis 
Newberger, of the firm of Newberger, Rich ­
ards, Simon & Davis, Indianapolis, writes in 
part as follows: 
This matter was first brought to my attention 
by Attorney-General Wickersham, whose views 
I fully endorsed, and on the suggestion of Mr. 
Wickersham protested to the secretary of the 
American Ba r Association against the action 
so taken. 
The object of the American Ba r Association, 
as stated in its constitution, is "t o advance the 
science of jurisprudence, promote the administration of justice and uniformity of legislation 
throughout the Union, uphold the honor of the 
profession of the law and encourage cordial 
intercourse among the members of the American 
bar, " and "an y person shall be eligible to membership in the association who shall be and 
shall, for five years next preceding, have been 
a member in good standing of the bar of any 
State.' ' 
It will thus be seen that there is no lawful 
basis for the action of the executive committee, 
while such action measured by just humanitarian considerations is abhorrent. I am in full 
accord with the views expressed by you and 
shall attend the forthcoming meeting of the 
association at Milwaukee and do what I can 
to right the manifest wrong attempted to be 
done to Messrs. Lewis, Morris and Wilson in 
the action heretofore taken by the executive 
committee. 
Mr . John P . Nields of Wilmington , Del., 
says: 
I have already written to Mr. Lewis in regard 
to his unfair treatment by the committee of 
the American Ba r Association. I share the 
regret of your committee and can be counted 
on to express my indignation. TH E N. A. A. C. P. 179 
Mr . Ansley Wilcox , of Wilcox , Bul l & Va n 
Allen , Buffalo, expresses his disapproval as 
follows: 
I am wholly out of sympathy with the action 
of the officers of the association in connection 
with colored members, and feel that a great 
mistake has been made. 
Mr . George B. Youn g of Newport, Vt. , 
thus states his position in relation to the 
colored members: 
I have personally known Mr. Morris for a 
number of years and always thought well of 
him. I have felt and have expressed to the 
executive committee the feeling that the association is making a grave mistake in attempting 
to expel these members from the association. 
Mr . Yorke-Allen , of Alle n & Sabine, New 
York , expresses himself as follows: 
I agree with everything you so well say in 
your letter. A t the time of the occurrence 
I wrote to the secretary expressing the view 
that the action of the executive committee of 
the American Ba r Association was not only 
beyond its powers, but also a gross outrage and 
an absurd example to set to a race whose 
superiors they affected to be. 
It is, however, unthinkable that the association as a whole will stultify itself and its 
professed objects by endorsing the said action 
of its committee. Such a course would indeed 
be a wicked denial of justice and a blow at 
democracy. 
In reply to a second circular letter also 
sent out over Mr . Villard's signature, Mr . 
Adria n H . Joline, of Joline, Larki n & Rathbone, New York , writes: 
I wish to say that I have already signified 
in the only way permitted so far my opposition 
to the proposed action of the American Bar 
Association with regard to its colored members 
and am in accord with Mr. Wickersham in his 
views. 
Probably an unlooked-for effect of theaction of the committee upon prospective 
members i n the American Ba r Association is 
indicated by the following letter: 
WHERR Y & MORGA N 
Attorneys - at- Law 
4 3 Cedar Street 
New York 
Ma y 23 , 1912 . 
Mr. Charles J . O 'Connor, Chairman Committee 
Increase in Membership, American Bar Association, 152 2 Tribune Building, Chicago, Ill. 
DEAR SIR: 
I have your letter of May 1, 1912 , urging me 
to join the American Bar Association. Ordinarily one would feel gratified to receive an 
invitation to join an association distinguished 
by the names of so many prominent members 
of the profession. In the present case this is 
not so. As counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a 
large part of my professional labor is devoted 
to enforcing the rights of colored citizens of 
the United States, and obtaining redress for 
wrongs due to race prejudice. As the American 
Bar Association presents a signal example of 
this race prejudice and of discrimination based 
on this prejudice, it is impossible for me to 
consider your request. 
Yuurs very truly, 
WILLIA M N . WUERRY , JR . 
In contrast to these opinions we quote 
from Bench and Bar, the monthly magazine 
for lawyers, Vol . 28, No. 3 : 
Membership in the American Bar Association 
confers certain privileges of a character which 
imply social intercourse upon a basis of equality. 
To a very large proportion of the membership 
of the association, however thoroughly each one 
might respect the attainments, ability and character of a colored man, this sort of association 
would be violently distasteful. Certainly in this 
sense, and to this extent, the introduction of 
a colored man to membership is unfortunate, 
and it seems to us to be a mistake so serious 
as that it should be corrected, if this may now 
be done. 
A number of well-known clubs in New York 
City and elsewhere countenance racial discriminations. We have been informed, for example, 
that it is the settled policy of the Union League 
Club of New York City, of which we understand 
the present Attorney-General of the United 
States to have been once a member, to exclude 
Hebrews from membership. Personally, we 
know many Hebrews who are the most delightful of intimate and personal associates, and 
yet upon entering such a club, or continuing 
one's membership therein, one would not criticise or denounce its settled policy or seek to 
oppose or override it by circularizing its members or otherwise. And perhaps it may be 
observed, parenthetically, that those excluded on 
the ground of race are, if otherwise eligible, the 
last to make audible protest against the ban. 
Delicacy and gentility forbid. We are told also 
that the association of the bar of New York 
City, of which the Attorney-General is likewise 
•a member, has never admitted a woman to membership, though there are said to be a number 
of capable women lawyers in New York City. 
So far as we know neither of these regulations 
has caused great outcry, nor has either given 
rise to any postcard campaign by members, 
public officials or others, though perhaps the 
time is approaching when there will be no longer 
racial discrimination in clubs, nor will any 
lawyer be excluded from a bar association on 
the ground of race or sex. But such a time 
appears not yet to have arrived, and the consensus of the members, without internal officiousness or exhortation, is assuredly entitled to 
determine when a change of this far-reaching 
character shall be brought about. EDITORIA L 
POLITICS. 
H E colore d vote r no w 
stands face to face wit h 
the grea t questio n o f the 
prope r use o f his electora l franchise . Unde r 
norma l condition s 2,000,-
000 of the 20,000,000 votes whic h migh t 
be cast at a presidentia l electio n woul d 
belon g to the race, an d some day , despit e 
ever y effort of frau d an d race prejudice , 
those votes are goin g to be cast. 
To-day , however, o f the 15,000,000 o r 
mor e votes whic h wil l actuall y be east 
fo r President , some 500,000 wil l be blac k 
men's votes. 
Wha t shal l we do wit h these 500,000 
ballots ? 
Firs t o f al l we must teach ourselve s 
to regar d them seriously . Th e Negro -
America n is not disfranchised ; o n the 
contrary , he is a half millio n votes this 
side of disfranchisemen t an d tha t is a 
long , lon g way . Ther e have been "but 
two o r thre e presidentia l elections sinc e 
the wa r whic h have no t been settled 
b y a margi n o f less tha n a half millio n 
votes, an d i n ever y singl e electio n sinc e 
the proslaver y compromis e of 1850 
suc h a numbe r of votes distribute d at 
strategi c points woul d easil y have 
decide d the presidency . 
Th e votes of blac k American s are toda y at strategi c points. W e may , o f 
course, leave the Sout h out o f account : 
o n accoun t of illega l enactments an d 
braze n fraud , democrati c governmen t 
exists i n the Sout h onl y i n inchoat e an d 
incomplet e form . Th e presidentia l electio n is probabl y goin g to be decide d b y 
the Middl e West an d the State s o f Ne w 
Yor k an d Ne w Jersey . Ne w Yor k an d 
Ohi o have eac h betwee n 40,000 an d 
50,000 colore d votes; Ne w Jersey , Illi ­
nois an d Indian a have each 30,000 o r 
more . Is ther e an y politica l prophe t 
wh o woul d ris k his reputatio n o n the 
possibilit y o f an y one o f these State s 
bein g carrie d b y mor e tha n 20,000 
majority ? Ther e ma y be majoritie s o f 
50,000 o r 100,000 i n one o r two o f the 
States, bu t the chance s ar e tha t the 
colore d voters hol d the balanc e o f powe r 
i n ever y one o f their State s an d thu s 
have the powe r to sa y whethe r Willia m 
Howar d Taf t o r Woodro w Wilso n shal l 
be the nex t President . 
I f colore d Americ a ha d lon g politica l 
experienc e an d wid e knowledg e o f me n 
an d measures, i t woul d organiz e the 
blac k voters o f each Stat e int o a soli d 
phalanx . It woul d sa y to this phalanx : 
whit e an d colore d voters i n this lan d 
ar e sellin g their votes too cheaply . B y 
the use o f a "slus h fund " of $3,000,000 
Theodor e Roosevelt wa s able almost to 
spli t the Republica n party . Yo u coul d 
easil y sell you r votes nex t Novembe r 
fo r one o r two million s o f dollars, bu t 
tha t is too cheap. Yo u coul d easil y sell 
you r votes fo r a n Assistan t Attorney -
General , a Registe r o f the Treasury , a 
Recorde r of Deed s an d a few othe r blac k 
woode n me n whos e dut y i t is to look 
pleasant, sa y nothin g an d have no 
opinion s tha t a whit e ma n is boun d to 
respect. This also is too cheap—i t is 
dir t cheap. 
Wha t pric e shoul d yo u ask. fo r 500,-
000 votes, blac k America ? Yo u shoul d 
ask this: 
1. Th e abolitio n o f the interstat e 
"Ji m Crow " car. EDITORIA L 181 
Th e enforcemen t o f the Thir ­
teenth Amendmen t by the suppressio n 
o f peonage . 
3. Th e enforcemen t o f the Four ­
teenth Amendmen t by cuttin g dow n the 
representatio n i n Congress of the rotte n 
boroughs o f the South . 
4. Nationa l ai d to elementar y publi c 
schools withou t class o r racia l discrimination . 
Is this pric e too muc h to pa y fo r a 
presidency ? It is not i f yo u dar e 
ask it. 
Wh o the n woul d pa y it ? Woul d 
Willia m Howar d Taf t pa y it ? Ther e 
has not been i n the presidentia l chair 
fo r fifty years a ma n so utterl y lackin g 
i n initiativ e an d idea l as Mr . Taft . Hi s 
abject surrende r to Souther n prejudic e 
an d reactio n has been simpl y pitiable : 
H e bega n his caree r b y defendin g disfranchisemen t ; he followe d this b y 
promisin g to appoin t no blac k ma n to 
office i f an y whit e ma n protested ; an d 
i n spit e o f the fac t tha t ove r 200 Negroe s 
have been publicl y murdere d withou t 
tria l durin g his administration , the utmost tha t 10,000,000 blac k me n have 
elicite d fro m his lip s is a hesitatin g 
statement tha t he is sorry—an d helpless. An y colore d ma n wh o votes fo r 
Mr . Taft wil l do so o n the assumptio n 
tha t zero is bette r tha n minu s one. 
A s to Mr . Wilson , there are, one must 
confess, disquietin g facts: he wa s bor n 
i n Virgini a an d he wa s lon g presiden t 
of a college whic h di d not admi t Negr o 
students an d ye t wa s not honest enoug h 
to say so, resortin g rathe r to subterfuge 
an d evasion. A man , however, is not 
wholl y responsibl e fo r his birthplac e o r 
his college. O n the whole , we do not 
believe tha t Woodro w Wilso n admire s 
Negroes. Lef t to himself, we suspec t he 
woul d be lik e Mr . Johnson , the new dea n 
o f Yale . Mr . Johnso n is a Southerner, 
an d recentl y tol d a colore d applican t 
tha t Yal e di d not wan t "Chinese , Jew s 
o r Negroes. " Th e idea l o f suc h fol k 
woul d be a worl d inhabite d b y flaxenhaire d wa x dolls wit h o r withou t brains. 
Notwithstandin g suc h possibl e preferences, Woodro w Wilso n is a cultivate d 
schola r an d he has brains. W e kno w 
that there are severa l hundre d million s 
of "Chinese , Jew s an d Negroes " wh o 
have to be reckone d with , an d tha t the 
date at whic h the "blon d beast " wil l 
inheri t this eart h has been, to pu t it 
mildly , indefinitel y postponed . W e 
have, therefore , a convictio n tha t Mr . 
Wilso n wil l trea t blac k me n an d their 
interests wit h farsighte d fairness. H e 
wil l not be ou r friend , bu t he wil l no t 
belong to the gan g o f whic h Tillman , 
Vardaman , Hok e Smit h an d Bleas e are 
the brillian t expositors. H e wil l not 
advanc e the cause o f oligarch y i n the 
South , he wil l not seek furthe r means 
of "Ji m Crow " insult, he wil l not dismiss blac k me n wholesal e fro m office, 
an d he wil l remembe r tha t the Negr o i n 
the Unite d State s has a righ t to be hear d 
an d considered ; an d i f he becomes 
Presiden t b y the grace of the blac k 
man's vote, his Democrati c successors 
ma y be mor e willin g to pa y the blac k 
man's pric e o f decent travel , free labor, 
votes an d education . 
Outsid e of these two men , wha t else ? 
W e than k Go d tha t Theodor e Roosevelt 
has been eliminated . Ho w man y blac k 
men , wit h the memor y o f Brownsville , 
coul d support suc h a ma n passes ou r 
comprehension . O f Eugen e V . Debs, the 
Socialist candidate , we ca n onl y say 
this frankly : i f it la y i n ou r powe r to 
make hi m Presiden t of the Unite d States 
we woul d do so, fo r o f the fou r me n 
mentione d he alone, b y wor d an d deed, 
stands squarel y o n a platfor m o f huma n 
rights regardless of race o r class. 
OHIO. 
HI S fal l the colore d voters 
of Ohi o have, a wonderfu l opportunity ; the 
40,000 o r 50,000 votes 
whic h they cast wil l 
undoubtedl y decid e 
whethe r wome n shal l vote i n tha t Stat e 
an d whethe r the last o f the infamou s 
blac k laws shal l be swept fro m the 
statut e book. 182 TH E CRISIS 
Th e enfranchisemen t o f wome n means 
the doublin g of the blac k vot e a t the 
poin t wher e tha t vote is needed. I f 
woma n suffrage win s i n Ohio , i t wil l 
sweep the Middl e West an d East i n less 
tha n a generation . A s Negroe s hav e a 
large r proportio n o f wome n tha n the 
white s ou r relativ e votin g importanc e i n 
the Nort h wil l be increased . 
Moreover, we nee d above al l classes 
the women's influenc e i n politics—th e 
influenc e o f the mother, the wife ; the 
teache r an d the washerwoman . I n the 
Africa n fatherlan d the wome n stood 
hig h i n counsel. W e nee d them her e 
again . It woul d be ver y bad , indeed , i f 
the colore d vote shoul d be advers e to 
enfranchisin g women , even thoug h i t 
wer e not the decidin g factor, fo r the da y 
has gone b y foreve r whe n colore d me n 
coul d get a respectfu l hearin g fo r their 
protest against their ow n disfranchise ­
men t if, whe n offered the opportunit y 
fo r votin g fo r enfranchisin g their moth ­
ers, wive s an d sisters, the y shoul d fai l 
to do so. Fo r stil l anothe r reason i t 
wil l be unfortunat e i f the Ohi o Negroe s 
vote against votes fo r women ; the vote 
wil l be analyze d wit h keen an d eager 
intelligence , an d the results studie d fo r 
futur e use. Th e colore d voters wil l 
tur n man y possibl e friend s int o critics, 
to pu t i t mildly , i f the y inflic t upo n 
wome n tha t disfranchisemen t whic h al l 
thinkin g peopl e deplor e whe n applie d 
to the Negroe s themselves. Th e genera l 
propositio n tha t wome n ough t to have 
the righ t to vote surel y needs n o argu ­
men t amon g disfranchise d colore d folk : 
Wome n are workers; workers shoul d 
vote. 
Wome n are taxpayers; taxpayers 
shoul d vote. 
Wome n have brains; votin g needs 
brains. 
Wome n organize , direc t an d largel y 
support the family ; familie s shoul d vote . 
Wome n ar e mothers o f men ; i f me n 
vote, wh y no t women ? 
I f politic s ar e too nast y an d roug h fo r 
wome n voters, is i t no t time we aske d 
the vot e o f wome n to cleans e the m ? 
Is ther e a singl e argumen t fo r the 
righ t o f me n to vote, o r fo r the righ t of 
blac k me n to vote , tha t does no t appl y 
to the votes fo r women , an d particularl y 
fo r blac k women ? 
m 
ANARCHISM. 
H E CRISI S has continu ­
all y insiste d tha t peon ­
age, false arrest an d in ­
justic e i n the Souther n 
courts wer e responsibl e 
fo r the mass o f so-called 
Negr o crime . Th e testimon y to this 
comes continuall y fro m whit e Southern ­
ers themselves. I n nearl y ever y South ­
er n Stat e this ha s been asserted fro m 
time to time i n official reports, bu t perhap s the latest an d strongest o f these 
confessions comes fro m Alabama . Th e 
Federa l gran d jur y o f Jefferso n Count y 
says tha t justice s an d constable s ar e 
deliberatel y enrichin g themselve s b y a 
system o f extortio n an d intimidation : 
' ' Fo r victims, whethe r mal e o r female , 
i t single s out, i n ever y instance , those 
too poo r o r ignorant , too humbl e o r 
frightene d to protec t themselves. A 
very large majority are Negroes. Wer e 
the y no t Negroes, bu t members of a 
more resentful race, anarchism wouldbe prevalent." 
WERE THEY NOT NEGROES ! Conducted by JESSIE FAUSE T 
Seeking the Best. B y Otis M . Shackelford. 
Burton Publishing Co., 1911. 
Perhaps we can best describe this volume 
by quoting a line from its dedicatory note. 
"A n autobiography, entertaining, instructive 
and inspiring. Ten chapters of true stories 
and interesting episodes i n the life of the 
author." Thus much is true and more, for 
the book, while not great literature, has a 
style so attractively simple and naive that 
one insensibly turns many a page before he 
puts it down. 
The author's motive for writin g is certainly very praiseworthy, and one for colored men and women to consider. "W e must 
have," he says, "some one to perpetuate our 
memory i n letters, or our past wil l indeed 
be a thing of the past. It is unfair and 
unreasonable for us to expect men of the 
other race to do this for us. W e must tell 
our own tales of woe and sing our own songs 
of gladness." 
m 
A Narrative of the Negro. B y Mrs. Leil a 
Amos Pendleton. Published by the author, 
Washington, D. C , 1912. 
Now, at last, it would seem, we have an 
historian of no mean ability who has arisen 
i n answer to our need. Too much credit 
cannot be given Mrs. Pendleton for the 
interest and effort manifested i n the conception and execution of her book. 
The modest title and the slenderness of the 
volume hardly lead the reader to suspect the 
comprehensiveness of treatment which actually awaits him. Fo r this book treats not 
only of the Negro i n the United States, but 
considers bis condition here only as an important phase of his general history. This 
last is surveyed from his earliest days i n 
Africa . Viewed i n this light one gains a 
new idea of the immense historical value of 
the Negro and of the persistence with which 
he plays his part i n the drama of nations. 
•Despised, hated, debased, exploited i n every 
imaginable way by every nation on every 
continent, the Negro still is. An d so out of 
the blackness of despair springs eternal 
hope. 
The colored American would do well to 
put this book i n the hands of his children, to 
let them know that they, too, have great 
men and splendid women. I n these pages 
is told the story of Toussaint L'Ouverture, 
of Denmark Vesey, Na t Turner, Sojourner 
Truth, Harrie t Tubman. W e know too 
little of the cause for the fame of these 
characters—if, indeed, we know of them at 
all. Whereas, these are names to conjure 
with—to inspire i n all people of color high 
purpose, unflinching courage, great persistence. Whe n one thinks of the fearful odds 
i n slavery times against the black man who 
dared to try to lift his head, and then remembers that these people dared—there is nothing finer i n all history. An d these people are 
ours, not the borrowed types of a hostile 
race whose members hold us persistently 
aloof. 
The style is simple, concise and very readable—the general presentation on the whole 
is very commendable. 
m 
Poems. By H . Cordelia Ray. The Grafton 
Press, New York. 
One is impressed by the versatility of this 
author. He r little book contains almost 
every sort of poetic form and deals with 
almost every imaginable subject. The qualit y of the verse is uneven, perhaps, but much 
of it is very, very good. Often her choice 
of terms for her word pictures is quite 
happy. Take the following: 
"Wa n statues stare i n gardens fair, 
Prou d i n their cold beseeching." 
The ballads are very interesting. They 
have a distinct flavor of old far-off times and 
reveal much of the poetic atmosphere i n 
which this author undoubtedly moves. 
WHA T T O REA D Mary Dunlop Maclean 
O n Tuesday , Jul y 9, Mar y Dunlo p Maclean , sinc e its inceptio n the 
managin g edito r o f TH E CRISIS, wa s i n he r office helpin g wit h the 
Vacatio n Numbe r tha t shoul d go to the printe r i n its entiret y b y the 
en d o f the week. Sh e made man y last notes, fo r the senio r edito r wa s 
awa y o n his vacation ; the n closed he r desk, an d drov e to the hospital . 
' ' I shal l be gone onl y a few weeks,' ' she said , an d gave a cheer y 
good-by. Bu t the operatio n prove d mor e serious tha n ha d been 
expected, an d afte r two day s o f struggl e to regai n strength , o n Friday , 
Jul y 12, he r brav e heart ceased to beat. 
O f the man y friend s o f TH E CRISIS an d the associatio n none gave 
so full y o f the leisur e snatche d fro m a bus y life . Sh e came to us i n 
1909, afte r ou r first conference . Sh e ha d been deepl y stirre d b y wha t 
she ha d hear d an d seen, an d she aske d the chairma n i f she migh t be 
of service . Sh e wa s a newspape r writer—wa s ther e not somethin g 
she coul d do tha t woul d be o f help ? 
Suc h a n offer was eagerl y accepted, an d durin g the followin g 
summe r an d autum n she edite d an d superintende d the publicatio n 
of the proceeding s o f the First Nationa l Negr o Conference . I n Novem ­
ber o f the nex t yea r TH E CRISIS wa s started , an d i t wa s the n tha t the 
association began to understan d its grea t acquisition . On e o f the best 
newspape r wome n i n the country , she brough t to TH E CRISIS a n attractiv e literar y style , a rar e judgment , an d a n amazin g abilit y to 
accomplis h a prodigiou s amoun t o f wor k i n a minimu m amoun t o f time . 
She carrie d o n a large correspondenc e wit h CRISIS contributors, she 
edite d Opinio n an d Me n of the Month , an d he r judgmen t was appeale d 
to man y time s i n the makin g u p of the magazine . In the bus y day s 
o f proofreadin g an d dummyin g she di d he r ful l share . Sh e an d the 
senior edito r toile d togethe r lon g hours, goo d comrade s both , unwearie d 
i n their efforts to mak e each numbe r o f TH E CRISIS a littl e bette r tha n 
the last. Sh e ha d a profoun d belie f i n the geniu s o f the ma n wit h who m 
she worke d an d was inestimabl y helpfu l i n he r criticis m an d praise . 
This was he r free an d gla d gift to ou r cause. Bu t i n the meantime 
she earne d he r livelihoo d as a membe r of the staff of the Sunda y Times, 
an d each week saw two, three, sometime s fou r article s writte n between 
Monda y mornin g an d Thursda y night . Eac h ha d he r distinctiv e style , an d 
was entertainin g as wel l as instructive . On e of he r last article s wa s a n 
accoun t o f a recent book o n la w b y the Nationa l Association's president, 
Mr . Moorfiel d Storey . She was a good linguist , an d woul d come to ou r 
office i n the mornin g wit h a volume i n Frenc h o n "Primitiv e Man " (she 
was especiall y intereste d i n this subject), an d before the da y wa s ove r 
she woul d have writte n a delightfu l runnin g accoun t o f the best the book 
contained . He r memor y was remarkable . Sh e neve r took notes durin g 
a n interview ; bu t he r reports wer e so accurate , she so wel l an d so entertainingl y reproduce d the ma n an d his ideas, tha t those wh o ha d me t he r once wer e alway s gla d to stop an d give he r of their bus y time . A t 
the colleges an d librarie s an d museums o f the cit y she made man y 
friends. ' 
Sh e wa s bor n i n the tropics, at Nassau , o n one o f those lovel y 
West India n island s tha t gleam pur e whit e ami d the ravishingl y blue 
waters. Th e gaiet y an d kindliness o f the Souther n lan d was he r birth ­
right . Sh e dance d alon g the brigh t beach, an d ha d a merr y wor d fo r 
al l wh o crossed he r path . Whe n a chil d of si x she was invite d to a 
fancy-dress party , an d he r mother, doubtin g he r abilit y at costumemaking , mourne d to the child's fathe r tha t she coul d not make a prope r 
dress. 
"Pu t he r i n an y gow n she has, " the fathe r answered , "an d name 
he r Sunbeam. " 
An d so we name he r i n ou r hearts. Wit h the rest o f us disma l an d 
rain y day s are not uncommon ; but, howeve r har d lif e touche d her, the 
sunligh t wa s alway s i n he r face. 
Sh e wa s most kindl y i n he r judgments. She like d the Frenc h 
saying : "H e has the faults o f his qualities. " Th e "quality, " the 
abilit y tha t abide s i n each o f us, this she alway s recognized . Fo r the 
rest the faul t wa s onl y a shadow, a negativ e accompanyin g a fine an d 
worth y nature . 
He r affection fo r the Negr o began wit h he r birth . Reare d amon g 
the blac k an d colore d peopl e he r heart kne w no color line . Th e islan d 
o f he r birth , unde r Britis h rule , was generous to the Negr o an d wholl y 
free fro m the lawlessness so commo n i n the lan d of he r adoption . Th e 
colore d boys an d girls wit h who m she playe d wer e he r good friend s an d 
remaine d so throughou t he r life . Whe n a gir l o f 16 she wa s sent to 
Bosto n to complet e he r education ; an d ther e she foun d the Ne w 
Englanders somewha t aloo f an d chill . Bu t there wa s one gir l wit h 
dar k hair an d ric h brow n colorin g wh o wo n he r heart. The y soon became 
friends; bu t afte r a few weeks the Bosto n gir l wit h brav e Ne w Englan d 
conscienc e came to he r ne w frien d an d tol d he r tha t she wa s colored . 
Th e answe r was a laug h an d a war m handclasp . "I t must have been 
tha t tha t made me at once care fo r you,' ' she said ; ' ' yo u mak e me thin k 
of home. " Throughou t he r life , ah, so short, fo r she ha d not reached 
middl e age whe n she died , she wa s at home wit h colore d folk . An d 
the y responde d swiftl y to he r straightforwar d affection an d sympathy . 
A s I sit here at he r desk, strivin g clumsil y to do the wor k she di d 
so well , listening , unconsciously , fo r he r footstep, startin g at each soun d 
o f a voic e i n the adjoinin g room ; I ask myself wha t woul d she wish" 
me to writ e coul d she stan d beside me and , laying " he r han d o n mine , 
guid e m y pen ? He r brigh t spiri t sees not diml y now, bu t face to face. 
Woul d he r wor d be lik e this ? 
Th e dea r eart h is ver y foolish . It is makin g suc h a pothe r about 
colo r an d race an d forgettin g the spiri t i n man . A s thoug h fo r one 
momen t o f the eterna l moments i t matters whethe r a man's ski n is 
blac k o r whit e o r re d o r yellow , whethe r he live s i n a palac e o r a cabin . 
These thing s are not life . The y are onl y shadows. Forge t them an d 
stan d i n the sunligh t of gentleness an d brotherhood—th e ligh t most 
precious. M W. O. VACATIO N DAY S 
"Breeze is blowin' wif perfume, 
Jes' enough to tease you ; 
Hollyhocks is all in bloom, 
Smellin' fu' to please you. 
Go 'way, folks, an' let me 'lone, 
Times is gettin' dearah— 
Summah's settin' on de th'one, 
An ' I'm a-layin' neah huh! " 
THE CRISI S has asked its readers for 
information regarding vacation days, 
and has received answers from all points of 
the compass, from Florid a to Michigan, from 
Maine to Alberta . Lookin g through these 
many communications we may gather a few 
important facts. 
One fact, all too evident, is that few of 
our readers are able to leave their work for 
any length of time. "We're too busy trying 
to earn a living, " they write, "to think about 
summer resorts." To this large body of people the picnic, the evening car ride, the 
excursion to some neighboring park is the 
only escape from the city's toil and heat. . 
"Ho w arc you welcomed when visiting picnic grounds and parks? " we have asked. 
"Yo u are tolerated i f you are very careful," 
is one answer to this question, arid it seems 
to cover a large number of cities. Yo u may 
go to the beach, but you may not hire a 
bathing suit; you may walk about under the 
trees, but you may not dance in the newly 
erected hall; you may ride in the trolleys, but 
you may not take the sightseeing automobiles; these are some of the ways in which 
you are "tolerated." A t least, so word comes 
to us from the East. In the West things 
seem better, and we hear of the best of good 
fellowship in some Western towns. 
When they have the money and the time to 
take a vacation, our correspondents show us 
that the choice of a summer resort is limited. 
The white New Yorker, for instance, may 
choose from a thousand different places the 
one to which he will go with his family. H e 
may turn to the hills and camp out i n the 
Adirondacks or board among the Whit e 
Mountains; or, loving the sea, he may settle 
in some one of the innumerable little village 
towns among the rocks along the coast of 
Maine. H e has but to choose and pay his 
board. But you, i f you are colored, will 
knock in vain at the farmhouse door for 
hoard and lodging. The beautiful, inexpensive, out-of-the-way places are out of your 
way, indeed. The only sure means of escaping discrimination is to board an ocean 
liner, preferably a French or German one, 
and make your pilgrimage abroad. 
Bu t since only the very favored few can 
do this, the colored people are providing summer resorts for themselves, runnin g hotels 
and acquiring pleasant cottage sites. Our 
correspondents have sent us word of a number of these places, though we do not doubt 
the list could be greatly extended. Atlanti c 
I N TH E CA T SKILL S VACATIO N DAY S 187 
RAFTIN G O N TH E RIO GRANDE , JAMAIC A 
Cit y ranks first as a watering resort. Here 
is Fitzgerald's Hotel, Mrs. Poole's cottage, 
Ridley's cottage and others. The colored 
people have their own drug store, their bathing pavilion, and i n the summer months they 
may be seen i n numbers on the famous 
boardwalk. Sixteen-day excursions are run 
to Atlanti c Cit y from as far west as Ohio, 
and from many points north and south. 
Movin g down the Jersey coast, we find a 
second resort at Sea Isle. Mr . James Gordon, superintendent of the Brookly n Howar d 
Colored Orphan Asylum, owns a hotel here 
that accommodates 150 guests. Dr. Owen 
M . Walle r of Brookly n is among the 
cottagers. 
A t Cape Ma y is the large hotel owned and 
operated by Mr . E . W Dale. Al l this Jersey 
coast is one long stretch of sand, with refreshing breezes from the open sea. 
Board at these various resorts ranges from 
$5 to $10 a week. • 
Our correspondents write of Arunde l and 
of Somerset Beach, Md. ; of Buckroe Beach, 
Va. , and, turning inland, of Silcott Springs, 
Va. , and pleasant boarding places among the 
mountains at Asheville, N . C. Turnin g north 
we find an attractive boarding place at 
Shawnee on the Delaware, i n Pennsylvania, 
at Catskill, and at Saratoga, where the wellknown Thompson cottage is located. 
Fro m Chicago we learn of a new and attractive summer place—West Michigan resort. 
West Michiga n resort is opposite Chicago 
across the lake. The colored people have 
bought ten acres, with several hundred feet 
of lake beach. The colored farmers i n the 
vicinity are a prosperous group, and good 
rooms with excellent food can be secured. 
The property is being admirably developed. 
Some of our CRISIS readers make their 
summer outings at the colored schools. Wil -
berforce College, West Virgini a Institute and 
many others are places at which colored people may secure good and reasonable board 
during the summer months. Those who attended the Niagar a movement conference at 
Harper's Ferr y in 1906 remember the delightful situation and excellent fare at Storer 
College. Harper's Ferr y is one of the excursion places which many colored people 
make their Mecca i n the summer months. 
Fo r persons whose outings must be short 
the excursions offered by the railroads and 
steamships are popular. Old Point Comfort, 
Niagar a Falls and Harper's Ferr y are among 
the places our friends write us of. I n the 
West we learn of Colorado Springs, with its 
Garden of the Gods, and of the entrancing 
sights of the Pacific Coast. Such trips are 
not only a delight but an education as well. 
Southerners often come North for their 
summer outings, and visit with friends i n 
one of the large cities. This is true of the 
white as well as of the colored, and New 
Yor k and Chicago each summer gain many 
thousand sightseers. A country farmer, who 
for a number of summers welcomed a couple 
of city "fresh-air" children to his farm, givin g them their board for nothing, declared 
at last that he thought the city folk should 
reciprocrate; that they should invite his children to see the wonders of which the city 
child loved to boast. Doubtless they would 
B Y TH E SE A 188 TH E CRISIS 
have enjoyed it. Certainly the summer 
visitors i n the cities we know seem to have 
a happy time, and to enjoy the variety of 
good things provided. Perhaps the pleasantest places are the large towns near the undeveloped country; of such a place one correspondent writes: "It is good to roam the 
hills, to view the natural scenery and to visit 
the moving-picture shows." 
Not all of the city's colored summer visitors come for a good time only. There are 
always a few in the colleges, New York , 
Chicago and Cambridge claiming their share. 
This is an excellent time for the teacher who 
desires a deeper knowledge of his or her 
subject to study with men high i n their 
professions. The summer schools of philanthropy, too, are becoming better known i n 
the South, and each year a few colored people enter them. The New Yor k school has 
given its certificate to students from Atlanta , 
Nashville, Washington and other cities. These 
young men and women learn much of the 
multitudinous activities of a great municipality and sometimes stay on to share i n the 
city's work. 
The final fact that is brought keenly to us 
is the number of colored people who make it 
possible i n the summer to return to their 
homes. The South seems filled wit h blessed 
mothers and grandmothers, fathers, uncles, 
cousins, who stand i n the open doorways with 
their hearty welcomes. "W e go home to 
visit, " is the most frequent answer received 
from our vacation questioning. The elevator 
boy who has worked twelve hours a day in 
the hotel for seven days i n the week saves 
his tips and takes the boat to his mother i n 
far-away Jacksonville. The West Indian 
porter carries his savings to the steamship 
company and sails down to the island paradise that hems i n the Caribbean Sea. The 
busy physician feels the breath of the Blue 
Mountains i n the midst of the city's heat, 
leaves his practice with his neighbor and 
returns to the farmhouse i n the high hills. 
The tired seamstress finds herself one mornin g walkin g among the pines, past the 
log-cabin schoolhouse, on down the road to 
the open door of home. The welcome is so 
hearty, the memories so pleasant, that the 
return home marks the brightest of vacation 
days. 
WELCOM E HOM E SHOR T STOR Y COMPETITIO N 
A number of stories have been sent us i n response to the invitation to our CRISIS 
readers. W e may roughly divide them into three groups: 
Didacti c stories. Some of these have had good plots, others none, but nearly all 
have been hurt artistically by the always present desire to instruct the reader. This is a 
common fault among writers i n America . A n able critic has said of us: "W e arcpreachers, not artists." 
Old-time "darky " stories. Fro m the literary viewpoint these have been the best. 
Bu t the most of them have been too evidently old time, copying a style so well known as 
to be stereotyped. W e want humorous tales, but we would like them in a little less 
threadbare clothes. 
Character sketches. The story that we print below comes under this head. It is 
slight, but it bears the stamp of sincerity and truth. It shows us a young colored girl 
from a viewpoint new to many. It interprets for us a bit of human life. 
W e hope that our readers wil l send us other stories. W e want the good plots well 
worked out; we want merriment and laughter; we want pictures of the real colored 
America . 
TH E SERVAN T 
By FENTO N JOHNSO N 
H sho' ain't gwine tuh 
wohk foh dese hyar cullud folks no mo'. 'Deed 
ah isn't." 
An d i n these words, 
spoken during great 
emotional stress, Eliz a 
Jane, three weeks removed from the Southland, announced to herself her dissatisfaction with the Crawfords. 
"It's nuffin' but wohk, wohk, wohk all de 
time as i f ah nevah gits tiahed. It's 'Liz a dis 
and 'Liz a dat an' nevah do dey say when de 
day am done: 'Won't you come wif us to de 
festival or de 'viva l meetin'?' Ah's gwine 
tuh quit dese high-toned folks, an' git i n 
some white fam'ly. Ah's too lonely heah." 
The Crawfords were well-to-do Chicago 
Negroes. Mr . Crawford was a lawyer, who 
i n recent years had acquired a fortune 
through real estate. His wife was the 
daughter of a Southern Congressman of reconstruction days, and was consequently 
proud of her money and family. They had 
two children, Wallac e and Aline , who were 
students of the university, and very popular 
among the young people of their race. Ac ­
cording to their point of view those who 
were inferior to them intellectually were not 
their equals socially and the servant's position was the lowest plane of society. Mrs. 
Crawfor d was a prominent clubwoman and 
intimate with the leading social workers of 
both races. Mr . Crawford belonged to the 
Elmor e Club, an organization of colored 
professional and business men, who had purchased a neat little clubhouse where they 
could play billiards and entertain their 
wives and friends at dances and whist parties. H e had received his education at Fis k 
University and a Chicago law school, and 
was looked upon with high respect by the 
black world. 
Eliz a came to them from the backwoods 
of Georgia with one gingham dress and a 
pair of squeaky new shoes. Mrs. Crawford 
engaged her partly on account of her pretty 
face and her seeming willingness to do as 
she was bidden; and for a day or two the 
little Georgian appeared satisfied, for she 
was i n financial straits and the liberal wages 
were uppermost i n her mind. Bu t when 
Mrs. Crawford advanced her half of her 
wages the irresponsible creature had enough 
to satisfy her few wants and began to discover the faults i n her situation. Mrs. 
Crawford was too haughty; Alin e too proud 
and cold; Wallace never had a pleasant word 
for her or asked her to go out with him; and 
Mr . Crawford was splenetic and hard to 
please. The work was too confining; she 
longed for the open air and for the freedom 
of her own Georgia land. Ever y night the 
lights on State Street shone so brightly, 190 TH E CRISI S 
emphasizing her loneliness i n a city where 
she had neither friends nor acquaintances. 
I n Georgia she was not confronted with 
the social problem. There she worked for 
the whites and associated with the blacks; 
there the color line obliterated every other 
line society should wish to draw. N o rich 
Negroes asserted their superiority over her; 
she was just plain Eliz a and they were Moses 
or Mandy , as the case might be. An d now 
that she was up North, where money was the 
basis of social stratum, inferiority within the 
race was sickening and disappointing. 
That was the situation that confronted 
her that Frida y evening as she sat before the 
little mirror i n her room. 
Softly to her ears came the low strains 
of a violin. Music ! Ho w it touched her 
soul! Could she resist the spell? Could 
she, who loved to hear the drowsy humming 
of the bees and the endless song of the 
brook back there i n Georgia, refrain from 
listening to the melody of rosin and bow? 
Wit h low, measured step she left her room 
and went upstairs to the library, where the 
Frida y Evenin g Culture Club, a young people's organization, was being entertained by 
Wallac e and Aline . Wit h a slight tremor, 
for she feared that she was breaking some 
social rule, she knocked on the door, which 
was presently opened by Wallac e himself, 
standing before her with bow and violin. 
" 'Scuse me, please. A h jes' wants tuh 
heah de music, dat's all. A h laks music 
so," she said, her voice trembling with fear. 
"Oh , it is you, " was all that Wallac e said, 
as he motioned her to a seat i n the corner. 
There were about twenty young people i n 
the library and the music room. They were 
elegantly dressed, intelligent i n countenance, 
and many of them handsome. A t the time 
Eliz a entered Alin e was playing a selection 
from Chopin on the piano, and the members 
of the club were conversing i n low tones. 
Eliz a could not understand the drift of their 
conversation; such names as Ibsen, Galsworthy and Shaw were mentioned. The 
problem novel was discussed, and current 
politics was made the ground for friendly 
argument among the boys. Al l this was 
Greek to the little unlettered girl i n the 
corner, and her large black eyes opened wide 
with astonishment and her breath heaved 
with wonder. 
Presently a young octoroon girl, who had 
acquired some reputation among her people 
as a concert singer, was called upon by the 
presiding officer to render a contribution to 
the program. Alin e accompanied her as i n 
a voice both sweet and technically correct she 
rendered a love song from Schubert, and for 
an encore sang i n a tone of passionate 
tenderness the "Swin g Low , Sweet Chariot, " 
of plantation days. 
The singer was followed by Wallace , who 
said : " I might give you something from 
the masters, but as we have music o f our 
own I think it is better that we should 
cultivate that." 
An d so the young musician tuned his 
instrument and started to pla y the sorrow 
songs that can never die, because they are 
the genuine expression of America n life. 
A s the wil d passionate music came forth, 
trembling with its pathos, a tear glistened i n 
Eliza's eye. She saw the little cabin that 
she called home, the burning sand where the 
Negro children played, the cotton field with 
its wealth of snowy blossoms, and the lane 
on a moonlight night when the dusky lovers 
plighted their troth, free from the problem 
of color. She saw the grave where her 
mother lay, gone to sleep too soon because 
poverty had preyed on her and won the 
battle. She saw the river windin g its way 
through eternity, bringing as its tribute the 
body of her father, given to the water by a 
crowd of hilarious poor whites, drunk with 
cheap corn whiskey. 
An d he, who thus played the old plantation songs, was he not more than she? H e 
could throw on the screen of her mind pictures of her home life by means of an 
instrument that she could not even wield. 
H e and his sister were versed i n the lore and 
the music of civilization. Withi n her bosom 
was nothing save the emotions that she 
could feel so vividl y but could not express. 
To him culture had granted the gift to in ­
terpret the joys and sorrows of the human 
soul; and some mysterious power had denied 
her that sweet privilege. 
A s all this flashed across her mind, she 
realized her utter littleness. Rising , her face 
wet with tears, she left the room so quietly 
that no one noticed her departure. 
Whe n she had reached her room she threw 
herself across the bed and sobbed as i f her 
heart were bursting. 
"A h wants tuh luhn ! A h wants tuh luhn ! 
Ah's so po' an' nuffin' lak. A h wants tuh 
luhn. " LESSONS FRO M RUSSI A 
By I. M . RUBINOW , late of the Imperial Russian Civil Service 
O U may have heard it said 
many times that Russi a 
and the United States are 
closely bound together by 
ties of historical friendship. O f late, however, 
there has been a good modern reason for such friendship between 
official Russi a and capitalistic America , for 
i n either country the powers that be could 
point at the other country and say to its 
protesting citizenship: "There, look across 
the ocean; they have the same troubles on 
the other side." I f a prominent Negro 
leader could say to his followers: "Why , you 
have no reason to complain, for you are better off than the peasantry or the Jews i n 
Russia, " the Russian . government -.could 
with equal conviction thus address its Jews: 
"Yo u think our treatment of you is uncivilized and cruel; look, then, and see 
whether the most advanced republic i n the 
world gives any better treatment to its foreign races, such as the Negro. " It is this 
touching community of interests that has 
given the Russian Jew, transplanted to this 
country, a good deal of interest i n and sympathy for the Negro, and for the same 
reason, perhaps, the intelligent America n 
Negro has always had a more than 
ordinary interest i n the fate of the Russian 
Jew. 
Different as are ethnologically these two 
racial groups, the Jew and the Negro, their 
common suffering from race prejudice has 
brought them together, i f not i n their own 
eyes, then i n the eyes of humanity at large; 
and it is perhaps worth while mentioning 
this point, that one of the very few American 
books on the problem of race prejudice, that 
by Prof. Shaler of Harvard , devotes onehalf to the Negro and the other half to the 
Jew. 
Some time ago a distinguished Russian 
professor of economics had been visiting this 
country, of which he admitted he knew very 
little. Naturall y the Negro problem struck 
his attention immediately. H e had no time 
to study it, and so he asked me to tell him 
the essential features of this problem i n as 
few words as possible. I thus addressed 
him : "Yo u know all the economic and legal 
and political disqualifications under which 
the Russian peasant suffered terribly through 
centuries of slavery and is still suffering 
after half a century of so-called freedom." 
"Yes, " he said, he knew, for this was the 
subject of his life work. "D o you know, " 
I continued, "the social and legal, and also 
political and economic disqualifications under 
which the Russian Jew is forced to live because of religious intolerance and an unreasoning racial prejudice?" An d he said 
that since there were not many Jews i n his 
part of Russia, he had not given much 
thought to it, assuming that to be a local 
problem, but that he knew a few intelligent 
Russian Jews and felt very sorry for their 
condition. Then, to complete my crossexamination, I said: "Now imagine 
10,000,000 people who must suffer the combined effect of almost all difficulties under 
which both the Russian peasant and the 
Russian Jew are living , and you wil l get 
some conception of the Negro problem, i n 
this country." 
M y good Russian professor raised his 
hands to heaven and i n an awestricken voice 
exclaimed: "M y God, how can they stand 
it? " 
It is the same bond of sympathy which I 
have spoken of above that forced me to take 
up the study of the Negro problem when I 
first moved South ten years ago, and to keep 
up a more or less active interest i n it since 
then, and with these ten years of study back 
of me I am still often inclined to repeat the 
same question of my Russian friend : "Ho w 
can they stand it? " Ho w many an American has been asking the same question i n 
regard to the Russian peasant and to the 
Russian Jew, and perhaps some ten years 
ago that question was as difficult to answer. 
Bu t some things do happen i n Russia. 
Some five or six years ago things which will 
go down i n history as the great Russian 
Revolution of 1905 to 1907, happened, and 
i n these years both peasant and Jew i n 
different ways proved that they did not want 
to stand it, and i f nothing of any great 
permanent value has as yet been achieved, 
and i f a good many of the old troubles have 192 TH E CRISI S 
come back, we have at least obtained an 
answer to the question: they stand it because they are overwhelmed by a superior 
force, and perhaps the same answer might 
have satisfied my Russian professor i n regard to the America n Negro. 
Now to many, patriotic Americans any 
such comparisons between the problems of 
despotic Russi a and democratic Americ a 
may seem to be very fa r fetched. O f course, 
I do not at all intend to minimize these 
political differences, but let me point out to 
you the no less obvious -points of similarity. 
Only fifty years ago both the Russian 
peasant and the American Negro were chattel slaves. There were great plantations 
growing wheat and rye instead of cotton 
and corn, but growing it with slave labor. 
There were the noble slave owners, aristocratic, even kind, but sometimes inhumanly 
cruel, usually quite indolent and unbusinesslike. There were large dwellings, full 
of useless domestic service. There was the 
same contempt of trade and industry and 
there were even the same characteristic manifestations of gross immorality, resulting from 
ownership of human beings with which the 
South was familiar, so that in many respects 
the Russian land owner and the Southern 
slave owner had a very similar psychology. 
But no less interesting are the similarities 
between the American slave and the peasant 
serf, though I do not suppose anyone has 
tried to trace any racial relationship between the curly-haired Negro and the flaxenhaired Slav. There was often the same 
canine, unreasoning fidelity toward one's 
owner, and that was often used as an argument to prove the divine origin of serfdom, 
though serfdom was a new institution i n 
Russia, as slavery was i n America . On the 
other hand, there was among the more independent spirits the same secret longing for 
freedom. There were fugitive serfs • and 
even the same brutal acts of protest and revenge at times. 
The intellectual abolition movement in 
this country had its counterpart i n Russia, 
and at the same time. An d it was fought 
out on practically the same line of thought. 
There were the spirited onslaughts on slavery, which were met, as they were here, by 
appeals to history, economics and religion. 
A s the slaveholder and the slave were usually of the same race and nationality, it 
was somewhat difficult to marshal biology 
i n defense of slavery. That was really the 
only essential difference. An d perhaps i n 
both countries the intellectual arguments 
would not have succeeded i n destroying the 
peculiar institution, i f it were not for the 
pressure of powerful economic facts which 
made slavery a cause of weakness and not 
of power. Russian history has immortalized the saying of Cza r Alexande r II., when 
he tried to convince the nobility of the absolute necessity of emancipation : "Gentlemen, i f emancipation will not come peaceably from above, it wil l come forcibly from 
below." 
• It may be a pure coincidence, but surely 
it seems significant that the emancipation 
of the peasant and the Negro slave took 
place practically at the same time. The 
Russian emancipation act was promulgated 
i n the same year that the great wa r began 
i n this country. Bu t the conditions of emancipation i n the two countries were radically 
different. Fo r the Russian peasant was at 
least given some opportunity to acquire 
land, even though at an exorbitant price, 
and was left undisturbed as an independent 
tiller of the soil. 
N o matter what its shortcomings, the 
method of emancipation of the Russian 
peasants was a masterpiece of statesmanship as compared with the crude methods 
which have been used i n a simila r emergency i n this country. The methods of the 
Russian autocracy and nobility were bad 
enough, but the methods of democratic and 
republican Americ a were infinitely worse. 
The Russian act at any rate represented 
results of some thought and study. The 
emancipation of the Negro viewed from a 
distance looks like a hasty act prompted by 
a childish faith i n the efficacy and allsufficiency of personal freedom and freedom 
of contract as a foundation for economic 
life. Only read the contemporary writings 
of Carl Schurz, one of the noblest men of 
the time, and notice his absolute conviction 
that by • a simple substitution of the relationship of the employer and employee for 
those of master and slave wil l all economic 
and social problems be solved instantaneously. 
The political and legal ideas of the leadin g spirits of the times were fairl y definite. 
It was wrong to own a human being. It 
was necessary to preserve the Union . It 
was necessary to re-establish peace. These 
and similar ones were clearly announced 
principles. Bu t what was the expected fate LESSON S FRO M RUSSIA 
of several million emancipated beings? 
Wit h the stroke of a pen and of a sword 
the millions of ex-slaves, without property, 
were transformed into free citizens, free not 
only of individua l restraint but also of 
visible means of subsistence. An d yet 
around them were millions of acres of fertile 
land, which they had cultivated for over 
two centuries. 
Wit h such a different start fifty years ago 
it was no wonder that the development of 
the Russian peasant and the American 
Negro proceeded on somewhat different 
lines. Ye t the essential similarity between 
the two masses of agricultural population 
in lands of retarded economic development 
is seen even to-day. On the whole, the Russian peasant is as poor as the American 
Negro, and at times even poorer, for nature 
is less kin d to him, and the variability 
of the Russian crops causes those fearful 
famines from which the Negro, thanks to 
the even rainfall on his land, is fortunately 
guaranteed. H e is more illiterate than the 
Negro: Thus, in 1897, according to the last 
census, 66 per cent, of the male population 
of the Russian villages and 83 per cent, of 
the female population over 10 years of age 
could neither read nor write. H e is' no. 
more familia r with fruits of culture and 
civilization, neither has he the fine stimulating effect of a highly-civilized population. His usual dwelling is a one-room log 
cabin with a straw roof, and he is no more 
familiar with the laws of health and hygiene 
than is the backwoods plantation hand. H e 
is unenterprising and unbusinesslike. H e is 
often accused of being lazy, for he does 
not know how to work systematically. H e 
is not wasteful, as a rule, that is true; he is 
rather inclined to be overfrugal, but he 
spends enormous sums for vodka, his national drink, and it has often been said that 
the drinking habits of the Russian peasant 
are the only force that keeps the financial 
structure of the Russian autocracy from 
collapsing. H e does not often treat his wife 
with the consideration due to a lady, and 
lets her work i n the field, either on' her 
own farm or for hire. His wife bears him 
many children, and an appalling number 
of them die. H e is very religious, but also 
very superstitious; not any too moral, at 
least not any too strict i n sex relations. The 
most sincere, most self-devoted friends of 
the Russian peasants do not deny these 
facts, but try to explain them by the peculia r economic and social conditions of their 
existence. Fo r it so happens that both the 
Russian peasant and the middle classes in 
Russia arc of the same hue, and therefore 
no racial criticism is possible and no racial 
apology necessary. 
The long list of adverse characteristics 
of the Russian peasant may have sounded 
to you like an extract' from a speech by 
John Temple Graves or ex-Governor Vardaman on the American Negro. 
A highly skilled American statistician recently pointed even at the Negro rate of 
mortality as a racial characteristic. It is 
true that the Negro race i n the United 
States shows a death rate of 30 per thousand, while the white race has a rate of 
only 17.3. But, as I have shown recently 
i n a brief article, an investigation in Central Russia demonstrated the interesting 
fact that the mortality of the peasants 
showed a rate of 29.2; moreover, that it 
varied in an inverse ratio to the land owned, 
so that the families with smaller land ownings had a greater death rate. Thus, on 
one hand, were the peasants with less than 
14 acres per family : they had a death rate 
of 32.7; and, on the other hand, there were 
the few peasants who held more than 135 
acres with a death rate of only 19.0 per 
cent., or a little higher than that of the 
white American. 
Here is, then, the first important lesson 
which Russia may teach, how utterly unscientific, how utterly childish and silly is an 
effort to explain the economic, the intellectual or moral status of the American 
Negro by any inherent racial traits i n view 
of the identical results accomplished b y similar economic forces i n an entirely different 
race. It is true that after the brilliant 
work of Prof. Boa z has been done, there 
may seem no need for this lesson; but the 
lesson of Russi a to me is even more convincing, for it is a lesson drawn from 
thousands of facts which may not be contradicted. 
So much for the peasant. Now let us 
turn our attention to the Russian Jew. 
Now, what points of similarity are there 
between the Russian Jew and the American 
Negro? None whatever. If I were to propose you a conundrum: Wha t difference is 
there between the Russian Jew and the 
American Negro? the proper answer would 
be: Al l the difference in the world. No 
one denies the Caucasian origin of the Jew. 194 TH E CRISIS 
An d even the worst enemy of the Jew in 
Russi a has not dared to bring forth the plea 
of racial inferiority against him. I n fact, 
the official justification of the Russian government i n its policy against the Jews is 
the necessity to protect the simple-minded 
Russian against the abler, shrewder Jew. 
So here we have a theory of racial antagonism based upon a claim of race superiority rather than race inferiority. Unlik e 
the Negro, the Russian Jew is primaril y a 
city dweller; unlike the Negro, he is on a 
higher educational level than the masses 
surrounding him. Ye t the Jew is an outlaw 
under the law, restricted i n his civil, political 
and economic rights. Man y occupations are 
closed to him, his school facilities are 
limited, he is not eligible to political office, 
and has scarcely any franchises left; and, 
of course, he suffers from a good deal of 
social discrimination. H e is often laughed 
and sneered at by the members of the 
admittedly inferior Slavic race. It is a disgrace to marry a Jewish girl—though she 
may be used as prey i n true Russian fashion. 
A specific Jewish crime has been invented 
i n Russia—now that sounds quite familiar, 
does it not?—though the Jewish crime—the 
ritua l murder—is altogether the product of 
a wil d imagination. An d pogroms happen 
in Russi a and are as brutal or worse even 
than lynching is i n the South. 
O f course, all these things are officially 
explained as a sad but unavoidable result 
of race antagonism. Wh y does Russia refuse to better the condition of the Jews ? 
Because the people would not stand for it. 
The people simply must every now and 
then kil l a few Jews (or a few Negroes) 
to give vent to the rational race antagonism. 
Bu t what is the truth? That Jew baiting is 
the most convenient method to divert the 
attention of an ignorant though dissatisfied 
mass from the real political and social 
problems. So every time there is evidence 
of rising dissatisfaction i n Russi a there is 
a pogrom. An d every time the supremacy 
of the solid Democracy is threatened by any 
livin g issues, there is an Atlant a riot. 
Eve n as the Russian government has the 
power to stop antagonism i n less than 
twelve hours, so our responsible authorities 
could stop any lynching bees were it once 
seriously understood that these affairs would 
not be connived at. 
An d it is with a good deal of justice 
that the most despicable elements in Russia 
have replied to our America n protests 
against Russia's treatment of Jews, by 
pointing at Atlant a and asking : "Wha t 
right have you to protest? Do you treat 
foreign races any better?" 
An d there is your second lesson from 
Russia : that race inferiority has nothing to 
do with violent race persecution, but an exclusive position under the law, a lack of 
political rights, foster and develop the race 
antagonisms, and even contempt for a 
higher race, and that the worst expression 
of this race antagonism usually may be 
traced to sordid motives and partisan 
politics. 
Now let us pursue our analogy a little 
further. The Russian Jews and the American Negroes have one thing very much i n 
common. They do not like to be kicked 
about and abused, to have their skulls 
broken, or their houses burned, because they 
both happen to be human. An d so a good 
many Jews emigrate—for they have that 
advantage over the Negro, they can go to 
the United States and be happy. Bu t that 
does not solve the problem. Then there 
is the movement for the return to the Hol y 
Land , their own land. They call it Palestine; you call it Liberia , I believe. Bu t 
we left Palestine many years before you 
left Liberia , and so among the masses at 
large there is not very much enthusiasm 
for it. The majority of the Jews have a 
strong conviction that the problem of the 
Russian Jew can be solved right only i n 
Russia, as the problem of the American 
Negro i n Americ a only. Some" of them 
embrace Christianity, and move away from 
their natural surroundings, and spend 
the rest of their lives in the hopeless task 
of hiding their Jewish birth—crossing the 
color line you call it, I believe—and they 
are considered traitors to the race—that, 
too, is familia r to you. 
An d then there are all kinds of leaders. 
Some say: Be good; obey all the laws, even 
the most unjust ones. Show your love to 
the powers that be; sing Halleluja h to the 
great name; perhaps men may grow more 
tender hearted. Meanwhile work hard and 
acquire some property; for you know a rich 
Jew is not treated so badly after all. An d 
that is true; a rich Jew is treated even better than a rich Negro may ever be expected 
to be treated. Yet, notwithstanding all the 
supposed commercial talents of the Jew, 
that as yet has failed i n solving the Jewish LESSON S FRO M RUSSIA 195 
problem i n Russi a just as it will fail to 
solve the Negro problem i n America . 
It is very encouraging, therefore, that 
within the last decade an entirely new tendency has arisen among the Russian Jews, 
an entirely new hope. Not flight, not begging mercy of the victor, not dreaming of 
the Hol y Land—not even money—but tight 
is the thing the Jewish people have turned 
to as a solution. Economi c fight through 
the unions i n the struggle against poverty, 
self-defense committees i n fighting the Russian lynching bees, and a political fight for 
political and civil rights. It is true that 
the results of this fight for rights have not 
as yet been great, that they have lost i n 
the failure of the Russian revolution. Bu t 
the results as fa r as the Jewish race itself 
is concerned have remained. These are 
a sense of racia l dignity and pride, without 
which no race advance is possible; and the 
lessons of the Russian revolution are no 
less valuable because the revolution has 
failed. 
I can state them i n a few words: I n the 
revolutionary ranks all racia l antagonisms 
have disappeared. That was to be expected. Bu t even outside of the ranks of 
the direct fighters for the revolution, as 
soon as the breath of new political and 
social ideals had reached Russian society, 
there were no more Jews and Gentiles, but 
only citizens of one land fighting for political and social justice. Thus was the lie 
given to the theory that race antagonism is 
organic and inevitable. It is inevitable in 
a state of political reaction, of social stagnation, i n a state of gross materialism, where 
social ideals are unheard. An d that is the 
reason why you have social antagonism in 
the South. An d thus, as your present' status is nothing but a system of retarded 
development, your hopes are the hope's of 
human progress and civilization. It is 
quite true that the triumphs of humanity 
and brotherhood of races i n Russi a did not 
last very long—did not survive the revolution. Bu t that only corroborates the truth 
of my statement. It is by the degree of 
unity between races and nations that you 
can measure the general level of a country's civilization. 
An d this, i f you will , is the third useful 
lesson that Russia may teach us. Fighting, 
active resistance, not humble begging for 
charity, is the effective weapon of a subjugated race as of a subjugated class. 
But fight not alone. Seek your natural 
historical allies. It is my personal conviction that as the Jews of Russia have found 
their natural allies i n the working class, so 
will the American Negro. It matters not 
that the Russian workingman was often unjust and cruel to the Jew, and it matters 
not that the American working-man is often 
unjust and cruel to the Negro. Don't strike 
at the article that happens to be nearest 
to you first; but examine carefully who it 
is that profits by your oppression, and when 
you have found that, i n nine cases out of ten, 
you have properly placed the responsibility 
for the oppression. I n his ignorance the 
American workingman may be influenced to 
abuse the Negro ; but the time is not long 
i n coming when he will understand that he 
has nothing to lose and a good deal to gain 
from the advancement of his co-worker. 
An d when that day comes a good deal will 
have been accomplished for the solution 
of the Negro problem. LYNCHE D A WOMA N 
WE find that Ann e Bostwick came to 
"
v
 her death at the hands of parties 
unknown, " was the verdict rendered by the 
coroner's jur y that investigated the lynching 
of the colored woman who killed her mistress, 
the wife of a wealthy planter named Jordan, 
at Pinehurst, Ga., June 24. 
The usual verdict by the same old type of 
jury, but i n this case the sex and well-known 
mental condition of the victim have eliminated the customary excuse which is generally 
dilated upon with sensational detail and frequently without a vestige of evidence as 
justification for mob violence. Wit h that 
progressive form of local government which 
constitutes every man his own sheriff, there 
seems to be no doubt that the colored woman 
is to have equal rights, privileges and protection with the colored man. There is to 
be no discrimination on grounds of sex. 
Pinehurst has advanced ideas. 
That the unusual features of the lynching 
were thoroughly appreciated by the community may be inferred from the following 
extract from the Cincinnati (O.) Enquirer 
of June 26: 
"Great crowds attended and saw the shotriddled body of the Negress cut from the 
tree. Sheriff Bennett has made no arrests 
and none is expected. The truth is that there 
is general rejoicing over the lynching of the 
Negress and the lynchers are known to 
everybody. The Negress was lynched from 
an auto. The machine i n which she was 
sitting was driven under a tree, a rope placed 
about her neck and the other end tied to a 
limb of the tree. The machine was started at 
high speed and the Negress left hanging. 
He r body was then shot to pieces. He r eyes 
were shot out and such a fusillade directed 
at her waist that she was cut i n two." 
Commenting upon the verdict of the coronor's jur y the same paper says: "The verdict was rendered in the face of the fact 
that the automobiles i n which the lynching 
party pursued the slayer and the sheriff are 
known to be owned by some of the most 
prominent citizens of Cordele, Vienn a and 
Pinehurst." 
The circumstances of the murder of Mrs. 
Jordan, so far as we have been able to 
ascertain them, were as follows: 
Ann e Bostwick, who was about 60 years 
old, had been employed by the Jordans 
for some years, and bore the reputation of being a good servant, though at 
times she showed a bad disposition. "He r 
father, Thomas McAfee, " to quote the Macon 
Telegraph, "is considered one of the very 
best representatives of his race. H e is 
honest, a successful farmer, and of the large 
family he has raised none has ever been 
convicted of crime." The morning of the 
murder the colored woman had been severely 
reprimanded by Mrs. Jorda n and dismissed 
from her service. Possibly anticipating 
trouble, Mrs. Jordan kept her door locked 
until late afternoon. Abou t 4:30, as she 
stepped out on the veranda, she was seized 
by the Bostwick woman, who was concealed 
behind a pillar, stabbed three times and her 
head nearly severed from her body. The 
THE BURDE N TH E BURDE N 197 
colored woman then went to a field where COLORED ME N LYNCHE D WITHOUT 
Mr . Jordan was at work and informed him TRIAL . 
of her horrible deed. 1885 ; 78 1899 84 
Surely a crime sufficiently ghastly to 1886 71 1900 107 
arouse any community, but a crime for which 1887 80 1901 107 
the community itself was wholly responsible, 1888 95 1902 86 
as is testified by representative people who 1889 95 1903 86 
knew the woman and by extracts like the 1890 90 1904 83 
following, taken from a Southern paper, the 1891 121 1905 61 
Macon Telegraph of June 30, 1912: 1892 155 1906 64 
"Whil e livin g here (Fort Valley), the 1893 154 1907 60 
lynched Negress was tried by a jur y and 1894 134 1908 93 
found a fit subject for the lunatic asylum, 1895 112 1909 73 
but owing to the crowded condition of that 1896 80 1910 65 
institution she could not be received. I n her 1897 122 1911 63 
rational moments she was a good reliable 1898 102 
servant but became violent at times." ' Total / 2,521 
HISTORIC DAYS IN AUGUST 
1. Slavery terminated i n Britis h Colonies, 
1834. 
2. Lecompton (Kansas) Constitution rejected, 1858. 
4. Robert Purvis, abolitionist, born, 1810. 
7. Benjamin Lund y held his first abolition meeting i n Boston, 1828. 
9. P . B . S. Pinchback nominated for 
governor of Louisiana , 1872. 
10. Frederick Douglass addressed antislavery convention at Nantucket, 1841. 
11. Robert G . Ingersoll bom, 1833. 
12. Convention met i n Mississipp i to 
revise constitution, 1890. 
13. Anti-abolition riots began i n Phila ­
delphia, lasting three nights, 1834. 
14. Battle of Deep Bottom, 1864. 
16. Peter Salem died, 1816. 
17. First attempt to unite the A . M . E . 
and A . M . E . Zion Churches, 1820. 
20. (?) Twenty Africa n Negroes landed 
as slaves at Jamestown, 1619. 
21. Nat. Turner Insurrection i n Virginia , 
1831. 
22. Benjamin Lund y died, 1839. 
23. Africa n Methodist Episcopa l Church 
incorporated, 1796. 
24. Independence of Liberi a proclaimed, 
1847. 
25. Plantation slaves revolted i n Hayti , 
1791. 
28. Ac t for abolition of slavery i n British Colonies passed parliament, 1833. 
29. Sonthonax decreed liberty of slaves 
in San Domingo, 1793. 
30. James G. Birne y nominated for 
President, 1843. 
31. General Fremont's emancipation proclamation, 1861. 
L . M . HERSHAW . 198 TH E CRISIS 
Publishers Chat 
The September number of TH E CRISI S will be a 
Woman Suffrage Number. Few subjects are of such 
national importance to-day. W e shall have contributions 
from prominent women who are authorities on this subject. 
CITIE S WITHI N TH E VEI L W e shall begin 
soon a series of articles on the various cities of the world 
which have a large colored population. They will treat of 
the life of these thousands in an interesting way. 
. BABIES—Th e October number of TH E CRISI S will 
be Children's Number. This is the month of school beginnings and family reunions. W e want pictures of colored 
children of eight years of age or less, especially babies. W e 
shall give three prizes to the three most interesting pictures. 
Pictures must reach us not later than September 10th. 
TH E POIN T O F APPEAL—Upo n "The Point of 
Appeal" of a magazine rests the effectiveness of its advertising qualities. 
When a magazine is a good advertising medium, it 
indicates that its "Point of Appeal" is so strong that the 
readers' attention does not flag until the last advertisement 
has been read. 
It is this "Point of Appeal"—distinct, individual, different—which has made TH E CRISI S a result-producing 
medium for particular advertisers. 
Mr . Advertiser: Let us help you prepare your selling 
talks in harmony with this "Point of Appeal." Our suggestions are free. 
October, 1910—1,000; October, 1911 — 10,000; July, 
1912—22,000—a "Point of Appeal" for advertisers. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 199 
Patterns! Patterns! 
Exclusive creations of Madam e Becks, one of Ne w York's fashionable 
modistes. 
O n account of their originality, Madam e Becks' costumes and designs 
are in constant, demand by discriminating dressers and dressmakers. 
B y special arrangement we are publishing Madam e Becks' patterns exclusively in TH E CRISIS. 
Shirt Waist, No. 6213 
B y mail, 17 cents 
No . 6213 ; Shirtwaist—Material 
required, 3 6 bust: 2 1/2 yds, 36 in. 
wide; 1/2 yd- all-over lace for 
collar; 1 piece soutache braid. 
Patterns cut for sizes 36, 38 and 
40 . 
Skirt, No. 5348 
B y mail, 17 cents 
Shirtwaist Skirt can be made of 
serge, linen or taffeta. Material required: 3 yds., 4 0 in. wide, or 4 
yds., 36 in. wide for 24 waist. 
Patterns, are cut 24, 26, 28 and 
30 for waist measure. 
Patterns cut to measure, 50c. 
Ladie s are invited to consult 
Madam e Becks through this column. 
Address: 
Pattern Dept., TH E CRISI S 
26 Vese y Street Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E Crisis. 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A professional man advertised in TH E CRISIS for a partner with capital. The 
profession is one that offers little encouragement to colored men and yet he writes: 
"Kindl y stop the advertisement in TH E CRISIS, as my want 
has been filled. We appreciate the very good results (from 
TH E CRISIS) and will forward check on the 15th. " 
A large corporation advertised in TH E CRISIS for a general manager with 
capital. The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those 
with capital and experience. They write: 
' ' We believe that one of the parties is really interested in 
our proposition and will close with him in a few days.' ' 
They ' ' closed " with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
There is our story in a nutshell. 
Those who require high-grade help should use our ' ' Help Wanted' ' columns, 
and those who are trained or experienced as high-grade helpers should advertise 
their services where they may reach the largest number of possible employers. 
HEL P WANTE D 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming , country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer you a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y GO . 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS—Represen t reliable house, 400 per 
cent, profit. Selling GORDON' S Photo Pillow 
Tops. High grade work. Eas y sales. Bi g money. 
Samples and catalogue free. 
Luthe r Gordon Co. 206 N. Fifth Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
AREN' T YO U TIRE D O F WORKIN G A T "so much 
per " piling up profits for somebody else? Would 
you consider a proposition of going in busines for 
yourself without any investment but your time and 
talents? If so write and get our proposition. 
Young and old can make money with our proposition. 
TH E NELSO N SUPPL Y CO. , Harrisburg , Pa . 
AGENT S make big money selling our Negro pic 
lures, size 16 x 20. "Jesus Died for Both, " 
"Clingin g to the Cross," "Protecting Angel, " 
"Booke r T . Washington," "Heavenward, " " A 
Mother's Joy, " ' 'Inspiration,''
 1 'Mama, I Love 
You, " "Jac k Johnson." Catalog free. Peoples 
Portrait Co., 710 W . Madison St., Dept. C, 
Chicago, 111. 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
PATENT S 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
56 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machines Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone 343 John Room 604 
MUSI C 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musical Ar t 
Pupil of Sigismund Stojowsky 
Teacher of Piano, Theory, Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
REGALI A 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio v 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 201 
REA L ESTAT E UNDERTAKER S 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Large tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming, 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. We have 
for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses an ' barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
City property a specialty. Business lots in the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. Fo r any investment in Texas property, write T. B . Madison Real 
Estate Company. 2415 El m Street, Dallas. Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
L
 $30,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Can sell you a 
house for $50, $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Far m land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. An y of these are in good locations. 
Writ e for further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estate 
1218 1/2, Mt. Verno n Ave . Columbus , Ohi o 
Canada, Province of 
British Columbia 
WANTED—T o hear from one hundred 
respectable colored families who desire to 
settle in Britis h Columbia, where I have 
four hundred acres of rich black loam 
garden land, all cleared, that I will subdivide into five-acre blacks, build good 
comfortable homes of two to ten rooms, 
barns, sheds, etc. This property is near 
Vancouver , with railway, electric lines and 
water transportation conveniently near; 
located on the best salmon-fishing stream in 
the world; an abundance of game, wild duck, 
pheasant, quail, deer, etc. The section around 
is well populated and very rich and valuable. 
Maps with plans, etc., ready August 15. Be 
prepared to make your selection upon receipt 
of same, for the number of these blocks is 
limited. A very small cash payment will be 
required, balance to run five years. Fo r full 
particulars, etc., write me at once. 
ANDRE W J . NAPIE R 
Real Estate and Insurance 
736 Nelson St., Vancouver , B . C . 
Telephone Columbus 8935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BEOS . 
Undertakers and Embalmer s 
Notary Publi c 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 West 63d Street New York , N . Y. 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
SCHOOL S 
Lear n Algebr a or 
Shorthand Writin g 
During your spare time. Complete course; either 
one by mail, $14.00; book furnished. $2.00 down 
and then $1.00 a month until paid. We can accommodate 200 by mail. 
PERKIN S SEMINAR Y 
320 S. 10th Street Birmingham, Ala . 
INVESTMENT S 
Invest Your Money 
in Mound Bayou 
W e are promoting and financing Th e 
People's Brick Company , one of the 
most-needed and best-paying enterprises in the town. 
OU R REFERENCE : TH E 
BAN K O F MOUN D BAYOU . 
O R AN Y CITIZEN. . 
YOU R MONE Y will earn 7 per 
cent, from the time it is invested, and 
much more in the very near future. 
Fo r complete information address 
The S. I. & E. Corporation 
MOUN D BAYOU , MISS. 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 202 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 2 6 Vese y Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911 
National President—Mr . Moofiel d Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . John E . Milholland, New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garnet B. Waller , Baltimore, Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
OFFICERS 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B. D u Bois, New York . 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, N. Y . 
Assistant Secretary—-Miss Marth a Gruening, New 
York . 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
2 0 00 
OUR 
CLOCK 
MEMBERSHIP 
1500 50 0 
743 JUL Y lO,1912 
JOIN US 
1000 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. Class 4. Contributing Members, paying $10, 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. $5 or $2 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 per 
per year. year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annual 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
GOO D COMMISSIO N PAI D T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOI N NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
1101/2 Colfax Ave. , South Bend,Ind. 
Too , Too ! Too , Too ! Too, Too 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
Fo r particulars write G . W . BLAND , H . S. P. 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY' S 
328 Leno x Avenue 
Telephone Harle m 1896 
126th Street, NE W YORK , 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Intr.; Dr . Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager. 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 * 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHIO 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
DID YO U SE E 
TH E BECK S PATTERN S 
O N PAG E 199? 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cora Va n Schoick is conducting a sale and 
exhibit of unusual interest at the WHIT E ROS E 
MISSION , 217 East 86th Street, New York . 
There is on sale hand-painted china and pillow 
tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive for 
gifts and interior decorations. 
Telephone 3253 Harlem 
CARPE T GLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture ; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the warld, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D 
SPECIALT Y 
RUG S OUR 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
White Rose Working Girls' Home 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 204 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Te n Year s with Dr . D . C. Whit e 
Telephone 7189 Morningside 
DR. JAME S A. BANK S 
DENTIS T 
204 WES T 133d STREET , NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crown and Bridg e Wor k a Specialty 
Pur e Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L. McGHE E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
Genera] Practice Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
Office: Room 502, Eberl y Block, Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel. 2026 Port Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . Fr McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, M d 
Mention TH E 
P A M P H LET S 
Published and sold by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. African Civilization: B y M . D. Mac ­
lean. Price 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
B y Burt G. Wilder. Pric e 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: By Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Pric e 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: By Briga ­
dier-General Burt, U . S. A . Price 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Pric e 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Price 2 cents. 
7. Disfranchisement: By John Haynes 
Holmes. Price 5 cents. 
8. Contribution of the Negro to Human 
Civilization: By Dr. A . F . Chamberlain. 
Price 15 cents. 
9. The Relation of the Negroes to the 
Whites in the South: By W . E.. B. Du Bois. 
Price 15 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
BOOKS 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
James F . Morton, Jr. , A.M. , Autho r and Publisher. 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bug 
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . Y . 
The Power of Womanhood 
A Speech by Joseph Wellington 
PRIC E 20 CENT S 
Sold by 
TH E STANDAR D NEW S COMPAN Y 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 205 
YOU R LOCA L PRINTE R 
may be able to do your ordinary printing, but your business and 
personal stationery, wedding invitations, calling cards, pamphlets, etc., 
require that particular attention which our experience and facilities 
afford you. 
As first-class printers in New York City, we are subject to the 
most exacting demands, since new designs and type formations must be 
constantly originated to satisfy a large clientele of most discriminating 
patrons. 
W e refer you to Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS. 
Write for samples and special quotations. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Make Your Spare Moments 
Profitable 
<J The continued growth of TH E CRISIS necessitates the extension of 
our field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish 
sub-agencies and look after renewals. 
€| If you can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
in your city, we can make you a proposition that will interest you. The 
work is dignified as well as profitable. 
- ADDRES S BUSINESS MANAGE R : 
TH E CRISIS, 26 Vesey Street, NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 20 6 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Wit h a foreword by Dr. Fran z Boa s of Columbi a Universit y 
Chapter I. Ho w the colored people won their civil and political rights. 
Chapters II. and III. The Negro tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living, with a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapter VI . The colored woman, her discouragements and successes. 
Chapter VII . A vivid description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapter VIII . The Negro in politics in New York . 
Chapter IX . The author's personal views on the race question. 
Pric e $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Department of Th e Crisis, 26 Vesey St., N . Y . 
PLAY BALL, BOYS! 
Last half of the ninth; bases full; score tied and "Casey" at the bat. 
Ge t in the game, boys. Organize a baseball team in your city. 
Baseball is the most popular sport in this country. In every hamlet, town 
and city may be seen the future "Rub e Fosters" and "Willia m Matthews" romping 
over corner lots, batting, pitching and learning to play the game. 
Organize your team and get our great baseball outfit for a few hours' work. 
Ou r outfit includes 
10 Spaldin g basebal l suits wit h nam e of clu b (an y color) . 
10 cap s to match . 
10 pairs basebal l stockings. 
1 catcher's mit . 
1 first baseman's glove . 
3 infielders' gloves. 
3 outfielders' gloves. 
-..FOR INFORMATIO N WRIT E TH E : 
Busines s Manage r 
26 VESEY STREET 
of TH E CRISI S 
NEW YOR K 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . i 
Greate r Speed—Greate r Accuracy—Greater 
Efficiency—are the logical results of installing the 
UNDERWOOD 
TYPEWRITER 
^ Exclusive Underwood features make 
possible the most important labor-saving 
systems of modern accounting. 
Th e ever growing demand puts the 
annual sales of Underwoods far ahead 
of those of any other machine—making 
necessary the largest typewriter factory 
and the largest typewriter office building in the world. 
^ Such a demand from business men everywhere is unquestionable 
evidence of the practical mechanical superiority of 
THE MACHINE YOU WILL 
EVENTUALL Y BUY " 
Branch Offices in All Principal Cities 
UNDERWOOD TYPEWRITER CO., inc . 
Underwood Building NE W YOR K 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . This magnificent hotel, replete with every modern improvement, claims distinction for its location; 
direct Southern exposure. Superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. 
Endorsed by leading representative citizens. 
Concerts daily by the Abyssinia orchestra. Garage, bathhouses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special 
attention given to ladies and children. Literature and information mailed upon request. 
E . W . DALE , Cape May, N . J. , Owner and Proprietor 
The TESTIN G FIRE 
By ALEXANDE R CORKE Y 
Autho r of "Th e Victor y of Alla n Rutledge " 
Is the Sanest Story Eve r Written on the Race Problem 
It is the first story ever written on the race 
question, by a white man, that is not antagonistic 
to the colored race„ 
EVER Y FREEDMA N SHOUL D REA D IT 
Through its pages runs a sweet romance, but 
it is more than a love story. It is a novel of 
uplift, accomplishment and promise. 
N o One Interested in the Rac e Question Should Miss It 
Price $1.25 Net; Postage 10 Cents Extr a 
The H . K . FL Y COMPANY , Publishers 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of TH E CRISIS, 
26 Vesey Street, New York 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 