Christmas Crisis National President 
MOORFIEL D STOREY , Boston 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN , New York 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR. W . E. B. D U BOIS , New York 
Vice-Presidents 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , New York 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLMES , New York 
JOH N E. - MILHOLLAND , New York 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMKfi , Washington 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON , Brooklyn 
REV . G. R. WALLER , Springfield, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Treasurer 
RO Y NAS H 
Secretary 
ADDITIONA L MEMBER S OF TH E BOAR D OF DIRECTOR S 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONE S 
DR. O. M. WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR . WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIA M COO K 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR . JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
Can you conceive any better Christmas gift than a 
membership in the N. A. A. C. P., or a CRISIS subscription given to a friend or to an enemy? 
Yes, we furnish Christmas Cards free. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
Date , 1916. 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD , Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York . 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Mention TH E CRISIS.. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . 
BURGHARD T DU BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for December, 1916 
PICTURES 
COVER. Design by Lucille Rogers. Photograph of the Painting of 
The Three Kings. By Quentin Metsys, Metropolitan Museum, New York. 
CARTOON. The Election. By Lorenzo Harris 59 
ANTHONY CRAWFORD 67 
THE "BIG HOUSE" OF THE BALDWIN PLANTATION 72 
MEN OF THE MONTH 76 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT 77-80 
CARTOON. Christmas in Georgia, A. D., 1916. By Lorenzo Harris 78 
ARTICLES 
"BITS." A Christmas Story. By Helen G. RicVs 64 
CHRIST-MOTHER. A Poem 66 
THE FIRST STONE. A Story. By Joseph Lyndel Bowler 68 
THE FORETREKKERS. A Poem. By Alice Werner 71 
FIFTY YEARS IN LOUISIANA. By John Paul Baldwin 71 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 59 
THE OUTER POCKET 73 
MEN OF THE MONTH 75 
THE LOOKING GLASS 81 
THE HORIZON 88 
TH E CRISI S for January 
The January number of TH E CRISI S will be Richmond number, with articles ami pictures 
pertaining to that most interesting colore'1 city. 
TH E CRISI S CALENDA R for 1017 will be a calendar of Negro biography, with lives and 
pictures of 24 of the greatest men of Ne^ro blood of all time. Price twenty-five cents. Ready 
December 10. Limited edition. Order early. 
Remember our Christmas books and cards. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY -FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must "be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the P*st Office at New York, N. Y. 56 
NIUIINJIIIUUIIIIIIIIUIINIIIIIIRANIIIIIIRJIIRAIINIIFFL 
THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
"/ cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School Term Opened Oct. 4, 1916 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. I 
TIIAIIIIIIMNIINIIIIIINIIIIIMMIIMIIIIMIIIIWIIIIWMIIIIIIIW 
TH E 
AGRICULTURAL AND 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
(FORMERLY A. & M. COLLEGE) 
Fall Term began September 1, 1916. 
Board, lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. 
Maintained by the Governments of 
the United States and of Worth Carolina. 
Short courses. 
Courses leading to the degrees of 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture 
and Bachelor of Science in Mechanics. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
Address: 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, healthful, well appointed. 
This school offers to young colored 
men and women who have a reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to 
become teachers, courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and 
agriculture. Tuition is free. Board, 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The entrance 
fee is $7 . Fall term opened September 16, 1916. 
For full information, write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, PRINCIPAL. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
[IIII!!II[NNIIIIIIIIIIIIII]II!IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII]INIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII[III]IIII[IIIIIIIIW THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 57 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Vale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wclleslcy. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
goo d drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Beg-an September 21.1916 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
tinder the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
60 9 N. 43 d St W . Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E COLORE D TEACHE R 
A Monthly Educational Journal 
Frederick A. McGinnis, Wilberforce, Ohio, Editor 
Isaac H. Miller. Atlanta. Ga., i 
T. B. Steward, Kansas City, Mo. r Associate Editors 
\V. H. Fouse, Lexington, Ky. ) 
$1.00 PE R YEAR—1 0 CF.XTS PER COPY . 
AGENT S WANTED . 
Address: The Colored Teacher, Box 22, Wilber ­
force, 0 . 
TEACHER S A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois. Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York. North Caro 
lina. Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania. Rhode Island. 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas. Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
U0 3 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Books? Se e th e Selecte d List o n 
th e Bac k Cove r 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College , Academy , Divinit y School 
A n institution famou s withi n recen t years 
fo r its emphasis o n all sides o f manl y develop ­
ment—th e only institution in th e far South 
devote d solel y t o the educatio n o f Negr o 
youn g men . 
Graduate s give n high rankin g b y greatest 
norther n universities. Debating , Y . M. C . A. , 
athletics, all liv e features. 
Fo r informatio n address 
JOH N HOPE , Presiden t 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FIS K UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founde d 186 6 
Thoroug h Literary , Scientific , Educational , 
Musica l an d Socia l Scienc e Courses. Pionee r 
in Negr o music . Specia l stud y in Negr o life . 
Idea l an d sanitar y building s an d grounds. 
Well-equippe d Scienc e building . 
Christia n hom e life . 
t Hig h standar d o f independen t manhoo d and 
womanhood . Fo r literature , etc., writ e 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , Presiden t 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educationa l 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned anil controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the host universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began Sept. 28th, 191G. 
For further information address 
W . A . FOUNTAIN , Presiden t 
BISHO P J. S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 58 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
III ME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L O F 
French Dressmaking, Ladies^ Tailoring and Millinery. 
Bridges System. 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying, Draping, 
Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taking two or more consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridges Diploma means 
something to you. 
448 E. 35th St. Chicago, 111. 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keeping 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A. B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
W e typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill i 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, President 
1227 SO, 17TH STREET, PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
SHORTHAN D The standard system easily 
mastered by our method. 
You write business letters the sixth lesson. Complete course of 20 lessons. Pay for each croup when 
you are ready for them. Send $3.00_TODA' Y for 
enrollment and first lessons. Get Started N( )W. 
Sample Lesson-—fifty cents. Pitmanic Institute. 4277 
Cote Brilliante, St. Louis, Mo 
SCIENC E MUSI C 
TEACHER S MATHEMATIC S 
STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Established 1897 
101 1 NE W YOR K AVENU E WASHINGTON , D . C . 
Domestic Science Teache r (a graduate of Cheyney Institute, Cheyney, 
Pa.) wishes a position as teacher or 
matron. Address L. H., care of Th e 
Crisis, "O Fifth Avenue , New Yor k 
City. 
Adorn Your Hom e | 
WIT H 
th e Ne w Pictur e of 
jesus christ 
reproduced from description of Publius Lentulus : 
maire of Judea during Christ's time. 
The size of this picture is 714x9^4, mailed to ; 
any part of United States or Canada on receipt ; 
ot 10 Cents either in coin or postal stamps : 
M KEFFEL, 1873 2nd Ave., New York ! 
AGENTS WANTE D EVERYWHER E \ 
ROLAN D W . HAYES , Teno r 
RECITALS CONCERT S ORATORIO OPER A 
"A n unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. 
ADDRESS ! 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
A Christmas Gift? 
JUS T PRESEN T A YEAR' S SUBSCRIPTIO N T O 
TH E CRISI S AN D I N THI S WA Y WIS H JO Y 
TO YOU R FRIENDS—FO R JO Y INDEE D WILL IT 
BE ! 
B Y WA Y OF SPECIAL OFFER: 
FIV E NE W PAI D U P YEARL Y SUBSCRIPTION S 
TO TH E CRISI S SEN T AT ON E TIM E WILL 
ENTITLE TH E SENDE R TO A YEAR' S SUBSCRIP ­
TIO N FREE. THI S OFFER HOLD S GOO D UNTIL 
MIDNIGH T O F 4 JANUARJ R, 1917 . 
TH E CRISI S CALENDA R FOR 191 7 WILL 
B E A XEGR O BIOGRAPH Y WIT H JIVE S AN D 
PICTURE S OF Twenty-four O F TH E GREAT ­
EST ME N O F XEGR O BLOO D O F ALL TIME . 
TH E PRIC E IS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS —th e 
VALU E IS BEYON D MEASURE—AN D TH E 
SUPPL Y IS LIMITED ! 
Le t the -
- 4 in 1 -
Coupon Pla n 
- Increas e < 
You r Profits 
Mail Order Dealers 
SELL VALUABLE INSTRUCTION 
SYSTEM S B Y CUT PRICE COUPO N UNDER MONE Y BAC K 
GUARANTEE . BI G MARGIN . 
SMALL SELLING-EXPENSE . 
COMPLETE PLAN , SAMPL E 
COUPON S AN D BAIMAI H 
BULLETIN SENT ON REQUEST. 
MAIL DEALER'S COUPON SYSTEM 
621 80. Dearborn Street, Chicago 
Statement of the Ownership, Management, Etc., 
Required by the Act of Congress of August 21, 1912, 
of TH E CRISIS . Published monthly at 70 Fifth Avenue, 
Xe w York, N . Y. , for October 1, 1916. 
State of New York 1 
County of New York / ss- • 
Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State 
and county aforesaid, personally appeared A. G . 
Dill, who, having been duly sworn according to law, 
deposes and says that he is the Business Manager 
of TH E CRISIS , and that the following is, to the best 
of his knowledge and belief, a true statement of the 
ownership, management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the Act of August 24, 1912, embodied in 
section 443, Postal Laws and Regulations: 
Publisher: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fifth Avenue , New 
York City. 
Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth 
City. 
W . E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 
York City. 
Augustus Granville Dill, 70 
Editor: ^ W . E 
Avenue, New York 
Managing Editor: 
Fifth Avenue, New 
Business Manager 
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Owners: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation with no 
stock. 
Moorfield Story, President, 
Roy Nash, Secretary, 
Joel E. Spingarn, Chairman Board of Directors. 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Treasurer. 
Known bondholders, mortgagees and other security 
holders, holding 1 per cent or more of total amount 
of bonds, mortgages or other securities: None. 
A. G . DILL . Business Manager. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this -?9th day 
of September, 1916. 
EDWAR D T. BRF.DEV. Notary Public. 
(M y commission expires 30th March, 1918.) 
Notary Public, Kings County, No. 81 
New York County, No. 176 
New York Register, No. 8180 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 13—No. 2 DECEMBER, 1916 Whole No. 7 4 
Editorial 
TH E ELECTION . 
yE shall not see My face, except 
* your brother be with you.— 
Genesis 43:3 . 
THE WORL D LAST MONT H 
THI S has been a distracting 
and unsatisfactory campaign, both to black and to 
white people. Fe w men 
could vote according to their consciences, because neither candidate 
represented their consciences. Mr. 
Wilson wa s satisfactory as a reducer 
o f the tariff, a promote r of currency 
reform, and as a man of Peace. But 
he was still the representative of the 
southern Negro-hating oligarchy, and 
acknowledged its leadership. Mr. 
Hughes wa s the author o f several of 
the best decisions in favor o f the Negro that the reluctant Supreme Court 
has ever handed down. A t the same 
time, on specific Negro problems he 
was curiously dumb. White Christians again at St. Louis, Mo., attacked the Negro problem, and, as 
usual, surrendered. The Episcopal]-60 THE CRISIS 
ans started to put the Negroe s out of 
the church b y giving them their own 
bishops—a logical and necessary step 
if the Church wa s not prepared fo r 
full interracial brotherhood. An d it 
is not. The Church ended b y doing 
practically nothing. If a southern 
bishop wants a Negr o suffragan bishop he can have him. But he does not 
want him and he is not likely to. 
In Haiti and Ireland, veiled tyranny 
and cruelty still persist. They have 
killed six America n soldiers in San 
Domingo ; but the numbe r o f black 
men wh o have been killed, and the 
black wome n wh o have been tortured, 
is not counted in the dispatches. Ireland is again on the verge of rebellion. The Great Wa r finds German y frying to crush Roumani a in 
the East, and still, with difficulty, 
holding with England and Franc e in 
the West ; while in Allied Japan a new 
wa r premie r comes to power, Terauchi. This means an unbending attitude toward China and America . 
Strikes go on. They wer e wo n when 
American whites threatened the nation ; they wer e lost when "dirty foreigners " rebelled at Bayonne. Meantime, Samuel Gompers is sizing up 
the new Negr o immigrants to the 
North, and deciding ho w far the 
unions can go in keeping them out. 
Cotton is high, and the southern 
Negr o farme r is prosperous; but the 
northern Negro laborer is paying wa r 
prices and rents in order to make wa r 
millionaires. With all this, it wa s 
fitting for Yal e University to tell her 
history, in great pageantry. 
TAGORE 
rep^UI THE world in these days is Inlgl beginning to listen to a 
H great, new voic e representEaaa l ing the colored races and 
speaking with the peculiar authority 
o f a Nobel prize man. Rabindranath 
Tagore , the East Indian poet, and 
knight o f the British Empire , has recently addressed the students o f Tokio 
University, Japan. His attitude toward Europe is generous, but firm. 
He says: "In Europ e w e have seen 
noble hearts wh o have ever stood up 
for the rights o f man, irrespective of 
color and creed ; wh o have braved 
calumny and insult from their own 
people in fighting fo r humanity's 
cause and raising their voice s against 
the mad orgie s o f militarism, against 
the rage fo r brutal retaliation or rapacity that sometimes takes possession o f a whol e people ; wh o are alway s ready to make reparation fo r 
wrong s done in the past b y their own 
nations, and vainly attempt to stem 
the tide o f cowardl y injustice that 
flows unchecked because the resistance is weak and innocuous on the 
part o f the injured. 
"But, wher e Europ e is to o consciously busy in building up her 
power, defying her deeper nature and 
mockin g it, she is heaping up her 
iniquities to the sky, cryin g fo r God's 
vengeance, and spreading the inflection o f ugliness, physical and moral, 
over the fac e o f the earth with her 
heartless commerc e heedlessly outraging man's sense o f the beautiful 
and the good. " 
This is his answe r when asked wha t 
shall suffice for the healing of the 
nations: "Th e great problem o f man's 
history has been the race problem. 
Western civilization, particularly as 
exemplified in Germany, has been 
based upon exclusiveness. It has 
been watchful to keep so-called 
'alien' elements at arm's length; to 
minimize them; to exterminate them. 
This attitude must change, if peace is 
to come and endure upon the earth. 
W e want 'a social unity within which 
all the different peoples could be held 
together, yet fully enjoyin g the freedom of maintaining their ow n differences.' Unity in difference—as the 
river, no w hurryin g along between 
steep banks, no w loitering ove r the 
shallow meadow-reaches; no w flecked 
with foam in its swift flow, no w dappled with sunbeams in its smooth and EDITORIAL 61 
level course ; now lashed to fury by 
the howling winds, now dimpled by 
the gentle summe r airs—still remains the river, the one—so the 
stream of humanity, whether expressing itself in a higher or a lower 
type, in white, or yellow, or black, or 
red, or brown man ; whether rushing 
torrent-like through the great ways 
of modern commerc e and industry, or 
sleeping in the backwaters o f thought 
and reflection, is one. " 
MUDDLE 
ilOTHING can better illustrate 
our meaning when we spoke 
last month of the need of 
political education among 
colored people, than the attitude of 
a few Negroe s toward the political 
mission o f the N. A . A. C. P. It 
goes without saying that this association is, and has been from the beginning, a political organization, in 
the best and broadest sense of that 
term. It takes part in politics, and 
sees and knows no disgrace therefrom. It maintains that in any republic, except a dead one, there is no 
greater mission fo r citizens and organizations of citizens than wise, 
honest, determined political activity. 
It is manifestly the business o f the 
N. A . A. C. P. to teach the Negroes 
of the United States these elementary 
truths in politics: (1 ) It is the first 
duty o f candidates fo r public office 
to tell their constituents wha t they 
stand for. (2 ) It is the first duty of 
any person, black or white, to know 
the attitude o f candidates on matters 
affecting his interests before he votes 
fo r or against them. (3 ) Wheneve r 
any man is voting fo r a candidate 
whos e beliefs and intentions he does 
not know, that voter not only acts 
the part o f a fool, but he endangers 
the ver y foundations o f republican 
government. This Association proposes, in every wa y possible, to make 
candidates fo r public office declare 
befor e election their attitude toward 
the Negr o and his needs. 
THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY 
|R. CARTE R G. WOODSO N 
and his associates have a 
right to feel proud of the 
completion, with the current October number, of the first volume of The Journal of Negro History. 
It forms a volume o f over 500 pages, 
containing 16 leading articles varying 
from 7 to 26 pages. These articles 
cover a wide range o f subjects: 6 pertain to the history o f free Negroes; 4 
are on African and West Indian Negro history; 2 are biographical; 14 
are on miscellaneous subjects in politics and war; 178 page s are given to 
documents, and 23 pages to book reviews. The Journal already circulates throughout the Americas, and in 
Europe, Asia and Africa . It has 
been placed in the leading colleges 
and libraries, and yet, it has only 
1000 subscribers. Surely, if the 
Negroes of the United States take 
themselves seriously they will multiply this subscription list by at least 
ten in the next twelvemonth. 
THE LYNCHING FUND 
CORRESPONDEN T from 
Greenfield, Mass., no 
doubt voices the thought 
of many o f our friends 
when he asks in regard to lynching: 
"D o you really think it possible to 
put a stop to such lawless actions 
throughout the South? " and "In what 
wa y do you think it can be done? " 
There are, indeed, many persons 
who would be willing to help us raise 
not $10,000, but $100,000, if they 
saw clearly a method o f stopping 
lynchings. W e ma y answer frankly 
that there is no royal road to social 
reform. The methods which we have 
in mind for the elimination o f this 
savagery in the South are neither 
new, spectacular, nor sudden. They 
are the old and well-worn paths of: 
(1) Publicity; (2 ) The better administration of present laws; (3 ) Court 
actions in all possible instances; (4 ) 
New legislation; (5 ) Federal' inter-6'2 THE CRISIS 
ference. W e place frankly our greatest reliance in publicity. W e propos e 
to let the facts concerning lynching 
be known. Today, they are not fully 
known ; they are partially suppressed; they are lied about and 
twisted. 
We propose, then, first of all, to let 
the people o f the United States, and 
o f the world, know WHA T is taking 
place. Then w e shall try to convict 
lynchers in the courts; we shall endeavor to get better sheriffs and 
pledged governors; w e shall seek to 
push laws which will fix the responsibility fo r mo b outbreaks, or for the 
failure to suppress them; and we 
shall ask the national government to 
take cognizance of this national 
crime. 
KEEP HIM IN HIS PLACE 
|H E damnable- impertinence of 
those wh o would keep the 
Negro a slave is so unbelievable and persistent 
that the facts must be continually reiterated. A correspondent writes us 
from Springfield, Mo. : "W e are having some trouble here concerning the 
use of the public Carnegie library. 
The Negroe s have the privilege of 
drawing books but are not permitted 
to look through the stacks or use the 
reference rooms. W e are forced to 
ask the librarian for the book which 
we desire to draw and if the book we 
wish is not available we must depend 
upon her to make a selection fo r us. 
W e cannot use the reference room nor 
can w e draw reference books and 
take them from the library. Consequently the wor k of our High School 
pupils is greatly handicapped as well 
as the wor k of older persons wh o desire to do research work . 
"W e wish to know if there are any 
provisions made by the Carnegie library board fo r Negroe s when libraries are established. In short, we 
wish' to know if the librarian or the 
local library board has the right to 
deny us the free use of the public 
library?" 
The Atlanta, Ga., Constitution publishes this extraordinary and matterof-fact special dispatch from Macon, 
under the date o f Octobe r 31 (the italics are ours) : "'Fearing that the general unrest amon g the Negroe s o f the 
city and the efforts that are being put 
forth on the part of the authorities to 
keep them from being transportea 
from Macon to the North, ma y result 
in a riot which the city authorities 
will not be able to cope with, Chief of 
Police, George S. Riley, today recommended to the civil service commission that forty magazine rifles be purchased fo r the police department. A t 
the present time the police only have 
their pistols and clubs. 
"Monda y mornin g 1,000 Negroe s 
congregated at the Southern railway 
depot expecting to leave fo r Michigan 
in a special train. The police dispersed them, but had difficulty in 
making several of them move on. 
Several arrests wer e made. It is said 
that a surliness no w exists amon g a 
certain class o f the Negroe s and the 
police want to be able to cope with 
any situation that ma y arise. " 
Can you beat this calm defiance of 
the Thirteenth Amendment ? 
THE ARTFUL DODGER 
VASSA R COLLEG E has a 
new president, Dr. H. N. 
McCracken. He recently 
wrote, in the Ne w Yor k 
Times, to a critic : "Yo u are reported 
in you r remarks as having classed 
Vassar with the so-called 'select 
schools.' The implications o f this 
phrase are unjust if applied to Vassar. I understand a 'select school' to 
be a school which selects, or at least 
admits, only the children o f certain 
classes o f people, and prides itself 
upon a certain aristocracy o f clientele. This charge is wholly out o f 
place with respect to Vassar. " EDITORIAL 63 
Thereupon the editor o f TH E CRISIS 
took it upon himself to address Dr. 
McCracken : "Yo u say that 'this 
charge is wholly out o f place with 
respect to Vassar.' I write to ask if 
Vassa r has changed its policy o f refusing to admit students o f Negr o 
descent? I shall be very glad to 
know if this is true." 
In reply to this letter the following 
bit o f noble and large-hearted evasion 
has been received from the president's secretary: "In reply to your 
letter o f October 24, to President 
McCracken, I beg to say that the 
question to which you refer has not 
arisen during his administration." 
A CARD 
E wer e mor e touched than 
we can say by the beautiful book that has just come 
to us, with the autographs 
o f all those wh o .attended the first 
Ameni a Conference as our guests last 
August, and we shall treasure it always as a memento o f those whom 
w e are very proud and very happy to 
call our friends. Will you tell them 
how deeply grateful we are fo r their 
kind, mor e than kind words, and how 
the pleasure which we ourselves had 
drawn from the conference wa s renewed as w e read wha t each friend 
had written, as we tried to feel what 
each o f them had felt during those 
days and had mirrored in his soul? 
W e wish you could tell all America , 
too, ho w much it loses by cutting itself off from hearts so generous and 
so warm-hearted and from friends so 
loyal and so good to possess. 
Alway s cordially yours, 
, . ( J. E. SPINGARN, 
(Signed) } AM Y Spingar n 
"REFINEMENT AND LOVE" 
A COLORE D girl writes us 
from Oswego , N. Y. , saying : 
"D o you want to know 
what I like best about TH E CRISIS? 
Wha t I enjoy most ? Wha t fires my 
ambition to struggle on ? Well, it is 
just this: The successes o f other 
members o f my race and what they 
are doing in this United States. 
"An d do you want to know what I 
like least? Just such expressions as 
these: 'The recent Irish revolt may 
have been foolish, but would to God 
some o f us had sense enough to be 
fools!' The great Napoleon realized 
after all that the use o f forc e wa s not 
the best wa y to achieve one's ends. 
That sort of a foundation is too 
weak ; it cannot last. So is it not 
better to keep before our people ideas 
and thoughts o f culture, refinement, 
service and love and in that wa y 
build our progress on a sure foundation? " 
No one wishes mor e than TH E 
CRISIS that "culture, refinement, service and love " should triumph in the 
world ; but we continually fear lest 
easy-going young folk should loll in 
their parlors toasting their toes and 
expect the horror of the world's 
blood sacrifice to be accomplished by 
someone else while they are practising "refinement and love. " Terrible 
as it may be, the awful fact faces the 
colored races in this world : That no 
human group has ever achieved freedom without being compelled to murder thousands o f members o f other 
groups wh o wer e determined that 
they should be slaves. Let us hope 
and deeply pray that this may not 
happen in the case o f colored folk ; 
but at the same time let us set our 
faces grimly toward the fact, with 
unwinking eyes, that it may be necessary. Wa r is Hell, but there are 
things wors e than Hell, as every 
Negr o knows. 
'T'WO men looked out from their 
prison bars— 
The one saw mud, the other, stars. "BITS " 
A Christmas Story 
By HELE N G. RICKS 
T
HE feathery snowfiakes came hurrying 
down simply because it was the day before Christmas and not because there was 
any intention on their part to remain. It 
was late afternoon and the holiday bustle 
had only partially subsided. 
Pushing through the crowds at the railway station a young girl emerged, muffled 
up to the ears in furs, with a girlish face 
wreathed up to the eyes in smiles. It was 
very evident with her that Christmas was 
coming. At the gate entrance she inquired 
about her train. The train was gone! To 
stand there stupidly gazing at the official 
who certainly was not responsible helped 
matters not at all. Of course, it meant a 
"wire " and a wait until next morning. To 
a girl who was bent on meeting a bunch of 
college friends at a house party Christmas 
morning, the laconic information concerning 
the means of her transportation came not 
joyously. The tears which filled her brown 
eyes were definitely feminine. And then a 
little smile slipped out from somewhere and 
she proceeded to the Western Union office. 
She was pushing through the door leading out to the busy street when a little 
brown hand caught at her skirt. 
"Evenin' Herald, Lady? " 
The girl looked down. 
"Why , little fellow, you're crying. I 
can't let you take my pet indulgence away 
from me like that. Tell me about things, 
dear." And she brushed a perfectly good 
little tear out of the corner of her eye—the 
one that had refused to be chased when the 
smile came. 
"It's—it's that I've just got to sell out 
tonight. It's—it's oranges for Bits." 
By this time the ragged little coat-sleeve 
was serving wonderfully as a handkerchief. 
"Come, come, little lad, stand over here 
out of the crowd. Somehow I don't understand. Who is Bits?" 
"Why , he's all I'm got—that's all." 
"Oh, I see! Can't you tell me more about 
him and your own little self? Maybe I can 
buy you out?" 
The childish face stared up into the girl's 
with an incredulity that was not at all concealed. 
"Mean it, or jes' kiddin'?" 
"Yes, dear, I do mean it. Tell me. " 
"It ain't so awful much to tell you 'bout 
where we live, 'cause we ain't roomin' in any 
manshun. Bits an' Spatch an' me all sleeps 
on a cot in Mis' Barney's basement, an' we 
gets our feed from Greeley's grocery when 
we gets it. Spatch is jes' beany 'bout 
weenies—swellest little poor dog you ever 
seen. We ain't got no folks but jes' ourselves, an' Spatch. Somehow, though, Bits 
hits it off' with the papers—he's onto his 
jo b all right. I'm littler than him an' 
folks lots of time passes me up. We ain't 
never had heaps, but we has alius been 
happy, 'cause Bits says it's the only way 
to top off things. He's sick, though, now— 
he jes' all to oncet took down an' they 
bustled him off to the hospital. He looked 
right spruce an' cleaned up in that white 
bed when I went to see him, but say, he 
was soma sick. They told me I could come 
back tonight, an' I wanted awful hard to 
take him oranges 'cause tomorrer's Christmas. But you see, I'm down to six cents, 
less'n I sell out. Guess I wasn't a game 
thoroughbred, like when you saw me cryin'— 
bet you Bits wouldn't a done it! My name's 
Rodney, but folks as knows me calls me 
Pep, 'cause some days I hits it off right 
spunky—specially when they're hot on—on 
Spatch's trail—he's one-eyed." 
With the ingeniousness of the small boy 
he related the history of himself, Bits and 
Spatch. And the girl understood. 
"Rodney, I'm going to buy you out and 
we'll dispose of these Heralds someway. 
You lead the way because we must get these 
oranges to Bits. May I go with you, please, 
to see your brother?" 
"Well, I should jes' bet you can! It ain't 
so far, but I spect' as how you'll better take 
the car. I'm only got six cents, but I'll 
boost you up an' pop the conductor a halfdime an' beat it faster than the car an' 
be waitin' for you. " 
"Thank you, dear, for wishing for me to 
ride, but oh, I'd love to walk with you if I 
may." 
"Say, you are some great—know it? " 
And the look of gallant appreciation overspread the boy's face. 
fi4 "BITS" 66 
"Maybe if you're this good for walkin'— 
maybe you wouldn't mind cuttin' over two 
blocks with me. I promised Spatch that 
he could g o tonight." 
"Certainly! Ar e you cold, dear?" 
"Should say not—too excited! " 
They were reaching the quarter of the 
city very unfamiliar to the girl. Faithfully she followed the little figure striding 
along manfully with a bundle of "Evenin' 
Heralds" tucked under one arm. 
" 'Lo, kids! " 
They had passed a bunch of little street 
children. 
"That's my bunch. They was some starin'—huh? Wonderin' bout you, I guess." 
Finally they had reached a tenement 
house. 
"Can't ast you in, but I'll be right down 
soon as I untie him. An'—an' shall I leave 
these papers? She could use them for 
kindlin'." 
"Oh, yes, by all means! I'll wait for you." 
In an incredibly short space of time a 
boy with a dog was retracing his steps down 
the street in company with the girl. 
"Ain't he a dog fer you? Spatch is the 
cut'off for 'Dispatch'—one of the old papers. We'r e pardner s!" 
His new friend smiled understandingly. 
A t the fruit stand they purchased the 
oranges. 
"Say ! but you're some lady. I'll bet Bits 
will like you heaps. Wha t made you good 
to me today? " 
"Why , my dear! I just love all the little 
boys and girls of my race. I just wanted 
to help you if I could, just a little bit." 
They had now reached the hospital. The 
girl, the small boy and the dog entered the 
building. It so happened that the lady visitor was not a stranger to the hospital force, 
consequently Spatch was graciously accorded 
a permit. 
"Ho w is the little lad, nurse?" 
"The crisis came four nights ago—he 
will recover. He's been waiting for his little brother—go right in." 
The white hospital cot was near the window and a shaft of light fell across the face 
which instantly became illumined with a 
smile when Spatch and Pep uttered their 
effusive greetings. 
"Well, if here ain't the little kid and 
Pardner! How's business? Sleep cold last 
night, Pep? " 
"Should say not! So warm, almost had 
to hist the window! " 
The tail of Spatch wagged perilously near 
the sack of oranges purposely concealed at 
the foot of the bed. 
Bits smiled, and then his eyes fell on the 
girl standing a little away from the bed. He 
turned towards Pep, and in a voice a trifle 
weak and very much puzzled, exclaimed: 
"Pep, who's the swell skirt? She with 
you? " 
"She's some lady! " A smile followed his 
words, absolutely appreciative. "She bought 
me out an' then come clear here jes' to 
see you. Can't you shake? She's a—a 
friend of mine." 
In the course of a few minutes she was 
irrevocably taken into the partnership with 
Bits, Pep and Spatch. After the neighborhood news had been imparted and all preliminaries completed, the oranges were presented. The smile from Bits more than 
paid their real value. 
All too soon the nurse came to announce 
the close of visiting hours. 
"Pep, old feller, cover up good tonight. 
Give Pardner a weenie and please take 
three of these oranges for yourself—tomorrer's Christmas. Stick it out! I'll be back 
to the old job soon. They're bully to me 
here." 
The girl bent over the little sick-a-bed 
laddie. 
"Bits, is there a single Christmas wish 
of yours that I could fulfill, dear? Please 
let me try." 
"Mighty nice of you. I think you've 
done a heap now. But there is—is something. It's the little kid there. I've heard 
about juvenile officers an' their doin's. 
Mebbe somebody could get a home for him. 
He's a smart little chap, Miss, an' deserves 
a chance. When I get well I'd work to help 
for his keep. Could you get him in? " 
"Yes, dear, I've been thinking of Rodney 
all the way over here. Fortunately I know 
the very people to secure him a home. And 
I have a friend who has charge of a settlement house, and I am going to take him 
there tonight so he won't be lonesome. It's 
warm there, and they'll be good to him— 
they really would be happy to have him 
come. Plenty of boys there, and games, and 
a Christmas tree. T'll be there myself for 66 THE CRISIS 
a while. Now, have a good sleep and don't 
worry about him. Spatch is going, too. 
Good-bye." 
As they turned to look back once more 
at the door, a smile from Bits was following them. Outside Pep hesitated. 
"Look here, I've lied—yes, I've told a 
ripper! I was freezin' cold last night—I 
give the blanket to my Pardner here." 
"I understand, laddie. Tomorrow is 
Christmas. We're going down town on this 
car and I'm going to fit you out in some 
real warm clothing for your Christmas present, Rodney. And then tonight you, and 
Spatch, and I, are going to the settlement 
house. There, other little colored children 
are having a Christmas tree, and games, 
and fun! And there isn't going to be any 
more paper selling for you, or Bits, but 
you're going to have a real home and a 
chance to go to school. I have friends who 
will help me. Ar e you willing, dear?" 
Two little cold hands ecstaticly clasped 
themselves over one of the girl's, and two 
little tears of jo y made two little tracks on 
his childish brown face. 
"I guess you're the 'Christmas Angel' 
I heard 'bout oncet. Gee! but you're touchin'! " 
The happiness that reigned in his little 
heart that Christmas eve is not to be described in words. Pep appreciated. 
On Christmas morning a car stopped outside the settlement house and the girl 
bounded out to return leading a small boy, 
refreshed and happy and followed by a oneeyed canine disciple. 
All arrangements had been made and both 
boys were to be located in a private home 
with a fair chance. A young doctor, the 
very dearest friend of the girl's, had consented to look after her charges in her 
holiday absence. It was he who opened the 
door of the car as they approached. 
"Good morning, little chap! Merry 
Christmas!" 
"Ditto"—this last from Pep, and an exhilarating bark from Spatch. 
"Rodney, this is Dr. Weston—our friend." 
When they reached the ward, one bound 
and Pep was at the side of the bed. 
"Know me, Bits? Some looker, ain't I ? 
Had one spludge las' night—too big almost 
to talk about. She done it all. She's an angel! Now, hold your breath while I tell you 
the biggest ever! She's found a home for 
you, an' me, an' Spatch, an' we're goin' to 
school, an'—an' she means it!" 
The "Christmas Angel " and the doctor 
came nearer the bed. Professionally he 
reached for the pulse and all the friendliness possible was in his greeting. 
"Well, little friend, I'm in the partnership, too, and we're going to get you well 
in ten days! " 
Bits smiled first at one and then at the 
other appreciatively. 
"Yo u two don't know how I thank you 
for myself an' the kid! I can't tell you. 
Just give us the chance—we'll prove up 
the claim! " Determination and gratitude 
were in his face. 
"I'm glad if you're pleased, Bits. Yo u 
are both going to be my little brothers, and 
Spatch here (at this opportune moment 
there was an appreciative tail-wag) is going to be our mascot. I must hurry now 
to catch the train, for I'm going away for 
three days. Dr. Weston is going to give 
Rodney a 'big day,' and I think he has a 
surprise for Bits. Good-bye, dear! " 
There was a kiss left on the warm forehead. A little hand shot out from the 
covering. 
"You're the best Christmas I ever had! 
I—I just wish I could whisper to you, some 
thin'—" 
The girl bent down. Two arms went 
around her neck, two words from a little 
heart filled with gratitude slipped out— 
"Merry Christmas!" 
CHRIST-MOTHER 
O STAR-DUS T drifting from above 
On fairy moonbeams, sunshine shod, 
Dim davghter of the lips of God 
To me and angels—Thou art Love. 
0 earth-kissed raining joy, and rife 
With all still wonders that abide; 
Ghost Mother of the Time and Tide 
To me and faerie Thou art Life. 
0 Love and Life, 0 Wrack and Ruth— 
Soft sentry on the path to Hell, 
High Heaven's trumpet winding well, 
Dear death's destruction Thou art Truth. ANTHONY 
CRAWFORD 
A NTHON Y CRAW -
FORD, a colored 
farmer, of Abbeville, 
S. C , owned 427 acres 
of the best cotton land 
in the county. He had 
raised a family of sixteen children, was reputed to be worth 
$20,000, and had always been a law abiding, self-respecting citizen. On October 21, 
he came to Abbeville, 
and went to the store of W. D. Barksdale, to 
sell a load of cotton seed. The .two men 
quarrelled about the price, although no blow 
was struck by either one. Crawford was 
arrested by a local policeman and a crowd of 
idlers from the square, pictured below, 
rushed to give him a whipping for his "impudence." He promptly knocked down the 
ringleader with a hammer. The mob set 
upon him and nearly killed him. He was 
thrown wounded into jail. A few hours 
later, fearing that the sheriff would remove him secretly, the mob dragged his 
wounded body forth, jumped on it, and mutilated it, and finally hanged and shot it. 
They then warned his family to leave the 
county by November 15. 
A full account of this lynching as investigated by Roy Nash, Secretary of the N. A. 
A. C. P., will appear shortly. 
PUBLIC SQUARE, ABBEVILLE. 
67 THE FIRST STONE 
By JOSEPH LYNDE L BOWLE R 
E VE R since heroines 
in r e c o g nizably 
human shape have made 
thei r appearance on 
this planet they have 
been shuffled into accepted molds cunningly 
devised to exclude all 
except types of one social group. Their eyes 
must be blue or brown, 
their cheeks crimson, 
their hair blond or 
brunette with curling, 
rich waves, and their 
form as comely and as 
irresistible as that of 
Venus, never fat nor 
too plump. But in motion pictures of life, in 
the great dramas of the 
soul, the women of heroic mold who tame, 
wild, conquering fate, 
and lift the world to 
higher strata, are heroines. There are no barriers. Can the passion 
of prejudice stifle the 
throbbing vision of the soul? Can physical 
or moral force stop the eternal wail of the 
ocean? Cressid, Desdemona and Jessica are 
emphatic in negative assertion. 
The reel this evening is the ten million 
soul mystery (with apologies to Tannhauser), for it cannot be measured in dollars 
and cents. It signifies a deeper meaning 
than dross; it is the mystery of caste. The 
scenario was arranged by fate, and the 
drama is staged in the great Southland of 
America. 
Dwarfed in the little prison of defeated 
ambition our heroine, Ernestine Rawls, steps 
forth—a wonderful shock of dark brown 
hair, bright, laughing, hazel eyes sheltered 
by long lashes, bewitching and fiery. In 
fact, she has all the virtues of the ordinary 
heroine, except that her skin is brown and 
she is a Negro. She has reached the enviable age of twenty. Her strong mouth, yet 
most delicate, the symmetry of the curves of 
her neck and shoulders, make her beautiful. 
Interesting she is also; of a truth, unfailingly interesting. She was recently graduated 
from Chicago and returned home a full 
fledged artist; yes, kind friends, a colored 
artist, who could paint landscapes; who 
loved nature and revelled in raptures over 
the billowy emerald meadows, the gold of the 
harvest fields, the cloud cities, the thrill of 
the meadow lark, the bee bearing its cargo 
of perfume and flapping its awkward way 
along ambient bends of grass and mottled 
flowers, the cotton, foamy and white; all 
these whispered messages of love to her 
soul. She painted Nature; she loved it, but 
she was not glad. 
She was forbidden to love it. Man-made 
laws attempted to narrow and dwarf the 
spirit; but her dream vista only widened 
and mounted to the vast reaches of heaven 
and tore its way through the languid currents of oppression. 
Lexington, Ark., was a little town of fifteen thousand people. Nothing was different 
in this town from hundreds of other towns 
in the great Southland. Fo r eighty years 
it had been the same size. The business 
district was arrayed around the country 
68 THE FIRST STONE 09 
i'6urt house; the band played every Saturday evening; the farmers came in every 
week and swapped corn for produce. Money 
was scarce and trading consisted largely 
in barter. Life in this place was like a flat 
color wash—prosaic, dull and blue, needing 
here and there a brush or an extra touch 
of romance to make it obtrusive. The colored people here were in the majority, but 
were mere cattle socially. They were not 
permitted to ride in the town omnibus from 
the depot; they were required to raise their 
hats on entering any of the public buildings, 
while members of the dominant race kept 
theirs glued to their heads; they were compelled to be indoors at ten in the evening; a 
certain sequestered district was allotted for 
their living; merely one hundred were permitted to vote. However, they went to the 
same post office and the same court house to 
pay their taxes. They became so accustomed to insults which the humdrum of life 
placed upon them and so inured to the barriers of race that they took for granted the 
fact of their oppression and said nothing. 
Now, dear friends, our hero, Samuel Price, 
one of the fortunate youngsters of Lexington, whose grandfather had saved his pennies in slavery, and whose father, through 
years of sacrifice had accumulated a modest 
fortune, had returned home from Wisconsin with his master's degree. Ten years ago 
when he left this town he was a tow-headed 
boy; now he was a man: tall, cultured, refined, but a Negro still. 
The insult of caste unnerved him at first. 
He was in a new world and he could not 
explain it. Everything had a deeper and 
sadder meaning. He revolted against the 
whole Southern attitude. He thought of the 
Southland as the blissful Eden of his heart 
where the love and laughter of the skies, the 
sunset and the dew melted into a blazing 
promised land. He thought that the ignorance of his people was the cause of discrimination; that oppression could be driven to 
its lair and the brave and strong might enter 
the heart and soul of those dear sweet 
Southern plains. But this was a dream— 
the mastodon had grown too large, too audacious, too powerful. To refuse to submit 
to its canons meant violence, perhaps death. 
He had glimpses of the mighty movement of 
existence, incessant and inevitable; but the 
realities of his visions were dulled and his 
dreams were impractical. 
ON E MOMENT , PLEASE, TO CHANG E KEELS 
The acquaintance of this pair began early 
in each of their young lives. Seventeen years 
before they sheepishly mot each other with 
greetings of blushes and they remained inseparable. They had dreamed vague dreams 
of the future together. Some were never to 
be crystalized into reality; some dreams had 
become fact; some were meaningless and 
the only value to them was the jo y of dreaming. They inveigled memories of the day 
when the darts of Cupid had fertilized and 
blossomed into fruitage; when the meaning 
of love could not be explained by mortal or 
angelic tongue and they had often sat it out 
with sighs and sighs. And she had said 
"yes." The love of the bare-foot, bare-head 
dusty stage of life deepened with years, 
more perfect, more powerful, more definite. 
Now just a space of two days intervened; 
the space of eternity; the long, long moments and the vastness of the seconds 
lagged slowly on. The wedding march, the 
minister, the rice and the particulars of convention overshadowed them. It was the 
same old story, Mr. Reader, Miss Critic, Mr. 
Good Man, the same old familiar passion 
that burned your soul and was not consumed ; that sent its current up your spine to 
your hair tips, and you revelled in dreams 
and dreamed sweet dreams. Ye t they were 
colored—but they had souls. 
John Clark, the District Attorney of Barton County, saw a chance to enlarge his 
power. He wanted to be mayor. He made 
a brilliant campaign and placed in his platform for election a plank specifically denouncing the Negro, although there was no 
apparent cause. But politics will be politics, 
and Clark wanted office. He pointed to the 
fact that some "niggers " had come to town 
and were riding around in seven-passenger 
cars; that soon the others would become 
haughty; that if elected he would place the 
license tax so high for them that there would 
be no joy-riding by "niggers " in Lexington. 
He also declared that a new "nigger " had 
entered competition with the omnibus line 
and was hauling "niggers " from the depot 
in a finer conveyance than the town could 
afford the dominant race. This struck a 
tender cord and the power of giant prejudice began to wax strong. For prejudice is 
the vilest form of ignorance. 
A Lexington paper, through its "Public 
Opinion" columns, began anonymous attaeks 
upon Clark's candidacy. It ridiculed his 
stand on the Child-labor Law and showed 
the voters that he was working boys and 
girls of ten and twelve. Pointed questions 7 0 THE CRISIS 
were put to him concerning his stand on prohibition, the direct election of Senators, 
Woman Suffrage and other modern issues. 
These attacks uncovered his past life and 
showed that he opposed any legislation that 
would benefit all the people. His platform 
was literally demolished. Blakemore, the 
opposing candidate, made capital of these 
attacks and began a thorough investigation 
of his private affairs. For the first time 
since the war Lexington began talking politics. The bands, the campaign meetings, 
filled with half drunken men who were bartered for cigars and dollar bills and the preelection promises, awoke the sleepy town, 
while politicians with cigars in the corners 
of their mouths held up impatient farmers. 
Clark rushed into the newspaper office at 
the end of a hot day, pulling his hair and 
offering to bribe the editor if he would refuse to run this matter in his "Public Opinion" columns, but his offers were refused. A 
brooding sense of social unfairness unbalanced his brain and the desire to eliminate 
all opposition was not corrected by the normal powers of inhibition. 
"Wh o in the devil is this fellow sending 
in this stuff?" he shrieked. The click of the 
typewriters stopped and every one from cub 
to the editor professed his ignorance. The 
only information that he could receive was 
that the letter had come from Lexington. 
Smarting under the influence of his wrath 
he went directly to the post office and offered the postmaster a reward to find the 
culprit. The emotion which prompted this 
impulse was primitive; it was only a chance. 
He gave the postmaster the letter containing 
the last attack, and swung out of the old 
dirty room shaking his fist violently in the 
air. 
It was not long after that a letter dropped 
in the box and the man behind the cage 
caught it just as it had fallen into the receptacle. He looked out and saw a little 
colored boy. 
"Sonny! Sonny! " he exclaimed. The boy 
halted. 
"Sir? " 
"Wh o gave you this letter? Don't lie to 
me! " 
The frightened youth stretched himself. 
"I—I don—n—no A—a—man in the 
big automobile down yonder." 
"What. That 'nigger' Price? " 
"Ye—s—s—sir, Mr. Jones." 
Appearances are very deceptive; the images on the retina are often imperfect. Price 
and Earnestine apparently were ensconced 
in a corner of her spacious home, talking. 
Occasionally their hands would touch, but 
such collisions, sweet and gentle, help God to 
perform the miracles of souls. Really, they 
were walking in gardens of flowers flecked 
with brilliants near a great grove of orchids 
where birds were chirping and the heavenly 
choir consisting of nymphs were crooning 
lullabies to the accompaniment of an orchestra composed of Beethoven and Wagne r and 
Bach. Ye t I would have sworn they were 
talking in a parlor. 
A little boy ran in breathlessly, yelling 
with all his might, "Mr. Price ! Mr. Price! 
Deys blowed up de garage. Old Clark is 
comin'! " 
Price reached for his gun, bolted the door 
and turned out the light, but he was too 
late. The front door fell in and an army of 
men rushed upon him. Some one pressed 
the button and flooded the room with light. 
Price stood before them with a gun pointing 
defiantly. They ran back. A shot from the 
outside tore a picture, then several shots 
were exchanged, and Price lay in a swoon. 
His helpless form was rushed to the veranda. Wild frenzy swayed their craven emotions. 
Earnestine screamed and ran to the aid 
of her lover. Falling prostrate on his shoulders, she raised her head; her eyes met 
those blue drunken eyes of Clark. She felt 
a numb sense of familiarity; he staggered 
and stared dumbly. She pleaded with him 
and they jeered. She said things she wanted 
them to know; things that were etched in 
her fleshy heart; things that burned, but 
were true; that Clark was her father; that 
his treatment of- her mother was cruel, and 
that he had by means of gold held back the 
inevitable from the sensitive ears of the 
world. Clark clinched his fists, and would 
have struck her, but fragile femininity challenged the blow. He was ruined. The mob 
began to listen; finally they became silent 
and one by one they slunk away. Soon the 
bleeding form of Price and Earnestine were 
alone. She dragged him back into the house 
with all the remaining strength she had; 
then she crumpled in a storm of tears. 
That night a wounded Negro and his betrothed were on the train bound for the 
North, God knows where. 
"It was lucky," he sighed painfully. FIFTY YEARS IN LOUISIANA 7 1 
She assented. But what they thought as 
the moon tinged their faces with its metallic 
white glow, what was in their souls, I cannot say. Yet the insult of caste had be«n 
challenged and the first stone in Lexington 
had been thrown. 
THE FORETREKKERS 
By ALICE WERNE R 
H
ARK ! He comes with crack of whip 
and jingling harness-chains; 
Up the hill his oxen toil with the loaded 
wains. 
He is bearded, big and broad, and the folk 
who flee 
To the hill-tops, watching him, murmur, 
"Wh o is he? " 
"This has come and that has come with 
noise and blood and flame, 
Wrestling, tearing, trampling down—all of 
them the same. 
Whence they come and what they seek, 
striving thus and thus, 
How know we, who only wait?—Who shall 
care for us? " 
This is he who built the waste when England knew it not; 
Heavy is his strong right hand when his 
anger's hot. 
Wrestling with an iron land hath left him 
gaunt and grim— 
Leave the good and ill he did to God that 
judgeth him! 
Wh o comes here with beat of drum and 
clash of brazen bands? 
Many men they follow him out of many 
lands; 
All the tribes who hear his voice shouting 
from Malmani, 
Wondering ask, with hand to lip: "Lowo' 
'mlungu bani?" 
This the Empire-Builder is, who paints the 
map in red— 
(You'll know what that is, my sons, when 
all is done and said!) 
He will tell you gold is more than loyal 
hearts and true— 
Wait awhile, my people, yet—he's not the 
man for you— 
Still the dark-faced people stand, waiting 
for the day, 
While around them battles crash and kingdoms pass away. 
Mighty men, with children's hearts, such as 
God makes wise, 
With the deeps of life and death in their 
smiling, patient eyes. 
This will pass and that will pass—wrath 
and greed and guile. 
Theirs the victory who wait; patience yet 
awhile! 
One shall come without a mask—never need 
the people ask 
When he leads them to the task—"Lowo 
'mlungu bani?" 
Wait for him who comes to serve, seeking 
not to reign! 
In the dawn when we discern how our 
dreams were vain— 
Pomp and pride are shadows all that baseless fade and flee. 
Truest truth the words that One said in 
Galilee. 
FIFTY YEARS IN LOUISIANA 
Views of a Northern White Settler in the South 
By JOHN PAU L BALDWI N 
I
N 1867, our family moved from northern 
Ohio to Louisiana, and bought the old 
sugar plantation where the town of Baldwin 
now stands. The next plantation had just 
been secured by the Freedman's Aid Society, 
and is now the home of the Gilbert Industrial College, under the management of 
Professor Reynolds. Thus was established 
in Louisiana a place for both white and colored folk; and we now look at our progress 
here as the best for the two races. 
There were some fine white people, with 
European ideas, living in Louisiana in early 
days; it was luxury for a few, and labor for 
many. Then came the industrious aliens, 
from our own Eastern States, and the "car-72 THE CRISIS 
petbaggers," of course! No wonder we were 
looked upon as aliens when we began to sell 
land to colored people at the close of the 
Civil War. The so called chain lions waited 
on us one night, and we were so frightened 
that we returned to Ohio. But later, the 
better class of white people in Louisiana 
gave us to understand that we would not be 
disturbed if we returned to Louisiana. So 
we went back and took up our work, as you 
colored people must do to-day. We cared 
little for politics. In those days, Reconstruction time, my grandfather was importuned to pay $25 for a political barbecue. 
He announced that he was neither Republigreatly advanced views of what the colored 
man should be. " 
Let me add that this Father Baldwin was 
already the founder of Baldwin College, at 
Berea, O., the pioneer at Baldwin, Kan., and 
a patron of Baker University, when he 
came to Louisiana and began devoting his 
efforts to the uplifting of the colored race. 
Pardon this mention of Father Baldwin; it 
is done to show the character of the man 
who gave his talents to the cause of colored 
people, after losing his most beloved son in 
Kansas by the exposures of the pioneer life. 
The Civil Wa r devastated Louisiana. The 
armies left only a few grains of corn scatTH E "BIG HOUSE " OF TH E BALDWI N PLANTATION ; NO W A NEGR O SCHOOL, 
can nor Democrat, but a Prohibitionist. 
His stump speech was so novel that he was 
applauded, and our political troubles passed 
away. A southern lady, the widow of our 
sheriff at that time, is now one of our 
friends, and she has said of my grandfather: 
"In those uncertain times, Father Baldwin 
separated himself from the others, who 
came to the South and exploited the colored 
people for political purposes. He was a 
benefactor, a humanitarian, and he held 
tered on the ground for food. We found the 
colored people in need and without work. 
There was rich soil, but we were not farmers; just plain business men, and this is how 
we succeeded: the old slaves knew how to 
raise sugar cane and cotton. W e divided the 
land among them, first as tenants, and then 
we sold each family a house, in the old quarters, that could be moved off to a separate 
little farm. Thus a slave was made an independent farmer, himself and family home-THE OUTER POCKET 73 
builders; and it frequently occurred that old 
couples, from slavery time, would have legal 
weddings, with bridal veil, wedding cake 
and a church reception. 
The colored people brought the sugar 
cane and cotton to our sugar house and prepared them for market. We furnished the 
land and the factory, and taught them how 
to run the machinery. We kept the accounts, sold the products, and gave them 
two-thirds of the crop, or net proceeds. 
More than a hundred of these men became 
tenants and then land owners. 
The share crops became too numerous to 
be kept separate at the factory, and in 1878 
we rebuilt our factory. We made white 
sugar, weighed the cane and the cotton as it 
came into the factory, and credited each 
man at the scales; but the profit sharing 
system is still working at Baldwin. This 
factory was the first in Louisiana to work 
on the central factory plan of separating 
the work in the field from the factory, making it possible for the small farmer to raise 
sugar cane. This economic plan has now 
spread to other parts of Louisiana, and has 
proven one of the best plans of meeting the 
world's competition in sugar prices. 
The old slaves have spent their last years 
as free men with their families, and they 
have not been driven away from their property, as in Georgia. They no longer wear a 
discarded army overcoat, and pasture their 
ponies where the armies passed. The 
younger man now gets his suit of clothes 
from Chicago, and rides in the steam car. 
The question of social equality has never 
given us trouble. The natural difference 
between the white and colored people has 
caused a natural division of the races, the 
white people preferring their churches and 
societies the same as different nationalities 
divide in other parts of the world. They 
are now centering in one part of the city 
where there is a large church and white 
school. The colored people are moving 
toward other parts, where they have 
churches and societies and Gilbert Industrial 
College. We stand for temperance, honesty 
in business, and the white people think, well 
of our town as a place to live. 
, We have saw mills, railroad and steam 
service, a third-class post office, and a bank. 
The colored people arc encouraged to have 
bank accounts. There is enough forbearance, one race for the other, to accomplish 
this working condition, and both races are 
better off by this co-operation in business. 
Never mind about politics in the South. 
You were never treated as badly as the Belgians have been treated by the Germans. 
Be industrious, own your homes and farms, 
and be taxpayers; read the papers and 
know more of public questions. Years ago 
the Federal government had its white tents 
and a few soldiers by the voting booth, and 
you voted, but you were hardly ready for 
the ballot. Designing white men influenced 
you, and bad laws were made. The white 
property holders and taxpayers of Louisiana 
had to protest, and you lost the ballot. You 
had the opportunity to vote, but did not 
know the responsibility of voting. But look 
at another side of the question, and see what 
you have gained. The old plantation bell 
that swung at the head of the quarters, in 
slavery time, now swings on the colored 
Baptist clurch. It calls together willing 
hearts now. You have the great, natural 
resources of the soil and the climate by 
which you can live and send your children 
to school. The land is waiting for you at 
easy payments; your property rights will be 
respected. Gilbert Industrial College is here 
for your children, and it points to the arts 
and industries, and the higher life. The 
expenses are reasonable; you can partially 
support yourself while at school. You 
young colored people should consider this 
opportunity. If you do not, others will. 
The people of the West are looking toward 
the South, and they will take up this land 
before long, and you will not know where 
to go. 
The Outer Pocket 
I A M glad to report to you that the 
"Birth of a Nation" has been removed 
from our club houses in the Canal Zone. A t 
a meeting of the Senior Secretaries, in New 
York, yesterday, Dr. Mott asked me to 
make mention of this incident, which I did, 
and he expressed himself very strongly in 
opposition to having anything in our buildings which reflected unfavorably upon any 
group of men. He called upon our Cabinet THE CRISIS 
of Senior Secretaries for their approval or 
disapproval of the position which he had 
taken in full agreement with my position 
against 'this film. Every man stood with 
us and other things were mentioned. The 
"Yellow Menace" film, which is very objectionable to the Chinese, was mentioned and 
we were all asked to keep our eyes open 
with respect to these objectionable films. 
Of course, you will understand that International Secretaries can only advise unless 
it may be in some places where the work 
is directly under our charge, as it is on the 
Canal Zone. 
J. E. MOORLAND. 
Washington, D. C. 
By the rearrangement of your pages you 
please us very much. You inspire and guide 
by your short, lucid, potent editorials which 
you wisely put on your first pages. You 
tell long stories by the illustrations and you 
very properly multiply them. You relate 
the wrongs we suffer and you fitly put them 
on the last pages since the memory of them 
cannot "add one cubit to our stature." 
GEORGE 0 . MARSHALL. 
New York City. 
In the last issue of the CRISIS I notice to 
my unpleasant surprise that you are becoming discouraged with the idea of pageantry 
as given in New York, Washington and 
Philadelphia because of some unjust and ungrounded criticism and what appears to be 
non-appreciation on the part of some of 
our would be leaders. 
Now, Dr. DuBois, I have witnessed the 
performance, not only witnessed the drama, 
but taken part in it and I speak from experience and observation. I know the good 
accomplished by this drama. The classes 
of people you touched through this medium 
you could not touch by any other means. 
DAVID D . MATTOCKS. 
New York City. 
So often before there was the CRISIS I 
felt as I now do and wanted to express myself, but feared I would trip in my presentation of the facts, but through following 
you with heart and soul I gained the nerve 
and I have not lost a case yet. These little 
daily, weekly, monthly arguments with men 
who think they know only to admit their 
wrong finally are things that will slowly 
but surely awaken the spirit of justice in 
both the wrongdoer and the indifferent excuser. 
ALONZO C . THAYER. 
Winona, Minn. 
I might as well tell you now that if I 
had to express my opinion of the CRISIS in 
vote or otherwise I should express it as 
being highly gratified—not that everything 
in the CRISIS pleases me, but because of the 
high character of the work. I know you 
are not an angel, therefore, you cannot 
please me with everything. 
GEORGE W . COOK. 
Washington, D. C . 
May I add that although in every number 
of the CRISIS I read much that hurts me so 
that I almost dread to take up the next 
number, yet I believe in it, approve of it 
and enjoy especially the beautiful pictures 
and the accounts of the remarkable achievements of many members of the colored race. 
It is doubtless good that I should be hurt 
—it is the share which any white person 
ought to bear for the injustice which the 
colored races constantly endure from us. 
The colored people in Oakland, some of 
whom I know well, are an exceptionally 
competent, self-respecting set of citizens 
measured by the highest standards. 
MAR Y ROBERTS COOLIDGE. 
Berkeley, Cal. 
Permit a member of the Anglo-Saxon race 
to say that your magazine and management 
is most inconsistent. 
You and a lot of other darkies get up on 
your hind legs and roar like the jackasses 
that you are about the "Birth of a Nation" 
which tells the truth and yet, you print a 
story in your magazine about a Negro who 
had brains enough to get riels [sic] but not 
enough to keep out of jail. If a white man, 
or a darky either, for that matter, should 
make a "movie " prove that you would probably howl, or rather brag. 
Myers is right. Even educated yellow 
Negroes, like DuBois, are simply children 
and simple ones at that. He and the rest 
of the crew ought to be South with masters 
to look out for them as nature intended. 
LATHAM WOODBERRY. 
Princeton, N. J Men of the Month 
A PHYSICIAN 
A ARO N McDUFFI E MOORE was born 
in Columbus County, N. C , December 
6, 1863. He entered Shaw University, in 
Raleigh, in 1884, and was graduated from 
its medical department, finishing the four 
years' course in medicine in three years, and 
standing second in a class of forty-two students when examined by the State Board. 
He began his practise of medicine in Durham. 
Aside from the practise of medicine, Dr. 
Moore has been a potent factor in the development of a number of race enterprises, 
chief among which are the North Carolina 
Mutual and Provident Association, of which 
he is the secretary and the treasurer; he is 
a trustee of Shaw University, the North 
Carolina Reform School, and the Colored 
Orphan Asylum; a director of the Mechanics and Farmers Bank; the superintendent 
of Lincoln Hospital Nurse Training School, 
and the secretary and the treasurer of the 
Rural School Extension Department of the 
North Carolina State Teachers' Association. 
A TEACHER 
\ F ISS HARRIETT E L. SMITH, one of 
the few colored teachers in the 
schools of Boston, Mass., died in that city 
last June. She was the youngest daughter 
of the late John J. Smith. 
Miss Smith was a graduate of the Bowdoin Grammar School, the Girls' High 
School and the Boston Normal School. 
From the time she was graduated from the 
Boston Normal School and until her death, 
she was a teacher in the Bowdoin School. 
Her influence in the community was strong 
and far-reaching. She was keenly interested in matters affecting her race, and was 
a staunch admirer of the N. A. A. C. P. 
from its beginning. 
A STRONG WOMAN 
NPH E late May Hallowell Loud, of Boston, Mass., was one of the strongest 
members of the Board of Directors of the 
N. A . A. C. P. The Boston Branch has 
published an excellent biography and memorial, in pamphlet form, edited by Mr. 
B. R. Wilson. 
Mrs. Loud was born in 1860, and died 
early in 1916. She was descended from a 
celebrated family of Abolitionists, and was 
an artist by profession. Gradually, however, her interest in humanity and particularly in the Negro race claimed all her 
energies. 
A SOCIAL WORKER 
THOMA S E. TAYLOR , the new secre-
' tary of the Colored Men's Branch of 
the Y. M. C. A., in New York City, is a Canadian by birth. He studied at the Public 
Collegiate Institute and Business University 
in London, Canada. For eight years he was 
associated with his father in the barbering 
business, and for six and one-half years he 
was an employee of the Canadian Postal 
Service. He resigned this position to enter 
the Y. M. C. A. movement as secretary of 
its Branch in Indianapolis, Ind., where he 
has been successfully acting in this capacity 
for the last eleven years. 
AN ORGANIZER OF BOY SCOUTS 
P V R. W. M. FOWLER, a colored physician 
in Los Angeles, Cal., is the organizer 
of the Colored Boy Scouts of that city. The 
movement has a membership of sixty-two 
boys, ranging from twelve to fifteen years 
of age, and is chartered by the State and 
recognized by the Scouts of America. 
Dr. Fowler was born in Atlanta, Ga., 
May, 1882 . His family moved to Los An ­
geles, Cal., where he received his schooling, 
finishing the study of osteopathy in June, 
1915 , at the California Osteopathic College. 
A USEFUL WOMAN 
A /fRS . N. F. MOSSELL is the wife of Dr. 
N. F. Mossell, the founder of the 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and 
Training School, in Philadelphia, Pa., which 
was incorporated in 1896. Through Mrs. 
Mossell's efforts over $15,000 has been 
added to the treasury of this institution. 
Amon g the well-known philanthropists she 
has succeeded in interesting in this work 
are Andrew Carnegie, Henry Phipps, Miss 
Grace Dodge, Isaac Seligman, Mrs. Henry 
Villard and John Converse. 
Mrs. Mossell is also an author and has 
published "The Wor k of the Afro-American 
Woman. " 
OUT OF THE PAST 
T 7 OR many years Cassar Grant was a picturesque figure in Winchester, Va. He 
was Virginia bred and born, and was never 
7 5 THE LATE MISS H. L. SMITH. 
T. E. TAYLOR. 
MRS. N. F. MOSSELL. 
CAESAR GRANT. 
DR. A. M. MOORE. 
THE LATE MRS. M. H. LOUD. 
DR. W . M. FOWLER. SHADOWS OF LIGHT 77 
seen without his red bandanna—that relic 
of the turbaned East. Many folks were entertained by his queer, wise sayings. He 
always refused to be photographed, but our 
correspondent secured' this picture over 
twenty years ago. 
Shadows of Light 
UNVEILIN
G OF THE STATUE OF ANTONIO MACEO, THE COLORED LIBERATO
R OF CUBA, MA
Y 20, 1916, AT HAVANA. THE 
"BRONZE TITAN," AS HE WAS CALLED, IS COMMEMORATED B
Y A BRONZE AN
D MARBLE STATUE, DONE B
Y DOMINICO 
BONI, AN
D LOCATED I
N "MACEO PARK." 
Courtesy of Christian Science Monitor. CHRISTMAS IN Inasmuch as 
ye did it unto 
the least of 
thes e , M y 
brethren, y e 
did it unto Me . 
RGIA , A . D., 1916 8 0 THE CRISIS 
JAC K BOND , OF SELMA , ALA. , SI X YEAR S OLD, WH O SELLS OVE R 60 COPIES OF "THE 
CRISIS;' ' CHAPLAI N SCOTT OF TH E 10TH CAVALRY , AN D CHAPLAI N GLADDEN , OF THE 
24T H INFANTRY , U. S. A. ; ATHLETI C CARNIVA L OF THE 25TH INFANTRY , AN D 
OTHE R WHIT E REGIMENT S I N HONOLULU , WIT H MILLS , OF COMPAN Y F, 
WINNIN G TH E 220 YARD S DASH . The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
FROM "Chicago Poems," by Carl Sandburg: 
"I am the nigger, 
Singer of songs, 
Dancer . . . 
Softer than fluff of cotton . . . 
Harder than dark earth 
Roads beaten in the sun 
By the bare feet of slaves." 
R. G. Lehmann, in Indian Ink: 
For an English soldier and an Indian 
soldier buried together in France: 
"When the fierce bugle thrilled alarm, 
From lands apart these fighters came, 
An equal courage nerved each arm, 
And stirred each generous heart to flame. 
"Now, greatly dead, they lie below; 
Their creed or language no man heeds, 
Since for their color they can show 
The bl od-red blazon of their deeds!" 
We are reminded that an Indian, Lajpat 
Rai, has just issued in Calcutta an interesting book of over 400 pages on "The United 
States of America. " Over one-fourth of the 
book is devoted to a sympathetic and discriminating discussion of the Negro problem. 
He says that: "Christian writers, who dare 
not raise their voice against the color line in 
the U . S. A. have no hesitation in sitting in 
judgment on Hindus, and denouncing them 
and their religious system for the institution 
of caste." The book is well-worth owning 
and may be ordered at TH E CRISIS office. 
We acknowledge the receipt of Dr. Matilda A. Evans's excellent little biography of 
"Martha Schofield" (126 pages). Also, 
"Five Generations Hence," by Mrs. Lillian 
B. Jones, of Fort Worth, Tex., and the Rev. 
J. W . Norris, "The Ethiopian's Place in History." 
NEGRO ART 
THE Chicago, 111., Examiner says: 
"Ruth St. Denis, who comes to the 
Palace Music Hall this week in a new dance 
pageant, is a young woman who has studied 
out her own theory of bodily rhythm and 
expression, and follows her own conclusions 
without reference to any school of Terpsichore. 
" 'The Negro is our real dancing teacher,' 
she says. 'To him it is a vital and necessary 
thing to dance. He loves it and gets much 
jo y out of his easy and graceful, if somewhat heavy, mode of movement, and so from 
the black we have learned what little underlying grace and naturalness of movement we 
possess.' " 
The Minneapolis, Minn., Tribune says: 
"According to advices from Italy, that 
traditional land of song is throbbing to the 
accents of a song by an American Negro 
who has probably never set foot on Italian 
soil. Harry T. Burleigh's 'The Young Warrier,' in its Italian guise as 'II Giovane 
Guerriero,' is today sung all over Italy. 
Maestro Riccardo Zandoina, the foremost of 
the younger Italian school, and the composer 
of 'Conchita' and 'Francesca da Rimini' (to 
be performed at the Metropolitan Opera 
House next season), has orchestrated the 
song, and dedicated the score to his American colleague. This is high honor for a 
Negro boy from Erie, Pa. 'The Young Warrior' is not to be classed with 'Tipperary,' 
which is of a pretty cheap order. Burleigh's 
song is the product of a fine musicianly imagination, a talent not of mushroom growth, 
but of thorough artistic development. When 
Amato sang the song at the Biltmore, in 
New York City, for an Allied benefit, it 
proved to be the sensation of the evening. 
"Burleigh has been producing and publishing music of high quality for years. He 
has written many songs, some of them of 
racial significance, some of universal interest, but all of intrinsic musical value and 
genuine appeal." 
TWO HEROES 
' I ' HE Long Inlander, Huntington, L. L, 
says: 
"The brave act of the colored man, Hewlett Edwards, -who gave up his life in trying to save others as he endeavored to stop 
a team of runaway horses on Main Street, 
Decoration Day, is as worthy of high commendation as that of the soldier who 
bravely marches forth to battle and lays 
down his life that his country might live. 
"It was said that an attempt was made 
to dissuade Edwards from performing the 
act, but he said he might save some one 
from being run over in the crowded streets 
as he rushed forward to stop the team. 
"The attempt may have been a rash one, 
81 8 2 THE CRISIS 
but a hero seldom stops to count the cost to 
himself when he sees others in peril. It was 
an appropriate Memorial Day deed, and we 
trust that his grave will be decked in the 
future along with those of the other fallen 
heroes. 
"An d what is more important, generous 
help should be given to his widow and her 
children as she is a worthy, hard-working 
woman, and is well deserving aid in the 
work of supporting herself." 
The Carnegie Hero Fund Commission, of 
Pittsburg, Pa., forwards us the copy of a 
letter recently sent to Mrs. Betty E. Malone, 
of Athens, Ala., which is, in part, as follows: 
"Through the courtesy of the editor of 
TH E CRISIS, 2 6 Vesey Street, New York, N. 
Y., the attention of the Carnegie Hero Fund 
Commission has been called to an act performed by your son, Julius T. Malone, by 
which, on November 18, 1912 , he saved an 
indeterminate number of persons and attempted to save others from death by burning, at Los Angeles, Cal.; but in the performance of which act he sustained injuries 
which resulted in his death. His case, after 
a thorough investigation, was considered at 
a meeting of the Commission held this afternoon ; and I have much pleasure in informing you that in recognition of your son's 
heroism on that occasion the Commission 
awarded you a silver medal, and death benefits at the rate of $1 0 a month during your 
life, or until further notice." 
"LICHT MEHR LICHT" 
IT is as difficult for the North to become 
satisfactorily vocal on the impossible 
situation in the South as it is for the South 
to see in the "Negro " problem simply one, 
great, human question. Ye t both miracles 
occur now and then. For instance, the Pittsburgh, Pa., Courier says: 
"The solid ivory South is seeing things. 
There is a drab outlook ahead for those 
whose eyes are not trained to see without 
good light. The fear is growing in several 
sections that the good people of the South— 
white—may soon find it necessary to go to 
work, and of necessity give up their ancient 
and honorable outdoor pastime of lynching 
'niggers.' 
"The reason is that the South has finally 
awakened to discover such a heavy movement of Negroes to the North that the labor 
supply is in dire peril. If it keeps up, there 
will be nothing left for the whites to do but 
to go to work. Anyone who can imagine a 
greater hardship than this, has some imagination. 
"Befor e the Civil War, when a southern 
gentleman desired to use the last word in 
sidewalk diplomacy, deliver an ultimatum, 
as it were, he called his gentleman opponent 'a nigger thief.' Then southern chivalry arrived at the end of its vocabulary and 
any further relations called for action, not 
mere words. Immediately after the wa r the 
southern white man did his level best to 
exterminate the black man. 
"No w all that has changed. The South 
was slow to learn, but at last the lesson got 
home. Instead of the South supporting 'an 
army of lazy niggers,' the South learned 
that the Negroes had all the time been supporting e useless and idle whites. Montgomery, Ala., has just passed an ordinance 
making it a crime to 'entice labor' from that 
city. Aberdeen, Miss., has taxed employment agencies shipping Negroes North, out 
of existence. The Jackson, Miss., Daily 
Neivs wakes up to find that if the South 
loses its 'colored labor' it will go bankrupt. 
'Colored labor' is some different from— 
'niggers.' 
"All of which shows that, in spite of sophistries, is the element most essential to 
society." 
On the other hand this astonishingly fine 
thought comes from the Augusta, Ga., 
Chronicle: 
"In a toy wagon sits a little, begrinned 
Negro boy, with a twig in his hand—his 
whip. 
"The 'horsie' pulling him along the street 
is a smudgy-faced white boy. He's running 
fast, but the little driver goads him on, applying his whip just as any driver would. 
"It's fun for the children to be both 
'driver' and 'horsie.' The 'horsie' stumbles 
and falls. The driver whips him to make 
him get up. He had seen it done with a 
real horse, and wasn't he playing 'horsie'? 
"U p runs the 'horsie's' mother and spoils 
it all. She snatches the whip from the Negro boy and drags off her own child. 
" 'Get away from here, you ' 
"Tha t would be enough, you may think. 
But the mother shakes her own child and 
rebukes him. 
" 'Didn't I tell you not to go with that 
? Is he the best playmate you can 
find?' THE LOOKING GLASS 83 
"It is an unfortunate incident. But more 
unfortunate is the thought that mature persons instil the germ of racial prejudice into 
innocent young minds. 
"Children, be they rich or poor, white or 
black, Jew or Christian, see no distinction 
among the human inhabitants of this globe. 
They seek happiness in associations of all 
kinds. 
"Then comes 'Reason,' and the young 
mind is ravaged by thoughts that grow into 
prejudices. 
"It seems logical that the actions of children should be examples for their parents. 
Ye t it is so, and will remain so until the 
mature persons will use their thoughts for 
the betterment of humanity—not as aids to 
the promotion of vanity. 
"There is only one class, one race, one religion in this whole, wide world, and that is 
—humanity." 
POLITICS 
THE Rotten Borough system, of the 
South, and other evils of oligarchy 
were dwelt on often in the late campaign. 
The Wilmington, Del., Journal says: 
"It so happens that the Democratic Party, 
by means of the iniquitous election laws 
which are operative in the Southern States, 
enters every campaign with an enormous initial advantage. Twenty-two United States 
Senators, more than a hundred Representatives in Congress and 146 votes in the Electoral College are at the disposal of the Democratic Party without even the formality of 
a contest. The only controversy which ever 
arises is as to which Democratic faction in 
any one of the eleven States which constitute the Solid South shall control the offices. 
"Naturally, the North chafes under this 
sort of thing—though the North would 
probably grin and bear it if the South 
showed less of a disposition to 'rub it in' 
to the North whenever a Democratic administration is in power. " 
The Portland, Ore., Spectator adds: 
"In 1910 Mississippi had about 786,000 
whites and more than a million Negroes 
within its pleasant confines. Ye t in the last 
presidential election Mississippi cast a total 
of less than 65,000 votes—almost exclusively 
white and almost exclusively Democratic. 
As Senator Williams so eloquently and 
truthfully said in his speech on behalf of 
Filipino independence, heaven never granted 
one people the right to hold another in subjection. But how is it that Senator Williams's colored tellow-citizens are not allowed to vote in Mississippi?" 
The New York Evening Post says: 
"The parade yesterday of the new Negro 
militia regiment, 800 strong with a full 
complement of 1,350 men assured, all raised 
within a few weeks, is fresh proof of the 
stupidity and narrow prejudice of Congress 
in not authorizing additional colored regiments for the legular army. But Congress, 
controlled by Southerners, would not specify 
the color of the recruits for the new organizations created by the Defense Ac t and the 
Wa r Department and the president would 
not ask it to—not even after the Tenth 
Cavalry under Gen. Dodd had again shown 
its fighting quality in Mexico. " 
But the South continues obdurate: 
"An appeal has been made to the Negroes 
of Florida in behalf of the Republican candidates in that State. That is bad. The 
Negro is practically eliminated from politics 
in the South and it is better for both races 
that he stay out. And there is no room or 
reason for two parties in the South, for if 
there should be two strong parties bidding 
would be sure to begin for Negro support. 
It is better for the white people of the 
South to settle their political differences in 
white primaries." 
A South Carolina paper says: 
"During the last 40 years in South Carolina the Negro has been on the outside of 
the jury room and away from-the polls. 
"Does any white man in South Carolina 
wish these conditions changed? 
"Is or is not the present condition satisfactory? 
"If it is satisfactory what is to be gained 
by lugging the Negro into political campaigns, in one way or another, in South 
Carolina? 
"Thirty-seven American States outside of 
the South consent to the elimination of the 
Negro from political affairs in the South. 
"The more the subject of the Negro is 
agitated on the stump in the South the 
greater the danger of infusing new life into 
the old anti-southern feeling in the North. 
"Every southern politician that delivers 
'anti-nigger' speeches is, however he may 
not intend to be, the ally of those Northerners who still hate the South." 
Our Prohibition friends may be interested 
in this which though eight years' old still 
represents Louisiana: 
"To the Negroes of Caddo Parish: 
"The Prohibitionists are always ready to 84 THE CRISIS 
help elevate your race; but believing that 
the ballot can best be cast by those familar 
with its use, we wish to say the election of 
January 14, 1908, is an election at which 
White Men Only will vote. 
"Campaign Committee of Prohibition 
League." 
Meantime the white South after eliminating the "corrupt" Negro vote cannot apparently carry on decent elections. One of the 
contestants in the late North Carolina 
primary protests to the Democratic Committee : 
"I take it that no Democrat would want 
to take his nomination if a great majority 
of the electorate should honestly believe that 
he was taking a tainted nomination. I have 
here affidavits and letters from different 
parts of the State, from men of unquestioned integrity, which set forth that money, 
whiskey, coercion and intimidation were 
used in the primary election held on the 
12th day of this month and in several instances that names were placed on the club 
rolls on the day of the primary, and that 
boxes were opened before the time provided 
by law so that a number of men might 
vote, and that ballots were fraudulently 
changed, in order to bring about Mr. Manning's nomination for governor. These affidavits and letters are here in the original 
and will be read to the committee if it so 
desires; and every mail brings additional 
evidence of the same character. 
"I have carefully gone over this evidence 
and it has produced the impression on my 
mind (and I am convinced will produce a 
like impression upon the unbiased mind of 
any man of ordinary reason) that no confidence can be placed in fhe result of the 
election; and therefore for this reason and 
for the reason which I have above stated 
—to protect the integrity of the Democratic 
primary, and to preserve the unity of the 
white people of the State, and in the interest 
of justice and fair play, I am compelled to 
vote against the nomination of Mr. Manning; and I further think that this committee should order another primary for governor." 
A woman writing in the Chicago Evening 
Post says: 
"It was said that 10,000 colored men voted 
for Mr. Wilson in 1912. Why ? Did they 
think that Mr. Wilson's southern birth and 
training would be helpful to them in securing political justice? Mr. Wilson's oft-repeated phrase, T speak as a Southerner,' 
has been emphasized from the first by acts 
which show him to be a Southerner of the 
old type and not one who represents the 
progressive element of the new South. 
"His Jim Crow methods of segregation of 
colored men and women in the departments 
at Washington show that he feels as a 
Southerner and not as an America n on this 
question of simple justice. His uncalled for 
humiliations of men and women who had 
rendered efficient service in those departments for many years leads us to believe 
that the Washington correspondent of the 
Detroit Free Press may be correct in attributing Mr. Wilson's opposition to suffrage to 
the same cause. 
" 'Persons close to the president,' declares 
this correspondent, 'say they believe his private opinion is that Woma n Suffrage in the 
South would be bad for that section of the 
country on account of the increase it would 
cause in the Negro vote.' . . . 
"An d thus 'the new freedom' for man 
means the perpetuation of the old political 
bondage of the women of the South, black 
and white. Will the colored women of Illinois vote for the perpetual bondage of their 
sisters in the South or will they vote for 
the man, Charles Evans Hughes, who has 
declared for giving the ballot to every 
woman through a Federal Amendment and 
for the Republican Party—the only party 
through which the colored man could have 
received the ballot." 
The letter sent to Mr. Hughes by the N. 
A. A. C. P. during the campaign, has called 
forth much comment. The Baltimore, Md., 
Evening Sun says: 
"Now, it seems that Mr. Hughes is no 
more inclined to answer the questions of the 
dusky but faithful followers of his party, 
than he is to become 'vocal' and definite 
when interrogated by his opponents. 
Wherefore, TH E CRISIS, a sort of highbrow 
Negro periodical, in New York, prints the 
following sorrowful threat: . . . 
"Good gracious! If the colored brethren 
take to voting the Socialist ticket, what 
chance will the poor Republicans have? " 
President Wilson answered the letter of 
the N. A. A. C. P. as follows, through his 
secretary: 
"The president asks me to acknowledge 
the receipt of your letter of October 10th, 
and to say that he stands by his original as-THE LOOKING GLASS 
surailces. lie can say with a clear co n 
science that lie has tried to live up to them, 
though in some cases his endeavors have 
been defeated." 
The funniest result of the inquiry is the 
wild-eyed protest of a little colored sheet, 
in Seattle, Wash., called Cayton's Weekly, 
under the head, "Some Big Fool Advice. " 
It cries plaintively: 
"Suppose the colored voters should write 
to Mr. Hughes as suggests Dr. DuBois, and 
suppose Mr. Hughes should make an unfavorable reply. Then, in Heaven's name, 
what would the colored voters do? " 
What, indeed! 
Wide-spread response is coming to our 
proposal of a Negro Party. The St. Luke's 
Herald, Richmond, Va., says: 
"Maybe Wilson will keep his word if he 
is re-elected. Maybe he will not be afraid of 
the Hoke Smiths, the Clarkes and the Vardamans, knowing that he was serving his 
last term. 
"But, we lean to the opinion that the 
Xegro will, as a matter of political protection, soon begin the formation of an independent party, voting for those men and 
measures that seem to be of most benefit to 
him. It almost seems that the Negro will 
be forced to do this, willing or unwilling." 
The Baltimore, Md., Afro American adds: 
"It would be the platform of this party to 
stand, unmoved by bribery and lust for office, for the manhood rights of the Negro; 
a platform with a single plank and only 
one issue before it, just as the Socialists 
stand for a more equable distribution of 
wealth, and the Prohibitionists for the banishment of rum. 
"The possibilities of such a Negro Party 
cannot now be estimated accurately. With 
the two and one-half millions of colored people actually wielding the ballot in a single 
party, their popular vote would be just six 
times the voting strength of the Socialists' 
and fourteen times the strength of the Prohibitionists' in the presidential election of 
1912. In fact, they could come within 900,-
000 of equalling the popular vote for Mr. 
Taft in the same year." 
A private letter from a prominent Washington office holder says that the proposal: 
"appears to be excellent and timely. 
"The reasons seem too obvious to require 
much argument. There have been, and are 
now, ample precedents—nnalog-ous in the 
politics of Europe 
"No more uppui tunc Lime for the suggested move is likely to recur in many years l<> 
come—because this happens to be a period 
in American politics when no great moral 
principle divides the leading parties, an 
'era of good feeling' among the whites;— 
and there is no substantial moral reason 
for hidebound allegiance to any of the nowexisting parties. 
"The only answer to the proposition is to 
act now. 
"Wh o shall act first? Not those Negro 
Republican imaginary 'leaders' who hope for 
political preferment—because they would 
pronounce the move monstrous. Not Negroes now in the Federal service—because 
they openly could not afford to take the risk. 
Not the rank and file—because that would 
be slow and cumbrous. 
"The persons to take the iniative are 
among the members of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, who are free to act." 
"COLORED" 
IT is always comparatively easy to deny 
*• the accomplishment of colored folk by 
the simple expedient of forgetting that those 
who have done anything were colored. Who 
has not heard of Fraunces Tavern down at 
the Battery in New York ? Frederick J. 
Haskin, writing in the Washington, D. C , 
Evening Star, says: 
"George Washington and nearly all of his 
officers came here when he bade them his famous farewell, while at the time that 'Black 
Sam' Fraunces dispensed good dinners here 
nearly every one of any consequence in New 
York came to dine." 
Black Sam Fraunces, mind you, although 
the "black" is usually omitted. 
"The place got its name and its real start 
in life in 1757 when it was purchased by a 
thrifty West Indian Negro, Samuel 
Fraunces, who was commonly known as 
'Black Sam' and who seems to have been a 
cook and caterer of talent if not genius. A 
consideration of the story of Fraunces Tavern shows that the place of cooks in history 
has been overlooked and underestimated. 
It is they who bring great men together 
and cause great events to be planned and 
set on foot. Thus the Sons of Liberty and 
the vigilance committee got together at 
Black Sam's and planned to throw England's tea overboard before they would pay 
a tax on it; and here met the famous com 
mittee of enrrespondenfe, of which we never 86 rHE CRISIS 
heard before, but which, according to the 
History Club, which quotes Woodrow Wilson, was the real beginning and origin of 
the Continental Congress and so the seed 
from which our great and glorious republic 
sprang." 
And there is romance that goes with the 
place, too: 
"But it appears that plots against liberty 
as well as for it were fomented at Black 
Sam's. For in 1776 there were men in England who saw that the great personality of 
Washington was one of the greatest dangers 
to England's hold upon the colonies, and 
these men were not above removing the danger as best they could. 
"So it happened that a frequenter of 
Black Sam's place was a young Englishman 
named Hickey, who had deserted from the 
British army and enlisted as an American 
volunteer. Because he was a clever man, 
despite his bad record, he had become one of 
General Washington's bodyguard. 
"This man was the king-pin in a plot to 
assassinate Washington, and the first step 
in the plan was for him to win the help of 
the general's housekeeper. This person was 
none other than the young and attractive 
West Indian girl, Phoebe Fraunces, daughter of Black Sam. The murderer first won 
her heart and made her his mistress. Then 
he let her know his plan and the part she 
was to play. There is no record of the struggle that took place in the mind of Phoebe 
Fraunces when she found that the man she 
loved was the appointed murderer of her 
master. But the fact remains that she revealed the plot to Washington and saw her 
lover hanged." 
THE NATIONAL STIGMA 
/ AN editorial in the New Republic, New 
York, says: 
"This scourge of lynching has become a 
national stigma as evil as that of chattel 
slavery, whose cursed heritage it is. It 
springs directly from that old despising of 
the servile race, now brought to a nominal 
equality. It is akin to the spirit that makes 
Russian pogroms, and drenches Armenian 
cities in blood. The annals of American 
lynchings show atrocities far worse than 
any registered in modern wars between civilized nations. Ar e they a forecast of what 
would happen if we went to war with any 
peoples considered by our masses ns markedly inferior'/ In a war with the white men 
of another civilized nation, American soldiers would probably be the humanest in the 
world. But in a wa r with 'natives' or 
'greasers' can we be sure that this will-tolynch would not operate toward such 'backward peoples' as contested American conquests? 
"If the lynching spirit springs from that 
racial intolerance which seems to be the 
worst quality in the Anglo-Saxon temperament, anything which makes headway 
against race-prejudice should tend to neutralize the will-to-lynch. One's first impulse 
is to urge the suppression of lynching by 
main force. But there is no machinery for 
such suppression. A local police is powerless against a mob. A State constabulary 
could not prevent Coatesville. If it were 
in Mexico that these lynchings occurred, 
some of our patriots would probably insist 
that Carranza garrison every town. But 
this is the United States, and we must look 
rather to the rousing of popular anger 
against the scourge. The better element in 
the sections where the will-to-lynch is lurking must be stirred to positive expression. 
It is notorious that the mob-criminals are 
rarely punished. The better opinion seems 
to sink back dazed and numb. It should be 
stirred to a diagnosis and an appeal that 
would check and finally exterminate a feeling which is, in the last resort, dependent 
upon general social approval. 
"The campaign against the will-to-lynch 
must be inaugurated by the friends of the 
Negro and by those Americans who find 
their patriotism in the removal of national 
stigma. That is why the enterprise of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, which is raising funds for 
a thorough investigation of the subject and 
for an effective marshalling of public opinion, is so important. Such an attitude 
promises to fight lynching not in any bitter 
or sectional spirit, but with an attempt at 
scientific diagnosis, and the pressure of social contempt upon the classes in whom the 
will-to-lynch still flourishes." 
R. P. Brooks, a professor in a white normal school in Athens, Ga., writes a letter to 
the New Yor k Nation protesting against the 
criticisms of the South for the lynching evil. 
He closes with these words: 
"The eradication of lynching is not to be 
a matter of a few years. Tt is a malady. THE LOOKING GLASS 87 
ihe causes of which lie deep in human nature. Of one thing, however, the world 
should be assured: all the forces of enlightenment in the South are banded together 
to the end that the stigma shall ultimately be removed from our midst." 
The Nation replies: 
"Whil e we agree with most of Professor 
Brooks's contentions, we emphatically cannot with the last sentence. Waco, Tex., is 
the seat of Baylor University. Not a single 
teacher, or preacher, or newspaper, or public official has spoken out against the mob 
which publicly burned a convicted Negro 
there. W e have yet, at this distance, to 
see a single sign that Wac o has a conscience, or that anybody has banded together there to remove the stigma of that 
atrocious crime. It is precisely because 
the 'forces of enlightenment' are so little 
vocal in the South that there is so little 
headway against lynching. The conviction 
of a few lynchers in Waco, and their punishment, would do more to stop the evil 
than anything we can readily think of. 
When lynchers go unpunished, as in Coatesville, Pa , the evil flourishes. As for the 
northern criticism of lynching, we wish it 
were a thousand times more intense of 
lynchings both North and South." 
W e commend to the South the following 
comment from the Havana, Cuba, Post: 
"W e wonder if the lynchers in Kentucky 
should realize the impression abroad that 
they cause by their lynchings, if it should 
in any way cause them to curb their thirst 
for blood. . They surely do not realize that 
they cause ridicule to be heaped upon American civilization, and intimations to be cast 
that we are little above savages 
"W e wish that the citizens of Kentucky 
could see the effect their mob has caused 
abroad. We will quote from one Spanish 
newspaper alone, the Diario de la Marina. 
It does not say many words, but it says a 
whole lot. W e quote: 
" 'The Negroes lynched, shot, and burned 
in Kentucky speak very highly in favor of 
the civilization of the Great Republic ' " 
Mr. Raymond L. Phillips, of Boston, 
Mass., sends us the following suggestion: 
"The president has given his approval to 
Armenian, Lithuanian, and other collection 
days; perhaps he would join us in an antilynching crusade. 
"Why not set u duy aside fur a collection 
from the public in all our northern cities'.' 
Young ladies could be stationed on the corners with collection boxes appropriately 
marked. Besides getting some money, we 
might be enabled to work up some news for 
the 'dailies.' " 
MISCELLANEOUS 
" A spirit once knocked at the portals of 
heaven and the Guardian Angel came to 
answer the summons. 
" 'Wha t would you have?' asked the 
Angel. 
" 'A soul's enjoyment of eternity.' 
" 'And what have you done upon earth to 
merit it? ' inquired the Guardian Angel, 
opening the great book of human deeds. 
" T have kept the commandments and 
walked in the paths of virtue.' 
" 'What else?' 
" T gained wealth and gave freely to the 
poor.' 
" 'Wha t else?' 
" T have been faithful to my church and 
prayed always.' 
" 'Wha t else?' 
" T have shunned the wicked and all 
things common.' 
" 'What else?' 
" 'What else? Surely that is enough.' 
"'No! ' exclaimed the Guardian Angel, 
closing the book. 'You have been ashamed 
of your race, and of the blood God Almighty 
poured into your veins. It is the greatest 
sin of all. We have no place for you 
here.' " 
The Monitor, Omaha, Neb. 
"A n old Negro mammy, who was addicted 
to the pipe, was being lectured on the habit 
by a Sunday-school teacher. Finally the 
latter said: 
"'D o you expect to go to heaven?' 
" 'Yes, indeedy!' 
" 'But the Bible says nothing unclean 
shall enter there. Now the breath of the 
smoker is unclean. What do you say to 
that?' 
" 'Well, I reckon I leave ma bref behin' 
when I enter dar,' was old mammy's response." 
JVpRtrrv Chriflt-iav Advocate. 
m & m m & m The Horizon 
N. A. A. C. P. NOMINATIONS 
THE Nominating Committee, consisting 
of Mrs. Florence Kelley, Mr. Joseph P. 
Loud, and Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, appointed by the Chairman of the Board of 
Directors in accordance with Article VIII 
of the Constitution, has submitted the following list of nominations for members 
of the Board of Directors of the N. A. A. 
C. P. for the term expiring January, 1920: 
Miss Jane Addams, Chicago. 
Dr. C. E. Bentley, Chicago. 
Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, New York. 
Dr. F. N. Cardozo, Baltimore. 
Dr. W. E. B. DuBois, New York. 
Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn. 
Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Dr. John G. Underhill, New York. 
Miss Irene Lewissohn. 
MUSIC AND ART 
MRS. MAU D CUNE Y HARE , pianist, 
and William H. Richardson, baritone, 
began their season October 18, at the College of Applied Harmony, Boston, Mass., 
under private management. On October 
23, Mrs. Hare gave a lecture-recital, "The 
Achievements of the Afro-American in 
Music," at the New England Conservatory 
of Music, under the patronage of persons 
of social distinction, as well as a number of 
the most distinguished musicians of this 
country—among them the celebrated American musician, George W. Chadwick, Director of the Conservatory of Music, Wallace 
Goodrich, conductor, and Arthur Foote, 
composer. The program was received with 
the warmest appreciation, and Mrs. Hare 
has been requested by a number of musicians to repeat the recital at a later date. 
On October 26, Mrs. Hare and Mr. Richardson appeared at the Bethany Baptist 
church, of Roxbury. Mr. Richardson gives 
prominent place on his prog-rams to the 
songs of Henry T. Burleigh, and other wellknown composers of color. 
(T Musical America says: "During the coming concert season, Zabetta Brenska, soprano, intends to pay particular attention 
to H. T. Burleigh's songs, and at all her 
concerts several of his songs will be presented on her programs. " Mme. Brenska 
and Paul Althouse, tenor, of the Metropolitan Opera House, will be heard during the 
season in joint recitals 
(I "Afro-American Folk-Songs " were discussed by Miss Margaret H. Millmard, October 20, at Public School No. 28, in New 
Yor k City. 
d Lois B. Deppe, a young and promisingbaritone, in New Yor k City, is studying under Buzzie-Peccie, the teacher of Alma 
Gliick, and Sembrick. 
(I Miss Myrtle Moses, a white prima donna 
mezzo-soprano, of the Chicago Opera Company, recently appeared for the Hampton 
Choral Union at Hampton Institute. 
C On December 7, Miss Mary White Ovington's "Hazel " will be produced on the stage 
of the Y. M. C. A., in Brooklyn, N. Y., by 
colored people. "Hazel " is the story of the 
life of a little colored girl in the North and 
in the South, and the play is being produced for the benefit of the Lincoln Settlement. 
C The Music School Settlement, in New 
Yor k City, of which J. Rosamond Johnson 
is the director, has commenced its third 
year's work. Many prominent people in 
the music world have been secured for its 
Sunday afternoon concerts. Sidney Wood ­
ward, the noted tenor, has been added to 
the faculty this season. 
C Mesdames Magett, pianist; Prince, reader; and Howard, vocalist, all wives of ministers in Portland, Ore., recently gave a 
unique musical recital at Mt. Olivet Baptist 
Church, in that city. 
(I Albert E. Greenlaw has been constantly 
engaged as a soloist for ten years by some 
of the wealthiest and most influential white 
churches in Canada, and has received liberal 
pay for his services. He is a native of 
Scottdale, Pa. It is said that much of the 
success of revivalists, with whom he has 
traveled, has been due to the fullness and 
sweetness of his voice. 
(I Mme. E. Azalia Hackley successfully directed a folk song festival in Chester, Pa., 
October 24, and on October 19, gave a song 
recital demonstration at Musical Fund Hall, 
in Philadelphia. 
C "The Trooper of Co. K," a photoplay of 
the fight at Carrizal, was recently presented 
in Omaha, Neb., by colored people. 
C. Miss Lois Fox, a white interpreter of 
and writer on plantation Negro life in song 
and story, has opened a studio in New YorkCity. 
S8 THE HORIZON 89 
il "When Lindy Sung" is a photoplay 
showing the life of a colored child in a 
school with white children. It is sympathetically done and tells how the colored 
girl saved the lives of her mates by singing 
during a fire. 
INDUSTRY 
THE Negro migration from the South to 
the North has assumed large proportions. Definite figures are difficult to get. 
An estimate from Atlanta, Ga., states that 
at least 118,000 colored men have come 
North since April 1. 
(I The Enfield Hosiery Mills Company, at 
Enfield, N. C , is teaching colored girls to 
operate in the mills. A modern mill is being erected at Rocky Mount, N. C , in 
which colored help only will be employed. 
C The Tremont Silk Mills have opened a 
branch factory in Harlem, in New York 
City, and employment has been given to 40 
colored girls between the ages of 14 and 18 
years. If this investment proves successful, 
it is planned to open other mills. 
C. Eighty colored stevedores were used to 
unload the cargo from the German submarine, Deutschland. 
G The Strouse, Adler Company is fitting up 
a corset factory in New Haven, Conn., and 
will employ 100 colored girls. 
C As soon as 100 colored girls can be secured for employment, a factory will be 
opened for them in Detroit, Mich., by one 
of the largest wholesale drygoods and garment making concerns in that city. Clerical 
positions, as well as operative, will be open 
to colored people. A restaurant and gymnasium will be connected with the building. 
Operatives will average $10.00 a week. 
C. All the slave catching machinery of the 
South is being put into motion to stop migration. Negroes are being arrested wholesale. Two hundred were taken from the 
Union Station, Savannah, Ga., and put in 
jail. Immigrant agents have been arrested 
and exorbitant license fees charged. To 
cap the climax, the Department of Labor 
has sent two colored men nosing about for 
evidence to keep Negroes in peonage. 
C. Southern colored speakers, who depend 
upon the good will of the white South, are 
urging Negroes not to migrate. Richard 
Carroll, of South Carolina, is one. Colored 
people in New Yor k will be surprised to 
learn from Dr. Moton, of Tuskegee, that New 
York Negroes find "it very difficult even 
now to find places to stay; they are huddled 
together in quarters like pigs, and many of 
them cannot find any place, and there is 
bound to be suffering this winter. 
"They will take colds and develop pneumonia and consumption as well as other diseases, and either will die there or be brought 
home in a dying condition." 
(I Many strikes are taking place because of 
this movement of labor. A number of white 
bricklayers in Philadelphia, Pa., struck last 
week because a colored bricklayer was employed. The contractor immediately paid 
them off and employed colored help entirely. 
Colored men have been employed as strike 
breakers among the longshoremen in the 
northwest. Negro workers on street cars 
in Panama struck, and other workmen 
threatened. At Marshall, Tex., GOO Negro 
helpers struck at the shops of the Texas 
and Pacific Railway. Their demands were 
granted and they went back to work. At 
Omaha, Neb., the white Musicians' Union 
threatened to strike if a colored band was 
employed in the Hughes parade. They 
changed their minds, however, and the Negro band marched amid great applause. At 
New Britain, Conn., white workers struck 
at the depot because 50 colored men were 
employed as freight handlers. 
C The depositors of the defunct Penny 
Prudential Savings Bank, at Birmingham, 
Ala., will pay a 15% dividend of $25,000, 
This was made possible by the purchase of 
a building by the Alabama Lodge of the 
Knights of Pythias, which paid $15,000 cash 
and assumed $59,000 in mortgage. 
C An official of the Albany, Ga., Bank says 
that 300 Negro farmers have recently 
opened accounts at the bank, and that these 
accounts are steadily increasing. This is 
said to be true all over southwest Georgia, 
d The Wag e Earners' Savings Bank, of 
Savannah, Ga., has declared a dividend of 
$1.20 per share. 
C Large and successful state fairs have 
been held at Jackson, Miss.; Raleigh, N. C.; 
Memphis, Tenn.; Houston, and Texarkana, 
Tex., and Birmingham, Ala. 
EDUCATION 
THE 10th anniversary of the Alpha Phi 
Alpha, the first Greek letter fraternity 
among' colored men in the United States, 
will be celebrated at Richmond, Va., in 
December. It was organized at Cornell 
University. Today it has chapters in 18 of 
the largest universities in the United States 
and includes nearly 1,000 members. 
(T The U. R Bureau of Education reports 90 THE CRISIS 
that while white illiterates in the United 
States amount to 5,500,000, and are increasing, colored illiterates have decreased from 
3,150,000 in 1880 to 2,227,731 in 1910. 
(I Miss Josephine Wormley has been made 
Assistant Director of Music in the schools 
in the District of Columbia, and put in 
charge of the music in the colored schools. 
She succeeds the late John P. Layton. 
C Dr. George W. Hubbard, for 40 years 
Dean of Meharry Medical College, has been 
made president of that school. 
C A t Iowa State University, the Phi Alpha 
Delta fraternity, composed of colored students, has been ranked third among Greek 
letter societies in point of scholarship. 
C Miss Gilberta Bridgwater, a colored girl, 
won the speed and accuracy contest in typewriting at the Lincoln High School, Portland, Ore. 
(I The extraordinary contradictions in the 
South are shown in the invitation given by 
the colored Allen University, Columbia, 
S. C , to ex-Governor Blease, to address the 
students. Blease stated that it was his 
vote that once made George W. Murray 
congressman instead of his white opponent. 
He declared that he had always tried to do 
justice to the Negro, and had never insulted 
a colored woman. He told the students to 
aspire. "Yo u are coming to higher things. 
They can't hold you back despite what I or 
any other man may say!" 
C The Commission to Study Race Relationship in the South, composed of representatives from southern white colleges, has 
issued two open letters. The one issued 
last October was against lynching; the second letter, just issued, is an appeal for 
greater educational opportunities for Negroes. It says among other things: "The 
inadequate provision for the education of 
the Negro is more than an injustice to him; 
it is an injury to the white man. The South 
cannot realize its destiny if one-third of its 
population is undeveloped and inefficient. 
For our common welfare we must strive to 
cure disease wherever we find it, strengthen 
whatever is weak, and develop all that is 
undeveloped. The initial steps for increasing 
the efficiency and usefulness of the Negro 
race must necessarily be taken in the school 
room. " 
C The last Georgia legislature appropriated 
more than $400,000 for white educational 
institutions in the state, and not a cent for 
Negroes, except a small part of the Morrill 
Fund ($8,000) which comes from the U. S. 
government. 
C Six colored girls are enrolled at Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Mass. 
C Tuskegee Institute has enrolled 1,229 
students this year; the Colored State Normal School, at Nashville, Tenn., has enrolled 1,242! Hampton Institute has 1,300; 
Atlanta University has the largest enrollment in its history. Other colored institutions seem similarly full. 
C The Jeanes Foundation reports cooperation with colored public school superintendents in 14 states. Its supervising industrial teachers visited 4,480 public schools 
and raised for school improvement, $100,312. 
These teachers were paid $56,556, of which 
the counties paid $17,913. 
(I It is reported that Julius Rosenwald has 
given $25,000 for a colored school near 
Independence, Mo. 
(I Dr. James A. Bray, secretary of the 
C. M. E. Church, has 12 educational institutions under his charge for which he has 
raised $58,366 in 5 weeks; this is in addition to the regular income of $25,000. 
(I Claflin University, South Carolina, has 
received $1,000 toward its endowment from 
Butler General, a colored farmer. 
(I The appropriations of the General Education Board show the usual discrimination 
against colored schools. Three white colleges get $400,000, while 2 colored schools 
get $10,000, and salaries are provided for 
2 education agents among Negroes in Oklahoma and Maryland. 
(I The 110 rural colored teachers in the 
state of Delaware receive an average annual 
salary of $227.74 each. 
(I It is reported that the registration in the 
colored schools of the District of Columbia 
has decreased from 18,616, in 1911, to 17,-
875, in 1915. 
C Kittrell College, North Carolina, has lost 
a building by fire. 
C The students of Tuskegee Institute have 
raised $750.50 in cash toward the Booker 
Washington Memorial Fund. 
(I The North Carolina Colored Teachers' 
Association appointed last year Charles H. 
Moore as State Inspector of Colored Schools. 
Mr. Moore has traveled over 12,000 miles 
through the state, and reports that funds 
raised by special taxes laid on colored people, are often spent for white schools. "The 
average Negro rural school house is really THE HORIZON 91 
a disgrace to an independent civilized people." 
C The 9th annual session of the Oklahoma 
Association of Negro Teachers, recommended E. A. Johnson's "History of the 
Negro, " as supplementary reading. 
C In Mcintosh County, Okla., where many 
rich Negro oil properties are situated, the 
county commissioners failed to levy taxes 
for the Negro schools to run more than 3 
months. 
G The graduates of Lincoln University, in 
the southwest, have organized an alumni 
association to raise funds for the Rendall 
Memorial Arch, at that University. 
C A conference for Negro education was 
called by James E. Shepard, the president 
of the National Training School, Durham, 
N. C , and held in that city. Amon g the 
speakers were the state superintendent of 
public instruction, and many educators of 
prominence. 
C Contributions, however small, are asked 
for the Slater School, at Winston-Salem, 
N. C , to complete a $12,000 fund which the 
state promises to duplicate. 
MEETINGS 
HE Rhode Island Union of Colored 
Women's Clubs met in Providence. 
G The Negro Organization Society, in 
Richmond, held its 4th annual meeting at 
Roanoke. It aims to promote "better 
health, better homes, better schools, and 
better farms." 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
FORMER STAT E SENATO R STEPHE N S. GRISWOL D has willed $3000 
to the Colored Howard Orphan Asylum, 
in New York. 
G A colored hospital, to be named after 
David Livingstone, is to be built in Pittsburgh, Pa. 
G James Weldon Johnson was awarded 
third prize, of $200, out of 800 contestants for the best political editorial sent to 
the Public Ledger, Philadelphia. Mr. Johnson, who was former United States consul to Nicaragua, has been a contributor 
to T H E CRISIS, is contributing editor of the 
New Yor k Age, and the author of the "Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man, " and 
many excellent poems. His biography appears in the February CRISIS, 1913. 
G Dr. K. K. Wright, Jr., the new manager of the Christian Recorder, held a 
unique "Negro Literature Week, " at Philadelphia, in connection with the A. M. E. 
Book Concern. Among the authors present were James Weldon Johnson, Kelly Miller, W. S. Braithwaite, and W. E. B. DuBois. 
C The Negro militia on the Mexican border have all returned home. The First Separate Battalion, of Washington, D. C , was 
the only unit on the border which was recruited to maximum strength. It was over 
four months in the field. Major James E. 
Walker was in command. The Eighth Illinois Regiment, under Colonel Denison, has 
made a notable record. It took part in 
the great march of 15,000 soldiers through 
the streets of San Antonio, and its band 
was especially applauded. The whole regiment was entrained in the short space of six 
minutes and was greeted in Chicago by a 
great throng. The committee of welcome 
was headed by the mayor, a group of aldermen, and the Hull House band. 
C A t Tacoma, Wash., a committee of colored people, under Mrs. N. J. Asberry, presented a loving cup to Colonel A. E. Joab, 
and two volumes of Negro literature to E. 
S. Stallcep, in appreciation of their services during the protest against "The Birth 
of a Nation." 
C A canvass is being made in Norfolk, 
Va., to raise money for the - colored day 
nursery. A similar effort, in Richmond, is 
raising $10,000 for the Old Folks' Home. 
C A new Negro bank, capitalized at $10,-
000, has been started at Columbia, S. C. 
G The Illinois State Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs has 71 clubs with 2,057 members. They have raised $12,265 in the last 
two years. 
G The colored people's exhibit at the greatest agricultural fair in the South, held at 
Dallas, Tex., was exceptionally good and 
received widespread praise. 
C The Pullman Porters Benefit Association 
was organized in 1915, and now covers the 
country. It is divided into zones of 1000 
men each. They have induced the Pullman 
Company to provide hospital care, pay during sickness, rest rooms and free baths. In 
some cases promotions have been made to 
yard foremen and mechanical positions. 
G A monument to the colored soldiers of 
the Civil Wa r has been unveiled in Lincoln 9 2 THE CRISIS 
Cemetery, Norfolk, Va., by a colored G. A. 
R. post. 
(I Idlewild, Mich., is a flourishing colored 
colony, in Lake County, which owns 1100 
acres of land. It has a club house, golf 
course, tennis courts, and many attractive 
cottages. 
(I When the city of Birmingham, Ala., inspected its grocery establishments recently, 
a colored firm, the Harris Brothers' Grocery 
Company, 701 Fourteenth Street, N., received a perfect mark of 100. 
d A fire in the colored town of Buxton, 
la., destroyed nearly $20,000 worth of property. 
C A tag day for the support of Day Nursery, Denver, Colo., was held by colored 
women of the city, and netted $923. 
C Colored boys are playing on several of 
the leading white football teams; one is on 
the team of Brown University, and two are 
on the excellent team of Tufts College. 
C E. A. Williams, a colored United States 
farm demonstrator in southern Georgia, has 
been presented with a Ford automobile by 
his rural admirers as a token of appreciation for his services. 
d A colored boy of eighteen, Walter White, 
has been appointed from Boston as stenographer and typewriter in the Wa r Department at a salary of $1000. He gained the 
position through civil service examination. 
(I A t Poquonock, Conn., a reception was 
given by the tobacco growers to the young 
colored college students from the South 
who had worked on the plantations during 
the season. There were 1400 in that region 
who came North to harvest tobacco, and the 
employing firms say that the experiment 
was a great success. -
G The colored Y. M. C. A. in Indianapolis, 
Ind., has the largest enrollment of any colored association in the country. It counts 
1118 members. 
C The colored people of Pittsburgh are 
raising $10,000 for a new Y. M. C. A. building. Sixty-five thousand dollars will be 
added to this sum from local funds, and 
$25,000 from Mr. Rosenwald. 
THE CHURCH 
IT is said that Katherine Drexel has 
* given $7,000,000 in all, for the education of colored Catholics, and has devoted 
her life to that work for the last thirty 
years. She is now 57 years of age. 
C The Missionary Society of the M. E. 
Church was founded in 1819 by a Negro, 
John Stewart, of Ohio. The centennary of 
this event will be celebrated in 1919. A 
monument has just been erected to Stewart's 
memory at Upper Sandusky, Ohio. 
C The Layman's Missionary Movement convention was held for three days in Atlanta, Ga. It is one of several conventions 
among colored laymen held under the auspices of the movement which centers in New 
York City. Adolphus Lewis, of Pennsylvania, is executive secretary for the conventions among colored men, and had charge 
of the Atlanta meeting. It was one of the 
largest meetings of the sort ever held. 
C The Arkansas Presbyterian Synod refused to adopt the report of its committee 
against lynching. The members did not 
think the subject was "proper" ! 
C S. P. Harris has sued R. H. Boyd, of 
the Baptist Publishing House, Nashville, 
Tenn., for $10,000 damages for libel. These 
gentlemen are on opposite sides of the Baptist split. 
PERSONAL 
\ MONG distinguished Negroes who have 
died during the last month are: Joshua 
A. Crawford, a lawyer, of Boston, Mass.; 
Young Turner, a wealthy farmer, of Lebanon, 111.; Thomas P. Taylor, an abolitionist, 
of Boston, Mass.; Samuel E. Young, a caterer, of Baltimore, Md.; the Rev. J. A. 
Taylor, a Baptist pastor, of Washington, 
D. C ; Silas H. Johnson, captain of fire engine company No. 3, Denver, Colo.; Lyde 
Wilson Benjamin, an unusually successful 
young business man, of Boston, Mass.; 
Frank Estell, custodian of one of the largest 
buildings in St. Louis, Mo.; and John H. 
Sherman, an old and well-to-do letter carrier, of Jacksonville, Fla. 
C James Bertram Clarke, a graduate of Cornell University, and until recently a teacher of Spanish in the High Schools of Brooklyn, N. Y., has gone to Rio Janeiro to represent a United States commercial concern. 
(L The Honorable James A . Cobb, formerly special assistant United States attorney 
in the District of Columbia, has been appointed professor in the law school of 
Howard University. 
(L John Ernest Green, formerly lieutenant 
in the Twenty-fourth United States Infantry, has been promoted to a captaincy. He 
is now serving as attache in Liberia. THE HORIZON 93 
0 First Sergeant John B. Kemp, of Company E, Twenty-fifth United States Infantry, has been celebrating the fifth anniversary of his marriage, his 45th birthday, 
and his fifth year of service in the regiment, 
at Schofield Barracks, Honolulu. There 
were 160 guests, including Chaplain and 
Mrs. Prioleau. 
C Sergeant D. P. Green, of the Twentyfifth United States Infantry, has been retired after 25 years' service. The Army and 
Nary Journal says that he was for years 
"the best known and most liked man in the 
Twenty-fifth." He was given character "excellent" on each of his eight discharges, 
and was recommended for a certificate of 
merit in the Philippines. 
C John T. Newsome, a colored lawyer, in 
SERGEANT PETEB BIGSTAFF. "THE HERO OF 
CARBJZAL" 
Washington, U. C, has had a judgment 
awarding William Byrd $18,600, confirmed 
by the Supreme Court of the United States. 
C In response to a demand from Henry 
Wattcrson, that "from the records of that 
last fatal charge at Carrizal, there should 
be recovered the name of that black soldier 
whose heroic loyalty to his white comrades, 
touches the high water mark of soldier devotion and deathless courage," the WarDepartment has named Peter Bigstaff, who> 
has since been promoted to sergeant. 
POLITICS 
r
T
, H E Negroes of Oklahoma issued the following manifesto during the recent 
election: "In most of the counties of this 
state the Negroes have in large numbers 
registered unmolested, but in Mcintosh, 
Muskogee, Wagoner, Okfuskee Counties, the 
real black belt of Oklahoma, there has been 
a flagrant violation of the recent Supreme 
Court decision and Negroes have been 
intimidated and abused by the minions 
of Governor Williams. For instance, at 
Rentiesville, a Negro town in Mcintosh 
County, where there are 180 electors, 4 
Negroes are registered. At Eufaula, 
with about 400 black electors, 6 have 
been permitted to qualify. In the city 
of Muskogee, with about 12,000 odd Negroes, 
their rights have been curtailed and denied 
with a viciousness unheard of in this state. 
A t Boley, which is situated in Paden District No. 2, with 500 odd electors, not a 
single Negro is registered save and except 
3 or 4 who affiliate with the Democratic 
Party. Wagoner County registrars were 
equally as ruthless in their disregard for 
the citizenship rights of black men, and the 
time is ripe for a fearless and determined 
stand against the outrageous encroachment 
of southern prejudice." 
(L The Board of Public Instruction, of Escambia County, Fla., has arbitrarily declared vacant the offices of the colored supervisors of Negro schools. These supervisors have hitherto been elected by the 
patrons, and they had general charge of the 
Negro schools. As the Negroes were disfranchised by the white primary, this was 
the only way in which Negro taxpayers had 
any voice in the school. 
(I The Republicans of Douglas County, Neb., 
published a pamphlet with a photograph of 
all the candidates except Will N. Johnson, 
the colored candidate for Public Defender. 
C The Negro Party, of Tennessee, held 94 THE CRISIS 
schools to show the voters how to mark the 
ballot, which was 28 inches long. Some 
10,000 Negroes were registered. 
FOREIGN 
FlEL D MARSHA L VON HINDENBUR G 
•*• says in an interview in the Berlin 
Vorwaerts: "If we are going to drag this 
war on indefinitely, then the whole of Europe will bleed to death and America and 
the colored races would be our heirs." 
(I A company of commercial and educational experts, headed by M. R. Hilford, will 
leave for the African Mandingo country in 
December. The Mandingo Development 
Corporation and the Mandingo Association, 
Inc., will co-operate in an effort to better 
the social, health, educational, and religious 
conditions of the country. 
GHETTO 
JOHN H. JOUBERT, general manager of 
a street railroad in New Orleans, has 
succeeded in getting a city court to declare 
that he has no Negro blood. His greatgrandmother was described as "mestizo." 
Many testified that his grandparents had 
been described as "colored." We hope he is 
happy at last. 
C The Union Furniture Company, of To ­
ledo, Ohio, has been haled into court for defrauding Negroes, in Texas, in a lottery 
scheme for buying furniture. The U. S. 
Government spent $6,000 in the prosecution 
and brought 34 Negro witnesses from Texas. 
(I The case of the colored men convicted of 
the murder of Dr. C. F. Mohr, of Providence, R. I., has gone to the Supreme Court 
of the state. 
C Dr. Isabel Vandervall has sued the Women's and Children's Hospital, of Syracuse, 
N. Y., for refusing to admit her as interne 
after they had contracted to do so. 
(I The Ohio Supreme Court has confirmed 
the power of the Board of Film Censors to 
keep "The Birth of a Nation" out of the 
state. Colored people have barred this film 
from Cambridge, Mass. 
(I Three hundred citizens of Oilton, Okla., 
tried to lynch two white councilmen, whom 
they accused of running the town into debt. 
Both of the councilmen were injured and in 
great danger until rescued by the police. 
(I Thomas Willis, a Negro janitor, was 
nearly killed by a mob in New York City, 
for stabbing a boy. 
C The Savannah Tribune says: 
The lynching of two Negroes in Blakely, 
Ga., about ten months ago and the sentencing of another to be hung soon, a fourth 
to life imprisonment for the killing of a 
white farmer, and the burning of several 
churches and halls have caused a great 
exodus of Negroes from that section. 
(I One of the members of the lynching 
mob at Lima, O., was found guilty by the 
jury ; others are still to be tried. 
(I In spite of the fact that the woman assaulted at Lima, O., failed to identify 
Charles Daniels, he has been convicted on 
circumstantial evidence and sentenced to 
from 3 to 20 years in the penitentiary. 
(I Since our last record the following lynchings have taken place: 
October 6, Gilmer, Tex., Will Spencer, 
hanged for slightly wounding a policeman. 
October 7, Sandersville, Ga., Charles 
Smith, hanged for shooting a sheriff. 
October 10, Little Rock, Ark., Frank 
Dodd, hanged for "annoying a white woman." 
October •—, Greenwood, Miss., Allen 
Nance, shot for firing at an automobile 
party. 
October 16, Paducah, Ky., Brack Kinley, 
hanged and burned for assaulting a white 
woman. 
October 16, Paducah, Ky., Luther Durett, 
hanged and burned for saying that he "intended to get some white man." 
October 21, Abbeville, S. C , Anthony 
Crawford, hanged fo r striking a white man. 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ANTILYNCHING FUND, N. A. A. C. P., 
October 6 to November 6, 1916. 
Receipts to October 5 previously announced $11,265.71 
Grand Lodge K. of P. of 
Ohio $50.00 
Chicago Branch — A. L. 
Weave r and C. A . Barnett, collectors 30.50 
Boston Branch 25.60 
Newark Branch 25.00 
Indianapolis Branch ... . 23.00 
Co. B, 24th Infantry, U. 
S. A 19.20 
Cleveland Branch 11.00 
Johnson City, Tenn., contributions—J. H. Byers, 
collector 10.50 
Macon, Ga., Business and 
Civic League 10.50 
Miscellaneous Contributions 79.40 
Total 284.60 
_ Grand Total $11,550.31 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 95 
Thre e Reason s Wh y Yo u Shoul d 
Insur e in Standar d Lif e 
FIRST, BECAUSE OF 
PROTECTIONThe prime reason for the existence of a life insurance company is protection. STANDAR D 
LIF E can give you this because it is the only Old Line, Legal Reserve life insurance company 
in the world owned, operated and controlled by Negroes. Its policyholders are protected by a 
deposit of Sion.nno.mi w ith the State Treasurer of Georgia. They are protected by the very 
nature of the company in -that it is a legal reserve company the setting aside of a large, 
definite portion of each premium paid as a legal reserve is required of all companies of this 
type. They are protected by the fact that all officers are bonded by the National Surety Company of New York. And lastly, the men behind the company as officers, directors, agents and 
employees arc of the finest and ablest type in the Race. 
SECOND, BECAUSE OF 
EMPLOYMENTAt the present time STANDAR D LIF E is giving lucrative employment to over two hundred 
of our people. It is opening up wonderful new fields of employment to our young men and 
women. Some one has said that "the greatest problem of the educated Negro is to know what 
to do with his education after he has gotten it." Teaching and pleaching are noble and necessary professions but all of us cannot teach and preach. STANDAR D LIFE gives entrance to 
the field of business to the young Negro who has the brains but not the capital, or who has both 
but little outlet for either. Some day you or your son or your dauvhter may want a dignified, 
well-oaying position. At its present rate of growth, it is only a matter of time before STANDAR D 
LIF E will have its five and ten thousand employees. 
THIRD, BECAUSE OF 
INVESTMENTDuring the year of lOlo over One Hundred Billion Dollars were loaned to the people of 
the United States by the life insurance companies of this country. Legal reserve companies 
are compelled to invest their reserve in real estate and bonds. If you want to know how 
much of the above mentioned amount was loaned to colored people by the life insurance companies of this country, try and sec how much you can borrow from them on your own real 
estate. Naturally STANDAR D LIF E will invest its reserve in real estate owned by colored 
people. As the company increases its* insurance in force, and as its reserve increases, one can 
easily see what the rrowth of this company means to the economic future of the Race. During 
the past twelve months we Lave loaned over Fifty Thousand Dollars to our people, which has 
K resulted in saving to the Race property of at least twice this value and in several cases many 
- times more. 
N Think over these arguments and if they appeal to you see one of our agents or write 
\
to us for additional information. Our slogan now is FIV E MILLIO N DOLLAR S 
WORT H O F PAID-FO R BUSINES S B Y DECEMBE R 31ST. Will you help us to 
achieve this mark ? 
fen a
d "e X
\ Standard Life Insurance Company 
particular^ \ 
a bo m > Hom e Office , 200 Aubur n Avenu e 
insurance. \ ' 
^ Atlanta , Georgi a 
Amount $ ^ 
SEX \ CAPITA L - - - $125,000.0 0 
AG E
 V Agencies in Georgia, Alabama . Tennessee, Kentucky, 
Weight N Arkansas, Missouri, Texas, Mississippi and the Dis-
\ trict of Columbia. 
Height . 
OCCUPATION
 x ^ Nearly Three Million of Insurance in Force 
Name ... . K W e can write you and protect you in any 
\ part of the world in amounts from $250.00 
Address V to $6000.00. 
r. ,, , , v Neman E. Perry, President 
((_. Dec. 1*H<> \ Harry II. Pace. Secretary-Treasurer 
\ 
Mention TH E CRISI S Preparations for the hair 
supreme in reputation 
if 
SOLD EVERYWhere in U.S.A. 
"WALKERS"- ^ hair restorer 
and treatment of no regrets. Distinctive in its superiority. 
LELI A COLLEG E 
WALKER' S HAI R PARLO R 
Eastern Branch: 110W . 3GTH St., New Yor k City THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 97 
THE LITERARY SENSATION OF THE YEAR 
"TH E FORGE D NOTE " 
A Romance of the Darker Races 
By OSCA R MICHEAU X 
Foremost Negro Novelist, Who Also Wrote "THE CONQUEST" 
Third Large Printing 
li e was leaving, the somewhat sad and silent young man she had met not long before and 
had come strangely to admire, and she was sorry. "Yes," he would come in for a few 
minutes. It was rather unusual—the acquaintance they had formed—for neither had inquired 
ot the other beyond the name. Vet there was about it all something mutual—they always 
agreed so readily—both seemed to correspond in views. So when he told her that he was to 
leave she was downcast and sorrowful and sad. She heard his footsteps as he passed down 
the warkway later and out of her life. But upon her lips a kiss burned—he had placed it 
there on a sudden impulse, and would have declared his love, . . . But she had begged 
him not to . . . Why? 
It was weeks afterwards when he called again,.and had not written her that he would. He 
was going South, to Dixie. About her, her actions, mysterious at times, was something he 
had never come to understand. . . . He would this night. It was a winter night, cold, 
dark and dreary. He stood at last before the door, but as he waited athwart for her, her 
voice and smile, another, an old, old woman with evil eye and heart, rose out of the darkness 
and told him the story 
And so it was that Sydney Wyeth went upon a journey. And what came to pass upon 
said journey; the girl he had failed to see but who came again into his life; and how he 
was brought at last to know and understand makes up a novel teeming with turbulent excitement, humor, intrigue and a romance the most splendid and effective ever produced with the 
Ethiopian in the title role. 
The tremendous story of a woman's soul, symbolic in its interpretation of the Negro, it 
bears a trenchant message for every thinking man and woman living in the world today. 
From across the sear the London Globe has to say: "Strong, carefully wrought, artistically 
complete, not merely satisfying but curiously impressive." 
But the Daily Standard, London, is less brief: "After the bosh and bathos, the howling 
sentimentality, the sickening gush, the night dress stupidities so often offered as American 
fiction, it is a relief, a joy and a strengthening to read the full, fine novel Mr . Micheaux, 
peer of Negro writers, has produced. It touches the primal passions, the ultimate, intimate 
realities with strength, sincerity and conviction. Masterly it is. His portrayal of the little 
brown heroine and Sydney Wyeth's method of redemption is touched with genius." 
Th e Holiday s Wil l Soo n B e Her e 
and among the gifts you make will perhaps be a book or so. So going to the book store, 
what will you buy? A set from "The Old Masters" is suggestive, no doubt; but will they 
be read? Will the "gift" book with pretty red corners and a few little short stories and 
poems, etc., be read ? Wh y not exercise more discretion ? Wh y not, as one of our agents 
who sold 4,000 copies alone to the white people of northeast Nebraska said of the multitude 
of his customers there that say, "I'm going to try that book because it has never been my 
privilege to read a novel by a Negro author"—and they read it; their neighbors read it, all 
the country is reading ami re-reading it. WHY SOT YOV.' 
If you think this book will interest you, sit down and write out on a postal or letter these 
words or their purport and mail to us: 
PLEAS E SHI P M E A COP Y OF "TH E FORGE D NOTE " 
C. O. D. B Y PARCE L POST. I AGRE E T O ACCEP T 
SAM E O N DELIVERY , SUBJECT T O EXAMINATION , 
IF I T PLEASE S ME. 
Or if you take our word, send us your check or money order and address to whom you 
wish it sent and the same will be mailed so as to reach them, on -or near about the date you 
would have it. 
Send at once and state what date you would like to have tin- book shipped. Give ample 
time so as to avoid the usual holiday rush. 
LIBERA L COMMISSIO N T O AGENT S PROSPECTUS FREE 
CLOTH BOUND 17 FULL PAGE 111. 541 PAGES PRICE $1.50 
WESTERN BOOK SUPPLY CO., Lincoln, Nebraska 
Publishers 98 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOK S B Y COLORE D AUTHOR S 
Nearly a quarter of a century has passed since the Neale house was fotfnded. Hundreds 
of its publications are in active circulation. None of these are more vitally important to 
the American people than those that relate to racial problems. They comprise a library 
in themselves. Limitations of space enable us to announce here but a few of these books 
by prominent colored authors. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, Howard University. 
Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable." 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness 
and skill." 
Out of the House of Bondage. By Kelly 
Miller, colored; Dean of the College of Arts 
and Sciences, Howard University. $1.65 by 
mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. He neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogues." 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; 
at present Major in United States Army. 
Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, 
colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. Mr. Stemons 
contends that industrial opportunity, rather 
than industrial education, is the basic need 
of the Negro. He presents his arguments 
in vigorous English of extraordinary 
purity, and the book may easily be classed 
with the foremost literature of the Negro 
race. $1.00 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D. D., 
K. C , colored; with an introduction by Adna 
B. Leonard, D. D., LL. D. $1.60 by mail 
Philadelphia Christian Recorder: "The book is 
filled with splendid idealism, and in spite of its 
somewhat verbose character, presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromise for the present 
exigencies may not be heeded." 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors. By 
J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. Two editions: one in English and 
the other in French. Each edition $3.20 
by mail. 
The Nation, New York: "Haiti, at last, has a 
champion who is entitled to be heard; for he speaks 
from fullness of knowledge, and from a position of 
political eminence sends forth no uncertain sound. 
It is not too much to say that the latest book on 
Haiti is also the best that has ever appeared respecting the so-called 'Black Republic' Minister Leger 
has struck a new note, for, unlike others who have 
written on the subject, he places himself against a 
veritable wall of facts, and not only wards off the 
blows that are aimed at his country, but takes the 
aggressive against her critics." 
The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit. 
D., colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
among the foremost men of his race. % 1.60 
by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By George 
W. Ellis, K. C , F. R. G. S., colored; recently, and for eight years, Secretary of 
the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of West Africa, " "Islam as a Factor 
in West African Culture," "Dynami c Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other 
works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 by 
mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "It is the third consecutive contribution made by a noted man to our knowledge 
of conditions and peoples in West Africa." 
Albany Times-Union: "It is easily one of the most 
important contributions ever made to the literature 
of the Negro race." 
New York Crisis: "This history ought to be in 
every American's library." 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Youn g Men and Young 
Women, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study of Negro achievement and should be an 
inspiration to the young men and the young women 
of the race." 
Prof. Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D., the eminent historian and educator, writes: "The 
Neale Publishing Company to-day represents high-water mark in America for its historical 
works. Upon its list are to be found the best books upon each and every side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety 
as to lend luster to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor. " 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO./WITT ™ OR THE CRISIS, TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 9ff 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY « ATLANTA . GA . 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By JAMES F. MORTON, JR., A . M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling f»cti and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 WEST 138TH STREET •:• NEW YORK, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Ten poems by 
•EFFIK T. BATTLE, A.M. 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. "Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and true inspiration."—George W . Cable. PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS: OKOLOHA IHDUSTEIAX. SCHOOL, Okolona, Miss. 
$25.0 0 PER WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling "History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish* American War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 400 pages. 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NEW YOR K 
"Th e Truth About the Bible " 
This book deals with the sex of the Bible. "It 
will empty our jails, insane asylums and hospitals 
in time; it should be in every home in the world." 
j, H. Powell, M. D. "For ideas, it is the world's 
greatest book."—1. Silas Harris, A. M. "It is 
the world's most revolutionary book; it means a 
better race."—W. A. Swan, M. D. Read this 
book. Price J2.00. Address the Author. Sidney 
C. Tapp, Ph.B., 601 Delaware St,, Kansas City, Mo. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscrip t Criticize d 
an d Revise d 
Poems , Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press ARTICLES, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Bo x 102, Howar d University, 
Washington, D. C. 
Qffxxccl CALIAMITI; (Qarb* 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEMEN . 
IOO FO R BO CENT S O R BO FO R 3 0 CENTS . N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FO R SAMPLE S AN D TERM S 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWN1NG 
INDIANAPOLIS . INDIAN A 
wants the "M y Lad}' Quality" package. Contains beautiful assortment of six exquisite Post Cards, six Place Cards, three Gift Cards, one Transfer Doily Pattern an d a valuable coupon wort h 75c. Sent postpaid FOR 10c, 3 for 25c. Agents wanted. Gloster Sales Co., Dept. G, 670.E. 170th St.. 
Ne w Yor k City. 
WONDERFUL XMAS BARGAIN 
Finest quality assorted post cards, seals, booklets an d tags all in one package for twelve cents by mail. Boy s and girls can mak e money . Write for information and 
send 2c. stamp. Write 
JULIE N MILLER , 
1201 Spruce St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
EVERY WOMAN 
AGENT S WANTED ! 
For our new book. Progress and Achievements of the Colored People. Showing the 
wonderful doings and new opportunities of 
our race, low price, many pictures, lightning 
.-eller, S10.00 per day. Ask for terms. Write 
quick. AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 
7th St., "Washington, D. C. 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
THE EARLY NEGRO POETESS COLLECTED BY 
RICHARD R. WRIGHT. JR.. AND 
CHARLOTTE CROGMAN WRIGHT 
and arranged in an attractive volume suitable for 
a holiday gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: :: New York 
lOO O GIVE BOOKS 
ON E THOUSAN D DOLLAR S SAVE D lOO O 
SPECIAL BOO K BARGAINS 
Masterpieces of Xegro Eloquence..$1.50 postpaid Race Relationship in the South, set, 
Life and Times of Frederick Doug- 7 vols $5.00 postpaid 
j as s 2.50 N. B. Catalogue of new rare books, 
The Black Pha'anx 3.00 pertaining to the colored race. 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E :: 135 Wes t 135t h Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CIISI S 10 0 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
„ W e MANUFACTURE LODG E REGALI A fo r ever y 
V \ FRATERNAL SOCIETY . CAS H o r INSTALLMENT 
\ \ PLAN . CHEAPES T BADG E HOUS E I N THE COUNT -
J
1
 '•' RY . CATALOGUE FOR YOU R SOCIET Y FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Y X The Segro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES.Prea. 
N . E . Cor . 8t h & Plu m 
Cincinnati , Ohi o 
If Yo u Wea r Shee r Blouse s 
Good tast e demands the remova l of hair 
from unde r the arms. Observ e well-gowned 
women everywhere . 
The safest and most "womanly" way is to 
dissolve the hair.—on face, lip. neck, or underarm—by applying- eome El Rado, the Sanitary 
Liquid, with a piece of absorbent cotton or Bmall 
sponge. The hair comes off in a few moments 
without injury to the ekin, or increasing and 
coarsening later growth, as is the case with 
shaving. N o disagreeable odor. Money-back 
guarantee. El Rado is sold at all toilet counters, 
in 50c and $1.00 sizes. 
If you prefer, we will gladly fill your order 
by mail direct, in plain wrapper, if you will 
write inclosing stamps or coin. 
LELI A W . ROBINSON , Distributor 
110 West 136th Street New York 
FRE E 
Just to get your nam e and acquaint you with our unusual 
offerings, w e will send you absolutely free a 
hot iron Transfer Doily Pattern of artistic design together with our catalog upon receipt of 
your nam e and address. A post card will do. 
Mention the CRISIS . Gloster Sales Co., Dept. G, 670 E. 170th St., Ne w Yor k City. 
PEOPLE' S HAI R 
KATTJRA X FRON T FABT J 
rovers Entire Hea d . 
I N 
Latest Styles of Wigs, Plats, Transforma 
tions, Puffs, Electric Combs. W e are 
largest firm in this line. Send 2c for 
new Catalogue. 
Th e Old Reliabl e 
MME . BAUM'S HAIR EMPORIUM 
486 8th Ave., New Vor k City 
the 
our 
The SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M introducing 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guaranteed to Grow Holr in SIX TREATMENT S 
or Money Refunded. Price SO cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mall or at College. 
MRS . E . SLAUGHTER GAMBL E 
3001 LAWTO N AVENU E 4T. LOUIS. MOT" 
'AINLESS treatment for | ;ORNS. BUNIONS. TNOTCOWN NAILS, and ALL therAILHENTS of the FEET. DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
CHIROPODIS T Registered In the States of New York and New Jersey Telephone 12S4 Audubon. 167 West 136th St., New York City. 
GANT T QUIN O SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E Enroll In our Correspondence School. Anything in Beauty Culture. B y Mall. Diplomas Issued. Terms Fine. Quino Hair Grower, 50c. Temple Oil, 75c. Try a Box. 
Write: QUINO. 63S FOR E Street. NASHVILLE. TENN . 
Mention TH E C R THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 101 
The Wonder 
of the Age 
LIQUI D ENAME L 
UQUI D EN*M£ 
HIG H SUR FACE 
POLIS H 
Is the last word in a High surface 
Polish. Positively gives the most brilliant and lasting lustre- known. Is absolutely waterproof, dustproof and finger 
mark-proof not affected by heat, cold, 
or dampness. Keeps indefinitely. Liquid 
Enamel's only rival is a large diamond 
under the rays of a powerful arc-light. 
Dries spontaneously with each stroke 
of the cloth. 
USES 
Admirabl y adapted for use on automobiles, 
exterior and interior of Pullmans and all 
steam cars, carriages, mahogany, wainscoating of botels, banks, office buildings, 
private residences, motor cycles, victrolas, 
desks, clocks, furniture, cabinet files, safes, 
book cases, exterior and interior surfaces 
of electric cars, violins, interior woodwork 
of stores and steamships, delivery wagons. 
PRIC E 50c PE R BOTTLE . 
W . AUGS . B . MATTHEW S 
79 Dexte r St., Medford, Mass. 
Agent. 
Good Buggies 
at 
LOW PRICES FOR CASH 
Write for Catalog 
C.R. PATTERSON & SONS 
GREENFIELD, 0. 
Negro Firm Buggy and Automobile Makers 
$10.00 IN GOLD 
For the best poem on the life achievements 
or death of the late L>r. Hooker T. Washington. Hundreds of poems have been written on 
the Ijfe achievements or death of Dr. Washington. Have you written one? If you have, 
send it to us as it may prove a winner. All 
manuscript must be typewritten, enclosed in 
a return stamped envelope and bearing the 
address of the sender. Act quickly. This 
offer will expire December 12. All manuscript 
returned. Address, 
PRAISEWORTH Y MTJSE, 
Care Journal and Guide, Dept. M, & 3, , 
620 Queen Street, Norfolk, Va . 
The winning poem with the other good ones 
will be published in the first issue of "Praiseworthy Muse," a quarterly magazine of AfroAmerican poetry. 
WHA T A FIV E DOLLA R BILL 
O F YOUR S WIL L DO ! 
It will purchase ONE SHARE of stock in the greatest NEWSPAPER SYNDICATE 
under the control of Colored people in the world, which proposes to operate a chain 
of "daily newspapers" connected and linked with each other by telegraph wires in 
such cities as: New York; Eoston, Mass.; Philadelphia, Pa.; Pittsburgh, Pa.; Baltimore, Md.; Washington, D. C, and Richmond, Va. 
It will help to make possible the great and needful service in unseating and abolishing that demon monster "color-prejudice" which has and is still keeping a padlock 
on the doors of "EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES " to this race. 
It will help to place in the hands of the race a bludgeon which will be in the form 
of concerted opinion that will more effectively wipe out the heinous and atrocious 
crimes of lynching in a single year than all of the thunder talk promises made by 
office seeking politicians would bring about in a decade. 
It will help to provide a PRINTING PLAN T to be installed in each one of the 
above named cities which will give to qualified men and women POSITIONS of a 
higher grade. 
It will help you to help yourself. 
W e have prepared a wonderfully interesting booklet' of "facts and figures" on this 
most wonderful opportunity. It will tell you of many things of which you have probably never thought about. Tt will inform you of the vast amount of good that is in 
your own power to do. Send for it and read it over—today. It is FREE! 
THE THUNDERER PRINTING—PUBLISHING CO., INC. 
174 Wes t 135th Street, NE W YOR K CIT Y 
LOUI S A. LEAVELLE , Prest. JOH N D. HADWIN , Treat. 
Mention T H E CRISTS 10 2 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
$6 0 A WEE K AND THIS FREE 
JT0M0BILE 
Ton—yonreelf—can positively make S60 a week and get a Free 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetio, ambitious felloes, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 50 years—the KOBIN80N FOLDING 
BATH 1UB. Demonstrating: Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new Invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom In any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively nnleaksMe. Absolutely fruaranteed for 
10 years. Ee member, fully 7055 of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sale s Successe s 
Two Kales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
e
profit In80 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to date, 
•kholder, Mont., orders $1072 In 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fasoinating work. Write a postcard. Le t me 
write yon a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit la good If yon mean tmsfoieBS. But yon mnst be 
ambitions, yon must want to make money. That s all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay yon $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFQ. CO, 
4286 Factories Building* TOLEDO , OHI O 
Bi g Entertaine r 
12 0 Parlor Games, 5 Comic Beeitations, 
15 Tricks with Cards. (8 7 Jokes, Riddles 
and Funny Readings. 7 3 Toasts, 3 Mono-
. loguos, 5 0 Money Making Recines.^All 
for 10 Cents. 3 for 20 Cents, Postpaid. 
J. C . DORN , 909 S. Dearborn St., Dept. 75. Chicago. 111. 
O 1 0 Seethe Selected Liston 
BOOKS ! the Back Cover 
I 
Sp ecial Offer toadvertis e 
ou r swel l 
clothes. This handsome, handtaiWed $15 Suit, in 18 different 
new styles, special price only 
$8.50. W e offer you The Bicrgest 
Values in Tailoring", and please 
remember always: W e Will No t 
'''eepOne Penny O f You r Money 
Unless you are WEL L PLEASED . 
ni g Pay-Easy Work 
Agents! Make ,$35 to $65 a week 
0
 right in your own town. 
Fart time or all. We furnish Tailor 
Book with styles, samples, wholesale 
prje and oil instructions 
v Wri^e for it Today. 
TH E CHICAG O TAILOR S ASSN . 
OeftflB 515 So-FranKlin St., Chicago. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W . 135th Street New York CUJ 
T .i,„ s
 . . {Central 104-W 
Telephones: { Mai n g , 
HARR Y E. 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
1607 Williamson Building 
DAVI S 
NOTARY PUBLI C 
Clereland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLA S 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOE-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Life Buildinf 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block . 
Near Third and Hennepin 
M'nneapolis Minn. 
TeL 5437 Fort Hilt" Cable AddreM, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMecheo 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEYR-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARRY M. COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write jor Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
Mrs. Minnie C. Warwick 
Novelty Shop 
Novelties, Dry Goods, Toilet Articles, Lingerie of 
all kinds in stock and made to order. "Wedding 
Outfits at reasonable rates, 
178 Northampton St., BOSTON , MASS . 
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY FOR A DENTIST 
desiring t o locat e in Philadelphia , Pa . Fo r 
particulars address Fran k Dawson , 1020 Chestnu t Street. 
WHO KNOWS
 a
 soo d tow n wher e a colYT11 V ftiwnJ ore d busincs s wou] d b e ap . 
predated ? Hav e mone y and service s fo r the right 
town . Correspondenc e invited. Address: J. L . T. , 
car e TH E CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , N . Y! 
Mention TH E CRISTS A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
B y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , autho r of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Ques t of th e Silve r Fleece, " "Selec t Bibliograph y of 
th e Negr o American, " etc . 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's ne w boo k is th e latest additio n t o a remarkabl e 
serie s of low-price d ne w book s wit h whic h everybod y shoul d be ­
com e acquainted . 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per C _ „ _ i 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - - VVC * X16 L 
Postage extra 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
Th e CRISIS , 7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISI S The CRISIS 
christmas Book mart || 
The best Christinas gift is a good book. | | 
Through the CRTSIS you can order any book printed at the regular H 
publishers' prices. ff 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlylc. { 
J\ Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIVE L IFE IN SOUTH AFRICA. (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.5 0 U 
H AZEL. (Mar y Whit e Ovington) . $1.0 0 If 
T H E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED M AN . (Anonymous) . 1.2 0 If 
NORRIS W RIGH T C UNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare ) 1.5 0 | | 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amo s Pendleton) 1.5 0 |f 
SOULS OF B LAC K F OLK . (W . E. B. Du Bois) 1.2 5 II 
T H E W HIT E M AN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge ) 1.Q0 
R AC E A DJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2;B0 ' ffV 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley ) 1.25 ^ If 
H AL F A M AN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) LOO- |f 
A FTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 ff • 
JOH N B ROWN . (W . E. B. D u Bois) ". 1.2 5 jj 
NEGRO IN A MERICA N HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.2 5 Jf 
P RINC E H AL L AND H I S FOLLOWERS. (Georg e W . Crawford).. . 1.0 0 j| 
NEGRO CULTURE IN W ES T AFRICA. (Georg e W . Ellis) 2.0 0 If 
T H E NEGRO. (W . E. B. Du Bois) 5 0 jj 
T H E EDUCATION OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carte r G. 
Woodson ) 2.0 0 jj 
F ACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch ) 1.5 0 ( { 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W . C. Berwick -
Sayers) 2.2 5 |j 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 JI 
P OEM S OF P AU L L AURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 H 
A FRO- A MERICA N FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 ' IS 
O U T OF TH E HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 Ij 
Address, THE CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York |[ 