The Crisis 10cts Feb 1918 FEB 1^18 
Frank Walts President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
MAJO R J. E. SPINGARN , Chairman of Board 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR . W . E. B. D U BOIS , Director of Publications and Research 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washington 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N TONES 
DR. O. M. WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A . SINCLAI R 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C . BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H. STUDI N 
DR. JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
N. A. A. C. P. RECORD FOR 1917 
The organization of branches throughout the South. Fifteen new branches having been organized in the principal cities of the South Atlantic States; making a 
total of 95. 
An officers' training camp at Des Moines, Ia., as a result of which there are nearly 
700 fine young colored officers commissioned in the army. 
The great victory in the United States Supreme Court on the Louisville Segregation case. 
Investigations and publication of the facts in: the Memphis lynching, the East St. 
Louis riots, the Houston affair, the Dyersburg lynching. 
Defense of the colored men accused of rioting at East St. Louis and of Dr. Bundy 
against whom the death penalty is sought. 
Defense of many individuals in their rights as American citizens, especially in 
cases of discrimination in the Civil Service. 
Much important work done by the local branches. 
Date. 1918. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York . 
SIR: 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment o f my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
$ City and State 
Mention TH E CRISI S EDITOR' S JUBILE E NUMBER—Editio n 68,00 0 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . 
BURCHARD T D U BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1918, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for February, 1918 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . THE EDITOR. Drawn from Life. By Frank Walts 
IN CASTLETO N GARDENS , JAMAIC A 166 
DYERSBURG , TENNESSEE 182 
THESE. Decoration by Hilda Wilkinson 185 
ARTICLES 
THE SHADO W OF YEARS . By W. E. B. DuBois 167 
LENORA' S CONVERSION. A Story. By Edna May Harrold 17 1 
NEGRO EDUCATION . A Review. By W. E. B. DuBois 17 3 
THE BURNING A T DYERSBURG . A n N. A . A . C. P. Investigation 178 
LYNCHINGS AN D MOB MURDERS, 191 7 183 
T O THE UNITED STATE S OF NORT H AMERICA . A Poem. By Thomas 
Campbell 184 
THESE. A Poem. By Lucian B. Watkins 185 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIA L 163 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 186 
TH E HORIZON 191 
TH E CRISI S FO R MARC H 
Annual Report of the N. A. A, C. P. The Cooperative Movement, By Dr. J. P. Warbassee; 
Special News from the Cantonments, Special Pictures, and a Cover by Battey. 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : TH E DATE OF EXPIRATION OF EACH SUBSCRIPTION IS PRINTED ON THE WRAPPER. WHE N 
THE SUBSCRIPTION IS DUE, A BLUE RENEWAL BLANK IS ENCLOSED. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : TH E ADDRESS OF A SUBSCRIBER CAN BE CHANGED AS OFTEN AS DESIRED. 
I N ORDERING A CHANGE OF ADDRESS, BOTH THE OLD AN D THE NE W ADDRESS MUST BE GIVEN. TW O WEEKS ' 
NOTICE IS REQUIRED. 
MANUSCRIPT S AN D DRAWINGS RELATING TO COLORED PEOPLE ARE DESIRED. THE Y MUS T BE ACCOMPANIE D B Y RETURN POSTAGE. I F FOUND UNAVAILABLE THEY WILL BE RETURNED. 
Entered as second class matter November 2 , 1910 , at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 8 , 1879 . 160 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM , N. C. 
Open to Students of Either Sex. 
It is mor e than a mere school. It is a communit y at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections 
of the country in improved Negr o communit y life wherever 
our trained workers locate. 
Th e following departments are already in successful operation: Teache r Training, Industrial, Literary, Academi c and 
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Househol d 
Economic s and Departments of Music. 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed by any School for 
the Education of Negro Yout h in the South. 
Th e next term opened Monday, Octobe r I, 1917. For catalog 
and detailed information, address 
President, JAMES E. SHEPARD , 
DURHA M - - - NORT H CAROLIN A 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
Twenty-fourth Annual Session. 
Fall term began Sept. 1, '17. 
Three Strong Departments: Agricultural, Mechanical and Academic. 
Short Practical Courses of 
Three Months; Maintained by 
the Governments of North Carolina and of the United States. 
Special training for teachers of 
vocational subjects. 
Board, Lodging and Tuition, 
$9.00 per Calendar Month. 
For Catalog and Further 
Information, address 
President Dudley, 
A. & T. College, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
For reasonably matur e students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$100, Fall term began Wednesday , September 19, 1917. 
The Summe r School for Teachers, from 
July 5 to August 2 inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
For further Information writ e t o 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , 
Principal. 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 161 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal 
School and College, with manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortyeight years of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectual Atmosphere . Noted for Honest and 
Thorough Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September 19, 1917. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O . DRAWE R 524 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in tome of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. Flipper, Chairman Trustee Board. 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies— Athletics— -Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma 
First Semester opened October 3, 1917. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
Mention TH E CRISI S 162 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"A genuine welcome to colored men and women." 
AFTERNOON AND EVENING COURSES IN 
HISTORY, ECONOMICS, SOCIALISM, ENGLISH, PUBLIC SPEAKING, ART, MUSIC, 
PHILOSOPHY, LITERATURE BY SCOTT NEARING, MORRIS HILLQUIT, ALGERNON LEE 
and other leading specialists 
Fees nominal. Call or write for particulars. 
Correspondence Courses in History, Economics, Socialism. 
Write for circular. 
THE RAND SCHOOL OF SOCIAL SCIENCE 7 EAST 15TH STREET, NEW YORK CITY 
(Mention where you saw this advertisement.) 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY , N . C . 
A Religions Co-Educational School with A 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modem Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session Opened Wednesday , October 3, 1917. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS, President or 
J. E. Aggrey , Registrar . 
Th e Slate r Industria l an d 
Stat e Norma l Schoo l For Colored Youth of Both Sexes 
WINSTON-SALEM , N. C. 
I. Offering Standard Courses In Academic Subjects, In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, In Education. II. Graduates receive the Teacher's Certificate. III. Located amid the foothils of the mountain section of Western North Carolina and the health conditions are ideal. IV. Accommodations excelent and expenses moderate. 
For further information communicate with S. G. ATKINS, Principal 
SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL, 
Winston-Salem, N. C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor Recitals Concerts Oratorio Opera "An no usualy good voice. The natural quality la beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good ' taste."—Philp Hale, In the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. „ 
Address. 3 WARWICK ST.. BOSTON. MASS. 
LULU ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
126 W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBERT 
Soprano 
"She has one of the best voices that God has given her race." —Los Angeles Times Engagements accepted for Concerts, Recitals, Oratorio 93 Locust Street, Detroit, Mich. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their high estimate of the splendid attainments of Clarence Cameron White and his Concermeant appearance in your city s the musical event of the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 15-No. 4 FEBRUARY, 1918 Whole No. 88 
Editorial 
JUBILEE. 
THE Editor of the Crisis will 
celebrate his fiftieth birthday on the twenty-third of 
February, 1918. He would 
be glad on this occasion to have a 
word from each of his friends. 
ON E HUNDRE D THOUSAND . 
IN the Christmas Crisis we renewed our oft repeated request for a circulation of 
fifty thousand. The response 
was so genuine and unexpected that 
a second edition of the Christmas 
number was demanded, and the net 
paid circulation reached fifty-four 
thousand. The January circulation 
was even larger. 
Having, then, apparently reached 
the first goal of our ambition, we 
have straightway begun an organized drive for bigger things. Mr. T. 
J. Calloway of Washington, D. C, 
has been added to our force for three 
months to take charge of this special 
effort. We hope to have a circulation 
of seventy-five thousand before May 
1, and of one hundred thousand before 1919. 
A COLORE D CONGRESSMAN . 
THE ratio of congressional apportionment in the United 
States is one representative to 
every 211,877 inhabitants. 
American Negroes, under any just 
system of proportional representation, ought to have in the Sixty-fifth 
Congress at least fifty-six representatives to defend the country not only 
against alien enemies, but against 
the Bourbon South! We have not a 
single congressman, thanks to oligarchy and mob violence in the South 
and gerrymandering in the North. 
With the recent migration, however, 
careful and unselfish political leadership can soon send black men to 
Congress from New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois. 
With five representatives from such 
states we could then attack the rotten democracies in Border States like 
Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri, 
and finally the Solid South. Here lies 
our line of march, comrades! To the 
work. 
TH E CONFERENC E 
THE seventh annual conference 
of th e N. A. A. C.P. wa s a 
meeting of unusual interest. 
Our ninety-six branches and 
nearly ten thousand members were 
represented by over seventy delegates and large local audiences which 
varied from one hundred to two thousand, culminating in the Sunday afternoon mass meeting, when Colonel 
Young, Attorney W. Ashbie Hawkins, and Rabbi Wise addressed us. 
There were three conferences, well 
attended, despite the unusual weather. The discussions were full of interest and information. The public 
meeting at Ethical Culture Hall had 
a fine audience and addresses by 
Moorfield Storey, Oswald Garrison 
Villard, the Rev. Mr. E. W. Daniel, 
Colonel Moss, and Dr. DuBois. The 
theatre party, the reception at the 
Henry Street Settlement, and the din163 164 THE CRISIS 
ner at the Lybia were the social features, and they were thoroughly enjoyed. 
These mid-winter conferences must 
in the future become regular landmarks and increase in interest and 
attendance. 
TH E DOUGLAS S HOME . -
THE homestead of Frederick 
Douglass in Anacostia, D. 
C, has been redeemed. In 
less than one year the President of the National Association of 
Colored Women, Mrs. Mary B. Talbert, has been enabled to sign the 
check wiping out every dollar of indebtedness on "Cedar Hill." At the 
last biennial held in Baltimore, when 
the National Association proposed to 
redeem and restore "Cedar Hill," it 
was thought impossible; but the impossible has been done, and done by 
Negroes. Not a dollar has come 
from white people. Eventually, the 
National Association of Colored 
Women will restore it to its original 
beauty, and the spot, long grown 
over with weeds and briars, will be 
a mecca for travellers to the capital 
city. It will become the permanent 
headquarters of the National Association of Colored Women, and everything relating to the history of the 
colored race in America will be gathered there. 
All honor to Mrs. Talbert. 
YOUTH . 
THE death of a young colored genius, at the very 
beginning of his career, 
must give colored America 
pause. We have got to organize 
more carefully and more thoughtfully for the support and encouragement of talented youth. 
We must remember that most 
white people of this country do not 
want to encourage Negro talent. The 
Slater Board which, under ex-President Hayes, looked for exceptional 
Negroes, to give them training, would 
not under any circumstances pursue 
such a policy today. They do not 
want exceptional Negroes. They 
want servants and workingmen. 
Servants and workingmen are 
needed, but so is genius. We must 
open the doors to aspiring youth. 
We must support and encourage Negro talent. We must endure the natural boastfulness of youth and its 
lack of respect for age or accomplishment. None is worse than we were 
twenty years ago. But let us conserve our talent. No Negro genius 
must die from neglect or lack of appreciation. 
TH E RAILROADS . 
THE taking over of the railroads by the United States 
government is an event of 
first importance to colored 
Americans. Not only does it probably mark the ending of a system of 
private profit, based upon so general and standardized a necessity as 
travel, but it goes further than that. 
With the proper administration in 
Washington, it means the end of the 
"Jim-Crow" car, for with the government as owner, what state can prescribe conditions of travel? 
Moreover, the railway unions have 
absolutely excluded colored men. 
Only white men can belong to the 
conductors' union, the engineers' 
union, the switchmen's union, the 
firemen's union, etc. If the government continues to hold the railways 
after the war, and this is more than 
probable, these union men will become civil servants. Any person 
passing the requisite examination, be 
he white or black, can enter this 
service, and he cannot be excluded 
from the unions. 
It is, therefore, the business of 
every black voter to see that the railways of the United States never revert again to private hands; and 
then to use his growing political EDITORIAL 165 
power in the North to oust the southern oligarchy from its entrenched 
power in Washington. 
THE NEGRO THEATRE. 
SLOWLY, but ever more surely, 
Negro art in the drama is 
pushing to the fore. "Chu 
Chin Chow," the great spectacle imported from London to New 
York, has dozens of colored folk in 
the caste, and some of them are 
treated as recognized artists. Matty 
Thomas especially deserves notice. 
The recent performance of "The 
Servant in the House" by colored 
players at the Lafayette Theatre, 
New York, and elsewhere was of 
such unusual merit as to call for special commendation. Clarence E. 
Muse, as the Drain-man; Andrew S. 
Bishop, as the Servant; and Mrs. Anderson, as Mollie were sincere, painstaking characters, showing not only 
talent of a high order, but what is 
even more commendable,—thorough 
and sympathetic study. These colored players are doing pioneer work, 
the value of which for Negro art 
can scarcely be over estimated. It 
is, therefore, doubly unfortunate 
that their manager is apparently 
making their devotion and art so 
much a matter of mere business 
and so little a question of ideals. 
These actors and their fellows are 
being painfully and persistently overworked and underpaid, and the staging of their plays is much too parsimonious. The time is approaching 
when healthy competition must either furnish more managers or force 
them to treat their artists and Negro 
art with greater consideration. 
TO GENERAL H. P. McCAIN. 
WE would like to ask the Adjutant General of the 
United States Army a 
few questions: 
1. Did not the Examining Board 
before whom COLONE L 
CHARLES YOUNG appeared 
recommend that he be RETAINED in the service and 
NOT retired? 
2 . Are not the findings of the Examining Board WITH THIS 
RECOMMENDATION on file 
in your office? 
3 . Is it LEGAL to retire an officer 
of the United States Army before he appears before a RETIRING BOARD? 
4 . Did COLONEL YOUNG ever 
appear before a RETIRING 
BOARD? 
5 . Do not your records show that 
he did NOT appear before a 
Retiring Board, because the Examining Board decided NOT to 
recommend him for retirement? 
6. WHO, THEN, "RETIRED" 
COLONEL YOUNG? 
7 . Was he ever LEGALLY retired? 
8. Who was it in your office who 
sent him to Ohio to do a job 
which your office immediately 
refused to let him do? 
9 . Is there any connection between 
the fact that Charles Young is 
black, and you were born in 
Louisiana; and does that connection explain the extraordinary truth that one of the 
best officers in the United States 
Army, whom Pershing, Roosevelt, Ballou, and a dozen others 
have recommended, and still 
recommend to command a regiment, is rewarded for a quarter 
century of service to his country by being virtually held a 
prisoner in Ohio on full pay 
WITH NOTHING TO DO? 
10 . Who is it, in this case, that is 
hindering and obstructing the 
efficiency, of the United States 
Army and its work in this 
mighty and righteous war—a 
black colonel or a white general ? Copyright by Brown and Dawson. 
I N CASTLETO N GARDENS , JAMAICA . 
166 The Shadow of years 
By W. E. B. DuBois. 
THE most disquieting sign of my mounting years is a certain garrulity 
about myself, quite foreign to my young 
days. I find a growing tendency to fix 
innocent listeners with my stern eye, despite their all too evident longing to escape, 
and to tell them what life has meant to 
me. In this case I have been most easily 
persuaded that CRISIS readers are more 
than anxious to know about me, simply 
because I am having a birthday. Selah! 
I was born by a golden river and in the 
shadow of two great hills, five years after 
the Emancipation Proclamation. The house 
was quaint, with clap-boards running up 
and down, neatly trimmed, and there were 
five rooms, a tiny porch, a rosy front yard, 
and unbelievably delicious strawberries in 
the rear. A South Carolinian owned all 
this—tall, thin, and black, with golden earrings, and given to religious trances. My 
own people were poor. I never remember 
being cold or hungry, but I do remember 
that shoes and coal and flour caused mother 
moments of anxious thought in winter; a 
new suit was an event. 
We were part of a great clan. Full two 
hundred years before Tom Burghardt had 
come through the western pass to the Hudson with his Dutch captor, " Ccenraet Borghghardt," sullen in his slavery and achieving his freedom by volunteering for the 
Revolution at a time of sudden alarm. His 
wife was a little black Bantu woman who 
never became reconciled to this strange 
land; she clasped her knees and rocked and 
crooned: 
"Do bana cobu—gene me, gene me! 
" Ben d'nuli, ben d'le " 
Tom died about 1787, but of him came 
many sons and one, Jack, who helped in 
The Wa r of 1812. Of Jack and his wife, 
Violet, was born a mighty family, splendidly 
named: Harlow and Ira, Cloe, Lucinda, 
Maria and Othello! I dimly remember my 
grandfather, Othello, or Uncle " Tallow, " 
—a brown man, strong-voiced and redolent 
with tobacco, who sat stiffly in a great high 
chair because his hip was broken. He was 
probably a bit lazy and given to wassail. 
At any rate, grandmother had a shrewish 
tongue and often berated him. This grandmother was Sarah—" Aunt Sally "—a stern, 
tall, Dutch-African woman, beak-nosed but 
beautiful-eyed and golden skinned. Ten or 
more children were theirs, of whom the 
youngest was Mary, my mother. 
Mother was dark shining bronze, with 
a tiny ripple in her black hair; black-eyed, 
with a heavy, kind face. She gave one 
the impression of infinite patience, but a 
curious determination was concealed in her 
softness. The family were small farmers 
on Egremont Plain, in Sheffield, and elsewhere, going out now and then to work 
as " help." At about the time of my birth 
economic pressure was transmuting the 
family generally from farmers to " hired " 
help. Some revolted and migrated westward. Some went city-ward as cooks and 
barbers. Mother worked some years in 
service at Great Barrington, and after a 
disappointed love episode with a cousin, 
who went to California, she met and married Alfred DuBois and went to live by 
the golden river where I was born. 
Alfred, my father, must have seemed a 
splendid vision in that little valley under 
the shelter of those mighty hills. He was 
small and beautiful of face and feature, 
just tinted with the sun, his curly hair 
chiefly revealing his kinship to Africa. In 
nature he was a dreamer, romantic, indolent, 
kind, unreliable. He had in him the making 
of a poet, an adventurer, or a Beloved Vagabond, according to the life that closed 
round him. His father, Alexander DuBois, 
cloaked, under a stern austere demeanor, 
a passionate revolt against the world. He, 
too, was small, but squarish. I remember 
him as I saw him first in his home in New 
Bedford — white hair, close-cropped; a 
seamed, hard face, but high in tone, with 
a grey eye that could twinkle or glare. 
Long years before him Louis XI V drove 
two Huguenot cousins, Jacques and Pierre, 
into wild Ulster County, N. Y. One of 
them in the third or fourth generation had 
a descendant, Dr. James DuBois, a gay, 
167 168 THE CRISIS 
rich bachelor who made his money in the 
Bahamas where he and the Gilberts had 
plantations. There he took a beautiful little mulatto slave as his mistress and two 
sons were born: Alexander in 1803, and 
John later. They were fine, straight, cleaneyed boys, white enough to " pass." He 
brought them to America and put Alexander in the celebrated Cheshire School in 
Connecticut. Here he often visited him, 
but one last time fell dead. He left no 
will, and his relations made short shrift 
of these sons. They gathered in the property, apprenticed grandfather to a shoemaker; then dropped him. 
Grandfather took his bitter dose like a 
thoroughbred. Wild as was his inner revolt against this treatment, he uttered no 
word against the thieves and made no 
plea. He tried his fortunes here and in 
Hayti; he became eventually chief steward 
on the New York and New Haven boats, 
and later a small merchant in Springfield. 
Always he held his head high, took no 
insults, made few friends. He was not a 
" Negro, " he was a man! Ye t when the 
white Episcopalians of Trinity Parish, New 
Haven, showed plainly that they did not 
want him or his folk, he led the revolt 
which resulted in St. Luke's Parish, and 
was for years its senior warden. Beneath 
his sternness was a very human man. Slyly 
he wrote poetry. He loved much and married three wives, but he was hard and unsympathetic with his children. Some of 
them and their children are now " white," 
but his oldest son quarrelled and ran away 
from home and married my brown mother. 
So, with some circumstance, having finally gotten myself born, with a flood of Negro 
blood, a strain of French, a bit of Dutch, 
and thank God! no "Anglo-Saxon, " I come 
to the days of my childhood. 
They were very happy. Early we moved 
back to grandfather's home; I barely remember its stone fireplace, big kitchen, and 
delightful wood-shed. Then this house 
passed to other branches of the clan and 
we moved to rented quarters in town; to 
one delectable place " up stairs," with a 
wide yard full of shrubbery, and a brook; 
to another house abutting a railroad, with 
infinite interests; and, finally, back to the 
quiet street on which I was born—down 
a long lane and in a homely, cozy cottage, 
with a living room, a tiny sitting room, a 
pantry, and two attic bed rooms. Here 
mother and I lived until she died in 1884; 
for father early began his restless wandering. I last remember urgent letters for 
us to come to New Milford where he had 
started a barber shop. Later he became 
a preacher. But mother no longer trusted 
his dreams and he soon faded out of our 
lives into silence. 
From the age of five until I was sixteen 
I went to school on the same grounds— 
down a lane, into a widened yard, with a 
big choke-cherry tree and two buildings, 
wood and brick. Here I got acquainted 
with my world and soon had my criterions 
of judgment. Wealth had no particular 
lure. We had in town no very rich, but 
many " well-to-do " folk. As playmate of 
the children I saw the homes of nearly all, 
except a few immigrant New Yorkers of 
whom none of us approved. The homes I 
saw impressed me but did not overwhelm 
me. Many were bigger than mine, with 
newer and shinier things, but they did not 
seem to differ in kind. I think I probably 
surprised my hosts more than they me, for 
I was easily at home and perfectly happy 
and they looked to me just like ordinary 
people, while my brown face and frizzled 
hair must have seemed strange to them. 
Yet, I was very much one of them. I 
was a center and sometimes the leader of 
the town gang of boys. W e were noisy 
but never very bad, and, indeed, my mother's quiet influence came in here, as I realize now. She did not try to make me 
perfect. To her I was already perfect. 
She simply warned me of a few things, 
especially saloons. In my town the saloon 
was the open door to hell. The best families had their drunkards and the worst 
had little else. 
Very gradually I began to feel myself a 
part from my play fellows, with a special 
work, a special race. The realization came 
slowly—although at times there were' sudden revelations. Curious enough, however, 
I always felt myself the superior, not the 
inferior, and any advantages which they 
had were, I was sure, quite accidental. I 
had only to mobilize my dreams—then they 
would see! 
I was graduated from the high school at 
sixteen. It was my first open triumph. THE SHADOW OF YEARS 169 
I talked on " Wendell Phillips," and all my 
town applauded with my mother. It was 
her great day, and after it she soon turned 
her face to the wall and slept. I was long 
in realizing my loss. That came many 
years after. Now it was the feel of wings. 
I was going beyond the hills, into the world 
which beckoned steadily. 
There came a little pause. I wanted to 
go to Harvard, but white friends said I 
should go South, and they promised a scholarship. Very well, I was eager to see my 
people. They were yet strangers to me. 
So I embraced the opportunity, quite forgetting the curious irony by which I was 
not regarded as a real citizen of my birth 
town, with a future and a career, and went 
to a far land, among strangers who were 
regarded as (and in truth were) " mine 
own people." 
A s I peer back through the shadow of 
my years, seeing not too clearly, but through 
the thickening veil of wish and afterthought, I seem to view my life divided 
into four distinct parts: the Ag e of Miracles, the Days of Disillusion, the Discipline 
of Wor k and Play, the Second Miracle Age . 
The Ag e of Miracles began with Fisk and 
ended with Germany. I seemed to ride in 
conquering might. I was captain of my 
soul and master of Fate. I willed to do! 
It was. I wished and the wish came true. 
I suspect that beneath this triumph there 
were many failures and disappointments, 
but the realities loomed so large that they 
swept away even the memory of other 
dreams and wishes. 'Consider for a moment how miraculous it all was to a boy 
of seventeen, just escaped from a narrow 
valley: I willed, and lo! my people came 
dancing about me—riotous in color, gay in 
laughter, full of sympathy, need, and pleading ; unbelievably beautiful girls—" colored " girls—sat beside me and actually talked 
to me while I gazed in tongue-tied silence, 
or babbled in boastful dreams. Boys with 
my own experiences wrought out with me 
great remedies. I studied eagerly under 
thoughtful teachers, and new worlds opened before me. 
I willed, and lo! I was walking beneath 
the elms of Harvard—the name of allurement, the college of my youngest, wildest 
visions; I needed money: scholarships and 
prizes fell into my lap; commencement 
came, and standing before Governor, President, and grave, gowned men, I told them 
certain astonishing truths, waving my arms 
and breathing fast. They applauded rapturously, and I walked home on great pink 
clouds of glory. I asked for a fellowship 
—and got it. I announced my plan of 
studying in Germany, and when the Slater 
Board excused itself, I went at them hammer and tongs. Ex-President Hayes, their 
chairman, smiled as he surrendered. 
I crossed the ocean in a trance; I saw 
London and Paris, Rome and Florence, 
Vienna and Berlin; I walked in valleys and 
climbed mountains; for the first time in 
my life I met real, human souls, face to 
face, and "made friends. Distinctions of 
race and color faded. I felt myself just a 
man, not merely a " colored " man. I builded great castles in Spain, and lived therein. I dreamed and loved and wandered and 
sang; then I dropped suddenly back into 
" nigger "-hating America. 
My Days of Disillusion were not disappointing enough to embitter me. I was 
still upheld by that fund of infinite faith, 
although dimly about me I saw the shadow 
of disaster. I began to realize how much 
of what I had called Will and Ability was 
sheer luck. Suppose my good mother had 
preferred a steady income from my child 
labor, rather than bank on the precarious 
dividend of my higher training? Suppose 
that pompous old village Judge, whose dignity we often ruffled and whose apples we 
stole, had had his way and sent me while 
a child to " reform " school to learn a 
" trade " ? Suppose Principal Hosmer had 
been born with no faith in " darkeys," and 
instead of giving me Greek and Latin had 
taught me carpentry and the making of tin 
pans? Suppose I had missed a Harvard 
scholarship? Suppose the Slater Board had 
had then, as now, distinct ideas as to where 
education of Negroes should stop? Suppose and suppose! As I sat down calmly 
on flat earth and looked at my life, a certain great Fear seized me. Wa s I the 
masterful captain, or the pawn of laughing sprites? I raise my hat to myself 
when I remember that even with these 
thoughts I did not hesitate or waver, but 
just went doggedly to work; and therein 
lay whatever salvation I have achieved. 
First came the task of earning a living. 170 THE CRISIS 
I was not nice or hard to please. I just 
got down on my knees and begged for work, 
anything and anywhere. I wrote to Hampton, Tuskegee, and a dozen other places. 
The trustees of a backwoods Tennessee 
town considered me, but were afraid. Then, 
suddenly, Wilberforce offered to let me teach 
Latin and Greek at $750 a year. I was 
overjoyed! When offers from Tuskegee 
and Jefferson City followed, I refused; I 
was so thankful for that first offer. 
I went to Wilberforce with high ideals. 
I wanted to help to build a great university. 
I was willing, seriously willing, to work 
night as well as day. I taught Latin, Greek, 
English, and German. I helped in the discipline, took part in the social life, and 
begged to be allowed to lecture on sociology; 
and began to write books. But I found 
myself against a stone-wall. Nothing 
stirred before my impatient pounding. Or 
if it stirred, it soon slept again. 
For the first time in my life I realized 
that there were limits to my will to do. 
The day of miracles was past, and a long, 
grey road of dogged work lay ahead. I 
had, in a sense, won, but could I remake 
Wilberforce? No. So I determined to 
leave Wilberforce and try elsewhere. Thus, 
the third period of my life began. 
First, in 1896, I married—a slip of a 
girl, beautifully dark-eyed and thorough 
and good as a German housewife. Then 
I accepted a job to make a study of Negroes 
in Philadelphia for the University of Pennsylvania—one year at six hundred dollars. 
How did I dare these two things? I do 
not know. Ye t they spelled salvation. To 
remain at Wilberforce without doing my 
ideals meant spiritual death. Both I and 
my wife were homeless. I dared a home 
and a temporary job. But it was a different daring from the days of my first youth. 
I was ready to admit that the best of men 
might fail. I meant still to be captain of 
my soul, but I realized that even captains 
are not omnipotent in unchartered and 
angry seas. 
I essayed a thorough piece of work in 
Philadelphia. I labored morning, noon, and 
night. Nobody ever reads that fat volume 
on " The Philadelphia Negro, " but they 
treat it with respect, and that consoles me. 
The colored people of Philadelphia received me with no open arms. They had a 
natural dislike to being studied like a 
strange species. I met fo r the first time 
those curious cross currents and inner social whirlings of my own group. It set 
me to groping. I concluded that I did not 
know so much as I might about my own people, and when President Bumstead invited 
me to Atlanta University, the next year, to 
teach sociology and study the American 
Negro, I accepted gladly at a salary of 
twelve hundred dollars. 
My real life work was done at Atlanta 
for thirteen years, from my twenty-ninth 
to my forty-second birthday. They were 
years of great spiritual upturning, of the 
making and unmaking of ideals, of hard 
work and hard play. Here I found myself. 
I lost most of my mannerisms. I became 
more broadly human, made my closest and 
most holy friendships, and studied human 
beings. 
I became widely acquainted with the real 
condition of my people. I realized the terrific odds which faced them. From captious criticism I changed to cold science; 
then to hot, indignant defense. I saw the 
race hatred of the whites, naked and unashamed. I held back more hardly each 
day the mounting indignation against injustice and misrepresentation. I faced with 
streaming eyes the awful paradox of death 
and birth—in fine, I emerged a man, scarred, partially disillusioned, and yet, grim 
with determination. 
At last, forbear and waver as I would, 
I faced the great Decision. My life's last 
and greatest door stood ajar. Wha t with 
all my dreaming wa s I going to do in this 
fierce fight? Against all my natural reticence and hatred of forwardness, contrary to my dream of racial unity and 
my deep desire to serve and follow and 
think, rather than to lead and inspire and 
decide, I found myself suddenly the leader 
of a great wing of my people, fighting 
against another and greater wing. I hated 
the role. For the first time I faced criticism 
and cared. Every ideal and habit of my 
life was cruelly misjudged. I, who had 
always over-striven to give credit for good 
work, who had never consciously stooped 
to envy, was accused by honest colored people of every sort of small and petty jealousy; and white people said I was ashamed LENORA' S CONVERSIO N 17 1 
of my race and wanted to be white! I 
realized the real tragedy of life. The captivity of my soul was linked to the bloody 
and bowed head. Yet, there was no pomp 
of sacrifice, no place for appeal for sympathy. We simply had doggedly to insist, 
explain, tight and fight again until, at last, 
slowly, grudgingly we saw the world turn 
slightly to listen. My Age of Miracles returned again! 
My cause grew, and with it I was pushed 
into a larger field. I felt more and more 
that Atlanta must stand well with philanthropists, while my larger duty was to 
speak clearly and forcefully for my people, despite powers and principalities. I 
was invited to come to New York and 
Lenora's 
Conversion 
IT all started on the day Gaynell, Lenora, 
and I decided to pay our first visit 
to Mrs. Holman, whose husband had just 
been assigned to the pastorate of our 
church. I had dressed and was waiting 
when Lenora came with the news that Gaynell was at home with an aching tooth, but 
that she would join us in an hour's time 
if she felt better. So Lenora and I prepared to relieve the tedium of waiting with 
a game of cards, mother being absent. We 
were just beginning the second game of 
" Seven Up " when foot-steps sounded on 
the walk. Discovery was imminent; quickly 
stuffing the deck of cards into my blouse 
pocket I seized the morning paper and was 
reading reports of the cotton and zinc markets to Lenora when mother came in. 
An hour had passed and Gaynell had not 
come. Lenora and I started out to pay our 
call without her. The Reverend Mr. Holman, himself, answered our ring and ushered us very courteously into the parlor 
where Mrs. Holman sat knitting. After 
we had talked awhile, she asked us if we 
were Christians and seemed pained when 
we said, " No. " Then she asked us if we 
would not care to give our souls to God. 
take charge of one part of a new organization. I came in 1910 . It was an experiment. My salary even for a year was 
not assured, and I gave up a life posi 
tion. I insisted on starting TH E CRISIS 
as the main part of my work and this, 
after hesitation, was approved. THE 
CRISIS succeeded, and here I am on my 
fiftieth birthday. 
Last year, I looked death in the face 
and found its lineaments not unkind. But 
it was not my time. Yet, in nature sometime soon and in the fullness of days, I 
shall die; quietly, I trust, with my face 
turned South and Eastward; and dreaming or dreamless, I shall, I am sure, enjoy 
death as I have enjoyed life. 
By Edna May Harrold 
Lenora sighed and murmured something 
about wishing to do better, but I said nothing because for some reason I was beginning to feel uneasy. Then Mr. Holman 
spoke: " There is no reason why these 
dear children should not become soldiers 
for Christ," he said. " God wants the lambs 
in His fold. Now is the time to give Him 
your hearts; now, while they are tender 
and comparatively free from sin." 
" There is no time like the present," said 
Mrs. Holman, rising. " Reverend, pray 
that these darling girls' hearts may be 
touched, and that they may accept the 
Master now. " 
So we all knelt down and as the pastor 
opened his mouth to pray I shifted my position just a little and—luck of the luckless—those cards fell out of my pocket! 
Well, as real authors say: " Let us draw 
a curtain over the painful scene that followed." Somehow I managed to get away 
from that house, but not before I had been 
shown several reasons why I, if no one 
else in town, needed religion badly. 
The following Sunday Mr. Holman 
started a revival. The services lasted a 
week and on the last night Lenora joined 172 THE CRISIS 
the church. When Mr. Holman asked her 
to testify, she said she felt so happy and 
wished her sinful companions would follow 
her step. Her heart, she said, was too 
full for words; then she began to sing: 
" Though Your Sins Be As Scarlet," looking straight at me ! Gaynell chuckled right 
out, but I sat there hating everybody and 
especially that unknown person who invented the first card game. 
Lenora's conversion caused much happiness among the older members of the 
church, but most of her young friends took 
a different view of the situation. Lenora 
had always been a jolly girl, popular with 
nearly everyone, but now her conduct 
showed a marked change. She shunned all 
of the girls except Gaynell and myself, 
and into our unhappy ears she was continually pouring tales of the Joys of Salvation and imploring us to give up the 
pleasures of this wicked world before it 
was too late. 
" Lenora," I said, one day after she had 
spent half an hour or more pitying our 
unsaved state, " you talk like Gaynell and 
I are simply steeped in sin. I'm not saying a word against you having religion, 
but I really don't see what we have done 
that is so very, very sinful." 
" You really don't, Belle? " Lenora asked, 
and her eyes narrowed. " Well, maybe you 
have forgotten that miserable card episode, 
but I haven't and never shall." 
Of course, that made me furious, and 
I said: " No, Miss Angel, I haven't forgotten that ' card episode,' as you call it, and 
I know you haven't. Nor have Mr. Holman 
and Mrs. Holman forgotten. It didn't make 
any difference to any of you that I cried 
myself sick and apologized a dozen times. 
It seems to me that if you all had so much 
religion you'd forget it and forgive me, 
too, instead of always throwing it in my 
face! " 
Gaynell said, "Belle , be careful; " but 
Lenora replied very gently: "I' m only telling you for your own good, and I'll forgive 
all you have said to me because ' Blessed 
are ye when men shall revile you,' you 
know, " and she walked off, leaving me too 
angry for words. 
" Gaynell," I said, " I know it's wrong, 
but I do wish something would happen to 
bring Lenora down from her pedestal. If 
Mr. and Mrs. Holman could only see that 
their idol's feet are made of clay,- my cup 
of jo y would overflow." 
" I know how you feel," said Gaynell, 
" but nothing will ever happen to Lenora. 
She doesn't go any place, but to church." 
And so we were plunged into dispair, forgetting that the darkest hour is just before the dawn. 
Then about ten days before school opened Mrs. Greenway issued invitations to 
a dance in honor of her son, Henry, who 
was going away to begin his first term 
in college. It rained during the whole of 
the day set for the dance, but when night 
came the weather cleared and the stars 
twinkled in the sky and I was glad just 
to be alive. 
Gaynell and I went to the dance together. W e didn't say much, but deep in 
my heart I was thinking of Lenora and 
I know Gaynell was, too. I remembered 
how she loved dancing and I couldn't help 
feeling glad I wasn't converted when I 
thought of all Lenora was going to miss 
that evening. 
The first ten minutes or so after we arrived at Mrs. Greenway's, we were very 
busy getting our dance cards filled. NEGRO EDUCATION 173 
Then the music started and everyone was 
searching through the crowd for their partner for that dance, when Gaynell clutched 
my arm. 
" For mercy sakes," she whispered, " look, 
it's Lenora! " 
It was Lenora. 
And even as I looked, amazed, I saw 
Henry Greenway approach her eagerly and 
whirl her away in the dance. 
Lenora's backsliding created as much 
comment as her conversion. The Reverend 
Mr. Holman and his wife prayed over their 
fallen idol and bade her think of the fate 
of those who set their faces toward the 
Light and then turned back. Some of the 
old people said it was a wonder that Lenora 
had held out as long as she did, considering Gaynell and myself. Others said Lenora didn't have much religion in the first 
place, or she would not have lost it so 
easily. I inclined to the last opinion myself, but I said nothing, for I was glad 
Lenora had ceased trying to be an angel 
and had become human once more. 
Negro Education 
by W. E. B. DuBois 
THE casual reader has greeted this 
study of Negro education with pleasure. It is the first attempt to cover the 
field of secondary and higher education 
among colored Americans with anything 
like completeness. It is published with the 
sanction and prestige of the United States 
government and has many excellent points 
as, for instance, full statistics on such matters as the public expenditure for Negro 
school systems, the amount of philanthropy 
given private schools, Negro property, etc.; 
there is excellent and continued insistence 
upon the poor support which the colored 
public schools are receiving today. The 
need of continued philanthropic aid to private schools is emphasized and there are 
several good maps. Despite, then, some 
evidently careless proofreading (pages 59, 
129, 157), the ordinary reader unacquainted 
with the tremendous ramifications of the 
Negro problem will hail this report with 
unstinted praise. 
Thinking Negroes, however, and other 
persons who know the problem of educating the American Negro will regard the 
Jones' report, despite its many praiseworthy features, as a dangerous and in 
many respects unfortunate publication. 
* Negro Education, a Study of the Private and 
Higher Schools for Colored People in the United 
States; prepared in co-operation with the PhelpsStokes Fund, under the direction of Thomas Jesse 
Jones, specialist in education of racial groups. Bureau of Education. Two volumes, 8 vo., 424, 724 
Th e Thesis o f th e Report 
This report again and again insists by 
direct statements, by inference, and by continued repetition on three principles of a 
thesis which we may state as follows: 
First, that the present tendency toward 
academic and higher education among Negroes should be restricted and replaced by 
a larger insistence on manual training, industrial education, and agricultural training; secondly, the private schools in the 
South must " co-operate " with the Southern whites; and, third, that there should be 
more through-going unity of purpose 
among education boards and foundations 
working among Negroes. 
Th e Negr o Colleg e 
The whole trend of Mr. Jones' study and 
of his general recommendations is to make 
the higher training of Negroes practically 
difficult, if not impossible, despite the fact 
that his statistics show (in 1914-15) only 
1643 colored students studying college subjects in all the private Negro schools out 
of 12,726 pupils. He shows that there are 
(in proportion to population) ten times as 
many whites in the public high schools as 
there are colored pupils and only sixtyfour public high schools for Negroes in the 
whole South! He shows that even at present there are few Negro colleges and that 
they have no easy chance for survival. 
Wha t he is criticising, then, is not the fact 174 THE CRISIS 
that Negroes are tumbling into college in 
enormous numbers, but their wish to go 
to college and their endeavor to support 
and maintain even poor college departments. 
What, in fact, is back of this wish? Is 
it merely a silly desire to study " Greek," 
as Mr. Jones several times intimates, or is 
it not rather a desire on the part of American Negroes to develop a class of thoroughly educated men according to modern 
standards? If such a class is to be developed these Negro colleges must be 
planned as far as possible according to the 
standards of white colleges, otherwise colored students would be shut out of the best 
colleges of the country. 
The curriculum offered at the colored 
southern colleges, however, brings the author's caustic criticism. Why, for instance, 
should " Greek and Latin " be maintained 
to the exclusion of economics, sociology, and 
" a strong course in biology? " 
The reason for the maintenance of these 
older courses of study in the colored colleges is not at all, as the author assumes, 
that Negroes have a childish love for " classics." It is very easily and simply explicable. Take, for instance, Fisk University. Fisk University maintained Greek 
longer than most northern colleges, for the 
reason that it had in Adam K. Spence not 
simply a finished Greek scholar, pupil of 
the great D'Ooge, but a man of singularly 
strong personality and fine soul. It did not 
make much difference whether the students 
were studying Greek or Biology—the great 
thing was that they were studying under 
Spence. So, in a large number of cases 
the curriculum of the southern Negro college has been determined by the personnel 
of the available men. These men were 
beyond price and working for their devotion to the cause. The college was unable 
to call men representing the newer sciences 
—young sociologists and biologists. They 
were unable to equip laboratories, but they 
did with infinite pains and often heartbreaking endeavor keep within touch of the 
standard set by the higher northern schools 
and the proof that they did well came from 
the men they turned out and not simply 
from the courses they studied. 
This, Mr. Jones either forgets or does 
not know and is thus led into exceedingly 
unfortunate statements as when, for instance, he says that the underlying principle of the industrial school "is the adaptation of educational activities whether industrial or literary to the needs of the 
pupils and the community," which is, of 
course, the object of any educational institution and it is grossly unfair to speak 
of it as being the object of only a part 
of the great Negro schools of the South. 
An y school that does not have this for its 
object is not a school but a fraud. 
TH E PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
Not only does this report continually 
decry the Negro college and its curriculum 
but, on the other hand, it seeks to put in 
its place schools and courses of study which 
make it absolutely impossible for Negro 
students to be thoroughly trained according to modern standards. To illustrate: 
Mr. Jones shows (page 90) that in Butte, 
Mont., manual training has been put into 
the elementary schools at the rate of half 
a day a week during the first six years and 
two half days a week in the seventh and 
eighth grades. When, however, it comes 
to the smaller elementary industrial schools 
of the South Mr. Jones recommends one-half 
day classroom work and one-half practise 
in the field and shops every day. 
What, now, is the real difference between these two schemes of education? 
The difference is that in the Butte schools 
for white pupils a chance is held open for 
the pupil to go through high school and 
college and to advance at the rate which 
the modern curriculum demands; that in 
the colored schools, on the other hand, a 
program is being made out that will land 
the boy at the time he becomes self-conscious and aware of his own possibilities in 
an educational impasse. He cannot go on 
in the public schools even if he should 
move to a place where there are good public schools because he is too old. Even if 
he has done the elementary work in twice 
the time that a student is supposed to it 
has been work of a kind that will not admit 
him to a northern high school. No matter, 
then, how gifted the boy may be he is 
absolutely estopped from a higher education. This is not only unfair to the boy 
but it is grossly unfair to the Negro race. 
The argument, then, against the kind of 
school that is being foisted upon Negroes NEGRO EDUCATION 175 
in the name of industrial education is not 
any dislike on the part of the Negroes for 
having their children trained in vocations, 
or in having manual training used as a 
means of education; it is rather in having 
a series of schools established which deliberately shut the door of opportunity in 
the face of bright Negro students. 
.INDUSTRIAL TRAININ G 
With the drive that has been made to 
industrialize elementary schools before the 
children have learned to read and write 
and to turn the high schools to, vocational 
teaching without giving any of the pupils 
a chance to train for college, it is, of course, 
beside the mark to criticize the colored colleges because the children that come to them 
are poorly trained. 
Much of the criticism of colored teachers 
is also unfair. Even well-trained teachers are having curious pressure put upon 
them. Here is a teacher with eighty or one 
hundred pupils trying to teach them three 
r's in a country district. The Jeanes Fund 
sends a supervisor and introduces, to quote 
the report (page 35), "shuc k mat work, 
simple sewing, patch quilting for girls, repair of buildings and woodworking for 
boys. " It might be possible with money 
and teachers so to interlock this work with 
the teaching of the three r's as to help 
the net result; but when the stress, the 
emphasis, and the inspection has to do 
mainly with the industrial work as such, 
and nobody knows or cares about the chief 
work for which the school ought to exist; 
when the white community demands of 
these schools servants and laborers and not. 
educated men and women, what is the result 
bound to be? 
With its insistent criticising of Negro 
colleges this report touches with curious 
hesitation and diffidence upon the shortcomings of industrial schools. Their failure 
to distinguish between general education 
and technical trade training has resulted 
in sending out numbers of so-called teachers 
from educational schools who cannot read 
and write the English language and who 
are yet put in public and other schools as 
teachers. They may show children how to 
make tin pans and cobble shoes, but they 
are not the right persons to train youth, 
mentally or morally. In the second place, 
most of the trades taught by these trade 
schools are, because of hostile public opinion and poverty, decadent trades: carpentry, which is rapidly falling below the 
level of skilled trades; the patching of 
shoes; blacksmithing, in the sense of repair work, etc. The important trades of 
the world that are today assembled in factories and call for skilled technique and 
costly machinery are not taught in the vast 
majority of Negro industrial schools. Moreover, the higher industrial training calls 
for more education than the industrial 
schools give. I remember some ten years 
ago going into the wheelwrighting shop at 
Hampton. I said to the white instructor: 
" How are your students getting on? " He 
said: " Fairly well, only they haven't 
enough mathematics." Ye t here is a report 
that has much to say over the foolishness 
of teaching mathematics! 
That the course of study in the Southern 
schools as well as in the schools of the 
nation has got to be changed and adapted 
is absolutely true, but the object of a school 
system is to carry the child as far as possible in its knowledge of the accumulated 
wisdom of the world and then when economic or physical reasons demand that 
this education must stop, vocational training to prepare for life work should follow. 
That some of this vocational training may 
be made educational in object is true; that 
normal training may use manual training 
and even to some extent vocational training 
is true, but it is not true that the industrializing of any curriculum necessarily 
makes it better or that you can at one and 
the same time educate the race in modern 
civilization and train it simply to be servants and laborers. Anyone who suggests 
by sneering at books and " literary courses " 
that the great heritage of human thought 
ought to be displaced simply for the reason of teaching the technique of modern 
industry is pitifully wrong and, if the comparison must be made, more wrong than 
the man who would sacrifice modern technique to the heritage of ancient thought. 
COOPERATION 
The second part of Mr. Jones' thesis lies 
in an insistence that the private schools 
of the Negro should " cooperate " with the 
South. He stresses the adaptation of education to the needs of the " community " 
(page 18), evidently meaning the white 176 THE CRISIS 
community. He quotes on page 25 the 
resolution of the white Southern Educational Association which deplores that the 
Negro schools are isolated from the " community," meaning again the white community. He instances Willcox County, Ala., 
where there are almost no public schools 
and recommends that the private schools 
established there be put under " community " authorities (page 149). Now what 
is this " community " with which the colored people are to cooperate? 
In the first place, Mr. Jones admits 
(pages 4 and 5) , that it is only the progressive few in the white South that care 
anything at all about Negro schools. He 
might go even further and acknowledge 
that if a plebescite were taken tomorrow 
in the South the popular vote of white people would shut, every single Negro school 
by a large majority. The hostile majority 
is kept from such radical action by the more 
progressive minority and by fear of northern interference, but the condition in which 
they have today left the colored schools 
is shown by this report to be truly lamentable. 
Mr. Jones quotes from Southern white 
men who speak of Negro school houses as 
" miserable beyond all description," of 
teachers as " absolutely untrained" and 
paid " the princely fortune of $80.92 for the 
whole term." He goes on with fact after 
fact to show the absolute inadequacy in 
the provision for colored children in the 
public schools of the South. On the other 
hand, he shows the increase in Negro property, the larger and larger amounts which 
Negroes are contributing to the school 
funds; and with all this he practically asks 
that the domination of the Negro private 
schools, which are now bearing the burden 
of nearly all the secondary and higher 
education of the Negro and much of the 
elementary education—that the domination 
of these schools be put into the hands of 
the same people who are doing so little 
for the public schools! 
There is not in the whole report a single 
word about taxation without representation. There is not a single protest against 
a public school system in which the public 
which it serves has absolutely no voice, vote, 
or influence. There is no defense of those 
colored people of vision who see the public 
schools being used as training schools for 
cheap labor and menial servants instead 
of for education and who are protesting 
against this by submitting to double taxation in the support of private schools; who 
cannot see that these schools should be 
turned over to people who by their actions 
prove themselves to be enemies of the Negro 
race and its advancement. 
Until the southern Negro has a vote and 
representation on school boards public control of his education will mean his spiritual 
and economic death and that despite the 
good intentions of the small white minority in the South who believe in justice for 
the Negro. It is, therefore, contradictory 
for this report to insist, on the one hand, 
on the continuation of northern philanthropy for these schools and, on the other, 
to commend various southern schools in 
proportion as they have gained the approval of the white community. 
Compare, for instance, Fisk University 
and Atlanta University. Both Cravath of 
Fisk and War e of Atlanta were men radical in their belief in Negro possibility and 
in their determination to establish well 
equipped Negro colleges. Cravath, however, lived in a more enlightened community which was earlier converted to his 
ideals. He did not yield his opinion any 
more than Ware , but War e lived in a community that to this day will not furnish 
even a high school for its colored pupils. 
To say that Fisk should receive on this 
account more support than Atlanta is rank 
injustice; if anything Atlanta deserves the 
greater credit. 
Cooperation with the white South means 
in many cases the surrender of the very 
foundations of self-respect. Mr. Jones inserts in his report one picture of a colored 
principal and his assistant waiting on table 
while the white trustees of his school eat. 
The colored people of the South do not care 
a rap whether white folks eat with them 
or not, but if white officials are coming into 
their schools as persons in control or advisors, then to ask that in those schools 
and in their homes the colored people shall 
voluntarily treat themselves as inferiors is 
to ask more than any self-respecting man 
is going to do. 
The white community, undoubtedly, wants 
to keep the Negro in the country as a NEGRO EDUCATION 177 
peasant under working conditions least removed from slavery. The colored man 
wishes to escape from those conditions. Mr. 
Jones seeks to persuade him to stay there 
by asserting that the advance of the Negro 
in the rural South has been greatest (pages 
97 and 123), and he refers to the "delusion " of city life even among white people. This may be all good enough propaganda but, in fact, it is untrue. Civilization has always depended upon the cities. 
The advance of the cities has been greatest 
for all people, white and colored, and for 
any colored man to take his family to the 
country districts of South Georgia in order 
to grow and develop and secure education 
and uplift would be idiotic. 
Mr. Jones touches the State schools very 
lightly. Here are cases where the whites 
have control and stories of graft and misappropriation of funds and poor organization are well known to everybody with the 
slightest knowledge of southern conditions. 
Teachers there and in the public schools 
are often selected not from the best available, but from the worst or most complacent. 
In small towns and country districts white 
trustees may maintain their mistresses as 
teachers and the protest of the colored people has fallen upon deaf ears. Until, then, 
colored people have a voice in the community, surrender to the domination of the 
white South is unthinkable. 
NORTHERN PHILANTHROP Y 
This brings us to the third part of Mr. 
Jones' thesis, namely, that the boards working for southern education should unite as 
far as possible with one policy. This is 
an unfortunate and dangerous proposal for 
the simple reason that the great dominating philanthropic agency, the General Education Board, long ago surrendered to the 
white South by practically saying that the 
educational needs of the white South must 
be attended to before any attention should 
be paid to the education of Negroes; that 
the Negro must be trained according to 
the will of the white South and not as the 
Negro desires to be trained. It is this 
board that is spending more money today 
in helping Negroes learn how to can vegetables than in helping them to go through 
college. It is this board that by a system 
of interlocking directorates bids fair to 
dominate philanthropy toward the Negro in 
the United States. Indeed, the moving 
thought back of the present report is the 
idea of a single authority who is to say 
which Negro school is right or is wrong, 
which system is right and which is wrong, 
etc. 
No one doubts the efficiency of concentration and unity in certain lines of work 
but always, even in work that can be unified, the question is whose influence is going 
to dominate; it may well be that diversity 
and even a certain chaos would be better 
than unity under a wrong idea. This is 
even more true in educational than in 
economic matters. Of course, the economic 
foundation of all recent educational philanthropy, particularly toward the Negro, 
is evident. Mr. Jones rather naively speaks 
of the fact that at certain times of the 
year " it is exceedingly difficult to prevail 
upon children to attend school " in the colored South which is, of course, another way 
of saying that bread and butter in the cotton fields is of more importance than 
trained intelligence. 
Undoubtedly, there has already been a 
strong public opinion manufactured in the 
country which looks upon the training of 
Negroes in the South as cheap, contented 
labor to be used in emergency and for 
keeping white union labor from extravagant 
demands as a feasible and workable program. It is, in fact, one of the most dangerous programs ever thought out and is 
responsible for much of the lynching, unrest, and unhappiness in the South. Its 
genesis came easily with the idea of working for the Negro rather than working 
with him, a thing which Mr. Jones condemns, but hardly lives up to his condemnation. 
In this very report the Negro was practically unrepresented. Instead of choosing 
a strong, experienced colored man to represent the Negro race (like W. T. B. Williams, or President Young of Tallahassee, 
or President Hope of Morehouse) an inexperienced young man was taken, of excellent character but absolutely without 
weight or influence. Of course, back of all 
this is the great difficulty of ordinary social intercourse. The reason that boards 
of trustees like those that control the 
Phelps-Stokes Fund find it so much easier 
to work for the Negro than with him; the 178 THE CRISIS 
reason that forgetting the investigations by 
Negroes at Atlanta University they turned 
to white institutions to encourage investigation and neglected established and 
worthy work is because if they are going 
to cooperate with the dominant white South 
and even with certain classes of Northerners they cannot meet Negroes as men. The 
propaganda that is so largely carried on 
and the influence that is so often formed 
through social intercourse must always, at 
present, be offered with the Negro unrepresented and unheard. 
There follows easily the habit of having 
no patience with the man who does not 
agree with the decisions of such boards. 
The Negro who comes with his hat in his 
hand and flatters and cajoles the philanthropist—that Negro gets money. If these 
foundations raise, as they do in this report, the cry of fraud they have themselves 
to thank. They more than any other agency 
have encouraged that kind of person. On 
the other hand, the Negro who shows the 
slightest independence of thought or character is apt to be read out of all possible 
influence not only by the white South but 
by the philanthropic North. 
If philanthropic agencies could unite for 
certain obvious great movements how 
splendid it would be! Take, for instance, 
the duplication of higher educational schools 
which Mr. Jones repeatedly denounces and 
which, undoubtedly, is a source of weakness. The General Education Board could 
settle the matter with the greatest ease. 
Let it offer in Atlanta an endowment of 
$500,000 for a single Negro college, provided that there be but one college there 
for Negroes. The boards of the different 
schools immediately would have something 
to act upon. As it is nothing that they can 
do individually would really better the situation. A new college formed by a federation of colored colleges in Atlanta, Marshall, 
Texas, and elsewhere, would be easily possible if an endowment was in sight. 
SUMMAR Y 
Here, then, is the weakness and sinister 
danger of Mr. Jones' report. It calls for 
a union of philanthropic effort with no attempt to make sure of the proper and just 
lines along which this united effort should 
work. It calls for cooperation with the 
white South without insisting on the Negro 
being represented by voice and vote in 
such " cooperation," and it calls for a recasting of the educational program for 
Negroes without insisting on leaving the 
door of opportunity open for the development of a thoroughly trained class of leaders at the bottom, in the very beginnings of 
education, as well as at the top. 
National Association for the Ad 
vancement of Colored People 
THE BURNING AT DYERSBURG. 
AN N. A. A. C. P. INVESTIGATION 
ON Sunday, December 2 , 1917 , immediately after the adjournment of church 
services, a human being was tortured and 
burned at the stake in the heart of the 
town of Dyersburg, Tenn. The victim was 
a Negro man, thirty years old, who was accused of criminal assault on a white woman 
of the county. 
TH E TOWN 
Dyersburg, Tenn., is a prosperous town 
of seventy-five hundred inhabitants, thirty 
per cent of whom are Negroes. It is the 
county seat of Dyer County, one of the 
wealthy counties of the State of Tennessee, and it is situated in the center of the 
county, which has a population of about 
thirty thousand. It is seventy-six miles 
north of Memphis, and two hundred miles 
south of St. Louis. 
There is a good white public school and 
two colored public schools. The colored 
public school is divided into two sections, 
owing to the fact that some of the Negroes 
live on one side of the town and some on 
the other. The principal of the white school 
is paid fifteen hundred dollars a year; the 
principal of the colored school is paid one 
thousand dollars a year. There are six 
white and five Negro churches. The principal of the colored public school bears an 
excellent reputation among the white people, as do the ministers of the more established Negro churches. There are five colored physicians. N. A. A. C. P. 179 
While there are no immensely wealthy 
citizens, there are a number of men in wellto-do circumstances. Several residences in 
the town are worth from fifteen to twenty 
thousand dollars. 
Two cotton compresses, a cotton oil mill, 
several large lumber concerns, and a number of other industries are carried on. The 
main railroad which passes through the 
town is the Illinois Central. There are 
three banks, one of which is national. 
While some of the colored people have fairly 
comfortable homes, the Negro populace lives, 
for the most part, in shacks and cabins, 
which are not fit for the housing of animals. 
The present Mayor, Mayor Evans Carne, 
began the serving of his third term January, 1918. Under his administration, a 
new lighting system has been installed, 
streets have been opened, graded, and paved, 
and many other improvements have been 
made. It is stated that Mayor Carne has 
done more for the uplift of the town than 
any other Mayor. 
LATION SCOTT 
The Negro, who was burned at the stake 
in Dyersburg on December 2, was named 
Lation Scott. He also went by the name 
of Ligon Scott. 
He had been employed during the crop 
season for about two years as the assistant 
of a white man, who rented and farmed 
a small section of a larger farm. This farm 
was in the Fourth District, two miles northeast of Dyersburg. The white farmer had 
been previously employed as driver of an 
express wagon; at the time of the crime 
he was employed as freight handler at the 
Dyersburg Depot. 
It is assumed that the white farmer 
thought he could make more money, after 
crop season was over, by working in town, 
leaving the Negro to do the work on the 
farm. The farmer was, himself, under 
thirty years of age. His wife was twentyfour. They had been married four years 
and had two children, one of whom was the 
particular pet of Lation Scott. 
The Negro was thirty years old, six feet 
and one inch tall, and weighed one hundred 
and fifty pounds. Accounts as to his intelligence vary widely. One report asserts that 
he was almost half-witted. Others attribute 
to him the intelligence of the average country Negro. A man who knew him states 
that his head was not well formed. Mr. 
States Miller, a white man who conducts a 
hardware store on the south side of the 
square in Dyersburg, and for whom he 
worked on a farm for a year or more, says 
that he regarded him as one with the average intelligence. He also says that during 
the time he worked for him no criminal or 
dishonest tendencies manifested themselves. 
He had the reputation of being a splendid 
hand at doing general housework, or 
" spring-cleaning," and a short time prior to 
the crime, of which he is accused, had done 
work of this sort for a prominent woman of 
Dyersburg. She states that she was alone 
in the house with him for two days. No 
trouble, however, resulted. 
In addition to farming and the doing of 
odd jobs, he was a preacher. While some 
claim that he was a Baptist, or Methodist, 
Mr. John M. Tarrant, of the Dyer County 
Exemption Board, states positively that he 
was a Holy Roller. This sect is very strong 
among the Negroes and poorer white people in West Tennessee, and has been extremely active for the past few years. It 
is more than possible that he was a Baptist, 
and " went over " to the Holy Rollers. 
The emotionalism of this sect is extreme. 
They claim the " gift of tongues," and make 
a practice of going into trances. They 
jump, jerk, shout, sing, and do what is 
known as a " Holy Dance." The white people who belong to this sect are, for the most 
part, inhabitants of the back country regions. It is generally felt among the more 
intelligent citizens that membership in the 
sect unfits a person for steady work, and 
effort is made to prevent reliable servants 
from joining it. 
It was reported that he was a victim of 
an advanced case of syphillis. This story 
was widely circulated and unquestionably 
served to further inflame the passions of 
the white men who were searching for him. 
He was included in the selective draft. He 
did not sign his name to his examination 
blank, having made a mark instead. The 
investigator for the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
visited the office of the Exemption Board 
and found that he was not exempt, but had 
passed the physical examination, and expected to be called for service at any time. 
He had recently been to the office to in-180 THE CRISIS 
quire when he would probably be called. 
A t an earlier date, his employer had been 
at the office for the purpose of making the 
same inquiry, not wishing to lose the Negro's services before his crops were laid by. 
Surprised to find that he was not exempt from service, as had been reported, 
the representative of the National Association repeated to the examining physician, 
who was present at the time, the report 
which had been accepted by the community, 
asking if it were then not true that he was 
in an advanced condition of venereal disease? The physician replied shortly that it 
was not true, or he would not have passed 
the physical examination. 
TH E CRIME 
The family for whom Lation Scott worked 
lived in a two-room box house. It is said 
that he sometimes slept in one of the rooms. 
During the day, while the farmer was in 
town at work, he worked on the farm. 
There was no one else on the place except 
the wife of the farmer and their two small 
children, both under four years of age. 
On the day of November 22, when the 
crime was committed, the wife of the farmer 
was engaged in picking cotton bolls from 
stalks, which had been brought in from the 
field to be picked in the house. 
Coming into the house, Scott approached 
the woman, when she was standing with 
her back turned, and threw a rope about 
her neck. He then bound her and, it is 
said, gagged her. He had either locked 
the older child in the barn before coming 
into the house, or else he went out and 
did so after tieing the woman, so that 
she could not escape. The report states 
that she begged for her life. He granted 
her plea on the condition that she would 
not tell what had occurred. It is, also, 
thought to be true that he granted her request because of his affection for the child. 
When he had left the place the woman 
ran out into the road, being apparently 
not tied to the extent of not using her 
limbs, and reported the occurrence to passers-by. 
The news spread rapidly; parties of men 
set out at once to apprehend the Negro. 
From that day until the first of December, 
when he was arrested, posses of enraged 
white men hunted him through the country 
with bloodhounds. 
For ten days he escaped detection, passing from house to house of colored friends 
and taking his way through the country. 
He could have gotten completely out of the 
community in that time, but this does not 
seem to have occurred to him. 
Descriptions of the Negro were published 
broadcast and a reward of two hundred 
dollars was offered for his apprehension. 
Feeling became very intense throughout 
Dyer and the adjoining counties. It wa s 
well known that if he were caught, he 
would be lynched. There seems to have 
been no question of this course on any 
side. 
He was recognized on the afternoon of 
Saturday, December 1, by a section foreman near Jackson, a distance of forty-nine 
miles from Dyersburg. He was arrested 
by this foreman and turned over to Sheriff 
Perry, of Madison County, of which Jackson 
is the county seat. Sheriff Perry notified 
Sheriff Bryant of Dyer County. Sheriff 
Bryant went at once to Jackson. 
From that place Sheriff Bryant took the 
Negro to Union City, a town sixty-eight 
miles north of Jackson, and a point much 
used as a junction between Dyersburg and 
other places. Here he was put in jail. The 
following morning, when the Sheriff returned home, he found that news of the 
Negro's whereabouts was known, and dispatched Deputy-Sheriff Cope Pursell and 
nightwatchman John Finney to Union City 
for the Negro. They were accompanied 
by Joe Curry, an undertaker, who owned 
and drove the automobile in which they 
made the trip, and Milton McGee, brotherin-law of the Sheriff. 
They took him from the Union City Jail, 
which is a strong, substantial building, and 
started through the country with him. It 
is probable that some members of the mob 
had left Dyersburg before the officers did. 
The road which they took from Union City 
leads direct to Dyersburg. 
Definite news of the Negro's whereabouts 
seems to have spread rapidly. Automobiles 
began pouring toward Union City and into 
Dyersburg from the surrounding country. 
Twenty-five or thirty cars, crowded with 
men, went to meet the car of the officers, 
in whose charge the Negro was placed, 
with the purpose of getting possession of. 
him. Seven-passenger cars were seen car-N. A. A. C. P. 
rying twelve men. People stood on the running boards. 
The cars carrying- the mob were left at 
a safe point. The passengers hid in tinwoods which bordered the road. At a point 
in the Obion River bottom, between the 
towns of Trimble and Obion, they swarmed 
out of the cane-brakes and took possession 
of the Negro. One of the officers states 
that it was very muddy at this point, and 
that the automobile in which they were 
riding was running slowly. 
The Negro was transferred to another 
car; then the whole party raced toward 
Dyersburg. 
In the meantime, the public square of 
Dyersburg had become packed with automobiles and people. As each car came in 
sight the crowd surged toward it, in search 
of the Negro. 
A determination seems to have gotten 
abroad among some citizens to give the 
Negro a " trial." A list of twenty-five 
or thirty names had been made, and the 
citizens to whom the names belonged were 
asked to serve on a jury. Twelve agreed 
to do so. 
It was feared that the heated temper 
of the crowd would not permit of even a 
mob-trial. A prominent and popular citizen 
was asked to address the crowd, asking 
that the Negro should be given a trial. 
He did so, speaking from a point near the 
court house. It was agreed that this plan 
should be carried out. 
Thirty minutes later the car carrying 
the Negro arrived in Dyersburg. Avoiding the streets which led to the court house 
from the north and east, along which the 
crowd naturally expected the car to arrive, it circled westward and came up to 
the south entrance of the court house. 
TH E " TRIAL " 
The Negro was carried into the court 
room and the jury took its seat. The room 
and the entire building were packed with 
people. Many stood on tables and backs of 
benches. 
Mr. David Moss, manager of the Phoenix 
Cotton Oil Mill, a prominent citizen of the 
town, acted as spokesman. He told the 
Negro to stand up. Scott stood up. 
" Ar e you guilty or are you not guilty? " 
Scott replied that he was guilty. In 
answer to inquiry the jury responded that 
181 
it found him guilty. Mr. Moss then turned 
to the crowd and spoke for six or eight 
minutes, importuning the men to be moderate. He asked them to remember that 
it was Sunday, and stated that the reputation of the county was at stake. It is 
reported by some that he then appealed to 
the woman's husband to prevent the mob 
from burning the Negro. The woman's 
husband, however, did not respond to this 
appeal. It is reported that it was his wish, 
as well as the wish of the woman herself, 
that the Negro be burned at the stake. 
TH E BURNING 
Lation Scott was taken charge of at once 
by leaders of the mob, who carried him to 
a near-by vacant lot, the corner of which 
adjoins the public square, and which is 
within a stone's throw of two churches and 
the residences of several ministers, as well 
as of the Mayor of the town. It is the 
property, jointly, of several sisters, prominent women of Dyersburg. The court house 
and the post office, attractive new buildings, are in sight of the spot. 
The Negro was seated on the ground and 
a buggy-axle driven into the ground between his legs. His feet were chained together, with logging chains, and he was 
tied with wire. A fire was built. Pokers 
and flat-irons were procured and heated in 
the fire. It was thirty minutes before they 
were red-hot. 
Reports of the torturing, which have been 
generally accepted and have not been contradicted, are that the Negro's clothes and 
skin were ripped from his body simultaneously with a knife. His self-appointed executors burned his eye-balls with red-hot 
irons. When he opened his mouth to cry 
for mercy a red-hot poker was rammed 
down his gullet. In the same subtle way 
he was robbed of his sexual organs. Redhot irons were placed on his feet, back, 
and body, until a hideous stench of burninghuman flesh filled the Sabbath air of Dyersburg, Tenn. 
Thousands of people witnessed this scene. 
They had to be pushed back from the stake 
to which the Negro was chained. Rooftops, second-story windows, and porch-tops 
were filled with spectators. Children were 
lifted to shoulders, that they might behold 
the agony of the victim. 
A little distance away, in the public 182 THE CRISIS 
square, the best citizens of the county 
supported the burning and torturing with 
their near-by presence. 
The Memphis, Tenn., News-Scimitar 
says: 
Not a single cry for mercy was ever 
uttered by Scott. His fortitude struck 
even the mob workers as uncanny. No one 
offered a plea for the Negro after he confessed. 
Not a domino hid a face. Everyone was 
unmasked. Leaders were designated and 
assigned their parts. Long before the mob 
reached the city the public square was 
choked with humanity. All waited patiently. Women, with babies, made themselves comfortable. 
A t last the irons were hot. 
" Have you anything to say? " 
A meek voice mumbled inaudibly. The 
Negro made a speech, but few caught the 
portent. 
A red streak shot out; a poker in a 
brawny hand was boring out one of the 
Negro's eyes. The Negro bore the ordeal 
with courage, only low moans escaping him. 
Another poker was working like an auger 
on the other orbit. 
The smell of burning flesh permeated the 
atmosphere, a pungent, sickening aroma 
telling those who failed to get good vantage 
points what their eyes could not see. 
Smoothing irons were searing the flesh. 
Swish. Once, twice, three times a red 
hot iron dug gaping places in Lation Scott's. 
back and sides. 
" Fetch a hotter one," somebody said. 
The execution went on. 
Now someone had another poker—jabbing its fiery joint into the. ribs of the 
doomed black. 
Then rubbish was piled high about the 
agonized body, squirming beneath its load. 
Someone struck the match—they say the 
husband of the assaulted woman applied it 
—and smoke began to curl upward into a 
blue sky. The flames gathered momentum, 
engulfing the body. The fire seemed to 
groan, but it was Lation Scott. 
More and more wood and rubbish were 
fed the fire, but at three o'clock Lation 
Scott was not dead. Life finally fled at 
four o'clock. 
The executioners departed, leaving only 
the morbid. Women, who had left their 
dinners in the making, hastened home. 
Children, who had tarried on the way home 
from Sunday School, scurried away. 
Women scarcely changed countenance as 
the Negro's back was ironed with the hot 
brands. Even the executioners maintained 
their poise in the face of bloody creases left 
by the irons—irons which some housewife 
has been using. 
Three and a half hours were required 
to complete the execution. 
DYERSBURG SENTIMEN T 
Public opinion in Dyersburg and Dyer 
County seems to be divided into two groups. 
One group considers that the Negro got 
what he deserved. The other group feels 
that he should have had a " decent lynching." Numbers of prominent Dyersburg 
citizens are of this second group. They 
say they thought the Negro was going to 
DYERSBURG , TENN. N. A. A. C. P. 183 
be given a " decent lynching," and that 
they consider the burning and torturing a 
disgrace to the community. By this is 
meant a quick, quiet hanging, with no display or torturing. 
The identity of the mob leaders is known 
all over Dyer County. From all accounts, 
they are citizens of doubtful reputation, 
backed up for this occasion by the sentiment of the community at large. 
A prosperous citizen made the remark 
that these men were no better than the 
Negro. He was threatened at once with 
lynching. This remark has, however, been 
made by others, as well as by the man 
threatened. 
Street talk in Dyersburg on Monday had 
not yet been touched by reflection. One 
man, who had been out of town on Sunday, 
was heard to say with gusto: " The best 
part about it was the burning. This hanging kills too quick. If I'd been here I'd 
have helped." 
Another commented: " It was the biggest thing since Ringling Brothers' Circus 
came to town." 
A few people—mostly women—said : " It 
was terrible." 
Many citizens seem to have the psychology of having performed an unpleasant 
duty. One citizen said: " People here can 
do a thing like that, and then forget all 
about it." 
LYNCHINGS AND MOB MURDERS, 1917 
ACCORDIN G to the CRISIS records there 
were 224 persons lynched and killed 
by mob violence in the United States during the year 1917. Of these 46 were lynchings of persons accused of crime and misdemeanors. The record of the Negroes 
killed follows: 
Proctor, Ark., February 9—James Smith 
(alias Coy Anderson), hanged; murder. 
Hammond, La., February 28—Emma 
Hooper, hanged; wounding a constable. 
Meigs, Ga., March 2—Linton Clinton, 
shot; assault upon a white girl. 
Maysville, Ky., March 12—William Sanders, hanged; robbery. 
Dyersburg, Tenn., March 19—William 
Thomas, hanged; shooting an officer. 
Kissimmee, Fla., March 27—S. C. Garner, hanged; refusal to give up farm. 
Pelham, Ga., March 28—Joe Nowling, 
hanged; reason unknown. 
Shreveport, La., May 11 — Henry Brooks, 
shot; intimacy with a white woman. 
Fulton , Ky., May 20—Lawrence Dempsey, hanged; wounding a railroad watchman. 
Memphis, Tenn., May 22—Ell Persons, 
burned; rape and murder. 
Columbia, Miss., June 2—Van Hayes, 
hanged; murder. 
Holdenville, Okla., June 16—Henry Conley, hanged; assault upon a white woman. 
Courtney, Tex., June 21—Ben Harper, 
hanged; he drove an automobile that ran 
down and killed a white girl. 
Riesel, Tex., June 23—Elijah Hays, 
beaten to death; striking a white woman. 
Cleveland, PTa., June 24—Shep Trent, 
shot; attempt to attack a white woman. 
Galveston, Tex., June 25—Chester Sawyer, hanged; attacking a white woman. 
Temple, Tex., June 29—Robert Jefferson, 
shot; without provocation. 
East St. Louis, Ill., July 2—175 colored 
men, women, and children slain by mobs. 
Orange, Tex., July 3—Gilbert Guidry, 
hanged; charged with attempted rape. 
Edgard, La., July 10—Marcel Ruffin, 
drowned; vagrancy. 
Reform, Ala., July 16—Unidentified Negro, hanged; petty theft. 
Pickens County, Ala., July 23—Poe Hibbler, hanged; attempted assault upon a 
white girl. 
Elysian Fields, Tex., July 23—Unnamed, 
hanged; entering a woman's room. 
Letchatchie, Ala., July 25—Will Powell 
and Jesse Powell, hanged; insolence. 
Amite, La., July 30—Dan Rout and Jerry 
Rout, hanged; murder. 
Garland City, Okla., July 31—Arland 
Avery, hanged; robbery. 
Ashdown, Ark., August 9—Aaron Jimerson; hanged; attacking a constable. 
Heathsville, Va., August 16—William 
Page, hanged; attempted assault upon a 
white girl. 
Memphis, Tenn., August 17—Strickland, 
hanged; reason unknown. 
Marshall, Tex., August 22—Charles 
Jones, hanged; entering room of a white 
woman. 
York, S. C , August 23—W. T. Sims, 
shot; opposing draft law. 
Chester, Pa., Sept. 3—3 colored men 
killed by mob. 184 TH E CRISIS 
Beaumont, Tex., Sept. 3—Charles Jennings, shot; cause unknown. 
Athens, Ga., Sept. 18—Rufus Moncrief, 
hanged; attacking a white woman. 
Goose Creek, Tex., Sept. 21—Bert Smith, 
hanged; attacking a white woman. 
England, Ark., Sept. 21—Sam Gates, 
shot; annoying white girls. 
Danville, Va., October 12—Walter Clark, 
shot; resisting arrest. 
New Orleans , La.— Fred Johnson, 
hanged; robbery. 
Quitman, Ga., Nov. 10—Jesse Staten, 
shot; insolent letter to a white woman. 
Sale City, Ga., Nov. 17—Collins Johnson and D. C. Johnson, hanged; disputing 
white man's word. 
Welch, W. Va., Nov. 22—Unidentified 
Negro, shot; attacking white woman. 
Dyersburg, Tenn., Dec. 2—Ligon Scott, 
burned; attacking a white woman. 
Rock Springs, Wyo., Dec. 14—Wade 
Hampton, hanged; annoying white women. 
Matter, Ga., Dec. 15—Claxton Dekle, 
hanged; killing in quarrel. 
LYNCHING S AN D MO B MURDER S O F 
NEGROES B Y STATE S 
Illinois 175 
Texas 9 
Alabama 3 
Louisiana .. . * 6 
Georgia 7 
Arkansas 3 
Tennessee 4 
Oklahoma 2 
Pennsylvania 3 
Florida 2 
Kentucky 2 
Mississippi 1 
West Virginia 1 
South Carolina 1 
Virginia 2 
Wyoming 1 
Total 222 
LYNCHING S B Y RAC E 
Negro 44 
White 2 
LYNCH1NGS AN D MO B MURDER S O F NEGROE S B Y ALLEGE D CRIMES 
Rape and attempted rape 11 
Murder , 5 
Assault and wounding 4 
Robbery and theft 6 
White women (intimacy, annoying, 
striking, entering room), etc 7 
Race prejudice (refusing to give up 
farm, accidental killing) 2 
Opposing draft 1 
Resisting arrest 1 
Unreported 4 
Vagrancy, disputing 3 
Killed by mobs , 178 
Total . -. 222 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D B Y YEAR S 
1885 
1886 
1887 
1888 
1889 
1S90 
1891 
1892 
1893 
1894 
1895 
1896 
1897 
1898 
1899 
1900 
1901 
1902 
1885-1917 
78 1903 . 
71 1904 . 
80 1905 . 
95 1906 . 
95 1907 . 
90 1908 . 
121 1909 . 
155 1910 . 
154 1911 . 
134 1912 . 
112 1913 . 
80 1914 . 
122 1915 . 
102 1916 . 
84 1917 
107 
107 
86 Total 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
65 
63 
63 
79 
69 
80 
55 
44 
2,911 
T O TH E UNITED STATES OF NORT H AMERICA 
By THOMA S CAMPBELL—1777-1834 
UNITE D STATES , your banner wears 
Two emblems—one of fame ; 
Also, the other that it bears 
Reminds us of your shame. 
Your standard's constellation types 
White freedom by its stars; 
But what's the meaning of the stripes? 
They mean your Negroes' scars. "Thirteen members of the 24th Infantry, U. S. A., found 
guilty of complicity in the riot and mutiny at Houston, Aug. 23, 
were hanged on the military reservation at Fort Sam Houston, 
at 7:17 a. m., Tuesday. * * *. 
"Without a tremor they stepped out with soldierly tread and 
singing a hymn they walked to their places. * * *. 
"Resuming their song they stood erect and displayed the 
greatest fortitude while the ropes were adjusted."—News item, 
December 11, 1917. 
THESE 
7:17, A. M.,December 11 ,1917. 
By Lucian B. Watkins. 
Lord, these are Thine! "With soldierly tread-
"Without a tremor-" they go their way -
"Singing a hymn-" they march ahead -
"Singing a song-" of peace today! 
Lord, these are Thine who pay their price 
For what a freeman's soul is worth,-
Whose madness is their sacrifice 
That what they love may live on earth! 
Lord, these are Thine! 
185 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE. 
JESSIE FAUSET , in The Independent: 
"Oh little Christ, what can this mean, 
Why must this horror be 
"For fainting France, for faithful France, 
And her sweet chivalry? 
" 'I bled to free all men,' you say, 
" 'France bleeds to keep men free.' " 
From James W. Johnson's "Fifty Years 
and Other Poems" : 
"If homely virtues draw from me a tune 
"In happy jingle or a half-sad croon; 
"Or if the smouldering future should inspire 
"My hand to strike the seer's prophetic lyre; 
"Or if injustice, brutishness and wrong 
"Should make a blasting trumpet of my 
song; 
" 0 God, give beauty and strength—truth to 
my words, 
"Oh, may they fall like sweetly cadenced 
chords, 
"Or burn like beacon fires from out the dark, 
"Or speed like arrows, swift and sure, to 
the mark." 
Mr. Johnson's first book of verse is tastefully gotten up, with an introduction by 
Brander Matthews, and on the title-page 
Mr. Johnson for the first time publicly acknowledges his authorship of "The Autobiography of an ex-Colored Man." We are 
sure that this excellent and painstaking volume will soon be in the libraries of the elect. 
"The Anthology of Magazine Verse for 
1917," by William Stanley Braithwaite, is a 
volume of 412 pages, and marks the twelfth 
volume of poetry and criticism issued by the 
leading American essayist in the art of 
Verse. TH E CRISIS fares well at Mr. Braithwaite's hands. Georgia Douglas Johnson's 
"To the Mantled," which appeared in the 
May CRISIS, carries the three stars of highest excellence; also Roscoe C. Jamison's 
"Negro Soldiers," in the September CRISIS, 
has similar honor. We note with interest 
that Mr. Braithwaite has in preparation a 
new book of poems, a novel, and a "Golden 
Treasury of Magazine Verse." 
We have received from Benjamin Brawley "The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus," a 
lyrical legend. 
Mr. Henry F. Downing's novel, "The 
American Cavalryman," a Liberian romance 
(Neale, 306 pages, $1.50) is an excellent 
and frank exposition of Liberian problems, 
done in the form of romance. It is well 
worth the reading of every student of 
Africa, being especially strong on its portrayal of native customs. 
Occasional Papers Number Nineteen, 
published by the trustees of the John F. 
Slater Fund, is by Mrs. L. H. Hammond of 
Georgia, a white! woman, on "Southern 
Women and Racial Adjustment." It is a 
marvelously frank statement from which 
we must quote two passages: first, on the 
educated colored woman : 
This discovery of the educated colored 
woman is of deep significance. It is she 
who must lift her people, but she can do so 
little without our help! The experience of 
one club woman is typical here. She seized 
upon a friend in the street one day, to share 
her recent discovery. 
"Yo u know I'm on the committee to meet 
the colored teachers in the clean-up campaign," she began. " is the chairman 
of their committee"—naming the head of a 
local school. "Yo u know she's a college 
graduate; I've heard about her for years. 
I thought she'd be a sort of spoiled cook, you 
know—forward, and all that. Well, she's 
perfectly fine! I didn't know there were 
any Negroes like that. That committee will 
work like it was greased. It means everything to the Negroes—and a lot to us, too— 
to have a woman like that at work among 
all these colored people here." 
Her face was alight with the interest of 
her discovery—a feeling a number of women 
are coming to understand, as they make 
similar discoveries in their own communities. Said the president of a city federation 
in Mississippi lately: 
"I had such a sense of adventure when I 
first began to get acquainted with these 
women here. Yo u know, we couldn't even 
get the poorer Negroes to clean up, except 
through these educated ones. The first time 
I went to talk to them about it you can't 
think how rattled I was. I'd been speaking 
in public for years, and never thought about 
being embarrassed. But they looked so different from any Negroes I'd known. I 
didn't know what their thoughts were like, 
or how to get at them. I've done some mental gymnastics since, and I trust I'm a 
broader woman for it." 
The outstanding feature of her experience, however, and that of many others, was 
the finding, in these uncharted regions, the 
same old landmarks of human need. They 
are common to all races and all time, and a 
realization of this fact is one of the things 
which is helping us to broaden out of a sectional into a world life. 
Finally read this on the relation between 
white and black women: 
The recognition of womanhood is a thing 
deeper even than race, a thing for all women 
to protect. The full recognition of this 
truth will do more to settle "the race question" than all other things combined, for all 
other things needed will come out of it— 
full racial justice, true racial separateness, 
186 THE LOOKING GLASS 187 
full human co-operation and respect. The 
status of the Negro woman will determine 
the status of the race. Amon g all races, in 
all times, it has been the lot of the women 
to bear the unbearable things. As they have 
won respect and protection, the race has 
climbed toward freedom and self-control. 
There is no way to raise the Negroes, except by this world-old process, and no one 
can set it in motion as can our southern 
white women. 
It is time for us to take stock of our responsibilities. Not long ago the writer 
heard a trivial, yet most serious, aspect of 
the matter put by a southern Methodist presiding elder. 
"Yo u white women," he said, "are the 
main obstacle to Negro morality. Yo u teach 
us men, and your children—your sons—that 
morality in a Negro woman is beneath a 
white person's notice." 
"Wha t do you mean? " a hearer demanded 
indignantly. 
"This: Social distinctions, which we all 
know are established forever, like the mountains—know it so well that it is a waste of 
breath ever to say it—are forever being 
confused in your thoughts with distinctions 
in justice and in law. This class of distinctions must be abolished, for the sake of our 
own civilization, if for nothing else. For instance : you refuse to give a Negro wife her 
legal title of 'Mrs.' It's not a social matter, 
as so many think; it's a legal right, defining 
a legal status fundamentally necessary to 
civilization. But you Christian women refuse it to women sufficiently handicapped, 
heaven knows, without this added difficulty. 
I'm not talking about your cooks; in the 
kitchen a woman of no race would expect 
the use of her legal title; but you refuse it 
to the race. You make no distinction between the Christian wife and the mother of 
half-a-dozen haphazard mulattoes; they're 
all 'Sally' to you. Yo u say, in effect, that 
morality in a Negro doesn't count. You 
teach your sons that from babyhood. The 
Negro women pay for it; but by God's law 
your sons pay, too—pay a debt more yours 
than theirs. And the daughters they marry 
pay, too. " 
W e welcome Young India, published by 
the India Home Rule League of America. 
W e acknowledge "The Spirit of Modern 
Education," by B. F. Allen, president of 
Lincoln Institute. Mr. Allen says: 
W e must have a spirit of unrest, but not 
of simple discontent. I do not urge you to 
be content, but both to desire and deserve. 
The failures of the world are those who 
have failed to find their life's work ready 
to hand and who have lacked the initiative 
to seek out abroad. Every man, every race, 
is sometime given an opportunity to make 
the most of the gifts of God—to make the 
best use of natural endowments. Some men, 
like Marcus Aurelius, are born with all they 
need to help them in this work; others, like 
Aesop, must snatch from Fate what she will 
not give of her own accord. You are born 
under a certain handicap because of the 
color of your skin; but this very handicap 
is your certificate of service." 
Through the generosity of Walter A. 
May, the School of Economics of the University of Pittsburgh has made a study in 
Social Economics called "The Negro Migrant in Pittsburgh." The work has been 
done by Abraham Epstein with the counsel 
of Professor F. D. Tyson. The study is 
primarily an investigation of the 18,551 
Negro newcomers to Pittsburgh during the 
year 1917, and is an excellent and careful 
publication. We shall speak of it more at 
length in a subsequent number. 
THE HOUSTON HORROR. 
TH E country was stunned by the execution of thirteen Negro soldiers at Fort 
Sam Houston, to expiate the Houston riot, 
where seventeen white persons were killed. 
The press of the country has been curiously 
silent, even in the South. The Fort Worth, 
Tex., News says: 
It is safe to say that had the offenders 
been white men, they would have been accorded the same short shrift; and no complaint against it could justly lie. 
But the Boston, Mass., Herald replies: 
Can you imagine any other racial group 
in this republic whose members would have 
fared the same way? 
The Macon, Ga., Telegraph forestalled 
the matter back in August, when it said: 
Surely, with a southern man in the White 
House; a southern man at the head of the 
Navy; and a Georgian guiding the Treasury 
Department, the menace of the situation can 
be brought at once to the proper side of the 
Cabinet, and quick measures taken to make 
impossible any repetition of the Houston, 
episode in the South. 
The Little Rock, Ark., Daily News swaggers with true southern brutality: 
The wonder is that a single one of these 
Negroes, or any of the forty-one others involved and now sentenced to life imprisonment, were ever allowed to see another sunrise 
Insofar as it is possible, the authorities 
at Washington have planned to safeguard 
the South against another such outbreak, by 
placing white southern men in charge of 
Negro troops. 
The southern white man is the only man 
who understands the Negro, and he alone 
can control him. The Negro must be ruled 
with a rod of iron and never once be allowed 
to lose sight of his proper place 
It is a truth of history that the Negro 
was a more valuable and a more loyal citizen 
in the old antebellum condition of involuntary servitude. 188 THE CRISIS 
There has been some faint murmuring 
at the precipitancy and secrecy of the executions. The New Yor k Evening Post says: 
It will be felt hard among the ten million 
colored Americans that the findings of the 
court martial were carried out so swiftly 
and secretly that no opportunity was offered 
to plead for clemency. The possible basis 
for mercy lay in the fact that the provocation suffered by the Negro criminals was 
great; the white police of Houston had maltreated the women of the Negro portion of 
the city, the men themselves had been brutally handled, their officers had been insulted. 
The Jamestown, N. Y., Post thinks that: 
It is certainly astonishing if these Negroes were put to death without submitting 
their case to the Wa r Department at Washington. 
A few papers are even more outspoken. 
The New York World says that: 
The Houston riot and the events growing 
out of it should be a warning to southern 
officials. At the start, the Houston police 
wei'e to blame. By their attitude toward 
Negro soldiers, they created a feeling of 
bitter resentment- that was finally responsible for the bloody outbreak that followed. 
The Buffalo, N. Y., Express remarks sarcastically: 
Being soldiers, the dead men should have 
learned to keep their tempers. Being Negroes in a Southern State, they should have 
learned this, anyway, for their own personal 
safety. Then they might have saved their 
lives, though they lost their self-respect. 
But isn't it time that the Wa r Department 
started playing fair with its black troops? 
If it cannot protect them against southern 
mobs, it should not order them to duty in 
the South. 
By the way, how many able-bodied white 
citizens of Houston have enlisted for the 
war ? 
The Pueblo, New Mexico, Chieftain compares Houston and East St. Louis: 
If anything, the acts of the white people 
in East St. Louis were far more grave than 
the acts of the Negroes in Houston. In no 
manner was either act excusable and the 
military authority exercised wide judgment 
in inflicting a sure and quick punishment on 
the Negroes. If the civil population in East 
St. Louis fails to inflict a similar punishment on the men who were guilty of those 
murders and crimes, it will only go to show 
that our government falls down in certain 
circumstances, and it will only go to increase the feeling that punishment is not 
fairly meted out. 
It would have been far better, so far as 
the general feeling is concerned, to have 
executed the white men in St. Louis and not 
the Negroes in Houston, because the white 
people are supposed to be better educated 
and better citizens, from the fact that they 
have had a greater amount of opportunity. 
The New York Evening Globe thinks that 
the hanging: 
Is not calculated to stimulate the patriotism of some 10,000,000 Afro-Americans. 
It is the belief of Negroes generally that 
they are unfairly and illegally discriminated 
against 
It is greatly to be feared that this country is making future trouble for itself, by 
having one sort of law for the white man 
and quite a different and more drastic one 
for the black man. 
A colored man, writing in the St. Louis, 
Mo., Post-Dispatch, says: 
The summary execution at Fort Sam 
Houston the Government will find to have 
been in vain, if it does not take some measures to put an end to the tyranny and brutality of the police and civil population 
toward Negroes in the South; for, notwithstanding the characteristic patience and 
forbearance of the race under conditions 
that no white man would tolerate for a 
moment, the Houston occurrence demonstrates that there is a limit. And there are 
many black people in the country to-day who 
will hold that these thirteen soldiers gave 
their lives for liberty and democracy in no 
less degree than their comrades who will fall 
on the battlefields of Europe. 
The comment of the colored papers is 
guarded, but represents, undoubtedly, deep 
and bitter feeling. W e append a few extracts : 
The thirteen brave soldiers who, found 
guilty by court-martial, were executed at 
San Antonio, Tex., really died as martyrs 
to southern race prejudice. Had not the 
brutality of the Houston police, of which 
they had frequently complained to their officers, become intolerable these brave men 
would not have had to stand trial for a serious crime, and would have been saved to 
serve their country honorably and valiantly 
at a time when brave men, loyal and true, 
are sadly needed, instead of being condemned to death because of a crime demanding expiation.— Monitor, Omaha, Neb. 
The Negroes of the entire country will regard the thirteen Negro soldiers of the 
Twenty-fourth Infantry executed as martyrs. They believe that the thirteen unfortunates died because southern prejudice, 
hatred, and brutality clamored for Negro 
blood in revenge for the shedding of the 
blood of white men, and no penalty short 
of death would appease their gory thirst. 
If, instead, a Negro mob, composed of 
Negro soldiers who murdered white persons 
in Houston, there had been a white mob 
which slaughtered Negroes who had abused 
or wronged white men or women, the leaders 
of the mob, instead of the death penalty, 
would be honored and rewarded with high 
official position.— Daily Herald, Baltimore. 
Thirteen hanged, forty-one imprisoned for 
life, nine for short terms, and five acquitted, 
represent the summary sentence passed THE LOOKING GLASS 189 
upon the members of the Twenty-fourth Infantry, who shot up Houston, Tex., on the 
night of August 23 last. Thus is closed another dark chapter in the annals of American Democracy. Closed but not forgotten. 
It will never be forgotten that these bold 
regulars, who broke the law and merited 
the punishment, were the victims of southern crackers and copperheads, who baited 
them on and taunted them beyond human 
endurance.— Afro-American, Baltimore, Md. 
The Negro soldiers will face harder battles in America than "somewhere over 
there." These have paid the penalty, and it 
is said: "They faced death bravely." America's mob violence was the agitator, and race 
prejudice was their executioner. The death 
of these men has done more to bring about a 
real democracy in America than the onslaughts of a thousand black heroes in Europe. The world is watching, and the Negro 
awakening. Those men knew the penalty 
and suffered the consequences. If the hell 
hounds of the South or anywhere choose to 
intimidate or in any way molest the Negro 
soldiers, and especially their women, then 
somebody must die. This is the beginning 
of the end. The Negro soldier can give but 
one life. The question is whether it shall be 
in defense of his own or his country.— Twin 
City Star, Minneapolis, Minn. „ 
The Brooklyn Eagle reports a colored 
minister, the Rev. Mr. George Frazier Miller, as saying in a sermon: 
The commanding officer was guilty of a 
military lynching, done for the purpose of 
appeasing the people of the South, who had 
to be avenged. I wish to say to The Brooklyn Eagle that it is sadly mistaken when it 
says, "the crime at Houston will never be 
repeated." Give men the same provocation, 
and the same thing will happen fifty times 
again 
THE "WORTHLESS" YOUNGER 
GENERATION 
A SPECIA L dispatch from Washington 
to the New York World says: 
Provost Marshall General Crowder today 
announced that colored registrants in the 
draft aggregated 737,628, or nearly eight 
per cent of the total registration of 9,586,-
508. Of these 208,953, or twenty-eight per 
cent have been called by the draft boards, 
and 75,697 certified for service. 
Out of every one hundred colored men 
called thirty-six were certified for service 
and sixty-four were rejected, exempted or 
discharged. Out of every one hundred 
whites called twenty-five were certified and 
seventy-five rejected, exempted or discharged. 
" It seems likely," said General Crowder, 
" that the difference is due entirely to a 
difference in physical qualifications or in the 
applicability of the several legal grounds 
for exemption or discharge. A more thorough study of the records will be necessary 
before the reasons can be definitely stated. 
It is clear, however, that the younger colored men of America are making a showing 
of which the whole Nation may be proud." 
MISCELLANEOUS. 
THOUSANDS of them (Negroes) have 
left the South. Many will never return. The causes of the migration have 
been in the main economic, but there can be 
no doubt of the fact that the Negroes, as a 
rule, have taken advantage of the present 
opportunity to leave behind them poor 
schools, inadequate police protection, and 
exasperating farming conditions, under 
which many of them have labored for so 
many years.— R. R. Moton in the Tuskegee 
annual report. 
When the mob at Memphis, the other day, 
burned a Negro at the stake and cut off his 
head for a Roman holiday, the gruesome details were immediately published throughout Germany, as a typical example of the 
civilization they could expect to have imposed upon them, if America won the war. 
—New York Independent. 
Very many of the original Negro songs 
are written in the pentatonic scale, which, 
as all musicians know, omits the third and 
seventh tone. The weird, indescribable, inimitable pathos of genuine Negro melody is 
an evolution of conditions; the inarticulate 
cry of the exile's stricken heart for the delicious depths of dimly remembered forests, 
for the half-forgotten tones of long-lost 
loved ones, or the sweet breath of fair lilies, 
that for him will bloom no more; for the 
dulcet notes of gay-winged birds, whose 
songs are hushed; for a thousand clinging 
recollections of a beautiful Paradise, growing brighter as it recedes—a Paradise that 
the wanderer knew lay further from him 
than earth from Heaven. The child of nature, who had no words, recorded his history 
in tones. These songs refute the oft reiterated statement that there is no distinctive 
American music.— Lewis Payne in Etude. 
And, in this anecdotal mood, I want to tell 
you of one of the best pianists I ever heard 
in San Francisco. He is a darkey, and he 
plays at one of the haunts of the Barbary 
Coast. Some friends had dragged me down 
there one night, nolens volens, and I felt as 
if I ought to be sprinkled with holy water, 
so sordid and abominable was it all. 
But the darkey's playing was a redeeming 
feature. I can see him, in my mind's eye, 
improvising an accompaniment to the singing of a bedizened woman. Such a skein 
of delicate chromatic counterpoint flowed 
into being under his fingers, as astonished 
and fascinated me. A cigar in his mouth, 
he sat there, staring at the wall, and extemporized so miraculously that Edwin Lemare's work, in the same class, is uninspired 
by comparison. It made me think of Blind 
Tom; but this man was no blissful idiot; 
he was a healthy specimen of humanity. 
There was no retreating forehead and imbecile expression. Verily, genius is like the 190 THE CRISIS 
wind, which "bloweth where it listeth," and 
it is to be found in the most unexpected 
places.— Redfern Mason in the San Francisco, Cal., Examiner. 
Two visiting artists added much to the 
success of the program. The pianist, Carl 
Diton, not only played several numbers with 
technical skill and admirable interpretative 
quality, but directed the singing, and played 
the accompaniments for the soloist. His 
opening number, Rachmaninoff's charming 
"Prelude in G Minor," was heard at a disadvantage, because of the noise of people 
entering and getting seated; but in spite of 
this difficulty showed his command of the 
instrument, and was very appropriate, from 
an artistic point of view, as an introduction 
to a program of the character presented. 
His own adaptation of "Swing Low, Sweet 
Chariot" was a charming number, and his 
interpretation of Chopin's "Polonaise" was 
very interesting. 
Mary Anderson, the soloist, has one of the 
most remarkable voices ever heard in Savannah. A contralto, its range is amazing, 
and the upper notes as perfect and full as 
the lower, with a lovely middle register. 
Something unusual in its quality, difficult to 
analyze, made it sound more like an exquisite wind instrument than like the human 
voice, the tones ringing out like a clarionet. 
It was interesting that she happened to sing 
two songs that Miss Wilson sang here recently, one the Irish ballad, "Danny Boy, " 
which was most beautifully given, and the 
other, the Negro spiritual, "Deep River." 
This and her singing of another spiritual by 
Burleigh, "Go Down, Moses," were most impressive, although her interpretation of 
music that was not the traditional music of 
her own people was quite as successful. She 
was particularly happy in some imitative or 
echo songs, one, "The Cuckoo." with a touch 
of humor in the interpretation, being' most 
effective. 
The concert was given for the benefit of 
the Negro Protective Association Industrial 
Home, which is maintained for dependent 
and orphan girls. R. R. Wright, president 
of the Georgia State Industrial College, 
made a short talk before the end of the concert, explaining its purpose and appealing 
for support for the work in the interest of 
which it was given.— Jane Judge, in the 
Savannah, Ga., Morning News. 
Through the twilight comes the rolling 
hum of tramping men, and another throng 
rubs its way through. 
"Africans! " 
They march past with faces red-brown, 
yellow or chestnut, their beards scanty, and 
tine, or thick and frizzled; their greatcoats 
yellow-green, and their muddy helmets 
sporting the crescent in place of our grenade. Their eyes are like balls of ivory or 
onyx, that shine from faces like new pennies, flat, or angular. Now and then comes 
swaying along above the line the coal-black 
mask of a Sengalese sharpshooter. Behind 
the company goes a green flag with a red 
hand in the center. 
We watch them in silence. These are 
asked no questions. They command respect 
and even a little fear. These Africans, jolly 
and in high spirits, are going to the first 
line—their place; and their passing is the 
sign of an immediate attack. They are 
made for the offensive. "Those men are for 
big moments; to them and to the Seventyfifth we can take off our hats."—Henri Barbusse in he Feu. 
The pronunciamento of Lloyd George concerning the African colonies is the most significant European utterance of the twentieth 
century in regard to the Negro race. The 
following are his words according to the 
New Yor k Times: 
With regard to the German colonies, I 
have repeatedly declared that they are held 
at the disposal of a conference, whose decision must have primary regard to the 
wishes and interests of the native inhabitants ef such colonies. None of those territories are inhabited by Europeans. The 
governing consideration, therefore, must be 
that the inhabitants should be placed under 
the control of an administration acceptable 
to themselves, one of whose main purposes 
will be to prevent their exploitation for the 
benefit of European capitalists or governments. 
The natives live in their various tribal 
organizations, under chiefs and councils 
who are competent to consult and speak for 
their tribes and members, and thus to represent their wishes and interests in regard 
to their disposal. The general principle of 
national self-determination is, therefore, as 
applicable in their cases as in those of the 
occupied European territories. 
The German declaration that the natives 
of the German colonies have, through their 
military fidelity in war, shown their attachment and resolve, under all circumstances, 
to remain with Germany is applicable, not 
to the German colonies generally, but only 
to one of them, and in that case, German 
East Africa. The German authorities secured the attainment, not of the native 
population as a whole, which is and remains 
profoundly anti-German, but only of a small 
warlike class, from whom their askaris, or 
soldiers, were selected. These they attached 
to themselves by conferring on them a highly privileged position, as against the bulk 
of the native population, which enabled 
these askaris to assume a lordly and oppressive superiority over the rest of the natives. 
By this and other means they secured the 
attachments of a very small and insignificant minority, whose interests were directly 
opposed to those of the rest of the population, and for whom they have no right to 
speak. The German treatment of the native 
populations in their colonies has been such 
as amply to justify their fear of submitting 
the future of those colonies to the wishes 
of the natives themselves. The Horizon 
MUSIC AND ART 
MAR Y ROSS DORSEY, a dramatic 
reader of Boston, and Helen Hagan, 
concert pianist of New Haven, have appeared in a series of recitals through Ohio 
and Indiana. A t Camp Sherman they entertained five thousand Negro conscripts. 
Roland Hayes, the tenor of Boston, sang 
before fifteen hundred men, officers, and 
representatives of the Y. M. C. A. work at 
Camp Sherman. 
The Cosmopolitan Choral Society of 
Baltimore, Md., recently presented Roland 
Hayes, the tenor of Boston; Lillian Evans, 
soprano, and Beatrice Lewis, pianist of 
Washington, D. C , in a recital at Bethel 
A. M. E. Church. Almost half of the numbers rendered were compositions of Negro 
artists. 
The Arts and Letters Society, Chicago, 
Ill., on December 21, held its first exhibition of paintings by Negro artists of the 
city. Amon g the exhibitors were F. L. 
Holmes, W. A. Harper, W. M. Farrow, 
Jesse Stubbs, Edward Knox, R. M. Wil ­
liams, Archibald Motley, and C. C. Dawson. 
The "Music Lovers' Club" of Tuskegee 
Institute is studying the works of Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor, and will render the 
"Wedding Feast" from "Hiawatha" in the 
spring. 
A t the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Musical Art Society, under Frank Damrosch, held at Carnegie Hall, New York 
City, an ovation was given Henry T. Burleigh by the whole audience. 
William H. Richardson, baritone, assisted by Maud Cuney Hare, accompanist, 
and Clarence C. White, violinist, gave a 
concert program at the Old South Meeting 
House, Boston, Mass. This is Mrs. Hare's 
and Mr. Richardson's third annual engagement by the Old South Forum. 
Frederick Stock, conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, announces 
Henry T. Gilbert's "Comedy Overture on 
Negro Themes," and Otterstrom's "Negro 
Suite" among a number of American works 
to be given on the programs this year. 
A Negro Song Rally was given at the 
Tree of Light in Madison Square Park, 
New Yor k City, on Christmas Day. Colored troops of the 367th Infantry, boy 
scouts, and nurses participated; and there 
were choruses conducted by Mme. E. A. 
Hackley, J. Rosamond Johnson, Mrs. Elizabeth Loguen, and Harry Barnhart. 
MEETINGS 
THE Grand Lodge of Masons in North 
Carolina have met in Salisbury. 
The Grand Endowment Secretary reported 
the payment of 201 death claims during the 
year, amounting to $59,000, and a balance 
of $20,066. 
The twenty-seventh annual meeting of 
the Florida Teachers' Association was held 
in Daytona. Among the speakers were Dr. 
James H. Dillard, the Honorable P. P. 
Claxton, and Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune. 
The twenty-seventh annual meeting of 
The American Negro Academy was held in 
Washington, D. C. "The Migration of the 
Negro" was discussed. The speakers were 
Messrs. W. Ashbie Hawkins, Kelly Miller, 
R. W. Bagnall, Matthew Anderson, L. M. 
Hershaw, and J. W. Cromwell. Mr. A. H. 
Grimke is president of the organization. 
A t the fifth annual meeting of the Negro 
Organization Society of Virginia, Dr. R. 
R. Moton was made honorary president, 
and Mr. Allen W. Washington, president. 
Dr. James H. Dillard, Mr. and Mrs. W. T. 
B. Williams, John B. Pierce, and others addressed the gathering. 
The tenth annual convention of the 
Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity has been held 
in Philadelphia, Pa., with the Rho Chapter. 
Five Alpha Phi Alpha men are now captains, twenty-five first lieutenants, and ten 
second lieutenants in the National Army. 
THE WA R 
TH E Fifteenth Infantry has as its emblem a buffalo head; their slogan is: 
"See it through." The Welfare League of 
this infantry conducted a regimental ball 
on New Year's Eve, to aid in a $40,000 bond 
issue for the erection of an auditorium at 
Camp Upton. Colonel Theodore Roosevelt 
is honorary president of the organization, 
and the Rev. Mr. H. C. Bishop, president. 
Dorsey Rhodes, bandmaster of the 551st 
Field Artillery, and a member of the Tenth 
Cavalry, is organizing a band of Negroes 
at Camp Meade. 
191 192 TH E CRISIS 
The regimental number of the Eighth 
Infantry of Illinois has been changed to 
the 370th National Guard Infantry. Colonel Denison and his staff are at Camp 
Logan, Tex. 
White persons at Camp Meade, Md., 
have been attacking some of the soldiers. 
The soldiers retaliated, and as a result one 
colored sergeant, W. Watts, has been sentenced to five years' imprisonment, and another, J.. P. Holloway, to three years. 
The Home Guard of Evanston, Ill., commanded by Captain William Stewart, is 
now affiliated with the 370th National 
Guard Infantry, formerly the Eighth Illinois, and known as Company K of the Third 
Battalion, Major Yantes commanding. 
The Ninth Ohio Battalion, composed of 
companies from Cleveland, Dayton, Springfield, and Columbus, has left Camp Sheridan, Montgomery, Ala., for "an Atlantic 
port." 
On complaint of General Crowder the 
entire Exemption Board of Fulton County, 
Ga., (the county where Atlanta is situated) 
has been removed from office, for discriminating against Negroes. 
Five hundred recruits from the South 
have been assigned to the machine gun 
battalion of the 184th Colored Brigade at 
Camp Upton. 
Dixie B. Brooks has been made supervisor of field work for the Red Cross at 
Columbia, S. C. She is the only colored 
supervisor, and is in charge of home service training classes for volunteer workers. 
The "Association of Universal Loyal 
Negroes," formed in Panama, is circulating 
a memorial to be signed by the Negroes 
of the world, praying the Entente Allies to 
turn over the German colonies to the Negroes themselves, as a "free and independent 
state." Interested persons may communicate with J. B. Yearwood at the Ancon Post 
Office, Canal Zone. 
A series of training camps for officers 
will be held from January 5 to April 5, 
1918. These camps are primarily for training enlisted men of the regular army, the 
National Guard, and the national army as 
officers. Schools which have had military 
training for the past ten years will be 
given quotas. Wilberforce University is 
the only colored institution thus recognized 
and will send a quota of twenty men. Ap ­
parently, there will be no special segregated 
camps for Negroes, but they will be assigned to the various camps. On the other 
hand, as the applications are already closed 
only a few hundred colored men will probably gain admittance. 
Colored persons who are skilled artisans, 
such as civil engineers, stenographers, 
typists, auto repairers, electricians, telegraph and radio operators, linemen, cablesplicers, draftsmen, plumbers, pharmacists, 
harness-makers and clerks, are desired for 
enlistment in the 92nd Division of the National Army. Correspondence should be 
addressed to the "Personnel Officer," 92nd 
Division, Camp Funston, Kan. 
Upon two occasions the Eighth, Ill., 
Regiment of the National Guard has paraded through streets of Houston, Tex., and 
been generously applauded by the citizens. 
Abbe Gabriel Sane was born in Africa, 
in 1869, and ordained priest in Senegal in 
1902. Being a master of six languages, he 
went to the front in France as interpreter 
in 1916, and was made chaplain to the 
Senegalese Tirailleurs. He was killed recentl y in Champagne by a bursting shell. 
Since June, 1916, a single Somali Battalion has won two hundred and sixty-four 
personal citations for bravery at the French 
front. 
The Distinguished Conduct Medal has 
been given by the English government to 
the following Negroes: Color-Sergt. Mohammad Osman, Mohammed Abukker, 
Sergt.-Maj. Disi, Sergt. Yohanne, Sergt.-
Maj. Mumuni Moshi and Lance-Corporal 
Akanno Ibadan. 
INDUSTRY 
A TOW N for twenty-five thousand colored workers is being discussed by 
the Newark, N. J., Board of Trade, in connection with Federal shipbuilding at that 
port. 
The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad has 
four colored night switchmen in its yards 
at Dayton. 
The Christmas Savings Club of the 
Mechanics Savings Bank in Richmond, Va., 
had for the year, 1917, 7,976 members, with 
total deposits of $73,700. 
The Standard Life Insurance Company 
of Atlanta, Ga., is experiencing such an 
increase in business that its force has been THE HORIZON 193 
working until nine-thirty o'clock. The 
daily average business during December 
was $40,000. 
The Baltimore Afro-American has installed a new Webb perfecting press at a 
considerable cost, and has enlarged and 
adorned the publication. The veteran editor 
Murphy is to be congratulated. 
The Dupont Powder Company is seeking 
through the Y. M. C. A. in Davisville, Va., 
five hundred colored men to work in the 
manufacture of war munitions. 
A building and loan association has been 
formed in Erie, Pa., to work out the Negro 
housing problem. 
The Colored Wage Earners' Savings 
Bank of Savannah, Ga., has 9089 depositors, 
an increase of 1833 over last year. The 
total deposits are $230,423. It is seventeen 
years old, and has declared an annual 
dividend of 12 per cent each year. 
EDUCATION 
TH E Freedmen's Aid Society of the M. 
E. Church appropriated $500,000 for 
educational work in twenty-one Southern 
schools this year, an increase of $16,000 
over last year's appropriation. 
Effort is being made to equip the Leonard Medical School, connected with Shaw 
University, Raleigh, N. C , so as to put it 
in Class A. A new instructor and $600 
worth of instruments have already been 
furnished. Money is needed for further 
equipment and support. There is only on? 
colored medical school, Howard, in "Class 
A. " Meharry is in "Class B, " and graduates of schools of this latter class are 
already barred from examination in twentyfive states. A commission was appointed 
by the National Medical Association at its 
Philadelphia meeting to appeal to American philanthropy, in order to raise the 
standard of colored medical schools. 
The annual report of Tuskegee Institute 
shows an enrollment of 950 boys and 645 
girls, or 1,595 pupils in all. Other enrollments in the children's home, the summer 
school, and the farmer's course brings the 
total up to 2524. There have been 12,355 
Negro donors to the Booker T. Washington 
Memorial Fund, and they have contributed 
$25,000. The total fund now exceeds one 
million dollars. 
The colored people of Nashville, Tenn., 
are again agitating for a modern high 
school. They were about to receive one 
some years ago, when internal dissension 
led to an inadequate and out of the way 
building being foisted upon them. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
IN its recent membership campaign the 
colored branch of the Y. M. G. A. in 
Louisville, Ky., added 596 new members to 
its roll, breaking all previous records. • 
During three years ten colored conferences of the M. E. church in Southern 
States have raised $24,791 for the Conventional Fund for Foreign Missions. 
The annual report of the National 
League on Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes shows that $61,000 has been handled 
by the central and branch offices, and that 
the work is being carried on in twenty-six 
cities. 
The Seventh Day Adventists of the 
United States and Canada have appropriated $55,000 for work among Negroes in the 
South. 
The United States District Court of 
Baltimore has ordered the release of a colored defendant imprisoned under the segregation ordinance on the ground that the 
Supreme Court decision nullifies the enactment. 
The exterior work on the new Negro 
Public Library in Knoxville, Tenn., has been 
completed, and it is expected that the building will be opened early in the year. The 
capacity of the library will be about fifteen 
thousand volumes; most of the books will 
be along educational and recreational lines. 
The Carnegie Association will appropriate 
funds to pay for the institution as soon as 
it is completed. 
The Knights of Pythias have dedicated 
their modern five-story building at Twelfth 
and U Streets, Northwest, Washington, D. 
Mr. S. W. Green, Supreme Chancellor, 
conducted the services. 
Morgan College Annex, at Lynchburg, 
Va., has been completely destroyed by fire. 
The loss is estimated at fifty thousand dollars, and was only partially covered by insurance. 
Through the work of the Council of Colored Women in Richmond, Va., $1,100 was 
raised within a month for the Industrial 
Home School for Delinquent Girls, at Peake. 
Mrs. Maggie L. Walker is president of the 
council. 194 THE CRISIS 
"Dunbar Park," a proposed community 
for colored people of Chicago, has been 
planned. Parks, gardens, and playgrounds 
are included. 
Patrolman Fowler, in Louisville, Ky., 
has been dismissed from the police force because of alleged misconduct toward a colored woman. 
The city attorney of Richmond, Va., has 
officially notified the police that there will 
be no further prosecutions under the segregation ordinance. The colored Leigh 
Street M. E. Church has, meantime, opened 
its front doors, which were closed by the 
police on the ground that they were on a 
white block! 
Architects are preparing plans for the 
colored branch of the Y. M. C. A., New 
York City, at 179 West 135th Street. It 
will be six stories, built of brick and stone, 
at a cost of about $100,000. A six-story 
home for the colored Y. W. C. A. on the 
north side of 137th Street is also beingplanned. 
AS a result of the decision of the Board 
of Estimate, fifteen colored teachers in Baltimore, Md., will receive an increase in salary of one hundred dollars each. 
In the last five years colored people have 
given fifty thousand dollars toward the endowment of Claftin College, Orangeburg, 
S. C. 
The American Woodmen, a colored secret order, has held its fourth quadrennial 
session. It has received since 1913, 
$408,317, and had a balance on hand July 
31, 1917, of $145,484. The order purchased 
$10,000 worth of Liberty Bonds. 
A patriotic pageant, written and directed by B. T. Harvey, Jr., has been presented 
in Atlanta by the Public School Teachers' 
Association. It was viewed by several thousand people. 
Sydney B. Chase has opened the North 
Avenue Theatre in New Rochelle, N. Y., 
under colored management. It has a seating capacity of five hundred. 
The Knights of Pythias of Louisiana 
have cleared a $75,000 mortgage on their 
temple in New Orleans. 
The Colored Authors' Library Association has been organized in Philadelphia, Pa., 
with R. R. Wright, Jr., president. Its purpose is to encourage the collection and cooperative publication of books by colored 
authors. 
Governor Gardner has appointed a colored commission to inquire into the educational and social conditions of Negroes in 
Missouri. N. C. Bruce is chairman, and 
among the other members are Dr. W. J. 
Tompkins, Kansas City; W. C. Gordon, St. 
Louis; and F. B. Weave r of Kansas City. 
A special correspondent of the New York 
Evening Post writes from New Orleans, 
that Negroes have been depositing considerable sums in the small interior banks, and 
have made " fairly large subscriptions to 
the Government Bond issues." 
Meldrim Auditorium of the Georgia 
State Industrial College, Savannah, has 
been destroyed by fire. The loss is ovei 
seven thousand dollars, which was only 
partly covered by insurance. 
In Caddo Parish, La., the property of 
Negroes, subject to taxation, is valued at 
$2,113,740. 
The Domestic Science Hall of the Brick 
A. I. & N. School, North Carolina, has been 
destroyed by fire. 
We are informed that the segregation 
ordinance proposed in the city of Birmingham, Ala., was never actually passed. 
The new Republican administration in 
Louisville, Ky., has appointed colored men 
as janitors in the City Hall, in place of 
former white men. 
The Loft Candy Manufacturing Company employed a colored salesgirl in one 
of their Brooklyn, N. Y., stores during the 
holiday season, Miss Lillian C. Dodson. Her 
sales were among the highest. 
The Kappa Gamma Kappa Club has been 
organized in New York City of young college women. Miss Elizabeth Townsend is 
president. 
The Booster Club, a Negro organization 
in St. Louis, Mo., collected $1,056 with 
which they made up six hundred and fifty 
kits for the Negro soldiers at Camp Funston. 
THE CHURCH 
TH E Order of Sisters of the Holy Family, in New Orleans, La., founded for 
colored Sisters by Very Rev. Father Roussilon, has celebrated its diamond jubilee. 
The A. M. E. Zion Church has recently 
raised $50,000 for a dormitory at Livingstone College, and $6000 for church purposes 
by two bishops, while twelve pastors in 
New York, Philadelphia, and elsewhere 
have raised $21,000 through rallies. THE HORIZON 195 
Elizabeth Coleman, of Boston, has entered the novitiate of the Handmaids of 
the Most Pure Heart of Mary, in Savannah, 
Ga., a new congregation for colored women 
founded by Very. Rev. Ignatius Lissner, of 
the Society of the African Missions. Mother 
M. Theodore, a cousin of the late Rev. Mr. 
Joseph J. Plantvigne, a Negro priest of the 
Josephite Order, is the present superior. 
Colored Episcopalians of Washington, 
D. C , have celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the work of this 
denomination among them. 
PERSONAL 
THE Venerable Archdeacon Edward 
Thomas Demby of Tennessee, has 
been chosen suffragan bishop of Arkansas, 
to have charge of work among colored 
Episcopalians. Archdeacon Russell of Virginia was first elected to this office, but declined. 
James Gregg, a white Congregational 
pastor of Pittsfield, Mass., has been elected 
principal of Hampton Institute. Dr. Gregg 
was born in Hartford, Conn., educated at 
Harvard and the Yale Divinity School, and 
is forty-two years of age. 
The Rev. Mr. A. E. Rankin, pastor of 
Gibson Chapel Presbyterian Church in 
Springfield, Mo., has been appointed chaplain in the National Army. He has been 
assigned to the 349th Field Artillery, Camp 
Dix, Wrightstown, New Jersey. 
Lieutenant H. H. Walker has been commissioned a captain in the United States 
Army , and assigned to camp Funston, Kan. 
Mary Church Terrell of Washington, D. 
C , is teaching French at Howard University, the former teacher being called for war 
service. 
C George Brown of Chicago, Ill., is the 
first Negro cook on the Golden State Limited of the Rock Island Railroad. 
W. B. Scott, who published the first colored paper in Tennessee, in 1865, The Nashville Colored Tennessean, is dead. 
Attorney James G. Cotter, in Chicago, 
Ill., has been made Assistant Attorney Gen-. 
eral for the State of Illinois. 
Captain Samuel B. Hart has been appointed chief sanitary inspector, with the 
rank of First Lieutenant, at the aviation 
cantonment, Camp Beauregard, Alexandria, La. He has served as sanitary inspector in Philadelphia, Pa., for ten years. 
The Rev. Mr. W. P. Stanley of Baltimore, Md., is to join the forces of the Y. 
M. C. A., in British East Africa. 
The Rev, Mr. Horace P. Talbert, formerly secretary of Wilberforce University, is 
dead. 
The Rev. Mr. Toney Perry of St. Louis, 
Mo., gave as a Christmas gift to his Alma 
Mater, Wilberforce '90, two lots in Houston, Tex., valued at five hundred dollars 
each. 
Lucius Sumner Hicks of Boston, Mass., 
has been made Assistant Corporation Counsel at a salary of $2200. 
Eddie Savoy, chief messenger to the Department of State, has received a costly engraved stick pin, a gift from Viscount Ishii, 
who was Special Ambassador to America 
from Japan. 
A testimonial dinner was tendered Mr. 
Moorfield Storey, National President of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, by the Boston Branch of 
the N. A. A. C. P., in appreciation for his 
services in connection with the recent 
famous decision of the United States Supreme Court in the Segregation Case, on 
Thursday evening, January 10. The dinner 
was held in the large banquet room of the 
Twentieth Century Club, 3 Joy Street, Boston, and was attended by more than two 
hundred persons. A program of music was 
interspersed with speeches of appreciation. 
The Branch presented Mr. Storey with a 
parchment scroll bearing words of appreciation for his loyal services to the Association and to the Negro race. This scroll 
was signed by all the persons present at 
the banquet and by many members of the 
Boston Branch. 
Howard Lee, a young colored athlete of 
Rochester, N. Y., who is only fourteen years 
of age, recently won three events in a Y. 
M. C. A. meet. 
By decision of the courts, the Ohio Industrial Commission will pay ten dollars 
weekly for six years to Josephine Mitchell, 
a colored woman of Dayton, for injury to 
her son at the Sucher Packing Company, 
which resulted in his death. 
Catherine D. Lealtad was graduated 
from McAlester College, Minnesota, with 
first honors in a class of twenty-five in 
1915, completing her course in three years. 
She made the best scholarship record in the 
history of the college and received the 
Noyes' prize. Afterward she was grad-196 THE CRISIS 
uated from the Normal school of St. Paul, 
and in the fall of 1917, was appointed a 
teacher in one of the schools of St. Paul. 
Complaints immediately were made to the 
principal because Miss Lealtad was colored, 
and she asked to be relieved. The N. A. A. 
C. P. of St. Paul, immediately took the matter up. White patrons of the school helped. 
Finally, the case was adjusted by transfering Miss Lealtad to another school where at 
present she seems to be getting on well. 
Alain Leroy Locke has passed his final 
examination for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy at Harvard University. His 
field is philosophy, and his thesis the theory 
of value. 
Dr. A. R . Burton, an interne at Freedmen's Hospital, Washington, D. C , made 
the highest average in the examination held 
by the Board of Medical Supervisors of the 
District of Columbia, last October. 
The Rev. Mr. Harvey Johnson has completed forty-five years of service as pastor 
of Union Baptist Church, Baltimore. 
The Hon. W. H. Lewis is leading counsellor in the case to prevent the extradition 
of John Johnson to West Virginia. His 
cross examination of the self-confessed 
white prostitute, who is accusing Johnson, 
was a brilliant piece of work. The case is 
still pending. 
Francis C. Sumner has been appointed 
a fellow in psychology at Clark University, 
Worcester, Mass. 
George W. Clark has been appointed 
Deputy Collector of Internal Revenue in 
New York City, at a salary of $1,200. 
Benjamin E. Mays won first prize in 
the sophomore speaking contest at Bates 
College. Mr. Mays was formerly a student 
at Virginia Union and South Carolina 
State. 
Lester A. Walton, of New York City, 
has been appointed chairman of a committee 
to organize talent among colored draftees 
into dramatic and minstrel organizations. 
Garrett A. Morgan, of Cleveland, Ohio, 
inventor of the national safety hood, a 
breathing apparatus and life preserver, has 
been demonstrating his device before the 
Lake Torpedo Company, Bridgeport, Conn. 
Trenton, N. J., has its first Negro policeman, in the person of Mr. Vincent Harvey. 
The first female letter carrier in Chicago, Ill., is a colored woman. Miss Dorothy 
Hill. 
A statement appeared in TH E CRISIS 
last month concerning a new apartment 
house at Atlanta, Ga., erected by S . O. 
Ozborn. We learn that .the building has 
been planned merely and not erected. 
The Rev. Mr. A. C Douglass has been 
appointed Chaplin at Camp Meade, Maryland. 
GHETTO 
THE Catholic Archbishop of Chicago has 
ordered that white people no longer 
attend St. Monica's Catholic Church at 36th 
and Dearborn Streets. He frankly admits 
that he is drawing the color line in the 
Catholic church. 
Alexander King, assistant superintendent of the Wall Street Post Office Station, 
New York City, for more than twelve 
years, has been demoted to a clerkship, because, it is alleged, of Secretary Burleson's 
attitude toward Negroes. 
Former Chief of Police of Indianapolis, 
Samuel V. Perrott, has been sentenced to 
four years in the Federal Prison at Atlanta, 
Ga., for beating and driving from the polls 
Thomas Campbell, a Negro. 
CRIME 
THE murder rate of the United States 
has increased from 8.4 per cent per 
hundred thousand, 1910-15, to 9.2 in 1916. 
Memphis, Atlanta, New Orleans, Nashville, 
and Charleston lead. Frederick L. Hoffman, of course, finds that the Negro is 
largely to blame for this rate! 
In Berwind, W. Va., a white woman 
thought that a colored man was going to 
chase her. He was arrested and eventually 
killed in jail by the deputy sheriff, who 
says that he did it in self-defense. 
The courts of Norfolk, Va., placed William A. Strole, a white druggist, under one 
thousand dollar bail, for criminally assaulting Argyle Scott, an eight-year-old colored 
girl. 
Dr. Leroy N. Bundy, the colored dentist 
of E. St. Louis, Ill., charged with leading 
the Negroes for defense in the recent rioting, has been placed under a bail of $48,000. 
Five more Negro soldiers of the Twentyfourth Infantry, have been tried for rioting 
in Houston, Tex., and sentenced to be 
hanged. They are Privates Babe Collier, 
Thomas McDonald, James Robinson, Joseph 
Smith, and A. D. Wright, of Company I. 
Their execution will be delayed until after 
President Wilson has reviewed the case. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 197 
To CRISI S Readers:—-
Dr. W. E. Burghardt DuBois, the Editor of the CRISIS , 
reaches his fiftieth birthday February 23d, 1918. The CRISI S 
magazine stands today as the organ for the dissemination of 
those principles of justice and equality to which he has devoted 
these years of activity. Hence it seems appropriate that I should 
transmit to our readers the following suggestion which has recently come by letter to me. 
My dear Mr. Dill :— 
Having recently returned to America after twenty years' 
residence in Liberia and London I hesitate to offer any suggestions. But having been a constant reader of the CRISI S 
and a warm admirer of its Editor it has occurred to me that 
other CRISI S readers may feel that they too would like to 
join in some testimonial to Dr. DuBois on his fiftieth birthday. I can think of no better way than for you to suggest 
to each subscriber to secure at least one additional subscriber 
and thus double the CRISIS family. 
Sincerely and appreciatively, 
HENRY F. DOWNING. 
New York, January 7, 1918. 
The suggestion of Mr. Downing seems particularly happy 
since, unlike a testimonial banquet or a birthday dinner that must 
be limited to those few fellow townsmen who happen to group 
themselves for such a purpose, this suggestion opens the door for 
all the readers of the CRISI S to participate on equal terms. As 
co-worker with Dr. DuBois for fifteen years and as Business 
Manager of the CRISI S for five of the seven years of its life, 
I can think of no celebration of his fiftieth birthday that would 
be more gratifying to him.' 
I appeal, therefore, to every reader who is willing to participate in this birthday testimonial to forward at least one new 
annual subscription to the CRISIS . 
With sincere good wishes. 
A. G. Dill 
Business Manager of The CRISIS , 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York City. 198 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Completes Your Life-Line 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Is the only regular old line legal reserve life insurance company owned and operated by Colored people. 
Began operation in 1913. 
Ha s a paid in capital of $125,000.00 
Ha s additional protection to policyholders of over $130,-
000.00 legal reserve. 
Ha s insurance in force of over $5,000,000.00. 
Issues policies from $250 to $5,000 on all modern plans. 
Ha s paid policyholders since organization ove r $60,-
000,00. 
Ha s paid to Colored Physicians nearly $40,000.00. 
Ha s paid to agents and employees, all members of the race 
nearly $90,000.00. 
Ha s outstanding loans to Colored people secured by real 
estate amounting to $80,000.00. 
Operates in 9 States and employs 200 agents, and 36 clerks 
and stenographers in its offices. 
Is helping to bring about the economi c emancipation of the 
race and deserves by its clean business methods the patronage 
and co-operation of all thinking people. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Home Office ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 199 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, Inc. 
Sells Insurance That Protects 
•iiniiiiitiiiiiiEiiiiiiniiiniitiiiiniiiiitiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiuijiiiiiiEiiiiiiiiJiiiiiiiiiiiiJiiiiiJiiiiiJiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifiiittiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiJia 
Insurance that covers the whole field of life's emergencies in one policy: 
Sickness, Accident and Death, and perpetual in payments for disabilities. 
Of all investments that of insurance is the safest, because it pays at the 
crucial moment—it is not subject to the money market or the rise and fall 
of stocks and bonds; but pays promptly upon the death of each policyholder. 
Then why not select the best that is to be had—a policy that pays every 
week with Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc.? Also owning and operating 
the Va. Beneficial & Insurance Co., Inc., at Norfolk, Va. 
Read a few testimonials from the thousands that are on file at home 
office in Richmond, Va. 
DRE W $217.5 0 SICK BENEFITS and $500.0 0 DEATH CLAIM 
Richmond, Va., July 2, 1917. 
T o Who m It May Concern: 
This is to certify that my wife, Mrs. Lelia V. James, 1104 Chaffin Street, 
was a member of Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., for six and one-half 
years. During this time, she was sick on several occasions and whenever 
she reported her illness to the Society, she received her sick dues promptly. 
He r last illness extended from the latter part of November, 1916, to June, 
1917. The Society sent her money to her bedside each week, from December 6, 1916, to June 6, 1917, and at her death paid over to me the Death 
Claim of $500.00. 
I take pleasure in recommending the Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., 
to anyone wh o wants a sure policy of protection all through life. 
Respectfully yours, 
GEORG E JAMES, Husband. 
CLARENC E JAMES, Witness. 
$500.0 0 DR . THOS . A . STEVENS ' DEAT H CLAI M 
1007 Sixth St., Lynchburg, Va. 
Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., February 10, 1917. 
Richmond, Va. 
Gentlemen: 
Kindly accept my sincere thanks for your check of $500.0 0 in full payment of death claim of my husband, Dr. Thoma s A. Stevens, wh o died February 6, 1917. The above named check was delivered to me Thursday, February 8, 1917, by your superintendent, Mr. R. D. Burton. 
I shall always speak in the highest terms of your company, and pray 
God's blessings upon the work. 
Respectfully, 
MRS. THOMA S A. STEVENS . 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOME OFFICE: 527 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va. 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINST SICKNESS, ACCIDENT AND DEATH. 
A. D. PRICE, President. THOS. M. CRUMP, Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN, Asst. Secretary. 
Mention THE CRISIS 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WHY THE DEMAND FOR 
HOMESTEAD ORCHARD ESTATES 
IS SO GREAT 
Ever since Homestead Orchard was first introduced, over a year ago, there has been 
a great and constant demand for its acreage, and that demand has been increasing 
steadily every day. Of all the various propositions that were ever handled by the members of this firm, not one has aroused so much interest and enthusiasm, nor met with 
such instantaneous success as has this one 
An opportunity to invest part of your idle savings where they will be safe and 
where they will earn you the maximum returns. An opportunity to insure yourself 
against the possibility of poverty and want for all time to come. An opportunity to 
secure a home for your old age in one of the most promising sections of Michigan, a 
land where living is a real pleasure, and where prosperity, health, happiness and everlasting enjoyment are to be had, and a place where you can spend your summer vacations and enjoy the beautiful lakes, streams, and shady woodlands that are there aplenty. 
Furthermore, a Homestead Orchard Estate is one of the best forms of insurance 
there is because the owner can reap the benefits of it while he lives instead of waiting 
until he dies. 
If you would like to know more about Homestead Orchard, what and 
where it is, how you can secure one of these estates on the Easy Payment 
Plan and have it cultivated, developed and taken care of for you without 
any effort on your part, how much it is likely to earn you, and all of its 
other features and advantages, simply fill out and mail the attached coupon 
at once and we will promptly send you full particulars without the slightest 
obligation on your part. 
We will also send you copies of letters received from some of the people who visited Homestead Orchard and who made a thorough investigation 
of everything. These letters are worth reading and worth receiving. 
Send for them without any delay. Remember that the demand is far 
greater than the supply and that the entire tract will soon be sold out. 
Only a limited number of estates has been allotted to each city, which 
means that quick action is necessary. 
Fill out and mail the coupon today. 
The Swan-Arenson Realty and Development Co. 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, Ill. 
Gentlemen:— 
You may send me full particulars about your Homestead Orchard offer, without any obligation on my part. 
WHY ? 
Because it offers the very opportunity that the people have been 
waiting for; an opportunity to realize all the hopes and aspirations 
that lie deepest in every human heart. A home, a perpetual income, 
independence and plenty. 
Address 
19 S. LA SALL E STREE T CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
Address 
Town . 
Nam e 
State 
Mention T H E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 201 
The Circle for Negro War Relief, inc. 
MRS . EMILI E BIGELO W HAPGOOD , President 
VICE-PRESIDENT S 
Governor Charles S. Whitman Dr. W . E. Burghardt Du Bois 
Dr. Robert R. Moton Colonel Charles Young Ray Stannard Baker 
HARRISO N RHODES . Treasurer MRS . JAME S W . JOHNSON , Secretary 
CAROLIN E S. BOND . Executive Secretary 
DIRECTOR S 
Governor Chas. S. Whitman Mrs. Amos R. E. Pinchot Charles S. Peabody 
Dr. W . E. Burghardt Du Bois Mrs. James W . Johnson A. B. Spingarn 
Col. Charles Young Ray Stannard Baker Russell Janney 
George Foster Peabody Mrs. Emilie Bigelow Hapgood Dr. Robert R. Moton 
Edward Sheldon Robert J. Coady 
The Circle for Negro Wa r Relief, Inc., is founded for the 
purpose of making the conditions under which the colored 
soldier trains and fights the same as those which exist for the 
white soldier. 
It is an incorporated body under the laws of the State of 
New York and is working in co-operation with the Red Cross 
and other governmental agencies. 
Its aims are 
To help the colored soldier before he goes to the front 
To help the colored soldier at the front 
To help the family which the colored soldier leaves behind 
It will co-operate with all existing agencies to bring immediate relief and will, as far as possible, inaugurate new 
agencies where the existing ones are insufficient; always aiming to avoid waste thru duplication of effort, it will organize 
units in various towns and neighborhoods of the country so 
that local conditions may be investigated at any time concerning the families of Negro soldiers. 
MEMBERSHIP, ONE DOLLAR 
Headquarters 489 Fifth Avenue 
New York City 
Subscriptions may be sent to 
HARRISO N RHODES , Treas., 222 West 59th St., or 
MRS. HAPGOOD , 489 Fifth Avenue 
New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S 20 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E DISGRAC E O F DEMOCRAC Y 
An Open Letter to President Wilson 
By KELL Y MILLE R 
" Th e ablest document the war has yet produced in the 
United States."—H. L. Menchen, Editor Smart Set. 
" Wit h this document the Negr o problem is no longer a 
vague futurity. Th e Negr o question has arrived."— 
New Yor k Globe. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE. 
Price, 10 cents a copy Terms to agents, 5 cents a copy 
OVE R FORT Y THOUSAN D COPIES ALREAD Y DISTRIBUTED 
Address:—KELLY MILLER , Howard University, WASHINGTON . D. C. 
TH E AMERICA N CALVARYMA N 
By HENRY F. DOWNING 
$1.50 Postage extra, 15 cents $1.50 
PRES S NOTICE S 
''Th e America n Cavalryman " by Henr y F. Downing , is the wor k o f a Negr o ... . and has 
some of its most stirring scene s laid in the Republi c o f Liberia . Thes e are facts whic h giv e 
this modest romanc e noteworth y place in the lists o f new fiction . . . ."—Ne w Yor k World . 
Dec . 30th. 
" . . . . is a romanc e o f the cavalr y servic e written b y a man wh o mor e than an y othe r Negr o 
has had access to the literary worl d o f today . . ." — Brookly n Eagle , Dec . 22nd. 
" . . . • . a romanc e of a ver y high orde r ... . His boo k is interesting throughou t ... . 
—Time s Star, Cincinnati, Dec . 22nd. 
" . . . • Her e is an unusual combination—a nove l written b y a Negro , in whic h ... . the 
scene is Liberia . Th e plot centers about a child wh o is lost whil e he r parents are in Africa . 
She is brough t up as on e of the natives, and the story o f he r recover y b y he r famil y is so 
constructe d as to include an excellen t pictur e o f the native life ... . Th e real her o o f 
the tale is a Negr o army officer wh o has been loane d to Liberi a ... . h e is an officer an d 
a gentleman, ever y inch, unde r the most trying circumstances. Interest is well sustained to the 
climax . . . ."— Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post, Dec . 1st. 
A generous commissio n will be paid t o thos e wh o sell this book . Fo r full 
particular s write t o the Author . 
HENR Y F. DOWNIN G 
253 West 137th Street New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
Have You Read 
"Morning Meditations 
and Other Selections" 
By 
Bishop R; A. Carter, A.M., D.D.? 
If you have not, send for a copy today. It is 
a book for thoughtful pastors. It is a storehouse of good things for aspiring young men 
and women. The book contains the choicest 
of the Bishops' sermons and addresses delivered to colleges, secret societies, General Conferences, etc. The sermons to the Odd Fellows and Knights of Pythias on their thanksgiving occasions have been pronounced by 
competent critics masterly expositions of the 
principles of these orders. You will enjoy 
reading "Dreams and Dreamers," "The Universal Law for Stars and Souls," "The Three 
Downward Steps in The Ministry." More 
than 200 pages beautifully bound in cloth. Now 
in its second edition. Price $1.25 a copy. 
Agents wanted. Liberal terms to the right 
persons. Order from 
Bishop R. A. Carter 
398 Aubur n Avenue , ATLANTA , GA . 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Bound in Full 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
1439 Swan n St. Washington , D . C . 
Agents Wanted to sell great epic poem to 
Hon. Frederick Douglass 
Historical and Epigramatic. Absorbing in interest; 
Inspiring! in effect; Epic in subject and replete with 
incident. 
One Hundred and Eight Verses—Illustrated. 
De Lux e Edition §1,00 . Writ e for terms. 
Enclose a 3c stamp. 
By Dr. M. A. Majors, 4714 State St., Chicago, Ill. 
THE NEGRO MIGRANT 
A Menace or A Social and Industrial Asset? 
[f you found that you had been the 
unaware host of about 18,550 Negro 
migrants, what would you think, what 
would you do, what conditions would 
you expect to find? 
Mr . Epstein's 76 page study with its 14 illustrations and 29 statistical tables and charts shows the 
Pittsburgh situation. 
Some Phases of the Study 
How and why did they journey from 
the South? 
The housing situation. 
Comparison of wage s and hours of 
labor. 
Attitude of employers and labor 
unions. 
Juvenile and adult delinquency. 
The health problem. 
Constructive suggestions. 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURG H 
by Abraham Epstein 50c postpaid 
Orde r fro m ABRAHA M EPSTEI N 
Irene Kaufmann Settlement, 1835 Center Avenue, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., or from The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., N. Y. 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph s Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :: ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A . M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• Ne w York, N. Y . 
$25.0 0 PER WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
AGENTS WANTED: $18 to $45 per week 
Now being made selling Prof. Kelly Miller's new book PROGRES S O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE. 50 0 large pages, only $1.95 . Teachers, students, ministers, widows, 
anyone with a little spare time can make $ 1 per hour. Everybody buys, it's easy 
to sell. Writ e for outfit and terms at once. This is an extraordinary offer. Ac t 
today. AUSTI N JENKINS CO. , No . 52 3 Ninth St., Washington, D . C . 
Mention TH E CRISI S 204 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th Street, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Being able to take a message rapidly in shorthand and transcribing it quickly on a typewriter will fit you to be of more service to Uncle Sam than the trench-men. Men and women 
can help win the Wa r by just knowing how to operate a typewriter. 
1 0 00 0 STENOGRAPHER S AN D TYPEWRITE R OPERATOR S AR E WANTE D A T 
WASHINGTON , D . C , A T A SALAR Y O F FRO M $1,00 0 T O $1,20 0 PE R YEA R 
Mr . Richard Hill, Jr., one of our students, was appointed last Septembe r at $1200 to 
start. Miss Helen L. Milton has been certified as Stenographer Typist-Clerk at $1000 and 
Mr . Huber t H. Hocutt has been certified as Typist-Clerk at $1000—othe r students are on the 
eligible list. Take our 90-day Wa r Emergency Course—reduced to $11.50; it will fit you to 
pass the Civil Service Examination as Typist-Clerk. 9 lessons in Fingering; 9 lessons in 
Letter-writing; 9 lessons in Tabulating and 9 lessons in Legal Work . Ap t students operate 
the typewriter blindfolded at the end of the course. Ne w classes in Stenography, Type ­
writing, Business Forms, Bookkeeping, and a Special Course in Junior Bookkeeping for school 
children in the 6th, 7th or 8th Grade. W e do not teach by mail. 
W e have given 1300 colored people, from the South and other places, work as domestics, 
free of charge. If you desire work in Philadelphia in a clerical or domestic capacity, write 
us, enclosing references and stamp for reply and our service will be rendered you gratuitously. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
Al l Races 
Prepare in the best school of its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 8 9 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W . Mottley, President 
Hale Infirmary and Nurse 
Training School 
328 Lake Street, Montgomery, Alabama . 
Hale Infirmary School of Nursing offers to intelligent young women between the age of eighteen 
and thirty-five a three years' course in the profession of nursing. Students of this school are eligible 
to Alabama examinations for the degree of R. N. 
For further information apply to the superintendent. 
Mme. BRIDGES' SCHOOL 
French Dressmaking , Ladies' Tailoring an d 
Millinery. Special Course s in Designing , 
Copying, Draping, Making , Trimming , Fin ­
ishing, Cuttin g an d Fitting. 
A PRIVAT E BOARDIN G SCHOO L FO R SPECIA L TRAINING . Individual Instruction. 
Write for Catalog. 4221 OAKENWAL D AVENUE , CHICAGO , ILLINOI S 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pre*, 
N. E. COR. 8TH & PLUM 
CINCINNATI. OHIO 
WE ARE NOW GIVING THE COURSE BY CORRESPONDENCE 
Special price for sixty days only $15.00, payable $10.00 with 
application and $5.00 when diploma is granted. Send $1.00 
for thirty days' trial treatment. 
W e teach only one person in a 
town, she teaches the rest. Ou r 
graduated agents are making 
money. 
Dermo College Co. 
Makes you an expert in hair and beauty culture 
Chicago 
DERMO COLLEGE CO. 
19 East 43d St. Chicago, Ill. 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 20 5 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr. BELL. 4709 State St.. Chicago. Ill. 
c 
I 
G 
A 
R 
s 
MITCHELSON'S 
SPECIALS 10CCIGAR S 
THE SMOKE DeLUXE 
A full Perfecto size of imported 
Havana Tobacco aged and cured 
to mildness and fragrance in the 
climate where grown, Delightful 
smoothness, taste, and pleasing 
aroma. A BO X OF THE M 
MAKE S TH E SMOKER' S GIFT 
SUPREME. Smoke one as an 
after dinner solace for a day of 
strain, for your personal ease, or 
hand them out for the comfort 
of your guest. Yo u have never 
smoked a Cigar you liked better. 
Sold in boxes of 50, postpaid to 
any address for $4.50. 
MITCHELSON' S 6c Havana Specials, box of 50, $2.85, postpaid. 
MITCHELSON' S 5c Havana Smoksrs, box of 50 , $2.35, postpaid. 
MITCHELSON'S Cigars, Cigarettes 
and Tobaccos 
Wholesals, Retail 432 Lenox Ave., New York City 
AGENTS $60 WEEKLY 
Robinson Folding Bath Tub. Big-seller. Costs 
little, no plumbing, little water. Weight 
15 pounds, folds into •mall roll. Full length baths, 
far better than tin tubs. Guaranteed 10 years. $10 
— a day easily made. Writs for free tub offer. ROBINSON CABINET MFG, CO 4817 Factories Bldg. Toledo, Ohio 
ANYON E KNOWIN G the whereabouts of 
Barnetta Louisa Hart, formerly of Cincinnati, 
Ohio, notify her brother, John Hart, Company D, 
25th Infantry, U. S. Army . 
TEACHFRS A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1408 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
100 CALLING CARDS 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The Hous e of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
BUST S O F 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. $1.50 each. The 4 busts 
for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
TH E ISAA C HATHAWA Y AR T CO . 
718 S. HICKORY ST., PINE BLUFF, ARK. 
Th e NE W YOR K AG E (weekly) $2.00 per year 
Th e CRISI S - - - (monthly) $1.00 per year 
Special combination offer in force until March 2, 1918 
Both one year to any address within the United States—$2.50 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M Introducin g 
LLYRA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
A Guaranteed Food Preparation for 
the Hair. Price 50 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System taught by Mail or at College 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gamble 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS . MO . 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Bo you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency ? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
Do you believe in progress and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely I * 
Then you will be interested hi, and want to w 
own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild, f 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * 
cure a beautiful lot for only $24.50 each; f 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your * 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing J 
clear title. J 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg., 
8 So. Dearborn St., 
Chicago, Il. 
Idlewild Resort comp
Mention The CRISI S 206 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Made to 
Your 
Order 
Special Offer 
to prove our fine quality: _ 
$1.95 These fine Pants for Dress or 
Business, cboice of MANY HAND' 
SOME styles, GUARANTEED FOR 18 
^^^^ ^ months solid wear and satisfaction or MONE Y BACK, absolute $5.00 VALUE—while they 
last, one pair to a customer, -
express prepaid $1.95 PANTS 
No Extra Charges 
No charge for Big Extreme Peg Tops or
 1 
Cuff Bottoms, nothing extra for fancy Belt 
Loops or Pocket Flaps, no charge for Open 
Welt Seams or Large Sizes—all novelty features 
FREE. This G0L D finished 
PIN FREE
 To you 
Classy, lapel pin with 
your first order, only a 
/few hundred on hand, get yours quick, 
CASH PROFITS to you for taking measures of relatives and 
neighbors. Young George Gekovich made 
$66.1 6 in one day. Write for free samples today. Send no money. 
Chicag o Tailors Associatio n 
Dept. F1 2 • 515 South FRANKLIN Street, CHICAGO Telephone Colorado 731 1 
MRS . G. WEATHERTO N 
National Employment Agency 
All Kinds of Domestic Help Furnished 
Reliable Colored Help a Specialty 
811 S, Fair Oaks Avenue, Pasadena, Cal. 
HOTEL WASHINGTO N 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 South Park Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 
SUNSHIN E COTTAG E 
A Rest Home for Women 
Convalescents and Invalids Cared For 
(Mrs) Corinna M. Phillips, R. N. 
171 King Street Springfield, Mass. 
We GIVE it to YOU 
Take thisfin e Made-toMeasure Suit and don't 
pay us one cent for it, 
W E WANT YOU TO GET ONE OF OUR HIGHCLASS SUITS, ABSOLUTELY Free, SO YOU,- -
CAN SHOW IT TO YOUR FRIENDS. IT WILL : 
BE A BIG ADVERTISEMENT FOR US. _ 
IF YOU HAVE A LITTLE SPARE TIME, 
YOU CAN EASILY MAKE FROM 
$35 to $50 extra every week 
and besides THAT be the BEST 
DRESSED MAN IN YOUR TOWN. IT'S AN 
OPPORTUNITY YOU CANNOT AFFORD TO 
OVERLOOK. DON'T DELAY A MINUTE. 
Write for this Big Offer at Once 
DROP US A LINE OR SEND US YOUR NAME 
ON A POSTAL CARD AND WE WILL SEND 
YOU ABSOLUTELY Free, OUR WONDERFUL 
STYLE BOOK, CONTAINING DOZENS OF SAMPLES AND FASHION PLATES TO CHOOSE FROM. Write Now. EVERYTHING 6ENT Free 
AND postage prepaid. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 981, CHICAGO 
Quality 
and Fit 
Guaranteed 
Telephones: Central 104-W Main 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building, Rooms 603 and 604 
Office 'Phone. 3297 Mulberry .,_„, . „ . 
Residence Phone, 5277-M Market NEWARK, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
81 8 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Office,: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
14 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W . P. McMechen 
HAWKINS & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Patents secured on easy terms 
Writ e for particulars 
JOS. H. STEWART, Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave. , N.W. , Washington, D, C. 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIAN S 
531 Lenox Ave., New York 
Telephone Greeley 4214 Established 1911 
BRANIC' S 
Ne w Yor k an d Brookly n Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WES T 35th STREET 
ANDREW J. BRANIC New York City 
FREE sui t 
BOOK AND 
SAMPL E OUTFI T 
Your choice of 1920 
suits. W e deliver free, let you try your 
suit and compare with others before 
you buy. Our prices lowest and no 
extra charge of any kind; our styles and 
quality unexcelled. Wear a Paragon 
suit and know you have the best. 
$5 to $10 a Day 
W e pay you big; money for showing 
your friends your suit, advertising 
us and taking orders. Our agents 
are sure of success, we show you 
how, furnish complete equipment, give 
you everything needed free. No money 
required. "Simply send us your name and 
address." Look into this, costs you nothing. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. Dept. 151 Chicago 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS Book mart 
Yo u can order through the CRISI S any boo k printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AMERICAN CAVALRYMAN. (Henry F. Downing) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T . WASHINGTON. (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHITE MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson) . 1.25 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) . . 1.00 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T . G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T . WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, THE CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York Advertising 
I'nilll liNllllllllil'lllHllftllMIOIIIIIIIUIIIII'llllllllllllllMtllllllllllllllNMIIIIIIIlllllllllllllMIIM'lllltililll 
There are twelve million Negroes in the United States. 
They spend a thousand million dollars every year. 
THE CRISIS reaches more Negroes with intelligence 
and money than any periodical in the world. 
If you have anything to sell which these people want 
advertise it in THE CRISIS. 
Remember that if our rates seem high it is because our 
service is exceptional. If you want testimonials 
to this, Write us. 
Circulation — 68,000 
Beauty for Women 
CLEAR, SMOOTH SKIN 
-PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
Famous Deluxe Beauty Book, illustrated 
and complete. Sent to you postpaid free 
of charge. Tells all about the Kashmir 
Wa y and describes the wonderful methods 
which hundreds of women are using to get 
A Kashmir Girl pretty skin and hair. You can do the same. 
5 or 10 minutes a day caring for your skin and hair the Kashmir 
Wa y will bring wonderful results. You Won't Know Yourself in a 
few days. 
WRIT E TODA Y DON' T SEN D AN Y MONE Y 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO. , Dept. K 
4709 Stat e Stree t Chicago , Ill. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 