THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Three FEBRUARY , 1912 Numbe r Fou r 
Captain CHARLES YOUNG . United States Army 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y The Nationa l Religious Training 
Schoo l and Chautauqu a 
extends a cordial greeting to the ministers of all denominations 
to be the guests of the School for one week, beginning July 
6, 1912, for the purpose of discussing the following and 
kindred questions : 
Wha t is the moral condition of the people in your community? 
Is crime on the increase? If not, what was the cause of its 
reduction ? 
Wha t is the sanitary condition? Wha t effort, if any, has 
been made to improve the sanitary condition? 
Is the death rate increasing? 
T o what extent do you co-operate with the Civic Improvement 
Leagues? 
Ha s settlement work been conducted to any extent in your 
community, and with what results? 
Wha t has been the effect of Temperance Organizations, and 
have you co-operated with them? 
T o what extent has the work of the Y . M . C. A . and 
Y . W . C. A . been effective in your community? D o 
you approve them? 
Wha t is the general fitness of the city and country school 
teacher? 
Wha t has been the attitude of the day-school teacher toward 
the Church and Sunday School? 
Wha t is the real religious condition of your people? Revivals, 
how conducted? 
Al l ministers who intend attending this Conference should 
make it known at an early date, addressing the President, so 
that reservation can be made for them. 
Th e Summer School and Chautauqua of the National 
Religious Training School will open July 3, 1912, and 
continue for six weeks. The most complete and most up-todate Summer School for the Colored Race in the United 
States. For particulars and terms address 
President JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
DURHAM , N . C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN , Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
J . MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W. S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FOR FEBRUARY , 1912 
PORTRAI T O F CAPTAI N CHARLE S YOUN G Coyer 
PAG E 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 139 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 146 
OPINIO N 147 
EDITORIA L 152 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 157 
DYNAMIT E I N KANSA S CIT Y 160 
DISFRANCHISIN G VOTER S IN MARYLAN D 163 
WOMEN' S CLUB S 165 
HISTORI C DAY S IN FEBRUARY . By L . M . Hershaw 166 
TH E BURDE N 167 
THE Y SAY: 
"One of the few magazines I read through." 
—K, E. Evans, Philadelphia. 
"Th e high level which you have obtained in 
TH E CRISIS."— E . R. A. Seligman, Columbia 
University. 
"Largely reprint, punk magazine."—Ralph Tyler 
in the Bee, Washington, D, C. 
"Th e greatest magazine ever published for the 
uplift of the Negro people."—Mattie E. Banks, 
Omaha, Neb. 
"Fo r some reason or other I have not yet received my CRISI S for December. Yo u people have 
made the thing so confoundedly indispensable that 
a fellow doesn't feel as though he can be without 
it very long after it is out."—George W. Crawford, 
New Haven, Conn. 
" A white clergyman told me some time ago 
that if it were not for the fact that your paper 
deals with the hated Negro problem, it would 
be ranked among the best magazines in the 
country."—D. R. Clarke, Philadelphia. 
"The Christmas CRISI S sold on sight. It was 
very, very good. I made a mistake in not ordering 
more of them."—A. M. Van Meter, Indianapolis, 
Ind. 
"I want to express my appreciation of the 
splendid work TH E CRISI S is doing. Th e editorials 
are such powerful records of what the whole movement means that they are worth the price (and 
far more) of the magazine. No thinking man 
could fail to be impressed by the force of the 
arguments presented by facts, editorials and contributions. TH E CRISI S is the new 'Liberator' and 
even more telling in its power."— Theodore B. 
Lathrop, Atlanta, Ga. 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter in the post office at New Yor k City. 136 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
Unite d States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
part by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH . President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE . OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
mal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard, ' Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T . WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA . 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments : College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r 
School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA. 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required i n the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training , giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepar e a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RICE HOVEY , President 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOL S 
The Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Petersburgh, Va. , Warden , the Reverend C. B . Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Augustine's School, Raleigh, N . C , for 
normal and collegiate training , the Reverend A . 
B. Hunter , Principal; the St. Pau l Norma l and 
Industrial School, Lawrenceville , Va. , the Reverend James S. Russell, Principal; St. Athanasius' School, Brunswick. Ga. . Mr . A . N . Perry , 
Principal; St. Mark's School, Birmingham , Ala. , 
the Reverend C. W . Brooks, Principal * the 
Vicksbur g Industrial School, Vicksburg , Miss. , 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall , Principal . Fo r 
information apply to the principa l at any school 
or to the Reverend Samue l H. Bishop, Genera l 
Agent, 416 Lafayett e Street, New Yor k City . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 137 
TH E LIF E AN D WORK S O F 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 
_ Containing his complete poetical works, his best short 
stories, numerous anecdotes and a complete biography of 
the famous poet. 
EXTRAC T FRO M INTRODUCTION . 
I think I should scarcely trouble the reader with a special appeal 
in behalf of this book if it had not specially appealed to me for 
reasons apart from the author's race, origin and condition. The 
' world is too old now and I find myself too much of its mood to care 
for the work of a poet because he is black; because his father and 
mother were slaves; because he was, before and after he began to 
write poems, an elevator boy. These facts would certainly attract 
me to him as a man if I knew hi m to have a literary ambition, but 
when it came to his literary art, I must judge it irrespective of these 
facts, and enjoy or endure it for what it was in itself. 
—Willia m Dean Howells. 
Profusely illustrated with over half a hundred full-page 
photo and half-tone engravings. 
Cloth $2 Half Morocco $2.75 Full Morocco $3.75 
SALE S AGEN T
 ; 
J . G . GUILE S 
214A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Bold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
PUBLICATION S 
A . M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It I» Not and Wha t It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
I n pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . G . 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B. 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
75 cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y R. R . Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Research Fellow in Sociology in the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania. Price , Paper , $2.00; 
Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO H CONCER N 
631 Pin e Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention The Crisis. 
"A noteworthy book of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
By W. E . BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
Eighth Edition 
"It is one of the noteworthy 
books, not merely of a year, but of 
the epoch. Its every page is filled 
with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality."—Boston Transcript. 
" A stripping bare of the moral 
and mental anatomy of the African 
in America so as to reveal the naked 
soul in its primitive simplicity, 
seared and scarred by ages of suffering."—New York Age. 
With Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
At book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAGO 138 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A Social Study of the Negro in New York 
HAL F A MA N 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr . Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
€J This book is the result of years of careful study and personal acquaintance with actual conditions in New York. 
tj Its truths being applicable to all communities where the two races live 
together, it must be considered one of the best social studies of recent years. 
Price, $1,00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO„ Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Book Department of Th e CRISIS, 20 
Vesey St., New York. 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
The UNDERWOO D is designed or 
correct mechanical principles, is made ol 
the best material and is unequalled in 
speed, accuracy, ease of operation and 
durability. UNDERWOO D sales 
exceed those of any other machine. 
"TH E MACHIN E YO U WIL L 
EVENTUALL Y BUY " 
Underwood Typewriter Co., 
INCORPORATE D 
Underwood Building New York 
Mention 
Publications of the N . A . A . C . P. 
Th e N . A . A . C. P. has for sale the following 
pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Hayne s Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horac e Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. Th e Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by 
America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of Hul l 
House. 
5. Th e Negro as a Soldier. B y BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
FIV E CENT S EACH . THRE E DOLLAR S A HUNDRE D 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Rea d the chapter on "Th e Bug ­
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already sold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . T . 
Lest you forget, we remind 
you that the Marc h CRISIS 
will be brimful of good 
things for every member 
of the family. 
The CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Volume Three FEBRUARY , 1912 Number Four 
ALON G 
COLO R LIN E 
ECONOMICS . 
Continue d testimon y accumulates 
showin g notable economi c advance 
amon g colored people. A t the recent 
meeting of the America n Economi c As ­
sociation one speaker said: "Th e figures 
at present obtainable indicate that between 1890 and 1910 the Negr o farm 
owners increased nearly 90 per cent, 
and that the value of their holdings in 
that same period has considerably more 
than doubled. If we leave out of account 
all Negroe s in the South, except those 
wh o own land, we find that these alone 
have become an economi c force that 
must be reckoned with . In South Caro ­
lina , for instance, not only are most of 
the farms run by Negroe s but 25 per 
cent, of the actual owners are black. 
q Th e filing of the wil l of the late 
George W . Smith , colored, of Champaign 
County , Illinois, shows an estate, the estimated value of whic h is $116,000, includin g 400 acres of good land. 
<J Mr . M . N . Wor k reports that colored 
people are operating 110,373 farms in 
Alabama , containing one-third of all the 
improve d land i n the State. Th e total 
value of the products raised by Negroe s 
on farms in the State in 1910 amounts to 
$40,000,000. 
f Th e Mil l Cit y Cotto n Mills near Dallas, Tex., have started work . The y 
represent an investment of something 
over $100,000. 
*J Amon g the other manufacturing enterprises whic h colored people more or 
less control, there are reported a silk 
factory in Nort h Carolina , an oil mil l 
and hosiery mil l in Mississippi, and a 
hosiery mil l in Nort h Carolina . 
<I A farmers' conference is being held 
at Hampto n Institute, Hampton , Va . 
<J Th e Metropolita n Mercantil e and 
Realt y Compan y of Ne w Yor k Cit y is 
said to be completely bankrupt and more 
than 5,000 colored people wil l lose about 
half a millio n dollars. 
*5 Th e State Bureau of Industrial Statistics of Pennsylvani a reports that the 
Negroes own between $15,000,000 and 
$20,000,000 wort h of real estate in Penn ­
sylvania. 
<J A write r in the Jolie t (Ind.) News, 
wh o has just been in Texas, says, wit h 
regard to Boley , Okla. , whic h is 
seventy miles east of Guthrie : "Th e town 
is only eight years old, has over 3,000 
population, and there is not a white person livin g in the town. The y have four 
miles of cement sidewalk, waterworks, 
an electric-light plant, a bank and everything that a modern little city has. Ther e 
is also a large college high school. On e 
business block, now being erected by the 
Colore d Masons, the second and third 
stories being used for lodge purposes, 
wil l cost over $30,000. I noticed fine new 
brick stores now under construction. " 
<J In Oklahoma it is reported that three 
colored women are very wealthy through 
the' ownership of land in the oil district. 
Miss Isabella Lewis owns eighty acres, 
whic h promises an income of nearly 
$400,000 a year. Miss Josephine Morris 
owns one hundred and fifty acres and has 
accumulated several millio n dollars. Mrs. 
Glen n and her daughters have an income 
of over $100,000. 
q Wellingto n Stewart, wh o recently died 
in Missouri , had accumulated a $30,000 
estate. 140 THE CRISIS 
Th e special committee on industria l 
peace in Lo s Angele s has received a 
communicatio n from colored people 
whic h says: "Sinc e the prime object of 
you r movement is the adjustment of the 
difficulties between 'organized labor' and 
capital, according to the press reports, 
permit me, in behalf of the 15,000 or 
20,000 Negroe s of. this city, wh o stand 
outside the ranks of 'organized' labor, 
to ask that they be not overlooked, both 
in representation and in the adjustment 
of these serious difficulties. 
"Althoug h unorganized and unrepresented in 'organized labor,' yet permit 
me to say that there are many just 
grievances and complaints whic h the 
colored people bear wit h patience and 
hopefulness that could be allayed and 
settled amicably by a proper understandin g between the capitalist and the colored 
people. Man y wrongs are being perpetrated against the colored people of 
Lo s Angele s as a race, whic h woul d 
cause darkest Southland to blush with . 
shame." 
EDUCATION . 
James Tat e Cater, a graduate of At ­
lanta University , '09, and at present a 
senior at Harvar d College, is assistant 
in mathematics at this the oldest university in America . 
<J Lea h Johnson, daughter of Joseph K . 
Johnso n of Norfolk , Mass., led her class 
at graduation last June at the Norfol k 
Hig h School, and took a $200 prize. She 
is now at Simmon's College . He r sister 
has gone to wor k on an abandoned farm 
and took first prize for greening apples 
at the Norfol k Count y Fair recently. 
*J Th e attendance at the public schools 
of. the Distric t of Columbi a has decreased in the elementary grades and 
increased in the high schools. Th e decrease in lowe r grades is explained as 
the result of the lack of truant officers. 
•I A new manual training school for 
colored pupils is to be built in Washing ­
ton. 
<I A n effort is being made in Oklahoma 
to abolish the colored State College at 
Langston . 
<I Th e colored people of Louisian a are 
asking an appropriation for a norma l 
school in Louisiana . 
IJ Th e sixth annual conference of teachers in secondary colored schools of Vir ­
ginia met at Virgini a Unio n University . 
•J Man y colored teachers' associations 
have been meeting in various Southern 
and border States. 
<J Th e trustees of the Jeanes fund have 
expended $40,000 during the last year, 
and together wit h the Slater fund are 
workin g in 2,500 communities. 
<j Th e Colore d State Teachers' Asso ­
ciation of Columbia , S. C , adopted resolutions whic h said: "W e woul d therefore 
respectfully implor e the school authorities to take deeper interest in and mor e 
careful insight into the operation of the 
Negr o schools, especially i n the rura l 
section. 
"W e note, wit h regret, through a careful reading of the advance sheets of 
the report of superintendent of education, that the Negr o schools of the State 
do not receive the care and attention 
to whic h they are entitled by the constitution and laws of the commonwealth . 
"Fo r instance, the terms are too short, 
the salaries of the teachers insufficient, 
the equipments inadequate, supervision 
woefully lacking. 
"Tha t we have carefully considered 
the item, in the State superintendent's 
report, relative to the small per capita 
paid durin g the past yea r for the education of the colored children, and feel 
that the amount is inadequate to train 
such citizens as the State of Carolin a 
requires, the constitution providin g that 
each child in the commonwealt h shall 
receive at least $3 for each school year. 
Th e report shows that only $1.71 was 
expended on each colored chil d for the 
past school year. " 
<I Luthe r Long , a little colored boy, 
made the best record last year of the 
400 boys at the State Industria l School, 
Golden, Col . 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e Frederic k Douglass Hospita l has 
succeeded in raising $294 mor e than the 
$15,000 whic h it asked for. Th e Publi c 
Ledge r of Philadelphi a has helped ma ­
terially in raising the fund, 
q It _ is announced that the $100,000 
buildin g of the colored Y . M . C. A. , in 
the Distric t of Columbia , wil l be ready 
this month. 
Th e buildin g has four stories and a 
basement, and contains forty-four dormitories, a boys' department, schoolrooms, 
Bible-class apartments, a large lobby, 
reading room, lunch room, gymnasium, swimmin g pool, locke r rooms, 
shower baths, bowlin g alleys, barber 
shop and recreation rooms. Th e third 
and fourth floors, containing the dormitories, are already completed and they 
are well appointed. Whe n finished, the 
buildin g wil l be the finest of its kin d for 
colored people. O f the $100,000, whic h 
it cost, the colored people of 
Washingto n have paid more than $25,000; 
Joh n D . Rockefelle r gave $25,000; 
Julius Rosenwal d gave $25,000; the Cen ­
tral Associatio n has raised about $11,000 
to help secure the Rosenwal d gift, and 
the remainin g $4,000 is being raised. ALONG THE 
Th e colored Y . M . C. A . of Columbus. 
0. , has collected $4,363 toward its new 
building . 
q Th e colored colleges of Littl e Rock, 
Ark. , are beginning a co-operative socialservice movement. 
q Governo r Di x of Ne w Yor k is again 
being asked to muster in a colored regiment, whic h has already been formed. 
q Willia m F . Abbott has been made jailkeeper at the Raymon d Street Jail, 
Brooklyn , at a salary of $1,200 a year. 
q Th e new St. John's Congregationa l 
Churc h at Springfield, Mass., has clubrooms for girls and a memoria l window 
in memor y of Joh n Brown . 
q A hospital know n as Boyd's Infirmary, 
wit h twenty rooms, two operating rooms 
and two large surgical wards, has been 
opened in Nashville , Tenn . 
q A delegation of colored Philadelphians 
have called on the new reform mayor 
to offer their aid and ask his assistance. 
The y offer aid in riddin g the city of the 
low Negr o dives whic h politicians have 
planted i n colored districts to seduce 
the Negr o voters. The y ask aid "to make 
it possible for colored people to obtain 
employment along lines other than those 
of beggarly paid menials, to whic h they 
are now almost wholl y restricted 
throughout the North. " 
Th e petition further set forth that 
growin g discrimination against Negroe s 
is a most portentous phase of the entire 
race situation in this country. In effect, 
the petition asked for summary justice 
being enforced for offenses committed by 
"a vicious element" in the Negr o race, 
but fair dealing toward the better and 
law-abiding Negr o citizens. 
q Th e colored people of Atlanti c Cit y 
are elated because the new mayor, Harr y 
Bacharach, has appointed a colored lawyer, I. H . Nutter, as a membe r of his 
official cabinet. 
q Th e Alabama Reformator y for Negr o 
Boys, founded and for years supported 
by the colored wome n of the State, has 
been formall y turned over to the State 
authorities. 
MEETINGS . 
Ther e has been unusually widespread 
celebration of Emancipatio n Day , January 1, north, south and west. 
q A meeting of the Ne w Yor k Peace 
Society was held at the Hote l Asto r to 
hear reports from the First Universa l 
Races Congress. 
q Governo r Stubbs of Kansa s made the 
welcomin g speech to the Interstate Literary Association , whic h met at Wichita . 
COLOR LINE 141 
q Th e Tri-Stat e Medica l Associatio n of 
Colore d Physicians meets at Jacksonvill e 
this month. 
q Th e Negr o problem was discussed 
during convocation week at Washingto n 
by Prof. Albert E . Jenks, of the Uni ­
versity of Minnesota , before the anthropologists. "Rura l conditions in the 
South " were discussed before the Ameri ­
can Economi c Association, 
q Alle n Chape l of Kansa s Cit y has established shower baths and built a large 
swimmin g pool. It also has a handball 
court and a day nursery, 
q Th e colored people of Chicago have 
leased Moun t Glenwoo d Grove for fifty 
years. The y propose to hold an annual 
Chautauqua. 
q Colore d lawyers have formed a State 
Ba r Associatio n in Nort h Carolina , 
q Colore d farmers of the Brazos farms. 
Texas, have organized a trading association by whic h they pool their cash and 
trade wit h the lowest-bidding merchants, 
q Th e new League on Urba n Conditio n 
Amon g Negroes, recently formed in 
Ne w York , is maintaining a probation 
officer in the courts and tryin g to establish decent places of detention for. delinquent colored girls, 
q Th e annual dinner of the colored min ­
isters of Washington , D . C , has taken 
place. 
q L . A . Headen of Ne w Yor k Cit y has 
been flying at the Mineol a aviation 
grounds. H e has now started south for 
an exposition tour. 
POLITICAL . 
President Taft has again indicated his 
hostility toward Negroes by signing an 
executive order, providin g that in the 
case of all free rural delivery appointments, three eligibles shall be certified in 
each instance to the appointing office in ­
stead of one, as in the past. This appears 
to be done for the purpose of preventing 
colored men wh o pass the examinations 
from being appointed, 
q O n account of discrimination against 
colored civil servants in the general associations, the colored men are proposing 
to form the Nationa l Associatio n of 
Afro-America n Classified Federa l Em ­
ployees. 
q Milto n S. Malon e has been appointed 
postmaster at Hilltop , W . Va . H e is the 
second colored man to hold such a position in the State. 
q Th e annual message of Governor. 
Blease of South Carolin a contained the 
followin g passage: 
Negr o Lodges. 
" I recommend that yo u pass some act, 
like the Rucke r bill, introduced a few 
sessions ago, in regard to Negr o lodges. 142 THE CRISIS 
Muc h annoyance is being caused in various parts of the State by the organization of such lodges. Negroe s who 
commit crimes are given assistance in 
escaping; money is raised to pay lawyers, 
if the one charged wit h a crime is a 
member of the lodge ; therefore, such 
lodges should be disbanded. 
White Persons Teaching Negro 
Children. 
"It is recommended that yo u pass an 
act prohibitin g any white person from 
teaching in Negr o schools or teaching 
Negr o children. W e boast of the fact 
that we have no social equality in South 
Carolina , yet whit e people are teaching 
in Negr o schools, wh o are associating 
wit h the pupils and teaching them that 
they are as good as white people, and are 
instillin g into their heads ideas of social 
equality. No t lon g since a white woma n 
(and a good-lookin g one) was seen walk ­
in g on a Negr o school groun d wit h one 
arm around a Negr o boy and the other 
around a Negr o girl. Wha t do yo u expect to be the outcome of this kin d of 
conduct? Stop it, and stop it now. 
Notaries Public. 
" A proclamation was issued revokin g 
the commissio n of all notaries public. 
Yo u passed a new act and since 3,681 
have been commissioned. Whil e this has 
been no hardship to any individual, for 
any citizen ought to be willin g to pay $2 
per annum, much less $2 in whol e for a 
notary publi c commission, by doing this 
I have made the State $7,473.25; have in ­
jured no one, and got ri d of all Negr o 
officeholders in the State." 
<J Th e Ne w Orleans (La.) Item says: 
"No w comes the charge that black-andtan Republicans have been allowed to 
register in the city by the hundreds. 
Ordinaril y the Democrats seek to prevent 
Negroe s from qualifying in the registration office. Th e charge is made that 
these Negroe s were permitted to register at substations durin g the last few 
days. 
"It is further reported the Lil y Whit e 
Republica n leaders wil l get together 
withi n a few days and take some action 
relative to the primar y they have called 
for January 24. It is intimated that with 
the large number of Negr o registrations 
reported the Negroe s might be able to 
outvote the Lil y White s in the January 
24 primary. Henc e the anxiety, as one 
Republican put it Saturday night. " 
TH E CHURCH . 
Th e missionaries wh o are plannin g 
"The Worl d in Cincinnati " exposition in 
that city deemed it advisable to exclude 
colored people from takin g part. This 
is raising a good deal of discussion in 
the city. A colored committee called 
upon the sponsors of the movement and 
the chairma n said that since two-thirds 
of the missionar y wor k of the worl d was 
carried on amon g colored people, he did 
not see wh y the colored churchmen 
should be excluded from this project. H e 
asked: "Is not the Negr o race in the 
world? " 
tj Th e Reveren d J. C. Roberts, a colored 
clergyman , has been made Vice-Modera ­
tor of the Binghamton , N . Y . and Vicinit y 
Ministeria l Association . 
q A $20,000 colored Catholi c church is 
about to be erected i n Milwaukee . 
^ A colored Y . M . C. A . institute has 
been held at Selma , Ala . Fift y delegates 
were present. 
ART . 
Th e Nationa l Associatio n of Musica l and 
Ar t Club s had its annual meeting in Ne w 
Yor k City . Twent y clubs in different 
sections of the country were presented 
for membership. Some of the most 
prominent musicians and art patrons of 
the race are members of the executive 
board, of whic h Mrs. Harrie t Gibbs 
Marshal l is president. 
<J Mr . R. Augustu s Lawson , pianist, was 
the chosen soloist at the concert given 
January 2 by the Hartfor d Philharmoni c 
Orchestr a in Hartford , Conn . His piece 
was Saint-Saens' " G Mino r Concerto, " 
and, accordin g to the reviewers, the 
pianist made an excellent impression. "It 
was a brilliant production. Th e orchestra 
seemed much inspired and of great sympathy. Th e soloist was full of broad 
expression, full of powe r and grasp; grace 
E . AUGUSTU S LAWSO N ALONG THE COLOR LINE 143 
and beauty of arrangement generally distinguish Saint-Saens' compositions and a 
certain fine intellectuality whic h gives 
them flavor. Mr . Lawso n was very successful in makin g those features apparent 
and yet he infused a certain sweep and 
force that lifted the composition into unusual dignity and strength. " Mr . Law -
son spent last summe r abroad, where he 
had the opportunity of knowin g Ossip 
Gabrilowitsch , the Russian pianist, wh o 
has spoken of Mr . Lawso n as a highl y 
gifted pianist, and the great master, 
Leschetizk y of Vienna , wh o mentions the 
beautiful wor k of the artist. 
<I Irene L . McCoy , i n the Fellowshi p 
Herald , mentions the followin g little -
know n Negr o writers: Mohamme d Kot i 
of the 15th Century ; Ahme n Bab a of the 
16th Centur y and Abderrahma n es Sadi 
of the 17th Century. 
<J "Th e America n Negroe s possess what 
has been called the 'harmoni c ear,' " 
write s Natali e Curtis in .the Craftsman. 
"Thoug h utterly without training, the 
Negroe s improvis e alto, tenor and bass 
parts to their songs wit h entire ease, and 
a whol e Negr o chorus wil l spontaneously 
break into harmony of real interest to 
the musician as well as of beauty. 
"I n the tobacco factories of the South 
and in the fields I have heard ignorant 
Negroe s wh o seemed nearly related to 
their primitive Africa n progenitors sing 
four-part harmony of a richness and 
charm truly amazing. " 
«J O n Decembe r 20 and 21, 1911, the 
"Messiah " was presented by the Uni ­
versity Chora l Society of Howar d Uni ­
versity, Washington , D . C. Th e soloists 
'wer e Mrs. Marth a B. Anderson , soprano, 
of Chicago, Ill.; Miss Lul u V . Childers, 
contralto, of Washington , D . C. ; Rolan d 
W. Hayes, tenor, of Boston , Mass., and 
C. C. Clarke , baritone, of Ne w York , 
N . Y . Th e accompanist was Miss Maud e 
E . Young . 
<J Th e Musi c Study Club , an association 
of amateur musicians of Springfield, 
O., has just completed a year's study 
of "Earl y Musi c of Al l Nations. " Th e 
program, admirably planned, included 
"Musi c of the America n Indians " and 
"Negr o Musi c and Sources. " 
f} "Talk s of Indian Life, " by Edwar d S. 
Curtis, author of "Th e Nort h America n 
Indian, " have been made doubly valuable 
by the introduction of Indian music, by 
Henr y F . Gilbert, wh o has taken Indian 
themes and worke d them out in musica l 
form. Mr . Gilbert has succeeded in makin g a permanent record of the Indian 
songs and melodies. 
<I "Th e Garden of Allah, " dramatized by 
Mar y Anderso n and Robert Hichens, is 
now being presented in Ne w Yor k City . 
Th e scene is the Sahara, Arabia n wome n 
take part as dancers, and Laibi , a colored 
flute player, has been brought to the 
Unite d States from Biskr a to play in the 
production. 
SCIENCE . 
Prof. Berr y of London , England , in a 
recent lecture said that from what we 
kno w of man's mental powers, and of 
what could be done wit h physica l culture, it could be affirmed that man was 
not deteriorating. Whethe r the future 
race was to be the white man was another, and altogether graver, question. 
Statistics proved indisputably that the 
white man in England , France , Italy, 
Australia , and also, but to a much less 
extent, in Germany, was slowl y but 
surely committin g racial suicide. The n 
would come the day of the yellow man, 
and the history of the invasion of 
Europ e by Neolithi c man woul d be repeated. No t perhaps in our day, not 
perhaps even in the day of our grandchildren, but come it would, if indeed the 
Caucasian inhabitants of Europe , America, Australi a and elsewhere did not learn 
the lessons which anthropology had to 
teach them. 
<I Sir Harr y Johnston in an article in the 
Contemporar y Review says: "W e should 
bear in min d that nowhere in the worl d 
exists a pure white race, in whose ancient 
ancestry there has been no mixtur e whatever wit h the Mongol , the Negro , or the 
Dravidian , and that, perhaps, a white 
race, whic h receives no ril l of blood from 
the other human types from time to 
time may die of physica l degeneration. 
Fo r myself, I seem to see the prospect 
of great racial developments in Asi a by 
mixtur e of blood. " 
«I Scott Elliot t in the "Stor y of Atlan ­
tis " says: "Th e people of Atlantis were 
a giant race, many of them towering up 
ten and twelve feet in height. The y were 
a dark-skinned people, ranging in complexion from that of the Chinese to that 
of the Negro . The y were a progressive 
warlike people, and the above authors 
say their descendants are spread all over 
the earth, from Chin a to Egyp t and 
Mexico , Alask a and Siberia. " 
CRIME . 
Th e Ne w Yor k Heral d reports thirtyfive lynchings for 1911; a Washingto n 
dispatch reports sixty for the same year 
and another paper reports seventy-one. 
A s a matter of fact there were without 
reasonable doubt over one hundred lynch ­
ings in the Unite d States last year, not 
counting lynchings like the burning of 
the family in Tennessee. Agai n this year, 
as in other years, very few of those 
lynched were charged wit h attacks on 
women ; eighteen out of the seventy-one 
is the most reliable report this year. 144 THE CRISIS 
<J Th e nation celebrated Christma s in 
Christian style by a lynchin g in Baltimore arising out of a quarrel and murde r 
in a saloon. 
<J Thre e white men have been arrested 
for the burnin g of Benjamin Pettigrew 
and his two children in Tennessee. Tw o 
of them have signed a confession whic h 
begins as follows: "T o the, Publick , and, 
the, honer, cort, of, decaturville, Tenn ; 
we was assoated wit h Mr . J. M . Hil l he 
read the Bible , to us, and, talked to us. 
about our soles, and, all so Rea d T o Us, 
in St. Mathews the 10th Chapter, and, 
the, 26 Verce , that thire was nothin g 
covered but, what would , be uncovered 
and nothing hid what would , be knowe n 
and, he talked to us about telling, the 
truth at the blessed Jesues,-said that to 
tell the, truth and, bleave the truth and 
it woul d make us, free and we do know 
that we did a great ron g but god has 
forgive us, as Mr , Hill , had us to go to 
god and, he has forgive us, and now 
we wit h up stretched, ormes, ask the 
clemences, and mercies, of, the, People, 
and, the, cort, to do all they cane, for, 
us, as we, air both maried boyes and, i 
Geor g Shelton aire onley 18 yares, old. 
and, never, Had , the, chence to go to 
school and, was raised up by a Goo d 
Fother. And , Oh , My , Der, ole, Mother, 
and my, Wife , and, Little , Baby ! If, i 
Had , Onley , of, Knowe n at the start 
what all this woul d of, cause, me, i woul d 
Not, of, done, it, for, aney amount, of, 
Money , But, Mr , Lige , Scott, tole, me, 
to; Tha t ole Be n ort to be, Killed , and, 
got, out, of, the neighborhood. An d Joh n 
Bailey, is, A Brothernlaw of, George 
Shelton, and, is, 24, yares, old, and His, 
Parints, Died , when he was a Littl e Bo y 
and, he, was raised up heare and, yonder, 
and, kik from Piller, to Post and, we, 
Both , have, no, Egacation and, never, 
relised what a black Path, of, sin we 
had been travling, til l Mr . J. M . Hill . 
Read, the Bibl e to us, And , Praid, for. 
and wit h us, and, then, we begin to 
Relise what we had done." 
•J Judge Hol t of the Unite d States District Court in Ne w Yor k says that there 
are approximately 100,000 unhun g murderers of the lynchin g type in the Unite d 
States and that there has been no time 
in many years in whic h crimes of vio ­
lence have been more ripe than in recent 
years. Wit h regard to lynchin g he says: 
"If, at the outset of an attempt at lynch ­
ing or of a strikers' mob, half a dozen or 
a dozen men were arrested for rioting, 
were tried the next day, and were sent 
to the penitentiary for a month, or a 
fortnight, or even for a ' week, riotin g 
woul d stop." 
<J A t Muldrow , Okla. , a Negr o was 
lynched for alleged murde r and crimina l 
assault. Th e judge and prosecuting attorney refused to take any steps. 
«J A t Wilmington , Del. , six Negroe s and 
one whit e man convicted of larceny were 
severely whippe d at the publi c whippin g 
post. 
<J President Taft has commute d the life 
sentence of two Negroe s wh o have been 
exonerated from the crime charged 
against them. The y were, however, British subjects and not Americans. 
t] I n Kentuck y the "first whit e man " has 
been sentenced to death for killin g a 
Negro . 
q I n Savannah, Ga., several years ago 
a white woma n was murdered. Severa l 
Negroe s were immediately arrested. It 
was afterward proven that the woman's 
husband committed the crime and the 
last of the colored men has finally been 
acquitted. 
Cfl In Oklahoma three white men wit h a 
certain numbe r of hired colored accomplices tried to get ri d of two colored 
children who inherited $250,000 wort h 
of property. Th e children were blown 
up by dynamite whil e they slept. On e 
of the white men was sentenced to life 
imprisonment and one, a wealthy oil 
operator, was acquitted. On e of the 
Negroe s was imprisoned for life and the 
third white man and two other Negroe s 
are yet to be tried. 
•J I n Topeka , Kan. , a colored schoolboy 
was arrested for throwin g paper wads, 
one of whic h struck a whit e girl . 
Neithe r the girl nor her. parents appeared against the boy, but he was given 
ninety days in the jail. Th e real animus 
back of the case was an attempt to make 
capital out of it for separation of the 
races in school. 
^ A very curious case has occurred in 
Ne w York . Th e Pullma n Ca r Compan y 
has paid Claude R. Lewis $37,500 damages for injuries to his daughter. Th e 
story given out is that the daughter was 
injured by a Pullma n porter, but the 
porter has not been arrested, and there 
is a suspicion that he is being made the 
scapegoat for someone else's crimes. 
<I Th e police court of Savannah, Ga., 
collected $25,000 in petty fines last year, 
chiefly from colored people. Man y 
Southern States use this kin d of police 
blackmail as a large source of revenue. 
<J Representative Kendal l of Iowa 
knocked a whit e man down in Washing ­
ton recently because the fellow had upset a basket of laundry belongin g to an 
old colored washerwoman . 
«J Cit y Marsha l Bod y of Pavo, Ga., replyin g to certain Negroe s wh o were protesting illega l arrests, said: "Blo w out 
the brains of Negroe s wh o complain. " ALONG THE 
COURTS . 
Th e result of the riot and lynchin g at 
Newark , O., Jul y 10, 1910, has been 
thirty convictions and two acquittals. 
Ther e were twelve cases whic h were not 
prosecuted and five went up on error. 
On e person was convicted of murde r in 
the second degree, thirteen for manslaughter, seven for riot and nine for 
assault and battery. Al l of whic h proves 
that it is dangerous to lync h a white man 
in Ohio . 
4 Th e Appellat e Court of Ne w Yor k 
State has sustained the $10,000 verdict 
secured by Willia m Chin n against the 
Ferr o Constructio n Compan y for injuries 
whil e at work . 
<| I n Richmond , Va. , the colored Elk s 
apparently are about to wi n their, right 
to existence and obtain damages for the 
injunction secured against them. 
<J Th e Postmaster-Genera l has decided 
that posta l cards bearing pictures of 
lynchings are unmailable. 
<I In Georgi a a colored boy was convicted of assault wit h intent to kill . Th e 
Court of Appeals in reviewin g his case 
held : "If one whose premises are in ­
vaded by a riotous mob, wh o lay siege 
to his habitation and continue their rioting, shoots into the mob and wounds 
one of its members, he does not commit 
the offense of assault wit h intent to murder; and this law is applicable, irrespective of any racial differences between the 
parties." 
TH E GHETTO . 
Th e Centra l Y . M . C. A . at St. Louis 
has been used for a mass meeting to 
propose a segregation ordinance for St. 
Louis. 
<] Th e followin g letter was sent to the 
colored dentist wh o is buildin g a house 
in a whit e neighborhood in Denver, 
Col. : "Yo u have doubtless lived lon g 
enough to kno w that the America n people, when aroused, are not to be trifled 
with , and whil e I am not predicting vio ­
lence to either yourself or property, yo u 
certainly are aware that either or both 
might occur. 
"Legall y yo u may be right, but in reality yo u cannot help but kno w yo u are 
wrong , and unless I am ver y badly mistaken, a particularly brilliant and successful man of you r own race, Booke r 
T. Washington , has made it an invariable 
rule to never intrude where he is not 
wanted, if he can possibly avoid it. 
"Personally , I am onl y too glad to 
grant yo u all the privileges due an 
America n citizen, but I do object to you 
enjoying those privileges in an exclusively white community. " 
*J I n Philadelphi a Miss Emil y Dinwiddi e 
shows that Negroe s pay 37 cents per 
room per mont h mor e rent than the 
COLOR LINE 145 
Italians, and 33 cents more than the other 
nationalities. A charity agent says that 
she finds it most difficult to place a Ne ­
gro family in a small apartment without 
paying excessive rent. In houses with 
furnished rooms Negroe s pay from $1 
to $3 per month more than whites pay 
for the same kin d of room. Rent is generally a larger item with the poor Negr o 
than with the poor white. Th e average 
rent for Negroes per month, when only 
one family occupied the house, was, accordin g to Miss Dinwiddie , $12.92, while 
the Italians paid $7.99, and the Jews and 
others $8.78. Whe n two or more families 
occupied the house the rent was $7.48 
for Negroes, $5.51 for Italians and $5.18 
for Jews. 
•I A t Paris, Tex., one Negr o letter carrier resigned after one day's work, because few persons in Paris woul d accept 
Unite d States mail from his hands. H e 
was succeeded by another Negro—the 
next available on the eligible list for the 
place. Hundreds of letters were received 
by Postmaste r Dickerso n protesting 
against mail being delivered by a Negro 
carrier. 
<I Southern Congressmen are again suggesting "Ji m Crow " legislation for the 
Distric t of Columbia , and it is said that 
legislation for excluding all Asiati c races 
is being strongly urged. 
<I In St. Paul, Minn. , the Great Norther n 
Express Compan y employed a youn g 
colored student of the Universit y of 
Minnesot a during the holiday rush. H e 
was, amon g other things, required to 
take valuable packages and check them 
in wit h the other express companies. 
Th e checking clerk of the Adams Ex ­
press Compan y refused to wait on the 
boy because he was colored. Th e local 
manager of the Adams - Express Com ­
pany, when complained to, justified the 
discrimination. 
«I Dr. W . J. Thompkin s of Kansa s City , 
wh o has been suing the M . K . & T. 
Railroa d for ejecting him from a Pull ­
man berth, has lost his case in the lowe r 
court. H e proposes to appeal it. 
<I Th e Great Norther n Railwa y Compan y 
has just sent to its employees the followin g rule concerning migration to Canada : 
570—People of the Chinese race must 
not be ticketed to any point in Canada 
or Cuba, or to a point in the Unite d 
States via a route passing through 
Canada. 
Foreigners wil l not be admitted into 
Canada except when en route direct from 
their own country, unless in the meantime they have become naturalized citizens of the Unite d States, and i n no 
event wil l they be admitted unless they 
have $25 per capita in hand. Colore d 
people wil l not be admitted under any 
circumstances. ALEXANDE R WALTER S 
Th e presentation of a lovin g cup to 
Dr. Alexande r Walters, bishop of 
the A . M . E . Zio n Church , whic h took 
BISHO P ALEXANDE R WALTER S 
place recently in Washington , D . C , 
was a graceful tribute to an energetic 
man. Bisho p Walters was born in Ken ­
tucky in 1858; he received a commo n 
school training, became a pastor in 1877 
and was elected bishop in 1892. Bisho p 
Walters has become well know n as one 
of the radical leaders of the colored 
people; he was lon g president of the 
Afro-America n Counci l and is a vicepresident and director of the N . A . A . 
C. P. I n the last presidential campaign 
he supported the Democrati c ticket and 
has since preached politica l independence to the Negroes. In the comin g 
campaign he may be expected to take a 
prominent part. Outside his own church 
he has occupied man y positions of honor 
and trust in religious circles, and is a 
genial, earnest man. 
ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
The 
MELVILL E CHARLTON . 
recent appointment of Melvill e 
Charlton as one of the organists at Unio n 
Theological Seminary calls the attention of 
the public to the work of this young man 
of 28. Charlto n was bor n i n Ne w 
York , was educated in the public schools 
and took a year in the College of the City 
of New York . H e then turned to the 
study of music and won a five year scholarship at the National Conservatory of Music . 
Afte r serving some years as assistant organist at St. Phillip's, he served in a 
similar position at the Religious School of 
Temple Emanu-El, the richest synagogue 
in America. Schirmer has just brought out 
Mr . Charlton's first published composition, and Th e Musica l Courie r calls him 
"a youn g musician of promisin g talent." 
CAPTAIN CHARLES YOUNG, U. S. A. 
Captain Charles Young , whos e picture 
is on our cover, was bor n i n Kentuck y 
in 1868. H e was appointed to West 
Poin t Militar y Academy from Ohi o in 
1885, and was graduated as a lieutenant 
in the army in 1889. H e has served 
wit h the 7th, 9th and 10th Cavalr y and 
25th Infantry. Durin g the Spanish Wa r 
he was major of an Ohi o battalion. 
Afterwar d he was detailed to duty as 
acting superintendent of the Sequoia and 
Grant Nationa l Park s in California , 
where his "interest and ability " were 
especially commended in forma l resoluMELVILL E CHARLTO N OPINION 147 
tions by the Boar d of Trade of Visalia , 
which declared that "by his energy and 
enthusiasm and business qualities displayed, the money set aside for improve ­
ments of the parks was most wisely and 
economically expended." 
In 1904 Captain Youn g was sent to 
Hayti , and thence twice to the Philip ­
pines. In the absence of the colone l he 
reviewed the regiment—the first occurrence of the kin d in the history of the 
Unite d States army. O n several other 
occasions he had comman d of the regiment. 
Captain Youn g is now being examined 
at Fort Rile y for his majority and is detailed to go as Unite d States military 
attache in Liberia . H e is married and 
has two children. 
The other colored officers in the army 
are as follows: Lieutenant-Colone l Al ­
len Allenswort h (retired); Majo r Jno. 
R. Lync h (retired); Majo r Wm . T. An ­
derson (retired); Captain Geo. W . 
Priolean, Captain Theophilius G. Steward 
(retired); First Lieutenant Benj. O. 
Davis; First Lieutenant John E . Green ; 
First Lieutenant W . W . E . Gladden ; 
First Lieutenant Osca r J. W . Scott; 
First Lieutenant Louis A . Carter. 
CHARIT Y ABROAD . 
Politicians may be, indeed, are sometimes said to be, deficient in humor, and 
the recent debates in Congress over the 
abrogation of the treaty with Russi a 
seem to bear out this statement. Tha t 
Jewish-America n citizens should have 
full rights in Russi a and that the Czar's 
atrocities should call forth the indignant 
protest of every decent-minded citizen 
goes without saying, but it is difficult to 
see how our honorable legislative body 
preserved a straight face over the fervent 
declarations, especially impassionated 
from Southern representatives that discrimination because of race is un-American and not to be tolerated. In a widely 
quoted speech by Senator Root, for example, we find him saying that perhaps the demand that Jewish-America n 
citizens be admitted to Russi a may result 
i n the exclusion of all Americans. 
"That, " he says, "i n some respects woul d 
be unfortunate, but, Mr . President, it 
woul d be better than the present. It 
is better that there should not be any 
discrimination whic h constitutes two 
sharply separated classes of our citizens. 
I woul d rather have one great body of 
America n citizens wh o have no right to 
enter a foreign land than to have two 
bodies of America n citizens, one of whic h 
has the right under our treaties to enter 
and the other of whic h has no right. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post, whic h 
alone of all the white newspapers sees 
the humor of the situation, observes: 
"It is encouraging to note that all the 
Southern representatives voted strongly 
against anything like 'discriminating between America n citizens on the ground 
of race' —i n Russia. Th e Senate resolutions introduced by Senator Culberson 
of Texa s recites broadly that 'the people 
of the Unite d States assert as a fundamental principle that the rights of its 
citizens shall not be impaired at home 
or abroad because of race.' This is 
good news for the Negroes of the South, 
for, of course, Southern leaders woul d 
not attempt to do more for the handful 
of America n Jews wh o wish to travel 
in Russi a than they woul d for millions 
of America n citizens in their own land. " 
The Maco n (Ga.) Telegraph objects 
to these remarks as "sarcastic" . and 
besides, it says, bringing its scientific 
learning to the front, the Post "misses 
the point," whic h is this: "Th e persecution of the Jews in Russi a is religious 
rather than racial, and in any case 'nationality' rather than 'race' is the more 
proper term to be employed in this 
connection. Th e Russians and Jews 
belong to the same grand division of 
humanity and in the larger sense are 
really of the same race of men. Whit e 
men and Negroes, on the other hand, 
belong to two of the four or five totally 
distinct grand divisions of the human 
species." 
Th e Telegraph does not go farther, 
we regret to say, and point out at just 
what distance of relationship one has 
the right to insult, oppress and lynch . 
Littl e is said on this head in the 
white press, but the Rev. Theodosius 
S. Tyn g sums up the situation in a 
ringin g letter to the Boston Heral d on 
the necessity of clean hands and a 
clear head. "Tha t Jews are ill-treated 
in Russia, " he says, "that America n 
citizens are unjustly discriminated 148 THE CRISIS 
against and that these things ought to 
end is indisputable. Bu t there are two 
objections against our present method 
of attempting to end them. 
"Th e first is that we do not come 
wit h clean hands. W e discriminate 
against our own citizens. I n the South 
we have 'Ji m Crow ' cars and 'grandfather clauses' aimed against the Negro . 
In the Nort h we have worse, a shutting 
out of Negroe s by popula r prejudice 
from all but a few occupations, thus 
denying them opportunity to show 
whether they are our inferiors or not. 
W e discriminate also (and wit h equal 
blindness) against foreigners. W e exhaust the resources of diplomacy to keep 
out of our country laborers from Japan, 
whose people are not inferior in natural 
endowment to any other, and from 
whic h it woul d be pretty safe to say 
that no illiterate ever came to this 
country. 
" A clear head is also desirable in 
dealing wit h international difficulties. 
But what is chiefly revealed in this 
precipitate and tumultuous denunciation 
of the treaty wit h Russi a is a feeling 
that any stick wil l do to beat a dog, 
and that indignant virtue is too virtuous 
and too indignant to consider what head 
is goin g to be hit by the stick, our 
own or the other, or perhaps various 
others." 
Th e papers run by colored people, of 
course, draw the deadly parallel: "Ther e 
are no two nations that are so much 
alike as Americ a and Russi a on race 
antipathy," says the St. Louis Advance . 
"Th e Russia n districts and segregates the 
Jew, and, at times, officially slaughters 
him; the America n alleges the most 
hideous crimes against the Negro , none 
proved by his own established tribunals, 
arrests, disarms, imprisons him and 
calls forth whol e communitie s to see 
the black helpless victim scorched, 
burned, riddled wit h bullets or vivisected 
and mutilated to suit the bloody cravings of a savage mob. Americ a places 
herself in a very inconsistent attitude 
when she demands that Russi a cease 
proscribin g the Jew when she is practicing wholesale proscription upon her 
own native citizens—the Negro—i n 
the Unite d States." 
Th e Cincinnati Unio n heartily approves the course of the President and 
adds: "Th e question now uppermost in 
the minds of all America n colored 
people is: Wh y does our great President not use simila r haste and courage 
in demanding that ten million s of his 
subjects should receive fair treatment 
here at home ; that they no longe r be 
mobbed, slaughtered and burnt almost 
withi n sound and sight of the Whit e 
House ? 
"Why? " 
A SOUTHERNER' S PROTEST . 
Th e Dail y Observe r of Charlotte , 
N . C , is one of the Southern papers 
whic h occasionally fights for justice for 
the colored man. Ou r association sent 
the editor of the Observe r one of 
our anti-lynchin g circulars containing, in 
addition to various facts about this 
crime, the two pictures whic h appeared 
i n "Th e Burden " of the January CRISIS . 
In reply we received a letter expressing 
the editor's indignation at the awful 
story and enclosing an editoria l suggested "by the circular. W e quote it at 
length: 
"Lynchin g is the greatest evil from 
whic h this country has suffered. It is 
a reproach to the nation, and particularl y to the people of the South, where 
the mob has so often wreaked its fearful vengeance upon its victims, not 
always for the commissio n of the 'unpardonable crime,' but for offences of 
lesser magnitude, offences for whic h the 
death penalty is not required by any 
civilize d country in the world . Durin g 
the last six months i n the Unite d States 
fifty-one men have been put to death by 
lynching . A great man y of them, we 
have not the least doubt, were guilty of 
the most horribl e crime of whic h the 
worl d knows anything, but man y of 
them doubtless were not worth y of 
death and none of them should have 
been put to death withou t due process 
of law. I n the last twenty-six years 
2,458 Negroe s have been lynche d in the 
Unite d States, and not one of the men 
takin g part in these lynchings has' been 
punished, and few of them, although 
they must have been wel l know n i n the 
communit y where they committed their 
crimes, have ever been summone d by 
the law to give an account of their vio ­
lation of the law. 
"W e writ e lon g essays about the 
cruelty of the people i n foreign countries; we are shocked at the barbarity 
of the Italians i n Tripoli ; we say lon g 
prayers in our churches and synagogues 
praising ourselves to the Almighty ; but 
we do nothin g to stop the fearful enormities of Judge Lync h and his crowd. 
This thing cannot go on forever; it 
should not have gone on at all, and 
particularly in the South, where white 
people are now absolutely i n control of 
all the machinery of the law ; where they 
select the juries and judges and prosecutors; wher e they alone are responsible 
for the execution of the law; and it is 
to our everlasting shame and reproach 
that in any of the Southern States there 
should be the lynchin g of any human 
being, whatever the color of his skin or 
the enormity of his crime . W e need not 
concern ourselves about the occasional 
lynchings i n Pennsylvania , Delaware , 
Indiana, Illinois and Ohi o and in the" 
far Wester n States; our responsibility OPINION 149 
is for the crimes committed within our 
own b&rders and by our own people. 
"I n a circula r just issued, we suppose 
by the Anti-Lynchin g League of Ne w 
Yor k [Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d People], two pictures are given of typical lynchings; one 
in Oklahoma and the other that is not 
fully identified, but it is gruesome 
enough in its appearance to excite the 
indignation of any man of right feeling. 
This circula r contains quite a number 
of extracts from newspapers commenting 
upon the lynchin g evil and quotes the 
statement of Governo r Blease, of South 
Carolina , about the Hone a Pat h horror, 
that rather than use the powe r of his 
office to prevent the white men from 
punishing the Negr o at Hone a Path, he 
'woul d have resigned his office and gone 
to Hone a Pat h and led the mob.' 
"Tha t was a horribl e thing for the 
governor of any civilized State to say. 
Anothe r great man in this country, the 
same being Theodor e Roosevelt, former 
President of the Unite d States, in a. 
recent article in the Outlook, of whic h 
he is contributing editor, made this weak 
and pitiful plea for the mob : 'Dreadful 
though it is for the mob spirit to be 
aroused in the communit y by such a 
crime, it woul d be even worse if the 
communit y did not feel the fury of in ­
dignation whic h produces the mob spirit.' 
This is encouraging the mob spirit and 
this is the sort of namby-pamby talk 
that has encouraged the 'fury of indigna ­
tion ' whic h has made the mob possible 
in this civilize d land. .With Governo r 
Blease, in South Carolina , in sympathy 
wit h the mob, and wit h Colone l Roose ­
velt, in Ne w York , excusing the mob 
spirit on the ground that it is produced 
by the 'fury of indignation,' we must impress the law-abiding people of the 
Unite d States as to one of the elements 
from whic h we must free ourselves if the 
law is to be respected and its violation 
is to be punished. " 
LYNCHING . 
A curious misstatement is goin g the 
rounds of the press whic h places the 
lynchings of last year at thirty-five. 
TH E CRISI S has record of twice as many 
as that, and we do not pretend to have 
collected the full number. Several papers 
comment on the figures. "W e woul d 
like to believe," says the Chattanooga 
Times, "that the decrease is due to an 
appreciable advance in sentiment for the 
'due course of law,' and in some communities we are justified i n reaching 
such a conclusion. Bu t there are occasions not of infrequent occurrence that 
present the discouraging evidences of 
the same old savage sentiment which , in 
circumstances of peculiar or- extraordinary excitement, may be expected to 
exhibit itself, especially where there is 
a weak or vacillating constabulary." 
Th e Louisvill e Courier-Journa l suggests that more can be done to lowe r 
the figures. "A s a cure for lynchin g an 
ounce of prevention, such as a remova l 
law furnishes, is wort h a pound of prosecution. Th e Kentuck y legislature is in 
session. Th e Courier-Journa l invites its 
attention to the opportunity to do a 
signal service to the State and to proclaim to the worl d a desire to sec lynching put down and the State and county 
payrolls relieved of the incumbrance of 
peace officers who are cowards or sympathizers wit h hoodlumism. T o the 
short sighted wh o believe in lynchin g 
in cases of assault it may be of interest 
to know that of the thirty-five lynchings 
in Americ a in 1911 only eleven were for 
alleged crimes against women. " 
Th e Boston Herald , in a long editorial 
on the general subject, says: "Persons 
wh o do not take the usual attitude of 
the South toward the Negr o are 
promptly set down as 'not understanding the race question.' A n attempt is 
thus made to estop any Northerne r from 
expressing an opinion. No r are the 
skirts of the Northerners much clearer 
of this horror. Th e recent affair in 
Coatesville, Pa., followin g a lon g line of 
simila r outrages, including a very atrocious affair a few years ago in Spring ­
field, Ill., raises the question whether in 
proportion to population the Nort h is 
really entitled to preach to the South at 
all of the evils of lynching. 
"An d still the horror persists,, wherever the dishonor lies. Ne w and dramatic ways of wreakin g vengeance 
against Negr o suspects are of almost 
daily report. It has taken many centuries to evolve from primitive barbarism a government of law; from that we 
are now suffering in this country a very 
serious relapse. T o suppose that the 
unfortunate black wil l lon g remain the 
only victim of it, even were they so 
to-day, woul d be a very serious mistake. 
Th e whole ghastly homicida l record is 
serving as a text book to the millions 
of natives of Southern Europe and 
Wester n Asi a who are to-day pouring 
into this country. The y are not wholl y 
to be blamed for inferring that violence 
is the America n way. " 
SOM E LABO R COMPLAINTS . 
Whe n a hurricane not lon g ago destroyed much property on Sea Island, 
S. C., a fund was raised for the sufferers. Th e colored men wh o lost their 
all in that disaster have received little or 
no help, and it is openly said that they 
wil l not, because white planters on the 
mainland wis h to hire these destitute 
laborers on their own terms. A long 
controversy has been goin g on in the 150 THE CRISIS 
Charleston New s and Courie r on the 
disinclination of the colored people to 
work , but a colored newspaper, the 
Charlesto n Messenger, asks what is 
meant by "work" : 
" A man connected wit h the government went down to inspect the damages 
and gave a fair and straightforward 
report of the disaster. Shortl y afterward, a few men here and there wh o had 
planted considerable cotton and a mil l 
here and there whic h needed fifty or a 
hundred hands, published their needs. 
The n came a statement that the sufferin g people could get work. Th e man 
wh o attempts to make a thousand people 
suffer for the sake of getting one or two 
hundred to go a hundred miles away 
from home without anythin g but a 
promis e is a dangerous citizen to any 
community. Ther e are two sides to 
every picture." 
Th e Messenge r thinks that if the 
farmers guaranteed the fare from Sea 
Island and a livin g wage whil e the men 
were on the plantations, there woul d be 
no difficulty in getting laborers. The n 
the editor makes this comment on the 
general situation: "Th e lon g commu ­
nication from Clarendo n County, almost 
two columns on Monday , attempting to 
destroy the Negro , put up one of the 
best defenses for him we have ever 
read, and it is that article that has interested us more in this matter. W e have 
been believing that the Negr o was 
really guilty of not workin g as he should, 
but since that article we stand ready 
to congratulate the Negr o for the progress he has made on the farm and we 
arc a little surprised that the News and 
Courie r hasn't done so, too, before now. 
"Whe n a white man, a farmer of broad 
experience, tells the public that the 
Negroe s in South Carolin a are planting 
more acres of land than the white man, 
and that many of the Negroe s last year 
made only one bale of cotton and that 
the same Negroe s this year have made 
four and five bales, and have made themselves so independent that they are not 
in a hurry to pick it out so as to help 
the white man pick his out, he is makin g 
no argument against the Negr o not wanting to work . Upo n this we rest our 
case for the Negr o and ask the News 
and Courier, the Florenc e Time s and all 
those wh o are complainin g about the 
Negr o not workin g to explain this 
paradox. " 
WHIT E AN D BLAC K TEACHERS . 
O n Decembe r 26 a gift of half a million dollars to the Peabody College for 
Teachers, at Nashville , was announced 
in connection wit h the final distribution 
of the great Peabody fund. Th e Ne w 
Yor k Evenin g Post says that this gift 
wil l insure a magnificent and wellendowed school for white teachers 
whic h should quicken the whol e public -
school system of the South. "Wha t is 
needed next is a simila r school for colored teachers, and the want and opportunity are so great that it is hard to see 
how some of our great philanthropists 
can have overlooked it. Ther e are those 
in the South wh o criticise the educated 
Negroes. Bu t how few the latter are! 
An d as for the teachers, no one wh o has 
not come face to face wit h a group of 
Negr o rura l school teachers can have 
any real idea of their unfitness for their 
work . Bein g themselves graduates of 
crossroad one-teacher schools, few if 
any are masters of the Englis h language. 
Th e summe r schools for teachers, wherever held, are attended by eager men 
and wome n whose lamentable deficiency 
is not offset by their thirst for learning 
or by their desire to be of service upon 
most meagre wages. Bu t the great gifts 
for education in the South are latterly 
flowing largely in the direction of the 
whites. 
"I n this connection it is interesting to 
note that the initia l gifts of the trustees 
of the Phelps-Stoke s fund established by 
the wil l of the late Miss Carolin e Phelps 
Stokes have gone to the Universitie s of 
Virgini a and Georgia . The y have donated 
$12,500 for a fellowship in each of those 
institutions, the holders thereof to make 
a scientific and also practica l study 'of 
the Negr o and of his adjustments to 
America n civilization.' Whil e some of 
the educated colored people wil l feel like 
endowin g scholarships elsewhere for the 
scientific study -of the white and of his 
failure to adjust himself to America n 
civilizatio n by lynchings from Coatesvill e to the Gulf and his persistent nullification of the Constitution in regard to 
suffrage, the experts wil l all agree that 
these gifts are usefully bestowed. Th e 
South does need to approach this problem—and the Nort h as well—i n a purely 
scientific spirit. Her e is primaril y a 
great governmenta l question, for half or 
mor e of the bitterness of the situation 
woul d disappear if law and order were 
maintained and absolute justice applied 
in the courts to both races. Th e Negr o 
has nothin g to fear from the bringin g 
out of the truth about his generally lawabiding character and his marvelous rise 
in fifty years, whic h no less a person 
than Colone l Henr y Watterso n has declared to be without an historica l 
parallel. " 
<J Th e Survey, published by the Asso ­
ciated Charitie s of Ne w York , brought 
together in a recent numbe r some opinions on* the meaning of the McNamar a 
case. W e quote a few paragraphs from 
the contribution of Mrs. Florenc e Kelle y 
of the Consumers' League , who is a 
membe r of our association's executive 
committee and one of our ablest and 
most willin g speakers. OPINION 151 
"N o light can be shed on the present 
situation, " says Mrs. Kelley , "by treating it as an isolated episode. It is an 
integra l part of the whole texture of our 
nationa l life, and any constructive action 
in regard to it must, in order to serve 
a helpful purpose, be based on recognition of this fact. In a modern industrial 
democracy the only preventive of violence is justice—political, social, industrial. A s a people we do not practice 
justice and we pay the penalty in recurrin g violence in diverse forms. 
"I n all of our States except six, women 
are disfranchised; and Negroe s are disfranchised increasingly in recent years, 
in law and in fact. Accompaniments of 
this injustice are white slavery, lync h 
law and peonage—three horrifying forms 
of violence incidenta l to our national 
life. 
"If women , Negroe s arid alien immigrants were safeguarded in their human 
rights; if the owners of the Asc h Buildin g 
and every employer, the doors of whose 
workrooms are locked, paid (in money] 
not wit h their lives) for the men and 
wome n burned in their buildings; if the 
miners now entombed—death by entombment is death by violence—had 
been made safe i n life and limb by their 
employers under laws established by a 
just people; if lynchers found certain 
retribution; if no white slavers were pardoned by the President in the rare cases 
in whic h they are convicted; if justice 
prevailed i n our daily life—the outcry 
and the surprise at the action of the Mc -
Namara s might be explained rationally. 
"Th e real cause for surprise, the root 
of the evil, is the infinite, supine, dogged 
resignation of the masses of workin g 
people under prevailing injustice." 
<J Th e followin g encouraging editorial 
we reprint from the Roanoke (Va.) 
Times: "I n the acquittal of the Negroe s 
accused of the murde r of the Stuarts in 
Buckingham Count y there is another 
triumph of Virgini a justice; and' a triumph over loca l prejudice and, possibly, 
some local cupidity. Th e Stuarts were 
brothers, supposed to be misers, livin g 
together in a rather lonely house. The y 
were found dead, their bodies partly consumed in the ruins of their home. Evi ­
dently murder, arson and robbery had 
been committed. Tw o or three Negroe s 
were arrested accused of the crimes. 
Th e strongest evidence against them was 
by members of their own race. One colored boy said he was an eyewitness. 
Th e accused were convicted and sentenced to die. The y appealed and the 
Supreme Court gave them a new trial. 
The y secured change of venue to Rich ­
mon d and a jur y of white men of that 
city acquitted them. Th e evidence was 
direct, but obviously untrustworthy. 
Th e defence was conducted by J. L . 
Lee , of Lynchburg ; and in our opinion 
no lawye r ever has given a better illustration of the lawyer's highest functions 
and duties than he did in this case. Hegave all the power of his min d and learning and much of his time—and he 
is a high-priced lawyer—to defending 
through three hard trials and representing in the highest court poor and obscure 
people." 
<J Th e Dalla s Express has heard a 
report that 150 white university men 
are makin g a study of the Southern 
Negr o and that "Negr o Lif e in the 
South, " a book written by Dr. Weath -
erford, is to be taken as a basis of the 
research. "That's queer," comments this 
paper, "the Dalla s Express woul d recommend a better basis—that basis is the 
Negr o himself. A s a beginning of the 
research we recommend that, the 150 university men put in about a year of prayerful study on themselves and another 
year on their own race, for it is a lamentable fact that the vast majority of 
Southern white men have never yet 
believed a single wor d they ever heard 
of the commo n fatherhood of Go d and 
the universal brotherhood of man. Unti l 
a man can believe this doctrine little 
importance need attach to his observations of the Negro, or, as for that matter, anybody else." 
<I Th e St. Louis Mirror, a single-tax 
paper, commenting on the refusal of the 
Chicago single-tax conference to draw 
the color line at their banquet, says: 
"Th e single-tax philosophy is for all 
men, for a man's chance for every man, 
white or black or yellow or brown. Tha t 
philosophy recognizes that the color 
issue is largely the white man's growin g 
fear that the colored man wil l get his 
job. Tha t philosophy woul d free the 
earth so that there woul d be jobs for all 
men and some jobs left over." 
<J Fro m a Richmon d paper comes this 
contribution to the gaiety of nations in 
the form of a letter from a lady of an 
aristocratic turn of mind : "N o daughter 
of the Confederacy wil l be a suffragette. 
N o veteran wil l permit female Negr o suffrage—if it brings on another war. Fo r 
when the cook comes to the meeting and 
puts on her bonnet quick, and goes to 
the polls and votes for Dr. Washingto n 
as President of the Unite d States, or 'you 
gets another cook,' the wome n wil l be in 
the saddle with saber and pistol galore." 
*I Th e conviction of one of the men wh o 
lynched Carl Etheringto n in Newark , 
Ohio , has called forth some comment as 
proof that the country still upholds justice .i n spite of Coatesville. Th e Chi ­
cago Tribun e alone puts its finger on the 
significant fact. "It must be noted," it 
says, "that in Ohi o the victim was white ; 
in Pennsylvani a he was black. " I have been rather fascinated by 
the poetic dream of the supremacy 
of Africa to institute the reign of 
peace when the conquering race of 
the Anglo-Saxons is ended. 
—FREDERIC HARRISON. 
LIGHT . 
WHE N the trustees of the 
Phelps-Stokes fund gave 
two Southern universities 
$12,500 each to endow a fellowship 
for the study of the Negro they did 
well. Fo r many decades there has 
been a venerable tradition that the 
South "knows " the Negro better than 
others. Gradually, however, it is 
dawning even on the white South 
that there is nothing in mere 
physical distance half so separating 
as the artificial social, economic and 
racial barriers erected in the South 
since the war, and that the ignorance 
of the white South as to the life, 
hurts and dreams of the darker half 
of their world is, in some respects, 
both phenomenal and disgraceful. 
Take, for instance, this letter from 
a Southern woman who has read 
T h e C risis : 
"The Negro is a child, incompetent to 
right his own wrongs, but wonderfully 
susceptible to inspirational teaching. 
A s a race he has a childlike conceit 
and thoroughly enjoys being 'in the 
limelight.' H e has the untutored's 
love of the morbid, revels in the sensational, and under praise wisely administered gives forth his best efforts. 
Some of the crime committed by the 
Negro is undoubtedly due to the desire to attract public attention. 'If 
fame cannot be won, infamy can,' is 
the subconscious conclusion of some 
Negro criminals—as it is with some 
white criminals. It seems to me that 
the best and most practical philanthropy that can be performed for 
the race is to cease discussing him as 
a problem and consider him as a 
child whose future career is to be 
shaped and molded by wise disciplinary educational methods." 
Consider for a moment this extraordinary judgment: "The'Negro " and 
" A Child! " Te n million people tossed 
nonchalantly into one mold with one 
estimate, one final and eternal judgment. One could not find ten million 
dogs, much less ten million men, 
whom one definition would fit. 
The difficulty is, of course, that 
this honest woman knows and can 
know but one or few types of Negro. 
He r observation is confined to her 
kitchen, the almshouse and the 
chances of the street. O f the black 
man as a' man, of the black woman 
as a woman, she has almost no 
experience, and by grace of the color 
line can have no experience. He r 
ignorance is all the greater because 
it is not known to be ignorance, but 
parades as deep and subtle knowledge. • The world-old phenomenon of 
the childishness, laziness and criminality of the ignorant and oppressed 
becomes in her blindness purely a 
racial, a "Negro " trait. If the gift 
to the University of Virgini a wil l do 
something to shake the appalling confidence of such wil d judgments the 
money wil l be well spent. 
O f course, the scientific result will 
be small. Fo r many years these 
young students wil l record not the 
observed facts, but their preconceived 
prejudices. This is inevitable with 
persons who start despising and not 
revering human souls simply because 
of their humanity. Gradually, however, truth wil l triumph. Gradually 
EDITORIA L EDITORIAL 153 
it wil l not be possible to assert unchallenged in the University of Georgia that "niggers are lazy." It wil l 
be explained by some perverse person that this laziness has somehow 
accumulated a thousand millions in 
fifty years—although, of course, those 
who did this are "exceptions." In 
time this center of learning will cease 
to talk of "the" Negro and begin to 
talk of men—some rich, some poor; 
some good, some bad; some undeveloped "children" and some children 
of the Kingdom of God. 
TH E GAL L O F BITTERNESS . 
MAN Y people object to the 
policy of T h e C risi s because, 
as they usually put it, T h e 
C risi s is "bitter." Some add that 
our news is depressing or that we 
are determined to look on the dark 
side, and so forth. 
It may be acknowledged at the outset that T h e C risi s does not try to 
be funny. No t that we object to 
fun : our office is a cheerful place, 
with bits of sunshine and eager 
young lives and high joyful purpose. 
But our stock in trade is not jokes. 
W e are in earnest. This is a newspaper. It tries to tell the Truth. It 
will not consciously exaggerate in any 
way, but its whole reason for being 
is the revelation of the facts of racial 
antagonism now in the world, and 
these facts are not humorous. 
True it is that this country has had 
its appetite for facts on the Negro 
problem spoiled by sweets. In earlier 
days the Negro minstrel who "jumped 
Ji m Crow " was the typical black man 
served up to the national taste. It 
was the balmy day when slaves were 
"happy" and "preferred" slavery to 
all other possible states. Then came 
the sobering of abolition days and war, 
when for one horrified moment the 
world gazed on the hell of slavery 
and knew it. for what it was. 
In the last fifteen years there has 
come another campaign of Joy and 
Laughter to degrade black folk. W e 
have been told that all was well or 
if aught was wrong the wrong was 
with the colored man. W e have had 
audiences entertained with "nigger" 
stories, tales of pianos in cabins, and 
of the general shiftlessness of the 
freedman, and concerted effort to 
make it appear that the wrongs of 
color prejudice are but incidental and 
trivial, while the shortcomings of 
black men are stupendous, if not 
fatal. 
This is the lie which T h e C risi s 
is here to refute. It is a lie, a miserable and shameful lie; which some 
black men have helped the white 
South to spread and been well paid 
for their pains. 
It is not easy to impress the real 
truth after this debauch of defamation, but we must try. In so trying 
we realize that the mere statement 
of the facts does not always carry 
its message. Often the lighter touch, 
the insinuation and the passing reference are much more effective. W e 
know this, and yet so often the grim 
awfulness of the bare truth is so 
insistent we feel it our duty to state 
it. Take those stark and awful 
corpses, men murdered by lynch law, 
in last month's issue: it was a gruesome thing to publish, and yet—could 
the tale have been told otherwise? 
Can the nation otherwise awaken to 
the enormity of this beastly crime of 
crimes, this rape of law and decency? 
Could a neat joke or a light allusion 
make this nation realize what 2,500 
murders such as these look like? 
W e trust that the Gal l of Bitterness wil l not spoil the pages of T h e 
C risi s or make its readers to shudder 
at ill-timed frankness. But Go d forbid that mere considerations of pleasantry and sweetness should ever 
make us withhold insistence, in season and out, upon that which a 
Southern white correspondent of ours 
calls "the barbarous treatment accorded an unfortunate people by the 
strong and arrogant Caucasian. Whe n 
Trut h shall have come into her own, 
through the medium of education, 
the color line - wil l be swept . into 
oblivion of a dark and disgraceful 
past. Me n will shudder at the deeds 
of their fathers, even as we shudder 
at the horrors of the Inquisition." TH E SOCIAL LIFE OF COLORE D AMERICA: 
154 THE CRISIS FEBRUARY, 1912 155 
I.—TH E MIDWINTE R ASSEMBL Y 
Baltimore, Md. 156 THE CRISIS 
TH E DURBAR . 
THE greatest concession wrung 
from an arrogant modern nation 
by a dark-skinned people has 
just been gained by the Indians from 
the English. The Durba r was not 
simply a ceremonial—it was a concession. Fo r a long time England has 
been trying to conciliate India by 
social deference to her princes. Few 
of the great drawing rooms of Londo n 
have not been graced in recent years 
by these Eastern potentates, and every 
public honor has been shown them. 
Al l this is an old method with rulers. 
Eve n with the American Negro the 
experiment is continually tried locally 
and nationally of extravagantly honoring leaders who can be depended 
on to do the tyrant's wil l unquestioningly. 
The rank and file, however, soon 
learn to discriminate between such 
empty honors and the real good of 
the people. Ground down by ignorance and poverty, India demands 
education and political autonomy. 
Oppressed by color prejudice they de-' 
mand the treatment of men. 
The Durba r brought concessions in 
all these lines. Its political significan t lay in the actual crowning of 
an English monarch in India. N o 
longer is George V . a foreign monarch 
ruling this land beyond the sea— 
he is an emperor crowned on Indian 
soil; moreover, his capital wil l be 
hereafter the ancient Indian capital 
of Delhi, and not the more English 
Calcutta, where a fierce native agitation has opened the eyes of England 
to the determination of young India 
to be free. 
The Durba r marked the establishment of the first great fund for popular education in India, and finally it 
brought one curious concession, a concession which England must have been 
almost ashamed to announce: hereafter the Victori a Cross for bravery 
on the field of battle will be given to 
brown men as" well as white! Thus 
ends a discrimination almost as disgraceful as the discrimination against 
colored candidates for Rhodes scholarships in the Southern United States. 
Ho w have these concessions been 
secured? By agitation—persistent and 
long-continued agitation, by unrest and 
protest which is not yet satisfied, and 
will not be until India is a free 
autonomous nation. 
CHINA . 
TO most folk the wonder of the 
Chinese revolution is not in the 
revolution but in the fact that 
Chinamen show themselves so human. 
There ' was a time when everything 
bizarre, curious and topsyturvy was 
quite as a matter of course attributed to China . Whe n it came to 
rational modern thought we calmly 
omitted China . Histories of the worl d 
omitted China ; if a Chinaman in ­
vented compass or movable type or 
gunpowder we promptly "forgot it" 
and named only their European inventors. In short, we regarded China 
as a sort of different and quite inconsequential planet. 
Suddenly now China looms as a 
modern nation seeking in the bloodlust of revolution the freedom to think 
and be. Shall we welcome Chinese 
rebirth with salvos of applause? 
Why—er—yes; yes, of course; but 
say, look here: what kind of a world 
is this going to be, full of civilized 
Japs, Chinks, dagoes and darkies? 
Isn't it high time for Desperate Desmond Hobson to win d his golden 
trumpet and hail us to war for the 
salvation of "white" civilization? 
Soberly, is not the world face to 
face with an enlarged, broadened, endless "race" and "color " problem, and 
what are those folk to do who cannot 
conceive a world where black, brown 
and white are free and equal? 
It also appears to me that when 
prejudices persist obstinately it is the 
fault of nobody so much as those 
who make a point of proclaiming 
them insuperable as an excuse for 
never joining in an attempt to remove 
them. Any prejudice whatever will 
be insurmountable if those who do 
not share in it themselves truckle to 
it and flatter it and accept it as a 
law of nature. 
—JOHN STUART MILL. FIRS T ANNUA L MEETIN G O F TH E 
CORPORATION . 
Th e first annual meeting of the corporation of the Nationa l Associatio n for 
the Advancemen t of Colore d People took 
place in the rooms of the association 
in the Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post Building , 
Ne w York , on January 4. Ther e were 
about seventy-five members present. Re ­
ports of the officers were read and a full 
board of directors elected. Supper was 
served at six and in the evening Richar d 
Brown , the youn g protege of the association, exhibited some of his remarkable 
water colors. 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , chairman 
of the executive committee, began wit h 
a general report of the activities of the 
association, whic h was in part as follows: 
Th e third annual conference was held 
in Bosto n Marc h 30 and 31. Th e sessions were interesting and attracted 
many warm adherents to the association. A Bosto n branch was formed. 
Th e fourth annual conference wil l be 
held in Chicago this spring. Miss Jane 
Addams, Miss S. P. Breckinridge and 
Dr. C. E . Bentley are amon g the prime 
movers. 
Th e legal aid wor k of the association 
has received special attention. In the 
cases of William s and Graham in Ne w 
Jersey the defendants were acquitted of 
false charges of murder. Boy s accused 
of crime have been helped to secure 
lighter sentences in Arkansa s and Dela ­
ware, and several cases are pending. 
Loca l civil-rights defense has been 
undertaken by the Ne w Yor k Vigilanc e 
Committee , our local branch, under Mr . 
J. E . Spingarn and Mr . Gilchrist Stewart. 
A campaign against the lynchin g that 
has specially marked the year 1911 has 
been inaugurated. Afte r each of these 
terrible occurrences the association has, 
through its officers, sent letters to the 
governors of the States demanding the 
punishment of the guilty. Th e governors 
of Kentucky , Florida , Oklahoma , Penn ­
sylvani a and Georgi a have been written 
to, not only by the association but by 
many individuals. 
A meeting was held on Novembe r IS 
to protest against lynching . A t no time 
has the association realized more clearly 
the need of awakening public sentiment 
against murderous lawlessness than when 
makin g arrangements for this meeting. 
One leading conservative after another 
declined to speak. The n the association 
turned to its own members and splendid 
addresses were made, well reported by 
the press. 
A t this meeting a collection was 
taken to be the beginning of a fund to 
investigate lynching. This investigation 
has been inaugurated at Coatesville, Pa. 
Th e Wendel l Phillip s centenary was 
celebrated in Boston, where Judge Wen ­
dell Phillip s Stafford spoke, and in 
Brooklyn , where Charles Edwar d Russell 
and Dr. R. V . Ransom were the chief 
speakers. 
Thu s far the association has endeavored to keep clearly before it two 
things—constant propaganda and legal 
work. Propaganda takes place through 
the publication of TH E CRISIS , the holding of public meetings, the furnishing of 
speakers for various organizations, the 
writin g of letters of explanation and 
protest. This wor k could and should be 
almost indefinitely extended. 
T o sum up, the association has now 
reached a point where it is a recognized 
body wit h a growin g reputation, and the 
possibility of wor k of prodigious importance. It must, however, receive the 
earnest, serious support of its membership. It must realize that in asking for 
money, it must secure large sums as well 
as small; in short, recognize that if it is 
to live and wor k it must operate, not on 
a basis of $7,00 0 a year, but of $20,000 . 
It must be housed in offices in whic h it 
is possible to do correct and painstaking 
wor k and it must have a larger staff of 
salaried workers. It must have these 
things or it wil l fail at the moment of 
achievement. It has against it an immense mass of public opinion, backed by 
inexhaustible resources. T o fight successfully, its members, those who believe 
in its work, must furnish it with greater 
power. 
*& Th e Directo r of Publicit y and Research 
reported that TH E CRISI S had a circula ­
tion of 16,00 0 and employed 25 0 agents. 
Since the beginning 150,00 0 copies have 
been printed, and the publication is rapidly becoming self-supporting, although 
started a year ago without a cent of 
capital. 158 THE CRISIS 
Throug h the lecture bureau the 
director has in sixteen months addressed 
ninety-nine audiences, aggregating about 
35,000 persons. O f these audiences, fiftythree were composed mainl y of colored 
persons, and forty-six audiences mainl y 
of white. Amon g those addressed have 
been twenty-six churches, twenty-six 
public meetings, fifteen schools and colleges, ten clubs, seven lecture courses, 
six social settlements, three working -
men's clubs, two reformatories and two 
learned societies. Thirty-five of the addresses were given in Ne w Yor k and 
vicinity, nineteen in the East, twentyfour in the West, ten in the South and 
eleven in Englan d in connection wit h 
the Races Congress. 
Amon g the publications issued by the 
director are one book, four pamphlets, 
eight magazine articles and several newspaper articles. 
1$ Th e report of the treasurer for eight 
months, Ma y 1 to Decembe r 31, 1911, 
was as follows: 
Receipts (cents omitted): 
TH E CRISI S $5,208 
Membership s 1,206 
Special contributions, etc 3,357 
$9,771 
Expenditure s (cents omitted): 
TH E CRISI S $5,138 
Salaries 2,587 
Office expense, travel, investigation, etc 837 
$8,562 
Proposed budget for 1912 (omitting TH E 
CRISIS ) : 
Salaries $5,000 
Office expense 2,000 
Lega l bureau... . 5,000 
Travel, investigation and other 
expenses 2,000 
$14,000 
tj Mr . Willia m M . Wherry , Jr., reported 
on the organization of the legal bureau. 
Ther e are in hand now five cases: A 
case of unjustifiable shooting by a Ne w 
Yor k policeman, a case of alleged crimina l libel, the Coatesville investigation, 
a case of discrimination in wages and 
the dynamitin g outrages in Kansas. Mr . 
Wherr y recommended that the legal 
bureau, first, investigate all cases by 
sending a special representative; secondly, form a legal committee of both 
lawyers and laymen to whom all facts 
shall be referred, wh o wil l determine 
the advisability of takin g up the cases 
and lay down a general policy. 
"You r society requires in regard to 
these cases two distinct classes of service: 
First, service whic h a lawye r ordinaril y 
performs for a client; namely, an in ­
vestigation of the facts and a determination of the rights and of the best 
course, from a legal point of view, to 
enforce or protect these rights. Bu t 
more important, perhaps, than this service is the service of determining wha t 
cases should be handled by the society 
at all in view of the larger question 
mentioned above whic h is pressing for 
solution. 
"I n my opinion, and it seemed to be 
concurred in by those of us present at 
the conference of the 20th, yo u wil l not 
be able to get efficient information in 
regard to the facts in a case without 
payin g something for it, and this determination of handlin g of the cases should 
be separated from the determination of 
what cases to handle. I therefore propose the followin g organization for you r 
legal work : 
" A legal committee to be made up not 
necessarily of lawyers but to have on 
it a number of lawyers. T o this committee all legal cases should be referred 
with such report on the facts as can be 
gotten. Th e function of the committe e 
is then to determine whether to handle 
the cases and do what is necessary. 
This committee should lay down a general policy, namely, that cases whic h 
do not specially involve the Negr o 
question but come to yo u simpl y because 
a Negr o is involved, should not be 
handled by the association, but should 
be referred to the legal-aid societies or 
other charitable institutions, and that 
onl y cases should be referred to the 
committee about whic h the executive 
officer of the society has doubt. 
"If a case is likel y to involve a large 
sum of money for its prosecution, undoubtedly a special appeal woul d produce 
the funds. 
"In addition to you r lega l committee 
yo u should employ counsel whose function woul d be to ascertain the facts and 
law in the case referred to him and make 
a report on it, and if the committee 
desires that it be prosecuted, to arrange 
for its proper prosecution. Counse l can 
undoubtedly secure lawyers at reasonable terms or free wh o wil l conduct 
these cases." 
<I Th e Ne w Yor k Vigilanc e Committee , 
the association's local branch, of whic h 
Messrs. J. E . Spingar n and Gilchrist 
Stewart are the leaders, reported that 
it had opened an office wit h a stenographer in attendance and a telephone so 
that it might be always ready for service. 
Th e branch is now handling a number 
of cases, one of a man's arrest followin g his attempt to protect himself from 
attack by a mob, three of violation of 
the civil-rights law, and several dealing 
wit h the beating of persons by police ­
men or by thugs. Th e branch believes 
that it is in a fair wa y to. stop the unnecessary roughness shown in the past by THE N. A. A. C. P. 159 
the Ne w Yor k police in dealing wit h 
colored people. Prof. Spingarn, in the 
course of his speech, said: 
"Th e Ne w Yor k branch labors under 
a peculiar difficulty. Unlik e the Nationa l 
Association , it has no violent outrages 
confronting it; it can present no picturesque wrong s to arouse public opinion 
or to inflame the popular imagination. 
Ne w Yor k has no disfranchisement; it 
has no lynchings (at least, not yet); 
it has no Ji m Cro w legislation. An d yet, 
despite these facts, colored men and 
wome n i n this city are confronted every 
day of their lives wit h the most gallin g 
conditions; they are subjected to insult, 
passive or active; they are refused 
service and courteous treatment even 
in the places where they are guaranteed 
absolute equality wit h their white 
brethren by legal statutes. The y have 
other and more specific wrongs to complain of, including actual injustice in the 
courts of justice; but I am not speaking 
of these. I am thinking rather of the 
studied humiliation imposed upon them 
daily by three millio n people. 
"Personall y I am inclined to think that 
this is in a sense even more dangerous 
than some of the more picturesque problems wit h whic h the Nationa l Associa ­
tion is struggling. Lynching , after all, 
is a mere sporadic brutality; and men 
have given vent to brutal passions when ­
ever their loves and hates have been 
aroused. Bu t this is not sporadic; it 
is due to no unreasoned impulse. It is 
continuous; it is reasoned; it is studied. 
Caste is a more difficult thing to combat 
than an occasional and meaningless outrage; and unless we ameliorate conditions here, we shall be confronted wit h 
a system of actual caste. If all the 
forces opposed to caste, to privilege, to 
inequality of justice and opportunity, do 
not joi n together to combat these conditions and to educate public opinion, 
it wil l not be lon g before the conditions 
in Ne w Yor k wil l be the exact counterpart of those in every city of the South. 
"It is to this wor k that the Ne w Yor k 
branch has committed itself. It is constantly attacking specific problems of 
discrimination or outrage as these come 
to it from time -to time upon the complaints of the individua l victims. Bu t 
it is desirous of doin g more than this. 
It hopes to be able ere lon g to make an 
organized attack on the whol e system 
of discrimination in places of public 
accommodation in order that the laws 
guaranteeing equal rights shall not forever remain the mere symbols of our 
hypocrisy—visibl e proofs of the impotence of our great democracy to cope 
wit h caste." 
<J Mr . Joseph P . Lou d reported for the 
Bosto n branch. Immediately after the 
third annual conference of the association, held in Bosto n in March , a local 
committee was formed as follows: Chairman, Mr . J. P. Loud ; treasurer, Mr . 
George C. Bradford ; secretary, Mr . 
Butle r R. Wilson ; committee on membership, Mrs. J. P. Lou d and Mr . Francis 
J. Garrison. 
Durin g the summer the branch successfully opposed several cases of discrimination against colored people. Th e 
centenary of the birth of Wendel l Phil ­
lips was celebrated with a meeting that 
attracted much attention from the press. 
Th e final organization of the branch wil l 
be perfected at a meeting set for February 8. In the nine months since the 
conference $1,368.95 has been raised by 
collections, dues and membership fees. 
Mrs. M . D . Maclea n reported at some 
length on her visit to Coatesville, which 
wil l be fully described in a future issue 
of TH E CRISIS . She was sent by the 
association to discover the facts in 
regard to certain sensational stories in 
the newspaper whic h told of attacks on 
white wome n by colored men. Ther e 
had been three such stories and' she 
found two of them to be absolutely 
without foundation. Th e third had its 
basis in the fact that a colored man 
had, apparently, seized or threatened to 
seize a schoolgirl wh o was wearing a 
watch on the outside of her coat. Al l 
three of the press stories have spoken 
of attacks whic h had nearly provoke d 
lynchings. 
Mrs. Maclea n also reported that the 
trials for the lynchin g of "Zach " Walke r 
last August were not over as most 
people understood. Thre e men are still 
in jail charged wit h complicit y in this 
crime and three are out on bail. Ther e 
is mor e hope of conviction now than 
there was at the former trials. 
Ther e is a small but earnest party in 
Coatesville whic h deeply feels the disgrace that the lynchin g of Walke r 
brought on the town, and our representative received cordia l help from them in 
her investigations. Th e majority of the 
townspeople, however, seem to feel that 
talk of the lynchin g even wit h the end 
of punishing the murderers "hurts business" and should be dropped. 
Mrs. Maclea n reported that she did 
not think the State had done its duty 
in regard to seeking and punishing the 
guilty persons. Muc h had been left 
undone, many lines of investigation had 
not been followed out, and little money 
had been spent. 
<I A board of thirty directors was elected 
at this meeting; their names appear on 
the third page of the cover of TH E 
CRISIS . Afte r the meeting of the corporation the directors, according to law, 
met and elected the officers of the association for the ensuing year. 160 THE CRISIS 
COLORE D RESIDENCES—EAS T SID E O F MONTGAL L AVENU E 
DYNAMIT E IN KANSA S CIT Y 
[SOM E CORRESPONDENCE ] 
In Novembe r this association received 
a letter from a well-known colored resident of Kansa s City , Mo. , whic h said: 
"W e desire to place before the legal 
department of the N . A . A . C. P . the 
case of a group of,Negroe s of Kansa s 
City , Mo. , wh o have suffered repeated 
attempts to destroy their property by 
an organization of white men wh o have 
demanded that they leave the neighborhood. Ther e are nine Negr o families 
in one block and twelve in the next wh o 
have purchased or are i n progress of 
buyin g their homes, rangin g in price 
from $1,500 to $4,000. I n the block in 
whic h I live five explosions of dynamite 
have occurred in the past year, causing 
considerable damage to our homes and 
much mental uneasiness on the part of 
our families. Th e last of these, whic h 
happened Saturday, Novembe r 11, was 
by far the most destructive of them all, 
completely wreckin g the home . of Mr . 
Hezekia h Walden . A t that time Mr . 
Walde n was workin g in Salt Lak e Cit y 
and his wife wit h two small children 
were alone in the house. 
"W e have again and again appealed 
to the mayo r and the chief of police to 
give us protection from these crimes, 
but the detectives have been of no help 
either in runnin g the perpetrators to 
earth or in checking further threats and 
outrages. W e feel that we have a clear 
case against the city, inasmuch as we 
have all faithfully discharged our duties 
as. citizens, and we are about to retain 
eminent legal counsel to defend our 
cause. I n addition to this we beg that 
we may have the assistance of some 
membe r of the legal department of the 
N . A . A . C. P., wh o wil l joi n us in vigorously prosecuting this case. 
"W e fear (as threats have already been 
issued) that our entire settlement wil l 
be dynamited unless active steps are 
taken to force the city to protect our 
lives and property. Asid e from this, if 
Negroe s are to be driven from one section of a city to another simpl y because 
a certain element (many of who m have 
moved into the neighborhood after the 
Negroes) demand it, we feel that no 
place wil l be left to them except the 
worst districts, even though they try to 
be peaceable, honest and industrious 
members of the community . 
"W e shall be glad to furnish yo u any 
particulars regarding the situation or its 
.history, and, besides, such photographs 
of the houses and surroundings as yo u 
may consider beneficial to the case. W e 
shall appreciate, also, an early reply. 
"Ver y trul y yours, " 
Th e association immediately took up 
this case and obtained further detailed 
information from a resident. 
"Yo u wil l recall our neighborhood 
when yo u drove out one day when here, DYNAMITE IN KANSAS CITY 161 
COLORE D RESIDENCES—WES T SID E O F MONTGAL L AVENU E 
when my sister was wit h me. Ther e are 
nine homes owned by colored people at 
this end of the block. Th e enclosed 
photos show yo u the two opposite sides 
of the street. Montgall , near 25th. Th e 
colored people have lived in these houses 
for periods ranging from eight years to 
two years. Whe n the first colored man 
purchased in the block there were only 
three whit e families in the near neighborhoo d at the other end of the block. 
Ne w houses were put up near and sold 
to whites, except the one adjacent to the 
colored family, which , after standing 
vacant for a while , was sold to a colored family, and then the other whites 
gradually sold out and moved away till 
there were nine colored in this block 
and about fifteen i n the block to the 
north of this one. The y lived in these 
peacefully til l nearly three years ago, 
when the agitation began that some 
Republican boss had 'Africanized ' the 
tenth ward. Meetings were held in a 
hall, denouncing agents and others wh o 
had sold to the colored people, and it 
was said that they must go by fair 
means or foul—that they had depreciated 
property, etc., etc. Feelin g ran high, 
and when a place on a neighboring 
street where no colored people had been, 
was sold to a Negro , the throwin g of 
dynamite began. Afte r three attacks on 
this house, the colored man moved out, 
and in a few weeks after that they 
began tryin g the same methods in our 
neighborhood on Montgall . 
"U p to the last attack the main injury 
done was the breaking of windows, but 
on the night of Novembe r 9 last a 
discharge was set off in the Walde n 
house, wreckin g it almost completely, 
so that it is unsafe to live in and could 
be repaired only at very great expense; 
the house cost originally about $3,400. 
His wife and children were alone in the 
house, he being in Utah , but fortunately 
were uninjured and made their home 
with a neighbor until they could get 
quarters i n another part of the city. 
"Th e first press notices said it was 
probably a gas explosion, but the insurance company, of course, showed that 
this was untrue and refused to pay insurance, and the house stands a wreck. 
"Th e photos wil l show yo u the nine 
houses in question, five on the west 
side and four on the east. The y would 
average about $3,000 in value, probably 
aggregating $30,000; two of the cottages 
have five rooms, others six and seven 
rooms; they are brick and frame and 
modern in every respect. 
"N o offers have been made to buy the 
places; they have been told indirectly 
that they must move out and leave their 
homes with agents and they wil l be sold. 
"T o us that is not a businesslike 
proposition and we have not moved. 
Onl y one house has been vacant about a 
year, the one owned by Dr. Unthank, 
and later bought by a colored teacher, 
who has not lived in it. 
"Tw o families have recently received 
threatening letters telling them to move 
out withi n thirty days, over the signature of 'Dynamite.' I understand that 
the letters were turned over to the 
postal inspector. 
"Th e newspapers are almost silent, 
have very brief notices, a few remarks 
about the Negroe s being in white neighborhoods, where their presence is objectionable, etc. 162 THE CRISIS 
"Th e officers claim not to be able to 
get any information about the matter. 
I wis h we were able to hire W . J. Burns. 
I think he could get them. 
"Th e meetings that started the trouble 
are not held publicl y now, but, it is supposed, in some private house, and that 
the throwers of the bombs are hired for 
the purpose. 
"Respectfully, " 
Th e governor of the State was approached and responded as follows: 
"Replyin g to you r letter of Decembe r 
IS, I enclose to yo u herewith a letter 
from Hon . Solo n T. Gilmore , police 
commissione r of Kansa s City , to who m 
you r letter was referred, together wit h 
the files of this office concerning the 
matter about whic h yo u writ e me." 
Th e police files gave these facts: 
"Th e first explosion happened on Apri l 
8, 1910, when the house located at 
2451 Chestnut Street and occupied by 
A . G. Howard , colored, was dynamited 
and the house slightly damaged. O n 
Decembe r 27, 1910, there was an explosion between the houses occupied by 
W . E . Griffin, colored, 2442 Montgal l 
Avenue , and Miss Anni e Jones, colored, 
of 2444 Montgall . Bot h of the houses 
were badly damaged and the house occupied by I. N . Day, 2440 Montgall , and 
Gearald Taylor, 2436 Montgall , were 
also slightly damaged at this time. O n 
Marc h 31, 1911, the house occupied by 
Susie Lewis, colored, at 3200 East How ­
ard Avenu e and owned by Mrs. Stoelz -
ing, of 2424 Par k Avenue , was dynamited, 
the explosion wreckin g the rear of the 
house and slightly damaged several 
houses nearby. O n Ma y 22, 1911, the 
house of W . E . Griffin, colored, 2442 
Montgal l Avenue , was dynamited for 
the second time and the house badly 
damaged and several windows broken in 
the neighborhood. O n Jul y 16, 1911, the 
home of Mrs. H . M . Reid , colored, 2461 
Montgal l Avenue , was dynamited and 
the house partly wrecked. O n Novem ­
ber 11, 1911, the house located at 2442 
Montgal l Avenu e was either dynamited 
or the explosion was caused by leaking 
gas. 
"N o arrests have been made of any 
of the perpetrators of these dynamitin g 
outrages, and the supposition is that 
these houses were being dynamited by 
the whit e people in that neighborhood 
wh o desired to rid the neighborhood of 
these colored families. This was the 
theory on whic h the police department 
was workin g when they received in ­
formation on Novembe r 26, 1911, from 
a colored man by the name of Louis 
Jackson, wh o stated that the houses 
were being dynamited by one Floy d 
Bullock , a colored man, wh o stated that 
he was dynamitin g the houses for the 
reason that he desired to reduce the 
value of property i n that neighborhood. 
Bulloc k has since been arrested on a 
charge of carryin g concealed weapons 
and is at the present time under for 
three years in the penitentiary. " 
A prominent whit e man writes this 
letter: 
"Personally , I am inclined to suspect 
that on account of race prejudice here 
detectives have not shown the energy 
whic h they should have shown. W e 
have no reason of doubting, however, 
that the police board has been sincere 
in its desire to arrest the offenders. 
Th e situation is a very difficult one. 
"Ther e is a very strong suspicion that 
the explosions have been carried on by 
an organization of white property own ­
ers. Earl y this week a Negr o was sent to 
the penitentiary on the charge that he 
was guilty of the dynamitin g at the solicitation of other Negroe s wh o desired to 
depreciate the value of property in the 
neighborhood. Whil e we do not pretend 
to be detectives and have no means of 
disproving the charge, the story hardly 
seems probable. 
"Yours truly, " 
A white lady writes: 
"Th e whol e web of black and white 
is so badly tangled here that even help 
has to get to these people quietly or it 
brings them trouble. 
"Please don't think I was not interested or that we did not want to give 
all the help possible. It is only very 
difficult to find the most helpful way 
of doing it. " 
Th e Kansa s Cit y Star had the following editorial Decembe r 29, 1911: 
"Th e credulity of Judge Latshaw of 
the crimina l court is quite remarkable. 
Judge Latshaw believes that a Negr o 
dynamited the homes of Negroe s at the 
instigation of Negroes! Such guileless 
gullibilit y is enviable. 
"Bu t that is neither here nor there. 
"Mor e to the point is it that because 
of this belief Judge Latshaw sentenced 
the Negr o to three years in the penitentiary, although the only charge 
against him wa s that of carryin g concealed weapons. Tha t is to say, the 
former extreme penalty of 'gun toting' 
was two years i n prison ; and many 
guilty ones have received only jail 
sentences or have escaped wit h a reprimand ; but this ma n was sentenced to 
three years in prison because the judge 
suspected him of a different crime. 
"Tha t was doubtless legal, for otherwise the judge woul d not have done it. 
Bu t ought it to be legal? Ough t a man 
wh o pleads guilty to one offense be 
given at least a yea r in the penitentiary 
for a crime he is not even legally 
accused of? " Disfranchising Voters in Maryland 
[The followin g account of the workin g of the attempts, in Maryland , to disfranchise white and colored voters alike is taken from a pamphlet by Verno n S. 
Bradley, endorsed and published by the Honest Ballot League of that State. Ou r 
article is a greatly condensed version of Mr . Bradley's story, but it contains the 
leading facts.] 
Th e legislature of Marylan d met in 
extraordinary session in Marc h of 1901 
to pass a new election law to restrict 
the Marylan d suffrage. In a continued 
development of this plan each succeeding legislature added numerous amendments, the most sweeping of whic h was 
the Wilso n law of 1904. Th e Wilso n 
law is in operation in eleven counties 
of Maryland , and the public outside 
these counties has little knowledge of 
what it is. 
It is necessary to remember that the 
legislature of 1896 gave to Marylan d 
the Australia n ballot law, providing, 
amon g other things, for bipartisan election officials; permittin g the use of an 
emblem by each politica l party and 
requiring a voter to make but one X 
mark to have his ballot counted for the 
entire ticket of his choice. 
Th e legislature of 1901 abolished the 
party emblem. Th e picture of "Ab e Lin ­
coln " or of Andre w Jackson, or of the 
hickor y tree was permitted no longer as 
an emblem or guide for the voter. Th e 
voter was required to make a separate 
X mark for every candidate for who m he 
voted. Supervisors of election were 
directed to arrange alphabetically on the 
official ballots the names of the various candidates. Th e supervisors of election, or a majority of them, were authorized to accept nominations from two parties using the same party designation, by 
prefixing to one some such qualifying 
term as "Independent." This was the 
stepping stone to the first fake tickets 
in Marylan d in the Novembe r election 
of 1901. Ballots could be rejected for 
trifling cause. 
Th e acts of 1902 gave the three supervisors of election, or a majority of each 
board (two being Democrats), the 
"powe r to make all rules necessary and 
regulations not inconsistent wit h this 
article. " A majority vote of the supervisors was made sufficient to determine 
all questions. Th e discretionary powers 
of the two Democrati c supervisors were 
enlarged. Th e next step was to give to 
them almost unlimited discretionary 
powers in the Wilso n law of 1904. 
Th e Wilso n law abolished the party 
designation. Th e alphabetical arrangement of names of candidates for county 
and State offices was abolished. It gave 
to the two Democrati c members of each 
board of election supervisors powe r to 
arrange names of candidates and to determine practically all questions relating to the ballot; it gave to them discretionary powers almost absolute. Th e 
law was applied to Somerset, Worcester, 
Kent, Talbot, St. Mary's, Charles, Calvert, Princ e George's and Ann e Arunde l 
counties. 
Th e Democrati c politicians responsible for the Wilso n law need the Negr o 
for their annual and most effective campaign issue. But Marylan d is not in 
danger of Negr o domination. Onl y 17 
per cent, of the registered vote of 
the State is Negro , and surely there 
is small compliment to the 83 per cent, 
white voters to have it fear domination 
by the 17 per cent, colored vote. Whil e 
the white registered vote has been in ­
creasing constantly, the colored registered vote has remained practically 
the same for twenty-five years. Twent y 
per cent, of the total registered vote of 
Marylan d was colored in 1888; 17 per 
cent, of the total registered vote was 
colored in 1910. Th e cry of Negr o 
domination is a fanciful issue, raised for 
politica l purposes only. 
Variou s tricks to disfranchise votes 
were resorted to. A s an example in 
Somerset County in 1903 a "fake ticket " 
ballot was used, with the name of a 
"Repudiation " party. Her e is a facsimile : 
FO R REGISTE R O F WILL S 
Vot e for One 
Thoma s Dixo n Democrati c | 
Willia m S. Lankfor d Repudiation | | 
Willia m F . Lankfor d Republican | | 
Woodlan d Alliso n Lon g Prohibitio n | 
| | 
It was hoped the Republican lookin g 
for Willia m F . Lankfor d woul d vote for 
Willia m S. Lankfor d or both; or that 
in lookin g for Republican woul d make 
his X mark after Repudiation or both. 
Nex t appears the Somerset official 
ballot of 1907. A s usual, it was a trick 
ballot, and had also a fake ticket. It 
was an illustrated ballot that furnished 
an emblem to the voter for the Demo ­
cratic candidates and . confusion to the 
voters for candidates of other parties. 
A Democrati c voter had only to mark 
above the black lines, and illiterates 
amon g the Democrati c voters were told 
to mark above' these lines. Th e names 164 THE CRISIS 
of the candidates on the Republica n 
ticket were mixe d up in confusion, and 
the Republican voters had to search all 
over the ballot for the names of the 
candidates for who m they desired to 
vote. Th e law had been changed and 
party emblems had been prohibited, as 
well as any other assistance to any 
voter; yet in defiance of this law the 
supervisors of election deliberately 
arranged a ballot wit h an emblem or 
heavy black guide line above the name 
of every Democrati c candidate to assist 
the Democrati c voter, but denied that 
guide line or any simila r assistance to 
the Republican voter. 
This Somerset ballot had not only 
guide lines to assist the Democrati c 
voter, but it had also a fake ticket wit h 
fake names of candidates lookin g like 
the names of Republican candidate's, deFOR HOUSE OF DELEGATES 
VOTE FOR TWO 
W. MITCHELL DIGGES 
AUGUSTUS B SLYE 
GEORGE O MONROE 
JOHN E WETHERALD. 
SYDNEY B. MUDD, JR. 
WESLEY J. WHEELER 
signed to draw accidentally to these fake 
names votes intended for the Republican 
candidates. Fo r instance, Abraham Lin ­
coln. Dryden , a candidate on the Repub ­
lican ticket, was paired off wit h Sidney 
Columbus Dryden , a fake candidate. 
(Th e same Sidney Columbu s Dryde n 
was used on a fake ticket to defeat Abraham Lincol n Dryde n on 
the Somerset ballot of 1909). Isaac 
Henr y Hal l was paired off wit h George 
Emor y Hall . Othe r simila r names were 
found for fake nominations for the 
Hous e of Delegates. 
Th e Wilso n law is a piece of class 
legislation. It has been submitted to 
popular vote in no county in Maryland . 
It was devised by a class of Democrati c 
politicians that needed such means to 
perfect an organization that woul d be 
proof against the Republican and the 
Independent voter. It has been applied 
to Republican counties, and it has 
accomplished the purpose intended; for 
in no county i n Marylan d have the 
Republicans elected a full county ticket 
where the Wilso n law was in operation. 
Countie s that before the days of the 
Wilso n law were close, or safely Repub ­
lican, now give regular majorities to the 
Democrati c ticket. N o sample ballots 
are published in the Wilso n counties. 
Th e Democrati c supervisors furnish in 
advance instructions to the voters of 
their own party and have ballots distributed for instruction purposes; but 
the Republica n supervisor and the 
Republica n voters are kept in ignoranc e 
of the form of the ballot until the time 
is too short for instruction of the voters 
of their party. 
Th e registered vote of Marylan d in 
1909 was about 11,000 mor e than in 
1899, whil e the counted vote was about 
50,000 less than in 1899. Whil e 89 per 
cent, of the registered vote of Marylan d 
was counted i n 1899, only 69 per cent, 
of the registered vote was counted in 
1909. Th e loss in the counted vote in 
ten years represents the voters disfranchised by the Wilso n ballot and by 
simila r election legislation. This disfranchised vote is of two kinds: First, 
the stay-at-home vote; second, the 
rejected vote thrown out by the election 
officials in the poll room. O f course, 
the total registered vote never is polled 
and counted. Ther e is always a certain 
number of registered voters that do not 
vote. 
Th e stay-at-home disfranchised vote is 
greater amon g the whit e voters than 
amon g the colored. If 68 per cent, 
of the white registered vote of Somerset 
county came out and voted, 32 per cent, 
stayed at home ; but onl y 22 per cent, 
of the Negr o voter stayed at home in 
this county, for 78 per cent, of the 
Negr o registered vote came out and 
voted. Th e percentage is about the 
same in Dorcheste r county. 
So much for the stay-at-home vote. 
Th e greater part of the vote disfranchised by the Wilso n ballot is represented in the rejected or throw-out vote. 
In the Novembe r election in 1909 there 
were 4,154 votes counted in Dorcheste r 
county for all the candidates on the 
State ticket, the highest vote. Thre e 
thousand, three hundred and five were 
counted in the Democrati c primar y two 
Charle s Count y Officia l Ballo t o f I909 
PAR T O F A BALLOT , FOU R AN D ONE-HAL F FEE T LON G WOMEN'S CLUBS 165 
months before. Onl y 882 mor e votes election than in the Democrati c primary, 
(Republican , Democrati c and Prohibi- though the Republican vote in the gentionist) were counted in the general eral election ran as high as 2,007. 
[As we are about to go to press news comes that the Wilso n ballot law has 
been repealed and the Bosley bill substituted. Th e Republican success at the 
polls last autumn made some change necessary, but the Bosle y bill is declared by 
the Independents to be no better or even more confusing than the old law. Fo r 
example, no party emblems are permitted and the voter must remember the 
politica l creeds of thirty-six candidates.] 
The "N " Street Day Nursery. 
A modest little six-room frame buildin g at 417 N . Street, N . W. , Washington , 
D . C , shelters the Da y Nurser y for Col ­
ored Children . So unpretentiously has 
the wor k been carried on that the 
nursery has no definite name, but takes 
the name of the street upon whic h it 
happens to be located. 
I n October, 1904, this movement was 
started by a group of white women, of 
whic h Mrs. Joseph A . Gilfilla n was the 
leading spirit, acting as secretary for 
the board and general manager for the 
work'. 
A part of the first annual report of 
the secretary reads as follows: "Ther e 
are three principa l ways in whic h the 
little colored children of this city are 
disposed of when their mothers go out 
for a day's work, as they must do to get 
bread for the children. One is to lock 
them in the house, babies and all, to 
care for each other. Anothe r is to turn 
them over to the care of a neighbor, 
who, wit h her own family to look after, 
instead of goin g out to work, takes in 
washing. A third, to keep an older 
child home from school to give such 
care as she can. Is it any wonde r that 
the district nurses have some pitiful 
tales to tell of accidents that have happened? On e of a child that was badly 
burned; another of a baby that was 
found a livin g skeleton. It had been 
left in the charge of a child of four 
years, wh o gave it its bottle faithfully, 
but whethe r the mil k was hot or cold, 
sweet or sour, was all the same. Bot h 
of these children, by having proper care, 
recovered. 
"Th e health report shows that out of 
every 1,000 colored babies born in Wash ­
ington 457 die withi n their first year; 
while in the same number of white 
babies only 183 die. No r is this all. 
N o one wh o has lived lon g in Washing ­
ton can have failed to notice the 
large number of deformities amon g the 
colored people, due to neglect in 
infancy. * • * * 
"Th e nursery is open every day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, from 
7 a. m. to 7 p. m.; the mothers bringin g 
the babies in the mornin g and comin g 
for them at night. The y are required 
to pay five cents a day for the care of 
each child and also to brin g all necessary food, whic h the caretaker prepares 
for each child, the nursery furnishing 
only the milk ; so that, although the 
nursery is a charity in the sense that 
it is not and never can be self-supporting, it does not have the effect of a 
charity on those wh o get the benefit of 
it. A supply of clothin g is kept on 
hand and after the babies are bathed 
they are allowed to wear it through 
the day, but their own clothes are put 
on before they go home. Th e effect 
of such care was shown in the case of 
one baby whose mothe r was quite disturbed the first night she took the baby 
home because it slept all night. Th e 
next mornin g she demanded, 'Wha t 
have yo u been givin g my baby? It 
never slept all night before.' Th e caretaker told her all she had given it was 
a bath and a good rubbing. " 
Th e foregoing shows the discerning 
sympathy and the desire for lovin g 
service whic h prompted the opening of 
the nursery; the same spirit has carried on the wor k through many vicis-
£itudes. 
Afte r the nursery had been in operation 
for some months, the management very 
justly felt that colored wome n should 
take part in its development, and in 
1905 Mrs. Gilfillan requested the assistance of the Alph a Charit y Clu b of 
Anacostia , D . C., through its founder 166 THE CRISIS 
and president, Mrs. 
Leil a Amo s Pendle ­
ton. Th e club responded at once , 
and, together wit h 
the Socia l Purit y 
Clu b of Washington , 
has lent assistance, 
givin g money, fuel, 
food, garments, etc. 
These wome n have 
also tried to explain 
to the mothers of the 
neighborhoo d 
the meaning and purpose of the nursery. 
In June, 1910, Mrs. 
Pendleton, president, 
and Mrs. W . Bruc e 
Evans , vice-president, of the Socia l 
Purit y Club , visited 
the five school buildings in the vicinit y 
of the nursery in the 
effort to interest the 
children and teachers in the work . Th e 
children were invited to attend a "party" 
and a large number responded. Th e 
girls were invited to attend a vacation 
school (a lack of space and of volunteer 
DA Y NURSER Y CHILDRE N 
teachers prevented a 
like invitation to the 
boys), and on Tuesday, Jul y 5, the vacation schoo l was 
opened. 
A numbe r of outgrow n garments had 
been solicited an d 
the girls were taught 
to make over large 
articles into smaller 
ones , t o darn , 
patch and mend ; 
they were also given 
simple lesson s in 
cookin g cereals, apples, potatoes, etc. 
Whe n th e publi c 
schools opene d in 
the fall, the girls expressed a desire to 
attend the sewing 
class on Saturdays, 
and so the members 
of the Socia l Purit y 
Clu b have conducted 
the vacation school 
and the Saturday class alternately.-
Th e result has been a marke d improve ­
ment in the manners and the entire tone 
of the girls of the neighborhood. 
HISTORIC DAY S IN FEBRUAR Y 
1. Charles Leno x Remond , worke r in 
the cause of abolition, born, 1810. 
2. Georgi a ratified the Fifteenth 
Amendment, 1870. 
3. Pennsylvani a Abolitio n Society 
petitioned Congress to abolish slavery, 
1790. 
4. James G. Birney , Fre e Soi l candidate for President, born, 1792. 
5. Resolution presented in Congress 
for annihilation of slave trade, 1820. 
6. Thaddeus Stevens reported Recon ­
struction Bil l in Congress, 1867. 
8. Confederate States forbid importa ­
tion of slaves, 1861. 
9. Recruitin g 54th Massachusetts 
Regimen t began, 1863> 
10. Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r died, 1906. 
11. Bisho p J. M . Walden , friend of 
Negr o education, born, 1831. 
12. Abraham Lincol n born, 1809. 
First Fugitiv e Slave Act , 1793. 
13. Absalo m Jones, first Negr o Protestant Episcopa l minister in the Unite d 
States, died, 1818. 
14. Frederic k Douglass' birthday, 
1817. Mr . Douglass never knew the 
day and year of his birth. B y a system 
of approximation, explained in his "Lif e 
and Times, " he concluded that he must 
have been born about the year 1817. 
H e selected St. Valentine's Da y as his 
birthday, because, as he used facetiously 
to remark, he was his race's "Valentine. " 
15. Blanche K . Bruce , a Negr o senator from Mississippi, presided over the 
Unite d States Senate, 1879. 
16. Henr y Wilson , abolitionist, senator and Vice-Presiden t of the Unite d 
States, born, 1812. 
17. Nebrask a ratified the Fifteenth 
Amendment, 1870. 
18. Texa s ratified the Fifteenth 
Amendment, 1870. 
20. Frederic k Douglass died, 1895. 
23. Charle s Sumne r opposed, in the 
Senate of the Unite d States, a bust to 
Chie f Justice Taney , author of the Dre d 
Scott decision, 1865. 
24. Bisho p Danie l A . Payn e born, 
1811. 
25. Hira m R. Revels, first Negr o 
Unite d States senator, took the oath of 
office as senator, 1870. 
26. Genera l Gran t forbade search for 
slaves in his lines, 1862. 
27. Dominica n Republi c formed, 1844. 
L . M . HERSHAW . TH E BURDEN 
RENTIN G A HOUS E IN 
PHILADELPHIA . 
I never had the experience of renting 
a house in my life until last June. I 
had attempted to buy a house, but after 
the bargain was about made, except 
transferring funds, the owner, who 
seemed at first anxious to sell, decided 
not to sell to a colored person. 
So I decided to rent until I could find 
the kin d of house I wanted to purchase. 
Th e first house recommended to me for 
rental belonged to the Stephen Girar d 
Estate. Ove r the telephone I was told 
that I migh t have it, and that the agent 
woul d go wit h my wife to show her 
through it. However, when my wife appeared, the agent was "too sorry to put 
her to the trouble, " but he "could not 
rent to colored people." Th e house was 
o n Sansom Street, between 40th and 
41st Streets. O n one side of it most 
of the occupants are colored. This was 
therefore surprising. 
I then called up several other agents. 
Al l of them gave me houses, out of 
repair or on poorl y paved and poorly 
kept streets, some positively filthy, because I told them I desired a house 
"for a colored clergyman. " 
No t being satisfied, the next day I 
called up Wm . J. Benham, and this was 
the conversation between us: 
"This is Wm . J. Benham, Incorporated. Wha t can we do for you? " 
" I am Dr. R. R. Wright , of 105 S. 
34th Street. I hear yo u have some nice 
little houses on Rub y Street, and I want 
to rent one." 
"Al l right, doctor, we have numbers 
— and on South Ruby . 
Th e rent is $18 per month ; six rooms 
and bath, all conveniences." 
"Yes, but haven't yo u some in the 
next block, above Market—o n Nort h 
Ruby? " 
Afte r a lon g pause: "Y-e-s, I think we 
have." 
"Al l right, I want one of them; when 
can I get it? " 
"Now , doctor, to be perfectly frank 
with you, I don't think yo u woul d care 
to have a house on Nort h Ruby . Yo u 
know—er—yo u know, er—er—they are— 
why , colored people live chiefly on 
Nort h Ruby. " 
"Wha t difference does that make, Mr . 
Benham? " 
"Well , I thought yo u woul d not like 
to live among them." 
" I don't if they are thieves, drunkards, 
wife beaters and general disturbers of 
the peace." 
"Oh , they aren't so bad as that, doctor, but yo u know they are colored. " 
"Ar e they respectable, quiet and law 
abiding? That's what I want to know. " 
"Oh , yes." 
"Well , I like colored people. I am 
from the South and I am used to them. 
M y father hires colored people, and I 
employ a dozen or more in my business. 
Yo u see, I make most of my money out 
of them. The y are a fine loya l set when 
yo u kno w them—I mean the respectable 
ones, of course." 
"Yes, " came weakly over the 'phone. 
"Now , Mr . Benham, I want a house on 
Nort h Ruby. " 
"Doctor, it wil l cost yo u $20." 
"Bu t I thought yo u said $18?" 
"No , $18 for South Ruby , but $20 for 
Nort h Ruby. " 
"Ar e they the same houses?" 
"Yes. " 
"Wh y $2 more? " 
"Well , that is the charge." 
"Oh , yo u have them pay $2 for the 
privilege of being colored, do you? I 
see." 
"Yes, I guess yo u are right, doctor." 
"Bu t yo u are not going to charge me 
$20?" 
Afte r a lon g pause: "Yo u see, we can 
rent that for $20 to a colored man, and 
so I guess we wil l have to charge 
yo u $20." 
"Well , I wil l take a house on South 
Rub y at $18. For, as much as I like 
the colored people, I am not going to 
throw any money away. " 
"Al l right, doctor, we have No . 
South Ruby ; yo u can have that for $18." 
Afte r a pause: "Now , yo u see, Mr . 
Benham, if it turned out that I am 
colored, could I still rent a house on 
South Rub y for $18?" Stil l longer 
pause: "Yes, I am a colored man, Dr. 
R. R. Wright. " 
"Well , doctor, I don't know ; I'l l have 
to see and I'll call yo u up." 168 THE CRISIS 
Fro m that day to this I have never 
been called up. I, however, called on 
Mr . Benham and found that he had "no 
houses on South Ruby. " 
Ma y say that I did move on Nort h 
Ruby , pay $20 per mont h (not to Mr . 
Benham, however), and find the street 
quite respectable. Ther e has been one 
arrest during the six months I have been 
here, also one case of serious drunkenness and one quarrel between families. 
In none of these were Negroe s involved. 
Withi n a year the street has changed 
from an all white to two-thirds colored, 
and all the remaining whites have "for 
sale" signs on their houses. 
R . R . WRIGHT , JR. 
•J Th e Internationa l Moulders' Journa l 
says: "Another argument used was that if 
we took the Negro molder into our union 
we woul d place him in a position to wor k 
in any of our shops, and by this means 
the Negr o woul d soon have all the foundries south of the Maso n and Dixo n line. 
This, in my opinion, is one of the weakest arguments advanced. If these brothers could come to Chattanooga , Tenn. , 
and see some of the Chattanooga foundries that are workin g Negr o molders, 
where there are no restrictions placed 
on the number of handy men and apprentices worked, he woul d soon realize that 
if something was not done soon to get 
us in a position to stop this evil, the 
Negr o in a very short time woul d be in 
a better position to do the very thin g 
that they claim they are afraid woul d 
happen by allowin g them to joi n our 
union. Th e only way to stop this practice is by organizing the Negr o molders 
and insisting on the foundries livin g up 
to the ratio of apprentices. If the Mold ­
ers' Unio n had taken up this wor k of 
taking the Negr o into their union years 
ago the Chattanooga foundries of to-day 
woul d not be used as incubators to turn 
out Negr o molders, and instead of having 
hundreds of Negro molders, there woul d 
have been very few.' Th e man virtually 
says, take Negroe s into the union so as 
to keep them out of the trade. 
<J A colored man who has not visited the 
South for several years recently took a trip 
and writes as follows: "Afte r crossing the 
line I took in. everything. N o colored man 
could go into the coaches of the whites 
under any consideration, and yet the whit e 
men could come into our car and drink beer, 
use bad language and smoke amon g our 
wome n travelers. I saw the conductor 
and flagman smokin g i n our car. Th e 
company can provide smokers for the 
whites to keep them from smokin g in 
the presence of their wome n passengers. 
Wh y can't it do the same for us? I 
was born in the South and stayed there 
until I was 24 years old, and I admit 
that the condition of the colored race 
is growin g steadily worse on account of 
the oppression of the whites. " 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.0 0 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C . R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AND . COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Mention TH E 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B . BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502 , Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B . S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW , 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
90 8 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 169 
THE 
BOOKS 
THE 
MAGAZINE 
STUDENTS OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM 
The Souls of Black Folk, DuBois 
History of the Negro • Washington 
John Brown • - DuBois 
Up From Slavery • • Washington 
Poems of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar 
Poems of W. S. Braithwaite 
Race Adjustment • Miller 
Negro In the New World, Johnston 
Following the Color Line, Baker 
Works of Charles W. 
Chestnutt 
Atlanta University Studies 
Negro and the Nation • Merriam 
Negro In the South j Washington 
'DuBois 
Sinclair 
(Kington 
Aftermath of Slavery • 
Half a Man 
Life of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe • • • • Stowe 
Mind of Primitive Man, Boaz 
Race Prejudice • • Finot 
Curse of Race Prejudice, Morton 
Quest of the Silver Fleece, 
a novel - - - DuBois 
Through Afro-America, Archer 
Southern South • • Hart 
Inter-Racial Problems, Official Record 
of the Universal Races Congress 
An d general readers will 
find this list embraces the 
most popular and comprehensive studies of the Negro 
question. They are the 
best books by the best 
writers and thinkers. By 
special arrangements with 
the publishers of the books 
we are in position to make 
combination offers at remarkably low prices. This 
offer is good for a limited 
time only and is made to 
increase the subscription 
list of 
THE CRISIS 
the magazine edited by 
W . E . B. DuBois with the co-operation of Oswal d Garrison 
Villard , Charles Edward Russell, Kell y Mille r and 
others. Th e Crisis is the organ of the National As ­
sociation Fo r the Advancement of Colored People 
and is a record of every important happening and 
movement in the world which bears on the great 
problems of interracial relations and especially 
those which affect the Negro American 
OUR OFFER: 
T o the 
Publishers 
of the CRISIS, 
20 Vesey Street. 
New York City. 
• „ , , i k Jt/ Gentlemen: 
W e have made special combinations 
, . . . . , , m 49 • Please send, 
with these books in sets of five, ten, fif- <^ 
. . without any cost to 
teen and twenty, together with a & , 
/ y me, your descriptive 
year's subscription to The Crisis, • i • , 
i circular offering these 
and will be glad to have the r L • I .L 
sets or books on the 
names and addresses of all / Negr o p roble m and a 
who find themselves / year ' s subscription to the 
interested in this / CRISIS. 
greates t o f / Nam e 
problems. Addres s 
City 
State _ _ 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 170 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
CLASSIFIE D ADVERTISIN G 
<| Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELECT readers. 
<1 If you want HELP, you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
<J If you want a POSITION. TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
(J You will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
•I Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
CJ Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
W e have for sale a numbe r of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and bams, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. City property a 
specialty. Business lots i n the best par t of 
the city, improved end unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texa s real estate. Land s are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texa s property, write 
T. B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company, 3416 El m 
Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
F OR SALE—W e have home s from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohi o 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Ca n 
sell you a house for $50 $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S I S A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Rea l Estat e 
121 8 1/2 Mt. Verno n Av e Columbus , Ohi o 
Mention 
Come to Oklahoma 
TAFT. OKLAHOMA, is the fastest-growing colored town in the United 
States. Already a flourishing, prosperous community with bank, industrial college and State - school for colored race, 
cotton gin, brick yard, churches, numerous stores and other enterprises, all controlled by thriving colored citizens. 
Surrounded by the most fertile farming 
land in' Oklahoma. Directly in the path 
of the fortune-making oil developments 
in Oklahoma. Splendid openings for 
home seekers, business men, mechanics 
and others. Invest your money in Taft 
now. It will make you handsome 
returns. 
Beautifully located lots, $25 to $30 
each. Five dollars cash, small monthly 
payments without interest or taxes. 
Perfect titles positively guaranteed. 
Write to-day for handsome illustrated 
map, booklet and lithograph. 
REEVE S REALT Y CO. 
Flynn-Ames Bldg., Muskogee. Okla. 
THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 171 
MUSI C I TYPEWRITER S 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupil of Sigismund Stojowaki 
Teache r of Piano, Theory, Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YORK CIT Y 
MIS S EDIT H W . McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
31 0 W . ll9t h Street New Yor k Cit y 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
a t reasonable rates. 
Musi c furnished for privat e parties. 
SCHOOL S 
MAYERS ' INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
BOARDIN G AN D DA Y SCHOO L 
Fo r the industrial, literary, moral and religious 
training of the Negro youth. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fo r particular s address 
FLOR A E . MAYERS , Principa l 
606 Payne Street Knoxville , Tenn . 
Remingtons. Densmores, Jewetts. $ 11.50 each; Franklins. 
Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. 
Bargain s in Underwoods. 
Smith s an d al l others. Al l 
guaranteed. Supplies. 
Standar d Typewrite r 
Exchang e 
23B Par k Row, New Yor k 
HEL P WANTE D 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address; 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
'Phone : Harlem , 6370 
Middlese x Employmen t Agenc y 
Offers you the benefit of its experience, gained 
by years of actual conduct of business and the 
prestige that comes from a large clientele of 
satisfied patrons. 
Our rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standard high. Mai l orders solicited. 
2229 Fift h Avenue , near 136th Street, 
New York . 
Ou r Norma l Preparatory Course 
includes a thorough review of Arithmetic . Grammar, Geography, U . S. History , Physiology, 
Reading, Spelling, Penmanship, Drawing , Civi l 
Government and Theory and Ar t of Teaching. 
Just the thing to prepare you for a teachers' 
examination. Address 
AFRO-AMERICA N CORRESPONDENC E 
SCHOO L 
2808 St. An n Street New Orleans, La . 
FURRIE R 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G . B . NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and re 
lined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Prices reasonable. 
24 WES T 136T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
PATENT S 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
55 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technica l Translations. 
Telephone 343 Joh n Room 604 
ME N AN D WOME N WANTE D 
to sell beautiful Ar t Pictures. Ou r agents 
are coining money on these pictures. 
Thre e sample pictures by mail, 35 cents. 
Te n sample postcards by mail, 6 cents. 
Address 
JACO B GRIFFIT H 
252 W . 53d Street Ne w Yor k 
WANTED— A first-class photographer to take full 
charge of studio in best city in America , with 
privilege of buying half interest of entire 
business. Owne r going on road as demonstrator. Fo r particulars address No. 100 , care 
of TH E CRISIS . 
WANTED— A man of character and ability to 
fill the position of Financia l Agent. Must be 
a good lecturer and a convincing talker. This 
will be a paying and permanent position. 
Investigate at once. 
Address TH E S., I. & E . CORPORATION , 
Moun d Bayou, Miss. 
WANTE D A T ONC E ! 
COLLECTOR S O F NAME S AN D ADDRESSE S 
WANTE D A T ONCE—On e person in every city 
in the United States, who can write plainly, to 
send us names and addresses of lawyers, doctors, 
merchants, business men of all professions, sufferers of diseases, pensioners, and so forth. 
Spare-time work and profitable pay. Fo r further 
particular s send two-cent stamp. Address 
O . A . WRIGH T 
Bedford Cit y Virgini a 
Mention THE Crisis. 172 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
1 =nl 0. Augustus Wright 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 . „
 w 
Attorney-in-Fact 
m P. O. Box 121 Bedford City, Va. 
Van Noy Printing Co. Practice s before the Department of the 
- Interior, and the several bureaus thereof 
100 Line n Finis h Card , by Mail , 50c at Washington , D . C. Prosecutes 
claims for pension, increase of penM
*" Mt>t ^
tl "tMt ^"*" Mltlt ^" >
 sion and bounty land. 
COMMERCIA L FEINTIN G Searches made of U . S. Patent Office 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G records; assignments of patents pre-
' BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G P. ar,
e d an d filed
- Trademark s and copyHMfataBBfaBaa ^ i
j Byatalat B rights procured. 
I Correspondenc e solicited. 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . Louis, MO . Approved : Bureau of Pensions, J . P. 
I | | 9-26-11-
~ 'Phone 4876-W Harle m 
A RACE ENTERPRISE The Quaint Entertainer , Autho r and Banj o 
Manufacturin g Badges, Banners and Comedian 
Supplies for all Fraterna l and Churc h AL. BROWN 
Societies. Catalogue upon request. Presents His 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. Duo, Trio and QUARTETT E 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. Fo r All Privat e Occasions 
N.E. Cor. 8th and Plum Streets References: Th e Publi c for 12 Year s stud
Cincinnati. Ohio Hours: 10 A.M. to 7 p . M. 
WHER E T O STO P 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
COMFORT—Large , air y rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE—In the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy - the most discriminating 
VOCA L AND INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC EVER Y EVENING 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Cours e Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. ' 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J. L. MARSHALL, Proprietor 
TH E SOUTHERN RESTAURANT 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 136th and 136th Sts. 
Real Hom e Cooking ; Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-made Rolls Served Ho t 
'Phone 2877 Leno x 
WHITE ROSE WORKING GIRLS' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenue s 
Pleasant temporary lodgings tor working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. Th e Home 
solicits orders for workin g dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S B . KEYSER , Supt. 
NORT H CAROLIN A 
SANDERS' HOTE L 
301 S. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N. C. 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDERSProprieto r 
'Phone 681 Ho t and Cold Baths 
WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meals at all hours. 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COR . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTOR STREET S 
Thre e Blocks from Unio n Station 
DURHAM , N . C. 
Mention The Crisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 173 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
Th e Kelse y Schoo l of Beaut y Cultur e an d Hai r Dressin g 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York Cit y 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Beauty Culture , Hair Makin g and 
Chiropod y scientifically taught. Day and night sessions. Instructions given to 
pupils in their own homes if desired. Diploma s awarded. Send for bookletdirectory of recently graduated students. 
Hoo Hoo! Hoo Hoo! Hoo Hoo ! 
SOMETHIN G NEW | 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
With a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
WANTED—Organizer s in every city in the United 
States. For particulars write G. W . Bland, H . S. P., 
1101/2 Colfax Avenue, South Bend, Indiana.
 1 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 "Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L . A. D E TOSCANO CO. 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Knights of Pythias 
Knights Templar s 
An d Patriarchs 
Equipments 
BADGE S 
JEWEL S 
REGALI A 
Paraphernalia 
and Supplies 
for Al l Societies 
Estimates Given 
Mme. B. E. de Toscano, Manager 
146 WES T 31st STREE T Bet. Sixth and Seventh Avenues NE W YOR K CITY 
Telephone 3253 Harle m CARPET CLEANING 
CLEANERS AND RENOVATERS FOR PARTICULAR PEOPLE 
NEW YORK CAREFU L CLEANING BUREAU 
12 WEST 13STH STREET 
W e make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture , we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OUR SPECIALT Y 
LADIES USE "VELVA " 
A medicated cream, delightfully perfumed. 
Unequalled for the complexion. Heals rashes, 
blackheads and pimples. A new and very scientific production. Fifteen cents per box, postpaid. 
Pric e list o f toilet preparations free. 
ALEXANDER SPECIALTY COMPANY 
150 Nassau Street New York 
BEAUTIFU L ART EXHIBIT 
Miss Cor a Va n Schoick is conducting a sal e 
and exhibit of unusual interest at the CLI O 
SCHOOL , 487 6th Avenue, between 29th and 30th 
Streets, New York. 
Ther e is on sale hand-painted china and pillow tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive 
for gifts and interior decorations. 
Mention THE Crisis. 
HOO T SUPREM E 
OFFICER S O F TH E 
Home Nest Tree 
110 1/2 West Colfax Ave. 
South Bend, Ind. 174 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Is Your Hair ^ 
"^Falling Out? ^ 
Your Hai r Wil l Not Be Beautiful Unless It Is Healthy 
When the hair splits, breaks off, falls out, or you have 
an abnormal amount of dandruff, you need the attention 
of a hair specialist. 
Hav e
 MADAM E WALKER' S Have 
You ^-PREPARATIONS— • You 
Dandruff? w ^
 no t on ^ re l' ev e
 these conditions and encourage Eczema? 
i— — a soft, healthy growth, but in using them you get the •———»«« . 
*} advice and personal attention of Madame Walker, who [ 
is regarded as an expert in the treatment of scalp diseases 
ADDRES S 
Madam e C. J . WALKE R 
640 N . WES T STREE T INDIANAPOLIS , IND., U . S. A . 
When You Send Out Letters 
to several hundred people at the same time, do they look and read like a 
"circular" letter or a "personal" letter? 
Letters that seem "personal" are always read with interest, while the 
ordinary "circular" is passed unread and unnoticed to the waste basket. 
If you plan to do some advertising by letters write me for information about "letters that get the business." 
Address 
ALBO N L. HOLSE Y 
20 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E Crisis. TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : Suite 311 , 2 0 Vese y Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25 , 191 1 
OBJECT.—Th e Nationa l Association 
for the Advancement of Colore d Peopl e 
is an organization of persons wh o believe 
that the present prejudice against colored 
races, and particularly the denial of rights 
and opportunities to ten million American s 
of Negr o descent, is not only unjust and 
a menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to Worl d Peac e and 
the realization of Huma n Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e wor k is carried 
on by four bureaus : 1. A Lecture Bureau . 
2. A Burea u of Lega l Assistance. 3. A 
Burea u of Information. 4. A Burea u of 
Publicit y and Research. 
Th e organ of the association is TH E 
CRISIS. 
ORGANIZATION.— Membershi p is 
open to all. Th e annual fee varies from 
$1 to $25 . Lif e memberships are $500 . 
Th e cost of the association for the last 
twelve months was $9,000 . 
W e need $1 4,00 0 for the coming year. 
OFFICER S 
Nationa l President — Mr . Moorfiel d 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Mr . John E . Milholland , Ne w York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, Ne w York . 
Rev . Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore . 
Chairma n of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , Ne w 
York . 
Treasurer—Mr. Walte r E . Sachs, Ne w 
York . 
Director of Publicit y and Research—Dr. 
W . Ε. B . D u Bois, Ne w York . 
—Miss Mar y W . Ovington, 
Ne w York . 
Assistant Secretar y — Mis s Marth a 
Gruening , Ne w York . 
BOAR D O F DIRECTOR S 
Terms Expire 1913 
Mr . George W . Crawford, New Haven 
Rev. G. It. Waller, Baltimor e 
Rev. A . Clayton Powell, New Yor k 
Dr. William A. Sinclair, Philadelphi a 
Miss Lillia n D. Wald , New Yor k 
Mr . Pau l Kennaday, New Yor k 
Rev. Joseph Silverman, New Yor k 
Mr . Thomas Ewing , Jr., New Yor k 
Mr . Rolan d F . Nash, Brookly n 
Mr . Joseph P. Loud , Boston 
Terms Expire 1914 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brookly n 
Rev. W . H. Brooks. New Yor k 
Mrs. F . R. Keyset, New Yor k 
Mr . Charles Edward Russell, New Yor k 
Dr. W. E . B . D u Bois, New Yor k 
Miss Jane Addams, Chicago 
Mrs. Florence Κ elley, New Yor k 
Dr. C. E . Bentley, Chicago 
Mrs. M . C. Terrell, Washington 
Dr. N . F . Mossell, Philadelphi a 
Terms Expire 1915 
Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New Yor k 
Mr . John E . Milholland . New Yor k 
Mrs. M . D . Maclean, New Yor k 
Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New Yor k 
Mr . Joel E . Spingarn, New Yor k 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New Yor k 
Bishop Alexander Walters. New Yor k 
Mr. Willia m English Walling , New Yor k 
Dr. Ο. M . Waller, Brookly n 
ADVISOR Y COMMITTE E 
Miss Gertrude Barnum, New Yor k 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New Yor k 
Prof. John Dewey, New Yor k 
Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott, New Yor k 
Mr. Hamilto n Holt. New Yor k 
Miss Mau d R. Ingersoll, New Yor k 
Rev. Horace G. Miller, New Yor k 
Mrs. Ma x Morgenthau, Jr., New Yor k 
Mr . James F . Morton, Jr., New Yor k 
Mr . Henry Moskowitz, New Yor k 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly , New Yor k 
Mr . Jacob H . Schiff, New Yor k 
Prof. E . R. A . Seligman, New Yor k 
Mrs. Ann a Garli n Spencer, New Yor k 
Mrs. Henry Villard , New York . 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise, New Yor k 
Mr . D . Maco n Webster, Brooklyn, Ν. Y . 
Mr . Geo. E . Wibecan, Jr., Brooklyn, Ν. Ύ. 
Mrs. W . H . Talbert, Buffalo, Ν. Y . 
Hon . Thos. M . Osborne, Auburn , Ν. Y . 
Mr. W . L . Bulkley , Ridgefield Park , N . J 
Miss Mari a Baldwin , Boston. Mass. 
Mr . Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Mass 
Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke, Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston, Mass. 
Hon . Albert E . Pillsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston. Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, Brookline . Mass. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass. 
Prest. Chas. T.Thwing, Cleveland, O. 
Mr . Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland. O. 
Hon . Harry C. Smith , Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H . C King , Oberlin, O. 
Prest. W . S, Scarborough, Wilberforce, 0. 
Mrs. Ida B . Wells Burnett. Chicago, III. 
Miss Sophronisba Breckenridge, Chicago, III. 
Mr . Clarence Darrow, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. Julius Rosenwald. Chicago, Ill.. 
Mrs. Celi a Parke r Woolley, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. F . L . McGhee, St. Paul . Minn . 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia , Pa . 
Miss Susan Wharton. Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia . Pa . 
Mr . W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa . 
Rev. Harvey Johnson, D . D. , Baltimore , Md . 
Hon . Wm . S. Bennet, Washington, D . C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford. Washington, D . C. 
M r L . M . Hershaw, Washington, D . C. 
Prof. Kell y Miller, Washington. D . C. 
Prof. L . B . Moore. Washington, D . C. 
Justice W. P . Stafford. Washington, D . C. 
Rev. J. Milto n Waldron. Washington, D . C. 
Prest. John Hope. Atlanta , Ga . 
Mr. Lesli e P. Hill , Manassas, Va . 
Mr . Willia m Pickens. Talladega, Ala . TH E DIFFERENC E 
Between "GOOD ENOUGH" and the "BEST" is the 
difference between ordinary print-shop work and ours. 
Our facilities, and long years of experience give 
our work that INDIVIDUALITY which you appreciate in 
your printed things. 
W e refer you to Mr . Condé Nast of Vogue and 
Dr . W . Ε. B. D u Bois of TH E CRISIS. 
By the way, we print TH E CRISIS. D p you like 
it? If so, let us make an estimate on your work. 
ROBER T N . WOO D 202 East 99th St., New York 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mak e You r Spare Moments Profitable 
^ Th e continued growth of TH E CRISIS necessitates the extension of our 
field force, and we need representatives in all cities to establish sub-agencies 
and look after renewals. 
€ | If yo u can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
i n your city, we can make yo u a proposition that wil l interest you . Th e 
wor k is dignified as well as profitable. 
Address, and send references to 
FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager 
20 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISI S 