One Dollar a Year Ten Cents a Copy 
Happy New Year 
The Crisis "Out of the House of Bondage" 
The latest and greatest book from the pen of 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
"N o man of his race has so sure a power of prunning falacies with passionless 
intellectual severity."—Boston Transcript. 
"Th e man searches deeply into underlying causes."—St. Joseph, Mo., Xews-Press. 
" A philosophic treatise."—Charlotte, N. C , Observer. 
"N o student of social conditions of America at the present time will want to fail to see 
it on his shelves."—Southern Workman. 
242 Pages. Price SI.50. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
Address: Prof. KELLY MILLER, Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founde d 1891 
Th e first trainin g schoo l fo r colore d 
nurse s in this country , Freedman's 
excepted . 
Comprise s a trainin g schoo l for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary , and 
thoroughl y equippe d children's department ; whe n fund s ar e ample , postgraduat e wor k ma y b e undertaken . 
Th e hospita l is ope n to all. Th e 
race s co-operat e i n the boar d o f 
trustees, in th e medica l staff and in 
administration ; the institution is the 
onl y on e o f its kin d i n whic h a colore d 
ma n ma y ac t a s interne . 
Cost o f building s an d equipment, 
$100,000 ; fre e fro m debt. Endowment , 
550,000 , contribute d mostl y b y wills 
mad e b y colore d men . Additiona l endowmen t needed , $5 0,000. 
Th e nurses' cours e covers thre e 
years; trainin g an d instructio n give n 
b y bot h races, accordin g t o the highest 
moder n standards. 
36th an d Dearbor n Sts., Chicago , 111. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducte d b y 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOI S 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted , 1914 , b y the Nationa l Associatio n for the Advancemen t o f Colore d Peopl e 
Contents for January, 1915 • 
PICTURES 
COVE R PICTURE . An unpublished portrait of the late Aida Overton 
Walker. Loaned by Mr. R. G. Doggett. Page 
BLAC K SOLDIER S A T TH E BATTL E O F MARN E 130-131 
CINQU E O F TH E AMISTAD . After the engraving by Sartain 139 
ARTICLES 
T O KEE P TH E MEMOR Y O F CHARLOTT E FORTE N GRIMKE . 
- A Poem. By Angelina W . Grimke 134 
IN TH E MATTE R O F TW O MEN . A Poem. By James D. Corrothers. 138 
TH E STOR Y O F TH E AMISTAD . By Susan E. W . Jocelyn 139 
SENATO R TILLMA N T O TH E EDITO R O F TH E MARYLAN D 
"SUFFRAG E NEWS " 140 
SEGREGATION . By M. W . Ovington 142 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E Il l 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 116 
OPINIO N 119 
EDITORIA L 129 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 135 
TH E BURDE N 145 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this pag e a renewa l o f you r subscription is desired . Th e dat e o f the expiratio n o f you r subscriptio n will be foun d o n the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address o f a subscribe r ca n b e change d as often as desired. 
I n orderin g a chang e o f address, bot h the ol d an d the ne w address must be given . Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S an d drawing s relating to colore d peopl e ar e desired. The y must be accompanie d b y retur n postage . I f foun d unavailabl e the y will b e returned . 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 108 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta. 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full course s in the followin g departments: 
College , . Normal , Hig h School , Gramma r Schoo l and 
Industrial. 
Goo d water, steam heat, electri c lights, goo d drainage . Expense s ver y reasonable . 
Opportunit y for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
Fo r informatio n address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September i, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A . & M. College Greensboro, N . C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St 
Mary. Address. 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
EDUCATE YOU R CHILDREN AT HOM E UNDER OUR EXPERT TEACHERS 
Course s fo r Adult s 
PUPILS RECEIVED AT AN Y TIME. WRIT E TO 
EDUCATIONAL EXTENSION SCHOOL, BOX 319 4 STATION F, WASHING-TON, D . C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
THE GENERAL 
HOSPITAL 
SCHOOL FOR 
NURSES 
Colored Department 
MORAL ATMOSPHERE AND HOME INFL UENCES. THOROUGHLY MODERN 
TRAINING. EIGHT HOUR DUTY. PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE UNDER PROFESSIONAL GUIDANCE. LABORATORY, 
SURGICAL, OBSTETRICAL, MEDICAL 
AND CONTAGIOUS CASES. SCIENTIFIC 
INSTRUCTION IN DIETETICS. SPECIAL 
PRIVATE NURSING. GRADUATES ELIGIBLE TO STATE REGISTRATION AND 
NATIONAL RE D CROSS NURSING 
SERVICE. ADDRESS, 
MIS S HARRIE T LECK , PRINCIPAL. KANSA S CnT, MISSOURI . 
Enrol l no w i n th e 
BEREA N MANUA L TRAININ G 
and Industrial Schoo l 
SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE, Opposite Girard College 
PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Winter Term opens Monday, January 4th, 
1915; Spring Term opens Thursday, April 
1st, 1915. 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D. D., 
Principal. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 10 9 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV . DR . CHARLE S H. PARKHURST , New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W . C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT . 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the managemen t o f the Societ y o f Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach o f a great variety o f educa ­
tional institutions, publi c and private, extendin g from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wid e range o f educationa l problems and 
practice . 
This schoo l offers to youn g colore d me n and wome n wh o have a reasonable 
secondar y schoo l preparation, and wh o earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully grade d course s in academi c work , domesti c science , domesti c art, 
manua l crafts and agriculture. Fo r teachers o f experienc e and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-schoo l cours e during the month s 
o f July and August . Tuitio n is free . Board , lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privilege s are offered fo r nine month s fo r $100. Th e charge fo r 
the same during the summer-schoo l cours e is $15 . Writ e fo r particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 110 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
MAN Y MOR E TEACHER S 
ARE NEEDED TO SUPPLY THE DEMAND S UPO N US. HUNDRED S OF 
EXPERIENCED OR WELL-PREPARED TEACHERS CAN JOIN US TO THEIR 
ADVANTAGE. W E CAN PLACE YO U IF YO U CAN BE PLACED. 
TH E NATIONA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
B . F . BOWLES , MANAGE R 
373 9 CONVERS E AVE . EAS T ST . LOUIS , ILL . 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained , viz. : Breat h in 
Singing , Tryin g the Voice , the 
Soprano , the Mezzo-Soprano , the 
Contralto , Teno r Leggier o or Hig h 
Tenor, the Baritone , the Bass, 
Parts o f the Voca l Apparatus, the 
Mouth , the Tongue , Positio n whe n 
Practising, Positio n whe n Singing , 
Ho w t o Practice , Goo d Rule s fo r 
Singing . 
Commen t from the conducto r o f the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated chora l society whic h receive d 
the first priz e awarde d at the Internationa l Singin g 
Contest held in Paris o n Ma y 25 , 1912 : 
"Dea r Mr . Tinsley : 
" I take grea t pleasur e in commendin g you r ver y 
useful an d succinctl y written boo k o n 'Tone-Placin g 
and Voice-Development. ' You r ow n appreciation o f 
the psycholog y o f singing an d the fundamenta l principle s o f the art yo u have cleverl y reduce d to a 
simpl e system. Cordiall y yours, 
"Fathe r WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Directo r Paulist Choristers o f Chicago. " 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : " A ver y practical 
little boo k is 'Tone-Placin g and Voice-Development, ' 
by Pedr o T. Tinsley . It contain s some ver y excellent 
material and voca l exercises, and shoul d be in the 
hands o f all voca l students. " 
From "Musi c News, " Chicago , 111.: "Accordingl y 
his 'Practica l Metho d o f Singing ' is a most concis e 
and practical little manual, containin g man y valuabl e 
voea l exercises. It canno t fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious voca l students. " 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Sinc e I practised you r exercise s o f 'Tone-Placin g 
and Voice-Development * m y voic e is mor e resonant 
than it has bee n fo r years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a ne w voice. " Prof. Joh n T . Layton , 
Directo r Coleridge-Taylo r Musica l Society , 1722 10th 
St., N . W. , Washington , D . C. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedr o T . Tinsley , 6448 Drexe l 
Ave. , Chicago , 111.; or Clayto n F. Summy , 64 E. Va n 
Bure n St., or Lyo n & Healy , Adam s and Wabas h 
Ave. , Chicago , 111. 
The February 
CRISIS 
will be 
KNOXVILLE NUMBER 
DO YOU ADVERTISE ? 
If you want to bring your business to the attention of 150,000 discriminating readers advertise 
in TH E CRISIS . Advertising rate cards will 
be sent on application. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e Ne w Yor k 
LEAR N B Y MAIL TO CUT AND MAK E MODEM , HANG-WELL PANTS 
OF ANY STYLE. 
FUL L COURS E - $ 5 CUTTIN G ONL Y - $ 3 
STOVEL'S MODERN PANTS MAKIN G SCHOOL, ANCON, CANAL ZONE 
"A Mother's Love" 
is the title o f on e o f ou r five ne w Negr o pictures, just 
off the press. It portray s a beautiful youn g colore d 
mothe r fondlin g her sturdy babe . Painte d in 12 
colors, it is rich and elegant, an d ever y hom e shoul d 
have a cop y hangin g on its wall. Writ e us fo r free 
circula r reproduction s o f ou r ne w picture s and terms 
to agents. Fo r 15 cents in stamps w e will sen d 
agent's 50 cent sampl e cop y o f " A Joyfu l Welcom e 
Into Heaven, " the pictur e whic h our agents have sold 
25,000 copie s o f durin g the past fe w months. W e 
mak e a specialty o f enlargin g photographs. Wor k 
guarantee d the best and price s reasonable . 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
THE DOUGLAS SPECIALTIES CO. 
DEPARTMEN T K , 
354 8 VERNO N AVE. , CHICAGO . 111 . 
MENTIO N TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 9 -No . 3 JANUARY, 1915 Whole No. 51 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
T
H E reproduction of "The Adoration of 
the Kings' ' by Jan Gossart which appeared in the Christmas number of Th e 
Crisis is one of a number of noted paintings 
which make the figure of the adoring black 
king one o f prominence. The Antwerp Museum houses the "Adoration of the Magi," 
by Rubens, in which the Nubian slaves are 
grouped by the side of the worshiping camels and the African king is pictured parading in the center o f the picture. In the 
Louvre is seen, painted three years after, a 
second picture by the same master, commissioned for the Church o f the Sisters of the 
Annunciation in which the black king is 
placed as the central figure. 
<J In Burne-Jones' '"The Star of Bethlehem" the adoring Negro prince is the third 
figure on the right. A painting of an unlike 
subject, exhibited in the Vienna Gallery, 
''The Four Quarters o f the Globe," by Rubens, symbolizes the quarters of the globe by 
one o f the great rivers—the Danube, the 
Nile, the Ganges and the Amazon. The rivers are in turn symbolized by four male 
figures with their beautiful female companions. Of "bronze-hued" loveliness are the 
man and the maid that represent the Nile. 
<J A recital o f unusual artistic excellence 
was that by Mr. Charles Burroughs o f NewYork in contemporary American and British 
poetry and verse, given at the Berkley Theatre, New Yor k City, on November 6. Mr. 
Burroughs has chosen from the most important authors of to-day, many distinctive 
poems that divided his program into the following sections—"The Wa y to Aicady, " 
"The Way s of Love, " "More Matter of 
Fact," " A Variant Note," and "The Note o f 
the World. " Mr. Burroughs was assisted by 
Mr. A. Nathaniel Gross, pianist, Mr. Israel 
Katz, violinist, and Mr. J. Joseph, accompanist. 
<J On the evening of November 12 in Steinert Hall, Boston, Mr. Roland Hayes, the 
tenor whose beautiful voice gains in communicating power, gave a recital of songs, 
classic and modern, before a very large and 
enthusiastic audience. Mr. Hayes was assisted by Mr. W . I. Howard, a student violinist of the New England Conservatory of 
Music, and Miss Ruth Ye o and Mr. Charles 
Harris, accompanists. 
(J On November 30 Mr. Hayes sang at the 
First Congregational Church at Nashua, 
N. H. 
<J Mr. Hamish Mackay, a baritone who 
comes to America with the declaration ''to 
spread the gospel of British, and particularly Scottish music," gave a song recital at 
Aeolian Hall, New York City, in November. 
S. Coleridge-Taylor was one of the English 
composers represented on his program. 
C| Musical America states that "Afro-American Folk Songs " was the subject of an absorbing lecture recently given by Mrs. Margaret Millward at Public School 129, 
Rrooklyn. 
<J John M. McCormack, the celebrated Irish 
tenor, who was heard in a recital on November 15 at the Academy of Music, Brooklyn, 
N. Y., gave as one of his concluding songs 
"Life and Death," by Coleridge-Taylor, 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 112 TH E CRISI S 
which was said to be one o f the strongest 
numbers on the program. At Mr. MeCormack's recital at Symphony Hall, Boston, 
November 30, he presented Coleridge-Taylors "Yo u Lay So Still." 
<J Boosey and Company announce among 
their recent publications "The Rainbow 
Child," by S. Coleridge-Taylor. Familiar 
works by this composer are announced to be 
given in England this season by the Ealing 
Philharmonic Society, Hither Green Choral 
and Orchestral Society, Central Croydon 
Choral Society, S. London Philharmonic Society, and West Croydon District Society. 
«fl Mr. Clarence C. White, violinist, of Boston, Mass., gave a recital at Wilberforee 
University on November 10. Miss Ida F. 
Horton was the accompanist. 
<J On Xovember 23 Mr. Joseph H. Donglass gave a violin recital at Reedy Chapel, 
Galveston, Texas. 
<fl The Atlanta University quartet with Mr. 
Sidney Woodward, tenor, was heard in and 
about Boston, Mass., during the week of 
November 16. A recital was given by the 
quartet in the interest of the University at 
the home of the Misses Houghton, Cambridge, Mass.. on the afternoon of Xovember 1G. 
<J The Tuskegee Singers, assisted by Mr. 
Charles Winter Woo d in dialect readings, 
gave concerts in Texas during the month of 
Xovember, in the interest of Tuskecee Institute. 
<J Mine. Anita Patti-Brown. soprano, was 
heard with pleasure in Boston and surrounding cities during the latter part of Xovember. 
<J On Xovember 13 the Clef Club Orchestra 
of Xew York gave a concert in the Academy 
of Music, Philadelphia, Pa. The orchestra 
was assisted by a chorus of 60 male voices 
and presented a program of light music of 
syncopated melody. 
C[ A folk song concert of Afro-American 
music was given under the direction of Mine. 
E. Azalia Hackley at Symphony Hall, Boston. Mass.. on Xovember 30. The soloists 
were Mr. R. Nathaniel Dett. pianist, of 
Hampton. Va., and Mr. Clarence C. White, 
violinist. Of the chorus of '200 voices the 
Boston Herald said: 
"The singing was remarkable for the 
beauty, depth and richness of tone displayed. 
There was precision, too, and spontaneity. 
The leaders of these choruses were members 
of church choirs. Among them Miss Allen's 
voice was conspicuous for its beautiful quality. R. Nathaniel Dett, pianist, played his 
own compositions, two suites, the 'Magnolia' suite and 'In the Bottoms.' He also 
conducted his anthem, 'Listen to the Lambs,' 
in which he has made effective use of the 
Negro scale. Mr. White played pieces by 
Coleridge-Taylor and his own 'Berceuse.' " 
<J Myrtle Wallace, a little eleven-year-old 
colored girl, of Vancouver, B. C , was awarded a prize for water-color painting at the 
annual provincial exhibition recently held. 
<J The tenth season at the Little Gallery of 
201 Fifth Avenue, New Yor k City, opens 
with an exhibition of statuary in wood by 
African savages. Hitherto such objects have 
been housed in museums and studied for 
ethnological interest. 
q The Music School Settlement for Colored 
People, 4 and 6 West 131st Street, New 
York City, announces a series of lectures and 
recitals. Amon g the lecturers who are volunteering their services are Miss Natalie 
Curtis, Miss Kitty Cheatham. Henry E. 
Krehbiel, Talcott Williams, Kurt Schindler, 
Howard Broekway, David Mamies, Walter 
Damroseh, Thomas Mott Osborne, Canon C. 
W . Douglas, George McAneny, and W . E. 
B. DuBois. 
<I Mr. William M. Farrow, of Chicago. 111., 
won the first prize for his painting " A Bit 
of Catskill Mountains," at the art exhibit of 
the Montgomery County Art Association. 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
'T^H E steamer "Liberia" is reported sunk 
*• by Germans. The expedition left New 
York last spring and planned to settle on 
the Gold Coast of West Africa. 
<I The Charleston County Medical Association has submitted its annual report to the 
Corporation o f the Hospital and Training 
School for Nurses in South Carolina. 
<J Mr. Charles Robinson, an aged Creek 
Negro, of Tulsa County, Okla., isth e father 
of 42 children. 
<J Miss Josephine Field, a 16-year-old colored girl of Baltimore, Md., has won two 
Two Dollar prizes offered by the Baltimore 
Evening Netvs for prize stories. 
<J Funds are being raised for the erection 
of a hospital for colored people in South 
Carolina. The white citizens o f Columbia 
and generally of the State of South Carolina 
will raise $10,000 if the Negroes will raise 
an equal sum. 
<J Negro church folk of Chester, Pa., are ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 113 
fighting a neighboring saloon. This is part 
o f a bitter fightoagainst the place by the NoLicense League. 
<J Attorney William R. Stewart, of Youngstown, Ohio, moved the admission of a white 
attorney to practise before the U. S. Supreme court. This is the first time in the 
history of the court that a colored attorney 
has stood sponsor for a Caucasian. 
q The Progressive Negro League of Chicago, 111., organized about two years ago, 
now has a membership of 200 or more members, composed of business men and women. 
The League has created a Public Service 
Commission with M. T. Bailey as chairman, 
to co-operate with various civic and governmental bodies of the state and city of Chicago, to better the conditions of AfroAmericans. 
<J Many philanthropic organizations among 
colored people are feeling the present financial stringency. Miss Elizabeth Walton, 
head of the Walton Kindergarten, of New 
York City, says in an appeal: "Yo u who 
have given your contribution each year, but 
have not come in contact with the individual 
needing help or the worker giving his life to 
the work, cannot realize what the withdrawing of your contribution this year means." 
ECONOMIC S 
r
 I \H E Standard Life Insurance Company, 
of Atlanta, Ga., has passed the million 
dollar mark for paid-up insurance. Mr. 
Hemau E. Perry is the president of this organization and Mr. Harry H. Pace, the secretary. 
q The "Starlight," an excursion steamer of 
Baltimore, Md., was destroyed by fire. Captain Brown, the owner, says he will have another steamer for the excursion business next 
summer. It is thought that this may have 
been the work o f incendiaries. 
q The Pythians, of Kentucky, raised $5,000 
on Thanksgiving Day. The cornerstone for 
a $120,000 building was laid at Louisville. 
EDUCATIO N 
T ^H E Freedman's Aid Society of the M. 
•*- E. Church reports a total expenditure 
o f $510,341.15 from all sources in the prosecution o f work during 1913-14. The Jubilee 
Fund now amounts to $249,761.09. Of this 
colored conferences have raised $133,000.00. 
Including Conference collections and Jubilee 
Fund, and tuition, room rent, board and incidentals, the colored people provided nearly 
$300,000 o f the total receipts o f half a million dollars of the Society. 
*J S. 11. Tingley, of Providence, R. I., has 
contributed $75,000 to the Freedman's Aid 
Society. 
q Through the philanthropy of Mrs. Sallie 
J. McCall, the Colored Industrial School of 
Cincinnati has been established. Mrs. McCall left the bulk of her large personal fortune as an endowment for such an institution. The amount of property which has 
come finally into the possession of the school 
makes this the largest single gift ever made 
to colored people for a specific purpose. 
MEETING S 
' I \H E National League on Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes, of New York 
City, held its second annual public meeting 
at Bethel Church, December 4. 
CJ The second annual meeting of the Emancipation Association, of Philadelphia, was 
held November 8. Plans were made for the 
celebration of Emancipation Day by colored 
citizens of Philadelphia, on January 1. 
q The State Teachers' Association has met 
in St. Joseph, Mo. There were 135 teachers 
present. 
Cfl The Lone Star State Medical, Dental and 
Pharmaceutical Association met in Houston, 
Texas, November 9, 10 and 11. The meetingwas not well attended but was very interesting. Their next meeting will be held in 
Marshall, Texas. 
q The twenty-fifth anniversary of the employment of colored teachers in the city 
schools was observed with special exercises 
at Baltimore. 
CJ At Newport the Union Congregational 
Church has been celebrating its ninetieth anniversary. This church has a long and interesting history. 
In 1781 the African Union Society of 
Newport was organized and January 24, 
1824, the Union colored church succeeded it. 
For 30 years the Rev. Mahlon Van Horn 
was active pastor. The Rev. C. L. Miller is 
the present pastor. 
q The failure of the firm of Lewis Johnson 
and Company, a white bank of the District 
of Columbia, has tied up some of the resources of the financial department of the 
A. M. E. Church. The church collects over 
$200,000 a year outside of its local finances. 
POLITICS 
A DELEGATIO N of colored men representing the National Equal Rights 
League had an interview with President Wilson last month. The President resented the 114 TH E CRISI S 
tone of the spokesman, Mr . W . M . Trotter, 
and defended segregation. The incident has 
caused widespread comment, 
q I n the late elections Mr . S. B . Turner, 
of Chicago, Ill., and Mr . Robert R . Jackson 
were elected to the Genera l Assembl y from 
the First and Thir d Districts. Rev. Barne y 
Bone, a Negr o minister, 70 years of age. 
was elected Justice of Peace at Noblesville , 
Indiana . 
<J The Socialists succeeded i n electing one 
Unite d States Congressman, four State Senators and twenty-six Representatives, besides 
hundreds of local officials. 
<J Mr . Robert N . Woo d has been re-elected 
Chie f of the Unite d Colored Democracy of 
New York . 
PERSONA L 
BUTLE R CAMPFIEL D who has held the 
best record i n case examination of railway mai l clerks i n the Eleventh Distric t wit h 
an average of 99.97 per cent has been promoted to the St. Louis and Texarkan a railway post office. 
q Willia m Russell Johnson, a well known 
and popula r colored citizen of Brooklyn , 
for 23 years a clerk i n the city civi l service, 
is dead. 
<J The Thomas Y . Crowell Compan y announces a book on the Haytia n Revolution , 
by Chaplai n T. G. Steward of Wilberforc e 
University . 
q Attorne y H . L . Tigno r and ex-Judge E . 
M . Hewlett have been successful lately in 
winnin g difficult cases i n the Washingto n 
courts. 
q Mr . B . F . Cox , a graduate of Fis k Uni ­
versity, is the new principa l of Aver y Institute, Charleston, S. C. H e has formerly 
acted as principa l at Florence , Ala. , and 
Albany , Ga . 
q Whe n Judge Robert H . Terrell recently 
visited the courts of Philadelphi a he sat on 
the bench with Judge Brow n of the Domestic Relations Court, and Judge Gorma n i n 
the Juvenil e Court. This is perhaps the first 
time that a colored judge has thus been honored i n Pennsylvania . 
q Newton Lloy d Gilbert, son of the Rev. 
M . W . Gilbert, and a former student of Colgate University , is dead at the age of twentyfive. 
q Mr . W . Carl Bolivar, a well-known write r 
and collector of books, has died i n Phila ­
delphia. H e was for many years employed 
by the bankin g house of Joh n Ashurst and 
Company . 
«J Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell and Mr . W . 
E . B . DuBois have been addressing various 
forums and women's clubs i n Ne w England . 
Mrs. Terrel l was especially effective at For d 
Hall , Boston. 
FOREIG N 
A
BYSSINIA' S export an d import trade 
amounted to $10,000,000 last year. The 
Unite d States and six Europea n nations are 
workin g to develop an d monopoliz e it. A t 
present there are five America n citizens i n 
Abyssinia , two of whom are Negroes. The 
Frenc h are buildin g a railroa d 500 miles to 
the sea whic h wil l cost $20,000,000. The 
America n consul was received by 2,000 soldiers and 10,000 people. 
<fl There are two sorts o f Frenc h Africa n 
troops—Turcos and Senegalese. The Turcos 
are recruited from Arabs, Berbers and Ne ­
groes along the Nort h Africa n coast. The 
Senegalese are West Africa n Negroes. 
GHETT O 
THE murde r of colored women still proceeds i n Atlant a an d the perpetrator 
has not been arrested. 
q A n ordinance fo r the segregation of Ne ­
groes i n St. Louis has been introduced into 
the Hous e of Delegates. The bil l establishes 
white and colored blocks and also neutral 
blocks. The latter are eventually to become 
white or colored. Fine s and imprisonment 
are the penalties. 
q Fro m Franklin , Ky. , comes the story of 
two white men tried for the murde r o f a colored woman. The woma n had attended a 
dance wit h a colored man. The two white 
men met the couple and on charging her with 
infidelity and goin g wit h colored men, shot 
and kille d her instantly. A simila r story 
comes from Cincinnat i where a white man 
killed a colored woman because she wanted 
to return to her colored associates, 
q The Y . W . C. A . of Portland . Ore., has 
drawn the color line . 
q I n East St. Louis one and one-half per 
cent of the monthly salary of each teacher 
is deducted to pa y for a lecture course. 
Reserve seats can be had by payin g ten cents 
extra. Whe n the colored teachers appeared 
at the last lecture they were shown to the 
gallery i n spite of their reserve seat checks. 
They protested, but it is now threatened that 
unless they attend these compulsory lectures 
and submit to being "Jim-Crowed " they 
may be dismissed. 
q The Inasmuch Missio n o f No . 1011 Lo -ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 115 
cust Street, Philadelphia, is trying to reclaim the fallen o f the surrounding slum 
section. They have recently announced, 
however, all such fallen folk must be white. 
Bishop Rhinelander is said to be Chairman 
of the Board o f Directors. 
<J It is said that the white Presbyterians of 
New York are joining with the various Negro-hating associations of Harlem to keep 
out colored people. They have recently declared that they are unable to find a site for 
a colored church in the district where the 
colored people wish it to be. The colored 
people declare that a site could easily have 
been found if the stated clerk and a leading 
white Presbyterian pastor in Harlem had 
not blocked the way. 
q The State Farmers' Union of North Carolina at a recent meeting passed the following resolution: 
"That we earnestly reiterate our endorsement o f the plan adopted at our last session 
urging land segregation between the races, 
and urge our local unions to help bring it 
about, to wit: That wherever the greater 
portion o f the land acreage in any community is owned by one race, a majority o f the 
voters o f that race may say, if they wish, 
that in future no land shall be sold to persons o f a different race, provided such action 
is approved by a reviewing judge or board 
o f commissioners as being necessary to their 
peace and safety and the protection of their 
social life." 
€1 The children of J. R. Medlin of Wake 
County, N. C , have been "accused" by the 
Board o f Education of having Negro blood, 
but the Supreme Court has decided that this 
has not been proved and that, therefore, the 
children may attend the white schools! 
<J Five years ago George Gains, a wealthy 
white saloon keeper of Orange, Va., died 
and left the bulk of his estate amounting to 
over $50,000 to "Rose Henshaw and our 
two children." Rose Henshaw is colored 
and is now being sued by Mrs. Dora Delinger for alienating her husband's affections. 
q A t Fort Wayne , Ind., A. D. Trenton 
shot H . T. Bruce, a colored head-waiter and 
killed him because the colored headwaiter 
had "talked back to him." Trenton pleaded 
guilty and was given an indeterminate sentence o f from two to twenty years. 
<J Rev. Thomas King, a reputable colored 
minister of Montgomery, Ala., was shot recently by two white men and robbed of twenty-three dollars. His assaulters claimed 
self-defense and wore released on a bond of 
$1,000. 
q Fo r the first time in the history of Sacramento a proprietor of a restaurant has 
been .arrested for refusing to serve ' a 
colored man. M. D. Travis is the complainant and the Peacock Cafe the defendant. 
COURTS 
R
 I 'H E white and colored shriners of 
Georgia have amicably settled their 
dispute. 
q The U. S. Supreme Court in the Oklahoma "Jim-Crow" car law case declined to 
declare the law unconstitutional because of 
a defect in the presentation of the case, but 
they intimated that the failure to provide 
sleeping cars and dining cars for colored 
people was illegal. 
q The Louisville segregation case has come 
up in the police court where Arthur Harris 
was fined for breaking the law. The city 
attorney brought in a real estate expert who 
declared that the Phythian Hall at Tenth 
and Chestnut Streets would depreciate property. This hall will cost $125,000. He also 
quoted Booker T. Washington and President Wilson in defense of the law! 
q A conductor on a dining car in California 
shot and killed a colored cook because he did 
not like the way in which his steak was 
cooked. He was acquitted on the plea of 
self-defense. 
I | For the first time in the history of Florida a white man has been convicted for the 
murder of a Negro. Three men were convicted of murder in the second degree for 
killing E. Johnson, a Negro. 
CRIME 
' I ''HE following eight lynchings of colored 
people have taken place since our last 
record: 
q St. Petersburg, Fla.—lohn Evans, accused of assaulting a white woman. 
CJ Shreveport, La—K . McKnight, T. Lewis 
and M. Dirden, accused of murdering a post 
master. 
q Byhalia, Miss.—Fred Sullivan and his 
wife Jane Sullivan, accused of burning a 
barn. They left a four year old child. 
<I Lynchburg, S. C.—D. Wilson, accused 
of murdering a white woman. 
q Hillside, Ky.—H . Allen, killed by night 
riders. No charge. MEN OF The Month 
A POE T 
JAMES DAVI D CORROTHERS was born 
in Cass County, Mich., July 2, 1869, in 
the celebrated "chain lake" section. He is of 
Negro, Scotch, Irish, Irdian and French 
blood. As the only colored boy in the little 
town where he was reared he says that he 
. had actually to whip every white boy in the 
village before he was allowed to go to school 
in peace. At fourteen he began to work in 
saw mills and on farms and among other 
things blacked boots and gave sparring exhibitions. Eventually he attended Northwestern University and Bennett College in 
North Carolina. He afterward worked in 
newspaper work on several daily papers and 
knew well "Mr. Dooley, " Frances Willard 
and Henry D. Lloyd. Among his colored 
friends were Frederick Douglass and Paul 
Lawrence Dunbar. 
Mr. Corrothers is a poet and writer and 
recently has been read in the best periodicals. 
To the Century, especially, he has contributed for sixteen years and to numbers of 
the leading dailies. He has just completed 
a book for which Ra y Stannard Baker has 
written the introduction. Mr. Corrothers 
married Rosina B. Harvey, o f Washington, 
a musician o f note and composer. There is 
no doubt that Mr. Corrothers ranks with 
Mr. Braithwaite as the greatest of living 
Negro American poets. 
A READE R 
T > ICHAR D B. HARRISON , o f Chicago, 
was born in London, Ontario, September 28th 1864. He began life as a newsboy 
and then worked on cattle farms and as a 
bellbov in the old Russell House in Detroit. 
MR . JAME S DAVI D CORROTHER S MR . RICHAR D B. HARRISO N ME N OF TH E MONT H 117 
TH E LAT E HON . J. WILLI S MENAR D 
Here he began to read Shakespeare and to 
take lessons in elocution, studying under the 
best teachers he could find. He made his 
first tour of the United States in 1891 and 
in 1895 married Gertrude J. Washington, 
the first colored graduate of the Chicago 
Musical College. Mr. Harrison was a great 
friend o f Paul Lawrence Dunbar and Mr. 
Dunbar was best man when Mr. Harrison 
was married. From 1892 to 1896 Mr. Harrison worked under the Great Western Lyceum Bureau in California. He returned to 
the East in the latter year and has been 
working largely among his own people. 
He is a man o f talent and ambition and is 
desirous now especially o f establishing a 
lyceum bureau to encourage the talent of the 
Negro race. 
TH E FIRST NEGRO CONGRESSMA N 
J
WILLI S MENAR D was born in Illi-
• nois in 1840. During the war he came 
to Washington and was a clerk in the Department o f Immigration. In 1863 he went 
to British Honduras but returned and went 
to New Orleans where he was appointed Inspector o f Customs and afterward Street 
Commissioner. He was nominated for Congress in 1868 receiving 3,000 voles over his 
white opponent, Kaleb Hunt. He ran for 
an unexpired term for the Fortieth Congress and was declared elected by the said 
authorities. He was not, however, sealed in 
Congress although later Senator Sheldon received the same vote and was vouched for by 
the same authorities and was seated. Thus, 
Menard broke the ice and was in reality the 
first colored congressman. 
Mr. Menard removed to Florida in 1871 
and was appointed a clerk in the post office 
in Jacksonville and later to the state legislature. He then became Collector o f Internal Revenue and twice Justice of Peace.. 
In all his public trusts he proved himself a 
capable and faithful man and his speech before Congress in the Congressional Contest 
was notable. He retired from public life 
without a stain on his character and died in 
1893 at the age of fifty-three. 
A SUCCESSFUL PHYSICIA N 
PDWAR D G. BOWDEN , of Griffin, Ga., 
was born in Georgia, November 30th, 
18S0. At the age of fifteen he was sent to 
St. Augustine's School, Raleigh, N. C , where 
he graduated in 1902 from the College DeDR . EDWAR D D . BOWDE N 118 TH E CRISIS 
partinent. After teaching school he went to 
Meharry Medical College in Nashville. Tenn.. 
where he graduated in 1907 and began the 
practice of medicine in Griffin. He has a 
large practice, has accumulated real estate 
and operates the only colored drug store in 
the county. 
He was married to Miss Elizabeth Allen 
in 1000. 
A JUSTICE OF TH E PEACE 
Mr. A. BTJRRELL, a colored man of 
Carney Iowa, was born in Virginia 
as a slave and is about sixty years of age. 
He came to Iowa in 1SS0 and lives in Crocker Township where there are about two 
hundred and fifty voting farmers and about 
two hundred Negro and foreign miners. He 
has served for two years as Justice of the 
Peace and has just been re-elected over a 
white opponent by a good majority to serve 
until January, 101-3. He is a miner and 
farmer. He produces eighty bushels of corn 
to the acre and he has just bought two and 
one-half acres to add to his four and onehalf at $350 per acre. 
He is a good specimen of the quiet, thrifty, 
honest Negro working man. 
MR . A. BURREL L 
RESIDENC E O F DR . BOWDEN . GRIFFIN . GA . WHA T MR. TROTTER 
SAID. 
MR. TROTTE R AN D MR. WILSO N 
"Mr. President, we are 
v
 here to renew our protest against the segregation of colored employes in the departments 
of our National Government. Mr. President, 
one year ago the sixth o f this month we 
came before you as a delegation of this same 
organization, now the National Independent 
Equal Rights League, and presented a national petition, signed by colored Americans 
in thirty-eight states, protesting against the 
segregation of employes of the National 
Government whose ancestry could be traced 
in whole or in part to Africa, as instituted 
under your administration. W e then appealed to you to undo this race segregation 
in accord with your duty as President and 
with your pre-election pledges to colored 
American voters. W e stated that such segregation was a public humiliation and degradation, and entirely unmerited and far-reaching in its injurious effects, a gratuitous blow 
against ever loyal citizens and against those, 
many of whom have aided and supported 
your elevation to the Presidency of our common country." Mr. Trotter named the various departments in which segregation is still 
in force. 
"Hence we come to you, Mr. President, by 
vote of this league, to se't before you this 
definite continuance o f race segregation 
against us a year after you heard our protest and seemed to heed our appeal, to renew 
the protest and appeal to ask you to entirely abolish segregation of Afro-American 
employes in the executive departments." 
"In reply the President 
WHA T MR. WILSON ^ ^ afte r Qu r j^ j 
SAID -
 visit he and his cabinet 
officers had investigated as he promised, and 
cabinet officers told him the segregation was 
caused by friction between colored and white 
clerks, and not done to injure or humiliate 
the colored clerks, but to avoid friction. 
Members of the cabinet had assured him that 
the colored clerks would have comfortable 
conditions, though separated. He had taken 
their view that the segregation was the best 
way to meet this situation and that the best 
thought of the administration has so decided. 
"The white people of the country," the 
President continued, "as well as I, wish to 
see the colored people progress, and admire 
the progress they have already made, and 
want to see them continue nlong independent 
lines. There is, however, a great prejudice 
against colored people, but as Mr. Spencer 
says, we are all colored, but I mean those of 
African descent. It will take one hundred 
years to eradicate this prejudice, and we 
must deal with it as practical men. Segregation is not humiliating but a benefit, and 
ought to be so regarded by you gentlemen. 
If your organization goes out and tells the 
colored people of the country that it is a 
humiliation, they will so regard it, but if you 
do not tell them so, and regard it rather as a 
benefit, they will regard it the same. The 
only harm that will come will be if you cause 
them to think it is a humiliation." 
"Mr. President, we did not 
MR. TROTTER'S ^ T Q T|) E M ; T E HOUG E A G 
REPLY. delegates of the National Independent Equal Rights League protesting the 
segregation in the attitude of dependent 
wards of the nation, but as full-fledged 
American citizens, absolutely equal with all 
others, to demand our equal rights under the 
Constitution. It is not in accord with the 
known facts to claim that the segregation 
was started because of race friction of the 
white and colored clerks. The indisputable 
facts of the situation will not permit of the 
claim that the segregation is due to the friction. It is untenable, in view of the established facts, to maintain that the segregation 120 TH E CRISIS 
is simply to avoid race friction, for the simple reason that for fifty years white and 
colored clerks have been working; together 
in peace and harmony and friendliness, doing so even through two Democratic administrations. Soon after your inauguration 
began segregation was drastically introduced 
in the Treasury and Postal departments by 
your appointees." 
Then I was interrupted and given 
the rebuke when the President 
OUARREL , SAI(3 . „ I F TM G 0^,51^ ^ j s eve r 
to have another hearing before me it must 
Lave another spokesman. Your manner offends me." 
I was thunderstruck. I immediately asked 
in what way I was offensive, and the Chief 
Executive replied: 
"Your tone, with its background of passion.'' 
I then said. '.'But I have no passion in me, 
Mr. President, you are entirely mistaken; 
you misinterpret my earnestness for passion." 
1 then continued my rebuttal and was interrupted by the President, especially when 
I told him that we could not control the 
minds of the colored people, and would not 
if we could on the segregation question. I 
continued saying: "Two years ago you were 
regarded as a second Abraham Lincoln," 
when he stopped me and said he wanted no 
personal reference. I told him if he would 
allow me to continue he would see my intent. He said he "was the one to do the interrupting and not me." 
T then concluded by saying, "Now we 
colored leaders are denounced in the colored 
churches as traitors to our race. "What do 
you mean by traitors?" inquired the President, and I replied, "Because we supported 
I he Democratic ticket in 1012." 
We have given above Mr. Trotters account of the curious incident which brings us comments from all 
over the nation. First, as to facts, we quote 
a Socialist, Morris Williams, writing in the 
Ne w York Call. 
"President Wilson has had an opportunity 
to show himself a great man—and lie failed. 
That man of such promise, of so much intelligence, with an opportunity to write himself down as a President a thousand times 
greater than the petty party that he came 
from, fell down. His party is too powerful. 
Without that party he feels that he cannot 
advance politically, and he dares not do 
right wheu that party is wrong. 
"Twice before he has been tested, and 
twice before he has failed because he dared 
not dare his party. Twice the women bearded him in his den, twice they asked his opinion, the opinion o f an honest and an intelligent man, what he thought about votes for 
women. And both times he made an undignified and a cowardly dodge, because he 
feared his party. 
"This time he had a greater opportunity 
in that he had a chance to do something far 
more unpopular than indorse votes for women. That cause has millions of active friends. 
The cause of the Negro has very few friends. 
And least of all has it friends among the 
Democratic party, coming as it does mainly 
from the Bourbon South. 
"I, who write this, write with feeling. I 
know whereof I speak. Fo r a number of 
years I was employed in the government department in Washington, meeting there men 
and women of both colors, of all kinds from 
North and South. I know the situation in 
the government offices, and I know the Negro 
officeholder. I know the brutal, the fiendish, 
the savage persecution of the Negro in the 
South, rivaling as it does the treatment of 
the Jews in Russia. I know it, not having 
read of it in a book, but from having seen it. 
"Many times did I surrender, with little 
enough regret, the friendship of my office 
associates, and of many others, because I 
was naive enough, democratic enough, Socialist enough, human enough, to regard the 
Negro as a human, as a brother and often as 
a Comrade in our movement. Often enough 
did I suffer, together with my wife, because 
we did not believe the Constitution to be a 
lie, our proud boast nothing but sham, and 
our liberty a jest. • And so we know. And 
we know that nowhere is there such cruelty 
as there is in the capital city to a persecuted race." 
"Yo u cannot beat the civii service rules. 
If Maggie O'Rafferty happens to head a 
stenographers' list you must appoint her, 
even if you come from Georgia, and if you 
find out (as one Southern official found out 
of a girl of that name) that she is as black 
as ink there is no redress. It is written. It 
is the law. 
"In the government offices there was a 
technical equality. The Negro clerks had to 
eat in inferior saloons, they had to herd by OPINION 121 
themselves. But they sat in the same rooms 
as the "superior" whites. It galled the whites 
if they came from Georgia or Alabama. I 
have known men from the South to refuse to 
go to work with Negroes—who happened to 
be their intellectual and their moral superiors—in the same room. Until it was impressed upon them that they needn't, that 
there were thousands of others who were as 
willing and as able to do the work as they, 
and who did not have those compunctions. 
"Then came the Democratic party into 
power. That party was led by men o f the 
type of J. Thomas Hefiin, hater of labor, 
oppressor of Negroes; men Kke the Hon. 
Pitchfork Ben Tillman; men like J. K. 
Vardaman, whose motto it is that 'this is a 
white man's country;' men like John Sharp 
Williams; the finest group o f nigger baiters 
the country has ever produced. They say 
they speak for the South—and the South 
does not say them nay. They fulminate, 
they wave the bloody shirt, they nulify the 
Constitution, they beat and degrade and terrify and enslave 10,000,000 men of our fellow citizens; they make of our great profession o f liberty and equality a fraud. They 
say they are the South. They announce 
that they speak for that great section of the 
country. An d that section does not rise up 
as one man and deny the hellish insult. 
"That is the party o f Woodrow Wilson. 
That is the party that made him President. 
Their chief strength came from the South; 
without the South—the White South (for 
all elections are white men's elections) — 
Woodrow Wilson would never have become 
President. Without the aid of the party 
of those men, the cultured Wilson would 
never have ascended to the Presidency. And 
so there are political debts to pay. 
"The bulk of the party comes from the 
South. The largest part of the Cabinet 
officers are Southerners. The bureau chiefs 
are now largely Southerners. Men of the 
inferior calibre o f William J. Harris, the 
'original Wilson man o f Georgia,' of absolutely no ability, supplant geniuses in 
highly technical positions such as the directorship o f the census. 
"The inevitable followed. Negroes were 
segregated from the whites in the government offices. The Jim Crowism of the government began. Those who knew saw imminent the casting out of all Negro employes. An d I, who know, can say that the 
service will suffer immensely by the institution of the Southern heelers, men almost illiterate, men who think that they are still 
fighting the Civil War, for the cultured 
Negroes who have fought their way up 
against such unparalleled odds. 
"S o they went to Wilson. Wilson the 
cultured, Wilson the Democrat, Wilson the 
pride of America. And Wilson bethought 
himself of Tillman and Blease and Bailey 
and Hefiin and Underwood. Wilson was 
confronted by the choice of rescinding the 
order segregating the races, and bringing 
down upon himself a whirlwind, and of supporting hideous wrong, fastening upon the 
limbs of virtual slaves still more strongly the 
shackles of degradation and passing it on 
with a meaningless platitude. 
"S o Wilson was weighed in the balance. 
He was faced by the great opportunity. 
AN D H E FAILED ! 
"He murmured some fatuous rubbish 
about reducing the "friction" between the 
races in the offices, that the offices that were 
assigned to the Negroes were "as good " as 
those assigned to the whites, and that they 
had nothing to complain about. And that is 
what is said of every bit of injustice that is 
inflicted upon the under dog—that it is good 
for them; that they ought to appreciate it. 
"So the Southerners were upheld, the government is officially on a par with railroads 
that have Jim Crow cars, the President 
either wrote himself down as one of the oppressors, or he groveled before them. And 
real Americans may hang their heads in 
shame before the whole world." 
The northern press has stood up 
NORTHERN WIT H UNUSUA L VI?OR _ TH E NE W 
OPINION. Republic says: "it does not seem 
obviously appropriate for the President of 
the United States to complain of the 'intolerable burden' of his own office to Negroes 
who daily suffer burdens more intolerable, 
who come to the President with real grievances due to the President's own inaction in 
a moral crisis. The President waives aside 
all references to consideration of political 
support by Negroes as 'blackmail,' but the 
President before his election sought that support, and sought it with explicit promises 
which Negroes and others believe have not 
been kept. 'Should I become President of 
the United States,' he said during the campaign of 1912, 'they (the colored people) 
may count upon me for absolute fair dealing 
and for everything by which I could assist 122 TH E CRISIS 
in advancing the interest of this race in the 
United States.' What the President has as 
yet done in advancing this interest he does 
not state; what he intends to do in the future 
he does not state. But he does express his 
unwillingness to interfere with Southern 
members of his Cabinet, who are segregating 
colored employes, setting apart Federal 
civil servants with Negro blood in them as 
though they were lepers, a humiliation which 
is bitterly resented by colored people 
throughout the country and deplored by 
thousands of high-minded white people, yet 
one which the President finds words to condone. The President used fair words in 1912 
in his appeal to the Negroes for votes. W e 
know now that those words meant nothing." 
Then conies a number of papers who we 
let speak for themselves. 
"The Constitution defines the place of the 
Negro in our citizenship. The Negro clerkin Washington is entitled to precisely the 
same treatment that any other clerk receives. 
He has had it under Republican government 
without friction and without any suspicion 
that he was being injured by the failure of 
the government to segregate him. No prejudice lias been shown him by this administration in the departments over which Mr. 
Bryan of Nebraska, Mr. Garrison of New 
Jersey and Mr. Lane of California preside. 
It is the Southern secretaries who discovered 
that Jim Crow regulations were necessary. 
Does the President of the United States 
approve their exhibition of prejudice against 
the Negro?"—Syracuse (N. Y. ) Post Standard. 
"The whole thing now laid before us is a 
typically Southern issue, treated by the government in a typically Southern way. Mr. 
Wilson's attitude toward this race-sesTeeation is, without question, perfectly honest, 
just as it is in the case of other gentlemen 
with Southern traditions bred in the bone. 
The slave-holders were not less honest in 
their contention GO years ago. But the 
grave question presented is whether the 
President of the United States, in taking 
this view, is living up to the constitution o f 
his country, which he is bound by oath to 
recognize ard uphold. The constitution may 
err in its attempt to give all men, of whatever race and color, an equal political right 
with every other race. But at least it is the 
law of the land and as such is not to be nulified by any individual who happens to believe that in this respect the constitution is 
unwisely drawn."—Lowell (Mass.) Courier 
Citizen. 
"Perhaps the language of the spokesman 
was not tactful. Perhaps the President's 
suave, pleasant words and promises regarding fair and equitable treatment proved a 
bit irritating when contrasted with conditions as they exist and as the President 
knows they have existed for years. 'The 
systematic denial o f manhood rights to 
black men in America is the crying disgrace 
of the century.' These are the words of the 
editor of TH E CRISIS, perhaps the ablest 
champion of his race."—Boston, (Mass.) 
Traveler and Evening Herald. 
"The principle seems clear. The people 
of the United States as a whole would oppose the adoption by their Government of 
anything resembling the Jim Crow policy. 
If States, cities, or private corporations see 
fit to do this, that is their own affair. But 
the national Government must keep free 
from it, not primarily because the policy is 
bad for the Negroes, but because it is bad 
for the Government."—Indianapolis Xeics 
(Ind.). 
"That is to say, the colored people ask 
their rights and the President answers that 
he feels very kindly towards them and while 
he cannot consider giving them those he is 
favorable to the idea of giving them something else about as good, if they can only be 
induced to think it so. They demand equal 
treatment as citizens of the republic. He 
says no. we must screen you off, but we 
will make thing's comfortable for you behind 
the screen. But you don't do that, they answer, for Semitic. Celtic. Slavic or any other 
class of employes. No, replies the President, but we do it with you, and I cannot 
discuss the matter any further with you."— 
Post Express (Rochester, N. Y.1 . 
"At the National capital sits a Congress 
elected by the suppression of nearly a majority of the votes of the Southern States. 
It is a dishonestly elected Congress, and 
every American knows it. This is Haunting 
a great National scandal constantly before 
the eyes of every intelligent citizen of the 
United States. 
"In such fashion, the conscience of the 
nation is being tested. Fo r ourselves, we 
have no doubt whatever that, in the end, 
most Americans will demand that this festering sore of criminality in the National government shall be cured; that the caustic remedy demanded by the Constitution of the OPINION 123 
United Stales, (the reduction of the representation o f all States where this dishonesty 
is open and flagrant) shall be applied. The 
only question is, how much longer shall the 
scandal be allowed to exist in its rank and 
shameless dishonesty?"—Advertiser (Boston, 
Mass.). 
''The President, a man of southern birth 
and broad principles, should lose no time in 
ordering the rescinding of the McAdo o and 
Burleson orders. The race-hatred fomenters 
will accept from him action they would 
blindly oppose if it came from a president 
of northern birth. He has a chance, just as 
the Negro orator declared, to be a second 
Abraham Lincoln by starting and leading a 
movement that will emancipate the race from 
disabilities under which it now labors, even 
as it was emancipated fifty years ago from 
involuntary servitude. The first and greatest 
of progressive principles is equality before 
the law."—Evening Globe (New York City). 
"However that may be, this delegation was 
within its rights in making its protest. If 
political conditions and consequences were 
introduced into the plea or argument, it was 
not 'blackmail,' as the President indignantly 
termed it, more than was the threat of Representative Henry in his demand for cotton 
legislation, the demand of labor and its responsive sop in the Clayton bill, or many 
another dicker in the routine of the Presidential life."—Bulletin (Philadelphia, Pa.). 
"The race affected had a right to be heard 
in their own behalf and showed a proper 
spirit in going directly to the President with 
their grievance. W e fear that the President 
has lost his head. He is certainly not so 
happy in these extempore statements, made 
under the irritation that so easily besets 
him as in his more studied deliverances which 
compel the admiration even of his political 
opponents and often skillfully cover up the 
fallacies of his reasoning and hide from view 
the mischievous character of the policy he is 
commending."—Press (Philadelphia, Pa.). 
"The incident recalls the similar vexation 
shown by the President when he abruptly 
dismissed an equal suffrage delegation on 
June 30 on the ground that he could not 
'submit to cross-examination.' When a man 
is right, he usually will listen patiently to 
the other side; when he knows he is wrong, 
he is very likely to fly off the handle."—New 
York Mail. 
"After their visit to the White House the 
members o f that anti-segregation deputation 
must have come to the conclusion that the 
great mistake made by American Negroes is 
in not having had themselves born Filipinos 
or Mexican Indians."—New York Herald. 
"That there was reason for the President's 
ill temper is quite true, but it was supplied 
by the Cabinet members who were responsible for the narrow-minded policy of segregating Negro employes from white job ­
holders."—New York Mail. 
"It may be as claimed that the spokesman 
of the colored delegates that recently interviewed President Wilson for the purpose of 
protesting against the segregation of the colored clerks in the U. S. departments at 
Washington did not treat the President with 
proper respect, and deserved the rebuke he 
received; but it is a fact, nevertheless, that 
the protest was against a shameful outrage." 
--Express (Penn Yan, N. Y.) . 
"W e had supposed, after the investigations 
of last winter, that the vicious policy had 
been checked; we understood that it was to 
be abandoned gradually. In numerous instances the Jim-Crowing had, we know, been 
stopped. The more discouraging is it to 
find the President apparently upholding 
what the World justly calls the "foolish indiscretions of members of his Cabinet." 
There was no genuine complaint as to the 
conditions in Washington. Colored and 
white employes had worked side by side for 
fifty years. Some of them had been appointed by Grover Cleveland—one of his appointees to high place being the father of 
Mr. Trotter, a veteran of the Fifty-fifth 
Massachusetts. But the Wilson Administration went out of its way to create the issue 
it now deplores, and cannot see its way clear 
to admitting its mistake and reverting to 
the only defensible position of absolute 
equality in the Government service."—Evening Post (New York City). 
"The Negro race in this country is the 
political equal of the white race, under the 
Federal Constitution, and while the 'Jim 
Crow' status and 'grandfather' suffrage laws 
of various States have stood the test of judicial review, segregation in the Washington 
departments unquestionably violates the 
spirit of the Constitution, whatever shift for 
the Government the courts may find in its 
letter. That the nation-wide public sentiment 
outside of Washington itself sustains classification of this character in Government departments is not susceptible of proof. The 
southern influence now dominating those de-124 TH E CRISI S 
partments is simply asserting its power by 
introducing the crudest southern customs into the Government of the whole people."— 
Springfield Republican (111.). 
"It is desirable that the nation know the 
President, and that some false notions as to 
his absolute poise and ideal judicial demeanor be removed. He did not keep his 
temper yesterday; he showed not the control 
of the school-master, but the pettishness of 
the schoolboy. He would never have rebuked 
white callers in the superior way he did his 
black ones. It is evident that Hon. Wood -
row Wilson has yet a good deal to learn of 
the great lesson of the brotherhood of mankind."—Register (New Haven, Conn.). 
"W e once knew a southern attorney; one 
of the finest men who ever lived. In discussing the Negro problem at one time, reference was made to his colored clients. They 
entered his office as did white clients, they 
came to him personally, explained their case, 
he gave advice, accepted their money, became their attorney and appeared for them 
in court. 
"But when it was hypothetically stated: 
'They come to your desk in your office and 
sit down,' the reply came instantly and 
sharply. 'Not by a sight; no Negro 
sits in my office.' W e know of no better 
illustration of the southern attitude toward 
the Negro. It is tolerant, helpful, even 
kindly and thankful, until some approach is 
made that savors of social contact or recognition. Then the bars are clamped."—Duluth News Tribune (Minn.). 
"President Wilson was not frank when he 
suggested to the delegation of visiting Negro 
leaders that segregation in the departments 
had been resorted to to make the Negro independent of the white race. 
"Segregation has been resorted to because 
the southern leaders in Congress are bound 
to have the Negro eliminated from the public 
service in any but a menial capacity."—Register Leader (Des Moines, Iowa). 
"The reason given for segregation is nothing but an excuse of the hollowest kind, 
which ignores notorious facts."—Oregonian 
I Portland, Ore.). 
TH E COPPER " Tll c No ^
Toe s
 called to proHEADS test against the segregation of 
colored employes in some of 
the Federal departments. In presenting 
such a protest, they asked for a consideration 
that has not been asked for by recognized 
leaders o f their race—such as Booker Washington, and those who are most directly concerned with the cause of Negro education in 
the South. White men are freer and more 
contented when they work by themselves. 
Negroes are freer and more contented when 
they work by themselves. Forcing white 
and black to mix in employment, where no 
real necessity for mixing exists, is hurtful 
to the self-respect and efficiency of both."— 
Daily Eagle (Brooklyn, N. Y.) . 
"The President explained to its members 
that the rule was one o f convenience and expediency, to avoid friction between the races. 
W e can all perceive its wisdom and justification, excepting those Negroes who insist 
upon thrusting themselves into white company. The rule involves no political ostracism. The colored Treasury employes can 
continue to serve the government and draw 
their salaries. There is nothing in the Constitution or the various Civil Rights' acts 
that compels white men to associate with 
Negroes in the civil service, any more than 
in business or social life. Secretary McAdo o 
has doubtless found that detachment of the 
colored from the white employes of his department would insure the smoother working and greater efficiency o f its official machinery."—Herald (Syracuse, N. Y.) . 
"Booker Washington answered the segregation question by saying that the colored 
man ought not to wish to associate with a 
white man who did not want him and that 
the colored man ought to insist just as strenuously that the white man should not be allowed to associate with him. As long as 
there is a clash of the races they should be 
kept apart and the keeping apart should not 
reflect upon one race any more than it does 
upon the other."—Journal (Meriden, 
Conn.). 
TH E "The incident developed out of the 
SOUTH undertaking of the present administration to rectify the evils existing 
in various departments at Washington arising out of the employment o f both whites 
and blacks in the same rooms and bureaus. 
During the early days of this administration, 
Mrs. Wilson was reported to have observed 
with her own eyes some o f the hardships 
o f white women in having to work beside 
Negro men. Naturally, with her refined 
breeding and Southern rearing, she perceived the dangers of that situation. It had 
grown more and more aggravated during OPINION 
various Republican administrations, when 
that Party's leadership was so abject in its 
submission to Negro dictation arising out of 
political conditions in the East and West. 
This was thoroughly illustrated by Mr. 
Roosevelt's conspicuous knocking under to 
a delegation of Negro leaders, who protested against his original attempt to rid 
the Southern Republican organization of the 
incubus of Negro influence."—News (Birmingham, Ala.). 
"There is no injustice in the separation 
of the races in the federal departments so 
long as it does not carry with it unequal 
accommodations or unequal official privilege. 
It involves no more hardship on one race 
than the other. The white people do not 
complain o f this separation; why do the 
Negroes? Social equality they will never 
gain in the South, and never generally in 
the North, and the sooner they have the good 
sense to realize this, and the race pride to 
make them regard the question with indifference, the sooner they will command public respect. William Monroe Trotter, of 
Boston, and others of his kind are rendering 
their people a notably bad service by such 
insolent performances as that at the White 
House Thursday."—Baltimore (Md.) Sun. 
"W e should really like to know just how 
many Negro reporters are on the staff o f 
The Evening Post and The World. W e 
should like to know how many Negro editorial writers are on the staff of each of these 
papers. If there are no Negro employes in 
either of these important departments of 
our contemporaries, we should like to know 
why it is so? Wh y are not half of their 
reporters and editors Negroes? Wh y don't 
they give their theories a real test? 
"But they will not do this. They are 
hyprocrites, steeped in prejudice, and in the 
single matter of real knowledge- of the races 
and their true relations to each other, are 
little less than ignoramuses, for all of their 
splendid ability and talents in other respects."—Advertiser (Montgomery, Ala.). 
"Trotter has been trained to regard himself as an equal. Visit Florida in the winter. 
Yo u will see the 'Yankees' address a white 
laborer as an inferior, and yet in intercourse with the commonest blacks address 
them very deferentially as 'Mister' and 
•Mrs.' The Negro will always grab an 'ell' 
if you grant him an inch. The people have 
yielded to Negro assumption so far that he 
feels he has won a victory over the superior 
race. Nowhere on the cars, on the streets, 
do Negroes even act on a plane of equals, 
but as superiors. 
"D o we not every day truckle to our inferiors, and the Negroes see it? Farmers 
needing labor truckle to him, the storekeeper does the same, the politicians pat him on 
the back, so that the Negro's attitude has 
been changed towards the whites. No outward signs o f deference; they are studiously 
omitted. The evident intent is to assert not 
equality, but superiority."—Telegraph (Macon, Ga.). 
"While agitators of the Trotter stripe and 
certain of their political inciters will doubtless strive to make capital of it, the episode 
will react to the sole injury of the Trotter 
cause. Race instinct has quickened wonderfully throughout the white North in recent 
years. Insistent and offensive demands for 
racial social equality by self-styled Negro 
leaders, and the attempts at offensive assertion of their imagined "rights" are largely 
responsible for the race clashes recorded in 
more than a few Northern states."—Times 
Picayune (New Orleans, La.). 
"The 'Lexington, Ky., Herald' thinks that 
the President's treatment of the Trotter, 
colored, visiting committee, was 'peculiarly 
unfortunate,' but the 'El Paso, Texas, Times' 
says Trotter is a 'Jamaica coon,' who would 
be made to demonstrate that he was truly 
a 'trotter,' if he should visit 'any representative'southern community.' "—Courant (Hartford, Conn.). 
"The little bunch of Boston niggers that 
made the 'protest' against the attitude of 
President Wilson in refusing to be called 
down by them, do not represent the respectable, self-respecting, law abiding colored 
people of the United States, who are not 
worrying about 'race equality.' The Tucker 
darkey who tried to 'sass' the President is 
not a Booker T. Washington type of colored 
man. He is merely a nigger."—Beaumont 
(Tex.) Enterprise. 
"At what point will the governTH E NEW men ( . a s
 government stop the seSOUTH. gTegalion of different races? As 
we conceive the purpose of this government, 
it is to treat every individual as equal before 
the eyes o f the law—black, or white, red or 
yellow, Jew or Gentile, Protestant or Catholic—whatever the breed, whatever the creed, 
matters not, at least should matter not to the 
public official charged with the duty of serving all the people. 
"The humblest American citizens of full 126 TH E CRISIS 
Negro blood is in the eyes of the law the 
full equal of the most powerful citizen of 
the purest Anglo-Saxon descent. The public servant elected by the people, paid by the 
people, owes to the humblest citizen the same 
protection and the same treatment accorded to the most powerful. Neither breed nor 
creed, neither culture nor vocation, should 
determine the treatment accorded to a citizen by a servant. 
"W e are distressed that the President has 
allied himself with those who believe in the 
perpetuation of race prejudice and justify 
race passion. As a private citizen, every 
man has the right to determine his own 
course; as a public official, the higher the 
office the greater the obligation to act with 
justice and treat with patience those who 
must look to the public officer for the protection the law. 
"It is but a step in descent from the position taken by those public officials in Washington who segregate one race to the public 
official in a southern state who advocates 
lynch law. The example of the higher official will be cited by the lower official as 
justification for his course. The mob of the 
South that lynches in the night is but a step 
further than the official order that segregates because of color in the day."—Lexington (Ky.) Herald. 
"The Courier-Journal agrees with the 
New York World that the 'segregation' business over in Washington spells rather small. 
During fifty years, including two Democratic Presidential terms, there was no 
thought of separating the white and black 
official sheep. Wh y should the suggestion 
meet the assent of anybody now? 
"The President acted with entire propriety in calling down the impudent Negro 
who acted as spokesman for the committee 
of colored protestants. It seems that he is 
a well-known professional agitator from 
Boston who was once imprisoned for breaking up a Booker Washington meeting. The 
lesson he received may not do him any good. 
But it ought to impress itself upon all who 
fail to recognize the sanctity of the White 
House and the dignity of its occupant. 
"The segregation order should be revoked. 
It has no real cause or interest to back it. 
The issue should not have been raised. Having rebuked Trotter, let Mr. Wilson take 
matters further into his own hands, and restore the status quo,"—Courier Journal 
(Louisville, Ky.) . 
TH E COLORED " T*° tte r ,
 WS, S
 "ndoLlbtedl.y 
PRESS rash, and entered upon his 
duty without any diplomacy 
whatever, but the President can not escape 
the suspicion that he seized the opportunity 
to evade the issue by hiding behind Trotter's 
ultra-zealous attitude; that he purposely 
subordinated the interests o f ten million 
American citizens to his own established 
code of White House formalities, and magnified the latter as a justification of his evasion of his plain duty toward the former,— 
all under the guise of an imaginary offense 
to the dignity o f his office."—Pittsburgh 
(Pa.) Courier. 
"The unfortunate part o f the situation is 
that the President was insulted and stated 
that no man had spoken to him since he had 
been elected as had this Boston Negro and, 
therefore, whenever the Negroes came to the 
White House again during his occupancy, 
they must have another spokesman. The attitude of this leader, in itself, seemed to be 
a good argument for segregation."—Louisville (Ky.) News. 
"While the whole incident is a regretable 
one from some angles we are of the opinion 
that good to the race at large, will come out 
of it by causing influential journals throughout the country to condemn the un-American 
policy now endorsed by the Administration." 
—The Messenger (Charlottesville, Va.). 
"W e recall with a degree of disgust that 
under circumstances when Trotter and his 
gang were in the position of hosts, they 
played the role of bullies and Bowery toughs 
nearly breaking up a meeting at which Dr. 
Rooker T. Washington was the chief speaker, the leading Mr. Trotter spent 30 days' 
time in jail for his offense. W e are tempted 
to give expression to the wish that Trotter 
and his Northern zealots would let Negro 
affairs alone if they can do no more than 
bungle them up. 
"There is not another Negro in the whole 
race who would have committed such a performance."—Birmingham (Ala.) Reporter. 
"But we have never known Mr. Trotter 
to lose his head in any controversy, or to 
forget his duty as a cultured Christian gentleman. Tt may be true that his earnestness 
was mistaken for temper, or perhaps for an 
inexcusable failure to properly realize his 
'place' when speaking in the presence of or 
to a 'white man.' The horrible image of a 
'sassy nigger' may have been focussed in a 
greatly magnified and chromatic field, but OPINION 127 
we are sure that it was the result of some 
form o f aberration we know not what."— 
The Bee (Washington, D. C) . 
"One has only to be at the national capital and see what is going on to be convinced 
of this. It is not a party fight, and partisan 
lines should be ignored. The danger is 
through the federal government and we are 
all citizens of it and should all exert a pressure upon the federal government, both direct and through others. W e appeal to the 
race to realize the danger and to exert their 
powers as citizens at once and as never before. W e can win if we will work."—The 
Guardian (Boston, Mass.). 
"When the same Wm . Monroe Trotter and 
a few of his associates who supported Wilson, called upon the Governor in 1912 at 
Trenton, they were received with open arms 
and the glad, grasping hand so fraternally 
extended. Promises, many promises, sweet 
promises, made to the ear, but to be broken 
to the heart, were eagerly made, not alone 
with the tongue, but with the pen. The 
Christian Governor of New Jersey, pledged 
himself as a Christian man that the NegTO 
had nothing to fear, for should he be elected 
president, they would receive Christian treatment and should hold under his administration, all the offices or as many offices as they 
were holding under the then Taft administration."—Si. Luke Herald (Richmond, Va.). 
The Washington Bee thus comments on 
the Hampton defense o f President Wilson: 
"The milk o f the quotation consists in the 
following: 'I think one of the happiest circumstances of recent times is this co-operation between the white people and the Negroes in the South in intelligent efforts to 
advance the economic success and comfort 
of the Negroes and put them in a position 
where they can work out their own fortunes 
vvith success and self-respect.' That the 
President's attitude is clearly stated in the 
above quotation there is small reason to 
doubt, and to that extent we certainly agree 
with Mr. Aery. But as to whether the President's attitude is the correct one, or whether 
it comports with the actual conditions obtaining, in the main, at the South, or whether 
it is in harmony with the social' forces calculated to produce the ultimate results he 
seems to desire, are questions upon which 
there is large room for differences of opinion. The supposition that the 'economic success and comfort' of the colored people can 
be reasonably expected under the general 
policy of the South, which is being encouraged by the President and more and more 
rigorously applied than at any time since 
Emancipation, lending lo discourage and 
repress every manifestation of aspiration 
for political and civil equality, becomes manifestly illogical, it' not preposterous in the 
light of the true significance of 'economic 
success and comfort.' " 
m 
OUR QUESTIONNAIR E 
"In order to secure informaTH E BOURBON ^ FOJ . NEGR 0 TH E 
SOUTH. 'National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People' has sent a 
'questionnaire' to every congressional nominee, according to the New York Evening 
Post, which publishes the queries and reports on the responses of the nineteen New 
York candidates heard from. . . . 
"This report is highly interesting, both 
as a revelation of the purposes and threatening attitude of the 'National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People' and 
as proof of the yielding to the pressure of 
the Negro vote in the doubtful States on the 
part o f a considerable number of politicians 
who, if left free, would undoubtedly respond 
to their normal instincts in opposition to the 
abnormal intermarriage of distinct races. 
"The most important means of 'advancing 
colored people,' in the view of the 'National 
Association' for the purpose, is to marry 
them to the whites, it would appear, and, in 
order to secure the Negro vote, a considerable number of New York candidates are 
willing to be advertised as favoring such a 
policy. And yet the idea is monstrous, contrary to nature, and opposed to every normal instinct implanted in the several distinct 
varieties of mankind. 
"There must be very good reasons why 
there are some half dozen grand divisions 
of the human race, set apart by color and 
other distinctive racial characteristics, and 
there are equally good reasons why it is undesirable for all these distinct races to become merged into one mongrel type; otherwise all mankind from the outset would have 
been o f one color and of a general likeness 
varying only in individuals. Nature itself 
has set up a barrier opposed to such a mongrelization and inevitable deterioration, and 
this barrier is what we call racial aversion 
or race prejudice, which, when it does not 
lead to wrong or crime, is in itself a per-128 TH E CRISIS 
fectly normal, innocent and desirable thing." 
Macon (Ga.) Daily Telegraph. 
eating, calculus-workers o f Boston condemn, 
and no resolution can stop our song."— 
Montgomery (Ala.) Advertiser. 
TH E BOSTO N SONGS 
NORTHERN AND 
SOUTHERN 
OPINION. 
"In eliminating the objectionable song books from 
the institutions under their 
control the Boston school 
committee have affirmed a principle and 
made a contribution to social peace. The 
meanest kind of disparagement is that of 
epithets aimed at race, nationality or creed, 
and the subjection of children to it on the 
ground of their color would have been a flat 
negation of everything there is of humane 
in our educational system. And the successful protest just registered is by no means 
the end of the good work. The colored people are especially sensitive, and have a right 
to be. They are not the only sufferers."— 
Boston (Mass.) Herald. 
"Boston culture is getting to be a nuisance, due largely to the fact that as Bostonians become 'cultured' they do not lose 
any of their stupidity. 
"If the point raised by the Boston Negroes and whites were submitted to a referendum of Southern Negroes and their best 
friends, the Southern people, there would 
be about six votes in each State cast in line 
with the Boston demand. 
"Take out of the hearts of men 'My Old 
Kentucky Home,' 'Massa's in De Cold, Cold 
Ground,' 'Suwanee River,' and a few others, 
and some of the sweetest, fondest, recollections of the Southern plantation Negro 
would be wiped away. 
"The folklore songs of the South, the best 
of which were written by a sympathetic 
Northerner, the plantation melodies, the delicious Negro dialect, picturing as they do 
the simple emotions, strange superstitions, 
the melancholy and the gladness o f the Negro heart—these must stand. They will 
stand. Any literature in which the Negro 
is portrayed must give place to these 'insults,' if the truth be told. Tf the Negro be 
not forgotten he must be pictured as he is 
and he has always been, for, if we abolish 
folklore songs with their comedy, their 
pathos, their abiding sentimentality, there is 
no charm in any part of any study of the 
Negro race. 
"The Negroes of the South and the white 
people of the South have decided that they 
love the melodies and stories which the beanA BOURBO N A T BA Y 
The New Yor k World has the following 
report of the last dinner o f the Southern 
Society in New York : 
"John Skelton Williams, Comptroller of 
the Currency, brought up the race question 
by declaring in his address: 
" 'All other issues have appeared to us 
light and negligible when white supremacy 
was threatened. Happily such fears are now 
no more to be regarded than as a frightful 
dream. Our constitutional conventions in the 
different States have so limited and safeguarded the right o f suffrage in an effort to 
secure an enlightened electorate, that Negro 
rule has ceased to be a menace. 
" 'Long ago we determined that the Negro 
should never be our master; that we would 
work with him and help him and let him 
help and work with us, but that, as a social 
and political equal, the best interests of both 
races and of the country demanded stern, 
final and definite prohibition. The dignity, 
welfare and prosperity o f the two races and 
of the entire country are and will be promoted by the policy o f strict segregation.' 
"Former Attorney-General George W. 
Wiekersham took suave but pointed issue 
with this declaration. 
" 'I do not believe,' he said, 'that this 
problem will ever be solved by the total disfranchisement for all time o f 10,000,000 of 
our citizens. No people can thrive and advance if, side by side and working with them, 
are 10,000,000 who are disfranchised from 
all voice in government. 
" 'God knows that this is a difficult problem and God knows how it will be solved, 
but it cannot be solved by denying to any, be 
he black or yellow or red, the right of a 
voice in making the laws by which he shall 
be governed and in the choice of the men who 
shall govern him.' 
"Then turning toward the Comptroller, 
Mr. Wiekersham concluded earnestly: 
" 'Believe me, this problem is not solved 
by the method you offer.' 
"It was notable that while Mr. Williams had 
been heard through without applause, Mr. 
Wiekersham was twice interrupted by handclapping." 1 
CORRESPONDENC E 
RESIDENT Woo d ro w 
Wilson. 
My dear Sir: 
Enclosed are three 
editorials from the New 
York World, the Tribune and the Post, bearing on the recent 
interview of a representative of the National Independent Political League at 
the White House. 
This Association does not for a moment excuse any rudeness or lack of 
courtesy to you who above all others are 
entitled to respect, but wishes to place 
itself on record as agreeing with Mr. 
Trotter that the slightest discrimination 
against colored people in the federal 
service is a grave injustice. 
Respectfully yours, 
(Signed) J. E. SPINGABN, 
Chairman of the Board of Directors. 
m 
FROM THE BOSTON "GLOBE." 
[H E following editorial on 
' ' The Alleged Failure 
of Democracy' ' was written by the editor of THE 
CRISIS and printed in the 
Boston Sunday Globe: 
We are becoming more democratic, but not 
easily, not without struggle and misgivings. 
Our progress seems even slower than it is 
because we have really experienced so little 
real democracy in the past. We founded a 
republic in 1787 which was in reality an 
aristocracy of the most pronounced tendencies. The democracy ushered in by Andrew 
Jackson was the beginning of that system of 
government by deception where "the people" 
are congratulated on the possession of all 
powers of government, while the real rulers 
hide in the background so effectually that 
their very existence often is not sensed. 
Since the Civil War we have driven these 
rulers into the open, and frankly acknowledged, weighed and studied their power. 
From this knowledge we have started 
well on the way toward dethroning the ward 
heeler and the petty boss, and are hammering 
at the strongholds of the greater bosses. Our 
real difficulty comes in settling in our own 
minds a proper, permanent repository for 
the power thus regained. In other words, 
we are facing to-day still the elementary 
problem of democracy: How far do we dare 
trust the mass of the people, not with sham 
power and sounding phrases, but with real 
power? 
Those on the one hand who call for commission government, and those on the other 
hand who ask for the initiative and the recall 
represent the two different answers to this 
problem. True it is, that there are those farsighted ones who combine both demands. 
For the most part, however, we may disf
inguish those who would deposit the power 
won from the bosses with one or more strong 
men for safekeeping; and those who would 
try and place that power just as far as possible in the hands of the masses. 
There can be no doubt that the former type 
of thinkers gains great strength and support 
from the supposed failure of certain democratic experiments in the past, particularly 
in the case of the foreign vote in our cities 
and of the Negro vote during reconstruction 
times. The alleged failure of democracy in 
reconstruction times especially has been used 
in the past and is still used as a tremendous 
argument against democracy in the nation 
and in the world. The argument runs something like this: "Ignorant freedmen failed 
as voters. This proves that democratic 
government cannot rest on ignorance." But 
how much learning is necessary to a share 
EDITORIA L Draw n by Pau l Thiria t 
TH E DESPERAT E ATTEMP T O F GENERA L VON 
This pictur e drawn b y the specia l artist for TH E CRISIS , the Ne w Yor k Herald, and the H 
foun d themselve s hemme d in b y the Allie s at Germign y l'Eveque , nea r Varreddes, during the bat* 
wa y throug h the tow n blac k Colonia l troop s arme d wit h lon g Frenc h bayonets charged them. 
Afte r man y had bee n slain on bot h side s the German s retreated. Copyrighted by The Crisis and the .\ . Y . Herald 
break the allied line of the marne 
show s an inciden t o f the fighting o n the Marne . Whe n Germa n force s unde r Genera l vo n Kluc k 
lost desperat e han d t o han d encounters o f the wa r occurred . A s the German s wer e makin g their 
time the German s withstoo d the onslaught, the fighting takin g plac e betwee n blazin g houses. 132 TH E CRISIS 
in the government? Immediately our ideas 
enlarge: "Government is for the educated 
and the expert. It is a reward, not a right. 
Democracy is an evolution that may come to 
fruition in a thousand years. To-day we 
need the strength and efficiency found only 
in a few. " In the face of such argument it 
is high time that the people of this country 
asked themselves seriously two questions: 
What is democracy? Did democracy fail in 
reconstruction ? 
Democracy is not a gift of power, but a 
reservoir of knowledge. Only the soul that 
suffers knows its suffering. Only the one who 
needs knows what need means. Ignorance 
may vitiate the expression of needs and vice 
may deceive, but it remains true that despotism and aristocracy have displayed far 
more ignorance of the real needs of the 
people than the most ignorant of democracies. 
The people alone are the sources of that real 
knowledge which enables a State to be ruled 
for the best good of its inhabitants. And 
only by putting power in the hands of each 
inhabitant can we hope to approximate in 
the ultimate use of that power the greatest 
good to the greatest number. 
Seldom in the history of the world has 
this great truth been so well proved as 
in the experience of the American Negro. 
Without civil or political rights, and admitting every claim of benevolence on the part 
of his master, he became a slave, whose very 
existence threatened the industrial and 
spiritual life of the nation. Emancipated 
and given a vote, despite his ignorance and 
inexperience, he gave the South three gifts, 
so valuable that no one to-day would dream 
of giving them up : 
1. The public-school system. 
2. The enfranchisement of the poor 
vhites. 
3. The beginning of modern social legisation in land reform, eleemosynary in-
;titutions and social uplift. 
The Negro was not disfranchised because 
le had failed in democratic government, but 
oeeause there was every reason to believe 
that he would succeed, and it was his success 
which the beaten masters feared more than 
his failure. 
Having disfranchised him with this fiction 
of failure, that same fiction is being used 
to-day to discredit democracy throughout the 
nation, to stop the just enfranchisement of 
women, to curtail the power of the foreign 
born and their descendants, and to support 
the argument in the twentieth century that 
the democratic ideals o f the nineteenth century were in vain. 
To the help of this program comes the 
wholesale exploitation and despising of 
colored races and the suicidal career of 
universal conquest to which.Europ e stands 
committed. 
But the march of real democracy goes on. 
Slowly but surely the masses o f men will 
become the great depositors of the bulk of 
both political and economical power, for 
their own good. Only democratic government can be both enlightened and selfish, 
both bond and free. 
LOGI C 
1 N E o f the interesting way s 
o f settling the rac e prob ­
lem come s to the for e in 
this perio d o f unemploy ­
men t amon g the poor. In 
Waterloo , Ivy., the enterprisin g chie f o f polic e is arresting all 
unemploye d Negroe s an d puttin g them 
in jail, thus securin g their labo r fo r the 
state at the cheapest possibl e figure. 
This brigh t idea di d no t originat e in 
Kentucky-. It is use d all throug h the 
Sout h an d stron g sermon s an d editorials 
are writte n against "lazy' ' Negroes. 
Despit e this ther e are peopl e in this 
countr y wh o wonde r at the increase of 
"crime " amon g colore d people . 
BOURBON S 
' H E Charlott e Observer 
note s that a Philadelphi a 
pape r has been asked wh y 
the intelligent, rich and 
thickl y populate d North 
an d West are divide d into 
nearl y equa l politica l partie s whil e the 
Sout h vote s simpl y the Democrati c 
ticket. Th e Observer explain s ponderously . It says that the reason is because 
the Negr o wa s enfranchise d fifty years 
ago . "This colore d majorit y wer e Republica n and as a perfectl y logica l consequenc e the y force d practicall y all 
whit e voters " into the Democrati c party. 
This is all clea r an d logical, bu t wh y EDITORIA L 133 
in the name o f reason are they still votin g like on e unthinkin g her d instead o f 
like intelligent beings ? Th e Negroe s 
have been disfranchised. I n the southern Sout h the blac k vot e is quit e negligible . Cadd o Parish, La., with a majority o f colore d inhabitants has forty-nine 
Negr o voters an d ove r fou r thousand 
white voters. Why , then, are these fou r 
thousand whit e voters votin g withou t 
rul e or reason ? Ar e they so afraid o f 
forty-nine votes ? Certainly not. Th e 
real reason is that there is n o demo ­
crati c governmen t in the South . Ther e 
is simpl y an oligarch y kep t in powe r b y 
skillful stirring u p o f hatred in the 
breasts o f me n against persons o f Negr o 
descent. I n this wa y a vast rotten boroug h has bee n built up , an d democrati c 
governmen t in the Unite d States canno t 
triump h until this is destroye d roo t and 
branc h and the franchis e based upo n intelligenc e regardless o f rac e or sex. 
AGILIT Y 
iRS . 0 . H . P. BELMON T 
is comin g in fo r considerable praise o n accoun t o f 
he r facil e answe r to a disturbin g question whil e 
she wa s campaignin g fo r 
suffrage in the South . A t Chattanoog a 
she wa s asked if he r movemen t mean t 
the givin g o f vote s to colore d women . 
Mrs. Belmon t wa s most adroit. Th e expectan t hush fell o n the audienc e and 
instead o f standin g u p like a frank 
woma n an d sayin g "Yes, " Mrs. Belmon t 
quibble d an d twisted after the most approve d southern fashion. "W e want, " 
she said, "the same votin g privilege s fo r 
colore d wome n as are give n colore d 
men. " An d ther e the adroitness stands 
nake d an d unashamed . 
It will undoubtedl y attract the support o f those southerners wh o wan t 
aristocrati c whit e wome n to vot e an d to 
vot e their narrow-heade d prejudice s into a ne w southern oligarchy . Bu t there 
ar e peopl e who m such dishonesty will 
no t attract. It will not, fo r instance, 
attract the tens o f thousands o f black 
voters wh o are goin g to cast their ballots 
in certain states this fall wher e the suffrage question will come up . The y will 
not b e satisfied in havin g their black 
sisters o f the Sout h disfranchised like 
their black brothers and they will hold 
in frank and logica l suspicion a part y 
that is workin g fo r that kin d o f demo ­
cracy . 
Moreover, there are thousands o f whit e 
peopl e in this countr y who m this kin d 
o f quibblin g disgusts. Everybod y 
knows wha t desperat e effort has been 
mad e b y certain elements amon g the 
suffragists to dodg e the Negr o problem, 
to try an d wor k fo r democrac y fo r whit e 
peopl e whil e bein g dum b befor e slavery 
for blacks. This element has been 
squelched several times in the counsels 
o f the part y bu t it continuall y bob s up . 
Le t the suffrage movemen t beware ! I n 
the turning s o f time Mrs. Belmon t ma y 
no t be as adroit as she at present conceives herself. 
IN COUR T 
T has happene d time after 
time, in case after case. 
Th e America n Negr o has 
taken his cause befor e the 
courts half prepared . H e 
has been warne d o f this. 
H e ough t to have learned b y bitter experienc e bu t he has no t ye t learned. 
La w is no t simpl y a matte r o f right and 
wrong—i t is a matte r o f learning, experienc e and precedents. A colore d 
lawye r ma y g o befor e a court with a 
just case. H e ma y brin g learning to 
his case. I n nine cases ou t o f ten he 
canno t brin g experienc e becaus e the 
colo r line in the legal profession give s 
him little chanc e fo r experience . With ­
ou t this experienc e his knowledg e o f 
precedents must be limited. 
Attorne y Harrison , wh o brough t the 
recent Oklahoma case befor e the Supreme Court, is a ma n o f intelligenc e 
and devotio n to his cause. H e wa s 
warned , however, frankly b y lawyers o f 134 TH E CRISI S 
wide experience to associate wit h himself the best legal talent of the country 
so that his case might be adequately presented. H e refused this aid. H e succumbed to the temptation of tryin g to 
bear the whole burden himself, under 
circumstances where it was no dishonor 
but ordinary carefulness to call to his 
aid other and more experienced attorneys. The result was that his case was 
half lost. The strong statement which 
was elicited from the court is of great 
value, hut the real decision which wil l 
stop the Oklahoma experiment is yet to 
come, and all the laborious work must be 
done over again. Ho w many times are 
we going to repeat this foolish mistake? 
ROS S 
R. EDWAR D A L S -
WORT H ROS S ha s 
found a new road to fame 
and seems scarcely to 
recognize that the new 
road is quite old and 
worn by many bloody feet. Mr . Ross is 
vastly set u p by a contemplation of his 
own perfections. H e is white, handsome 
and masterful and of goodly physical 
proportions. Here , then, is a starting 
point. Persons who haven't his style of 
beauty and whose parents haven't been 
able to send them to college and above 
all, persons whose faces do not reflect 
the same amount of light as his open 
countenance are being damned by Mr. 
Ross for time and eternity. 
"The black Portuguese," says the distinguished gentleman, ''are obviously 
Negroid, lack foresight and are so stupi d they cannot follow a straight line." 
Afte r this it woul d hardl y be necessary 
to quote things that Mr . Ross would say 
about Negroes. I n fact, i f Mr . Ross had 
his way he woul d clean most human 
beings off the earth. H e has his firm 
opinions concerning Jews, "dagos" and 
the unspeakable East. The only difficulty about this new crusader is that he 
takes himself seriously and that current 
magazines are sufficiently i n want of 
ideas to print what he says. Of such is 
the kingdom of prejudice ! 
T o Keep the Memory of Charlotte Forten Grimke 
B Y ANGELIN A W . GRIMK E 
Stil l are there wonders of the dark and day : 
The muted shrilling' of shy things at night, 
So small beneath the stars and moon ; 
The peace, dream-frail, but perfect while 
the light 
Lie s softly on the leaves at noon. 
These are, and these wil l be 
Unti l eternity; 
Bu t she who loved them well has gone away. 
Eac h dawn, while yet the east is veiled grey, 
The birds about her window wake and 
sing ; 
An d far away, each day, some lar k 
1 know is singin g where the grasses swing ; 
Some robin calls and calls at dark. 
These are. and these wil l be 
Unti l eternity; 
Bu t she who loved them well has gone away. 
The wil d flowers that she loved down green 
ways stray ; 
He r roses lift their wistfu l buds at dawn, 
Bu t not fo r eyes that loved them best; 
Onl y her little pansies are all gone, 
Some lyin g softly on her breast. 
An d flowers wil l bud and be 
Unti l eternity; 
But she who loved them well has gone away. 
Wher e has she gone? An d who is there to 
say ? 
Bu t this we know : her gentle spirit moves 
An d is where beauty never wanes, 
Perchance by other streams, mi d other 
groves; 
An d to us here, ah ! she remains 
A lovely memory 
Unti l eternity; 
She came, she loved, and then she went away. NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE A A N 
m m m ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
ANNUA L MEETIN G 
' I \H E annual meeting will be held in New 
York City on Monday afternoon, January 4, in Room 521, 70 Fifth Avenue, at .'i 
P. M. This meeting is purely formal and 
will, without transacting any business, adjourn until February 12. On that date there 
will be two sessions: an evening public session, over which Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard will preside, at Ethical Culture Hall, 2 
W . 64th Street. The chief address will be 
made by the Hon. Charles S. Whitman, the 
Governor-elect, who will present the Spingarn Medal. 
There will be other distinguished speakers 
on the program including Prof. William 
Pickens. The subject of the address of 
Prof. Pickens will be Frederick Douglass. 
Prof. Pickens, formerly of Talladega College 
and now at Wiley University, has devoted 
himself to teaching since his graduation 
from Yale where he was one of the honor 
men of his class, having been elected to the 
Phi Beta Kapp a and class orator. He is 
becoming increasingly known as a lecturer 
and is the author of "The Heir of Slaves." 
The business session o f the annual meeting will be held in the Parish House of St. 
Mark's Methodist Episcopal Church at 2.30 
in the afternoon of February 12, and will 
be open to members only. The Nominating 
Committee o f the Board of Directors, consisting o f Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Chairman, Dr. F. N. Cardozo and Dr. C. E. 
Bentley, announce as their unanimous choice 
the nomination of the following directors to 
succeed themselves as members of the Board, 
their terms to expire in January, 1918: 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York ; Dr. 
V. Morton Jones, Brooklyn; Mr. John E. 
Milholland, New York ; Prof. George William Cook, Washington; Dr. J. E. Spingarn, 
New York ; Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston; 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York ; 
Dr.' O. M. Waller, Brooklyn; Mr. William 
English Walling, New York ; Mr. Archibald 
H. Grimke, Washington. These are to be 
voted upon by the Association at its business session, at which time a new constitution and by-laws recommended for adoption by the Board o f Directors will be presented to the Association for approval. 
MEETING S 
A PARLO R meeting was held at the New 
York home of Mrs. Henry Villard on 
Saturday afternoon, November 21. Mrs. Villard, who presided, made an eloquent plea 
for justice to the Negro and dwelt on the 
menace of race prejudice as illustrated in 
the present war. Mr. Harry T . Burleigh, 
the baritone and composer, captivated his 
audience by his characteristically artistic interpretation of selections from Negro spiritual songs and lullabies. The attention 
which Mrs. Butler R. Wilson's address received, was a significant tribute to its effectiveness. 
The Trenton Branch held a successful 
meeting with Mr. Studin and Miss Kathryn 
M. Johnson as speakers. A number of new 
members was secured. 
As a result of the meeting held by the 
Branch o f the Oranges at which Mr. Arthur 
B. Spingarn, Chairman of the Legal Committee, and Mrs. Wilson spoke, fresh interest was aroused in the work of the N. A. A. 
C. P. and a series of meetings in the Oranges is now being planned. 
At the meeting which was held at Howard 
University in the interest of the Association 
by College Chapter No. 1 a prize was offered 
for the best essay on the work of the N. A. 
A. C. P. This was donated by Mrs. Henry 
Villard and is a fine portrait of William 
Lloyd Garrison. Stirring addresses were 
made by Dr. Spingarn, Mrs. Wilson and 
Mr. Thomas of the District of Columbia 
Branch. The assembly hall was crowded to 
its doors by enthusiastic students. 
Dr. Spingarn and Mrs. Wilson also spoke 
to large audiences in Wilmington and Harrisburg. Many new members and subscriptions to TH E CRISIS were secured and in 
Wilmington a branch was organized by Miss 
Kathryn M. Johnson. Mrs. Wilson also addressed a series of meetings in Pittsburgh 
which will be the starting point in the lecture trip now being arranged for Dr. Spingarn in January, and which will include the 
following cities: Columbus, Springfield, 
Dayton and Cincinnati, Ohio; Springfield, 
111.; St. Joseph, Mo. ; Des Moines, Iowa ; 
Omaha, Neb.; Minneapolis, St. Paul, Toledo 
and Buffalo. A few additional engagements 136 TH E CRISIS 
might be made for Dr. Spingarn if application is made to the National Office immediately. Dr. Spingarn pays all his own expenses. 
BRANCHES 
Baltimore: The ambitious program of 
the Baltimore Branch for the next few 
months indicates the activity of its members 
in the work of the N. A. A. C. P. A concert is announced for Friday, December 18, 
at Albaugh's Theatre. Miss Lucy D. Slowe 
has entire management of this affair. Miss 
Slowe, who is a teacher of English in the 
Baltimore High School, is distinguished for 
her executive ability. She was Secretary of 
the Branch at the time of the annual conference in Baltimore and too high praise 
cannot be given her work. On February 
12, a mass meeting to celebrate the anniversary of Frederick Douglass will be held, and 
on March 11, a second concert will be given 
for the benefit of the Association when the 
Williams Colored Singers will be heard. 
Boston: The Boston Branch has won a 
victory in persuading the Boston School 
Committee to withdraw from the schools a 
book entitled "Forty Best Songs " compiled 
for school use by James M. McLaughlin. 
This action was taken after a public hearing 
lasting over an hour and attended by 
a crowd which overflowed the corridors of 
the School Committee Chambers. The National Association was represented by some 
of its most distinguished officers and members including Miss Elizabeth C. Putnam, 
who led the campaign by securing the signatures o f many of Boston's leading citizens 
to the petition to eliminate the books from 
the school system; Mr. Moorfield Story, 
President of the National Association; Mr. 
Francis J. Garrison, the last surviving son 
of William Lloyd Garrison, and Dr. Horace 
Bumstead. Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Secretary o f the Boston Branch, who presented 
the case, summed up the matter as follows: 
"The objectionable words used in these 
songs are all such terms as are always used 
in the sense of epithets and our children 
have returned from school heart-broken over 
the facts that these songs are sung in school 
and that the white children had jeered at 
them as a result." 
Mr. Wilson was earnestly supported by 
the Rev. Monlrose William Thornton, the 
Rev. Benjamin W . Swain, the Rev. Samuel 
W . Brown, and the Rev. Powhattan Bagnall. Mr. Alonzo Meserve, Master of Bowdoin School, said that the songs had caused 
trouble in his school. The vote of the committee to discard the books was unamious. 
District of Columbia: Another victory 
over segregation was won by the District of 
Columbia Branch in the case o f one of the 
department stores in Washington which had 
discriminated against two colored teachers 
by requesting them to sit in a particular 
part o f their restaurant. Both the ladies 
who are members o f the District of Columbia Branch are college graduates and prominent in the Washington schools. The matter was taken up by the Branch and the 
owner of the store has given assurance that 
no discrimination would be tolerated in the 
future. 
El Paso: This southern outpost announces that they have planned a co-operative Emancipation celebration with the local 
churches, lodges and schools for Friday, 
January 1, for the benefit o f the Association. 
Kansas City: The Association desires 
through the columns o f TH E CRISIS to express its appreciation o f the generosity of 
the Kansas City Branch for the substantial 
contribution recently sent in response to the 
appeal to branches. 
The ordinance introduced to prevent the 
erection of the Baptist College on the Massie 
property is now in the Public Improvement 
Committee of the Uppe r House of the Legislature. Dr. H . M. Smith, a member of the 
Branch, has been most active in his efforts 
to kill this ordinance. 
Considerable space has been devoted in the 
local press to President Jacob's reply to the 
attack of Silas Harris on the questionnaire 
which was sent by the Association to determine the attitude o f the next Congress on 
the race question. 
The Branch announces that during the 
winter it will conduct an oratorical and 
musical contest open to the high schools and 
colleges in Kansas City and vicinity. Two 
cups will be offered as prizes, one going to 
the school which presents the best oration, 
and the other to the school which has the 
best glee club. 
Topeka: The National Association is to 
be congratulated upon having as the President of one of its branches the Governorelect of a great western state, the Hon. 
Arthur Capper, who has been President of 
the Topeka Branch since its organization. 
Mr. Capper is the owner o f the Capper 
Building. He came to Topeka in 1884 and TH E N. A. A. C. P. 137 
secured work as a typesetter on the Daily 
Capital. He became successively reporter, 
city editor, Washington correspondent, owner and publisher o f this paper, and in addition now also publishes several other papers 
and magazines known as the Capper publications. He is director in several banks and 
trust companies, is President of the Kansas 
State Historical Society and of the Board 
of Regents o f the Kansas Agricultural College, and prominent in several clubs. 
fg 
LEGA L BUREAU 
An illustration o f a difficulty the 
Association sometimes meets in its legal 
work is the Jim-Crow case from Oklahoma, McCabe et al vs. Atchison, Topeka 
and Santa Fe Railroad Company, recently 
argued before the Supreme Court o f the 
United States by Mr. William Harrison. 
The Association has been interested in 
this case since it first came up several years 
ago but as letters and telegrams addressed to 
plaintiffs' counsel generally received no reply it was impossible for a long time to 
ascertain anything definite. Finally the Association got in communication with Mr. 
Harrison and after a personal interview decided to comply with his request for cooperation by advancing $180 to pay the cost 
of printing the record of the case. W e quote 
from Mr. Harrison's letter to Mr. Storey 
dated August 23, 1913: 
"Acting in the name of and for the Association, Miss Nerney said that as a condition precedent to furnishing costs in said 
case it must be understood and expressly 
agreed that counsel for the Association must 
be invited to assist in the case and must cooperate and fully understand all procedure 
hereafter. To all o f which I hereby and now 
expressly agree and take pleasure in extending this invitation and request to Your 
Honor to assist me in all things hereafter 
pertaining to said case." 
After examining the record o f the case, 
however, the attorneys for the Association 
decided that it was not drawn so as to bring 
the question at issue squarely before the 
Court and that, therefore, the Association 
could not further co-operate. The wisdom 
of this decision is indicated by the statement 
o f Chief Justice Hughes to the effect that if 
the case has come before the court in a different form it would have had a chance o f 
being decided on its merits. 
Judge Storey, writing to the Association's 
attorney under date of November 19, 191.1, 
says: 
"The plaintiffs in this case do not allege 
that either o f thorn has any cause of action, 
they do not state that they have been denied 
proper accommodations on request, nor do 
they allege that they or either of them propose to travel. Reduced to its lowest terms 
their case is this,—that the state of Oklahoma has passed a statute which permits 
the railroad companies to provide dining 
and sleeping car accommodations for only 
one race, excepting accommodations of this 
sort from the general rule that the accommodations for all passengers should be 
equally good, that the railroad companies 
will, under the provisions o f this law, refuse 
to provide equal sleeping and dining car 
accommodations and they ask that they be 
enjoined from obeying the law. In the absence of any allegation that they or either 
of the plaintiffs have suffered any injury, 1 
do not see how- either of them alone could 
maintain a suit at law, or all of them together a suit in equity. 
"If the question could be fairly presented, 
I think the Court might be persuaded to hold 
that the railroad company was bound to 
furnish equal accommodations in sleeping and 
dining cars to whites and Negroes alike, but 
it seems to me that the way to raise the 
question is, for some colored man to ask for 
such accommodations and be refused, and 
then bring suit for damages. I am unwilling 
to go to the Supreme Court with a case 
which I think cannot be maintained, for I 
believe that would probably weaken my influence with the Court in other cases, and it 
is very certain that cases of great importance to the colored race will arise in which, 
perhaps, I may be able to help." 
Another typical case is that of the bombardment of the house of a colored man in 
one of our large eastern cities. He had 
purchased a home in a white neighborhood 
into which he moved with his wife and 
mother. In his absence a mob of boys 
stoned the house breaking windows and doing other serious damage. It was some time 
before the police reached the scene and in 
the meantime the two women were in great 
danger. Th local press devoted columns to 
condemnation of the outrage. The Association sent a representative to the spot at once 
and arranged to engage the best legal counsel in the country. The man and his family 138 TH E CRISI S 
were interviewed and then it developed that 
he had been advised by a city official by 
whom he was employed as a chauffeur to 
drop the ease. Assuranc e was given him 
that the city woul d reimburse him for all 
damages to his property. The Association 
could readily understand that no man would 
willingl y risk his position i n these hard times 
and also sympathized wit h him i n his decision to move his famil y as fa r as possible 
from the scene of the riot ; but the disheartening part of the incident was his unwilling ­
ness to sell his house to a colored family , 
which would have probably meant a loss to 
him on his origina l investment, or to even 
rent it to a colored family, alternatives 
urged by the Association in order that a test 
case might be made. On the other hand, he 
suggested that the Associatio n reimburse 
him for his investment i n the house and move 
a colored famil y into it. 
I n encouraging contrast to this is the case 
of a courageous colored woma n i n the same 
city who had had a simila r experience when 
she moved into a whit e neighborhood recently but who stayed on the ground. The 
guard placed about her home has been withdrawn and no furthe r difficulty has been 
anticipated. This case was conducted by 
the local Branc h of the N . A . A . C. P . 
The followin g have recently been elected 
members of the Boar d of Directors: Dr. F . 
N . Cardozo, Baltimore ; Mr . Butle r R. Wil ­
son. Boston ; Prof. George Willia m Cook, 
Washington . 
In the Matter of Tw o Men 
B y JAME S D . CORROTHER S 
One does such work as one wil l not. 
An d well each knows the right; 
Though the white storm howls, or the sun is 
hot, 
The black must serve the white. 
An d it's, oh, for the white man's softening 
flesh, 
Whil e the black man's muscles grow ! 
Well , I know which grows the mightier, 
I know; full well I know. 
The white man seeks the soft, fat place, 
An d he moves and he works by rule. 
Ingenious grows the humbler race 
In Oppression's proddin g school. 
An d it's, oh, for a white man gone to seed, 
Whil e the Negro struggles so! 
An d I know which race develops most, 
I know; yes, well I know. 
The white man rides in a palace car, 
An d the Negr o rides ''Ji m Crow. " 
To damn the other wit h bolt and bar, 
One creepeth so low ; so low ! 
An d it's, oh. for a master's nose i n the mire, 
Whil e the humbled hearts o'erflow! 
Well , I know whose soul grows big at this, 
An d whose grows small ; I know! 
The white man leases out his land, 
An d the Negr o tills the same. 
One works; one loafs and takes command; 
Bu t I know who wins the game! 
An d it's, oh, for the white man's shrinking 
soil, 
A s the black's ric h acres grow! 
Well , I know how the signs point out at last, 
I know ; ah, well I know. 
The white man votes for his color's sake, 
Whil e the black, for his is barred ; 
(Though ''ignorance' is the charge they 
make). 
But the black man studies hard. 
An d it's, oh, for the white man's sad neglect, 
Fo r the power of his light let go ! 
So, I know which man must wi n at last, 
I know ! Ah , Friend , I know ! TH E STORY OF TH E AMISTAD 
By SUSAN E. W. JOCELY N 
CINQU E 
Engrave d by Sartain after the origina l painting 
from life by N . Jocelyn ; now in possession of the 
Historica l Society of New Haven . 
MOR E than seventy years ago, a slaveship that flew the flag of Portugal, 
brought from Mendi , near Sierr a Leone, on 
the west coast of Africa , a party of fifty 
men, and two or three children, who had all 
been kidnapped for sale as slaves i n the 
Unite d States. 
I n consequence of cruel treatment durin g 
the voyage to Havana , a number of them 
died. A t this place they were placed on another ship, the Amistad, along with their 
owners, and were started for southern plantations. 
On shipboard they received such inhuman 
treatment that their ire was aroused, and 
finally broke forth in an uprisin g under 
Cinque, the forceful leader of the band. 
They overpowered the captain, and the crew 
escaped i n boats. Then they assumed control of the vessel and ordered the Spaniards, 
Monte z and Ruiz , who had purchased them 
from the kidnappers, to steer them back to 
Africa . I n the day time, the sun assured 
them that they were sailing eastward, but at 
night, the cunning Spaniards turned the 
helm i n an opposite direction, resulting i n a 
northwestern course, that finally brought 
them to Lon g Island near Montau k Point, 
when after much maneuvering, and many 
misunderstandings with the residents, they 
were taken across the sound under the arrest of a Unite d States survey brig , to the 
port of New London . 
Fro m there they were taken to New 
Haven , and locked up in jail , bidin g the 
time when a decision by the government 
should send them back to Africa , or deliver 
them to the Spanish government that claimed 
them. I n 1839, a time when the boasted 
"Lan d of the free was also the land of the 
slave," there was only one opinion on slavery that could be expressed with safety to 
life . However, these African s were not 
without friends who were determined that 
these kidnapped men should be allowed to 
go free. To this end, Mr . Joshua Leavett 
and Mr . Lewis Tappen , of New York , and 
the brothers Nathanie l and Simeon S. 
Jocelyn, of New Haven , were appointed a 
committee to procure funds for the protection of these friendless ones. The best legal 
advice was secured by these philanthropi c 
men, so that the case should be well pre-140 TH E CRISIS 
seuted. and there was a sharp fight for their 
freedom, conducted most efficiently by Mr. 
Seth Staples and Mr. Thomas Sedgwick, of 
New York, and Mr. Roger S. Baldwin, of 
New Haven, afterwards governor of Connecticut, and father of the present governor 
of Connecticut. 
At first it was difficult to get the facts of 
the kidnapping, as the Negroes' language 
was an unknown tongue. Finally, Professor 
Josiah Gibbs, of Yale, interested himself to 
the extent o f catching a few of their words, 
and then watching along the wharves in New 
York, till he found an African sailor who 
seemed familiar with the strange language. 
This achievement was of great assistance to 
the able lawyers who conducted the ease in 
court. So also was the portrait of the 
leader Cinque, painted by one of the champions of their cause. Nathaniel Jocelyn, of 
New Haven. The painting is preserved in 
the Historical building in that city, and attracts much attention there. It represents a 
man of magnificent physique, who was also 
described as the personification of agility 
and grace, with a face of marked character. 
The trial of the ease which was held in 
New Haven was decided in favor of the Negroes, or the "Amistads" as they were then 
designated, but an appeal was immediately 
taken from District Court to the Circuit 
Court, with the same result, and afterwards 
it was carried still higher to the Supreme 
Court at Washington. Excitement became 
intense. President Van Buren leaned to the 
Spanish, the southern side. Mr. Baldwin 
renewed his efforts, and ex-President John 
Quincy Adams, to whose name every colored 
person should give honor, entered into the 
case with keenest interest. His diary at that 
time testified how near to his heart this 
struggle for freedom lay. 
Just outside the New Haven harbor a 
schooner called the Grampus lay in waiting 
M 
Senator Tillman to the Editor 
My dear madam: 
Your note of July 26th received along 
with the clipping you sent. The same crusade that is now going on to force woman 
suffrage on the South has its origin among 
the same type of sentimentalists who 
brought about the Civil Wa r and hounded 
the southern people because of slavery. 
several days, that the captives might be hurried away as soon as a decision favorable to 
the Spaniards was made, so that there would 
be no time for an appeal on the captives' 
part, but there was another vessel not a 
great way off in those same waters, prepared 
by the philanthropists, to frustrate this plan, 
and give time for more argument. The captives were free-born, and merely kidnapped 
into slavery. 
The court commenced February 20, 1848, 
and after many delays, on March 25th, a 
despatch was sent to Mr. Baldwin in New 
Haven. "The captives are free. Yours in 
great haste and great joy , J. Q. Adams." 
The friends of these men immediately set 
about raising funds for their return to their 
native land. In the meantime they were 
taught to read and write, and the principles 
o f Christianity were instilled into their 
minds by those who had helped them in 
their trouble. 
Finally a vessel was found in New York 
harbor bound for Sierra Leone, and passage 
was secured for them. Rev. James W. C. 
Pennington, pastor of a colored Congregational church in Hartford, Conn., made an 
effort at this time to send the gospel to 
Africa, and this was said to be the origin of 
the Mendi Mission which was in 1846 combined with other societies, and became the 
American Misisonary Association. 
Of the five teachers who went out, two 
were "colored: Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, members of Mr. Pennington's church in Hartford. Mr. Wilson was once a slave, and 
Mrs. Wilson a Connecticut woman. 
In their native land some of these men, 
it is said, fell back for a while into their 
savage ways, but eventually the influence of 
the religious teaching in this country asserted itself, and they interested themselves in 
the spread of Christianity among thenpeople. 
of the Maryland Suffrage News 
I am sending you under separate cover 
copies of my speech on woman suffrage in 
the Senate, and Dr. Bledece's article on 
"The Mission of Woman. " both of which are 
commended to your careful reading. 
There are two sides to this question as 
everyone familiar with the South must know. 
W e have in South Carolina, a preponder-SENATO R 
ance o f Negro population,—100,000 more 
Negroes than white people. A moment's 
thought will show you that if women were 
given the ballot, the Negro women would 
vote as well as white women. Experience 
has taught us that Negro women are much 
more aggressive in asserting the "rights of 
that race" than the Negro men are. In other 
words, they have always urged the Negro 
men on in the conflicts we have had in the 
past between the two races for supremacy. 
W e found it hard enough to maintain good 
government under such conditions without 
adding to our perplexities by giving the ballot to women. Yo u do not realize or understand,—you cannot in Maryland,—because 
that state has always had a white majority, 
and a large one at that,—what it is to have 
a Negro legislature, or a majority of Negroes in the legislature to make laws and to 
levy taxes, as we of the South have had. 
With a "free vote and fair count," which we 
have never been willing to give the Negroes, 
and never will, in my judgment, South Carolina and Mississippi would inevitably be 
dominated by Negroes; and the States of 
Georgia, Florida, Alabama and Louisiana 
would have a large Negro vote in their law 
making and tax levying bodies. Consider 
the results. The debasement o f the ballot 
has always produced corruption, and bad 
government follows inevitably. 
I am also sending you under separate cover 
a photograph taken many years ago of the 
first Reconstruction Legislature of South 
Carolina in 1868. This will give you a 
hint, and only a hint, of what our people 
suffered until civilization seemed to be perishing from the face of the earth; but with 
the determination to throw off the yoke of 
carpet-baggers, scalawags and Negroes, regardless o f law and the army, South Carolina was redeemed in 1876 by its own true 
sons by the aid of the shot gun and pistol, 
as well as by the superior intelligence of the 
white managers, who cheated the Negroes 
mercilessly, because it was necessary. 
. A s you seem to want to study this subject some, I will send you along with the 
rest of the literature I am enclosing^ two or 
three speeches on the race question, in which 
I boldly told the Republicans to their teeth 
on the floor o f the Senate, that we "shot the 
Negroes," "cheated them" and "stuffed the 
ballot boxes. " 
TILLMA N 141 
Now, enough on that phase of the subject. I turn my attention to the clipping 
you enclosed about the per cent, of girls between 10 and 15 as breadwinners in Alabama 
and South Carolina, as well as the "age of 
consent" being 14 in the above states. 
If you know anything about the Negroes, 
you know that very few of the women of 
that race have any idea of virtue at all, and 
that must be the reason why the "age of 
consent" is so low. It is well understood 
that when the puberty arouses the passions 
in the sexes— and those passions are most 
virulent—Negro girls would take advantage 
inevitably of white men and boys who had 
sexual intercourse with them. If there was 
a severe punishment, it would involve very 
serious consequences. Mind you, now, when 
I was in the South Carolina Constitutional 
Convention in 1895, I did my very best and 
urged with all the eloquence I had at command, that the "age of consent" be increased 
to 16. But my arguments were unavailing 
and the age was fixed at 14 for the reason 
given above. 
To judge of South Carolina on a basis of 
per cent, you must remember that where there 
are so many Negroes, there is obliged to 
be lots o f ignorance. It is very misleading 
and unjust to urge against the South the disparity which statistics show to exist in the 
educational work. Then, too, all the accumulated wealth which enables rich Northern 
communities to levy heavy taxes to run their 
schools many more months in the year than 
we do, is much of it owing to the poverty of 
the South and their inability to bear heavier 
taxation. The southern states were not only 
devastated by the war, but they lost all 
their property; most of the finest houses were 
burned and in every way poverty seized on 
our land. To follow this up and increase the 
difficulties we have had to labor under, reconstruction came and the ballot was given 
to the Negroes. Ignorant, semi-barbarous 
savages, many of them only one generation 
removed and none of them more than three 
generations removed, from the barbarians 
in Africa, were given the ballot. 
My dear madam, think of all these things 
and then write me what conclusions you 
reach about my present attitude in regard 
to woman suffrage. 
Very sincerely yours, 
(Signed) B. R. TILLMAN. SEGREGATION 
By MARY WHITE OVINGTON 
iEADERS of TH E CRISIS 
know that within the past 
three years there have been 
repeated efforts to legalize 
the segregation of Negroes 
in the cities of the United 
States. These efforts have 
taken the form of ordinances prescribing 
the limits in which the Negroes shall live, 
and forbidding residence outside the prescribed limits. A second segregation has 
taken place since the incoming of the 
Democratic administration; a segregation 
in government departments, not sporadic, 
at the whim of an individual foreman, but 
by order of the departmental head. 
The National Association and The Crisis 
have fought this segregation, but while it has 
been reduced much of it still exists. 
There is, of course, nothing new in segregation. Negroes have been and are discriminated against throughout the country, 
and they are often segregated as they rent 
their dwellings and practice their trades. 
But it is one thing for an individual or a 
group of individuals to dictate a Negro 
policy, and it is a different and more 
serious thing when this policy becomes a 
law. In the first case, the oppressed race 
has a fighting chance; but when the discrimination is legalized, to combat it becomes a crime. 
The policy of segregation is vigorously 
defended, not only by the Negrophobist, 
but by many kindly and intelligent people 
who believe that they have the colored 
man's welfare at heart. The arguments 
that the latter put forth are of importance 
and should be understood and met. 
Legalized segregation, these people say, 
is necessary for the preservation of the 
white race. "It is a racial instinct that 
causes the Negro to he repulsive to the 
white man when associating with him on 
the same social plane." (Query: Is the 
instinct racial that causes the Negro to be 
repulsive to the white man when he wears 
the uniform of a mail clerk, but disappears when the same man dons the apron 
of a waiter?) Secondly, segregation gives 
the Negro a definite position in the city 
and government, instead of leaving him 
entirely to the mercy of the white man who 
wants to get rid o f him altogether. For 
instance, by segregating Negroes in the 
Printing and Engraving Department the 
government may decide that a certain number shall always work in that department, 
and thus assure the Negro of definite employment. And in the passing of a segregation ordinance by a city, the white 
people may determine to do better by the 
colored section than they have done by the 
legally unrecognized present colored quarters. An d lastly, segregation decreases 
race friction and thus is right and best. 
The white man does not want to associate 
with any Negro but the servant, and if the 
Negro be self-respecting he will keep out of 
the white man's way. As the Baltimore Sun 
puts it: "Most white men have too much 
self-respect to thrust themselves into company 
where they are not wanted. It would be well if 
the Negro could cultivate the same spirit. 
It would do far more to elevate him than 
the moving into white blocks.'' 
That segregation brings a momentary relief from race friction and secures a definite 
place for the colored man is sometimes the 
case. It did so when the Negro left the 
white church and started his own, when he 
taught in his own school and doctored the 
patients of his own race. But the segregation with which we are concerned deals 
with large bodies of colored men, employees 
in one trade or industry, and with hundreds 
of families seeking places in which to live. 
How does it work out with these groups? 
To turn to Washington. Segregation in 
the government departments establishes a 
precedent for treating white workers and 
colored workers as two sets of employees 
At present all come under the same civilservice rules and are admitted on the same 
examinations. But the placing of Negroes 
in separate rooms, the assigning them to 
jobs by themselves, may easily break down 
their impersonal status as civil servants. 
They may be placed in such positions as 
the white men in power choose for them, 
and may be paid such a wage as the same 
powerful white men deem suitable for a 
Negro. This has happened so often in the 
South as to be entirely familiar to every 
southern colored laborer. The Southern 
Kailwav, for instance, has two scales of SEGREGATION 143 
wages—one for its white and one for its 
colored workers; the latter, when doing the 
same work, receive only two-thirds of the 
amount received by the white employes, 
Colored waiters are a segregated group and 
receive a smaller wage than white. 
Antagonism arises when you place your 
laborers in segregated groups. The friction may be lessened between individual 
employes, but it becomes more bitter between the groups. The employer of colored and white labor in the South knows 
this, and when he wants to break a strike, 
to prevent concerted action on the part of 
his workingmen, he raises the cry of race 
solidarity and forces the white laborer back 
to his pitiable wage by an appeal to his 
still more pitiable race hatred. This is 
perhaps an unimportant argument regarding our wretchedly paid government workers, but it is of vast importance in connection with the efforts o f southern whites 
to better their condition. The Negro is used 
against them as a strike breaker, and confusion is secured among a class that needs 
to be united to secure any adequate return 
for its toil. The official recognition of race 
lines at Washington will strengthen those 
employers who reduce wages by pitting 
race against race. 
The advocates of segregation believe that 
though the Negro be separated from the 
white workman, and though he receive a 
smaller wage, he will be more likely to keep 
his jo b than if he be daily in the presence 
of the white man. But facts do not seem 
to justify this hope. The Southern Railway, of which we have spoken, expresses a 
liking for colored employees, and would 
allow them to work wherever they were fitted. 
But the labor unions o f the South, which 
have now adopted a policy of complete 
segregation, say otherwise; and a long and 
bitter strike was called to prevent the 
Negroes from acting as firemen. And so it 
goes on all along the labor line. As the 
two races are segregated, by their unions or 
by their employers, friction increases and 
the Negro usually goes to the wall. 
The legalizing o f segregation in the cities, 
it is claimed, will provide attractive spots 
where Negroes may dwell. But what precedent have we for thinking that this will 
be the case? Perhaps those who honestly 
uphold segregation ordinances as conducive 
to the Negro's welfare are familiar with 
the Oriental cities under British rule where 
the various races have their own attractive 
quarters. But these cities are under imperial rule. W o must remember that 
America is a democracy, and is therefore 
particularly unsuccessful with benevolent 
feudalism. A benevolent despot might take 
control of Richmond or Atlanta and divide 
the city into pleasant sections, taxing heavily and impartially for the upkeep of the 
whole. Such a despot would make equally 
attractive the white and the colored quarters. But in a democracy, of white voters 
only, the city would not be ruled with impartiality. Colored people would be forced 
to remain in such localities as the white 
people did not like. And if by chance the 
colored should succeed in beautifying their 
quarter, they would have no assurance that 
their white neighbors might not any day 
steal it from them. Wh y not, indeed? The 
white have the power to say where the colored shall live; it is they who segregate, 
and it is they who can give and take away. 
One can imagine this policy creeping from 
the city into the country, and one can see 
the ordinances changing as the white citizens change their minds regarding the most 
desirable land. If anyone doubts the probability of this thing's happening, let him 
read the story of the white man's treatment 
of the North American Indian. 
And yet the Negro should submit to discrimination because the white man wants 
him to, and, as the Baltimore Sun says, 
because it is rude to push yourself where 
you are not wanted. Here we have the 
second argument of those who favor 
segregation. 
This argument, we may at once note, is 
for "colored consumption only." That is, 
the Baltimore Sun, or any other paper, 
would not presume to write in this fashion 
regarding a white nationality. First, because it does not want to offend the whites, 
and, secondly, because it knows that it is 
just because the white man has pushed himself where he was not wanted that he has 
attained to success. W e have a democratic 
form of government because the workingmen of the early part of the nineteenth 
century forced themselves upon the unwilling legislatures and demanded representation in the council chamber. The story of 
the growth of our cities is the story of one 
despised group after another pushing its 
way where it was not wanted and maintaining its foothold. American progress, the 144 TH E CRISIS 
good and the bad of it, has been achieved 
by ambitious, aggressive, pushing men. 
An d this is not only the history of 
America; it is the history of England when 
America was but the dream of a Genoese. 
Probably when the first baker took off his 
apron and set himself up as a gentleman he 
was informed that he was not wanted, and 
that he would be far more gentlemanly if 
he went back to his oven. But the Bakers 
and the Cooks, the Tailors and the Drapers, 
the Shepards and the multitudinous smiths 
refused to cultivate the spirit recommended 
by the Baltimore iSwn. They took up other 
professions, they moved into new neighborhoods, and their descendants figure in the 
telephone books in pretty much every remunerative occupation but that to which 
their names assign them. 
No, when we tell people that they should 
not push themselves forward, but should 
stay contentedly where the ruling class puts 
them, it means that we want to use these 
people for our selfish ends. The labor 
world, that world that pulsates now on 
every continent with a common spirit, 
knows this, and strives hourly to wrest 
privilege from the wealthy few. The world 
of women is awakening to a realization of 
the same truth, and is refusing to take the 
place so long assigned to it by the master 
class. And every advance made by this 
world of women has been made against the 
policy of self-effacement preached by the 
Baltimore Suyi. Sex segregation has been 
nearly as bad as race segregation. Education, professional and business work, freedom of thought, these belonged to the 
sphere in which men revolved; and it was 
only as women used pushing and aggressive 
methods that they forced an entrance. 
But, says the believer in segregation, 
patiently or impatiently, according to his 
temperament: "Don't you understand that 
the arguments that apply to the white race 
do not apply to the black? It may be true 
that, white men have been aggressive and 
pushing, but we cannot permit this in the 
colored man. If we do he will push his 
way into our parlor and marry our daughter. Amalgamation is unthinkable and we 
must be adamant in preventing it." 
Here is our last and omnipresent argument. To which I for one make answer; 
that 1 do not, at least just now, desire to 
see amalgamation. But I oppose it, whether 
it takes place in the parlor or in the alley. 
And as I see practically no intermarriage 
in those States where it is permitted, I am 
not concerned with the parlor. The Southern girls whom I know are quite capable of 
taking care o f that situation without segregation ordinances. 
But what about the alley? For the sake 
of our Christianity let us put aside our 
hypocrisy and recognize that it is not the 
white woman who needs to be protected 
but the colored. The country to-day has 
learned that women are sold by thousands 
into the most horrible form of slavery. 
Prostitution, the white-slave traffic, these are 
facts that we have learned to face. Let us 
learn also that the colored women, all of 
(hem, are subjected to insult. The white 
man, if he desires to do wrong, knows that 
the world will take his word against the 
word of the colored woman. He may do 
his worst without danger to himself. So he 
brings amalgamation into the alley and 
walks awiay leaving it bear the burden alone. 
The outcry for segregation continually 
tends to make the segregated race appear 
as all of one kind, as all o f one class. 
Washington has its thousands of attractive 
colored girls, young women who have been 
carefully reared and who are modest and 
refined. An d yet these young people are 
frequently exposed to petty insult and persecution. The white men refuse to believe 
in their virtue and they are molested in 
many little nasty ways. They learn to 
despise the ranting Negrophobist, who is 
always first to approach them, with a bitterness that only a virtuous woman who 
has suffered insult can understand. 
I would propose another policy for the 
administration and the good friends of the 
Negro in Washington. Dro p segregation 
and preserve the purity o f both races by 
respecting colored womanhood. Encourage 
the young women o f color who are going 
quietly on their way and are annoyed by 
white men to bring their cases into court. 
I know a colored woman in New York who. 
when she was spoken to by a white man, 
had him arrested by a policeman and appeared against him. He gave as his excuse 
that he came from Virginia, but it proved 
of no avail with the judge, who fined him $10 
and made him apologize. Impress the white 
men of Washington that they will receive 
treatment similar to this. Try this policy 
for a time and see if it does not reduce 
friction between the two races, always re-TH E BURDE N 145 
membering that friction is felt by both 
parties. 
Imagine such a policy in a man-governed 
capital! But there are women in Washington, white and colored, and the time may 
come when they will grapple with the race 
question together; and it will be hard if 
they cannot produce something more conducive to justice and good feeling than 
segregation ordinances and the platitudinous 
orations on the superiority of the white 
Americans. 
COLORED MEN AND WOMEN 
LYNCHED WITHOUT TRIAL 
1885 
1886 
1887 
1888 
1889 
1890 
1891 
1892 
1893 
1894 
1895 
1896 
1897 
1898 
1899 
7S 1900 107 
71 1901 107 
80 1902 86 
95 1903 86 
95 1904 83 
90 1905 61 
121 1906 64 
155 1907 60 
154 1908 93 
134 1909 73 
112 1910 65 
80 1911 63 
122 1912 63 
102 1913 79 
84 1914, 11 months 52 
Total .2,715 
MISSISSIPPIGRAMS 
A T G . "My son graduated from a 
law school in the North and came home 
to practice. Old Judge , a good friend 
of ours for many years, advised that he leave 
here as these people would not tolerate a 
colored lawyer." 
A t G . "Since Vardaman's time the 
good white people are afraid to say anything to protect colored people. An d the 
others who get into office seem to do all the 
meanness they can to Negroes, especially to 
those who have property and education. 
They have ran several away from here. They 
let the lowest type of Negro do anything 
they want to us, and get off with it. It 
seems that they don't want to have decent 
and respectable negroes any more. 
At C . "I spoke at this place on 'The 
Progress and Education of the Negro.' My 
speech was an hour long and was applauded 
by some of the whites present. Next day I 
received this anonymous note: 'You have 
done us great harm.' Several Negroes came 
to me and advised me not to speak any more 
as the whites didn't like my speech. 'What 
did I say to offend them?' I asked. The following is a full list: 
1. I read a quotation from Mrs. L. H. 
Hammond's book in which a white woman is 
described as having entertained her beau in 
the kitchen. 
2. I had mentioned a colored man who 
owned an automobile. 
3. Said I had attended a northern university and traveled in Europe. 
4. Said some white people came to the 
United States as indentured servants. 
5. Said Anglo-Saxon is not the greatest 
race in the world in point of numbers. 
6. Said I wanted to send my daughter to 
Paris. 
It was claimed that No. 1 reflected upon 
white women! Numbers 2, 3 and 6 showed 
I believed in social equality and number 4 
and 5 reflected on the white people in general. Fo r saying these things in the course 
of a speech an hour long, I was advised to 
be quiet and get out of town as soon as possible. 
At Greenioood, Miss. 
Vardaman's home. Reported Verbatim. 
Negro—"Is there any mail for ?" 
Lady Clerk—(after looking over a number of letters for me)—"Is your name —? " 
Negro—"Yes. " 
Clerk—"What did you say? " 
Negro—"Yes, my name is . " 
Clerk—"Where did you come from? " 
Negro—" I came from . " 
Clerk—"I thought you did not belong 
around here, for folks around here's got 
manners, and know how to speak to ladies. 
Wh y didn't you say 'Yes ma'am?' " (giving 
mail to me). 
Negro--" I beg your pardon madam, I 
meant no discourtesy. They only say 'Yes' 
where I came from." 
TH E BURDE N 146 TH E CRISIS 
A Man's Voice—"If you aint got no manners you better learn some, and that quick." 
I went to my stopping place and told the 
incident as a great joke. The man of the 
house grew grave, his wife looked pale, and 
got up and walked out to hide her emotion. 
'•You may congratulate yourself that there 
was only one white man who heard you. 
Don't you go to that post office any more, 
but you get out of this town as soon as possible," said the man of the house, "for a mob 
may come after you any moment." 
At Ackerman, Miss. 
(Negro to ticket agent on other side of 
office.)—"Please give me a ticket to Reform, 
Miss." 
Agent—"Did you say Reform? " 
Negro—(Having forgotten the experience 
of a few days before in Greenwood) — 
"Yes. " 
Agent—"Did you say 'Yes' to me? " 
Negro—"Yes. " 
Agent—"Don't you know I am a white 
man? Yo u say 'Yes sir' to me or you won't 
get any ticket here." 
Negro—(calmly)—" I thought you sold 
tickets for money. I didn't know there was 
any special way of asking for them." 
Agent—"Yon damn black nigger, you,— 
you get out of here or I'll teach you how to 
talk to a white man." 
So 1 paid my fare on the train. 
At Waterford, Miss. 
At U. S. Post Office ke] t in a small store. 
Negro—(opening door)—"Please tell me 
where I mail these letters?" 
White Man—(It was a legal holiday but 
the store was open. Several young men had 
been drinking.)—"Take your head out of 
that door, nigger." 
Negro—" I merely want to mail these letters." 
White Man—"If you do not get out of 
there I'll fill your guts full of lead." 
So I moved away without mailing my letters, and well I did, for a half hour later I 
met another Negro who had blood all over 
his face and shirt, his mouth and head having been cut, and he told me that those white 
men at the store did it. I asked my host 
what could he done. li e replied: "Yo u had 
better say nothing' about it if you want to 
get away alive." 
"These are a few of the experiences of a 
trip through Mississippi. Everywhere the 
Negroes say: 'Don't write anything about 
conditions down here for it will make them 
worse, and whatever you say don't mention 
my name, for in this country a Negro is absolutely without protection.' " 
" I have carefully inquired at a dozen 
newstands for TH E CRISIS but did not find 
it, so I venture to write."—From a Traveler. 
"In America 'before the war,' I do not 
remember this contagion of luck phenomenon. But this summer I have had evidence 
of the imperviousness of our social atmosphere to manners thought reasonable in Europe. At one o f the chief hotels of Contrexeville, whose waters are in great repute, 
an American arriving just for dinner was 
ushered at once to an empty place at the 
'table d'hote.' He attacked his soup and 
then gave his first glance to his neighbors. 
At his right was seated a well-dressed, wellmannered colored gentleman. 
"The American jumped to his feet, threw 
his napkin at his unwelcome neighbor's head, 
and stalked haughtily from the room. He 
had made a scene, which a gentleman never 
does without necessity. The colored man, 
to whose presence none o f the half-dozen 
nationalities at table had dreamed of objecting, sat silent and hurt. He happened to be 
an American citizen also. An aged Frenehmau, distinguished-looking and decorated, 
rose from his seat and complimented the 
colored gentleman for keeping his temper, 
and expressed the general indignation at 
what had happened. Meanwhile the white 
American was heard outside wrangling with 
the proprietor, who informed him promptly 
that he was free to eat by himself at a separate table in the restaurant!"—Evening 
Post (New Yor k City). 
^ Dr. Johann Kunst is trying to organize 
an association to furnish to the German 
press and people biographical sketches of 
colored men of the less advanced races who 
have distinguished themselves as scholars 
or inventors. In his travels in German 
Southwest Africa Doctor Kunst found that 
the only colonist disposed to regard the 
native as other than a beast of burden 
created for the white man's benefit was an 
old man who had fought in the American 
Civil Wa r "and had seen the penalty of 
evildoing." TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 147 
The Time to Take 
Life Insurance 
Out of every nine people who applj for life insurance one of them can 
never secure a policy. 
That means that one person in every nine cannot secure life insurance at any 
cost, under any form of policy from any company. 
This has been demonstrated just as truthfully as any fact in life insurance. 
Last year over 100,000 applications for life insurance were declined. Think of 
what a shock it must have been to some of these folks who for the first time 
realized that they must carry alone a risk too great for even the strongest life 
insurance companies. 
We , ourselves, declined 10% of the applications submitted to us last year for 
a total of nearly Two Hundred Thousand Dollars. Some rejected applicants may 
hide their alarm under the cloak of indifference or anger, but there is the secret 
knowledge that comes with stunning force: "I am so near to death that a life 
insurance company does not feel able to assume a risk on my life. I am the one 
life in nine ! I am impaired !" 
The whole trouble was, these people waited too late to apply! If they had 
applied sooner, they might have been accepted as would fully one-half of all the 
people who are declined. There is one time, at least, in every man's life when he 
can secure life insurance. There is also a time in every man's life when he 
cannot secure life insurance. Are you waiting for that time when you cannot? 
Maybe you are waiting to take out a policy when you are able. But have you 
thought when you get able your health may be gone ? You may be impaired ! 
You may be the one life in nine that is bad! 
Maybe once in your life you had a policy and let it lapse. Maybe once in 
your life you applied for a policy and didn't take it. Do you know whether you 
could get that policy today? Nothing stands still. Decay is inevitable. Today you 
may be impaired, whereas you were as sound as a new dollar last year. Don't you 
know men among your friends who have suddenly sickened and died? Strong 
robust men they were, who said that you couldn't kill them with an axe, but underneath there was a secret disease, unknown maybe to them, until it burst forth in its 
deadly climax. They went into had health before they were able to take their 
insurance. 
The time to take life insurance is now. The time to take life insurance is 
when you can get it. You can get it today. But tomorrow you may be impaired. 
And once you get it, bold on to it. You may never get it again. 
Let us protect you. no matter where you live. Fill in the coupon and write 
today while your are alive, sound and well, to 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Pleas e 
send me 
particulars 
Capital Fully-Paid - - $100,000.00 
Over One Million in Insurance in force 
Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
about 
insurance . 
Amoun t $ 
Se x 
Occupatio n 
HEM A N E. PERRY, President 
HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary Address 
Nam e 
(C. Jan., 1915.) 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 148 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The 1915 Summer Session 
at 
WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
will be better than any previous session 
Courses offered: 
Normal Vocational 
Business Manual Training 
Accommodations excellent. Expenses low. Climate healthful. 
Instruction the best. 
Write for particulars. Address: 
W. A . JOINER, Supt. Normal Department, Box 36 
WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
A Life of 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY 
B y 
MAU D CUNEY HAR E 
(His Daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was one 
of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like to inspire 
your children with the life of this "Tribune of the Black People"? 
250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 149 
At Last 
A CALENDAR! 
The 1915 CRISIS CALENDAR: 
In print—clear and readable. 
In matter—interesting and informing. 
In appearance—beautiful and dignified 
13 large leaves, 12 1-2 by 9 inches. 
52 selections (one for each week in the 
year) from leading Negro authors. 
300 historic dates relating to the Negro 
Race in America. 
1 cover—worth the price of the calendar—adorned with the picture of a 
"Little Brown Baby with Sparkling Eyes.'' 
All on fine paper in well-known CRISIS style 
and all for 
2 5 Cents 
Order now for they will soon be gone. 
For Sale at TH E CRISIS Office 
AND BY CRISIS AGENTS 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
THIS $60 
' INSTRUCTION 
COURSE FREE 
| b I WIL L STAR T YO U I N TH E 
MAIL-ORDE R AGENC Y BUSINES S 
My father and I .started on S-10 worth of merchandise. We placed a few ads in the 
papers. Got a few agents started. In 2 years our agents were selling over $100,000.00 
worth of goods for us a year. We had just a few dollars capital; no experience. Soon 
our agents were selling goods all over the U. S. and in many foreign countries. We 
&at in our office and had people everywhere sending us orders and money by mail. 
We didn't have to do any canvassing or peddling. Agents sold our goods. We started 
at home; worked evenings at -Ilrst. Soon we quit our jobs and put all our time to the 
Mall-Order Agency Business. We made an amazing success selling by mail. 
Whv can't you do as well? I will help you. 
WE HAVE TAKEN IN OVER $1,000.00 A DAY!! 
Think of a business like that by mail. Listen! The sales from just one general 
agent made us over £10,000 a year profit. Suppose you started in your own 
home witli a few good selling articles, placed a few ads in the papers, and got agents 
setting your goods all over the country. Why couldn't you take in $100 a 
dnyf 1 will start you: will give ymi a;t;o Instruction Course FREE to study; 
supply you with circulars advertising 15 meritorious specialties, printed with 
your name and address on. I will tell you how and where to advertise; I will 
place an ad for you FREE. I will help you all I can. I need just a few hustling 
energetic co-operators, men with ambition, enthusiasm and back-bone. You 
don't need big capital; less than S-30 required. I supply you with complete equipment. If you want to 6tart in a fascinating, profitable business, 
write me, giving the names of three references and I will write you a 
long letter, telling you all. I will tell you the Inside Facts, how 
many concerns have made from So.000 to $50,000a year PROFIT in 
the very same business in which I want to start you. You must 
not delay. My oifer is limited. Sit dnwn and write me NOW. 
H. S. Robinson, Pres't, The Robinson-Butler Co., 
146 Factories Building • - Toledo Ohio 
pianos player pianos 
Factory
 To Home 
B Y M Y PLA N 
of selling direct from factory to home. \ can save you 
(rom $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Model Pianos. 
Tw o t o Fou r Years t o Pa y 
The'easiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
All middlemen, jobbers, dealers and agents 
profits cut out. No charge (or salesroom expense for my 
office is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
why I can sell the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons Write today. 
3 0 Day s Fre e Tria l 
We allow all freight charges, let vou use the/ty 
beautiful Evans Artist Model Piano for thirty days/X/ 
free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we will taRe 
it hack without anv cost to you—you are the solc^-/*?' 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, vou may jgy^Jdo so on our low factory wholesale price on>^v -s^ 
most convenient terms. /oj »y ^ 
Fre e Musi c I 
To the first customer in e; 
vou money. Write today 
F. O. Ev-"i Piano Co 
A NE W WA Y 
To Get Your Clothes Free 
A NEW PLAN TO MAKE 
BIG MONEY DURING 
YOUR SPARE TIME 
Something different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offe r eve r made. Lower 
prices—better clothes— 
bigger cash profits—Express paid on everything. 
Doubl e Pa y 
FRE E clothes and cash profits 
besides. W e don't ask you 
to use your cash profits for 
your own clothes. Ours is a 
new and better plan. 
An Extra Present with every order. Not a prize 
scheme. Choose what you want, work for it and get 
it besides your Cash Profits. Agent's Complete Outfit FREE, fifty-six stylish, real doth 
samples — fifty Fashion Plates. inside wholesale 
prices. Everything FREE. Get into the big 
money-making class. Just put your name on a 
post card and mail it to us today. 
SPENCER MEAD CO. , Dept. 303 , Chicago 
Mention Th e Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 15 1 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing, Hai r Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price, 50c. each. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Wav ­
ing. Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mine . A . Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TEACHER S The new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
•electing teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland. Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington, D. C. 
Onl y 
$65.0 0 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold onji.oo 
Profit Margin From 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogs 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS, 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern In the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate' in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Nowl 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
PROFITABL E SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Big demand everywhere. Exclusive territory. Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNING , Indianapolis. Ind 
COLORE D ME N 
WANTED TO PREPARE AS 
SLEEPING-CAR AND TRAIN 
PORTERS. 
N o experienc e necessary . Position s 
pay $65 to $100 a month . Stead y 
work . Standar d roads. Passe s an d 
uniforms furnishe d whe n necessary. 
Writ e now . 
I. RY . C . I., Dept. 28 , Indianapolis, Ind. i E . 
Your Next Suit 
Hand Tailored— 
Class y LiningsMillionair e Trimmings—Swell Cut -
Guaranteed FitFREE 
Made t o Your Measure 
$30 t o $40 woul d no t 
buy a better one , but you 
get it fo r nothing . No t a 
cent t o pay. Simpl y wear 
it, tell your friends whei o 
you got it, and make 
$
10to $15aDa y 
taking their orders. It if 
dead ensy. You nevt-raawo nobbier suit or a mores tunning pat 
torn, cut in strict lyTanno style <• 
monthsahead of the time»). Youi 
choice of 60 patterns and a dozei 
different styles to choose from. 
Drop ua a postal card for heavi 
pattern book, inside inionnatior 
about sty Its, flelf-meaaurinp 
blanks, etc., etc. Don't wait 
Everything" free—We pay ex 
pressaffo. Get ahead of tbo otho 
fallnwB—writo this very minute 
A postal will do it. 
AMERICAN WOOLEN MILLS CO. 
Dept. 151 CHICAGO 
BE SUCCESSFUL! 
Develo p Magneti c Forc e 
Send for 
"WH Y MEN SUCCEED" 
It's Fre e 
T. MARSDE N OTTO , 5 7 East Vanburen St., CHICAG O 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
ma y be mad e in commission s b y parties handling 
"Histor y o f Negr o Soldiers in Spanish-America n 
War " combine d with "Histor y o f the Negr o Race. " 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Stree t NE W YOR K 
REGALIA 
N . CORNER 8t h AN D 
CRISI S 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Ohi . 
Mentio n TH E 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
$3000 FO R YO U 
Exclusive 
Territory. 
100 % 
Profit. 
T
HAT' S the mone y yo u shoul d ge t this year. I mea n it. I want 
Count y Sales Managers quick, me n o r wome n wh o believe in 
the squar e deal, wh o will g o into partnership with me . N o 
experienc e needed . M y foldin g Bath Tu b ha s taken the countr y by 
storm. Solve s the bathing problem. N o plumbing , n o wate r work s 
required. Full length bath in anv room . Fold s in small roll, handy 
as an umbrella . I tell yo u it's great! GREAT ! Rivals $100 bath 
room. No w listen! I want YO U to handl e you r county . I'll furnish demonstratin g tub o n liberal plan. I'm positive—absolutel y certain—you can get bigge r mone y in a wee k with me than yo u eve r 
mad e in a mont h before . I KNO W IT ! 
Tw o Sale s a Day — 
$300.0 0 a Mont h 
n-nat you should get—every month. T ly bought. Modern bathing facilities for al1 
ceded in every home, hadly wanted, 
the people. Take the orders right 
, and left. Quick sales, immense 
' profits. Look at these men— 
Smith, Ohio, got 18 orders first 
k; Mevers, Wis., $250 profit first 
h; Newton. California. $60 in 
days. You should do as well. 2 
S A DAY MEANS $3"0 A MONTH, 
work is very easy, pleasant, 
ermanent. fascinating. It means a 
business of your own. 
'Little capital needed. 1 grant 
rredit—Help you out—Back you up 
a't doubt —Don't hesitate—Don't 
ou cannot lose. My^ther men are 
accounts, so cau you. Act then 
name on penny post card 
H. S. Robinson, Pres., c™, 1 »• Bid9
., TOLEDO , OHI O 
nch — Walkerville, Ont. 
MILE S M . WEB B 
School of Practical Photography 
All branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses: Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTER NOW . 
3519 So. STAT E STREE T CHICAGO , III . 
Telephone Douglass 6688 
Made-to-Measure 
Express $A7 5 
Prepaid 
Pants cut in the latest 
style. Made-to-your individual measure. Fit, 
workmanship and wear 
guaranteed. 
N o Extr a Charg e 
for peg tops, no matter how 
extreme you order them. 
Agent s Wante d 
A good live hustler in every 
town to take orders for our 
celebrate d made-to-measure clothes. Samples of all 
the latest materials FREE . 
W e Pa y Bi g Mone y 
to our agents every where. 
Turn your spare time into 
cash by taking orders for our 
stylish clothes. Write today 
for beautiful FRE E outfit. 
THE PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO. 
Department 803 CHICAGO 
Mentio n T H E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 153 
THE FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION 
By MAJOR JOHN R. LYNCH 
What some of the readers of this wonderful book say about it 
" I am prepare d to say with all cando r that 
you r boo k contain s the clearest, most unbiased, 
comprehensiv e and satisfactory narrative o f the 
Reconstructio n perio d and its happening s that I 
have eve r read."—Bisho p Georg e W . Clinton , 
Charlotte , N . C. 
"It certainly embodie s a plain and unbiased 
statement o f the facts o f Reconstruction."— 
Bisho p C. S. Smith , Detroit. 
"T o the charm o f a singularly lucid an d vigorou s style yo u hav e unconsciousl y adde d the literary beauty that come s from an intimate personal acquaintanc e with the facts narrated, 
viewe d with unprejudice d ey e and with the 
wid e sweepin g visio n that note s their correla ­
tion to the evolutio n o f ou r Nationa l life." — 
Rev . Joh n Albert Williams, Omaha . 
"Th e author sweepingl y refute s the claim that 
the party in powe r at that time blundere d b y 
makin g the Negr o a fellow citizen o f the Re ­
publi c with the same measur e o f rights, privilege s and prerogative s enjoye d by all others."— 
Rev . J. C. Anderson , D . D. , Chicago . 
" I regar d you r boo k o n Reconstructio n as the 
best I hav e see n upo n that subject. I conside r 
it so importan t a contributio n to that perio d o f 
ou r Nationa l history that I shall recommen d its 
adoptio n here as a boo k to be especially reporte d 
o n b y ou r classes in America n history."—Prof. 
T , G. Steward , Professo r o f History , Wilberforc e University . 
"Th e valu e o f this boo k lies in its careful 
statements and verified facts; an unusua l phenomeno n whe n dealing with subjects pertaining 
to the Reconstruction . I read it and immediately 
re-read it, whic h is the highest complimen t I can 
pay any book."—Dr . Charle s E. Bently , Chicago . 
" I have read with grea t pleasur e you r well 
timed and valuabl e presentation o f Th e Facts o f 
Reconstruction . * * * In judicia l tempe r and 
accurat e statement, yo u have justified the high 
esteem with whic h yo u wer e regarde d durin g the 
eventful perio d b y both parties."—Prof. Richar d 
T . Greener, Chicago . 
"I n Th e Facts o f Reconstructio n by Majo r 
Joh n R. Lynch , w e find that rare combinatio n o f 
memorie s verified b y facts and impressions, supporte d b y both logi c and history. A n up-to-date 
boo k written b y a schola r an d a patriot."—Dr. 
Georg e C. Hall, Chicago . 
"You r boo k give s me informatio n I have bee n 
searching fo r ove r twenty-five years."—Dr. A . 
Wilberforc e Williams, Chicago . 
This boo k ough t to be in ever y home . It is suitable fo r a Christmas, Ne w Year, birthday or 
weddin g present. 
Price $1.50. By mail $1.65 
Address: Majo r Joh n R. Lynch , 4321 Forestvill e Ave. , Chicago , 111, 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 7 Monograph s Sol d Separatel y 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 2S cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
WANTED 
Agent s (o r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
TH E BOO K O F TH E CENTUR Y 
A PULLMAN PORTER S MEMOIRS 
By 
JACK THORNE 
A collection of original Short Stories of 
Travel, written in an entertaining and attractive style, covering a period of ten years in the 
Pullman Service. 
Cloth Bound $1.0 0 
Goo d Commissio n t o Agents 
Address: ARTHU R A. SCHOMBURG, 63 
West 140th St., New York City, or JOHN E. 
BRUCE (Grit), 146 Warburton Ave., Yonkers, 
N. Y. 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R . WRIGHT , JR. , and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e :: :: Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E Cms n 154 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
Telephones: 
I Central 104-W 
[Mai n 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Kesidence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N . J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Mil 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORN EYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS . E. GREENE, JR. 
ATTORNEY AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
B. F. BOOT H 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW 
57 N. Second Street 
Memphis Tenn. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W . 135th Street Ne w York City 
WILLIAM L. BELL 
ARCHITECT 
13854 Auburn Avenue Atlanta, Ga.. 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teache r o f Theor y an d Pian o 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
J. E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforc e University 
Wilberforce , O. 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
W . T . McKissic k & Co's. 
FAMOUS 9 0 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 
Fo r Scalp , Hair an d Ski n 
P. O. Bo x 102, WILMINGTON , DEL. 
WANTED 
Agent s fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
ADVANCE STYLES 
FRE E 
Suits 
T o Introduc e 
Here we g:o a^ain , breaking all records for new 
nobby, ahead-of -the-time styles Be THE first IN YOUR town TO wear a suit thot IS ah.-ad ,.f IJ„. time. You can do IT FREE. To introduce these stylos quickly we will give you a complete BUIT Tree, and by your wearing it you 
can make 
$5 0 to $10 0 a Week 
Drop nsn postal forouxadvance book, select the styles you wunt 
and the cloth, and get 
You r Sui t FRE E 
Don't wait. Don't delav. Write right away. A postal w 1 do. We 
send everything the day your 
request ID received. We pay exPRESS on everything. Get busy, dimply BEND-US a postal with 
your name and address on ft. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
PePt. 151 CHICAGO 
Wear Next 
Season's 
Styl e 
NO W 
Mention THE CRISIS A Selected List of Book s 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
TH E QUES T OF TH E SILVE R FLEECE . (W . E . B. D U Bois) $1.3 5 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . (Charles W. Chesnutt) 1.50 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRIC S OF LOWL Y LIFE . (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARRO W OF TRADITION . (Charles W. Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPORT OF TH E GODS . (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E XEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . Du Bois) 1.25 
RAC E .ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E XEGRO . (B . G . Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D OF PRIMITIV E MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . E. Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O IN AMI-KI T * V HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
STOR Y OF TH E XEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booker T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S OF XEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICA N ABROAD . 2 Volumes. (William H. Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
THE'CO I JRE D INVENTOR . (Henry E. Baker) 15 
A CHILD' S STOR Y OF DUNBAR . (Julia L. Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E C»I» H Attention , Masons ! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale, formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of New Haven and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr. 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENTS 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A. & A. Scottish RUe : 
" Trince Hall and His Followers.' written by a scholarly Afro-American, presents to the Masonic world a treatise on the legitimacy of Negro Masonry that 
should be in the hands of every Mason seeking for Truth. The information 
contained in the chapter devoted to Prince Hall is alone worth to the young 
Masi m the price of the book. Brother Crawford's easy and pleasing style 
creates in the reader a desire to complete the volume before putting the book 
out of his hands." 
From Henry A. Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"The look fills a long-felt want among intelligent Masons of our Race. 
To know that we are right, and to substantiate that fact by intelligent research 
and logical statements, is worth more to us than what the other fellow may 
say. This is what Brother Crawford's book does; and it should be in the hands 
of every Mason of our Race." 
From Jose H. Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners : 
"A very strong brief, setting forth plainly the legitimacy of Prince Hall 
Masonry, and, as well, a stern call to all Negroes to assume full pride in the 
happy possession of a Rite which can show such clear proofs of its contentions." 
From William H. Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of "A History of Colored Freemasonry" : 
"I have read with great pleasure 'Prince Hall and His Followers.' The book 
is well written, containing clear and convincing diction. The impartial accuracy 
with which the facts are marshalled makes the book a verv valuable asset 
to Masons." 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDER NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: : : Ne w York 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 