VACATIO N ΝUMBER 
TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Two JULY , 1911 Number Three 
TH E LAT E JOH N B . TAYLOR , UNIVERSIT Y O F PENNSYLVANI A 
Whos e record for the quarter-mile ru n stlll remains untouched 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y 
FAMOU S COLORE D ATHLETE S TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPLE 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS ; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee-—-
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer-—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss Mary W . Ovington, 
New York, 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Bamum. New York. 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New York. 
•Rev. W. H. Brooks, New York. 
Prof. John Dewey. New York. 
*Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott, New York. 
*Mr. Thos. Ewing, Jr., New York. 
•Rev. John Hnynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr. Hamilton Holt, New York. 
Miss Maud It. Ingersoll, New York. 
Mis. Florence Kelley, New York. 
*Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York. 
•Mrs. F. R. Keyser, New York. 
Dr. Chas. Lenz. New York, 
Mr. Jacob W. Mack, New York. 
•Mrs. M. D. Maclean, New York. 
•Mr. John E. Mllholland, New York. 
Rev. Horace G. Miller, New York. 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., New York. 
Mr. James F. Morton. Jr., New York. 
Mr. Henry Moskowitz, New York. 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly, New York. 
•Rev. A. Clayton Powell, New York. 
•Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York 
Mr. Jacob H. Sehiff, New York. 
Prof. E. R. A. Seligman, New York. 
•Dr. Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Anna Garlin Spencer, New York. 
•Prof. J. E. Spingara, New York. 
Mrs. Henry Villard. New York. 
•Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York. 
•Mr. Wm. English Walling, New York. 
•Bishop Alexander Walters. New York 
Dr. Stephen Sv Wise, New York. 
Miss M. R. Lyons, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
•Dr. O. M. Waller, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mr. D. Macon Webster, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mr. Geo. E. Wibecan, Jr., Brooklyn. N. Y. 
Mrs. M. EL Talbert, Buffalo, N. Y. 
Hon. Thos. M. Osborne, Auburn. N. Y. 
•Mr. W. L. Bulkley, Ridgefleld Park, N. J. 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New Haven, Conn. 
Miss Maria Baldwin, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat. Boston, Mass. 
•Mr. Albert E. PiUsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstcad, Brookllne, Mass. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter. New Bedford, Mass. 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter, Baltimore, Md. 
Prest. Chas. T. Thwing. Cleveland, O. 
Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. 
Hon. Harry C. Smith. Cleveland, 0. 
Prest. H. C. Kin?. Oberlln. O. 
Prest. W. S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, O. 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, 111. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, 111. 
•Dr. C. E. Bentley, Chicago, HI. 
Miss Sopnronisba Breckenrldge, Chicago, 111. 
Mr. Clarence Darrow, Chicago, 111. 
Mr, Julius Rosenwald, Chicago. 111. 
Mrs. Cella Parker Woolley. Chicago. HI. 
Mr. F. L. McGhee. St. Paul, Minn. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia. Pa. 
•Dr. N. F. Mossell, Philadelphia. Pa. 
•Dr. Wm. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia. Pa. 
Miss Susan Wharton, Philadelphia. Pa. 
Mr. R. R. Wright, Jr.. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa. 
Rev. Harvey Johnson. D.D., Baltimore, Md. 
Hon, Wm. S. Bennet, Washington, D. C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford. Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Washlnston. D. C. 
Prof. L. B. Moore. Washington. D. C. 
Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington. D. C. 
•Mrs. Mary Church Terrell. Washington. D. C. 
•Rev. J. Milton Waldron, Washington. D. C. 
Prest. John Hope, Atlanta. Ga. 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill. Manassas, Va. 
Mr. William Pickens, Talladega. Ala. 
•Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New York. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W. E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS. Editor 
M . D. MACLEAN , Managing Editor 
FRANK M . TURNER. Circulation Manager 
ALBON L. HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLAR D 
f , k ,• , l J. MA X BARBER 
contributing J CHARLE S EDWARD RUSSELL 
1
 W. S. BRAITHWAITE 
KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FO R JULY , 1911 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 95 
ME N O F TH E MONTH : 
Rev. H . C. Bishop 102 
Right Hon. H . H . Asquith 103 
Right Hon. A. J. Balfour 103 
TH E VISION : Poem. By W. S. Braithwaite 103 
OPINIO N 104 
N. A . A . C. P 107 
BASKETBAL L TEA M O F TH E Y . M . C. A., WASHINGTO N 110 
EDITORIA L 112 
FAMOU S COLORE D COLLEG E ATHLETES . By Edwin B. Henderson.... 115 
TH E LITTL E KINGDO M O F SAL T 119 
WOMEN' S CLUB : Caring for the Young Women. By Mrs. W. A. Hunton.. 121 
TH E BURDE N 123 
WHA T T O REA D 125 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter In the post office at New York City. 
This Is to certify that I print fifteen thousand 
copies of the July Crisis, 1911. 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printer, 
202 East 99th St. 
Sworn to before me this 19th day of June, 
1911. 
P. J. BURKE, 
Notary Public, N, Y. C. 92 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
EDUCATIONA L DIRECTOR Y 
FORWARD ! 
March Your Son Off to Wilberforce 
The only school for Negro Youth which 
has a Military Department equipped by the 
National Government and commanded by a 
detailed United States Army Officer. 
DEPARTMENTS : 
MILITAR Y CLASSICAL THEOLOGICA L 
NORMA L SCIENTIFIC MUSICA L 
BUSINESS TECHNICA L PREPARATOR Y 
Banking taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Ten Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in part 
by the State of Ohio. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH President. 
WM. A. JOINER, Superintendent, C. N. & I. 
Atlanta University 
IB beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Tale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA. 
Wilberforce University 
WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Opens first Tuesday in September 
Located in Greene County, 3 % miles from Xenia, 
Ohio. Healthful surroundings. Refined community. Faculty of 32 members. Expenses low. 
Classical and Scientific, Theological, Preparatory, 
Music, Military, Normal and Business Departments. Ten industries taught Great opportunities for High School graduates entering College or 
Professional Courses. Two new buildings for girls 
to be erected this year—one now in process of 
erection, and the- other to be begun in the spring. 
Catalogue and Special Information Furnished. 
Address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, President. 
Washington Conservatory of 
Music and School of Expression 
902 T STREET, WASHINGTON, D. C. 
LARG E AN D COMPETEN T FACULT Y 
DEPARTMENTS 
Piano, Voice and Violin. Piano Tuning.Theory Analysis, Harmony, Counterpoint, Fugue,Vocal Expression, 
Wind Instruments, History ol Music, Methods. 
Scholarships Awarded Artists' Recitals 
HARRIET GIBBS-MARSHALL, President. 
GEORGE WILLIAM OOOK, Treasurer. 
ABBY WILLIAMS, Secretary. 
T.EWIS G. GREGORY, Financial Secretary. 
ANNIE E. GRINAGE. 
Uirginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library, prepare a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORGE RICE HOVE Y President 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
SHAW UNIVERSITY 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industrial departments tor both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. There are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine, Pharmacy and Theology. 
The facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that will 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several month.* or 
a year in advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who apply. 
The,present enrollment is over S00. 
The academic year begins on the Thursday 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. The charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDENT 
Shaw University, Raleigk, N. C 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
JEFFERSON CITY. MISSOURI 
Founded by tie Soldiers of the 62d and 66th 
Regiments of the V. S. Colored Infantry. 
Supported by the State of Missouri. Has 
Normal, Collegiate, Agricultural, Mechanical and 
Industrial Courses. Buildings and equipment 
unsurpassed. Thirty teachers representing the 
best schools of the country. Students from all 
sections of the country. For catalogue and further information address 
BENJAMIN FBAHKT.TN ALLEN , 
President. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar Sehool and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opens Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
Presiden t R . W . McGranaha n 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
BOOK S 
The Cur»e of Race Prejudice 
J AME S F. M OMTOM , JB., A.M., Author and Publuhtr 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. An arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "The Bugbear of Social Equality," which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRICE 25 CENTS
 1 
Address the Author at 244 West 143d Street, : 
New York, N. Y. 
ADVERTISER 93 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta. Ga. 
JOINING TH E NAVY ; OB, 
ABROAD WITH UNCL E SA M 
By JOHN B. PAYNTEB, A.M. 
First Race Contribution to Navy 
Literature 
Ordered by the Government for Libraries of 
War Vessels 
.. "It is a perfect picture-.of life on board 
ship when I first went to sea. The story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so. that I read it through 
at one sitting."—Richardson Clover, Rear 
Admiral, U. S. N., Retired. 
Cloth Bound. 300 Pages. Fully Illustrated. 
SECOND EDITION 
Sent Postage Paid on Receipt of One Dollar 
Address care of 
SUDWABT H PRINTING CO. 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 
RACE ADJUSTMENT 
By KELL Y MILLER. Howard University. Washington, D. C. A Standard Book on the Race Question. 
PRICE {2.00 
Social Equality S cents 
An Appeal to Reason, open letter 
to John Temple Graves 10 cents 
Roosevelt and the Negro 10 cents 
Forty Years of Negro Education.. 10 cents 
Ultimate Race Problem 10 cents 
The Political Capacity of the 
Negro 10 cents 
The Talented Tenth 10 cents 
ADDRESS AUTHO R 
PUBLICATION S O F TH E N. A. A. C. P. 
The N. A. A. C. P. hu for ule the followina pamphlet*: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Haynes Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. The Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of Hull 
House. . y ... 
- 5. The Negro as a Soldier. By BrigadierGeneral Burt, U. S. A. 
Ftvc Cento Each. Three Dollar* a Thousand 
Mention TH E CKISIS. 94 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
OU R ADVERTISIN G DEPARTMEN T 
must be a service to our reader as well as a source of income to our management 
CJ This magazine has a definite purpose: to tell the truth i n a quiet but positive manner. 
To provide reading matter of genuine interest to father, mother and children i n every 
patriotic American home is the purpose of those who write TH E CRISIS . To construct a 
magazine correct in dress and formation is the aim of those who print it, and every page is 
evidence of the earnestness and ability of those who really make possible this publication. 
<J In the advertising department it is not our purpose to solicit advertisements at random 
and fill our pages with advertisements of no interest and value to our readers. The reader 
purchases the advertising page as well as the reading page. Viewing the matter i n that 
light, it is our purpose to make the advertising a means of real service to our readers as 
well as a source of income to us. 
€J I n this number we begin a Hotel Directory and a Classified Advertising Service. Those 
who are general magazine readers can appreciate the value of these two departments. 
(J If your dealer hasn't an article you wish to purchase, he will get it for you. We aim 
to make TH E CRISI S advertising columns the market place for CRISI S readers, and 
if you don't see what you want among our advertisements, write us and we will help you 
find it. I n this way we will know the sort of advertisements to place i n our columns 
for the convenience and pleasure of our readers. 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertisin g Manage r 
Thi s Is 
Th e Crisis 
Fe w peopl e se e yo u 
Man y people see you r letters 
Correc t in Type , 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Use Good Stationery 
Correc t in Type , 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
No t the cheapest; but the 
best for the money charged 
S P E C I A I T V 
Weddin g Invitations printed 
or engraved — correc t style 
As k Edito r 
W . E . B . D u Bois 
b y permissio n WRIT E O H 'PHON E T O 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printe r 
202 East 99th Street New Yor k City 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Along the Color Line 
POLITICAL . 
O n June 12 the Senate voted to amend 
the Constitution so as to permit the election of senators by the people and passed 
the Bristow amendment whic h adds a 
clause givin g Congress the right of supervision over such elections. Th e vote 
stood 44 to 44; the tie was broken by 
the Vice-Presiden t wh o cast his vote for 
the Bristow amendment. Mr . Clark e of 
Arkansa s was the only Democra t wh o 
voted for the amendment. Fiv e Republicans—Borah, Gronna , L a Follette , Poin -
dexter and Works-—all insurgents, voted 
against it. 
Th e House , whic h has already declared 
for the direct election of senators, wil l 
now have to pass on the amendment 
whic h takes the place of the measure 
proposed by Mr . Sutherland and defeated 
some months ago. Ther e is strong opposition to the amendment o n the part of 
the Southern representatives. In the debate many held that the right to control 
elections was already vested in Congress 
and that the Sutherland and Bristow 
amendments in no wa y altered the situation should Congress ever desire to interfere. O n the other hand, some felt that 
the proposition, without the amendment, 
strengthened the South in the position it 
has taken in disfranchising the Negro . 
*J Th e bills in the Sixty-second Congress 
concerning the Negr o are a curious assortment. Byrd , of Mississippi, has a 
bill pending, designed to make it a crime 
for whites, Negroe s and Mongolian s to 
intermarry in the Distric t of Columbia ; 
Clark, of Florida , has a measure provid ­
in g for "jim crow " street cars in the 
District; Hardwick , of Georgia , wants 
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amend ­
ments abrogated; and Roddenburg, of 
Missisippi, wil l endeavor to restrict the 
congressional restaurant to white 
patrons. Ther e is no chance that any 
of these bills wil l become law. The y 
are brought forward merely as proof 
to the voters at home that their promoters are "sound on the question. " 
Representative Roddenburg , by the 
way, has joined the ranks of Congressmen wh o have assaulted colored men, 
a society adorned by Senator Stone, 
wh o slapped a waite r some time ago, and 
Congressman Heflin , wh o shot a Negr o 
in Washington . Th e Georgian recently 
fought a colored passenger in a crowded 
street car because the man jostled him 
more than he thought necessary. 
1$ A favorable report on the nomination 
of Willia m H . Lewis to be Assistant At ­
torney-Genera l has been authorized by 
the Senate committee on the judiciary. 
<J Th e Secretary of the Interior has appointed Willia m T. Vernon , former Reg ­
istrar of the Federa l Treasury, to be 
assistant supervisor of Indian schools 
in Oklahoma . Th e State officials protested. 
<I Carte r Harrison , the Democrati c 
mayo r of Chicago, has appointed W . A . T. 
Watkins, a colored man, to be assistant 
corporation counsel. Mr . Harrison's 
election was due largely to the votes 
of Negroe s wh o believed his attitude on 
race questions to be just. 
<J Th e Ne w Yor k legislature defeated 
Mr . Cuvillier's bill providin g for the 
organization of a colored regiment of 
the Nationa l Guar d in Ne w Yor k City . 
Th e colored people did not, however, 
give up the fight. The y aroused sentiment, saw the Governo r and other 
prominent Democrats, and the Assembl y 
reconsidered the vote, passing the bill 
unanimously. A s we go to press it 
seems almost certain that the Senate wil l 
concur. 
JUDICIAL . 
In the matter of the Oklahoma disfranchising "grandfather" clause two 
decisions have been rendered. It woul d 
now appear that it is legal to disfranchise the Negr o in the eastern half of 
Oklahoma and illega l in the western 
half. Judge Joh n H . Cotteral, of the 
western district, sitting in Oklahoma 
City , held positively that the amendment 
adopted by the people of the State last 
August is in violation of the Fifteenth 
Amendmen t to the Constitution of the 
Unite d States, whil e Judge Ralp h E . 
Campbell, of the eastern district, sitting 
at Muskogee , sustained demurrers in the 
case brought against election officials 
wh o refused Negroe s the right to vote , 
holdin g that no offense had been committed against the Unite d States. 
In his opinion, Judge Cottera l said that 
it is the prerogative of a State to establish educational and other restrictions 
for voters, but that the Oklahoma educational test clearly applies to one race 
only and is therefore unconstitutional. 
This "grandfather " clause is the familia r 
sort whic h provides that no person be 96 THE CRISIS 
allowe d to vote unless he can read and 
write any section of the Oklahoma con ­
stitution, but adds that the law should 
not apply to any one whose ancestors 
could vote on January 1, 1866. 
*J A n important decision i n Alabama 
was handed down by Chie f Justice R. R. 
Simpso n in the case of Sheriff Jinwright, 
of Bulloc k County , wh o on Apri l 2 permitted a mob to take from him and lync h 
a colored prisone r held i n the county 
jail. "It matters not that the prisone r 
may have been guilty of the most revoltin g crime know n to our laws, " declared 
the court in rendering its opinion, "the 
next wave of popular frenzy migh t deprive of his life one who, upon prope r 
investigation, woul d be found to be innocent. 
"It is vai n for us to write in our Con ­
stitution, that cherished heritage of Eng ­
lish-speaking people—'that all persons 
accused of crime shall have the right to 
a public trial, by an impartia l jury, and 
shall not be deprived of life, liberty or 
property except by due process of law'— 
if our government cannot and wil l not 
enforce it. A law not enforced is no law 
at all. Th e sheriff wh o defends his prisoner from violence is defending the constitution of his State and perchance the 
lives, the liberty and the happiness of 
his own family. " 
<J Despite the fact that Unite d States 
Judge Emor y Speer charged that the 
Georgi a contract labor violates the Con ­
stitution of the Unite d States and that 
hundreds of Negroe s are being held in 
peonage, a Maco n jur y has acquitted 
Joh n R. Rogers, Jacob Home , W . E . 
Channey and Luk e Dupree, four wealthy 
Georgians, of the charge, of peonage. 
Th e jury returned a verdict of not guilty, 
notwithstanding Judge Speer's positive 
statement to them that the men were 
guilty of peonage and conspiracy, and 
by their own testimony had convicted 
themselves. Th e judge practically ordered a verdict of guilty and he seemed 
angered when the jur y in five minutes 
returned a verdict of acquittal. 
It was durin g the course of this tria l 
that Judge Speer reprimanded Attorney -
General Felde r for continually using the 
wor d "nigger. " Th e judge remarked that 
he was tired of "nigger, nigger, nigger, " 
and suggested that the lawye r choose a 
more pleasing form of address. Mr . 
Felde r protested wit h a good deal of 
warmth , but Judge Speer was insistent 
and even hinted that he woul d not allow 
the lawye r to appear before him if he 
did not mend his manners. Judge Speer 
is a native Georgian wh o served in the 
Confederate army. H e was concerned 
in the prosecution of the K u Klu x Klan . 
H e has been independent in politics. 
Eigh t planters of Conecu h County , 
Alabama , have been arrested at Mobil e 
on indictments returned by the last 
Unite d States Gran d Jur y chargin g them 
wit h peonage. It is alleged that they 
have been holdin g farm laborers in a 
condition of peonage for man y months. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e newl y formed Colore d Citizens' 
Civi c and Protective Leagu e of Louisian a 
held a meeting in Ne w Orlean s to perfect their organization. Th e preambl e 
to the constitution and by-laws was 
adopted. Th e objects of the league are 
stated to be: Interest and co-operation 
in civic improvements; the moral, educational, commercia l and industria l advancement of the Negro ; the enjoyment 
and benefit of civil and politica l rights 
as guaranteed under the organi c law; 
the encouragement of a law-abidin g 
spirit; the securing of equal and exact 
justice before the law; the approva l of 
the law's penalty whe n due, and disapprova l and opposition when not due. 
Cfl Attache d to the Fifteenth Unite d 
States Cavalr y i n the pageant attending 
the coronation of George V . are nine 
colored cavalryme n under the comman d 
of Majo r F . S. Foltz . 
tj Senator Curtis, of Kansas, has introduced a bill in the Senate to erect in the 
Distric t of Columbi a a home for aged 
and infirm colored people. Th e home 
wil l be built out of the proceeds of a 
fund consisting of moneys due the estates 
of colored soldiers, sailors and marines 
wh o are now dead. A sum amountin g 
to about $300,000, representing pay, 
bounties and prizes of colore d men wh o 
were in the Unio n service in the Civi l 
War, lies in the Treasury . It has been 
several times proposed to use it i n the 
manne r suggested. Th e mone y was 
turned over to the Treasur y years ago 
after the commissione r of the Freed -
man's Bureau had found it impossibl e to 
locate the claimants. 
<J A monument to Joh n Brow n was 
unveiled on the campus of the Wester n 
Universit y for Negroe s at Quindaro , 
Kan. , on June 8. A subscription for the 
monument was started two years ago 
by the late Bisho p Abraha m Grant. 
<J Col . As a Turner, speaking before the 
colored Youn g Men's Christia n Associa ­
tion in De s Moines, Iowa , gave a glowin g 
tribute to the colored troops of the Civi l 
War. His remarks were chiefly occupied 
wit h the narration of various instances 
where the Negr o troops showed their 
valor. "The y were green troops to begin 
with, " he said, "but after a couple of 
weeks' practice, there were seventeen i n 
my company wh o could beat me shooting. The y were good soldiers and loya l 
soldiers. " ALONG THE 
<I CoJ. Joh n R. Marshal l has secured 
from the Illinois legislature an appropria ­
tion of $100,000 for an armor y for colored soldiers. This wil l be the first 
armor y in the Unite d States built for 
colored soldiers. Representative Edwar d 
Green, the colored membe r of the Illi ­
nois legislature, put the bill through the 
assembly. 
<J Th e one hundredth birthday anniversary of Harrie t Beecher Stowe fell on 
Wednesday, June 14, and was generally 
observed in large cities. Mrs. Mar y 
Churc h Terrel l one year ago published 
a request through the press asking that 
colored people everywhere and especially 
the wome n make that day one of special 
celebration. In Boston , Chicago, Denve r 
and many other cities large meetings 
were held. A t the commencement of 
Fis k University , Charle s Edwar d Stowe, 
son of Harrie t Beecher Stowe, was the 
chief speaker, and in Washington , Lyma n 
Beecher Stowe, her grandson, addressed 
a meeting organized by the wome n of 
the city. 
<J Si x years ago a committee was started 
in Ne w Yor k especially to look after the 
interests of the colored children wh o 
were not receiving their due share of 
summer outings. This committee writes 
that it is confident it is in a position 
to do mor e wor k than ever before, and 
to do it well, if it is sufficiently supported 
by the public. A s the result of several 
conferences held during the last two 
years matters have been so arranged 
that there is complete co-operation between all agencies doing fresh-air wor k 
among the colored people in Ne w York , 
thus avoidin g duplication of effort and 
securing a certain degree of specialization. Th e Committe e on Urba n Conditions is to keep the records and manage 
a mode l boys' camp, but the visitin g in 
the homes, arrangin g the groups for 
excursions or for longe r stays, educating 
the people as to the value of these outings and as to the available opportunities—in short, the "famil y and city " end 
of the work, is under the direction of the 
Negr o Fres h Ai r Committee . Last summer it sent away 214 people for a week 
or two wit h the help of the Tribun e 
Fun d and other good friends, but there 
were 50 more mothers and babies (a 
group usually unprovided for) wh o were 
ready to go if the money for them had 
been forthcoming, as well as 142 children wh o migh t ha-ve gone away if our 
visitor could have seen them mor e than 
once. Rev . Willia m N . Hubbell , of the 
Judso n Memoria l Church , is chairman of 
the committee, and Miss H . F . Emerson , 
131 East 66th Street, Ne w York , is the 
secretary-treasurer. 
COLOR LINE 97 
EDUCATION . 
Th e Genera l Educatio n Boar d has 
awarded $634,000 to white and colored 
colleges and schools and for other educational purposes. Conditiona l appropriations were made to these colleges: 
Convers e College , Spartanburg, S. C , 
$50,000; Drur y College , Springfield, Mo. , 
$75,000; Frankli n College , Franklin , Ind., 
$75,000; Frankli n and Marshal l College , 
Lancaster, Pa., $50,000; Huro n College , 
Huron , S. D. , $100,000, and Pennsylvani a 
College , Gettysburg, Pa., $50,000. Schools 
for colored people to whic h appropria ­
tions were made are: Hampto n Instituc, Hampton , Va. ; Tuskegee Institute, 
Tuskegee, Ala. ; Lan e College , Jackson, 
Tcnn. ; Spellman Seminary, Atlanta , Ga. ; 
How e Institute, Memphis, Tenn. ; Thomp ­
son Institute, Lumberton , N . C , and 
the Florid a Baptist Academy , Jacksonville, Fla . Eac h of these received about 
$10,000. 
<J Th e sixteenth Atlant a conference for 
the study of Negr o problems was held 
at the university on Ma y 30. Th e subject of study this year was the "Negr o 
Commo n School. " Dr. W . E . B. D u Bois 
is director of the conference. Fo r four 
years the conferences have been carried 
on under the auspices of the Joh n F . 
Slater fund. 
<J Andre w Carnegie has given another 
buildin g to the Trainin g Schoo l for Col ­
ored Teachers at Cheyney, Pa . This time 
it is a buildin g for the agricultura l department of this school to cost $10,000. 
Th e school offers professional courses 
for teaching industria l subjects and hopes 
to correlate these wit h agriculture. 
q Rev. George William s Walker, D.D. , 
for more than a quarter of a century a 
professor at Paine's college at Augusta , 
Ga., died on Ma y 17, after an illness,o f 
several months, in the sixtieth year of his 
age. Dr. Walke r was one of the heroes 
of the South. H e came to August a 
about 1884, and offered his services 
to the educational wor k of the Negro , 
whic h had been promised the race by the 
Southern Methodists. H e began his 
wor k in an upper room on Broa d Street, 
and later property was secured on Wood -
laWn Avenue , where teaching was carried on in remodeled stables. Erectin g 
Haygoo d Memoria l Hall , they changed 
the name to Paine College . Fo r twentyfive years Dr. Walke r has been a true 
friend of the race, suffering much because of his staunch loyalty, and deeply 
beloved by the colored people. I n the 
Apri l CRISIS we took occasion to express 
editorially our respect for this good man. 
tj Announcemen t has been made that 
Andre w Carnegi e has made a provisiona l 
donation of $10,000 for the completion 
of the Geo. W . Hubbar d Hospita l i n 98 THE CRISIS 
Nashville , Tenn . Th e Hubbar d Hospita l 
was opened several months ago. Th e 
win g already completed cost about 
$15,000, whic h was raised amon g the 
colore d people themselves. Th e furniture 
in the buildin g was supplied by funds 
raised by numerous colored women's 
clubs. 
<J A t the forty-eighth annual commence ­
ment of Wilberforc e Universit y the centenary of the birth of the late Bisho p 
Danie l A . Payne , founder of the college, 
was observed on the 11th and 12th of 
June. Bishop s H . M . Turner, VV. B. 
Derrick , L . J. Coppin , B. F . Lee , C. T. ' 
Shaffer and others delivered addresses 
eulogizin g the founder. 
CJ Th e colored teachers of Spartanburg 
County , S. C , are tryin g to organize a 
summe r school. 
TH E CHURCH . 
Th e Ne w Englan d Africa n Methodist 
Episcopa l Conference voted at their annual conference to advise the Secretary 
of the Nav y "that there has come to 
our knowledge that there exists at navy 
recruiting stations an impossibilit y for 
Negroe s to enlist except as coal passers 
or mess attendants, that the Negr o is 
discriminated against aboard the receivin g ships Hancoc k at Ne w Yor k and 
Frankli n at Norfolk , that on several battleships the Negr o is segregated, and 
that he has no opportunity to rise. It 
is petitioned that these conditions be in ­
vestigated and remedied. " 
CJ "Wanted , 400 men ! 100 boys! T o 
use our association home. " This was the 
caption of a large whole-page advertisement used by the Alic e Johnso n colored 
Youn g Men's Christian Associatio n in 
Knoxville , Tenn . A membership campaign 
was started by the members of the colored branch of the Youn g Men's Christian Associatio n in Ma y to obtain 400 
adult and 100 junior members of the 
association. It is said that the advertisement has been the means of attractin g man y new members. 
CJ President Taft made an address before a congregation of colored men in 
Washingto n wh o are endeavoring to 
raise money for the completion of their 
Youn g Men's Christia n Associatio n buildin g in that city. H e praised the generosity of Julius Rosenwald , of Chicago , 
wh o gave $25,000 for that purpose. 
ECONOMICS . 
T o check the invasion of choice residence districts by Japanese, Chinese and 
Negroes, citizens of Nort h Berkeley, 
California , have formed an organization. 
Accordin g to the circula r issued by the 
association, property owners, real estate 
men, banks and others wil l be interested 
in the project and every effort made to 
prevent Orientals and colore d persons 
from rentin g or buyin g property in sections i n whic h man y pretty homes have 
been erected. Certai n sections of the 
city have been designated as "restricted" 
areas. 
CJ Colore d ushers have supplanted whit e 
ushers in the new Northwester n depot 
in Chicago . I n makin g the change a 
time-honored custom has been abandoned. Officials of the road have advanced a numbe r of reasons for the 
change, chief amon g whic h is that colored ushers are easier to obtain, and that 
inasmuch as the Pullma n porters are 
now all of that race it is thought advisa ­
ble to make the system uniform through ­
out. 
CJ A t a meeting of the Tent h War d 
Citizens' Associatio n of Kansa s City , 
Andre w E . Gallagher, a membe r of the 
Tent h War d Citizens' League , made the 
announcement that great pressure was 
being brought to bear on the Boar d of 
Educatio n wit h reference to Negr o 
teachers livin g on Montgal l Avenue , between Twenty-fourt h and Twenty-fifth 
Streets. Th e meeting was in the nature 
of an "anti-Negro " gathering. Th e 
league was formed two years ago for 
the purpose of forcing the Negroe s from 
the south end of the tenth ward . This 
was the topic of discussion at the recent 
meeting. On e of the speakers was Floy d 
E . Jacobs, an assistant prosecutor in 
Kansa s City . 
" I have just returned from a trip 
through the South, " said Mr . Jacobs. 
"Ther e the people have to deal wit h the 
Negr o problem upon a large scale and 
they kno w how to accomplis h man y 
things better than we wh o live in the 
North . I n all of the principa l cities of 
the Southern States the Negroe s are segregated from the whites. Consequently 
there is no deterioration o f property as 
we kno w it here. I n this movement to 
organize Kansa s Cit y for its best development I am wit h yo u from beginnin g 
to end. It is the duty of every man here 
and every citizen of Kansa s Cit y to line 
up in this move whic h the Tent h War d 
Citizens' League has initiated. I do not 
say this because of race prejudice or of 
social prejudice, but it is a question of 
economics. " 
tj Oppositio n to the continued immigra ­
tion of America n Negroe s from Okla ­
homa into the Canadian northwest grew 
so rapidly that it was believed that the 
Canadian government migh t take action 
to put a stop to any further influx. Th e 
Edmonton , Alberta , Boar d of Trade 
passed resolutions to protest against the 
continuance of the immigration . Th e 
Winnipe g Boar d of Trad e protested on ALONG THE COLOR LINE 99 
the groun d that the Negr o is not adapted 
to the Canadian climate and conditions 
of life. Nothin g further was done, however, and there are no new developments. 
Ther e are now only about 17,000 Negroe s 
throughout the whol e of Canada. 
<J Th e census seems to show that the 
Negr o population of Marylan d is decreasing. Th e figures were analyzed by 
Judge Joh n C. Rose , wh o said: 
"I n 1840 there were 4,117 fewer Ne ­
groes in the State than there were in 
1830, and in 1910 there are 2,815 fewer 
than there were in 1900. Durin g the 
same time the white population has in ­
creased 110,220. I n some of the counties 
of the State the Negr o decrease durin g 
the last ten years has been very striking. 
Thus, in Kent, where there were 7,442 
Negroe s ten years ago there are now 
only 6,162." 
CRIME . 
Si x Negnoes suspected of complicit y i n 
the murder of a prominent citizen were 
taken from the jail in Lak e City , Florida , 
on Ma y 21, carried to the suburbs of the 
city, tied to trees, and riddled wit h bullets. Details of this murde r are given 
under N . A . A . C. P. notes and in "Th e 
Burden. " 
<J Be n Smith, an old colored preacher, 
was lynched at Swainsboro, Ga., on Ma y 
20, after he had shot his wife and fatally 
wounded Deputy Marsha l Nea l Canady. 
Th e deputy was summoned followin g the 
first shooting. Accordin g to the press 
report as he approached the cabin the 
preacher opened fire and then fled. 
Canady fell, mortall y wounded. A crowd 
pursued the Negro , caught him in a 
swamp, hanged him and filled his body 
with bullets. This was the second lynch 
ing in Swainsboro withi n ten days, the 
other victim being John McLeod , wh o 
shot and kille d Deput y Sheriff Benton 
Woods. 
*J In spite of the pleas of Circuit Judge 
W . L . Coo k to let the law take its course, 
and in the presence of several members 
of the State Legislature , a mob at Galla ­
tin, Tenn., lynched James Sweat, a 
Negro , followin g the death of Magistrat e 
Davi d Barry . It was claimed that Mr . 
Barr y was kille d by Sweat when he tried 
to make peace between the colored man 
and the cook on the Barr y farm. N o 
arrests were made after the lynching . 
<I Because he was accused of pointin g a 
gun at Mrs. Hendricks, wife of a 
planter, Henr y Jackson, a Negro , was 
lynched by a mob, i n the western part 
of Bulloc k County , Georgia . Th e mob 
was headed by the husband of Mrs. 
Hendricks, and it is said he tied the 
noose about the Negro's neck. Afte r 
the Negr o was suspended his body was 
riddled wit h bullets. Unde r the heading 
"Judicial " we give an account of the tria l 
of the sheriff. 
<I Joe Moore , a Negro , wh o confessed 
to having murdered Henry ' Googher, a 
farmer, was taken from the jail at Craw -
fordsville, Ga., on Ma y 22, and hanged 
to a tree by a mob. 
<J Th e most sensational case tried at 
the Decatur Superior Court of Georgi a 
was that of the State against H . A . Gee, 
Osca r Spoone r and Ji m Poitevent, 
charged wit h the murde r of a Negr o 
preacher by the name of Cheatham. Th e 
defendants were youn g white farmers 
of good standing, and it was alleged 
that they attempted to whitecap Cheatham one night in Apri l "for some reason undisclosed, " and that meeting wit h 
resistance on the part of the Negr o and 
his wife, they shot and kille d him. Th e 
evidence of the dead Negro's wife was 
that she positively identified each of the 
defendants, although they attempted disguise by blacking their faces. Eac h of 
the defendants proved a complete alibi, 
and received vindication at the hands of 
the jury by a verdict of not guilty. 
The y belong to prominent families. 
Th e colored press gives the "reason 
undisclosed" that Cheatham was protecting his wife- from assault. Thos e 
familiar wit h conditions where lawlessness against Negroe s is tolerated kno w 
that the black husband wh o protects his 
wife does so at the risk of his life. 
^ Th e white press of the country gives 
a few lines to the lynchin g of a colored 
woma n and her son at Okemah , Okla ­
homa, on Ma y 26. Th e woma n was 
under arrest on the charge of murderin g a sheriff. Th e news is thus given 
by the colored press: 
"Ther e wil l be no official investigation into the lynchin g of Laur a Nelson , 
colored, and her sixteen-year-old son, 
who were taken from the jail here, 
dragged six miles to the Canadian River, 
and hanged from a bridge. Th e woma n 
was the first lynched in the State. She 
was raped before she was hanged. 
"The woma n and her son were under 
arrest on a charge of murderin g Deputy 
Sheriff George H . Loney , wh o had discovered stolen goods in their home. " 
Th e Muskoge e Scimite r says of this 
crime : "O n Ma y 26 an article appeared 
in the Mornin g Phoenix , stating that 
Mrs. Laur a Nelson , a colored woman , 
and her son, a boy fourteen years old, 
had been taken from the county jail at 
Okemah , the county seat of Okfuskee 
County , and mobbed by Negroes. Al l 
of which was true, except charging the 
crime to Negroes, whic h was a lie. Th e 
murderers evidently started this to hide 
their dastardly deed. Th e sheriff, the 
jaile r and -every official in the county 
know that not a single Negr o was in 100 THE CRISIS 
the mob, and they kno w further that 
white men composed the mob, and the 
officers wh o were too cowardl y to protect their helpless prisoners should be 
separated from the office and the places 
given ME N wh o have some regard for 
their oath of office. 
"Just think of it. A woma n taken 
from her sucklin g babe, and a boy— 
a child only fourteen years old—dragged 
through the streets by a howlin g mob 
of fiendish devils, the most unnameable 
crime committed on the helpless woma n 
and then she and her son executed by 
hanging. This happened i n a Christia n 
communit y and where the machinery of 
the law was all in the hands of white 
men, there being no chance for escape. 
If the prisoners were guilty then wh y 
mob them, except to satisfy an irresistible greed and appetite for rapine and 
blood? Th e Okfuskee mob composed 
of white men committed the most damnable and hellish crime know n in annals 
of crime, not excepting the burnin g at 
the stake of a numbe r of Indians some 
years ago near this same place, and 
placed a blot on the fair name of Okla ­
homa that even time cannot erase." 
•J A delegation of Negroe s (as noted in 
the N . A . A . C. P. notes) were received 
in the Whit e House , on Ma y 31, and 
presented a written petition to President 
Taft urgin g him to send a special message to Congress to ask the enactment 
of a law makin g the crime of lynchin g 
punishable by the Federa l government. 
Th e President explained that the crime 
of lynchin g came entirely withi n the 
jurisdiction of the State governments 
and that he was powerless to help the 
Negroes. 
CJ A mob of 100 men and boys went to 
the hotel in Fitzgerald , Ga., where they 
found three colored delegates wh o were 
attending the annual encampment of the 
G. A . R., Department of Carolinas, Georgia and Florida . The y dragged them 
from their beds at 2 o'clock in the morn ­
ing, forced them to dress and then carried them into the street, where they 
were roughl y handled. Afte r whippin g 
the delegates and cutting the G. A . R. 
buttons from their coats, the mo b ordered them to leave town at once. 
CJ A story comes from Kansa s Cit y givin g an account of the second attempt 
that has been made withi n five months 
to destroy the home of W . E . Griffin, 
the colored principa l of the Booke r 
Washingto n Schoo l i n that town. A 
few weeks ago a bomb was exploded 
under a boardwalk about three feet from 
the house, wit h the result that every 
windo w in the house was broken and 
a large hole was blown in the .earth. 
Last Decembe r an effort was made to 
destroy the home of the teacher wit h 
nitroglycerine , and withi n the last two 
years several other attempts have been 
made to drive the colored families from 
the neighborhood. 
CJ Thoma s E . Howe s is a Negr o wh o 
was bor n i n Britis h Guiana , and now 
lives i n Scranton, Pa . Severa l months 
ago he became a naturalized citizen of 
the Unite d States and bought a house 
for the sum of $4,000. A s soon as the 
news of this invasion of the aristocrati c 
Prescott Avenu e was know n there was 
great indignation. Message s were sent 
to him of so unfriendly a character that 
he felt it the better part of valo r to place 
himself under the protection of the chief 
of police, wh o detailed an officer wit h 
instructions to see that the law was not 
violated. 
ART . 
Mr . H . F . Gilbert's "Comed y Overture on Negr o Themes " has been played 
for the first time at the Symphon y concerts i n Boston . This compose r has 
lon g lived and worke d in and around 
Boston , keeping his faith i n America n 
folk-tunes—Negro, India n or of popular balladry—as the source out of which 
an America n musi c coul d be written. 
This particula r overture he designed for 
an operetta drawn from Joe l Chandle r 
Harris's stories of "Uncl e Remus. " Fo r 
various reasons the compositio n of the 
operetta was abandoned, and Mr . Gil ­
bert reshaped the overture into its present form in whic h it has been played 
already i n Ne w Yor k and Pittsburg. 
H e describes it as follows: "Th e overture is not at all in the accepted form. 
Th e thematic materia l I have taken from 
various collections of Negr o folk-lore 
'lifting' a motive here and there. M y 
'lifting' has not been very extensive, 
however. Th e Negr o themes whic h I 
have employed amount altogether to but 
twenty measures. Th e whol e overture 
is developed from this material. 
"Th e piece opens wit h a light and 
humorous movement. Th e theme was 
manufactured from two-four measure 
motives whic h I found in that interestin g book, 'Bahama Songs and Stories,' 
by Charle s L . Edwards. Nex t comes 
a broad and somewha t slowe r move ­
ment, the theme of whic h (eight measures in length) is a wil d and mysterious 
sounding bit of melody. This tune and 
man y like it were sung by the deckhands and 'roustabouts' on the Mississippi steamboats i n the ol d days. It is 
the only theme whic h I have used in 
its complete form in the overture. It is 
to be found i n 'Slave Songs of the 
Unite d States,' by W . F . Alle n and 
others. Th e origina l word s were as 
follows: 
" 'Fo r to see my mammy , Oh — 
Ise gwine to Alabammy , Ah— ' 
"The n comes a fugue. Th e theme ALONG THE 
• 
of the fugue consists of the first four 
measures of the Negr o Spiritual, 'Ol d 
Ship of Zion, ' as noted by Jeannette 
Robinso n Murph y in 'Southern Thoughts 
for Norther n Thinkers. ' Th e fugue ends 
in a broad and 'quasi maestoso' statement of the theme, in augmentation. It 
is given out by the brass instruments 
and is interspersed wit h fragments of 
the roustabout's song, also in augmentation. Afte r this there is a return to the 
first theme and after considerable recapitulation and the development of a 
different ending or coda, the composition ends in an orgy of jollit y and ragtime." 
<J A t the Ne w Yor k Hippodrome a spectacle called "Marchin g Throug h Georgia " was presented, whic h called for 
a number of colored players. Th e 
author says, speaking of the rehearsals: 
"One thing I noted wit h great satisfaction was the intelligence and earnestness 
they all showed in grasping my effort 
to inject detail into their wor k wherever 
the action made its introduction logical, 
and I feel safe in offering a challenge, 
on their behalf, to any other body of 
so-called 'extra people,' whatever their 
race, employed i n any current attraction, 
to even approach them in this particular. 
N o matter in whic h direction one looks 
during the plantation scene, one wil l find 
that there is something being done that 
is thoroughly i n harmony wit h the main 
action, and being done not perfunctorily 
and mechanically, but wit h the zest and 
intelligence that woul d do credit to seasoned performers. 
"A n incident provin g the ability of 
Negroes to 'harmonize,' musically, with ­
out direction, occurred at an early rehearsal. A t one point i n the play an old 
colored preacher enters from one side 
singing the first stanza of 'Ol d Blac k 
Joe.' Th e 'extra people'—the 'slaves'— 
are supposed to be off the stage, but in 
the rehearsals, when there was no 
scenery and property, the company was 
grouped in a large half circle near the 
back of the stage, listening to the familiar words of the song. Whe n the singer 
had reached the first strain of the 
chorus, 'I'm coming,' I merely raised 
my hand wit h a comprehensive sweep, 
and instantly the refrain was answered 
by a burst of harmony so full and sweet 
that it made 'the shivers go up my 
back.' Tha t was all the rehearsals 
needed for 'Ol d Blac k Joe.' Th e colored 
singers did the rest themselves." 
MISCELLANEOUS . 
A plan to admit colored citizens to the 
Overto n Par k zoo has been discussed by 
the Par k Commissio n of Memphis, 
Tenn., at a special meeting of the Par k 
COLOR LINE 101 
Board . Th e idea is that the Negroe s 
may be admitted on certain days, to be 
designated by the Par k Board , probably 
not oftener than twice a month, or possibly once a week. Th e chairman of the 
board believes that the colored children 
who are pupils in the city schools should 
be admitted when accompanied by their 
teachers, and that possibly other Ne ­
groes, upon obtaining special permission 
from the Par k Board , including the parents of the school children, might be 
admitted on these days without any 
danger of friction between the races. 
•3 Harrie t Tubman , the famous colored 
woman wh o helped so many slaves to 
escape before the Civi l War, has been 
taken to the Harrie t Tubma n Hom e for 
the Aged , whic h she founded in Rochester, to end her days. She is between 
95 and 100 years old. It is said she 
piloted over 300 slaves to freedom. She 
is now poor, but friends are collecting 
the money to pay for a nurse for her. 
<I Th e Woman's Suffrage'party has just 
appointed two colored wome n as election district captains in Ne w Yor k City . 
It is rumored that simila r appointments 
wil l follow in districts where the colored 
vote predominates. 
<J Tw o weeks ago a little colored boy 
was taken to Ne w Rochelle , N . Y. , and 
there abandoned. Pendin g a decision as 
to what should be done wit h him the 
child was .kept i n the police station 
whic h is in the same buildings wit h the 
other city departments of the town. H e 
heard the men complaining of the rats 
whic h were so large they frightened 
even the cat, and having nothing to do 
he secured a bit of cheese, fastened it 
to the end of a fishing line and dropped 
it down a rat hole. I n the three days 
he was kept in the police station he 
caught sixty-seven rats, and before he 
was sent off to an asylum he was taken 
to the mayor to be thanked for his 
services. A collection was taken up to 
buy him a little watch. 
«J O n her arriva l at a hotel in Ne w 
Yor k the other day a youn g lady from 
Savannah discovered that she had left 
three diamond rings, said to be wort h 
nearly $2,000 in a Pullma n car. She remembered having placed them on the 
ledge of the window near whic h she was 
sitting. She informed the room clerk 
of the hotel and he immediately called 
up the railroad company. O n her return 
from the theatre one night the owner 
of the rings was told that the porter 
of the Pullma n car had found the rings 
and that she woul d receive them at the 
hotel. Men of the Month 
REV . H . C. BISHO P 
O n June 4 the Episcopa l Churc h of 
St. Philip , Ne w York , celebrated the 
twenty-fifth anniversary of the induction 
EEV . H. C. BISHOP 
of its rector, the Rev. Hutchin s C. 
Bishop. This congregation recently 
moved to a new building uptown and the 
Rev. Mr . Bishop summed up its progress 
during the last quarter century: 
"I came to this church January 1, 1886, 
and found as well established a parish 
as in those times could be," he said. 
"Ther e was an intact corporation, services regularly maintained. Th e communicant list of 300 wit h 187 families represented a splendid foundation upon whic h 
to work. Ther e were two organizations. 
Th e oldest female assistants' society still 
lives and carries on its work ; St. Philip's 
Paris h Hom e for aged and infirm still 
exists and wit h measure of success. To ­
day the organizations are St. Philip's 
Youn g Men's Guild , Alta r Society, St. 
Christophe r Clu b (divided into three 
parts), the Brotherhoo d of St. Andrew , 
Paris h Hom e Auxiliary , Women's Aux ­
iliar y to the Boar d of Missions, Girls' 
Club and St. Agne s Clu b for youn g girls 
(divided into two parts). I have not 
been disposed to multipl y withou t need, 
but the result of wor k has brought these 
into being, and they have all lived save 
one, St. Ceceli a Society, a musica l society. Eac h organization is now a most 
efficient part of its existence. 
"I n my rectorship there have been 
baptisms, 551; confirmations, 1,088; marriages, 541; burials. 852; communicants 
number over 1,100; 650 in the Sunday 
school, wit h the average attendance of 
500; $1,025,328 has passed through the 
treasurers' hands. O f this sum $4,080 
has gone to missions, $48,000 for purchase of church in Twenty-fifth Street; 
$265,000 for present church and parish 
house; $199,856 for maintenance of the 
church during twenty-five years, and 
$513,000 expended on other property. 
Half of the whol e has gone to maintain 
the church buildin g proper. " 
ST. PHILIP'S CHURCH, NEW YORK MEN OF THE MONTH 103 
MB. H. H . ASQUITH 
TW O PRIM E MINISTER S 
It is of great interest to the friends of 
the First Universa l Races Congress to 
know that both the Righ t Hon . H . H . 
Asquit h and the Righ t Hon . Arthu r Bal ­
four, the leaders of the opposing politica l 
parties i n England , have consented to 
serve as vice-presidents of the congress 
and wil l be actively interested in its sessions. Th e list of honorary vice-presidents includes 110 members of the Hagu e 
court of arbitration, 27 heads of parliaments throughout the world , and 80 
rulers, ministers of state, governors and 
ambassadors. Fort y distinguished scholars, from 20 different countries, wil l read 
MB. A. J. BALFOUR 
papers. Th e congress wil l meet in Lon ­
don from Jul y 26 to Jul y 29. W e give 
the programme of the session of Jul y 28, 
when the Negr o problem i n various 
phases wil l be discussed: 
Th e South Africa n Native , Teng o 
Jabavo, Kingwilliamstown . Th e Africa n 
Problem, Edwar d Wilmo t Blyden , LL.D. , 
and Sir Harr y Johnston, G.C.M.G. , 
K.C.B. , D.Sc . Th e Negr o i n America , 
W . E . B . DuBois, Ph.D . Th e Negr o 
Problem in Relatio n to Whit e Women , 
Dr. France s Hoggan . Th e America n 
Indian, Dr. Charles A . Eastma n (Ohiyesa). Th e Mixe d Races of Brazil , Dr. 
Joao Baptiste de Lacerda , Directo r of 
the Nationa l Museum of Ri o de Janeiro. 
TH E VISION 
B y WILLIA M STANLE Y BRAITHWAIT E 
(McClure's Magazine for June.) 
YO U are the vision, yo u are the image of the dream, 
Th e voice amon g the stars, the silence in the stream; 
A breath of the infinite poise, where space and time are spun, 
An d the circlin g orbits whee l their planets round the sun. 
Beyon d the outer margi n where nothin g calls to Go d 
Leaps the fiery symbo l to bloom where your feet have trod ; 
Her e is the earth resurgent wit h color and bloom of spring, 
Gloryin g the dream and the vision in the song yo u bring. OPINIO N 
TH E OKLAHOM A DECISION . 
It is generally conceded that Judge 
Cotteral's decision that the Oklahoma 
"grandfather " clause is unconstitutiona l 
wil l result in an appeal to the Supreme 
Court. Most newspapers avoid discussion of the decision. Th e Indianapolis 
Star, however, cheers Judge Cottera l 
heartily: 
"His argument is to the effect that the 
powe r to grant the right to vote was .not 
given to the Federa l Government, but 
the Fifteenth Amendmen t decreed that 
the right to vote should not be denied 
any person because of 'race, color or 
previous condition of servitude.' T o 
make the subjection of certain individ ­
uals to the 'educational test' dependent 
on their condition before 1866 woul d 
make it dependent on their race and 
color, the Court held. 
"It is refreshing to find one court 
wit h courage and clear understanding 
enough to decide directly on the merits 
of the question and not evade it by ruling on a technicality. A n appeal wil l 
probably be taken, and the Supreme 
Court wil l hardly be able to evade decision when the question comes before it 
in this way. Should it sustain the Okla ­
homa court the ruling wil l affect all the 
other States where a simila r disfranchising law is in force. Th e point in dispute does not touch on the wisdom or 
unwisdom of Negr o suffrage, but of 
whether a State has the powe r to overrule the Federa l Constitution. Fo r the 
present, at least, Oklahoma wil l have to 
refrain from doing so." 
Th e Ne w Yor k Tribun e says: 
"It is time that restrictions on the suffrage whic h are apparently based solely 
on race and color should be passed on 
by the Federa l courts. Ther e is no good 
excuse for such restrictions, since any 
State wishin g to deny the ballot to the 
ignorant, the vicious or the defective can 
employ legitimate means to improve the 
character of its electorate. It can im ­
pose an educational or property qualification, levy a poll tax or insist on a lon g 
term of residence. But it is imperative 
that the restrictions imposed should apply equally to all voters, whatever their 
race or color. Ther e should be no discrimination in favor of the white illiterate or undesirable person and against 
the colored illiterate and undesirable. 
Eac h voter should stand on his own 
merit and owe nothing to the undemocratic distinction of family descent." 
Th e Richmon d (Va.) Times-Dispatc h 
quotes the Tribun e and then says 
frankly : 
"Qualified by the statement that we do 
not think that the colored man should 
have the right to vote, this being a white 
man's country, there is muc h force in 
what the Tribun e says—if the suffrage 
is to be placed on an educationa l qualification, that qualification should be enforced without discrimination . If the 
suffrage is wort h having, it is wort h win ­
ning. Ou r present purpose, however, is 
not to discuss the subject on this broad 
line, but simpl y to suggest that this is 
not the time—we do not think the time 
wil l ever come—for amendin g the Con ­
stitution as to the method of electing 
Unite d States Senators; particularly, is 
it not the time for Senators from the 
Southern States to open the wa y for a 
return of the day whe n we shall have 
to fight the Negr o question all over 
again. Ther e are about 4,000,000 [sic] 
Negroe s in the Unite d States, most of 
them in the South, and it woul d not be 
comfortable to have them takin g part in 
the election of Senators, should the Fed ­
eral cotfrts hol d to the doctrine of universal suffrage. It is wort h thinkin g 
about." 
TH E ALABAM A DECISION . 
Th e Bosto n Heral d refers to the admirable decision of the Supreme Court of 
Alabama , whic h has removed a sheriff 
wh o allowed his prisoner to be lynched, 
and says: 
"Th e Montgomer y Time s speaks of the 
decision being received wit h satisfaction 
by lovers of law enforcement and haters 
of lawlessness. An d it is fair to assume 
that it reflects the sober sentiment of 
the State, as the newl y elected Governor, 
Emmet t O'Neal , is responsible for pushin g the case. Nothin g wil l so help to 
make this a law-abidin g country as a 
widespread convictio n that Law is in ­
tended for enforcement. Alabama is to 
be congratulated on officials who, appreciating the gravity of the issue, have had 
the courage to take the righteous stand. 
Laxit y in the South has arisen in part 
from a failure to gauge the publi c opinion of the World. Th e people of that 
section no mor e lack 'a decent respect 
for the opinion of mankind ' than do 
others. The y have simpl y failed to take 
in the condemnation meted out to them 
by the civilized world. " OPINION 105 
Th e Atlant a Georgian says the sheriff 
deserves his disgrace. "N o sheriff, no 
officer of any kind , wh o woul d be guilty 
of such dishonorable conduct deserves to 
remain in office for one moment. Th e 
law is too sacred for it thus to be 
stabbed in the back by the very persons 
wh o have sworn to uphold and defend 
it." 
"TH E MA N FARTHES T DOWN. " 
Mr . Booke r T. Washington's articles 
in the Outloo k have received comment 
on both sides of the proposition that the 
Negr o in the South is better off than 
the European peasant. Some Southern 
papers have quoted the articles wit h 
brief observations of their own or none 
at all. Th e Ne w Yor k Tribune , however, 
goes into the question: 
"Dr . Washingto n says that he has 
been tremendously impressed by the fact 
that the masses of Southern Negroe s do 
not fully appreciate the advantages whic h 
they possess in livin g in a country where 
there is a constant demand for labor of 
all sorts. Furthermore , it is clear tha i 
they do not sufficiently appreciate the 
practical monopol y whic h they enjoy in 
a great labor market like the South's. 
Th e Southern landowne r has been educated to the use of Negr o labor. H e is 
more or less blin d to its shortcomings 
and is disposed to ignore its relative in ­
efficiency. Th e farmhand on the Southern cotton plantation and the roustabout 
on Southern wharves and steamboats 
are, considering the wor k they do, about 
the highest-paid laborers i n the Unite d 
States. The y represent an uneconomi c 
survival of hand labor in a worl d of 
labor-saving machinery. I n the field of 
domestic service the Southern Negr o 
has also a practica l monopoly . Colore d 
cooks, nurses, waiters and laundresses 
get good wages and have no white competition. The y are all well fed and well 
clothed and receive a degree of consideration whic h is not given elsewhere to 
household employees. 
"It is a fact little noticed by those who 
hol d that the America n Negr o does not 
have a fair chance industrially that the 
struggle for life, whic h is so fierce and 
so exhausting in many other parts of the 
world , hardly touches him at all if he 
stays South. . . . Th e lot of the aver 
age America n Negro , especially the Ne ­
gro of the South, is not worse than that 
of any other group of human beings of 
similar capacity. It is, on the contrary, 
one which, offers a relatively large proportion of comfort, opportunity and 
hope." 
Th e Mancheste r (England ) Guardia n 
finds the articles unscientific, but thinks 
it-extremel y pathetic that there should 
be any race so miserable as to be encouraged by the fact that it has not 
sunk so low . as a few of the most unhappy dwellers in the Londo n slums: 
"Th e first installment refers to the 
lowest types of Londoners, and Mr . 
Washingto n describes certain homeless 
and broken men hunting for garbage and 
begging under thin disguises than whom 
he has never seen anythin g more hopeless and wretched. H e docs not appear 
to have made any close social or economi c study of our problems, but an impression is not without its value even 
though there is not any basis of comparison between the lowest of the Negroes 
and the lowest of the Englishmen . H e 
does, however, find points of contrast; 
the Negr o 'is never without hope and a 
certain jo y in living, ' he can always find 
labor of some kind , and Mr . Washingto n 
has never heard of a Negr o dyin g from 
lack of food. W e have the fine institutions here, it seems, but though they 
may save us from wrongs which are suffered by the Negroe s of the Southern 
States they cannot always ensure bread. 
" A good deal is made of the fifty-two 
cases of positive starvation in Londo n 
during a year, and these are formidable 
enough if they are taken as an indication of the numbers wh o do not quite 
starve, but it seems that these extreme 
cases have a certain spectacular value. 
Mr . Washington's desire in investigating 
the state of the most degraded of Euro ­
peans is to render a service to his own 
race. 'Ther e are not a few Negroe s wh o 
sometimes become discouraged and feel 
that their condition and prospects are 
worse than those of any other group of 
human beings. I wanted to see groups 
of people wh o are much worse oft than 
the Negro, and, through detailing their 
condition, place such facts before the 
Negr o in Americ a as woul d make him 
feel and see that, instead of being the 
worst off, his condition and prospects 
are much better than those of millions 
of people wh o are in the same relative 
stage of civilization.' 
"This betrays a dreadfully unscientific 
spirit, and we should suppose that students of social conditions woul d look 
wit h suspicion on Mr . Washington's 
facts; but it is movin g and pathetic that 
a leader of a race should set out to find 
comfort for his fellows in the miseries 
of other races." 
Mr . John E . Milholland , whose reply 
to Mr . Washingto n in Englan d last summe r occasioned so much discussion, 
sends a lon g article to the Bosto n Guardian. H e refers to "platitudinous, narcotic deliverances " i n the Outlook , and 
then says, in part: 
"Wha t was the issue raised by him and 
discussed by me? Th e pauperism of 
London ? Certainl y not. Th e awful condition of the East End ? Nothin g of 
the kind . 
"Surely in this day no argument is necessary to prove that, all in all, the Ameri ­
can masses, black and white, are better 106 THE CRISIS 
off materially—that is, i n the matter of 
food and drink—than those of most old -
worl d nations. This is no longe r a 
debatable proposition. 
"It woul d have been more to the point 
had Mr . Washingto n drawn comparisons 
between our Negr o policy, or lack of it, 
and the treatment of its colored popula ­
tion by the Britis h people. Tha t woul d 
have been relevant and quite in order. 
I am mor e or less familia r wit h the 
troubles in India, real or imaginary ; of • 
the Egyptia n ambition for self-government I have, some knowledge , as well as 
of race relations in the West Indies and 
Canada ; and in the light of that knowledge I challenge Dr. Washingto n or 
any one else to deny that there is more 
oppression, injustice and cruelty witnessed i n Mississippi, the Carolina s and 
other States, Nort h as well as South, 
durin g one year than amon g all the 
300 colored million s of Indi a for a 
decade. 
"Whe n was an Egyptia n lynched by 
his Britis h neighbors? Whe n was a colored man in Hindusta n burned at the 
stake? Wha t disturbance do yo u hear 
of in Jamaic a and wh y is it that in the 
vast territory known as Britis h America , 
wit h all its mixe d races and Indian tribes, 
a few hundred policemen are sufficient 
to maintain as perfect order as exists 
throughout any rural region of the civilized world ? 
"O n one point I agree wit h Dr. Wash ­
ington, but it requires no 'official statistics' to convince people that Englis h pauperism is a dreadful thing. Th e Englis h 
people themselves realize it, and the unprecedented measure introduced recently 
in Parliament by the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer, and accepted in principl e by 
all politica l parties, evidences the national determination to grapple wit h the 
problem along the boldest lines, just as 
my old friend, Genera l Booth , of the Salvation Army , urged a quarter of a century ago. 
"Righ t here is afforded the real antithesis, the most strikin g contrast 
between the Britis h and our own 
government. 
"I n comparison with the statesmanlike 
efforts of Englan d to deal wit h this question, what have we to offer? Mo b murder without protest, lync h law as thoroughly established as though it were 
upon the statute books, . . . tria l by 
jur y suppressed, free speech denied, 
elections a farce and the Constitutio n in 
practica l operation a mere sectional 
document! 
"Mr . Washingto n acts wisely in pressing his comparisons between the nations 
no further than the poorhouse or the 
unfortunate tramps asleep on the 
Thame s Embankment, and it may alleviate the tortures of the next poor devil 
roasted at the stake down in Georgi a to 
kno w that fifty-two Englis h beggars 
starved to death, although they escaped 
his fate. 
"It may comfort the hundreds of petty 
offenders, wholl y innocent victims of 
perverted police justice, that are now 
forced to disgrace humanity and shame 
America n civilization , workin g by day 
in chain gangs and sleeping by night like 
beasts of the fields in stockades, to kno w 
that Englis h paupers do not always receive sufficient food to sustain life. 
"It may content the one hundred and 
fifty thousand disfranchised colored voters of Louisian a to kno w that whil e deprived of all the rights of citizenship 
guaranteed to them by the Constitutio n 
of the Unite d States, they nevertheless 
wil l have all the ho g and homin y that 
they want to eat, and, accordin g to Mr . 
Washington's version of the Scripture , 
I suppose that immorta l psalm wil l hereafter read, 'Ma n shall live by bread 
alone.' " 
MEXICO . 
In the June Everybody's Joh n A . 
Avirett e writes of "Dia z and His Peons. " 
H e says the revolution in Mexic o is a 
revolution of hungr y men wh o have been 
taught to read and think. 
"It is primaril y a wa r brought on by 
excessive and unequal taxation. Fo r 
years the taxes have steadily risen, until 
the poor can no longe r endure them. If 
a poverty-stricken peon eats his own pig 
he must pay a tax of two to three dollars 
for doin g so. If he happens to own a 
cow, and hunger compels him to eat 
her, he is taxed seven dollars. This alone 
is indictment enough- to damn any government on earth! " 
Mr . Avirett e thinks the abuses in Mex ­
ico were due to Diaz's advanced age and 
his dependence on those about him rather 
than to any inhumanit y in the old "benevolent despot," but the order he 
founded is forever gone. Wha t of this 
to us in the Unite d States? asks Mr . 
Avirette . 
"It is absolutely true that Mexican s 
view American s wit h dislike and suspicion, notwithstandin g all polite lies to 
the contrary. The y tolerate us for two 
principa l reasons. Th e first is that they 
are weake r than we are i n armed power. 
Th e second is that they need America n 
ability, energy and capital. 
"This dislike is racial and fundamental. 
Th e Anglo-Saxo n and the Indian have 
never understood each other. . Th e purposeful and resistless advance of the 
fo rmer has first dispossessed, and then 
exterminated, the latter. Th e average 
Mexica n is virtuall y an Indian and feels 
the menace to him of Mexico's Ameri ­
canization. Mexican s have never forgiven the wa r by whic h we American s 
forcibly took from them California , Ari -THE N. A. A. C. P. 107 
zona, Ne w Mexic o and Texas; nor did 
the service we rendered them in the 
elimination of Maximilia n balance our 
own earlier aggression. Lik e all the 
rest of the Spanish republics of Centra l 
and South America , they distrust the mo ­
tives that inspire us when we enforce 
the Monro e Doctrine . Fo r every intervention of ours to save a Venezuel a from 
oppression by a Europea n powe r they 
recall our share in the theft of a Panama 
from a Colombia . 
"It is also an unfortuante fact that our 
rough-and-ready citizens lack consideration for all dark-skinned races. W e 
deem them all inferiors. Th e expression 
Qf this contempt has estranged our Afro -
America n fellow citizens, has incensed 
our Mexica n neighbors, and may some 
day involve us in a bloody wa r wit h 
Japan. It is a truism that contempt begets hate, and hate violence. 
"Mexic o is officially our friend—that 
is, by governmenta l treaty. She is fundamentally our enemy, by reason of race 
differences, our former despoliation of 
her territory, and our contemptuous 
treatment of her citizens since, at all 
times. These are fundamental facts to 
be faced!" 
«J Senator Bailey , of Texas, recently 
made an oration in Washingto n i n the 
course of whic h he delivered himself of 
the followin g opinions: 
"The race question can be solved by 
our being just to the Negr o race, as long 
as they wil l permit it. I n fact, we should 
be generous wit h them, but we must surmoun t the difficulty of the Negroe s wh o 
want to go to the front door. Th e only 
way for the two races to live in peace 
to the end of time is for the Negr o 
race to live in recognition of their in ­
feriority. W e should be generous wit h 
the colored people, I repeat, but they 
must never expect a place at the white 
man's table. 
"Th e Indians, wit h whom the Anglo -
Saxons had to contend, refused to live 
in peace wit h their white neighbors. A s 
a result of this, they were forced to the 
east and west coasts of their forme r 
dominions, and are now seeing the extinction of their race, as they gaze at 
the setting sun". If the Africa n race 
repeats the folly of the red men, they 
wil l share their fate." 
<J Th e Natura l Histor y Museum of this 
city has had an expedition in the Cong o 
forests collecting specimens in natural 
history and anthropology. "Th e report 
from the anthropologist, " says the In ­
dependent, of Ne w York , "has this to 
say of one family of Negroes—'savages,' 
remember, an 'inferior' race: 
."'Th e Mangbet u excel in their iron 
work ; indeed, their well-forged and 
finely worke d knives are masterpieces" of 
Negr o blacksmithing. Their pottery in 
its best samples reminds one of ancient 
Greek work. In producing well-balanced 
forms of artistic finish they show a very 
high development. Their carved and 
ornamented stools, benches, figures and 
shields, and their hatpins of ivor y may 
well be classed amon g works of art.' 
"Tha t is, these Negroe s compare wel l 
in their artistic culture wit h the Greeks 
of a period not lon g before Pericles, 
and are far superior to the Germans and 
Gauls before Roma n civilization reached 
them. " 
TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
Th e lawye r wh o acted for the N . A . 
A . C. P. ,in the case of Henr y Graham, 
arrested at Lakewood , Ne w Jersey, in 
connection wit h the murde r of Mrs. 
Turner, sends the followin g report to 
the Chairma n of the Executiv e Com ­
mittee: 
Ma y 19, 1911. 
M R . OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD : 
I left Ne w Yor k Tuesday night, Ma y 
16. O n Thursda y night, Ma y 18, 
Graham had been released from jail 
without a resort to legal proceedings 
being necessary and was on his way to 
his home in Lakewood . 
M y investigation in the latter place 
on Ma y 17 convinced me that the only 
case whic h the State had against Graham 
in connection with this murder was that 
he was the only man who up to that 
time was known to have been near the 
scene of the crime at the time of its 
commission. H e was intoxicated that 
mornin g and his story as to his move ­
ments on that day and the next contained 
numerous discrepancies. Whil e there is 
nothin g illega l in thus lockin g up a suspected person against whom a circumstantial case only, such as here, is made 
out, I feel sure that Graham was suspected and arrested in this case mainl y 108 THE CRISIS 
because he was a colored man, and it is 
precisely this discrimination between a 
black man and a white whic h we are 
tryin g to break up. 
Graham, therefore, because he was colored and because there was no one else 
upon who m to fasten the crime, was 
locked up in the Tom s Rive r jail as a 
materia l witness and was examined the 
first night by the public prosecutor and 
the detectives. Fro m that night, however, he was left alone and received 
kin d treatment. H e had just recovered 
from an attack of pneumonia, and as he 
was not wel l he was given all the medical attention whic h was necessary. I 
am able to state positively that there 
has been no element of the "thir d degree" in this case. 
O n Wednesda y evening I proceeded 
to Toms River, and in the absence of 
the public prosecutor, Mr . Theodor e J. 
R. Brown , I saw his assistant, Mr . W . 
Howar d Jeffrey. Yo u wil l be mor e than 
pleased to kno w that Mr . Jeffrey recalled at once the wor k of the Nationa l 
Associatio n in connection wit h the Asbury Par k and Georgetown cases, which 
he said had been noted by the crimina l 
authorities throughout this section of 
the State. H e intimated that he hadanticipated my arriva l in connection wit h 
this case, and that Graham had been 
treated accordingly. 
A s a matter of professional courtesy 
he requested me not to take any steps 
lookin g towar d the release of Graham 
until he could place me in touch wit h 
the prosecutor himself. W e reached the 
prosecutor in Ne w Yor k by. telephone 
next morning , and he made an appointment to see me in Toms Rive r at noon. 
Mr . Jeffrey went up by the early morn ­
ing train to meet him. 
Mr . Brow n failed to arrive in Toms 
Rive r by the noon train, and as I was 
waitin g in m y hotel for the arriva l of 
the .next train, the sheriff came in and 
informed me that Mr . Brow n had rushed 
over from Lakewoo d by automobile and 
had stayed just lon g enough to release 
Graham, and to leave the message for 
me that Graham woul d not be molested 
again unless a genuine case was made 
out against him. Graham in the meantime had started to walk twelve miles to 
Lakewood . This was about 4:30 on 
Thursda y afternoon. I learned in Lake -
woo d last night that Graham's wife had 
heard from him and was expecting him 
in the course of the evening. I arranged 
wit h Mr . Matthews, the colored ministe r 
in Lakewood , to inform Dr. DuBois or 
myself of any further developments in 
the case unfavorable to Graham. 
C. AME S BROOKS . 
Th e followin g letter, received from the 
accused man and his wife, we feel that 
we should share wit h the friends of the 
Nationa l Association : 
LAKEWOOD , N . J., Ma y 29, 1911. 
DR . W . E . B . DUBOIS : . 
DEA R SIR — Yo u will please pardon me 
for not writin g before this, but I have 
been in a state of jo y and gladness to 
the extent of my life until I could not 
compose myself to write . I wis h to 
thank yo u and the firm whic h yo u represent of law and the representative whic h 
yo u sent down to Tom s River, N . J., 
and secured my husband's (Henr y 
Graham) freedom from the charge of 
knowin g something of the death of one 
Mrs. Charle s T. Turner, whos e body 
was found here in the wood s i n April . 
M y husband was innocent and yo u 
proved him to be as soon as yo u took 
up the case. H e and I wis h to thank 
yo u again for you r kindness and good 
wor k done. I shall make a donation to 
the firm, that the good wor k may go on. 
Everythin g is quiet now, and though my 
husband has been sick since comin g 
home he is better now. An d whe n I 
leave this land for heaven, m y home, I 
wil l you, and this deed of justice, remember. Wit h best wishes, I remain, 
Yours very truly, 
ANNI E and HENR Y GRAHAM . 
Th e horribl e lynchin g at Lak e City , 
Florida , was at once investigated by the 
Association . Th e followin g account was 
secured from a prominent educator in 
Florida , and was sent to forty papers, 
in various parts of the country : 
Secretary of the Nationa l Associatio n 
for the Advancemen t of Colore d 
People : 
In reply to you r note seeking informa ­
tion as to the facts in the case of the 
Lak e City , Fla. , murde r on the 20th inst., 
I beg to make the followin g statement 
of facts as far as I have been able to 
learn them: 
Th e apparent origi n of the trouble was 
a neighborhood quarrel between a white 
man and a Negr o over a trivia l matter 
resulting in a murderous assault on the 
part of the whit e ma n upon the Negr o 
wh o took the pistol away from his assailant. Th e matter came up in the 
Justice of the Peace Court, i n whic h 
the Negr o was exonerated. 
It appears that the whit e ma n (or 
men) renewed the quarrel, even to the 
extent of entering the yar d of the Negr o 
(Norris by name), where the shooting 
affray occurred, resulting in the death 
of one whit e man and in the woundin g 
of another. Norris and his associates 
(members of his immediate famil y and THE N. A. A. C. P. 109 
a few neighbors) stood guard over the 
body of the dead man, allowin g no one 
to approach except the dead man's wife, 
until the sheriff arrived to who m he and 
his companions surrendered. 
He , together wit h two sons, son-inlaw and two neighbors were brought to 
the Tallahassee jail, fifteen miles from 
the scene of the trouble. Fearin g mob 
violence, the sheriff, contrary to the advice of the Governo r it appears, sent 
them to the Liv e Oa k jail, eighty miles 
away, where they stayed one night only. 
Thenc e they were taken to Lak e City , 
106 miles from Tallahassee and 26 miles 
from Liv e Oak . 
B y ruse as per telegraphic reports, 
these six men were taken from the jail 
and shot to death in the suburbs of the 
town by a dozen men—three automobile 
loads of persons unknown and from unknown places. O f course the air is full 
of rumors; but, like rumors, the informa ­
tion given is more or less unreliable. 
Th e upper Hous e of the Legislature , 
now in session, has voted a reward of 
$5,000 for the arrest wit h evidence to 
convict the guilty parties. It is more 
than probable that the lowe r Hous e wil l 
concur. 
Th e better elements of the whites 
throughout the State are thoroughly 
aroused over this especially heinous 
crime ; and it may be that there wil l be 
a serious effort made to brin g the assassins into court. These are the bare 
facts inth e case, as I have been able to 
gather them from conversation and from 
loca l papers. 
O n Ma y 31 a numbe r of organizations, 
includin g the Nationa l Association , represented by Dr. Wm . A . Sinclair, secured 
an audience wit h President Taft and presented a resolution against lynching . 
Afte r detailing the series of terrible 
lynchings—eleven in three weeks—"-that 
had been permitted in the South, the 
resolution declared: 
"W e believe that the time has come 
when the Chie f Executiv e of the nation 
—into whose hands have been committed 
the enforcement of the laws and the 
preservation of the rights of all the people—should call the attention of Congress 
to this awful reign of lawlessness and 
murder, and recommend that appropriate 
legislation be enacted for the protection 
of life, liberty and property in every part 
of the Unite d States, as the State governments seem impotent to render such 
protection. 
"An d we woul d urgently implor e your 
excellency to send a special message to 
Congress, asking that such action be 
taken, as wil l remove this foul blot whic h 
impeaches our civilization, our Christianity and the honor of our nation. " 
Th e President assured the committee 
that he could do nothing, and that the 
matter must be left to the individua l 
States. 
Th e Committe e on Federa l Ai d to 
Educatio n has reported through its 
chairman, Dr. Wm . H . Maxwell , that 
acceptances to serve on a committee to 
consider the whol e question of Federa l 
aid have been received from Prof. Joh n 
Dewey, Rev. Frederic k Lynch , Mr . Joh n 
E . Milholland , Dr. Charle s H . Park -
hurst, Miss Lillia n D . Wald , Dr . Owe n 
M . Walle r and Dr. Stephen S. Wise . 
Dr. Maxwel l wil l call a meeting in the 
early autumn, and ask the members to 
present a plan for wor k to the Executiv e 
Committee . 
Th e Directo r of Publicit y and Re ­
search made, during the month of May , 
a lecture tour whic h took him as far 
west as Denver. H e spoke at Wheeling, Cincinnati, St. Louis and Colorad o 
Springs, addressing in all from three to 
four thousand people, and receiving considerable attention from the press. H e 
is now in Englan d for the Universa l 
Races Congress. H e has acted for that 
body as the America n secretary for the 
colored races, and wil l give the address 
at the Congress on the Negr o in the 
Unite d States. 
Before sailing Dr. DuBois had made 
several other engagements to speak on 
race matters in London . H e wil l address 
the West Londo n Ethica l Society, the 
Subject Races International Committe e 
and the Libera l Club , and he wil l be 
entertained at dinner by the Lyceu m 
Club. Th e Races Congress opens Jul y 25. 
Mr . W . deForest Brush , the wellknow n Ne w Yor k artist, received a few 
weeks ago a call from a youn g colored 
lad wh o asked if he might show him 
some water-color paintings that he had 
made at his home near Charleston, 
W . Va . Th e boy produced his pictures, 
whic h Mr . Brus h at once saw showed 
nothing short of genius. Withou t any 
instruction, except such knowledge of 
colors as came to him through his trade 
of sign painter, the Doy produced wor k 
of great delicacy, beauty and truthfulness. Mr . Brus h wishes to teach the lad 
himself, and the Associatio n is raising 
money to support the boy during his 
years of instruction. 
Th e Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holme s is 
arranging a meeting for the centenary 
of Wendel l Phillips's birth, Nov . 29, 1911, 
at Plymout h Church , Brooklyn . Mr . 
Charle s Edwar d Russell wil l be one of 
the speakers. 
Th e Ne w Yor k branch, of whic h Prof. 
J. E . Spingarn is chairman, is formin g a 
Cit y Vigilanc e Committee , wit h Mr . Gil ­
christ Stewart at its head. 110 THE CRISIS JULY, 1911 111 
Young Men's Christian Association Basketball Team 
at Washington D. C. This team mas never defeated. EDITORIA L 
TH E FLAG . 
REPRESENTATIVE S from a 
number of organizations concerned with securing justice 
to the Negro—among them the N . A . 
A . C. P.—called upon President Taft 
the other day in regard to the recent 
lynchings in Kentucky, Florida , Georgia and Oklahoma. In view of the 
fact that Negroes had been murdered 
at an average of one a day, the 
committee respectfully asked that the 
President call the attention of Con ­
gress to this reign of lawlessness and 
that appropriate legislation be enacted. 
The President received the delegates 
with every courtesy, but assured them 
that the matter of lynching must be 
left entirely to the individual States. 
There is a side to this doctrine of 
States rights not without interest. A 
black man finds his status in the 
United States safer if he is a British 
subject than if he is an American 
citizen. Thus, a colored woman, 
entering the country a year ago, was 
subjected to grave indignities until 
it was learned that her husband was 
a Britisher, when the attitude toward 
her at once changed and she was 
given due consideration. It would 
be a matter for Federal interference 
if black British subjects were taken 
from jail and used as quarry by 
hunting gentlemen, but black American citizens, unable to appeal to the 
Unio n Jack, are assured that the 
Stars and Stripes have no power to 
protect them from serving as living 
targets or from slowly burning at the 
stake. 
ALLIES . 
OCCASIONALL Y we find in 
the columns of a national 
press, which as a rule regards 
the wrongs of colored citizens as 
"stale news" not worth printing, some 
really splendid argument in support 
of the militant position taken by this 
Association. What, for instance, 
could be more gratifying than this? 
It is a reprimand from the Commander-in-Chief of the army, the President himself, to a colonel who failed 
to advance a man on account of a 
prejudice against his race: 
"The President directs the Secretary of Wa r to inform Col . Garrard 
that his attitude in this matter is 
strongly disapproved as contrary to 
the ideals and principles of this 
country. 
"Such procedure indicates not only 
prejudice that should not be found 
i n an officer of his position and experience, but amounts to a failure to 
justly and fairly consider the merits 
and claims of the applicant as shown 
by his efficient service and excellent 
standing in the mental examinations. 
"Col . Garrard has been admonished 
to avoid a repetition of the action 
taken in this case." 
An d read this argument against 
disfranchisement. Does it not deal 
clearly and comprehensively with the 
matter? It is the Saturday Evening 
Post of Philadelphia which speaks:. 
"Fo r a hundred years they have 
been demonstrating that they know 
how to fight; and the last century of 
history shows that ability to fight, 
without some political ability, does a 
people little good. Afte r each victory 
they remain, as before, subject to 
whatever mere luck may bring them 
of good or bad in a ruler. Excludin g 
a people from politics . . . because 
they are politically inexperienced, is 
of a piece with keeping a child out 
of the water because he doesn't know 
how to swim. " 
How , then, has our cause gained 
two great allies? Is the fold larger 
by two wandering • sheep ? Not so, 
reader. Be not too lifted up. President Taft was dealing with the case 
of a Jewish soldier and the Saturday EDITORIAL 
Evenin g Post was speaking of 
Mexico . 
Yo u see, our Jewish citizens have 
votes, and as to Mexico , does not 
charity begin abroad? Good luck to 
the Jews—they are our best friends, 
and we rejoice to see them getting 
out of the Ghetto the Negro is just 
getting into. Good luck to our Indian brother in Mexico—ma y he find 
friends on every side. But it does 
seem odd that the rules of justice 
and logic should never apply in the 
case of the colored man right here 
in the United States. 
LEADERSHIP . 
A T the closing exercises of the 
privately endowed schools for 
Negroes you are impressed 
with the large number of graduates 
who tell you that they are prepared 
to return to the homes of their childhood, there to become leaders of their 
race. An d judging from the past, 
this prophecy wil l not be without fulfilment. Instead of going to a new 
land to seek their fortunes, like white 
boys and girls who have had similar 
advantages, many of these colored 
youths will return to the narrow, ugly 
surroundings of their former homes. 
They will sacrifice their personal 
pleasure for what they believe to be 
the good of the race. 
One cannot fail to applaud this 
missionary spirit, but zeal is discounted when it is coupled with an 
egregious sense of self-importance, 
and this unfortunate combination is 
not infrequent. " I leave these beloved walls," the valedictorian says, 
with a fine sweep of the hand, "to 
return to. my native home and become a leader of my people. I shall 
lift them out of the bondage of ignorance into the blessings of to-day." 
Wit h this glorious resolve he returns 
to his people, and before the year is 
out is counted a nuisance by his 
fellow townsmen. He went as a missionary where he had not been in ­
vited, and he had not the insight to 
see that he must be taught by his 
neighbors before he attempted to 
teach them. 
Mr . T. Thomas Fortune has written admirably on the danger of the 
overemphasis of leadership. "Lif t up 
yourself first," is the gist of his argument. An d while appreciating to its 
fullest the fine desire for helpfulness 
on the part of the young, educated 
Negro, we believe that, as far as possible, he should discount his own in ­
fluence and his own place in the community as he goes about his life of 
service. Wha t he needs is to gather 
about him those men and women in 
the community of best ability and 
highest power, to encourage all that 
is strong and virile in his comrades, 
to forget himself as he brings out the 
latent ability in others. If, on the 
other hand, he asserts his leadership, 
the people who could best help him 
wil l stand aside, and he will find himself surrounded only by the second 
rate and commonplace. 
That service is best that is not 
overwrapped with self-importance, and 
that leader is greatest who, like Lin ­
coln, is not self-appointed, but is 
chosen by the people of a democracy. 
TH E HIG H SCHOOL . 
TH E city of St. Louis has recently built a new colored 
high school. The story of 
the accomplishment of this great work 
reads like a bit of intrigue at the 
court of the later kings of France— 
of so great difficulty is it for colored 
men to get the least public recognition. 
Fo r years the colored high school 
was housed in the worst part of St. 
Louis, in the midst of white prostitutes and liquor dives; for years the 
colored people had to be content 
'with cast-off white schoolhouses and 
inferior accommodations. Finally, repeated appeals for a larger and better high school brought a decision 
on the part of the Board of Educa ­
tion to enlarge the old school. 
A vigilance committee of six colored men, headed by Charles H . 
Dodge, was formed and they brought 
in so strong a petition that the board 
hesitated. They could not find or 
afford a site for a new school, they 114 THE CRISIS 
complained. The committee of si " 
found a site, but two small property 
owners would not yield. The committee of six sat up half the night 
with them and finally themselves paid 
the difference in price out of their 
own pockets. 
Then the white neighbors rose in 
arms. The newspapers flamed, and 
meetings were held to keep the Negro 
schoolhouse out of decent quarters; 
finally it was planned to seize the proposed site for a park. The matter 
came to a vote, the Negroes 'rallied, 
and the project was defeated. (Does 
the black man need the ballot?) 
A t last all was arranged when the 
chairman of the committee of six was 
told confidentially that the board 
stood six to six on the project of the 
new Negro high school, and that 
unless a certain man was won over 
all was lost. Dodge went to see the 
man. The gentleman's secretary refused him admission. Dodge went 
to another man and got a letter. The 
vote stood seven to five, and black 
St. Louis got a one-hundred-thousanddollar high school, the best-equipped 
school of its kind in the country. 
Moral—Heave n and St. Louis help 
them who help themselves. 
DISCRIMINATION . 
ANORTHER N paper defends 
race discrimination in this 
wise : 
" A Negro is good enough to associate with a Negro. If not, why not? 
Wh y is not a 'Jim Crow' car good 
enough for a Negro to ride in if it 
is just as good as the cars used by 
white people? Wh y is not a colored 
church good enough for a colored 
congregation ? Wh y is not a colored 
school good enough for colored children ? To say that they are not is 
to join Governor Vardaman in declaring that Negroes are an inferior and 
criminal people." 
A - red-headed man is good enough 
to associate with red-headed men ; all 
persons with bald heads might be 
made to ride in 'special coaches; all 
Irishmen could be forced to go to 
the Irish school; cripples might be 
debarred from Grace Church—wh y 
not? Because the color of neither 
hair nor skin, no merely physical 
peculiarity and no merely racial difference, is sufficient to be made a 
basis of far-reaching and positive 
discrimination and segregation in a 
democratic government; it is silly, 
and dehumanizing. 
If Scotch or Negro or Wels h 
people wish to unite in their own 
churches or schools that is their business ; but to force them to do so is 
unchristian and uncivilized. If a 
separation on a basis of ignorance 
throws more Italians in one group 
than in another, that is a matter of 
learning, not of blood, and can be 
cured by schools. But for a sane, 
decent American here in the twentieth 
century to encumber his paper with a 
defense of caste and discrimination 
based on nothing more than race and 
color shows the moral plane on which 
a ' certain class of Americans are 
living. 
TH E CORONATION . 
GEORG E V . has been duly 
crowned King , Emperor and 
so forth. There was not at 
the coronation any special attempt, 
we understand, to emphasize the fact 
that the British Empir e is predominantly colored. 
The typical America n is an octoroon or, counting the islands, a mulatto ; but the typical Britisher is only 
one-eighth white. O f the 450,000,000 
of beings under the Unio n Jack only 
54,000,000 are white. Nex t to them 
come 300,000,000 yellow, brown and 
black Asiatics, and Britis h Afric a 
with perhaps 100,000,000 blacks and 
mixed bloods. 
The coming worl d man is colored. 
Fo r the handful of whites in this 
world to dream that they with their 
present declining birth rate can ever 
inherit the earth and hold the darker 
millions in perpetual subjection is the 
wildest of wil d dreams. Humanity is 
the goal of all good, and no single 
race, whatever its color or deeds, can 
disinherit God's anointed peoples. FAMOUS COLLECE ATHLETES 115 
TH E PREPARATION OF COLLEGE ATHLETE S 
Team of the Armstrong High School, Washington, D. C. 
Th e Colored College Athlet e 
B y EDWI N B . HENDERSO N 
Physical Director M Street and Armstrong High Schools, Washington, D. C, 
Th e colored college athlete of the past' 
and present bears an enviable reputation. 
His athletic prowess has brought him 
fame, his skill and courage have gained 
for him the respect and admiration of 
thousands, and it is impossible to overestimate the effect of his career upon the 
minds of thousands of American s wh o 
have seen him perform or have read of 
his doings. Th e path of the Negr o athlete is not strewn wit h roses. H e must 
fight the prejudiced attacks of Negro -
haters, whose methods are low and despicable. Fraternitie s often rule and 
hamper his efforts, so that in nearly all 
cases where he does wi n out his superiority is made evident beyond the slightest doubt. Nearl y every Negr o athlete 
of prominenc e in college has been a gentleman, has wor n his honors wit h mod ­
esty, and has gained respect by playin g 
the game and ignorin g the taunts of prejudiced opponents. 
Whe n competent physica l directors 
and equal training facilities are afforded 
the colored youth the white athlete wil l 
find an equal or superior in nearly every 
line of athletic endeavor. Th e native 
muscular development and vitality of the 
Negr o of the South, if directed in channels of athletic activities, woul d lowe r 
many records now standing, and our 
leaders should grasp the situation and 
develop agencies to conserve the vita l 
forces of the race. Physica l training, 
includin g athletics, should be a well-outlined course in every school for colored 
youth ; it should not be thrown into the 
hand of inexperienced student control, 
but should be developed under the direction of a department of physica l education. A t least one organization, the In -
terscholastic Athleti c Associatio n of the 
Middl e Atlanti c States, exists for the purpose of spreading the doctrine of sound 
health for colored people, and has prob -116 THE CRISIS 
ably done more to build up amateur athletics for the race than any other agency. 
T o wi n a college letter in a . major 
sport is the highest honor that can befall 
an athlete. N o mor e than fifteen men 
M. W. BULLOC K 
A Dartmouth Football Hero. 
out of a school roll of 5,000 can hope to 
wi n the honor at Harvar d on the football field during a season, only twelve 
or fifteen may aspire to the baseball 
honor, whil e the track honor is wo n by 
fewer athletes. Man y colored athletes 
have achieved this distinction. 
• Hon . Willia m H . Lewis, now Assistant 
Attorne y General, is considered by many 
the best center the game of football has 
known . H e wo n his letter at Amherst, 
and captained the team. A t Harvar d his 
greatest reputation as a center rush was 
attained, and during a game wit h the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania , he was captain of the great Harvar d eleven. Na ­
poleon Marshall , a lawye r of Washing ­
ton, D . C., was a runner of no mean 
ability, and wo n his letter in track wor k 
at Harvard . Matthews, the famous 
shortstop, was undoubtedly the best man 
on the baseball team at Harvar d Uni ­
versity, and many a game was wo n 
through his wor k wit h the stick. 
Ever y Universit y of Pennsylvani a 
student and alumnus knows of the late 
Joh n B. Taylor, the runner whose record 
for the quarter mil e of 48 4-5 seconds 
still stands untouched. Dr. Howar d 
Smith , of Baltimore , was anchor man on 
the famous two-mil e relay team of the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania . Ernest 
Marshall , now physica l director at How ­
ard University , was captain of the Exete r 
track team, and wo n his William s Col ­
lege letter as a membe r of the football 
team. Amherst has ever owe d a large 
part of her fame to colored men. W . T. 
S. Jackson, of M Street Hig h Schoo l in 
Washington , wo n his letter in football, 
baseball and on the track. His record 
for the half mil e and quarter mil e stood 
for many years as a school mark. 
"Heine " Bullock , of Andover, was considered one of the greatest fullbacks ever 
seen, and was a star track performer. 
Charley Watkin s was another high-class 
football player at Andover. 
T o suit many purposes Johnson , the 
famous Carlisl e quarterback of Glen n 
Warner's redskin eleven, whose generalship caused the overthrow of man y a big 
four team, was not generally known to 
be a Negro . In the Universit y of Ver ­
mont a colored lad, Watkin s by name, 
was captain of the football team. Ayler, 
of Brown , more than once thrilled the 
souls of thousands of Brow n men wit h 
spectacular dashes and tackles on the 
gridiron. U p in the Hanoveria n hills 
N. B. MARSHALL 
Who Distinguished Himself on Harvard's 
Track Team 
Matthew Bulloc k was a hero for four 
years. H e was undoubtedly one of the 
best end rushes that Dartmout h has ever 
had, and his fame wil l live in the hearts 
of Dartmout h men. FAMOUS COLLEGE ATHLETES 117 
WILLIAM C. MATTHEWS' 
Harvard's Famous Shortstop 
In the West, Oberli n College has had 
need of the skill, brawn and brains of 
the Negro . Merto n Robinso n for three 
years wo n the college letter, as catcher 
on the baseball nine, and last year his 
younger brother, Howard , finished a 
three years' position as catcher. These, 
two brothers are the only colored men 
who have played on the baseball team. 
W . Washingto n was a celebrated halfback on the . Oberli n team back in the 
nineties, and Pa t Brow n was given the 
record of tfie best guard in Ohi o last 
year. Principa l Ed . C. Williams, of M 
Street Hig h School, of Washington , was 
a star college baseball player, and his 
feats on the diamond still live in the 
memory of the athletes of Wester n .Reserve. H e also wo n the century event 
in impressive fashion as a track athlete. 
Da n Fairfa x and Te d Green were two 
college athletes whose fame as gridiron 
warriors was heralded throughout Ohio . 
Minnesot a State College lends a bright 
star to the array of football lights; Marshall, all-western end for two years and 
head coach of the Minnesot a team, was 
one of the most versatile of all players 
of the Wester n Conference teams. 
Jewett, back i n the nineties, was the 
great fullback of the Michiga n Uni ­
versity team. 
O f the Negroe s in the limelight today, we have at Harvar d a man whose 
feats wil l soon brin g him into public 
notice. This athlete. Cable, has done 
157 feet wit h the hammer, 26 seconds in 
the low hurdles, and over 21 feet wit h 
the broad jump. 
Leonar d Lapslc y at the Universit y 
has had the grit and nerve to withstand 
the attacks of race prejudice, and is 
showin g good form in the sprint events. 
Fre d White , of the Universit y of Penn ­
sylvania, during the past season captured 
first place in the fifty-yard dash at the 
indoor games of the Middl e Atlanti c 
A . A . U. , held on Young's Pier, in 
Atlanti c City . 
Joh n Pinkctt, of Amherst, is an athlete 
whose ability has overshadowed all 
others in athletic performances. Tw o 
years ago he was the only man at his 
college to wi n a place i n the Ne w Eng ­
land Intercollegiates, and for two seasons has been considered the best man 
in Ne w Englan d playin g center. His 
playin g has compared favorably wit h his 
famous predecessor, Lewis. E d Gray , of 
Howar d University, another former M 
Street Hig h School boy, created a sensation during his stay at Amherst by 
being chosen the third all-America n halfback, and is now considered the best 
halfback in the South. 
Ther e are many colored athletes in the 
secondary schools and colleges of the 
South whose names wil l yet find a place 
wit h the names of former great athletes 
on the roll of honor. 
P 
LEONARD LAPSLE Y 
Of the University of Michigan THE CRISIS 
JOHN PINKETT 
Of Amherst 
In Washingto n there are a few scholastic athletes soon bound to be heard 
of in collegiate circles. H . B. Desmon d 
and Henr y George, of Howar d Academy ; 
James Burwell , of Armstron g Technica l 
Hig h School, and Cyru s Miller, of M 
Street Hig h School, have registered 
times and distances equivalent to the 
best marks done by secondary school 
athletes in these States. Baltimor e and 
Washingto n have organized public 
schools athletic leagues of youn g colored Americans, whic h wil l result in an 
even better class of athletes in the future. 
Schools for colored youth are slowl y 
realizing the necessity for physica l trainin g as a means of preserving healthy conditions amon g students and of creating 
school traditions whic h add to the powe r 
of these institutions for good. Baseball 
and football teams alone have occupied 
the athletic field in our colored colleges 
in the past, but now in man y places 
other branches of athletics ,are takin g 
root. Competitio n is getting keener and 
better athletes are resulting. 
"Mat " Bullock , now instructing at At ­
lanta Baptist College , is responsible for 
the collegiate track meets held for the 
past three years i n Atlanta , whil e men 
like W . A . Joiner, G . C. Wilkinson , R. N . 
Mattingly , W . A . DeCatu r are responsible for the splendidly controlle d system 
of athletics conducted in the Middl e At ­
lantic States through the co-operation of 
the schools composin g the Interscholastic Athleti c Association . 
Amon g the leading collegiate athletes 
of the schools in this section are many 
whose ability places them in the ranks of 
the stars of the country. Terry , of How ­
ard University , as halfback; Barco , formerl y of Unio n Universit y an d Howar d 
University , as a quarterback and shortstop; Branch , a tackle of Lincol n Uni ­
versity, and Oliver, a crack basketball 
forward of Howar d University , have but 
few peers. 
Ou r universities and colleges have 
been hampered through the general ig ­
norance existin g in regard to the value 
and place of physica l education in institutions of learning, but conditions are 
now improving . Whe n Howar d University, Lincol n University , Hampto n Institute, Shaw Universit y and Southern colleges decide to adopt rules of eligibility 
EDWARD GRAY 
Of Howard THE LITTLE KINGDOM OF SALT 119 
of players in line wit h more modern 
schools, and when athletics are assured 
a fitting place in the curriculum of school 
work, the Negr o college athlete wil l 
measure stride for stride wit h the record 
holders of the worl d in all classes of athletic performance. Le t our leaders encourage development in this field and no 
race wil l show to better advantage in 
fair and clean competition. 
TH E M STREET HIGH SCHOOL TEAM, WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Many of these boys are now distinguishing themselves in college athletics 
Th e Littl e Kingdom of Salt 
I
N TH E heart of the desert of Sahara 
there is a tiny oasis, about six miles 
lon g and two broad. Her e lives 
and prospers a curious community 
of black men whose little kingdom has 
hardly ever been visited by the whites. 
The y number only about 600, and are 
hundreds of miles from any other civilization, but they are quite content, for 
they possess what is to them inexhaustible wealth in their salt wells. Just as. 
vessels stop at little coaling stations, so 
great caravans of' camels stop at the 
oasis of Agra m and take up the salt in 
return for provisions and other necessities. Sometimes as many as 14,000 
camels a year halt there on their way 
across the desert. 
Commandan t Mowret , commande r of 
the Twenty-first Regiment of the Frenc h 
Colonia l Infantry, has contributed to the 
Mond e Illustre of Paris a most interesting account of this odd little spot. H e 
says when the massive outlines of an immense caravan are discerned in the distance the natives of the village are ecstatic wit h joy. Lif e and abundance are 
approaching. Durin g the two or three 
days that the caravan tarries they are 
assiduously courted and feted. 
Th e business of barter is carried on at 
the salt wells and in the village all is 
bustle and animation, by night and by 
day, while the salt is being made up into 
packages and loaded. A n extraordinary 
uproar fills the air, compounded of the 
sounds of singing, dancing and quarreling, the loud beat of the tom-tom, 120 THE CRISIS 
and the strange groans and cries of the 
thousands of camels tethered against the 
walls of the village , which , by the way, 
is called Zinder. The n the merchants 
depart and the oasis settles into its 
forme r peace and calm. 
Bu t there is a constant fear of less 
attractive visitors—marauders eager to 
A MERCHANT OF TH E DESERT 
despoil the villagers of their wealth. Th e 
inhabitants of Fach i have adopted an .organization whic h is strikingl y original, 
and, Commandan t Mowre t believes, not 
to be found anywhere else in Blac k 
Africa . It effectually protects them from 
disaster. 
Withi n the interior of the village they 
have built a vast rectangular enclosure 
flanked by a tower at each corner. This 
rectangle is about 240 feet long by 150 
feet wide. Th e walls are some 36 feet 
high and 12 feet thick at the base. These 
walls are built wit h stones brought from 
the rock y mountains whic h border the 
oasis on the east, mixe d with natron 
from the salt wells and even with blocks 
of salt, the whole cemented wit h clay. 
Loo p holes run alon g the walls and the 
facades of the towers. In the interior 
of the inclosure a covered gallery is built 
along the whol e of the inner walls. In 
the center of the open court thus in ­
closed is a well givin g abundance of 
fresh water. 
Withi n this court are rows of sundried earthen vessels in the form of 
huge jars provided wit h lids made of 
clay or ingeniously plaited straw. Thes e 
jars rest on bases of woo d or clay, whic h 
prevent contact wit h the ground. I n 
them are stored the grain—rice, mil ­
let, sorghum, maize—received i n exchange for the salt. Th e covered gallery 
receives mor e perishable provisions, 
such as butter, fat, dried meat and vegetables, as wel l as garments, pieces of 
cloth and utensils of various kinds. 
A single opening gives access to the 
interior of the inclosure. It is closed by 
a solid gate made of thick planks and 
kept carefully locke d and bolted. Th e 
key is held by a special guard, designated by the chief of the tribe. This 
guard sleeps inside and-is responsible 
for the safety of the property. This arrangement enables the inhabitants to 
have onl y a few days' provisions and 
the most necessary tools and clothin g in 
their own houses. Thu s each family is 
exposed to the minimu m loss from 
chance thieves or bands of bandits, and 
such loss may be promptl y made good 
from the general store. 
Th e ingenuity of this tribe is shown 
elsewhere by their metho d of preserving 
their supplies—a matter of capital importance since the uncertainties and dangers of desert trave l ma y lpn g delay 
the arriva l of an expected caravan. Th e 
meat is dried as in other regions of 
Centra l Africa , but vegetables are conserved after a method of their own in ­
vention. Onions, beans, spinach and 
other native vegetables are dried and 
then compressed into a sort of hard, dry 
cake, so solid that neither air nor humidity can penetrate it, thus insurin g its 
"keeping. " Whe n needed for use these 
cakes are broken into fragments and 
soaked in water til l the vegetables assume their origina l form. 
Whe n bands of robbers are espied, 
threatening spoliation, or even capture 
and slavery, the entire populace takes refuge withi n the walls of the fort. Th e 
wome n and children and the aged occupy the court and the gallery, whil e 
the able-bodied men man the walls and 
towers to repel the invaders or lie sheltered on the roof of the gallery. A 
siege can never be of lon g duration, 
since scant provisions are left outside, 
and such as the enemy may have brought 
with him could hardly equal those with ­
in the fort. 
Th e habits of order and economy 
amon g these people and the necessity of 
carefully preserving property so hardly 
acquired has developed not only their 
intelligence and powe r of initiative, but 
their sense of solidarity or commercia l 
welfare in a very high degree. 
Beggars are quite unknow n in the 
community. Ever y inhabitant is part 
proprietor of the publi c property, represented by the salt wells, the date palms 
and the gardens. Ther e is always food 
for every one, mor e or less plentiful, to 
be sure, as trade is good or bad. WOMEN' S CLUB S 
CARIN G FO R YOUN G WOMEN . By Mrs. W . A . HUNTO N 
MBS. ELIZABET H BOSS HAYNES 
Th e Youn g Women's Christia n Asso ­
ciation is no longe r an experiment, but 
has fully proven itself one of the keys 
to most satisfactory success in the attainment of all that is highest and best 
in the fourfold nature of womanhood . 
It is constantly demonstrating its won ­
derful adaptability to meet the varyin g 
conditions and needs of each generation 
of women. It is not strange, therefore, 
that many of the intelligent colored 
women have been quick to discern the 
magnificent opportunity offered by this 
movement for the solution of their 
problems. 
Some four years ago, whil e the new 
national board of Youn g Women's Christian Associations of the Unite d States 
decided to extend its manifold supervision to the wor k being done for colored 
youn g women, a representative was sent 
to study that particular field. Amon g 
other facts ascertained, it was noted that 
in fourteen of our educational institutions, associations for youn g wome n had 
been organized, although hardly half that 
number were doin g any effective work . 
Several city associations had likewis e 
been launched, but only four were doing 
anythin g appreciable along Associatio n 
lines. , . 
In the spring of 1908 Miss Elizabet h 
Ross was called by the national board 
to be the first student secretary for wor k 
among colored women , and, after some 
special preparation, began her vigorous 
and remarkably successful labors the followin g fall. Whethe r at conferences at 
Silve r Bay, on beautiful Lak e George, 
or at wor k at headquarters in Ne w 
York , or in college visiting, the magnetic 
personality of this youn g woma n left 
its impress, and has proven of inestimable value in these pioneer days of Asso ­
ciation effort. She has demonstrated by 
her splendid powers the possibility of 
our college-trained girls serving their 
generation in a new and important move ­
ment for the salvation of womanhood . 
Student conferences were held withi n 
two years at Talladega College , Claflin, 
Tougalo o and Fis k universities, and fiftytwo student organizations, in as many 
educational . institutions, quickl y supplanted the fourteen found in 1908. 
Thos e wh o were fortunate enough to attend the Fis k Conference and to sit in 
the various sessions, hearing methods expounded and reports read by the enthusiastic student delegates, or who 
could watch the sea of eager responsive 
student faces as they sat under the spell 
of those last hours .in the Meharr y 
Auditorium, wil l never doubt the beneficent influence of the Associatio n movement on the lives of the thousands of 
youn g wome n now in school. Th e magnificent possibilities of the Associatio n 
are most naturally presented first of all 
to the student worl d because it is from 
the output of our higher educational institutions that we look for leadership in 
this great movement. Fro m this rank 
we must choose the Associatio n secretary, or, better stated, the executive—a 
woma n wh o knows and has great sympathy for girls—who is able to comprehend and meet the needs in the spiritual, 
social, educational and economi c conditions that surround her. Ou r largest 
need at present is not more associations, 
although that need at several centers is 
alarmingl y pressing. W e must first find 
trained leaders. T o that end three youn g 
colored women, graduates respectively 
of Radcliffe, Hartshor n and Fisk , wil l 
spend the summe r months at the Na -122 THE CRISIS 
tiona l Trainin g School, Ne w Yor k City , 
preparing for future service in Associa ­
tion work . 
Th e city Associatio n presents a field 
of immense opportunity, as yet, scarcely 
appreciated. 
Fou r years ago we reported four Asso ­
ciations; we must now mention five 
others, wit h beginnings in several additiona l cities, and calls for organization 
comin g from still other cities. Fo r want 
of close supervision, intelligent volun ­
teer service and money, the problem of 
maintaining a city Associatio n is a difficult one; but the results already attained 
in Ne w York , Brooklyn , Baltimore , 
Washington , Norfol k and St. Pau l prove, 
without doubt, the possibility and value 
of the movement. Th e Ne w Yor k Asso ­
ciation, providin g rooms whic h are constantly filled wit h girls and wome n from 
other cities, finding employment daily 
for those wh o seek it, offering opportunities for classwork and emphasizing 
the value of practical Christianity in a 
girl's life, has already overtaxed its present quarters, and is demanding a large 
and well-equipped buildin g to do a 
greater wor k for the restless, surging 
army of wome n of that great metropolis. 
In Brookly n the home life and social 
atmosphere are the chief charms, and 
they are so strong that its buildin g is 
constantly crowded, and one appeals 
often vainly for room and board. Girls 
from Ne w England , Canada, Colorado, 
California , Missouri , Georgia , Florid a 
and the Carolina s have lived in this home 
and returned to their own distant homes 
full of praise for the Brookly n Associa ­
tion. Last year 110 wome n found permanent positions through this Associa ­
tion, whil e 544 were given day or temporary employment. 
Baltimor e owns its buildin g and is 
doing a wor k simila r in its influence and 
results to Ne w York , wit h much stress 
placed on the Christian life and usefulness of its members. I n Washingto n 
the wome n have paid mor e than two -
thirds of the purchase price of their 
home, and have thoroughl y established 
themselves in the confidence of the public by their fine business acumen and 
high ideals. 
Th e Norfol k Association , co-operating 
wit h the Travelers' Ai d and Protectiv e 
Association , is meeting a long-felt need 
of that seaport town in givin g its large 
number of migrator y youn g wome n respectable and comfortabl e rooms, and 
it has a wonderful opportunity to pour 
something of mora l and spiritua l fragrance into their lives. I n one yea r 702 
steamers and trains were met and 479 
girls assisted in various ways. So effective has been the wor k of this association that its very stron g president, Mrs. 
Laur a E . Titus, wh o has been one of the 
foremost leaders in all reform and socia l 
movements of her State, was invited to 
active membership in the whit e Associa ­
tion of social workers of Norfol k and 
vicinit y and was accorded every courtesy. This is surely a lon g step in advance in the annals of Virginia . St. Paul, 
although in the far northwest, has realized the value of Associatio n work , and 
is callin g to the nationa l board for a 
trained secretary. 
Miss Ceceli a Holloway , a youn g college woma n of exceptiona l ability and 
strong personality, assumed the position 
of Student Secretary of the Nationa l 
Boar d last fall, when Miss Ross became 
Mrs. Haynes, and has been followin g the 
lead of her predecessor wit h splendid 
results. 
Th e city work, under the supervision 
of Mrs. Hayne s and the writer, has 
reached a psychologica l point in its development that wil l present in the near 
future some very positive results in in ­
creased volunteer service on the part of 
our public-spirited women , in a more 
enthusiastic response to the call of the 
secretaryship by our best-educated youn g 
women, and larger facilities in buildings 
and equipment. 
AN EVENING IN TH E NEW YORK ASSOCIATION TH E BURDE N 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITH ­
OU T TRIAL . 
1885. 
1886. 
1887. 
1888. 
1889. 
1890. 
1891. 
1892. 
1893. 
1894. 
1895. 
1896. 
1897. 
78 
71 
80 
95 
95 
90 
121 
155 
154 
134 
112 
SO 
122 
1898 102 
1899 84 
1900 107 
1901. 
1902. 
1903. 
1904. 
1905. 
1906. 
1907. 
1908. 
1909. 
1910. 
107 
SO 
86 
S3 
01 
04 
00 
93 
73 
05 
Tota l 2,458 
Th e Outloo k prints from "a Southern 
Correspondent " an account of the recent 
lynchin g of six colored men in Florida . 
Th e communication bears out informa ­
tion received by the Nationa l Associatio n 
and reported under the N . A . A . C. P . 
notes. Afte r tellin g the story of the 
forged telegram the correspondent continues: 
"Th e boy in charge of the jail at once 
opened the doors to these men, and the 
Negroes were told that the men had 
come to save them from a mob by taking 
them to another jail. Th e Negroe s were 
bound wit h ropes and went gladly wit h 
their captors, who m they hailed as their 
saviors. Shortl y afterward the good 
people of Lak e Cit y were aroused by 
long-continued firing of rifles and revolvers, and a few hours later the Negroe s 
were found in a nearby swamp, dead, 
and their bodies mangled beyond recognition by bullets. Th e automobiles had 
disappeared and have not been heard of 
since. 
"Tw o days later Governo r Gilchrist 
was represented as being much disturbed 
over the incident, when the wive s and 
kindred of the six Negroe s went to him 
to learn the authentication of the rumors 
they had heard. One of the papers commented upon the 'tearless stolidity' of 
these Negr o women . Th e Governo r demanded a full report from the absentee 
sheriff, and offered a reward of $250 for 
each of the three men wh o had deceived 
the sheriff's son. Ther e was no notice 
of any reward offered for other members 
of the lynchin g party. 
"Governo r Gilchrist seems not to have 
taken any further interest in the matter, 
possibly being occupied wit h the endeavor to find reasons for his veto of the 
bill passed by the Legislatur e to abolish 
the infamous convict lease system of 
the State, for Florid a retains, by the act 
of the Governor, this relic of barbarism. 
Th e Legislature , however, took some 
notice of the incident. A bill was introduced in the Senate offering a reward 
of $5,000 for the arrest of the members 
of the lynchin g party, and to this the 
Senator from Columbi a Count y proposed 
an amendment makin g his county im ­
mune from the possible consequences 
of the lynchin g of the Leo n Count y prisoners. 
"Durin g the debate there were several 
humorous allusions to the fact that the 
lynchin g party probably came from 
Georgia , the Georgi a line being some 
thirty miles distant from Lak e City . Th e 
Jacksonvill e Times-Unio n had a mil d 
editorial deprecating the lynching , but 
the humor of the incident, the fact that 
the lynchin g party came to the jail in 
automobiles, loomed larger in the editoria l min d than the tragedy itself. I 
have been able to find only one Florid a 
paper of importance, the Tamp a Tribune , 
whic h treats the affair as it woul d ordinarily be treated in civilized communitie s 
anywhere in the world . It says, amon g 
other things: 'The Tribun e wil l have 
no excuses to offer, nor wil l any other 
Florid a paper, when Florid a is taxed 
wit h this outrage by the Norther n press.' 
Th e Tribun e thinks that five of the men 
wh o were murdered were 'probably innocent.' Neverthless, the Tribune's fears 
that Florid a woul d be taxed wit h this 
outrage by the Norther n press seem 
to have been largely without justification. 
Th e lynchin g of Negroes, guilty or innocent, has become so commo n that the 
news of it is not now always carried 
by the press associations, and editorial 
comment has become a rarity. 
"O f course, if any one were in earnest 
about the matter, these lynchers could 
be detected. Automobile s on the sandy 
roads of Flori a leave their trails. A 
forged telegram woul d give a valuable 
clue to a good detective. Th e sheriff's 
son gave a good description of the five 
men. Doe s any one imagine that if 
Detective" Burns, for example, were put 
upon the trail of these cold-blooded 
murderers, he woul d not be able to find 
them? It should be noted also that this 
lynchin g was not for 'the usual crime.' 
Indeed, it woul d be hard to say now 
what is ,the usual crime for whic h Ne ­
groes are lynched. 
" A few weeks ago a popular and beloved officer of Emanue l County , Georgia, was killed, and a Negro, presumably 124 THE CRISIS 
guilty, was hanged by a lynchin g party. 
Th e editor of the Swainsbor o Forest 
Blade referred to the lynchin g party as 
a 'mob,' and for this he was gently taken 
to task by one of his readers in the followin g letter: 'Please allow me to say 
that I, for one, do not like to hear our 
good citizens wh o hang up a worthless 
Negr o and riddle his hide wit h bullets 
for snooting down one of our worth y 
officers, without provocation, as did the 
black brute in Swainsboro on the night 
of the 12th instant, referred to as a 
"mob. " I understand the wor d "mob " 
to mean a disorderly crowd, riotous assemblage, etc., and the paper stated that 
the "mob " dispersed quietly as they had 
gathered—a little strange procedure for 
a "mob, " don't yo u think? Th e wor d 
"mob " has a bad sound to me, and I 
am sure, had I been wit h those wh o 
saved the expense of feeding and sheltering that black fiend by the county, 
I woul d not have enjoyed being termed 
a part of a "mob. " ' 
"T o whic h the editor rejoins: 'It is 
true, the crowd did not make any great 
demonstration, and it was as orderly as 
could be expected under the circumstances.' 
"T o this we have come, then, in the 
South—that the murderin g of six black 
men, 'five of them probabl y innocent,' 
is taken as a matter of course, withou t 
unfavorable comment by the press of 
the State i n whic h the murde r occurs; 
that in another State a citizen, able to 
read and write , resents the use of the 
wor d 'mob' as applyin g to 'the goo d 
citizens wh o hang up a worthless Negro, ' 
and he regards murde r by the mo b as an 
economy, since thereby the feeding and 
sheltering of a prisone r are saved his 
county. Th e name of the county is 
'Emanuel. ' 
"Is 'Go d wit h us' still, or has he turned 
his face away? D o we fear the Lor d no 
longer, nor dread to bear the mar k of 
Cain? Is it not time that organs of 
civilizatio n in Americ a were beginning 
again to take notice of this nationa l sin 
of lawless murder ? Certainl y it cannot 
be said that the mob takes the law into 
its own hands i n these cases for fear 
that justice wil l be denied by the courts. 
I do not claim that the Negr o does not 
get justice generally, but he is certainly 
not likel y to escape the just penalty of 
the law when he has murdered a white 
man and the administration of the law 
is i n the hands of white men. I n view of 
these two of the man y recent instances 
of mob murder, I have felt that some 
voic e should be raised in protest." 
WHA T TO REA D 
BOOKS . 
Chailley, Joseph—"Administrative Prob ­
lems of Britis h India. " Macmillan . 
Th e book gives a complete survey, 
though summary in part, of religious, 
social, economic and politica l conditions in India, including, also, such 
topics as caste, codes of law and education. 
Gerderner, G. B. A.—"Studie s in the 
Evangelizatio n of South Africa. " 
Longmans. 
Grubb, W . Barbrooke—"Unknow n Peo ­
ple in an Unknow n Land. " Lippincott. 
A n account of a tribe of Indians in 
South America . 
Johnston, Sir Harry—"Britai n Across 
the Seas—Africa : A Histor y and De ­
scription of the Britis h Empir e i n 
Africa. " London : Nationa l Society's 
Depository. 
Kellicott , Willia m Erskine—"Socia l Di ­
rection of Huma n Evolution. " Apple -
ton. 
A n essay based upon three lectures 
delivered at Oberli n College in 1910 
whose aim is to state briefly and suggestively in simple, matter-of-fact 
terms the present status of the science 
of eugenics. 
Ovington , Mar y White—"Hal f a Man : 
Th e Status of the Negr o in Ne w York. " 
Longmans. 
In the "Foreword " of "Hal f a Man, " 
Dr. Fran z Boa s of Columbi a Universit y 
says, "Miss Ovington's description of 
the .status of the Negr o in Ne w Yor k 
Cit y is based on a most painstaking 
inquiry into his socia l and economi c 
conditions, and brings out in the most 
forceful way the difficulties under 
whic h the race is laboring, even in the 
large cosmopolitan population of Ne w 
York . It is a refutation of the claims 
that the Negr o has equal opportunity 
wit h the whites, and that his failure 
to advance mor e rapidly than he has 
is due to innate inability. " 
Wilkinson , Willia m Cleaver—-"Daniel 
Webster: A Vindication. " Funk . 
Prof. Wilkinso n of the Universit y 
of Chicag o in his initia l essay shows 
that Danie l Webste r is to be praised, 
not blamed, for his seventh of Marc h 
speech, and for his support of the 
Fugitiv e Slave Law . WHAT TO READ 125 
PERIODICALS . 
Ashley , Clifford W.—" A Corne r in FourPosters. " Scribner's, June. 
Beymer, Willia m Gilmore—"Miss Va n 
Lew. " Harper's, June. 
Miss Va n Lew , a Richmon d woman , 
was a spy for the Federa l government. 
General Grant wrote to her, "Yo u have 
sent me the most valuable information 
received from Richmon d during the 
war. " 
Brooks, R. P.—" A Loca l Study of the 
Race Problem: Race Relations i n the 
Eastern Piedmont Regio n of Georgia. " 
Politica l Science Quarterly, June. 
Bruere, Robert W.—"Hospita l Socia l 
Service. " Harper's, June. 
Jones. Samuel B.—"Th e Britis h West 
Indian Negro : Reconstruction. " 
Southern Workman , June. 
King , Genera l Charles—"Th e Voluntee r 
Soldie r of 1861." Review of Reviews, 
June. 
Ritzman , M . E.—"Woman's Lif e i n 
Africa. " Th e Missionar y Review, 
June. 
Sledd, Andrew—"Th e Dismissa l of Prof. 
Banks. " Independent, Ma y 25. 
Speers, M . W . F.—"Negr o Songs and 
Folk-Lore. " Th e Journa l of America n 
Folk-Lore , Oct.-Dec , 1910. 
Stowe, Charles Edward—"Harrie t Beecher Stowe : Frien d of the South. " Outlook, June 10. 
Thomas, Davi d Y.—"Souther n Non -
Slaveholders in the Electio n of 1860." 
Politica l Science Quarterly, June. 
Tourtellot, Ida A.—"Th e Conference for 
Educatio n in the South. " Southern 
Workman , June. 
Washington , Booke r T.—"Ho w Denmar k 
Ha s Taugh t Itself Prosperity and Hap ­
piness." World's Work , June. 
Washington , Booke r T.—"Lif e and Labo r 
on the Continent. " Outlook , Ma y 13. 
Washington , Booke r T.—"Race s and 
Politics. " Outlook , June 3. 
"The Contribution of the Negro to Human 
Civilization." Alexander FranciB Chamberlain, 
Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Clark University, Worcester. Mass. The Journal of Race 
Development. April. 
W e give below a few of Prof. Chamberlain's illuminatin g statements in the 
Journa l of Race Development, and we 
recommend the article in whic h they appear to the readers of T H E CRISIS. 
"Onl y individuals immune to the teachings of evolution could imagine that a 
race, millenniums old, and numbering today, after centuries of more or less brutal 
contact wit h the whites, mor e than 150,-
000,000, could have existed or could continue to exist, without in the slightest in ­
fluencing the currents of human thought 
and action. It is wit h eyes blind to the 
results of the most recent investigations 
of the origi n and the development of 
Negr o culture in Africa , and to the 
achievements of the race in other parts 
of the globe that such people content 
themselves wit h repeating words of prejudiced origin , whic h have lon g since lost 
significance, and wit h seeing in the 
Negr o onl y a beast or a half-man. " 
Concernin g the politica l and social organization of the Negr o peoples of 
Afric a the author writes as follows: 
"Th e comparison of Negr o Afric a wit h 
contemporary Medieva l Europ e is most 
interesting and convincin g here. Th e 
sociologica l and politica l phenomena in 
both regions of the globe at that time 
are strikingly similar. Parallels for the 
feudal system, the rise and development 
of the judiciary, the evolution of international law, the role of the market and 
the fair, and many other things could 
as well be studied in the one as in the 
other. Th e rise of innumerable small 
States and their ultimate consolidation 
into large kingdoms and extensive empires are equally characteristic of both. 
Negr o Africa , too, at this period, and 
since then also, has in like manner produced kings and politica l organizers, wh o 
have been men of genius possessing 
great personalities, and rankin g in character and ability wit h the princes and 
sovereigns of Europe at the time. Me n 
like Kin g Aski a of Songha i and Bello , 
the Sultan of Katsena , wh o has been 
called 'the Napoleo n of the Sudan,' deserve rank amon g the great figures of 
the world's history. " 
In regard to the art of the Negroe s 
in Afric a the write r says: 
"Fa r from possessing no art, the 
Africa n Negroe s have created some of 
the most beautiful art objects to be found 
in any museum in the wide world . Dr. 
Frobenius, i n his study of Africa n civilizations, says: 'The real Africa n need 
by no means resort to the rags and tatters of bygone European splendor. ' H e 
has precious ornaments of his own, of 
ivory and feathers, fine plaited willow -
ware, weapons of superior workmanship.' 
"Th e ars artium, however, of Negr o 
Afric a is the use of iron. Th e question 
of the origin of the art of iron-smelting 
is now being treated in detail by ethnologists, and, whil e general agreement 
has not been reached, the mass of evidence so far disclosed has convinced 
eminent men of science that the smelting 
of iron was first discovered by the 
Africa n Negroes, from whom, by way of 
Egyp t and Asi a Minor, this art made its 
way into Europe and the rest of the Ol d 
World. " 
Sir Harr y Johnston, writin g in Na ­
ture (London ) for March , says that the 
pygmie s of Africa , if taken from the forest and subjected to other conditions of 
living , wil l after two or three genera-, 
tions develop a stature much nearer that 
of the average man. 126 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHERET O STO P 
tj Our readers are urged to use these columns in outlining their vacation 
and travel plans. These hotels and stopping places are modern in every 
sense, and the traveling public is assured comfort and efficient service. 
tj For detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
The Travel Editor oi The Crisis, 20 Vesey St., New York 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
MARSHALL'S HOTEL 127-12 9 Wes t 53 d Stree t 
NE W YOE K CIT Y 
COMFORT — Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE — I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptiona l feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminatin g 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENING " 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3. 30c. Dinner. 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J- L . MARSHALL , Proprieto r 
TH E CLIF F HOUS E 
253 WEST 134TH STREET 
NEWL Y OPENED 
Special summer rates to permanent or transient guests. Special attention to out-of-town 
tourists. Up-to-date private house in every 
respect. Telephone connection. 
MRS. W. E. PERKINS, Prop. 
Telephone 4121 Harlem 
"TH E IDL E HOUR " 
Mrs. P. Brown 
HANDSOME FURNISHED ROOMS 
With All Improvements 
Permanent and Transient Guests Accommodated 
MEALS SERVED AT AL L HOURS 
77 WEST 134TH STREET NEW YORK 
Telephone 3593-L Harlem 
HOTE L PRES S 
Formerly The Walker House 
First-class Rooms by Day or Week 
Buffet Caf6 and Restaurant Connected 
Large Parlors To Let for Receptions 
19-21 WEST 135TH STREET NEW YORK 
J. H. PRESS, Manager 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WEST 20TH STREET 
Between 7th and 8th Avenues NEW YORK 
Neatly Furnished Rooms for Permanent 
or. Transient Guests by Day or Week 
MRS. THOMAS L. TE N EYCK , Proprietress 
Mention 
''A quiet place for quiet people to dine'' 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WEST 134TH STREET 
Between .Fifth and Lenox Avenues NEW YORK 
Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Sandwiches, Etc. Regular Dinner, 25c, from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at All Hours. 
Private Dining Room. Furnished Rooms To 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOHN E. BRADFORD, Proprietor 
TH E ALLE N HOUS E 
62 WEST 132D STREET 
SELECT, NEATL Y FURNISHED ROOMS 
All Improvements 
Wash-rooms, hot and cold water in every room 
FOR RENT BY DA Y OR WEE K 
Prices Moderate 
MRS. M. A. ANDERSON JOHNSON 
TH E ROSALIN E 
128 WEST 29TH STREET NEW YORK 
FURNISHED ROOMS 
BY DAY OR WEE K 
EDWARD D. SMALL, Proprietor 
Telephone 5395 Chelsea 
FURNISHED ROOMS 
BY DAY, WEE K OR MONTH 
Convenient to the Pennsylvania 
Depot and All Car Lines 
245 WEST 20TH STREET NEW YORK 
MRS. L. D. LAWS, Proprietress 
TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 127 
WHER E T O STOP—(Continued) 
HARLE M PRIVATE HOUSE 
Furnished rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Hot and cold water in everv room. 
MRS. BERR Y L. HICKS, Proprietress 
258 WEST 133D STREET NEW YORK 
Four doors from Eighth Avenue 
Telephone 3939-W Harlem 
MRS . ALFRE D HARPE R 
FURNISHED ROOMS 
BY TH E WEE K OR MONTH 
15 WEST 132D STREET NEW YORK 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 FIFT H AVENU E 
Between 135th and 136th Streets NEW YOR K 
We are prepared to give first-class service at 
a very reasonable rate. Real home cooking. 
Come and be convinced. Our motto is to please 
you. Meals at all hours. 
MRS. J . M. RIDDICK, Proprietress 
TH E VIRGINI A HOUS E 
MRS. MAR Y E. HILL, Proprietress 
NEATL Y FURNISHED ROOMS 
' Good Old Southern Cooking 
"Just Like Home" 
37 WEST 133D STREET NEW YORK 
IS YOU R HOTE L LISTE D 
I N THI S DIRECTOR Y ? IF 
NOT , WRIT E US FO R RATES . 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
Slljtl* fi0B? forking (girls' iSfomr 
217 EAST 86TH STREET 
Bet. Second and Third Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgingB for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicit! orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS FRANCES R. KEYSER , Supt. 
This magnificent four-story structure, with 
every modern convenience, has just been completed at a cost of $50,000. 
It is, without exception, the finest and most 
complete hostelry in the United StateB for the 
accommodation of our race. 
It is located on the highest elevation in the 
heart of the residence portion of cool Cape 
May. 
The view from the hotel is magnificent; on 
the front, overlooking the celebrated golf links, 
the vista stretcheB away to take in the beautiful driveways and farms of the inland section 
of the Cape. The rear commands an extensive 
view of the harbor and sea.. The invigorating 
ocean breezes reach every section of the hotel. 
The interior of this hotel may be described as 
the acme of luxury, comfort and elegance. 
The Hotel Dale contains one hundred light, 
airy and luxuriously furnished rooms with every 
modern convenience. Electric lights throughout 
the entire house. Suites with bath and long 
distance telephone connections. 
The elegantly furnished dining room is operated under both European and American plans. 
The cuisine will contain all the delicacies of 
the season, prepared by a master of the culinary 
art. Sea foods a specialty. 
PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
Telephone Strictly First-class 
TH E NE W DELMONIC O HOTE L 
16th and Ridge Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND HOME COMPORTS 
Ten large bedrooms, with electric light, steam 
heat and baths. 
Cafe on second floor. Best meals only. 
This hotel is newly furnished and up to date 
in every particular. We solicit your trade. 
Permanent and transient rooms; they are the 
best. Try one of our meals. 
(Ring bell after 12 m.) 
L. B. SMITH, Prop. A. R. SMITH, Mgr. 
ILLINOI S 
J. N. Washington Mrs. J . N. Washington 
Proprietor Manager 
iSjntel Uaaljmgtnn 
3252 WABASH AVENU E 
CHICAGO 
First-class Service for First-class People 
Rates: 75c, $1.00 and $2.00 Per Day 
Telephone Aldlne 516 
OHI O 
Home 'Phone B-3244 American—European 
HOTE L PLEASAN T 
P. H . WOOD 
NEW WITH MODERN EQUIPMENT 
9-11 ERIE STREET 
TOLEDO, OHIO 
One of the unique features of the hotel is the 
beautiful grill room. The management has engaged the full Abyssinian Orchestra to render 
afternoon and evening concerts in the room 
daily during the entire season. 
The open-air amusements available to the 
guests are numerous. The lawn of the hotel 
contains both croquet and tennis courts. 
The sea bathing at Cape May is unsurpassed 
on the Atlantic Ocean. It is remarkable for its 
fine surf and is perfectly safe at all times for 
women and children. The hotel has its own 
private bath houses. 
The sailing and fishing in the harbor and 
adjacent sounds'are always attractive and boats 
may be had at all times. 
The hotel is under the personal management 
of the owner, E. W. Dale, one of the most 
progressive and successful business men of our 
race. His experience as a hotel man has enabled him to use his very thorough knowledge 
of details in bringing the equipment of his 
hotel to perfection. 
This hotel is eaBy of access from the stations 
of either the Pennsylvania or the Reading 
Railroad. 
Literature and additional information will 
be mailed upon request. 
E . AkV . DALE , Owne r and Proprieto r 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAP E MAY , NE W JERSE Y 
NE W JERSE Y 128 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
<^ Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
^ If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates -of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
•I If you want a POSITION , TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
<fl Yo u will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. - . . 
* J Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
<J Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCIE S 
MISS I. L. MOORMAN' S 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCY 
Reliable help at all times for the most discriminating employers. 
References thoroughly investigated. 
463 LENOX AVENU E 
NEW YORK 
SITUATION S WANTE D 
YOUNG MAN (colored) about 19 years of age, 
with high school education, desires employment in private family, city or country. 
References given. Address Harrison Wesson, 
2144 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
AR T 
CRISIS PRINT S 
Reproduced on heavy paper, suitable for framing 
50 CENTS EAC H 
Cover illustration, April number, 7x9 inches, 
' 'Girl Reading.'' 
Cover illustration, May number, 7x9 inches, 
' 'Bishop Holly.'' 
Two-page photograph, May number, 10x13 
inches, ' 'Eighth Illinois Regiment.'' 
Cover illustration, June number, 7x9 inches, 
' 'One of the Little Ones. 1' 
Address Ar t Editor of TH E CRISIS 
Room 311 
20 VESE Y STREE T 
NE W YOR K 
Mention T 
MUSI C 
SONG S 
There is money to be made in songwriting 
If you write poems or compose music, send 
us your work for examination. If terms are 
satisfactory, we will publish and pay one-half 
profits. 
GOTHAM-ATTUCKS MUSIC CO. 
136 WEST 37TH STREET NEW YORK 
HEL P WANTE D 
LOCA L REPRESENTATIVE S for 
TH E CRISIS wanted in each locality. 
Some agents sell over 800 copies 
monthly. Write for particulars. 
Address: FRAN K M . TURNE R 
Circulation Manager 
Suite 31 1 
20 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K 
SCHOOL S 
YOUNG MAN, HAV E YOU A TRADE? 
By our method we teach the Barber Trade in 
six weeks. 
We give you a complete set of tools and 
secure you a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NEW YOR K BARBER SCHOOL 
Costello & Wise 
Cor. Bowery and Rlvlngton St. NEW YORK 
H E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 129 
ADVERTISING NOWADAY S PAY S YOU 
A M agent for all colored newspapers. 
A M agent along all lines of advertising. 
GE T up programs for all kinds of entertainments. 
FURNIS H the advertising for 25 per cent. 
WRIT E and place your business where all can see. 
KNO W all the new features of advertising. 
LE T M E HANDL E YOU R ADVERTISIN G 
Th e James E . Hol t Advertising Agenc y 
4 2 WES T I32 D STREET , NE W YOR K 
O. M. Waller, M.D., Pres. A . M . Thompson, Treas. B. 0. Waller, M.D., Sec. 
Sphinx Silver Polish 
The unsurpassed renovator of silver and plated ware. No acids; no scratching; absolutely harmless. Adopted in the largest hotels. Best for family use. Endorsed by silversmiths. Sells readily to the trade. Doubles your income. Agents wanted i n every city 
and town. Fift y per cent, commission. Write to-day. 
Manufactured by 
Sphinx Labor-Saving Soap Co., Inc. 
Oliic e an d Factory : 117 West Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephone 3253 Harlem CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 135TH STREE T 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture, we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CAEPET S AN D RUG S OU R SPECIALT Y 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-I^AW 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New York City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn. 
General Practice Notary Public. 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Office: 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLIC , 
Room 502, Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW. 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn, 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Wafnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 130 THE CRISIS A D VER TISER 
SEND US 50 CENTS for a beautiful 1%-inch 
messaline silk shirred elastic belt, with a fine 
gilt or gray pearl trimmed buckle. All colors. 
State size. Buckle alone 25c If not satisfactory, money refunded. Send for free catalogue. 
PERFECTION NOVELT Y CO. 
102-106 WOOSTER STREET NEW YORK 
£3T A CRISIS representative has visited the factory of the Perfection Novelty Co., and was 
favorably impressed with the numerous bargains. 
Seventeen Years' Experience 
WORK TURNED OUT PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Late with Broadway houses 
PRACTICAL FURRIER 
All kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. White furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Prices reasonable. 
24 WEST 135TH STREET NEW YORK 
No . 4 Specia l Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE—We have houses from $1,000 to 
$10,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—a good place to 
locate, plenty of work, a good place to locate 
for business. Can sell you a house for $50, 
$100 to $500 down, balance like rent. For 
speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long-time payments. 
Any of these are in good locations. Write for 
further information. 
THIS IS A COLORED ENTERPRISE 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Rea l Estat e 
12181
2 Mt. Verno n Aye. , Columbus, O. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Go. 
100 Linen Finish Cards by Mail, 50c. 
COMMERCIAL PRINTING 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOOK AND JOB PRINTING 
2315 MARKE T ST. ST. LOUIS, MO. 
CORNS, CALLOUSES, BUNIONS, CHILBLAINS positively removed by using Dr. 
Moore's wonderful discovery or your money 
refunded. Write to-day, explaining your troubles, with stamped envelope, your name and 
address.
 1 
DR. E . L . MOOR E 
C141 MONTCAL M STREET, E. 
DETROIT, MICH. 
The Rock City Sanitarium 
Corner Foster and Stewart Streets, 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
A quiet health home for invalids and 
sufferers from chroni c ailments. Locate d 
on an elevation, surrounded by spacious, 
shady lawns. 
Full y equipped for the successful 
treatment of diseases of the stomach, 
liver, kidneys, blood and nerves, by other 
methods than drugs. 
Th e famous Battle Creek Methods—• 
water, in the form of baths of all kinds, 
sprays, douches, packs, etc., electricity, 
massage, Swedish movements, dieting, 
etc., are used under the direction of a 
physician of fifteen years' experience in 
these procedures and a graduate of the 
Battle Creek Sanitarium. Surgica l and 
obstetrical cases received in special 
wards. Lad y physician gives especial 
attention to diseases of wome n and children. Rates, $10 per week and upwards. 
Fo r further information address 
TH E ROC K CIT Y SANITARIU M 
Nashville, Tenn. Telephone Walnut 87 
VISITORS ALWAY S WELCOME Giv e th e Chil d a Dol l 
The Most Beautiful of Al l the Toys on the Marke t Ar e the 
NEGR O DOLL S 
<I YOU R child would be happy if it had a Negro 
doll such as are sent out by the National Negro 
Doll Company, Nashville, Tennessee. Every race 
is trying to teach their children an object lesson by 
giving them toys that will lead to higher intellectual 
heights. The Negro doll is calculated to help in 
the Christian development of our race. Al l dolls 
are sent by express, charges paid. 
DOLL S FO R TH E SEASO N 1911-1912 NO W READ Y 
Prices from 50c. up to $8.50 
For Illustrated Booklets, Prices and Other Information, Send Five Cents to the 
Nationa l Negr o Dol l Compan y 
519 Second Avenu e N. , Nashville , Tenn . 
R. H . BOYD , President H . A . BOYD , Manager 
Brown-Spence r Correspondence 
School of Shorthand 
TH E LORD' S PRAYER . 
In ike Benn ntman System of Phonography—Corresponding Style. 
— ^ c i- ~ A r «s x -) (o
c
 *v = 
^ L. . r - r ~ i 
<J A system that can be 
learned during spare moments and thereby increase 
your salary from 50 to 
100 per cent. A thorough 
knowledge of Shorthand 
makes the position sure 
and the one so skilled in 
great demand. Yo u pay 
as you learn. Terms reasonable. Writ e for particulars. 
The Best, the Easiest, and Most Reliable 
Brown - Spencer Correspondence School of Shorthand 
2145 Missouri Avenue East St. Louis, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Other war d patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
Th e training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a free 
bed. 
Andrew F . Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F . Mossell. M.D. , 
Medica l Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr . Franz Boas, of Columbi a University 
"M y fathe r has alway s live d i n the 
South, " a youn g colore d ma n onc e sai d to 
me , "an d has attaine d success there ; but 
whe n I cease d to be a bo y he advise d me 
to liv e i n the North , wher e m y manhoo d 
woul d be respected . H e himself canno t 
continuall y endur e his positio n o f inferiority , an d i n the summe r he come s Nort h to 
be a man . No, " correctin g himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negr o is wholl y a 
ma n onl y i n Europe."— Fro m the Author's 
"Introduction.' 
Mis s Ovington's descriptio n o f the status 
of the Negr o i n Ne w Yor k Cit y is base d o n 
a most painstakin g inquir y int o his socia l 
an d economi c conditions, an d bring s ou t i n 
the most forcefu l wa y the difficultie s unde r 
whic h the rac e is laboring , eve n i n the larg e 
cosmopolita n populatio n o f Ne w York . It 
is a refutatio n o f the claim s that the Negr o 
has equa l opportunit y wit h the whites, an d 
tha t his failur e to advanc e mor e rapidl y 
tha n he has, is du e to innat e inability. — 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 