The 
CRISIS 
EASTE R 
191 9 
10 A COPY $100 A YEA R "We Are Coming, Father Abraham, 
One Hundred Thousand Strong!" 
During the darkest days of the Civil War, when the fate of the 
nation hung in the balance, Abraham Lincoln issued a call for volunteers to save the Union. The rousing answer came : 
"We Are Coming, Father Abraham, One Hundred 
Thousand Strong!" 
Today Democracy is threatened by lynching, disfranchisement, 
"Jim-Crowism," and race prejudice. The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, taking up Lincoln's cause and fighting 
to complete the work begun by the Great Emancipator, sends out a call 
for volunteers. "100,000 Members by the Tenth Anniversary" is our 
slogan. Whe n the Association holds its Tenth Annual Conference in 
Cleveland, Ohio, June 22 to 29, we want to be able to say as in the 6o's: 
"We Are Coming, Father Abraham, One Hundred 
Thousand Strong!" 
Today we number 48,000 members. 
If YO U are not a member, join now ! 
All branches are urged to recruit their strength to the maximum. 
If your city has no branch, write to the National Office for particulars on how to organize a branch. 
T o all white people who love justice and to all colored people wh o 
love liberty this call is made to join the ranks—the fighting ranks of the 
Association—and help make America a democracy in deed as well as 
in name. 
The membership fee is $1.00 per year or more. 
Members paying $2.00 or more per year receive TH E CRISIS 
without further charge. 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR THE 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 
70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 
NATIONA L OFFICER S EXECUTIV E OFFICER S 
President Chairman of the Board MOORFIEL D STORE Y MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N Vice-Presidents JOH N R. SHILLADY , Secretary ARCHIBAL D II. GRIMKfi O. G. VILLARD , Treasurer REV . IOH N HAYNE S HOLME S DR. W . E. R. DUBOIS , Director of Publica- BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
CAP T ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N JAME S WELDO X IOIINSON , Field Secretary OSWAL D GARRISO N YH.I.AR D WALTE R F. WHITE . Assistant Secretary TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. BURCHARDT DU BOISi AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL. BUSINESS 
MANAGER 
Vol. 17—No. 6 APRIL, 1919 Whole No. 102 
PICTURES 
Page 
"BROTHERHOOD." From the Sculpture Group, by May Howard Jackson. 
Photograph by Underwood & Underwood. 
WILLIAM EDWARD BURGHARDT DU BOIS 272 
THE CITY OF NEW YORK WELCOMES THZ RETURN OF THE "OLD 
FIFTEENTH" 293 
ARTICLES 
THE PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS. A Report 271 
CHILDREN A T EASTER. A Poem. C. Emily Frazier 274 
SOME CONTEMPORARY POETS OF THE NEGRO RACE. William Stanley Braithwaite 275 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 267 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 281 
MEN OF THE MONTH 286 
THE LOOKING GLASS 288 
THE HORIZON 294 
THE MAY CRISIS 
Dr . DuBois is returning from Europe, bringing a wealth of information, gathered first-hand, 
concerning the hlack man's share in the Great War . The May CRISI S will be "Negro Soldier 
Number"—and will tell of the Negro in the great conflict—AND SINCE ! 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. . 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November » . 1910, at the post office at New York. New York, 
under the Act of March I, 187*. 264 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service • 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training of Colored Youth in the South. 
THE FALL TERM OPENED OCTOBER 1, 1918. 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohio 
iEttablUhed ISSS) 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science 
and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Government for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' 
Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. 
Courses of Study—College (Scientific, Classical and Educational) ; Normal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theological (Regular and English); Academy 
—Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 
gymnasium just completed. 
School opened September 17th. For 
information address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, 
President. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who des:re to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Next regular term begins 
Thursday, September 18, 1919. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July r. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 265 
Atlanta University Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Oa. 
The oourses of study Inolude Hig h School, Normal 
School and College, with Manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley . Fortynine years of successful work have been oompleted. 
Students come from all parts of the south. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O . DRAWE R 524 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campu s o f 70 acres, commodiou s buildings with moder n conveniences. 
Hig h Scholarshi p — Talente d Faculty—Wel l 
equippe d library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational— Expense s 
ver y low. $100 pe r yea r o f eight month s 
will pa y tuition, board , room , etc. 
Comfortabl e dormitorie s with steam heat 
and ga s light. 
. COURSES OF STUD Y 
Domesti c Scienc e fo r girls, cooking , sewing , 
dressmakin g and embroidery . 
Pre-Academy—7t h and 8th grades. 
Academy—Fou r years with diploma . 
Pre-Medical—Tw o years abov e academy . 
College—Fou r years leading t o A . B. degree . 
Normal—Fiv e years abov e grade s with diploma . 
First Semeste r opene d Octobe r 2, 1918. 
HASE Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
South College Ave. and N. 19th Street 
rW , Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October i, 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age, sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object 
Efficiency ou r aim . 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal Pnila
-> Pa 1926 S. College Ave. ­
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
l Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First 
Class by Texas and Louisiana State 
Boards of Education. Harvard, Yale 
and Columbia represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational Th e largest institution o f learning in the South 
owne d and controlle d b y Negroes. Faculty o f specialists, trained in some o f the best universitie s in the 
Nort h and in the South. Note d for high standard o f 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equippe d dormitories; sane 
athletics unde r faculty supervision. Expense s reasonable . Locatio n central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology , Colleg e Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domesti c Science , Nurs e 
Training . Sewing , Printing and Tailoring , 
First Semeste r began Octobe r 1, 1918. 
Fo r further informatio n address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President BISHO P J. s. FLIPPEB , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CKISIS . 266 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY , N. C. 
A Religious Co-Educational School with 
a Tradition. 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts. 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfu'.ness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern 
Conveniences Accomodating 210 
just Completed and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and (iirls. 
Expenses Moderate 
Thirty-sixt h Sessio n opening: October, 1918. 
For Further Information Addrcsi 
D. C SUGGS, President or 
J. E. Aggrey , Registrar. 
THE A. & T. COLLEGE 
SUMMER SCHOOL 
TH E TWENTIET H ANNUA L SESSIO N wil l 
begi n Jun e 16th, and continu e fo r si x 
weeks. In additio n t o the course s fo r teach ­
ers o f academi c subjects, strong: course s 
wil l b e give n fo r teachers o f Agriculture , 
Manua l Training , Domesti c Art , Raffia an d 
Basketry . 
Th e followin g note d institution s ar e rep . 
resente d on the faculty : 
Harvard Columbia 
Cornell Chicago 
Howard Union 
Atlanta Fisk 
Drexel Ins. Hampton Ins, 
Myrtilla Minor Normal School 
Armour Institute of TechnologyIthaca Conservat ry of Music 
Pratt Institute A. &T. College 
Summe r Schoo l Bulletin s ar e sen t on request 
Ever y moder n sanitar y convenienc e ca n b e 
foun d in th e commodiou s dormitories. Bat h 
room s wit h showers and tub s ar e situate d 
o n ever y floor. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
PREST. DUDLEY 
A. & T. Summer School 
GREENSBORO , N . C. 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE. N. C . 
Blddle University, operated under the auaylces of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High SchooL 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
uf study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class ii 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
Fo r further information , addrei i 
Presiden t H. L. McCrorey , 
Charlotte , N . C . 
J . BRICK AGRICULTURAL, INDUSTRIAL 
AND NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS , Edgecomb e County , N . C. 
(O n A. C. L. R. R.) 
This Schoo l offers a first-class Hig h Schoo l 
Course , including Domesti c Science , Domesti c Art , 
Agriculture , Wor k in Wood , Iro n and Mechanica l 
Drawing . Pian o and Voca l Music , Nigh t School . 
A Tw o Yea r Teacher-Trainin g Cours e 
Is Ope n T o Hig h Schoo l Graduates. 
Teachers an d officers, 22; enrollment, 315— 
boarders, 212. Cottage s and buildings, 23. Schoo l 
farm, 1129J^ acres. Stron g athletic, literary and 
Christian associations. Schoo l term 33 weeks. 
Environmen t fine. Telephon e and telegraph Enfield, N . C. Fo r further informatio n writ e 
T. S. INBORDEN , Principal , BRICKS , N . C. 
The Slater Indu strial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexes WINSTON-SALEM , N . C. 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
In Academic Subjects 
In Industrial and V ocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers' Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina 
and the health conditions ar e ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n communicat e wit h 
S. G. ATKINS, Principal SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem , N . C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supporte d b y Baptist Stat e Woman' s Hom e 
Missio n Societ y o f Chicag o an d Bosto n and 
A . B. H . Societ y o f Ne w York . Students 
fro m si x differen t states. Graduate s ex ­
empte d on first grad e b y Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 300 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 17—No. 6 APRIL, 1919 Whole No. 102 
Editorial 
EASTER 1919 
EASTER by the sound of music 
tinkling up in the frozen 
hills and by the burgeoning 
of green things all over the 
Earth! And Easter, too, in our 
hearts! What a glorious difference 
between the Easter of 1919 and that 
of a year ago. Last April we were 
still at war,—how like a dream it 
seems these days — and the future 
loomed dark and beyond presage. 
Both Africa and America were pouring forth dark hosts in response to 
the continued summons to arms, and 
that made the hearts of some of us 
heavier than ever. "It is no war of 
ours," said some. "And why should 
we sacrifice ourselves?" asked others. 
But the wisest shook their heads,— 
"Right is always right; this is our 
country. We must save it and so doing save ourselves." So doggedly, 
sullenly, gladly, splendidly, in varied 
manner, but always persistently, we 
went to war. 
And we have helped save the world. 
And we have saved ourselves. Not 
immediately, not on all sides, a little 
less in the United States than elsewhere, where the actual fighting took 
place and others could see our valor. 
But the world knows us for what we 
are now—not cowards or traitors— 
our worst enemies knew better than 
to call us that, but a people big 
enough to rise above a consideration 
of domestic troubles—dire enough 
heaven knows—and to rush wholeheartedly into the business of saving 
the world. Suppose we had yielded 
to German propaganda, suppose we 
had refused to shoulder arms, or had 
wrought mischief and confusion, patterning ourselves after the I. W. W. 
and the pro-Germans of this country. How should we hold up our 
heads? But any other course than 
the one we have pursued, whatever 
our detractors may have feared and 
hoped, was to us unthinkable. We 
are not by nature traitorous. And 
it has been interesting and instructive to note that of those colored men 
who talked loudest against wholehearted co-operation with the country's cause, and who protested most 
vehemently against those who were 
outspoken in their determination to 
place America first,—of all those not 
one took an active step to prove himself willing to lay down life or even 
liberty for what he thought was 
right. There was talk and talk and 
talk. But not one played the role of 
Benedict Arnold. Not one was arrested even as a conscientious objector. 
Which is as it should be. / 
For see what has happened. We 
are in a position to come before the 
world saying: "Behold us. Here 
we are clean-handed and with pure 
hearts. You must listen to us. We 
black people, in addition to our rights 
of ordinary consideration, have 
proven ourselves worthy of extra 
consideration. And so we are holding a Pan-African Congress. The 
whole black world is virtually represented. We shall never rest, we shall 
never cease to agitate, until we have 
received from the world what we have 
267 268 THE
in such yeomanly fashion rendered— 
fair play." 
And all about us and our hopes 
rises the tide of Easter. 
FOR WHAT? 
MY God! For what am I 
thankful this night? For 
nothing. For nothing but 
the most commonplace of 
commonplaces; a table of gentlewomen and gentlemen — soft-spoken, 
sweet-tempered, full of human sympathy, who made me, a stranger, one 
of them. Ours was a fellowship of 
common books, common knowledge, 
mighty aims. We could laugh and 
joke and think as friends—and the 
Thing—the hateful, murderous, dirty 
Thing which in America we call "Nigger-hatred" was not only not there— 
it could not even be understood. It 
was a curious monstrosity at which 
civilized folk laughed or looked puzzled. There was no elegant and elaborate condescension of—-"We once 
had a colored servant"—"My father 
was an Abolitionist"—"I've always 
been interested in your people"— 
there was only the community of kindred souls, the delicate reference for 
the Thought that led, the quick deference to the guests you left in quiet 
regret, knowing they were not discussing you behind your back with 
lies and license. God! It was simply 
human decency and I had to be 
thankful for it because I am an American Negro and white America, with 
saving exceptions, is cruel to everything that has black blood—and this 
was Paris, in the vear of salvation, 
1919. 
Fellow blacks, we must join the 
democracy of Europe. 
THE FIELDS OF BATTLES 
I HAVE seen the wounds of 
Franc e — the entrails of 
Rheims and the guts of Verdun, with their bare bones 
thrown naked to the insulting skies; 
 CRISIS 
villages in dust and ashes—villages 
that lay so low that they left no mark 
beneath the snow-swept landscape; 
walls that stood in wrecked and awful silence; rivers flowed and skies 
gleamed, but the trees, the land, the 
people were scarred and broken. 
Ditches darted hither and thither and 
wire twisted, barbed and poled, cloistered in curious, illogical places. 
Graves there were—everywhere and 
a certain breathless horror, broken by 
plodding soldiers and fugitive peasants. 
We were at Chateau-Thierry in a 
room where the shrapnel had broken 
across the dining-table and torn a 
mirror and wrecked a wall; then we 
hastened to Rheims, that riven city 
where scarce a house escaped its scar 
and the House of Houses stood, with 
its laced stone and empty, piteous 
beauty, high and broad, about the 
scattered death. Then on we flew 
past silence and silent, broken walls 
to the black ridge that writhes northward like a vast grave. Its trees, like 
its dead, are young—broken and bent 
with fiery surprise—here the earth 
is ploughed angrily, there rise huts 
and blankets of wattles to hide the 
ways, and yonder in a hollow the 
Germans had built for years—concrete bungalows with electric lights, a 
bath-room for a Prince, and trenches 
and tunnels. Wide ways with German names ran in straight avenues 
through the trees and everywhere 
giant engines of death had sown the 
earth and cut the trees with iron. 
Down again we went by riven villages 
to the hungry towns behind the lines 
and up again to Verdun—the ancient 
fortress, with its ancient hills, where 
fort on fort had thundered four 
dream-dead years and on the plains 
between villages had sunk into the 
silent earth. The walls and moat 
hung gravely black and still, the city 
rose in clustered, drunken rain here 
and in yellow ashes there, and in the EDITORIAL 269 
narrow streets I saw my colored boys 
working for France. 
On, on out of the destruction and 
the tears, down by bewildered Commercy and old Toul, where a great 
truck hurrying food to the starving 
nearly put our auto in a ditch, and 
up to Pont-a-Mousson where Joan of 
Arc on her great hill overlooks the 
hills of mighty Metz; then to Nancy 
and by the dark and winding Moselle to the snow-covered Vosges. 
In yonder forest day on day the Negro troops were held in leash. Then 
slowly they advanced, swinging a vast 
circle—down a valley and up again, 
with the singing of shells. I stood by 
their trenches, wattled and boarded, 
and saw where they rushed "over the 
top" to the crest, and looked on the 
field before Metz. Innocent it looked, 
but the barbed wire, thick and tough, 
belted it like heavy bushes and huddled in hollows lay the machine-guns, 
nested in concrete walls, three feet 
thick, squatting low on the underbrush and scattering sputtering death 
up that silent hillside. Such wire! 
Such walls! How long the great, 
cradling sweep of land down the valley and over the German trenches to 
the village beyond, beside the silent, 
dark Moselle! 
On by the river we went to the 
snow-covered Vosges, where beneath 
the shoulder of a mountain the Ninety-second Division held a sector, with 
quiet death running down at intervals. The trenches circled the hills, 
and dug-outs nestled beneath by the 
battered villages. 
We flew back by the hungry zone in 
the back-wash of war—by Epinal and 
Domremy—Bourbonne-les-bains and 
Chaumont and so—home to Paris. 
FRENCH AND SPANISH 
ONE result of seemingly secondary, but really of prime, 
importance should come out 
of this war: the American 
Negro should speak French. It is 
idiotic for any modern man to be unilingual. Some of the most annoying misunderstandings of this period 
of revolutionary change have arisen 
from the fact that both in England 
and in France a man can rank as cultured and yet be able to make himself 
understood in but one tongue. Not 
only are there the usual and obvious 
arguments of mental and spiritual 
discipline for a working knowledge 
of living tongues, but American Negroes must remember that, outside 
the United States, the overwhelming 
number of educated people of Negro 
descent speak French and Spanish. 
Any effective rapprochement panafricain must depend, in the first instance, on the ability of the groups 
of the Negro race to make themselves 
mutually understood throughout the 
world. 
But more important than this is the 
fact that the only white civilization 
in the world to which color-hatred is 
not only unknown, but absolutely unintelligible is the so-called Latin, of 
which France and Spain are leading 
nations. It is to these nations that 
we must speak and appeal intelligently and with perfect understanding; with these we must make our 
closest personal friendships. Today 
the greatest threat on the earth's horizon is the possible world domination 
of the "nigger"-hating Anglo-Saxon 
idea. Only the world union of African, Latin, Asiatic, and possibly Slav 
and Celt can stop this arrogant tyranny—this death to human aspiration. 
Toward all this the first step is 
language. Every Negro should speak 
French. Large numbers should speak 
Spanish and Portuguese. Let these 
languages immediately begin to displace Latin, Greek and Hebrew in our 
schools. The ancient tongues have 
their proud place in human discipline 
and should never yield to "agriculture" and pseudo-science, but they 270 THE
must yield to modern tongues taught 
modern-wise—i. e., so as to enable 
the student in one or two years to 
speak and understand and read intelligently. This is the new article 
in our educational creed which the 
new times have brought. 
In every colored community there 
should be not only French and Spanish classes, but groups reading and 
speaking, following current newspapers and literature, listening to invited lecturers and visitors, and corresponding regularly with persons in 
France, Spain, the Islands and South 
America. Our visits abroad should 
not be merely Cook's tours, but personal rencontres for information and 
propaganda; every year from now on 
we should send abroad our best minds 
and most interesting personalities— 
if need be by public subscription—to 
teach the world the A B C of American color prejudice. This is what the 
white South has been doing for a century, and the white North has stood 
by consenting. It is high time that, 
armed with modern tongues, we tried 
a counter-propaganda and a positive 
spiritual alliance with the best culture of the modem world. 
MAJOR J. E. SPINGARN 
Major J. E. SPINGARN, 
who has been active active 
duy with the American 
Expeditionary Forces , 
writes us from Coblenz, Germany, 
that he expects to return to the 
United States early in April and to 
take up once more his old work with 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
FRAUD 
COMPLAINTS have come to 
The Crisis offices that one 
J. W. Wallace has been going through New England 
and elsewhere posing as a represent 
ative of TH E CRISIS magazine, solicit 
ing advertisements and write-ups for 
 CRISIS 
our pages and taking subscriptions. 
This man is a fraud. If he comes to 
your community escort him to the 
chief of police—as was done sometime ago with one Thomas Hopkins. 
TH E CRISIS urges that no money be 
paid to strangers who represent 
themselves as authorized agents for 
the magazine. 
A. G. DILL . 
TRIBUT E 
EXPRESSIONS of appreciation of the efforts of Dr. Du 
Bois in Paris have been 
coming in from so many 
sides that it seems only fair to his 
friends to make public some of their 
desires. We are venturing to do this 
in the absence of Dr. Du Bois, because he would not hearken to it if 
he were to be consulted. Colonel 
Charles Young writes a typical letter. He says in part: 
"Can we not make, before Dr. Du 
Bois returns, a Du Bois Number in 
which you can give us an inner full 
page cut of him that we can frame? 
Something without print on the reverse side? I am sure the colored 
college students throughout the 
country would cherish having such 
a number. 
"He has written from time to time 
many little striking and remarkable 
paragraphs that are inspiring to colored boys and girls which might be 
included if you could find them in 
his files. I am sure he would cherish 
the appreciative thought of him, and 
in his extreme modesty and utter forgetfulness of self he would never 
even assent to it were he present in 
the United States. 
"We owe Dr. Du Bois so much, you 
know, for his superior vision, his 
faith, probity and unswerving contending and insistence upon equity 
and freedom for us as American citizens regardless of a 'that and a 
that.' " - 1
THE PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS 
rhis article is compiled from reports anil bulletins on the l'an-African Congress sent hy 
W. E. BURGHARD T Du Bois 
THE Pan-African Congress is an estab­
 lished fact It was held February 19, 
20, 21, 1919, at the Grand Hotel, Boulevard 
des Capucines, Paris. The Executive Committee consisted of M. Blaise Diagne, President; Dr. W. E. Burghardt DuBois, Secretary; Mrs. Ida Gibbs Hunt, Assistant Secretary, and M. E. F. Fredericks. The Congress maintained an office at the Hotel de 
Malte, 63 Rue Richelieu, with office hours 
from 10 A. M. to 6 P. M. 
Fifty-seven delegates, including a number 
of native Africans educated abroad, were 
present at the Congress. In all, fifteen 
countries were represented, as follows: 
United States of America 16 
French West Indies 13 
Haiti 7 
France 7 
Liberia '. 3 
Spanish Colonies 2 
Portuguese Colonies 1 
San Domingo 1 
England 1 
British Africa 1 
French Africa 1 
Algeria 1 
Egypt 1 
Belgian Congo 1 
Abyssinia 1 
Total 57 
France was represented by the Chairman 
of the Committee of Foreign Affairs of the 
French Chamber; Belgium, by M. Van Overgergh, of the Belgian Peace Commission; 
Portugal, by M. Freire d' Andrade, former 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. William English Walling and Charles Edward Russell 
were in attendance from the United States 
of America. 
At the first meeting held Wednesday 
afternoon, February 19, M. Diagne, Deputy 
from Senegal to the French Chamber, 
opened the Congress with words of praise 
for French colonial rule. He expressed the 
hope that the ideal of racial unity would 
inspire all of African descent throughout 
the entire world. 
Many interesting speeches followed, all 
of which struck a characteristic note. M. 
Candace, Deputy from Guadeloupe, insisted with much eloquence and frankness that 
color should not be considered in the maintenance of human rights. That the rights 
of black Americans met with, so little respect in the United States was, he declared, 
a matter for special deprecation. 
Two other deputies from the French 
West Indies, M. Boisneuf and M. Lagrosilliere, spoke with equal eloquence and expressed their inability to understand how 
Americans could fail to treat as equals 
those who in common with themselves were 
giving their lives for democracy and justice. 
Mr. King, delegate from Liberia to the 
Peace Conference, gave an interesting exposition of Liberia's aims and accomplishments and expressed the hope that people 
of African descent everywhere would take 
jiride in that little independent black Republic and in every way possible aid in her future development. "Let us," he concluded, 
"be considered a home for the darker races 
in Africa. It is your duty to help. We are 
asking for rights, but let us not, therefore, 
forget our duties, for remember wherever 
there are rights, there are also duties and 
responsibilities." 
The Chairman of Foreign Affairs for 
France emphasized the fact that the sentiment of France on equality and liberty, irrespective of color, was shown by the fact 
that she had six colored representatives in 
the French Chamber, one of whom was the 
distinguished Chairman of the Congress, M. 
Diagne, who served on his Committee. Even 
before the Revolution France had pursued 
the same policy. 
M. Overgergh spoke of the reforms in the 
Belgian colony and of an International Geographical Society which he represented. 
M. d' Andrade talked of the opportunities 
and liberties given the natives in the Portuguese colonies. 
William English Walling said that while 
he had to blush when America was beinj 
arraigned, he felt that changes were already going on in the United States and 
that in time Americans, whether willingly 
or not, would have to submit to the opinion 
of the world and accord to her colored contingent full justice and equality. She must 
271 WILLIAM EDWARD BTJRGHARDT DU BOIS, 
Founder and Secretary of the First Pan-African Congress, which was held in Paris, France, 
Fehruary 19, 20 and 21, 1919. 
272 THE PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS 273 
yield or go down before the darker races of 
the world. If France has six colored representatives in Parliament, he said, the United 
States of America, considering her black 
population, should have at least ten colored representatives in her legislative body. 
Charles Edward Russell's address stirred and inspired all. He said the old 
notion that one race is inferior to another 
is false, and this war has helped to kill 
that idea. This Congress, he felt, was a 
splendid step forward. Africa should press 
her claims here and now. "It is a great 
opportunity and yours is the duty to fulfill 
it," he said. "It is a duty for Africa and 
for world democracy, for black and white 
alike. Insist upon your rights!" 
At the second session, Mr. Archer, exMayor of Battersea, London, England, spoke 
of the importance of demanding one's 
rights, of the value of unity of purpose and 
effort in ameliorating the condition of people of color throughout the world, starting 
with the United States and England. He 
said that while England accords many 
rights to her citizens of color, she does not 
give them as much representation as France. 
"We must fight for our just rights at all 
times," he concluded. 
Dr. George Jackson, an American, spoke 
of his experiences in the Belgian Congo, and 
explained why the natives had come to hate 
German Kultur. As a colored American he 
also had often had cause to blush for America. 
Mrs. A. W. Hunton, from the United 
States of America, spoke of the importance 
of women in the world's reconstruction and 
regeneration of today, and of the necessity 
of seeking their co-operation and counsel. 
At the afternoon session of the last day 
Mme. Jules Siefried, President of the 
French National Association for the Rights 
of Women, brought words of encouragement 
from the International Council, then meeting in Paris. She said that no one could 
appreciate better than women the struggle 
for broader rights and liberties. 
Resolutions were passed providing for another Congress to be held in Paris during 
the year 1921. 
The following resolutions, to be presented 
to the Peace Conference now in session, were 
unanimously adopted: 
I. The Negroes of- the world in Pan-African Congress assembled demand in the interests of justice and humanity, for the purpose of strengthening the forces of Civilization, that immediate steps be taken to develop the 200,000,000 of Negroes and Negroids; to this end, they propose: 
1. That the Allied and Associated Powers establish a Code of Laws for the international protection of the Natives of Africa 
similar to the proposed international Code 
for Labor. 
2. That the League of Nations establish 
a permanent Bureau charged with the special duty of overseeing the application of 
these laws to the political, social and economic welfare of the Natives. 
II. The Negroes of the world demand that 
hereafter the Natives of Africa and the 
Peoples of African descent be governed according to the following principles: 
1.—The Land: The land and its natural 
resources shall be held in trust for the Natives and at all times they shall have effective ownership of as much land as they 
can profitably develop. 
2.—Capital: The investment of capital 
and granting of concessions shall be so regulated as to prevent the exploitation of Natives and the exhaustion of the natural 
wealth of the country. Concessions shall always be limited in time and subject to State 
control. The growing social needs of the 
Natives must be regarded and the profits 
taxed for the social and material benefit of 
the Natives. 
3.—Labor: Slavery, forced labor and corporal punishment, except in punishment of 
crime, shall be abolished; and the general 
conditions of labor shall be prescribed and 
regulated by the State. 
4.—Education: It shall be the right of 
every Native child to learn to read and 
write his own language and the language of 
the trustee nation, at public expense, and 
to be given technical instruction in some 
branch of industry. The State shall also 
educate as large a number of Natives as 
possible in higher technical and cultural 
training and maintain a corps of Native 
teachers. 
5.—Medicine and Hygiene: It shall be recognized that human existence in the tropics calls for special safeguards and a scientific system of public hygiene. The State 
shall be responsible for medical care and 
sanitary conditions without discouraging 
collective and individual initiative. A ser­274 THE
vice created by the State shall provide physicians and hospitals, and shall enforce 
rules. The State shall establish a native 
medical staff. 
6.—The State: The Natives of Africa 
must have the right to participate in the 
government as fast as their development 
permits in conformity with the principle 
that the government exists for the Natives 
and not the Natives for the government. 
The Natives shall have voice in the government to the extent that their development permits, beginning at once with local 
and tribal government according to ancient 
usage, and extending gradually as education and experience proceeds, to the higher 
offices of State, to the end that, in time, 
Africa be ruled by consent of the Africans. 
7.—Culture and Religion: No particular 
religion shall be imposed and no particular form of human culture. There shall be 
liberty of conscience. The uplift of the Natives shall take into consideration their 
present condition and shall allow the utmost scope to racial genius, social inheritance and individual bent, so long as these 
are not contrary to the best established 
principles of civilization. 
8.—Civilized Negroes: Wherever persons 
of African descent are civilized and able to 
meet the tests of surrounding culture, they 
shall be accorded the same rights as their 
 CRISIS 
fellow-citizens; they shall not be denied on 
account of race or color a voice in their own 
government, justice before the courts, and 
economic and social equality according to 
ability and desert. 
9.—The League of Nations: Greater security of life and property shall be guaranteed the Natives; international labor legislation shall cover Native workers as well as 
whites; they shall have equitable representation in all the international institutions 
of the League of Nations, and the participation of the blacks themselves in every 
domain of endeavor shall be encouraged in 
accordance with the declared object of Article 19 of the League of Nations, to wit: 
"The well being and the development of 
these people constitute a sacred mission of 
civilization and it is proper in establishing the League of Nations to incorporate 
therein pledges for the accomplishment of 
this mission." 
Whenever it is proven that African Natives are not receiving just treatment at the 
hands of any State or that any State deliberately excludes its civilized citizens or subjects of Negro descent from its body politic 
and cultural, it shall be the duty of the 
League of Nations to bring the matto.i to 
the attention of the civilized world. 
BLAIS E DIAGNE , President. 
W . E. B. Du Bois, Secretary. 
CHILDREN AT EASTER 
C." EMIL Y PRAZIE R 
WHAT day in old Jerusalem when Christ 
our Lord was slain, 
I wonder if the children hid and wept in 
grief and pain; 
Dear little ones, on whose fair brows His 
tender touch had been, 
Whose infant forms had nestled close His 
loving arms within. 
 think that very soberly went mournful 
little feet 
When Christ our Lord was laid away in 
Joseph's garden sweet, 
And wistful eyes grew very sad and dimpled cheeks grew white, 
When He who suffered babes to come was 
prisoned from the light. 
With beaming looks and eager words a 
glad surprise He gave 
To those who sought their buried Lord and 
found an empty grave; 
For truly Christ had conquered death Himself the Prince of Life, 
And none of all His followers shall fail in 
any strife. 
0 little ones, around the cross your Easter 
garlands twine, 
And bring your precious Easter gifts to 
many a sacred shrine, 
And, better still, let offerings of pure young 
hearts be given 
On Easter Day to Him who reigns the King 
of earth and heaven. 
ISOME CONTEMPORARY POETS 
OF THE NEGRO RACE 
WILLIA M STANLE Y BBAITHWAIT E 
THE present revival of poetry in America could scarcely advance without 
carrying in its wake the impulse and practice of a poetic consciousness in the Negro 
race. 
While we have no traditions in the art, 
we have a rich and precious tradition in 
the substance of poetry: vision, intense emotionalism, spiritual and mystical affinities, 
with both abstract and concrete experience, 
and a subtle natural sense of rhythmic 
values. All these are essential folk-qualities, primal virtues in the expression of impassioned experience, whether festive or 
ceremonial, in all the indigenous folk-literatures of the world. But when a race 
advances from primitive life and customs, 
or when the divisions of a particular race 
become sharply differentiated by learning 
and culture, and intercourse with other peoples with modes of culture more perfect in 
certain respects affects them, there is produced a standard of form in written and 
oral speech that becomes a characteristic 
of class co-racial consciousness. This standard becomes the medium of literary expression in which taste is the vital essence, 
and is opposed by the "vulgar tongue" of 
the "people" in which the vigorous and imaginative folk-ballads are recited, the communal chants of traditional custom and 
ritual dramatized, and national songs sung. 
The survival of the vulgar tongue in modern times, where the influence of formal and 
conventional civilization has penetrated 
among primitive communities, is in dialect 
the attempt of the invaded, enslaved, and 
suppressed peoples, to imitate phonetically 
the speech of the dominant class or race. 
Dialect is, thus, not the corruption of the 
folk or tribal language, of the Frankish 
invaders of Gaul, of the Anglo-Saxon conquest of ancient Britain, of the absorption 
of the African savages—who may be likened in every tribal respect to the Franks, 
Angles and Saxons—by America, but of 
the language of the Latins, the Britons, and 
the English. 
Dialect may be employed as the langue 
d'oc of Frederic Mistral's Provencal poems, 
as a preserved tongue, the only adequate 
medium of rendering the psychology of character, and of describing the background of 
the people whose lives and experience are 
kept within the environment where the dialect survives as the universal speech; or it 
may be employed as a special mark of emphasis upon the peculiar characteristic and 
temperamental traits of a people whose action and experiences are given in contact 
and relationship with a dominant language, 
and are set in a literary fabric of which they 
are but one strand of many in the weaving. 
I have gone to some length in the foregoing because the matter is of vital importance to those who regard the future accomplishment of the Negro in American literature. It holds, too, I think, the explanation of that gap which exists between the 
mysterious and anonymous period of the 
"Sorrow Songs"—vivid, intense poetry of 
a suffering, but eternally confident folk— 
and the advent of Paul Laurence Dunbar. 
The Negro poet as such, can be said to 
have inherited no poetic traditions which 
would make him a bi-national artist: that 
is to say, he had no precursors sufficient 
in numbers and of decided genius, the substance of whose song was racial, while the 
expression was national—the glorious and 
perfect instrument of English poetic art, 
which we know as the common possession 
of Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Wordsworth, Keats, Shelley, Swinburne, Browning, Longfellow, Poe and Lowell. 
This gap I postulate as a silent transition to a new order of imaginative and emotional racial utterance. Remember that 
here was a race of many tribes, members 
of which amounting to hundreds of thousands were stolen from their native homes, 
from their immemorial customs and traditions, which in many instances have been 
proven to be the traits of a highly organized primitive culture and social code, and 
forcibly held in a captivity -that suppressed every virtue but work and every 
ideal but obedience. The struggle through 
two centuries under this unchristian suppression was toward the acquisition of a 
275 276 THE
new language which in all its unfamiliar 
and tortuous meanings had to be learned 
through the auditory sense, as the invaluable aids of reading and writing were denied; and it is little wonder that the earliest and latest folk utterance of these 
people was the collective yearning of sorrow, impassioned and symbolic, addressed 
to the one benign spirit their masters taught 
them from whom to seek love and mercy in 
a mystical hereafter as a compensation for 
their miserable existence on earth. It was 
the poetry of an ancient race passing 
through the throes of an enforced re-birth 
into the epoch of an alien and dominating 
civilization. 
When it sought voice in Paul Laurence 
Dunbar, it did so with old memories and 
impulses; it was the finale, in a rather 
conscious manner, of centuries of spiritual 
isolation, of a detached brooding and yearning for self-realization in the universal 
human scale, and in a childish gayety in 
eating the fruits of a freedom so suddenly 
possessed and difficult to realize. Dunbar 
was the end of a regime, and not the beginning of a tradition, as most careless critics, 
both white and colored, seem to think. But 
his niche is secure because he made the 
effort to express himself, and clothe his 
material artistically; though he never ventured into the abstract intricacies and wrung 
from the elements of rhythmic principles 
the subtle and most haunting forms of expression. His work reflected chiefly the life 
of the Negro during the era of Reconstruction and just a little beyond, when the race 
was emerging from the illusion of freedom to the hard and bitter reality of how 
much ground still remained to be dishearteningly but persistently fought for before 
a moral and spiritual liberty, as well as 
a complete political freedom and social fraternity, was attained. When Mr. Howells 
said that Dunbar was the first poet of his 
race to express and interpret the life of 
his people lyrically, he told only a halftruth ; what survives and attracts us in 
the poetry of Dunbar is the life of the 
Negro in the limited experience of a transitional period, the rather helpless and 
still subservient era of testing freedom, and 
adjusting in the mass a new condition of 
relationship to the social, economic, civil 
and spiritual fabric of American civilization. Behind all this was an awakening 
 CRISIS 
impulse, a burning and brooding aspiration, creeping like a smothered fire through 
the consciousness of the race, which broke occasionally in Dunbar as through the crevices 
of his spirit—notably the sonnet to "Robert 
Gould Shaw," the "Ode to Ethiopia," and a 
few other poems—but which he did not 
have the deep and indignant and impassioned vision, or the subtle and enchanting art to sustain. 
Such a poet we did have in substance, 
though he chose to express himself in the 
rhythms of impassioned prose rather than 
the more restricted and formal rhythm of 
verse. But the fact is as solid as the earth 
itself, that Dr. DuBois in "The Souls of 
Black Folk" began a poetic tradition. 
This book has more profoundly affected the 
spiritual nature of the race than any other 
ever written in this country; and has more 
clearly revealed to the nation at large the 
true idealism and high aspiration of the 
American Negro; and the intellectual mind 
of the country accepted it as the humanistic 
doctrine by which on terms of equal economic, political and social endeavor the 
Negro was to work out his destiny as an 
American citizen—sharing pound for pound 
the weight of responsibility, enjoying the 
same indivisible measure of privilege in the 
American democracy. 
It is only through the intense, passionate, spiritual idealism of such substance as 
makes "The Souls of Black Folk" such 
a quivering rhapsody of wrongs endured and 
hopes to be fulfilled that the poets of the 
race with compelling artistry can lift the 
Negro into the only full and complete nationalism he knows—that of the American 
democracy. "There is no difference between 
men;" declared G. Lowes Dickinson, the 
English Platonist, "wealth, position race or 
nationality, make no difference between 
men: it is only the growth of the soul." And 
the poets of a race give expression and reality to the soul of a people through whose 
eternal laws no unnatural impediments of 
injustices or wrongs can keep from ascendency to the highest fulfilment and the 
fullest participation in ideal and eternal 
privileges of life. 
I am not one who believes that a Negro 
writer of verse—or of fiction, for that matter—must think, feel or write racially to 
be a great artist; nor can he be distinctively 
labeled by the material he uses. This is a SOME CONTEMPORARY POETS OF THE NEGRO RACE 277 
fallacy too often expressed by critics to 
confirm the desired hypothesis that the 
Negro is humanly different in the scale of 
mankind, that even after some centuries of 
civilizing process in America, he is still 
nearer in his most cultivated class to the 
instincts of his ancestral forbears than any 
other of the conglomerate races who compose the citizenry of the Republic. In every 
race and nation there are primitives who 
retain the impulses of barbarism, more evident and prevalent among peoples of the 
Teutonic stock than among those of the 
Latin stock. But the Negro has absorbed, 
in his advanced class, just as the advanced 
class of any other peoples, the culture of 
the best civilizations in the world today, and 
in his imaginative and artistic expression 
he is universal. What I said about embodying racial aspirations and material does not 
alter this fact. All great artists are interracial and international in rendering in the 
medium of any particular art the fundamental passions and the primary instincts of 
humanity. 
The promise of this I seem to detect in 
the spiritual voice of the Negro becoming 
articulate in the poets who are beginning 
to emerge from the background of the people. They are springing up around us 
everywhere, and it is the profound duty of 
the race to encourage and support them. 
There is power and beauty in this pristine 
utterance—wood notes wild that have 
scarcely yet been heard beyond the forest 
of their own dreams. But if we will cherish 
these with a responsive audience, one day, 
and not very long hence, we shall have a 
great chorus of these singers to glorify our 
souls and the soul of America. 
These notes do not include all the poets 
who have published books within recent 
years; they are intended rather to indicate 
tendencies, which I regard as more important for the moment, and illustrated by the 
examples of representative work printed 
during the past year. Thus, such writers 
as the late James D. Corruthers, Edward Smyth Jones, George Reginald Margetson, and others, do not fall within the 
scope of this paper. Nor do these writers 
quite reach the artistic development of those 
I deal with, neither does Mr. Fenton Johnson, a young man already the author of 
three volumes, and whose recent work shows 
a rapid and steady progress. This question of equipment, of a thorough grounding in the technical elements of the science 
of versification, is the greatest handicap to 
the progress of many contemporary writers 
of verse. It is the hard and laborious task 
of mastering the subtle, and fluctuating 
rhythms of verse that the average individual 
tries to escape which produces such a mass 
of mediocre work, often choking and wasting the substance of a passionate and imaginative poetic spirit. It is difficult to impress upon such individuals that they must 
serve a jealous and consecrated apprenticeship to this divine mistress, and that ambition is but a humble offering upon the altar 
of her sacred mystical religion. 
There are, however, three books recently 
published, which show not only a distinctiv e poetic quality, but also an artistic adequacy of expression and which promise 
the fulfilment of the Negro in poetry I 
have so confidently predicted for the future. 
Besides these books, I have in the past year 
come across single poems in the magazines 
by unknown writers confirming more specifically the rapid development of the higher 
poetic qualities that are manifesting themselves in the Negro. These latter I will deal 
with first, because they represent what I 
hope most to see accomplished; because they 
are the proofs of my contention that poets 
of the race may deal with a rich and original 
vein of racial material and give it the highest forms of creative literary expression, 
which neither differentiates the author from 
the artist in general nor tolerates for a moment the false psychology of that gratuitous, 
separate standard by which white critics are 
prone to judge the works of Negro authors. 
The most significant accomplishment 
among these recent poems are two sonnets 
signed by "Eli Edwards" which appeared 
in The Seven Arts for last October. "Eli 
Edwards," I understand, is the pseudonym 
of Claude MacKay, who lives in New York 
City, choosing to conceal his identity as a 
poet from the associates among whom he 
works for his daily bread. His story as it 
is, which I had from Mr. Oppenheim, who 
accepted his poems when editor of The 
Seven Arts, is full of alluring interest, and 
may one day be vividly featured as a 
topic of historic literary importance. For 
he may well be the keystone of the new 
movement in racial poetic achievement. Let 
me quote one of the sonnets: 278 THE
TH E HARLE M DANCE R 
Applauding youths laughed with young 
prostitutes 
And watched her perfect, half-clothed 
body sway; 
Her voice was like the sound of blended 
flutes 
Blown by black players upon a picnic day. 
She sang and danced on gracefully and 
calm, 
The light gauze hanging loose about her 
form; 
To me she seemed a proudly-swaying palm 
Grown lovelier for passing through a 
storm. 
Upon her swarthy neck black, shiny curls 
Profusely fell; and, tossing coins in 
praise, 
The wine-flushed, bold-eyed boys, and even 
the girls, 
Devoured her with their eager, passionate 
gaze; 
But, looking at her falsely-smiling face 
I knew her self was not in that strange 
place. 
Here, indeed, is the genuine gift—a vision 
that evokes from the confusing details of 
experience and brings into the picture the 
image in all its completeness of outline and 
its gradation of color, and rendered with 
that precise surety of form possessed by the 
resourceful artist. The power in this poet 
is, I think, his ability to reproduce a 
hectic scene of reality with all the solid 
accessories, as in "The Harlem Dancer," 
and yet make it float as it were upon a 
background of illusion through which comes 
piercing the glowing sense of a spiritual 
mystery. Note the exalted close of Mr. 
Edward's riotous picture of the dancer 
when 
... . looking at her falsely-smiling face, 
I knew herself was not in that strange 
place— 
he translates the significance of the intoxicated figure with its sensuous contagion into something ultimate behind the 
"falsely-smiling face," where "herself"—be 
it the innocent memory of childhood, perhaps of some pursuing dream of a brief 
happiness in love, or a far-away country 
home which her corybantic earnings secures 
in peace and comfort for the aged days of 
her parents—is inviolably wrapped in the 
innocence and beauty of her dreams. This 
sonnet differs in both visionary and artistic 
power from anything so far produced by 
the poets of the race. The visual quality 
here possessed is extraordinary; not only 
 CRISIS 
CLAUD E MACKA Y 
does Mr. Edwards evoke his images with a 
clear and decisive imagination, but he 
throws at the same time upon the object 
the rich and warm colors of his emotional 
sympathies. 
Another poem of last year is by a 
young man, Roscoe C. Jamison. His 
"Negro Soldiers," first published in TH E 
CRISI S for September, 1917, is undeniably 
the finest contribution in verse to the Negro's participation in the war. In such a 
brief compass the poet has focussed the 
heart-burning predicament of a many-millioned people, and yet unfalteringly he 
points the inevitable self-sacrificing way, 
fervently believing that it will not be in 
vain. And underneath it all is a current 
of exaltation in that allusion to the crucified Christ which makes these people the 
victors in the anguish of their treatment. 
Though it was first printed in this magazine, and many times reprinted since,
shall quote it here, because it cannot be 
too often read and cherished: 
These truly are the Brave, 
These men who cast aside 
Old memories, to walk the blood-stained pave 
Of Sacrifice, joining the solemn tide 
That moves away, to suffer and to die 
For Freedom—when their own is yet denied! 
0 Pride! O Prejudice! When they pass by. 
Hail them, the Brave, for you now crucified! 
 I SOME CONTEMPORARY POETS OF THE NEGRO RACE 279 
These truly are the Free, These souls that grandly rise Above base dreams of vengeance for their wrongs, 
Who march to war with visions in their eyes 
Of Peace through Brotherhood, lifting glad 
scngs 
Aforetime, while they front the firing-line.
Stand and behold! They take the field to­ day, 
Shedding their blood like Him now held 
divine, 
That those who mock might find a better way! 
Need a race despair which possesses a 
voice of flame and dew like that—a voice, 
too, that has in it the solacing and uplifting strains of confident tomorrows? 
This young man had a future of immense 
possibilities. Unfortunately he has died 
since this appreciation was written. 
THE LATE EOSCOE C, JAMISON 
In Georgia Douglas Johnson we have the 
foremost woman poet of the race, a writer 
whose lyrics have some of that flame-like 
intensity and delicate music which makes 
Christina Rossetti the foremost woman poet 
of England. But I do not mean, and I do 
not wish it to be understood, that I limit 
her horizons when I characterize her as the 
foremost woman poet of the race. She expands beyond into the universal, and as 
the title of her volume, "The Heart of a 
Woman," indicates, she renders and interprets the mysterious and inexplicable secrets of femininity. The key that unlocks 
her dreams, her unique sensibility, to revealing those shadowy and passionate 
depths which lie in a woman's heart, seems 
to mould itself out of the abstraction of 
this mood in "Contemplation"? 
We stand mute! 
No words can paint such fragile imagery, Those prismic gossamers that roll 
Beyond the sky-line of the soul; 
We stand mute! 
The soul of this sex, playing for so many 
centuries the role of Lady Shalott, has at 
last refused to take the world reflected 
through a mirror; she will look with her 
own eyes through the window of experience 
down upon many-towered Camelot; the 
shattered mirror has brought her face to 
face with reality. That is why, perhaps, 
that women—before they gained the defiant 
courage of the new art with the Freudian 
psychology of erotic motorism—made most of 
the frail, pensive songs of the world. 
Whether in religion or love, or in the descriptive rendering of nature, they always 
extracted the substance to which clung the 
mist of tears. Not always the tears of despair, but tears of joy and exultation as well. 
This exquisite quality gives a charming atmosphere to Mrs. Johnson's lyrics. 
There is in Mrs. Johnson the pure poetic 
temperament, burning, quivering, thrilling, 
through the subjective lyric emotion into 
delicately textured and colored speech. 
Through these lyrics the whole scale of a 
woman's heart is sounded, and as if a little tired with so much giving, and so much 
like a woman, too, when she has lavished 
her soul upon life, she folds in the end 
her little dreams up in her heart: 
I'm folding up my little dreams 
Within my heart to-night, 
And praying I may soon forget 
The torture of their sight. 
For Time's deft fingers scroll my brow With fell relentless art— I'm folding up my little dreams 
To-night, within my heart! 
In Mr. Waverley Turner Carmichael's 
"The Heart of a Folk" we have a spontaneous singer who has written the raciest 
and most indigenous dialect verse since 
Dunbar. His gift is natural and unforced; 
humor and pathos blending with instinctive utterance throughout his work. His 
volume contains a number of pieces that 
can come under no other classification than 
that of the "Spirituals" of the ante-bellum 
Negro; he has accomplished the rare thing 
of reproducing both the haunting rhythm 
and the fervid imagery of the "Sorrow 
Songs," to a degree I did not think pos­280 THE
sible today. They are not exactly the same, 
but they come so close to the original impulse and expression that they might easily 
deceive one unacquainted with the inexplicable modulations of the genuine product. 
Here is a sample: 
Keep me, Jesus, keep me; 
Keep me 'neath Thy Mighty Wing, 
Keep me, Jesus, keep me; 
Help me praise Thy Holy Name, 
Keep me, Jesus, keep me. 
O my Lamb, come my Lamb, 
0 my good Lamb, 
Save me, Jesus, save me. 
Here is a poet who might restore something of that peculiar artlessness of praise 
and longing of the ante-bellum Negro and 
thus preserve a lingering echo of that tradition—if he returns from the furnace of 
war whither he has gone to help make safe 
his country for the democracy that wrung 
such bitter anguish out of his forebears. 
Looked at in every way the foremost 
poet of the race today is Mr. James Weldon 
Johnson, whose "Fifty Years and Other 
Poems" has recently been published. Certainly Mr. Johnson has proven himself more 
versatile than his brother-poets, and he has 
been able to define certain characteristics 
in his verse more broadly based upon experience. He is also more ably equipped to 
bend his material to the specific purpose in 
hand, so that there is no indefinite vagueness in his work. He has rather a fullbodied instead of a subtle music, and his 
emotions, enraptured as they are, never 
wander incoherently out of control. He 
brings, too, a wealth of ideas into his poems, 
and presents them with that finality Which 
sometimes makes you gasp at their audacity, and at others submit to the chastisements of truth. As Professor Brander 
Matthews remarks in his Introduction to 
 CRISIS 
Mr. Johnson's poems, he shows himself a 
"pioneer in the half-dozen larger and bolder 
poems, of a loftier strain, in which he has 
been nobly successful in expressing the 
higher aspirations of his own people. It is 
in uttering this cry for recognition, for 
sympathy, for understanding, and above all, 
for justice, that Mr. Johnson is most original and most powerful. In the superb and 
soaring stanzas of 'Fifty Years' (published exactly half a century after the 
signing of the Emancipation Proclamation) 
he has given us one of the noblest commemorative poems yet written by any 
American—a poem sonorous in its diction, 
vigorous in its workmanship, elevated in 
its imagination and sincere in its emotion. 
In it speaks the voice of his race; and the 
race is fortunate in its spokesman. In it 
a fine theme has been finely treated. In 
it we are made to see something of the 
soul of the people who are our fellow-citizens now and forever—even if we do not 
always so regard them. In it we are glad 
to acclaim a poem which any living poet 
might be proud to call his own." 
Mr. Johnson's poems are so much better 
known, most of them having originally appeared in the leading magazines of the 
country, than those of the other poets 
treated in this paper, that I shall not 
lengthen the already overlengthened space 
allowed me. And I wish, too, I might comment on Mr. Benjamin Brawley's fine ballad, "The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus," and 
the verses of Jessie Fauset, which I have 
noticed in the magazines from time to time, 
as having a certain wistful note of their 
own. Both these poets, I trust, will soon 
give us a collection of their poems, and thus 
give me the pleasure of writing about them. 
JAMES WELDON JOHNSON GEORGIA DOUGLAS JOHNSON National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
THE STORY OF THE BRANCHES 
FOR 1918 
The following in a short, incomplete report 
of the Branches of the Association. 
It 7tiust be short to fit THE CRISIS, and it 
must be incomplete since the National 
Office knows only a part of its Branches' 
activities. 
LABOR 
WIT H the cessation of immigration, incident upon the European War, 
hundreds of thousands of colored men and 
women entered upon new employment. This 
was not accomplished without many a battle. In Charleston, S. C , the Navy Yard 
needed women workers, but did not want to 
employ colored. The Branch, aided by the 
President of the District of Columbia 
Branch, succeeded in getting about 250 colored women into the Yard, in jobs which 
they have held satisfactorily. At San Antonio, Texas, the Branch, under its able 
Executive, secured employment for three 
hundred colored women at the Reclamation 
Station. At Memphis and Louisville, colored women were put at over-rough, disgusting tasks by the military authorities. 
The Branches had them removed and better 
work assigned them. Cleveland and Detroit 
were confronted with a great influx of 
northern labor into workshops and factories, 
and their Branches investigated conditions 
and did much to improve them. The colored workers have had their bouts with 
union labor. National headquarters has 
handled more than one case. At Charleston, W. Va., the Branch acted alone, successfully reinstating two colored plumbers 
with whom the white workmen refused to 
work. In the civil service, Detroit had a 
successful case getting a colored woman 
postal clerk- into the position to which her examinations entitled her. Danville, Va., saw 
to it that a Negro who had five times successfully passed his examination as letter 
carrier secured his position. But the bulk of 
this civil service work falls on the District 
of Columbia Branch. Washington is the 
center for government jobs. One time it is 
the case of a colored typist who is refused 
a registration card. The Branch sees that 
she is registered. Again a stenographer, 
summoned from a distant state, appears at 
the appointed place and because she is colored is told that she is not wanted. The 
Branch has her receive her appointment. 
All cases do not turn out so favorably as 
these, but the President of the Branch and 
his able Executive Committee (a committee 
that meets every Saturday afternoon 
throughout the year) see to it that cases are 
protested and that discrimination does not 
pass unchallenged. 
Our Southern Branches have been confronted with a new reading of the Work or 
Fight Order making it applicable to anyone 
whom an employer wants to keep or to get 
at a low wage! A hairdresser must drop 
her trade and do her white neighbor's 
washing. This is reported by the Montgomery Branch to the State Council of Defense 
and the fine is remitted. A woman, in Augusta, Ga., is arrested under the Work or 
Fight law for leaving domestic service to 
go into a better job, but when she comes 
before the court her case is dismissed, since 
the judge sees the room filled with influential, respected colored N. A. A. C. P. members. Little Rock, Ark., reports and gets action against the efforts of the cotton planters to keep women at a low wage in the 
fields. And Atlanta, Ga., after a vigorous 
fight, keeps the law from being applied in 
its city to women. 
EDUCATION 
FO R thirty-two years the anomalous situation has existed at Charleston, S. C , 
of colored children, not permitted to associate at school with white children, and yet 
taught by white teachers,—teachers who 
281 282 TH E
never failed to let the children know they 
felt themselves their superiors. The 
Charleston colored people have long protested against this and the Branch backed 
by the Branch at Columbia, the state capitol, was especially active this year. In consequence, the March CRISIS carried the news 
that the white teachers are to go out and 
the colored teachers to come into the schools. 
Charleston, W. Va., the capital of the 
state, has the immense advantage of having 
three colored men in the state legislature. 
Through their influence, with the active, energetic support of the Branch, much more 
money than formerly has been appropriated 
for colored state schools, and especially provision has been made for an adequate building for the colored deaf and dumb children. 
In the District of Columbia, the Branch, 
under the chairman of the education committee, expects to secure a fairer distribution of the city's funds than formerly. 
There are many Branches that find they 
must be on the alert to prevent some form 
of segregation in the public schools. This 
reached even as far north as Hartford, 
Conn., where the Branch came into existence 
in a spirited and successful protest against 
the placing of colored children recently arrived from the South in classes by themselves. The same is true of Moline, 111. 
Ypsilanti, Mich., wakes up to find that it 
has a separate school, forms a Branch and 
has an injunction issued to see that the 
school is closed. 
LEGISLATION 
TH E next few years should see considerable legislation favorable to the 
Negro. The recent coming together of the 
Texas Branches, all only a few months old, 
to petition the governor to push an AntiLynching bill for the state is a sign of the 
power the Negro will wield. Not the power 
that works for personal, political gain, but 
the strength of united public opinion. Where 
the Negro has the vote we are beginning to 
have colored members of the legislature. 
Our Branch on the Isthmus of Panama reports to us that a Negro has been reappointed judge on the Canal Zone. Houston, Texas, secures the right of colored 
women to register in the primaries. 
A few Northern states have excellent civil 
rights bills. Other states where we have a. 
number of active Branches are realizing the 
necessity of getting proper bills through the 
legislature. Branches in Pennsylvania, 
 CRISIS 
Ohio, Colorado, and Connecticut are engaged 
on this most important matter. 
JIM-CROWING 
I N our northern and western cities, where 
the Negro is a voter, he must nevertheless be on the alert lest his rights be curtailed by those white people whose superiority consists in making other people uncomfortable. From Ohio, through its Cleveland, 
Toledo and Lorain Branches, we learn that 
signs proclaiming that colored people will 
not be admitted to certain restaurants have 
been removed. The same news comes from 
Lincoln, Neb.; Mercer County, Pa.; Philadelphia (where theatres are also convinced 
it is best to stop segregation), Moline and 
Santa Monica Bay. The Wilmington, Del., 
Branch is working against segregation in 
the court-room, while Denver has objectionable signs removed from the city's tennis 
courts. San Antonio reports that it has secured better accommodations for the travelling colored public on the railroads in and 
out of its city; and Columbus, Ohio, is investigating the occasional Jim-Crowing of 
passengers between that city and Cincinnati. 
A most important Jim-Crow case has been 
tried and reported by the Baltimore Branch. 
Dr. Coleman, a colored woman physician, 
brought suit against the W. B. and A. Railway Company for attempting to segregate 
her. The case was tried by Mr. W. Ashbie 
Hawkins and a judgment of one cent and 
damages and cost was rendered. The case 
was appealed and the judge assessed the 
damages at twenty dollars. Mr. Hawkins 
writes: "I think the road is not enforcing 
the regulation now except with such persons 
as it feels will not give trouble." 
CRIMINAL CASES 
To report the Branch cases where colored men or women have been beaten 
up, or killed, by policemen; where they 
have been convicted of crime on what has 
seemed to the unprejudiced onlooker insufficient and prejudiced evidence would take 
many pages. Cases have come to us from 
Lynchburg, Va., Oklahoma, Raleigh, Newark, Port Worth, Kansas City, Kan., Bakersfield, Cal. The dramatic criminal N. A. 
A. C. P. case of 1918, ably handled by the 
Boston Branch, was that of John Johnson, 
accused of a crime in West Virginia, who 
fled to Boston. Governor McCall refused 
to send him back to West Virginia, on the 
grounds that he would not get a fair trial 
in his state. Witnesses were brought from N. A . A .
Charleston, W. Va., and after a trial that 
lasted eighteen days extradition was refused. 
San Antonio reported a case where damages were secured from a white man who 
struck a colored woman; and again a colored man whipped a white man for insulting his daughter, and was protected by the 
sheriff. Too often, however, where the 
white man is guilty, the justice meted out 
is similar to that of a case reported from 
Charleston, S. C , where a father, appeared 
against a white man charged with raping 
his ten-year-old daughter. The grand jury 
did not even examine all the witnesses, but 
at once brought in a bill of "No case." 
"THE BIRTH OF A NATION" 
TH E activity of the Branches has prevented the performance of this photoplay at Louisville, Ky., at Gary, Ind., and 
has again stopped it when a performance 
was attempted in Ohio. At Lincoln, Neb., 
and Springfield, Mo., objectionable features 
were removed. The Governor of the State 
of Pennsylvania in a letter to the Harrisburg Branch, which with Philadelphia, 
Washington and Newcastle has worked to 
have the film stopped throughout the state, 
says that he considers the play an outrage 
against one of Pennsylvania's greatest 
statesmen, Thaddeus Stevens. 
Another photo-play, "Free and Equal," 
had an objectionable Negro feature and 
owing to the energy of the Branches at Los 
Angeles and Washington, Pa., that part was 
eliminated. 
THE ARMY — SOCIAL SERVICE 
I T is unnecessary to state that the bulk 
of the work of colored as well as white 
people of the country during the past year 
has gone into war activities. The Negroes 
have given wholeheartedly to the war and 
at the same time have kept a weather eye 
out for discrimination. Emmett J. Scott, 
Assistant Secretary of War, has been appealed to many, many times. The Ohio 
Branches acted energetically in a case of 
discrimination in the Student Training 
Corps. At Ohio State University when 
the students were drawn up for drill, an 
order came for the Negroes to fall out. It 
was then explained to them by their Major 
that they would have to go to colored colleges for their training. Something of the 
same sort happened at Nebraska, where the 
Lincoln Branch was active. The matter 
 C. P. 283 
ended in the colored students being allowed 
to remain with the white. The Philadelphia 
Branch through its president worked assiduously to prevent segregation at mess 
among the white and colored workers at the 
shipyards at Hog and League Islands. 
Branch members were very active in the 
Y. M. C. A., Red Cross work, and gave 
generously to the Liberty Loans. The Boston Branch collected money for a Soldiers' 
Rest House, open to both races, reported 
by the War Department to be one of the 
best in the country. The President of the 
San Antonio Branch gave $5,000 for a Rest 
House. 
Apart from war work we hear of the 
Hartford, Conn., Branch starting classes for 
the children of southern immigrants; of 
Toledo planning a field day for the colored children of the city, and Christmas 
festivities for those who without their help 
would have had none; and of Atlanta turning to its civic tasks and rooting out dives 
and "blind tigers." 
CENSORING THE PRESS 
THE Branches keep up a steady censorship of the press. Objectionable articles are not allowed to pass unchallenged; 
news letters insulting the colored man are 
answered. Most important of all, the 
Branches are insisting that the word Negro, as long as it is to be used at all, shall 
be used as the name of a race and, therefore, capitalized. And while the press is 
censored, our own press is brought before 
the people. Many public libraries have been 
presented by their N. A. A. C. P. Branches 
with THE CRISIS. New Orleans, La., boasts 
a weekly news-sheet published by the 
Branch. 
RESPONSE TO NATIONAL OFFICE 
DURING the year the National office 
has asked for definite pieces of work 
from the Branches, to which they have 
heartily responded. The President of the 
United States was beset with letters and 
telegrams asking for a pronouncement 
against lynching, until his emphatic word 
came in August. All over the country letters poured in from Branch members demanding clemency for the soldiers at Houston. The forum plan suggested in the September Bulletin was delayed because of the 
influenza epidemic, but is now underway in 
a number of places. And meetings, in all 
the active Branches once a month, in those 284 THE CRISIS 
less active at irregular intervals, have kept 
up the interest of the organization. The 
Branch Bulletin, prints each month on an 
average of twenty-five reports. When we 
realize that all Branch work is done by 
volunteers, we appreciate what a vital part 
the movement has in the world of these 
Americans who believe in justice for the 
colored race. 
MEMBERSHIP 
BOSTON maintains the lead among our 
branches in diversity of membership, 
having a large number of persons representing other than the colored race; Des 
Moines probably has the most impressive 
with a long list of army officials. The 
Branches located at state capitols are wise 
when they secure their governors as supporters of their work. Providence has Governor R. Livingston Beeckman; St. Paul, 
Governor Burnquist, President of the 
Branch; and Kansas had as president of 
the Topeka Branch ex-Governor Arthur 
Capper, since elected to the senate. Denver 
has as member and generous contributor, 
the Hon. Lawrence Phipps, of the United 
States Senate. We are beginning to count 
our friends in Congress. A man who joins 
the N. A. A. C. P. does not have to have 
the Negro question explained to him. 
But most important to us are our rank 
and file, thousands upon thousands who subscribe to the Association platform and by 
their dues support its work. They have 
grown enormously in number since 1917— 
from 9,282 to 41,524 in the year. This 
great increase was largely accomplished by 
the Moorfield Storey Drive in the spring 
when the District of Columbia, Louisville, 
indianapolis, Charleston, Detroit, Springfield, Mass., Seattle, Dayton and Peoria 
went "over the top!" The National Office 
has worked with all the energy and determination in its power to convince the 
Branches of the value of its services and 
has rested its case upon them for support. 
The list with the present membership, on 
the following page, shows that it acted 
wisely. Through the work at headquarters 
and the work which we have tried to retail, a work carried on by unselfish men and 
women in every nearby state of the Union, 
the N. A. A. C. P. has become a vital force, 
a power for justice. America must rejoice in 
such a force, since today, for that state 
that fails to live in democracy and freedom, the handwriting is writ upon the wall. 
A PAGE OF BRANC H HISTOR Y 
1912-1919 
Membership 
Year Organized March, l, 1919. 
1912 
Boston District of Columbia Chicago New York
Baltimore Philadelphia Cleveland
Detroit, Mich
Indianapolis, Ind
East St. Louis, 111
Quincy, 111
1913 
Kansas City, Kan
 2,692 
 6,926 
 1,277 
 1,477 
 306 
 896 
 1,121 
 1,053 
 237 
 17 
 81 
. 691 
Kansas City, Mo. (Reorganized, September, 1915) 137 
Topeka, Kan 90 
Orange, N. J 126 
Northern California 1,073 
Muskogee, Okla 50 
Oklahoma City, Okla. (Reorgan­ ized, March, 1918) 45 
St. Paul, Minn 265 
Seattle, Washington 227 
Trenton, N. J
Providence, R. 1
St. Louis, Mo Union University, Portland, Oregon Harrisburg, Pa
Minneapolis, Minn Los Angeles, Cal
Shreveport, La
Newark, N. J
Pittsburgh, Pa
Buffalo, N. Y
Wilmington, Del
El Paso, Tex
 37 
 770 
1914 
 625 
 Va 20 
 165 
 109 
 554 
 295 
 191 
 85 
1915 
 740 
 67 
 302 
 75 
Albuquerque, N. M 114 
Springfield, 0 179 
Des Moines, la 389 
Cincinnati, 0 577 
Toledo, 0 611 
Danville, 111 20 
Peoria, 111 185 
Dayton, 0 326 N. A . A . C. P. 285 
Columbus, 0 696 
Evansville, Ind 21 
Lincoln Univ., Pa 36 
Decatur, 111 152 
Springfield, 111 136 
Louisville, Ky 1,325 
Gary, Ind 171 
Baltimore Co., Md 30 
Denver, Col 394 
Key West, Fla 150 
New Orleans, La 619 
1916 
York, Pa 68 
Camden, N. J 42 
Davenport, la. (Reorganized, Oc­ tober, 1918) 55 
Montclair, N. J 34 
Oberlin, 0 123 
1917 
Atlanta, Ga 1,353 
Richmond, Va 405 
Raleigh, N. C 49 
Jacksonville, Fla 510 
Greensboro, N. C 46 
Savannah, Ga 79 
Augusta, Ga 71 
Athens, Ga , • • • 36 
Durham, N. C 30 
Charleston, S. C 881 
Columbia. S. C 141 
Norfolk, Va. -. 52 
Tampa, Fla 167 
Macon, Ga 109 
New Haven, Conn 428 
Memphis. Tenn 1024 
Moline, 111 HO 
New Bedford, Mass 424 
Syracuse, N. Y 157 
Washington, Pa 294 
Maywood, 111 68 
Hartford, Conn 258 
Johnstown, Pa 229 
Toronto, Canada 39 
1918 
Springfield, Mass 340 
Portsmouth, Va 39 
Danville, Va 157 
Springfield, Mo 58 
Isthmian, C. Z 52 
Roanoke, Va 120 
San Antonio, Tex 1,228 
Winston-Salem, N. C 80 
Fayetteville, N. C 46 
Fort Worth, Tex 166 
Iincoln, Neb 236 
Lynchburg, Va 100 
Rocky Mount, N. C 51 
Santa Monica Bay, Cal 25 
Western University, Kan 30 
Wheeling, W. Va 61 
San Jose, Cal 67 
Sacramento, Cal 73 
Salt Lake City, Utah 53 
Fort Wayne, Ind 42 
Green Co., 0 379 
Ottumwa, la 61 
Adrian, Mich 42 
Akron, 0 12 7 
Asheville, N. C 103 
Charlestown, W. Va HI 
Charlottesville, Va 44 
Vicksburg, Miss 55 
Cheyney, Pa 78 
Vallejo, Cal 73 
St. Augustine, Fla 88 
Evanston, 111 59 
Beaumont, Tex 126 
Bluefield, W. Va 26 
Falls Church, Va 101 
Petersburg, Va 117 
Houston, Tex 414 
Muncie, Ind 40 
Fayette Co., Tenn 26 
Waycross, Ga 31 
Morgantown, W. Va 31 
St. Rose, La 76 
Lorain, 0 60 
Mercer Co., Pa 94 
Salem, Va 68 
Colorado Springs, Colo 87 
Columbus, Ga 132 
Middletown, 0 79 
Little Rock, Ark 102 
Montgomery, Ala 247 
Aiken, S. C 60 
Bloomington-Normal, 111 94 
New Castle, Pa 52 
Brunswick, Ga 88 
Darlington, S. C 29 
Bakersfield, Cal 99 
Flint, Mich 55 
Wellsvills, 0 52 
Ypsilanti, Mich 50 
"Pueblo, Colo 141 
Bay City, Mich 69 
Jersey City, N. J 77 
Omaha, Neb 158 
Selma, Ala 81 
Braddock, Pa 64 
Gonzales, Tex 50 
Silsbee, Tex 78 
Pine Bluff, Ark 105 
Pampanga, P. 1 126 
Urbana, 0 77 
Rome, Ga 124 
Thomasville, Ga 52 
Youngstown, 0 75 
Riverside. Cal 66 
42,781 
Members at large 1,547 
44,328 
* * * 
The following Branches have been received into the ranks of the Association 
since 1918. They show the encouraging 
growth of our work in the Southern States: 
Austin, Tex.; Cedar Rapids, la.; Dallas, Tex.; Fort Smith, Ark; Galveston, Tex.; 
Marshall, Tex.; Orange, Tex.; Albany, Ga.; 
Birmingham, Ala.; Henderson, Ky.; Hop­ kinsville, Ky.; Nashville Tenn.; Elyria, Ohio; Milwaukee, Wis.; Texarkana, Tex.; 
Alexandria, La.; Corsicana, Tex.; San Die­ go, Cal.; Grand Rapids, Mich. Men of the Month. 
GEORG E H. 
WHITE , 
called "the last of 
the Negro congressmen," is dead. He 
was born in Bladen 
County, N. C, sixtyfive years ago and 
studied at the local 
public an d normal 
schools and at Howard University. In 
1882 he wa s admitted to the Ba r 
and two years later 
was elected Solicitor 
for the Second District, including several counties, a position corresponding 
to that of District 
Attorney . After 
four years he was 
re-elected and served 
a second term; he, 
also, serve d two 
terms each in the 
House of Representatives and in the 
Senate; in 1896 he 
was elected a member of
A NEGR O CONGRESSMA N 
THE LATE CONGRESSMAN WHITE 
 Congress and 
first nomination for 
the presidency of the 
Unite d States received him as a delegate. 
Afte r practising 
law in the U. S. 
Supreme Court at 
Washington , he 
moved to Philadelphia. Following the 
death of Harry W. 
Bass, he. was appointed to the vacancy, as Assistant 
City Solicitor an d 
assigned to cases in 
the Municipal Court. 
When "The Clansman" was offered in 
the theatres of Philadelphia, ex-Con ­
gressma n White 
voiced a protes t 
against it to Mayor 
Weaver and it was 
barred. 
Thi s ma n was 
elected to Congress 
in the era following 
served two terms. The Republican Na­ father Clauses" have operated to make Mr. tional Convention which gave McKinley his White "the last of the Negro congressmen." 
reconstruction. Since that time the "GrandA " MOVIE " ACTO R 
NOBL E M. JOHNSON is known to millions of people throughout the world 
for his remarkable rise from the position 
of "extra" in Edwin Arden's Lubin feature, 
"The Eagle's Nest," to the foremost position accorded a Negro screen actor. Mr. 
Johnson is the son of Perry J. Johnson, the 
famous horseman. He was born in Colorado Springs, Colo., where he received a 
public school training. He followed during the next fifteen years a varied career 
of travel and adventure. In June, 1914, 
at Colorado Springs, he secured a position with a company of Lubin players, 
who were staging the eight-reel western 
feature, "The Eagle's Nest." He was assigned to an- Indian part, as his first introduction to the movie world. Upon the return of this company to 
Philadelphia, Mr. Johnson went to Los Angeles, in the employ of the 
Universal Company, 
where he has been 
steadily at work, with 
the exception of the 
time used in acting Noble M, Johnson for the D. W. Griffith feature production, "Intolerance." 
However, it was not until the re286 MEN OF THE MONTH 287 
IN "THE LION'S WARD" , "Sweeney Bodin" IN "THE EAGLE'S NEST" 
lease of the serial productions "The Red As a producer and director Mr. JohnAce " and "The Bull's Eye " that Mr. son's ability is demonstrated by the Lincoln 
Johnson's acting attracted national atten- Film Company (Inc.), a $75,000 Negro protion. ducing film company. 
A SINGER 
CLEOT A J. COLLINS is an Ohio 
girl. Her father is 
the Rev. Iva A. Collins, of the Ohio Conference, retired. 
Miss Collins is a 
dramatic soprano and 
an accomplished pianist. She has studied 
at the Clevelan d 
School of Music and 
the Ohio State Univ e r s i t y, and has 
taught music at Florida Baptist College, 
Samuel Houston College and the Episcopal 
Schoo l in San An ­
tonio, Tex. Through 
the interest of some 
white people in Cleveland, Miss Collins has 
had the advantage of 
a vocal course under 
Lila Robeson of the 
Metropolitan Gran d 
Opera Company, who 
says of her pupil : 
"She has a very lovely soprano voice of 
beautiful quality and 
sings songs with style 
and intelligence, " 
while Musical America reports : "The 
singing of Cleota J. 
Collins was positively 
thrilling . Th e 
entrances of the solo 
voice were made fortissimo on a high A 
against a choral background descending in 
curious intervals that 
would probably have 
taxed the ability of a 
Caucasian voice. Miss 
Collin s infused so 
much spirit into her 
work that the audience demanded a repetition." 
CLEOTA J. COLLINS Mie Lookiivg Glass 
LITERATURE 
EORGE HENRY BORER'S "Black G Regiment," quoted in the New York 
Herald on the return of the "Old Fifteenth" 
New York: 
Dark as the clouds even, Ranked in the western heaven. Waiting the breath that lifts All the dread mass, and drifts Tempest and falling brand 
Over a ruined land— So still and orderly, Arm to arm, knee to knee, Waiting the great event, Stands the black regiment. 
**** * 
"Charge!" trump and drum awoke; 
Onward the bondmen broke; 
Bayonet and sabre stroke Vainly opposed their rush. Through the wild battle's crush. With but one thought aflush, Driving their lords like chaff. In the guns' mouths they laugh, Or at the slippery brands, Leaping with open hands, Down they tear man and horse, Down in their awful course; 
Trampling with bloody heel 
Over the crashing steel, All their eyes forward bent, Rushed the black regiment. 
**** * 
Hundreds on hundreds fell; 
But they are resting well; 
Scourges and shackles strong. Never shall do them wrong. Oh, to the living few, Soldiers, be just and true! 
Hail them as comrades tried; 
Fight with them side by side; 
Never, in field or tent. Scorn the black regiment! * * * 
We are in receipt of "Emancipation and 
the Freed in American Sculpture," by Freeman H. M. Murray. This book gives an 
interesting and enlightening account of the 
various sculpture groups in which the Negro has been represented in America. 
THE " OLD FIFTEENTH" 
RETURNS 
Hp HE "Old Fifteenth," New York, has 
-1 come back to New York and has been 
the recipient of a well-merited storm of applause. The Boston, Mass., Post says: 
It is written in the book of fame of Amer­ ican soldiers that-the 369th United States Infantry, the first Negro regiment to go in­ to active service on the firing line, never lost a prisoner, a trench or a foot of ground 
in a service of nearly a year on French 
soil. Marching as an advance guard of 
the 161st division of the Second French 
Army, it was the first unit of all allied 
armies to reach the Rhine after the signing of the armistice. The regiment had 191 
days in front line trenches, which is believed 
to be a record among American units. The regiment never fought in an American bri­ gade or division, but as a part of the French Army. 
No matter where they fought—they 
fought, and as colored troops of the United 
States have always fought, "nobly." Fort 
Wagner and Kettle Hill and northern Mex­ ico knew the record of their gallantry. And 
now Europe knows it. 
* * * 
The Buffalo, N. Y., Courier records a 
new slogan: 
"My men never retire. They go forward or they die!" This was Colonel Hayward's reply to a French liaison officer on June 6 
last, when instructed to fall back during the height of the struggle for Belleau Wood. At the time Colonel Hayward had thrown off his jacket, with his insignia of rank, and was leading his colored heroes in a desper­ ate attack on the German positions. His answer blazed out of the heat of conflict— and will stand! 
Moreover, be it recorded to the eternal 
glory of his dark-skinned troops, they did not "retire." Some of them died, but the rest went forward as their commander said 
they would, winning a seemingly impossible achievement. 
* * * 
The New York Sim says thoughtfully: The Negro soldiers did not face the task of making a good reputation for fighting men of their race. That had been written in the history of the nation by their prede­ cessors in other wars. From the Revolu­ tion onward, whenever and wherever the United States has needed soldiers, the Ne­ groes have responded. They have always been recognized in the Regular Army as splendid material for professional soldiers, and they have similarly won honor in the ranks of the volunteers. In France they were brought into comparison with Negroes from other parts of the world, and in that 
comparison they suffered in no way what­ soever. The Negroes of New York who went over­ seas, return to their city with the knowledge 
288 THE 289 LOOKING GLASS 
that they have earned the plaudits that will 
be uttered in their honor by men of all races. They have upheld and raised higher than it ever was before the standard of their race. They have given the lie to the con­ tentions that city life is peculiarly demoral­ izing to men whose skins are black, and that 
the city Negro has not the physical stamina or the moral integrity of the field hand. 
The story of their achievements in the field 
is the final answer to those who have held 
that only in the southern climate and under patriarchal government can the Negro de­ velop the highest qualities of manhood and 
self-reliance. 
It must have been impossible to see the 
"Old Fifteenth" New York parade without 
being impressed with the greatheartedness 
of a people willing to fight "for a freedom 
which it does not itself possess. The New 
York Tribune recognizes this feeling: 
New York during the war period has seen and has been uplifted by many moving 
spectacles. But never have the feelings of massed thousands been as stirred as by the veterans of the Fifteenth as they marched 
with bayonets and helmets and superb elan. 
No wonder proud Colonel Hayward says his dark-skinned warriors are the best in the war. Black men returning from a great 
part in upholding a civilization they hope some day will also be completely theirs! The cheering said to them: "We are charmed by 
the magnanimity of your spirit." . . . First-class fighting men! Hats off to them! 
The tribunal of grace does not regard skin color when assessing souls. The boys cheered 
the Bartholdi statue. It makes the white man uncomfortable. It converts into strange reading glib eulogies of democratic principles. The success of one of our chief 
political parties is predicated on suppression of the Negro vote and other, parties look on without protest. 
, A large faith possesses the Negro. He has such confidence in justice that he be­ lieves its flow will yet soften hard hearts. The evidence of things hoped for suffices, and we have a wonderful example of a pa­ tience that defies discouragement. The souls of black folk! When values are truly meas­ ured, some things will be different in this country. 
CONCERNING LABOR 
EORGE E. HAYNES writes in the 
Southern Workman: 
One of the things I find colored men and women all over this country want is a fair and square chance to work at whatever they can do and in whatever place they can do 
it. They are simply asking for plain, ordi­ nary justice and for a chance to get jobs; and as long as they can do those jobs, to have a chance to hold them. 
Second, workingmen are asking for an 
ODportunity to be trained for their jobs. 
What we want is the equipment to do what­ ever work we feel ourselves called upon to 
do that the world wants done, whether that 
be writing books or following a plough, edit­ ing a newspaper or preaching a sermon, lay­ ing a brick wall, building a ship, or giving counsel at the peace table. We want educa­ tion at the expense of the public funds! we want the great bulk of the people taken off 
the charity list for their education and put on the basis of taxation. 
Third, I find that Negro men and women all over this country want a share in the common benefits of the community. I mean those public facilities in every community 
besides education. I find a common con­ sensus of opinion among workingmen all over this land that they want those ordinary 
benefits that every modern community now has provided for the residents. They are beginning to feel that they want bathtubs, sewerage and paved streets. 
The labor crisis has a peculiar significance when it comes to the question of providing the returning Negro soldier with 
work. Principal Holtzclaw, President of the 
Twelfth Annual Utica Negro Farmers' Conference, recently held at Utica Institute, 
Mississippi, said at the first session: 
We are proud of our soldiers and their ex­ ploits, both white and black. We are proud of the record they made. I would call to the attention of the Negro soldier that his rec­ ord in the present war is greatly appreci­ ated by both whites and blacks throughout 
the country. Now I would appeal to him most earnestly not to besmirch his record, to come back home, lay aside his uniform, take up his old occupation or a new one, and 
show to the world that as in war he is a soldier, so in peace he is a citizen. 
But it is easier to tell the Negro soldier 
how to hold his job than it is to tell him how 
to procure it. Forrester B. Washington 
comments in the Chicago, 111., News, on the 
lack of employment for the colored man 
who has come back: 
Ninety-nine per cent, of the colored sol­ diers who have returned to Chicago, not only 
from the cantonments in this country, but 
bearing the service and wound stripes of 
actual service on the western front, are un­ able to find employment in this city. Diffi­ cult as the problem is to obtain employment 
for returning white soldiers, it is infinitely more serious in the case of the colored he­ roes in khaki. 
If employment is to be looked upon as a reward for services rendered the country, then the colored boys deserve at least 50 per cent, division of jobs. For the "Old 
Eighth," a colored regiment, a large propor­ tion of which comes from Chicago, has seen much action and suffered many casualties. 
_ Colored soldiers who find employment are given only the most menial and lowest paid 
jobs. One returning colored soldier, a grad­ uate of Fisk University and student in Yale Divinity School, after spending a week and 290 TH E
a half in vain in search of employment in Chicago, finally was compelled to accept work as a trucker in the stockyards. 
Two colored Lieutenants, one a senior in the law school of the University of Michigan and the other a Hampton graduate, tramped 
the streets of Chicago's business district for four days before they finally found work as temporary clerks in the post office. 
These men have read that nothing would 
be too good for the colored boys who did 
their bit so bravely on the western front, and they complain that many of them have returned to be forced into even more in­ ferior jobs than they had before they went 
away. 
The United States Employment Service is glad to do what it can to place these men at 
work, but it is limited by the apparent un­ willingness of employers to wipe out the color line in the slightest degree. The fact 
is that in certain industries employers are taking advantage of the necessary retrench­ ment on account of the end of the war to make a blanket dismissal, not only of those colored employees who were taken on during 
the war, but also of those who helped them to solve their labor scarcity problem created 
by the stoppage of immigration two years before the United States entered the war. 
AFRICAN COLONIES 
OROFESSOR G. A. JOHNSTON ROSS, 
•t of Union Theological Seminary, New 
York, in a letter to the London Christian 
World opposes the suggestion that the United States take over the possession of the 
African lands taken from Germany in the 
present war: 
America has done wonderful altruistic work on the international plane, and is gird­ ing herself now for a much vaster program of international service, for which she is splendidly equipped. But that equipment most emphatically does not include equip­ ment to deal with Negro peoples. Have the newspapers and publicists who lightly sug­ gest that America should take a hand in the government of Africa forgotten that half 
the states of North America are but two generations removed from Negro slave hold­ ing; that even now in Virginia railroad 
waiting rooms have iron railings running up 
the center dividing the room into two parts, the one marked. "For White People" and 
the other, "For the Colored Race?" The young men of this country find it easy at 
the bidding of their instructors to interpret 
religion in terms of democracy and brother­ hood ; they appear for the most part, as their instructors do, profoundly unconscious of the violations of that spirit of brother­ hood which go on unchecked in their rela­ tion to the Negro. No; let the American people have full scope in Europe and in the international zone at the heart of what was Turkey, for their splendid and unselfish en­ ergies, but do not let America be burdened 
 CRISIS 
with tasks for which she is not yet histor­ ically and morally prepared. At least two generations yet must pass, if not more, be­ fore the virus of a cheap, contemptuous pride in the matter of her dealings with 
the Negro has been cleansed from the national blood. 
* * * 
His remarks are uncomplimentary to 
America, but they are well worth pondering. 
THE SOUTH AND DEMOBILIZATION 
THE South presents a curious attitude 
of unrest, one might almost say of fear, 
to the advent of the returning Negro soldier. A writer says in the Chicago, 111., 
Unity: 
Nothing but the pen of a Jonathan Swift 
could do justice to the present mood of the South, as it faces the prospect of the return and demobilization of the Negro regiments which have seen service in France. These Negroes have in past years been denied all 
rights and privileges of equal citizenship 
with whites; through the exigencies of war, they have been challenged to the greatest 
responsibility and highest honor which can be bestowed upon citizens, that of dying for their country; and they have been deliber­ ately taught the efficacy and justifiability of the use of violence in a just cause! Here is a tangle which may well give others than Southerners and Negroes, pause. It re­ minds one of the maxim so frequently used 
in the anti-slavery days—"no question is settled, till it is settled right." 
The New York Tribune adds: 
Why any one should become excited over the return of Negro soldiers from France is as perplexing to patriotic Americans as it is discouraging to the Negroes themselves, who have supported with remarkable and 
ready energy every movement necessary for national success in the war. In the South 
both races have worked together in food 
conservation, war savings, Liberty Bonds and other campaigns, and in these patriotic co-operative efforts have found a new rela­ tionship of friendly feeling and sympathy 
which, if retained, would help to bridge the critical stream of reconstruction and re- absorption of Negro soldiers into civil life 
* * * 
Yet reports from Alabama, Georgia and 
Tennessee say something akin to the Ku Klux Klan is being revived. It is almost un­ believable. The feeling of the Negroes as reflected in their newspapers is one of bit­ terness, discouragement and pathetic de­ spair. 
Ha ppily m,. , ' sen timent appears divided 
The Mayor of Knoxville, on receipt of a let­ ter from an organizer of the secret society 
in his state, called together a group of lead­ ing Negroes -of Knoxville and said he did not feel a branch of the organization was THE LOOKING GLASS 291 
necessary in his city. The name of Governor Roberts of Tennessee, having appeared 
on the list of members, he repudiated the 
organization and gave out an interview saying the use of his name was a forgery. 
An ill day will arrive if there is a revival 
of racial animosity in the South. 
* * * 
S. J. Young writes in the Columbus, Ohio, 
State Journal: 
Ar e we to see again the reconstruction 
days, only in a worse form, that were the 
aftermath of the Civil War—the rehatching 
of the Ku Klux Klan? 
The Negro came not here of his own volition, but, liking the climate and breathing 
the freedom that permeates the air everywhere, he is not now so easily frightened 
away. He is taxed without representation, 
segregated without a choice, disfranchised 
by numerical strength, lynched on the least 
provocation; the law that should protect is a 
hindrance, for it keeps him from protecting 
himself. Under these oppressions he has 
gone willingly into industry to build up the 
country; fought, bled and died that "our 
flag" may flaunt its colors to the breeze to 
tell of "freedom, " the freedom that is denied 
him. 
Wha t are his enemies afraid of that they 
should organize such a diabolic society, 
when all the world is seeking peace and the 
pursuit of happiness? He has never borne 
arms to protect his rights, nor slain to 
strike terror in the hearts of others. He is 
not anarchistic, but oppression may bring it 
about; not a Bolshevist, but hunger may 
make him so; not disloyal, but inactivity of 
the central government may cause it. He 
only asks the rights and privileges of an 
American citizen without any restrictions. 
Grant him these; denied these (in this day 
with the spirit of liberty in the air no man 
will tolerate an abridgement of his rights), 
who cannot foretell a divided country? 
W e cannot conscientiously solve the problem of Americ a or settle a Balkan quarrel, 
tell the South Americans to live brotherly 
and protect them from aggression when we 
do not protect at home. Liberty and brotherly feeling go hand in hand. Has it ever 
occurred to you that a man that has died 
so often for freedom of others may die for 
freedom for himself? Let us now begin a 
social evolution to establish an American 
plane of manhood for all of us. 
* * * 
But the really intriguing point is this— 
does the South actually suppose that the 
Negro soldier, after facing German gas 
and German barrage, is going to be seriously intimidated by a lot of silly, masked 
cowards? The wa r has not changed black 
skins to white but it has taught their owners to face a danger and see it through. It 
is just as "sweet and fitting to die" for 
Democracy at home as abroad. 
THE PITY OF IT 
HOW are we to reconcile lynching with 
the American attitude toward German and Russian brutalities? The Nation 
says: 
When the Negro went so willingly to war 
for the United States, he, of course, had 
faith that a new attitude of justice toward 
him might result. The Negro fighting in 
Europe was not simply fighting Germans, 
but was fighting indirectly for his privileges 
at home in America. With what result? 
According to the records of the Tuskegee 
Institute there were sixty-two lynchings in 
1918—twenty-four more than in 1917. The 
figure includes the lynching of two so-called 
disloyal whites. The State of Georgia again 
carries the banner of shame, leading all 
other states, with eighteen lynchings; Texas is next, with nine, and one a child under 
sixteen who was pregnant. So the story 
continues. But whereas stories of German 
and Russian brutalities, often wholly unsubstantiated, capture long columns in the 
press, our own real and terrible transgressions are crowded toward back pages into 
as narrow space as possible, if indeed the 
bloody tale is told at all. W e call attention 
once more to the facts, not to reproach any 
section of the country, but to remind our 
readers how serious is the task of building 
up a genuine civilization here at home. 
* * * 
A wearer of a Service Pin is concerned 
with the impression which our inconsistencies must make on the world abroad. He 
writes in the Detroit, Mich., Free Press: 
It is with deepest humiliation I note that 
the Southern States are still lynching Negroes. Right in the face of the peace conference, a mob burns a Negro on the public 
square in Texas for a crime for which the 
state had already meted out a fit punishment. Women, American women, stood by 
and rejoiced at this act of barbarism, while 
in France and Belgium women are crying 
out justice against Hun barbarism. 
Who will mention these facts at the great 
conference which has convened to make the 
world safe for democracy? Will our president? Or is he too much affected by the 
woes of the war-scourged countries to note 
the wrongs done his people here? If the 
Allies really wish to make the former German Kaiser suffer, they should clip his hair, 
blacken his face and banish him south of the 
Mason and Dixon line—most any state 
would do. We claim we love democracy, 
why persecute a man on account of his 
color? Wh y not imitate Marshal Foch, who 
said: "France has no color prejudice and 
persecutes no man on account of color or 
creed." 
* * * 
The Boston, Mass., Conf/regationalist and 
Advance says: 292 THE
In this proud hour of victory we have no 
right to boast. Rather, let us turn in humility to the shame of America, to the unfinished task that those who have fought the 
battles for freedom have left for us to do. 
A t least sixty-eight lynchings in the United 
States is the record for the year 1918. Wha t 
are we going to do about it in 1919? If we 
could do what we have done to save the 
world from Prussianism, can we not save 
America from the murderous mob and make 
it safe for the black man and safe for democracy? 
* * * 
A way out is suggested by the Boston, 
Mass., Evening Transcript: 
Since the president appealed to the people on July 26 to stop lynchings, twenty-one 
Negroes have been lynched—and perhaps 
some white men. Appeals of that sort have 
no permanent effect, evidently. Let us have 
a new Constitutional Amendment, providing 
that the Federal Government shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the states over 
these crimes of the mobs against law and 
authority. The new prohibition amendment 
grants to the Federal Government concurrent jurisdiction with the states to enforce 
prohibition. Only the teeth of the Federal 
Government, it seems, can ever destroy the 
jurisdiction of the mob. 
AMERICANIZATION 
SECRETAR Y OF THE INTERIO R 
FRANKLI N K. LAN E offers specific 
suggestions for the Americanization of the 
Negro: 
Then, we must consider the Negro. For 
him and his condition we are responsible as 
for no one else. He came here without exercising his own will. He was made a citizen without discrimination and in a large 
out-of-hand way. The Indian, we feel, we 
are responsible for as a nation, and we give 
him an education—a most practical one. 
But the Negro, who is a charge upon the 
American conscience and whose education, 
I believe, should long ago, in some part, at 
least, have been a charge upon the American 
pocket, is slowly, very slowly, coming into 
that knowledge which is his one chance of 
developing into a growing national asset— 
the knowledge of the way of making a living. When one looks into the effort that is 
being made to give the Negro the right sort 
of an education, he finds a much more cheerful picture than he had thought. The 
Southern States, for instance, are meeting 
with no little eagerness the offers that come 
to them to give some direction to the education of the Negro. The problem is basically 
one of money. The way has been found to 
give our colored citizen an education that 
will strengthen his fibre, widen his vision, 
and at the same time make him happy in 
achieving a useful place in society. There 
are no more inspiring and promising reports 
 CRISIS 
written in this country than those of the 
various foundations which are promoting 
the right method of educating the Negro. 
Not only is the response from the states 
encouraging, but experience has gone far 
enough forward by this time to demonstrate 
that with guidance, oversight and the bearing of only a part of the financial burden, 
this whole problem of lifting a backward 
people onto a level more compatible with 
our hopes for them and with their status as 
citizens can be realized. Still, this nation 
may learn what education will do fo r an undeveloped race by the study of its own work 
in the far-off Philippine Islands. 
* * * 
Of course, one might say that the Negro 
is already an American and needs only the 
right to enjoy the privileges of his citizenship. 
COMMUNITY SINGING 
THE Philadelphia, Pa., Record says: 
In our present widespread impulse to 
sing in communities, the Negro has come 
into his own. 
* * * 
Music is probably a good deal more of a 
motivating force to the colored races than 
to the white. It is one of their chiefest 
emotional outlets. They sing from instinct, 
from an inner necessity. No manual labor 
is so oppressive as to-silence them; and 
their love of harmony- makes them delight 
in concerted music—music with parts. 
It is this prompt and loving facility, this 
instinct for harmony as well as for melody, 
which makes the Negro such a valuable 
asset in our national will to sing. He does 
not have to be persuaded to be converted. 
Did you ever happen to be about an army 
post where Negro troops were in camp? 
There is music from reveille to taps; every 
hour, every minute of the day. All the 
time that the trumpeters are not blowing 
out actual routine bugle calls they are practicing them. Mouth-organs go, concertinas; 
more than anything, perhaps, guitars. 
* * * 
And when retreat comes at night, and 
the flag goes down, and the band stands 
out to play "The Star-Spangled Banner! " 
no other body of instrumental musicians 
ever plays with the wholehearted vivacity 
and sweep of a Negro regimental band. 
We have heard that a handful of pipers 
at the head of a Scotch regiment could 
lead that regiment down the mouth of a 
cannon. Well, likely enough they could. 
But so could an American military band 
lead a regiment of Negroes. One who has 
seen them march behind their screaming 
cornets and clarinets readily believes the 
thing. It amounts—the force of music— 
to a sort of mesmerism, —Western Newspaper Vnioit. TH E CIT Y OF NE W YOR K WELCOME S TH E RETUR N OF TH E "OLD FIFTEENTH. " The Horizon 
Vincent Saunders 
MUSIC AND ART 
O F the appearance of R. Augustus Lawson with the Philharmonic Orchestra 
in Parsons' Theatre, Hartford, Conn., the 
Daily Courant says: "Mr. Lawson, at the 
piano, was in very fine form and not only 
played the concerto with the orchestra, but 
was compelled to add two solo numbers as 
well." Mr. Lawson is organist of the Talcott Street Congregational Church. 
The bulletin of St. George's Church, New 
York City, announced on February 23 the 
completion of the twenty-fifth year of continuous service of Mr. H. T. Burleigh as 
baritone soloist, and remarked: "Through all 
these years, with their inevitable changes, 
he has been a faithful and devoted helper, 
friend and worker in the varied activities of 
this church. 1—Among our people in blessing 
and in bereavement, in jo y and in sorrow, 
few can have seen so much or have served 
so well." 
The fourth concert in the series of Historical Organ Lecture-Recitals was given by 
Clarence Dickinson, Director of Music at 
Union Theological Seminary, New York, on 
February 25, when an Ail-American program was presented. Mr. H. T. Burleigh, 
baritone, was one of the assisting artists, as 
well as one of the composers whose compositions were included on the program. Mr. 
Melville Charlton assisted at the second recital as second organist. 
An interesting account is given in the 
Musical Quarterly for January of the life 
of Chevalier de Saint-George, a noted violin 
virtuoso and composer of color who died in 
France in 1799. Saint-George was one of 
the first French musicians to write stringquartets. A street in Paris bears his name. 
The First Army Post Band, colored, is 
still active in France. During January the 
band played at one of the Catholic Cathedrals and also for the Prince of Monaco at 
his Chateau. The Prince expressed particular pleasure in Negro music. 
A particularly fine Army Band is that of 
the 368th Regiment, colored, of which Lieutenant A. Jack Thomas is leader. Lieutenant Thomas has had the advantage of two 
years' study at the Damrosch School for the 
training of band leaders. While abroad he 
composed "The Sons of Liberty March, " 
which was dedicated to the Ninety-second 
Division, and published by a French publisher. 
A t the Promenade Concerts in Queen's 
Hall, London, Henry F. Gilberts' "Comedy 
Overture on Negro Themes " was one of 
two numbers by American composers. 
(I Clarence Cameron White, violinist, asisted by T. Theo Taylor, pianist, played 
recently during the noon-hour for the 2,500 
white and Negro employees of the Armour 
Packing Company of East St. Louis, 111. 
A meeting in "Recognition of the Wa r 
Service of the Colored Soldiers" was recently held in Symphony Hall, Boston, 
Mass., with Dr. Alexander Mann, Rector 
of Trinity Church, Boston, presiding. The 
musical program included selections by Mr. 
Roland Hayes, tenor, camp-songs by Negro soldiers from Camp Devens, and Negro spirituals by choral classes from the 
Robert Gould Shaw House. 
Roland Hayes, tenor, recently appeared 
in song recital at the High School Auditorium, Plainfield, N. J., and at Quinn 
Chapel in Louisville, Ky. Of the latter engagement the Louisville Times says: "Ro ­
land Hayes, tenor, needs no allowances made 
for 'race or previous conditions.' His is one 
of the voices made for the expression of 
beautiful emotions and it is directed by an 
intelligence that gives scope to all its powers." 
Two Negro musical organizations have 
appeared in leading theatres in New Yor k 
City recently. The Clef Club Singers and 
Players have a four months' engagement 
at the Selwyn Theatre, where they have 
attracted favorable attention, with Deacon 
Johnson as leader and E. Gilbert Anderson as conductor. The Syncopated Orchestra under the direction of Will Marion 
Cook has appeared at the 44th Street 
Theatre. 
294 THE HORIZON 295 
TH E BAN D OF NE W YORK' S "OLD FIFTEENTH, " LE D B Y LT. JAMES REESE EUROP E 
THE WAR 
TH E names of forty-four Negro heroes 
of the Great Wa r have been unveiled 
on an honor tablet at the Civic League, a 
Negro organization in Williamsbridge, New 
York. 
The Jewish Welfar e Board has offered 
the use of one of its buildings at Camp Mills, 
Long Island, for an elementary and vocational training school for Negro soldiers assigned there to permanent duty. 
Since the "Old Fifteenth" has been mustered out of service, Assemblyman Martin 
J. Healy has introduced a bill to create a 
colored regiment of infantry in New York 
City to be officered by Negroes. The Healy 
measure provides that within three months 
after the enactment of the bill the AdjutantGeneral shall organize and equip a colored 
regiment which is to become a part of the 
National Guard. An y member of the regiment who served overseas is eligible for an 
officer's commission. The measure also contains a provision asking the Armory Board 
of the City of New York to provide an 
armory for this regiment. 
The City of New York, on February 17, 
celebrated the return of the 369th Infantry. 
The regiment was the first complete unit of 
the American Expeditionary Force to be 
paraded through the city. It passed under 
the uncompleted Victory Arch, led by policemen on horseback, the Police Band and 
Colonel Hayward. On Fifth Avenue they 
were reviewed by government and wa r officials and throngs and throngs of cheering 
citizens; then they marched through Harlem, where they were welcomed especially 
by their own. Each of the over three thousand Negroes was decorated with the Croix 
de Guerre; many wounded soldiers were in 
automobiles, notable among whom was Henry Johnson, who, with Needham Roberts, 
killed twenty-four scouting Huns; Lieutenant Europe's band, which became one of the 
most popular bands in France, was there; 
in the evening a dinner and entertainment 
was given the troopers by the city. 
Nettie Jackson says in the Buffalo, N. 
Y., Express: "Don't let it be said by the 
great American historians in the coming 
years that only American white women 
served as nurses in the great conflict. Put 
in a paragraph that the colored woman 
wanted to go, but the nation wouldn't let 
her. But by your own handiwork, Americans, you failed in the so-called blue-blood 
plan in the case of the Red Cross, for you 
so arranged it that you knew not the black 
from the white in the case of three hundred 
colored nurses that passed as white and 
served the great cause at God's command. 
The debauchery which the southern gentlemen and their sons delighted in will cause 
their own destruction." 
Last September Mr. L. B. Ransom was 
appointed Director of Colored Food Clubs 
in Indiana. He has organized food clubs 
in all of the large cities of the state, making a total of about one hundred clubs, 296 THE CRISIS 
representing a membership of two thousand persons. 
Sergeant J. S. Banks, of East Liberty, 
Pa., while serving with the American Expeditionary Force was promoted to a Lieutenancy. He is a member of the Maryland 
Separate Battalion. 
A statement from Lieutenant-Colonel 
George B. Lake of health reports for the 
last six months at Camp Grant, Rockford, 
111., gives the following facts: out of 81 
cases of scarlet fever only three were Negroes; in November there was not a case 
of diphtheria among the Negro soldiers, 
while among white soldiers the rate was 
20 per thousand; however mumps among 
Negro soldiers was 246.1 per thousand, and 
among the white soldiers 17.5 per thousand. 
Marga re t 
Washington is 
Orderly of the 
Minnesota Motor Corps. She 
furnishes her 
own car and 
since las t 
Apri l has 
worked from 
Alpha Station, 
one of th e 
largest Suf ­
frage and Red 
Cross stations 
in that city. 
She is also a 
surgical dressing supervisor 
of the Red 
MARGARE T WASHINGTO N Cross. 
MEETINGS 
THE National Negro Press Association 
held a four days' meeting during 
February in Nashville, Tenn., as its fourteenth annual session. The standardization of advertising, the unification of interest for race uplift, the proposition of heading off fake advertising agencies were discussed. Mr. C. J. Perry, of Philadelphia, 
Pa., was elected president. 
The International Committee of the Y. 
M. C. A. will conduct two student conferences for colored men this spring: March 
•27-30 at Prairie View, Tex., State Normal 
School; April 3-7 at Tougaloo College, Miss. 
Mr. W . C. Craver, International Student 
Secretary, will direct these conferences. 
The eighth annual Kings Mountain Student Conference, Y. M. C. A., will convene 
at Kings Mountain, N. C , May 23-June 2. 
Delegates from colored schools and colleges 
throughout the United States are invited 
to attend. 
A t Witherspoon Hall, Philadelphia, Pa., 
Dr. P. P. Claxton, U. S. Commissioner of 
Education, and Leslie P. Hill, Principal of 
Cheyney Training School for Teachers, 
brought to the attention of their audience 
the economic loss to the United States by 
its failure to educate its Negro population. 
Mr. H. T. Burleigh, Cleota J. Collins and 
the Cheyney Singers rendered music. 
A semi-political convention of Negroes 
held in Columbia, S. C , and led by Bishop 
Chappelle passed a resolution reaffirming 
allegiance to the Union Republican Party, 
"or any other political organization that will 
give us the rights to which we are entitled." 
The convention sent delegations to wait on 
Governor Cooper, to urge that Negroes be 
represented on boards of school trustees, 
and to the State Railroad Commission to 
present a petition for better railway service 
for Negroes. 
A t the meeting of the A. and N. College 
presidents, at Tuskegee Institute, the National Historical Society was organized, for 
the purpose of preserving Negro statistics. 
Dr. R. R. Wright, President of the State 
College, Savannah, Ga., was elected president of the organization. 
THE CHURCH 
ST. PAU L A. M. E. CHURCH , Pueblo, 
V Colo., from February 3-10 held a "Celebration of the Tercentenary of the Negro's 
Residence in America. " There were addresses, music and an art display. The 
Rev. W. H. Prince is pastor of this church. 
Out of a population of six thousand 
Negroes in Des Moines, Iowa, two thousand 
are members in active standing of the eight 
colored churches of the city. St. Paul A. 
M. E. Church has a membership of one 
thousand. 
The report of Olivet Baptist Church, 
Chicago, 111., for the year 1918 shows receipts amounting to $64,978 and disbursements, $58,698. It has a membership of 
7,648 and property valued at $250,000, with 
an indebtedness of $60,000. The Rev. L. K. THE HORIZON 297 
Williams, formerly of Fort Worth, Tex., 
has been the pastor for the past two years. 
Rev. J. H. Henderson, Pastor of Mt. 
Zion Baptist Church, Knoxville, Tenn., was 
recently elected a member of the white 
Baptist Ministers' Union. 
The National Catholic Association for 
the Advancement of the Colored People has 
been organized, with Dr. O'Connell, Bishop 
of Richmond, N. Y., at the head of the 
movement. 
The Yea r Book of the Churches reports 
1,204,328 Negro Baptist children and 125,­
474 teachers; for every one hundred church 
members there are forty children in the 
Sunday School. 
PERSONAL 
T T PON invitation of Will H. Hays, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, Dr. Robert R. Moton has accepted 
membership on the Roosevelt Permanent 
Memorial National Committee and become 
chairman of the Negro sub-committee. 
Sara McClenahan, a colored woman in 
Pittsburgh, Pa., has been appointed a police woman by the Department of Public 
Safety, to look after the morals of Negro 
girls and women. 
Lieutenant Charles 
C. Jackson, of Akron, 
Ohio, was awarded the 
Croix de Guerre for 
capturing the Belgian 
town of Lorgny, while 
he was with a machinegun company serving 
with th e "Suicide 
IT . JACKSO N Squad" of the Ninetysecond Division. 
Mme. Delia Parker Hicks, formerly of 
Goldsboro, N. C , now of Brooklyn, New 
York, announces the marriage of her daughter Minnie Thomascena to Professor J. Warrington Francis, of St. Kitts, B. W. I., and 
Brooklyn, New York, on April 26, 1919. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
TH E first Negro court attendant has 
been appointed by the Board of City 
Magistrates, New York, in the person of 
Harold E. Sinmelkjaer, twenty-seven years 
of age, an honorably discharged Second 
Lieutenant of the National Army. 
The Senate at Charleston, W. Va., after 
amending the School Code Bill, to eliminate 
the provision that one member of the State 
Board of Education should be a Negro, and 
further amending it to provide an Advisory 
Commission of three Negroes, passed the 
bill without a dissenting vote. It will now 
be voted on in the House. 
The Ashland Place Branch, Y. W. C. A., 
for young colored women in Brooklyn, N. Y., 
has been dedicated. The building is a fivestory structure and includes social rooms, 
library, class rooms, gymnasium, cafeteria 
and sleeping rooms with accommodation for 
twenty-two girls. 
Five hundred colored men are to be 
trained for Community and Rural Service 
among Negroes at the new Y. M. C. A. 
Training School, Atlanta, Ga., under the 
National Wa r Wor k Council, Southeastern 
Department. The school opened in February. Mr. J. W. Davis, Executive Secretary of the Twelfth Street Branch, Y . M. 
C. A., Washington, D. C , is director. 
The Wa r Camp Community Service recently assigned three colored women—Martha L. Main, Mary E. Bayne, and Edith 
Ross, for work among Negroes in Charleston, S. C , Augusta, Ga., and Norfolk, Va., 
respectively. 
A colored Y. W. C. A. has been formally opened in Germantown, Pa., with 
seven hundred charter members. 
The ratification by Illinois of the Prohibition Amendment to the Federal Constitution was the occasion of an interesting 
and dramatic incident. There are three colored members of the Lower House of the 
Illinois General Assembly whose campaigns 
have been largely financed by the "wet " 
element. It has been the accepted belief 
that no member from the districts represented could be returned if he failed to take 
his stand among the "wets"—in short, it was 
considered political suicide for anyone representing this constituency to identify himself in any way with the dry cause. Ye t 
one of the colored representatives, Adelbert 
H. Roberts, said in a rousing speech before 
the House: "Desiring to prove to the world 
that a Negro legislator is capable of having 
a broader vision, a higher conception of the 
duty of a citizen in a great crisis like this, 
than the Chicago Tribune (which had just 
published a scurrilous comparison of the 
prohibition amendment and the 15th amendment) I desire to join the best white people of the country by putting into the Constitution an amendment, quite as glorious as 
the amendment of emancipation." 298 THE CRISIS 
The R. W. U. Thrift Club, a student 
organization of Roger Williams University, 
Nashville, Tenn., was organized last summer to promote the sale of Wa r SavingStamps. The last monthly report of the 
treasurer shows a deposit of seventy dollars in these stamps. The organization is 
keeping in touch with each one of its alumni 
"over there." It recently furnished the 
school president's reception room with new 
furniture. 
Among the appropriations of the Legislature at Charleston, W. Va., are the State 
Negro Tuberculosis Sanitarium, for current 
general expenses, $15,000 during 1920 and 
$18,000 during 1921; for repairs and improvements, $5,000 each year; the West 
Virginia Negro Orphans' Home, for current 
general expenses, $12,500 each year; the 
Bluefield Negro Institution, for salaries of 
officers and teachers, $17,000 each year; 
other expenses, $9,000 each year. 
EDUCATION 
ON E of the youngest 
pupils to enter 
Hunter College, New 
York City, this term is 
a colored girl twelvey e a r - ol d Hyacinth 
Davis, who took the entrace examinations and 
passed with 100 per HYACINT H DAVI S cent in mathematics. 
The Assistant Superintendent of Schools, 
Washington, D. C , reports the graduation 
of two hundred colored grammar school 
students, of whom 142 will enter the new 
Dunbar High School and the remaining 
58, the Armstrong Manual Training School. 
The following Negrc students were graduated at the January commencement from 
high schools of Rochester, N. Y. : Hazel 
Cash, Katherine Beard, Emily Bennett, Mildred Taylor. The Misses Cash and Beard 
have been given office positions at East 
High School. 
The General Education Board has issued 
its annual report for the fiscal year 1917­
1918, which shows appropriations of $318,­
885 to schools for Negroes. 
In the State of Kentucky during 1918 
there were 390 high schools for white students, an increase of 20 over the previous 
year, with an enrollment of 21,707 students, 
an increase of 2,129 over the previous year. 
The number of graduates were 2,468, an increase of 260 over the previous year, 796 
of whom entered colleges, an increase of 
30 over the previous year. For colored 
students there were 34 high schools with 
an attendance of 1,209, of whom 42 were 
graduated during 1918. The cost of the 
white high school buildings and grounds 
is $4,874,513 with equipment valued at 
$250,000. The cost of the colored high 
school buildings and grounds is $352,170. 
GHETTO 
NEGRO officers of the American Expeditionary Forces returning on the Olympic were segregated, irrespective of rank, in 
a tea-room, while the white officials used the 
dining-room. Not only this, but James G. 
Wiley, a colored Y. M. C. A. secretary, says: 
"The regimental flag and colors of the 365th 
Infantry were salvaged and lost The 
officers so humiliated feel that, not only 
their personal valor and honor have been 
insulted, but that the uniform and rank 
of the United States Army have been degraded and they do not intend to let it go 
unchallenged." 
According to a bulletin issued from 
the Division Superintendent's Office at 
Marshall, on the Texas and Pacific Railroad, Negro passengers will be allowed access to the dining cars after the white passengers have used them. 
Injunctions restraining the use of the 
name Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order of 
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine by an organization of Negroes, on the ground that it 
is an imitation of the name of the Ancient 
Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, have 
been made permanent by the Supreme 
Court, which refused to review proceedings 
in the Georgia state courts. 
Having failed in their efforts to prevent 
Morgan College at Baltimore, Md., from establishing a Negro settlement by decision 
of the Legislature, the white opponents are 
now seeking to have the Park Board extend 
its property, which would prevent this effort. 
Magistrate Simpson in New Yor k City 
has rendered a decision to the effect that 
the exclusion of Negroes from the swimming pool at the Bronx International Exposition Grounds does not constitute an offense. The court has ruled, however, that 
ejected persons may file a suit against the 
management under the Civil Rights' Act. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 299 
Dear Reader:— 
The circulation of this issue of the 
CRISIS is 97,000—which shows that 
our CRISIS family is growing. But 
we are not satisfied and you are not 
satisfied when we remember that there 
are thousands of people in the United 
States — both white and black — who 
reallv need the CRISIS. Need Die 
CRISIS? Well, yes! Of the former 
group—because they should know how 
black folks are feeling and what they 
are thinking these davs of lofty talk 
about DEMOCRACY ! Of the latter 
group:—because they should know what 
their dark brothers—soldiers and 
civilians—on the battle scarred fields of 
Europe—in the dark and mighty continent of Africa—in the islands of the 
Sea—in the States of America United 
—what they are doing, how they are 
feeling and what they are thinking. 
This issue of the CRISIS tells of the 
Pan-African Congress recently held in 
Paris at the call of our own Dr. DuBois. The next issue will tell especially 
of the work of the black soldier in the 
Great War. 
There is no limit to the service which 
the CRISIS can render to the world in 
general and to the darker races in particular except your willingness to cooperate with us in our attempts to 
spread the truth, to tear down race 
preudice, to "Shout the Glad Tidings"! 
I have taken a long time to come to 
the point. If you want to help increase 
the CRISIS family—here is a suggestion, dear reader: 
For the next ten days following your 
reading of this page see how many 
new paid up yearly subscribers you can 
secure. Send their names and addresses 
plainly written with remittance to this 
office—and let the spirit of Easter 
abound! 
Sincerely yours, 
Business Manager of The CRISIS, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Htivo you Btudlod tho cover of this Issue of tho 
CRISls y Do you grasp Its deopor moaning? It Is 
Ma y Howard Jackson's way of expressing. "Brother ­
hood"—the mea t message of the rlson Christ. This 
flculpturo group Is on exhibition at tho Independent 
Ar t Society Exhibit now being held a.' tho Waldor f 
Astoria In Now Yor k City. "Th e Child," another of 
Mrs. Jackson's works has been for two years on exhibition In tho Corcoran Ar t Gallery in Washing ­
ton, D . C, 
Woul d you llko to adorn the walls of your home, 
your library or your school with photographs of these 
and other works of this gifted sculptress of the race? 
Add e B: 
MAY HOWARD JACKSON 221 W . 138th St. New Yor k City 
MODERN POULTRY 
BUSINESS Edited by a Colored American 
A Cornell graduate, a teacher and farme r 
Contents of March Number 
"Selecting the Layer," by the Association of 
Poultry Instructors and Investigators at 
Cornell University. 
"The Guinea Fowl," by Miss Viola Springstien 
"The Value of a Hen," by M, M. Wilson 
Report of the Laying Contest held at Storrs, 
Conn. 
Six Months, 25c. Send Post Office Order 
3 4 COENHII X BOSTON, MASS . 
Wanted at Once 
Automobile Mechanic. Must be steady, 
sober, competent man capable of complete repairs on all cars. 
Trimmer. Both carriage and automobile work, Man who can draft and 
build buggy and automobile tops. 
Make cushions and backs. Thorough 
knowledge of trimming line. 
Woodworker. Man capable of drafting 
and building wagon or truck bodies. 
Thorough knowledge of both buggy 
and automobile woodwork. 
Factory Superintendent. Man of presence, capable of meeting people. 
Knowledge of automobile work necessary. 
If you can fill the bill for anyone of 
these places, get in touch with us. 
Each a steady, paying position for the 
right man. Married men preferred. 
We don't want men who think they can 
do this work, but men whose experience has proven that they can do it. 
Are you the man ? 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Mention The Crisis. 300 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MEN AND WOMEN TRAINED IN AGRICULTURE 
WILL BE IN GREAT DEMAND AFTER THE WAR 
Secretary Lane is urging that plans and "Plans for providing the 
returned soldier with land surveys and studies be instituted now so that 
are rapidly taking shape. when demobilization begins, farms and homes 
* * * Let us not think of may be offered to the returned soldiers on the the individual returned sol­ most encouraging terms. dier exiled to a tongue of 
green land between the 
stony breasts of western 
mountains * * * but of or­ Under the Smith-Hughes Vocational Edganic communities of one ucation Act, the Government is already train­ or two hundred farms with 
ing Teachers, Agriculturalists and Mechanics competent agricultural advisers to brace up the tech­ whose services will be in great demand after 
nique of those who are the war to help these soldiers and rural in­ willing to learn."—The New habitants adjust themselves to the problems Republic. of reconstruction. 
Tuskegee Institute offers the Smith-Hughes Course in: 
Teacher-Training Agriculture Mechanics Home Economics 
Splendid opportunities for young men and women of purpose, and an exceptional 
chance for young men who have been placed in deferred classes or exempted. 
You may enroll NOW. 
Address, R. R. MOTON, Principal, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 
THE HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE 
Hampton, Virginia 
OBJECT—Founded in 1868 
by General Samuel C. Armstrong to train selected youth 
who should go out to teach 
and train their people. The 
Institute was designed to instruct Negro youth in morality, industry, and thrift. 
HAMPTO N TODAY—A n 
industrial village with 900 
boardin g students; 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; instruction farm of 835 acres; and 
200 teachers and workers. 
Hampton stands for a "sound 
body, a trained capacity, and 
an unselfish outlook on life." 
Hampton is on the State of 
Virginia list of approved 
four-year secondary schools. 
OVER 650 HAMPTONIANS HAVE BEEN COURSES — Recently reIN NATIONAL SERVICE vised four-year courses in 
Teache r Training; Home The young men are under military tris- Economics; Business; Agri­ cipline, and are formed into a battalion culture; and 13 Trades. with student officers. 
JAMES E. GREGG, D. D., Principal 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 30 1 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , Principal. 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
TALLADEGA, ALABAMA 
Founded in 1867, for the training of Negro Leaders. 
Beautiful and healthful location. First class equipment. 
A Theological Seminary. College courses leading to the A . B. degree — Classics, 
Science, Education, Social Service, Music. Manual training for both sexes. Large 
attention given to debating and public speaking. Nurse Training. Agriculture. 
Graduates enter professional courses in the best Northern Universities. Alabama 
grants first grade teachers' certificates to graduates in Education. 
The product of the College noted for fine character and efficient service. 
Rev. FREDERIC K A. SUMMER , President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System Position An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: THE S1STER-IN-CHARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Derrick 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
Shorthand SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. School Offers to High School graduates and young 
Chillis' Building women of higher education and good moral character, between the ages of 18 and 36, a three years' course in the profession of nurs­ 1435 Chestnut Street ing. For further information apply to the Superintendent enclosing a stamp. PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D All Races 
Prcuare in the best school of its kind in the State. in Class 
Subjects Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Pen­ manship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH. 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes COMMERCIAL CLASS Lenox Community Center—at Note:— . We strongly advise all Summer Students PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 to enroll now as applications are being Lenox Avenue and 135th St., New York City. sent in from all over the Country and Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. places in class will he at a premium. Fitz W. Mottley, President. 
TFAfHFRd A liv e agency furnishes the IJjnvuuiu connecting medium in a busi­ ness way between teachers and schools and relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. The Colored Teachers'Bureau We have had calls for teachers from Alabama. Arkansas, Delaware. District of Columbia, Florida. Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Mary­ land, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Caro­ REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TEEMS lina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
Address South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West : Colored Teachers' Bureau Virginia. Box 22, Wilberforee, O. THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C, 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 302 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University Lincoln University Studies of the Negro Problems Beginning September 22, 1919, the requirement for admission to the Theological Depart­ 20 Monograph! Sold Separately ment will be graduation from a College of Address Liberal Arts. Young Men wishing to prepare ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE for the Ministry in a Seminary, all whose re­ ATLANTA UNIVERSITY u ATLANTA, GA. sources will henceforth be devoted to the education of the adequately trained alone, are 
invited to write to $25.00 PER WEEK President, John B. Rendall may be made in commissions by parties handling Lincoln University P. 0., Pennsylvania. "History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race," 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK Summer School at the 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute 
June 16 to July 25 THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY For further information address 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters. Historical BYR D PRILLERMAN , President and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations Institute, "West Virginia. Printed on Fine Antique Book, Bound in Full Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
The Stenographers' Institute Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller or direct from the author. Address 1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
You can be a success in the JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
RECONSTRUCTION PERIOD 1439 Swan n St. Washington , D . C . it you know 
Phonography Typewriting Bookeeping 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, President 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
Books? See the Selected List on Firtt-Claas Service tor Firat-Clatt People
Inside Back Cover 3427 South Park Avenue, Chicago, III. 
A PROPHEC Y FULFILLE D Our Book, "A Tribute for the Negro Soldier" written just 
Single as the United States entered the World War , said that on 
the basis of the Negro race's history in every age, and every Copy clime, the American Negro soldier would make his mark in 
25c France. He has. Read the facts on which this prediction 
was made. 
BRUCE and FRANKLIN, Publishers 
1309 E. 18th Street AGENTS WANTED Kansas City, Mo . 
COLORED HEROES m FIERCE BATTLES 
Great War and Religious Pictures 
OU R COLORE D FIGHTER S 5. HI S MOTHER' S PRAYE R 
OU R COLORE D HEROE S 6. COLORE D MA N N O SLACKE R 
TRU E SON S O F FREEDO M 7. INSPIRATIO N 
EIGHT H REGIMEN T 8. JESU S DIE D FO R BOT H 
7,000 Agents wanted. Agents full outfit 50c 
Bargain Prices in lots of 25, 50, and 100. Agents can mak e $15.00 a da y 
WRIT E FO R CATALO G 
BETHEL ART COMPANY 97 South Street, Jamaica, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 303 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
25th Annual Report (Condensed) 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., was chartered at Richmond, 
Va., February, 1893, to. engage in Industrial Sick Benefit Insurance, 
insuring against Sickness, Accident and Death. The following report 
of business done during 191 8 will show that the Acorn of 1893 has 
become the Giant Oak of 1919 : 
Receipts 
Jan. 1, 191 8 Cash Balance brought forward $88,317.79 
Dec. 31 , 191 8 Annual 
Income 548,835.64 
Gross Receipts for 
191 8 $637.1534 3 
Disbursements 
Dec. 31 , 191 8 Total Disbursed, including investments made during the year 534.496-73 
Cash Balance, Jan. 
1, 191 9 $102,656.70 
Jan. 1, 1919 Total Assets $348,536.95 
Jan. 1, 191 9 Total Liabilities including Capital 
Stock 48,676.57 
Jan. Surplus Fund. $299,860.38 
A record unsurpassed by any other Insurance Organization confining its 
business territory to one state. 
A few desirable agency openings in Virginia for intelligent and thrifty young 
men and women. 
SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y O F VA. , Inc . 527 N. SECOND ST., RICHMOND, VA. 
OFFICER S AN D DIRECTOR S 
A. D. PRICE, Pres. W. E. BAKER, Treas. 
EDW. STEWART, 1st Vice Pres. A. WASHINGTON 
J. T. CARTER, 2nd V. P. ft Att'y. W. E. RANDOLPH 
B .A. CEPHAS, 8rd V. Prei. CHAS, N. JACKSON. 
B. 1. JORDAN, Sec.-Mgr. W. A. JORDAN, Asst. Secy.-Mgr. 
Mentijon TH E CRISIS. 304 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM, N. CAROLINA 
Strongest Old Line Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Insurance in Force - $16,096,722.00 
Assets nearly One-Half Million dollars. Owns $160,000.00 in 
Liberty Bonds. 
The following Editorial appeared in the "Durham (Daily) 
Herald," May 10, 1918 : 
A SUBSTANTIA L ENTERPRIS E 
(Editorial) 
The North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association, a business enterprise owned, controlled and actively managed by colored 
men of Durham, has developed into an important asset of the 
city during its nineteen years of existence. It is no idle boast nor 
advertising motto that this company is the " largest and strongest 
Negro insurance company in the world." It is just that and more. 
It is managed along the most modern lines and is a business which 
not only the colored people may be proud of, but one which also 
deserves a high place among the new insurance companies of the 
southern states. 
Income 1918 - $819,771.09 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$2,082,887.6 1 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILIT Y CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore, M. D., Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M. Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick. Ass't Sec'y 
mention the Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 305 
BOOKS BY 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
i. An Appeal to Conscience (just off the press—Macmillan) $ .60 
a. Race Adjustment (publishers' price, $2) 1.50 
3. Out of the House of Bondage (publishers' price, $1.50) 1.25 
4. The Three Books Listed Above (publishers' price, $4.10) 3.00 
5. The Disgrace of Democracy (100,000 copies distributed) 10 
6. The Negro's Place in the New Reconstruction (Ready about 
Jan. 15, 1919) 10 
Add 10% for postage to all orders. Remittance invariably in advance. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
KELLY MILLER, Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Inform yourself as to 
THE EXODUS OF THE 
NEGROES 
By reading 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson's 
A CENTURYOFNEGRO 
MIGRATION 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This book is unique in that it is the 
first and only scientific treatise jn 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
why the Negroes have migrated, 
where they have gone and what they 
have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Send all ordersto the author 
"An Art Treasure at Home" 
Wm . Edouard Scott offers a rare 
opportunity to have a rare art treasure in your home. Send a photograph of yourself or your son or your 
brother who is "over there" and he 
will paint a beautiful portrait of him; 
one that will retain color for one 
hundred years. Absolute lightness. 
Guaranteed both in color and form 
and beautifully framed to hang. 
PRICE S 
8 x 10 $25.00 
16 x 20 S0-
0 0 
24 x 30 100.00 
Terms: One-half down, balance on receipt of portrait, if absolutely satisfactory. 
Mr. Scott is a graduate of the Art 
Institute, Chicago, Julian Academy, 
Paris, France and the Beaux Arts, 
Paris. He also studied three years 
with H. O. Tanner and has exhibited 
in the Royal Academy, London, England, Salon, Paris and in most of the 
large Art Galleries of the United 
States. 
Address: 
1216 You Street, N. W. William E. Scott,
 6430 cK"ii A
" 
Washington Telephone—Wentworth 8810 , D. C. 1124 N. Senate Ave., Indianapolis, Ind. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 306 TH E CRISIS
NURS E 
WANTED: 
a trained nurse interested in children to work in an 
institution. Salary $5 0 month with board, room and 
laundry. Apply Coloras, care Crisis Magazine, 70 
Fifth Avenue. New York City 
GET A PENNANT AN D SHO W TH E BOY S THA T THER E IS 
A REA L WELCOM E MEAN T FO R THE M 
This Beautiful Pennant, 9x2 2 inches, 
will be mailed to any 
address upon receipt 
of 25c in stamps. The 
only pennant featuring the colored soldier. It is made of 
felt cover stock of the 
best quality on which 
is mounted the picture. We want agents 
in every locality. Ex ­
cellent profits. Send 
us 25c in stamps, or 
call on 
JULIAN R. MILLER, JR., 1201 Spruce St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
PRINTIN G at 
POPULA R 
PRICE S Good Letterheads, Envelopes, Cards, billheads or statements. $ 1 500, $2.25; 1,000, $3.50; 5,000, $14.75 . Cash 
with order. Money Back Guarantee. 
ye MISSION PRINT SHOP SA M H . READING , ye Printer 
611 N . 43rd Street PHILADELPHI A 
Antiseptic Foot Powder, relieving excessive perspiration and 
offensive odurs. 
Price 50 cents. By Mail 60 cents. 
DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER, Foot Specialist 
167 West 136th St.. New York City. 
Mrs. M. WATSON RUDD, 154 West 131st St. New York City 
has placed upon the market her new 
ROSE NINON NUFEET POWDER It is especially recommended for soldier?, clerks, railroad and factory employees, dancers and all persons 
who are required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—"Write for particulars. 
 ADVERTISE R 
My course in Penmanship" Bookkeeping, and Shorthand 
through the mail will prepare you lor the position worth 
while. Write for information. 
A. D. Nolley, M. Pen., 51 9 Michigan Ave., Buffalo N.Y. 
Suburba n Home s r ?rovea en,s mode
m m o™ 
electric car line connecting Washington, Baltimore, 
Annapolis and Camp Meade. Auto road. 30 minutes' ride to city. 
Nea r Washington , D . C . Lots 60 by 150. $270, $10 down. $5 monthly Houses 
built to order after $100 or more is paid" on lot. 
Fertile land, good elevation, gardens, chickens, etc. 
-Mure, school, churches, community club. Booklet free: Jal'loway , I 1 _ , Thos. J. Calloway ( I 
1403 New ~Yo g ^nu e | f Among Friends Washington, 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Patents secured on easy terms 
Write for particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave.. N. W., Washington, D. C. 
_ , , ( Central 104-W Telephones: j j M a n 6 1 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
] 607 Williamson Builidng Cleveland, Ohio 
General Practice Notary Public J 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
SIS Metropolitan Life Ruilding 
Minneapolis Minn 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
eapolis Minn. 
Tel, Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY A NO CO U N SELLOR-AT- LA \V 
3-i School Street Boston Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George \V. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Stt., Cincinnau, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 307 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBERT Soprano 
"She has one of the best Toloes that God has siren 
her race."—Los Angeles Times. 
"Special praise must be .given Mrs. Florence TaJbert who beside her natural gift has already reached a 
high plane of professional aoeuraoy."—Herman DeTries In Chicago American. 
Engagements accepted for Concerts. Recitals, Oratorio. 
659 28TH STREET DETROIT, MLOH. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one io their 
high estimate' of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron White and his Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical tvent of 
the season/' For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
CLEOT A COLLIN S LYRI C SOPRAN O 
"Miss Collins possesses a voice of wonderful quality 
which she manages with admirable taste and skill. Her 
personal charm and beauty enhanced the pleasure enjoyed 
from the really excellent program presented. The audience 
of music lovers in attendance were enthusiastic in their 
appreciation of the talented young lady."—Newark Dally 
News. ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
10 3 W . 143D ST. New York City. 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available (or Concert! 
Telephone 6393 Moraingside 
126 W. 134th Street New York City 
INVINCIBL E CONCER T CO . High Class Entertainers 
Churches School* Lodges Y. M. C. A.'S 
For dates and term s write: 
1910 E. 24th Street, Kansa s City, Mo . 
Roland W. Hayes 
Phonograph Records 
NO W READ Y AN D O N SAL E 
(Order by Number) 
No. I. Swing Low. Sweet Chariot $1.90 
Negro Spiritual, by Harry T. Burlelgb. 
No. 2. Veatl La Glubba (Put on Vour Smook).. .J2.00 
Arloao from Pagllaccl, Orchestral Accompaniment, 
Leoncavallo. 
No. 3. Twilight $1.00 
Ry Katherlne A. Glen. 
No. 7. By and By $1.90 
Dy Harry T. Burleigh. 
AGENTS BOSTON. Masa., A. J. Jackson & Co., 130 Boylaton St. 
BOSTON, Ma»i.. Harold Whltham, 1781 Washington 
St. 
BOSTON, Mass.. Hlcka, Laney & Eaton. 708 Tremont St. 
BOSTON, Mass.. R. A. Dlnsmore, 1221 Tremont si. 
CAMBRIDGE. Mass., Mra. O. W. Nowell. 800 Main St. 
SPRINGFIELD, Mass.. J. W. Adams, 150 Eastern Ave. 
WOBURN. Mass., Edward Caldwell, 388 Main St. 
DETROIT, Mloh., Miss Grace L. May, 253 Woodland 
MONTGOMERY, Ala.. Win. G. Porter, 368 Margaret 
St. 
TUSKEGEE, Ala., Arthur Logan. Tuskegee Institute. 
BIRMINGHAM, Ala.. MISB E. O. Wyatt, 1310 Avenue H. 
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., J. M. Robinson. Jr.. 1024 
East St 
BALTIMORE. Md.. W. H. Roberta. 235 N. Amity St. 
PORTLAND, Ore., Mrs. E. D. Cannady. 401 Buchanan 
Bldg. 
PHILADELPHIA, Pa.. Mrs. Margaret Corbett. 1941 
Balnbridge St. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Cal., Harry O. Johnson. Security 
Savings Bank. 
OAKLAND. Cal.. Mrs. A. M smith. 404 Moss Ave. 
CHARLESTON. S. C , E. B Lawrence. 470 King SL 
NORFOLK. Va., Miss B. C. smith. 822 Avenue A. 
PITTSBURGH, Pa.. Mrs. Chas. H. Trusty. 820 Anahelm St. 
WASHINGTON, D. C . Dr. C. Sumner Wormley. 007 
Florida Ave. 
SPRINGFIELD, III., Miss Alice E. Williams. Boi 
131. Chatham. 111. 
MADISONVILLE. Kv.. J. A Wataon. 117 Main St 
LOUISVILLE, Ky., Mrs. H. W. Jordan. 822 W. Walnut St. 
LOUISVILLE, Ky., Columbia Phonograph Co. 
PROVIDENCE, R. I., Miss Fiorina M. WUUams. 297 
Thsyer St. 
NEW YORK CITY. N. Y.. Dr. Harry C. Blue, 663 
Lenox Ave. 
MONTCLAIR, N. J „ James D. Williams. 7 Walnut 
PI. 
COLLINGSWOOD, N. J.. Mr. R M. Taylor. 501 Park 
WACO. Texas, Miss Lula Mayes. 1127 N. 7th SL 
MERIDIAN. Miss., L L. Foster. 1207 26th St. 
INDIANAPOLIS, Intl.. W. H. Roberta. 601 West St. 
WILMINGTON, Del., Mrs. Elizabeth D. Banton. 024 
French St. 
GREENVILLE, S. C , Mr. James R Kennedy. 630 
Pendleton SL 
CHARLESTON, W. Va., Mr. Edward C. Lewis, Box 
1201. 
WILLIAMSBRIDGE. N. Y.. Mr. Robert H. O. Toung. 
743 E. 2l8th St. 
DETROIT, Mloh.. Mr. W. Arnold nooper. 647 SL 
Antoine SL 
TULSA. Okie.. Mr. Harrison M. Maglll. 3051% N. 
Hartford Ave. 
ATHENS, Ga., Dr. Charles Walton. lCllt4> Clayton St. 
DAYTON. 0.. Mr. R. D. McGregor, 100 Pontlac St. 
CHICAGO. III., Mr. David Mitchell, 6428 Eberhard 
Ave 
PARKERSBURG. W. Va., Mrs. James E. Edmondson. 
591 5th St. 
ST. LOUIS. Mo., Mr. Claborne Riddle. 4208 W. fobs 
Rrllllante. 
NEW YORK CITY, The Pace & Handy Music Co., 
Inc., 1.147 Broadway. 
STAMFORD, Conn., Mr. Emmeti Lewis, Box 277. 
Reliable and energetic Agents wanted in 
cities not here mentioned. 
Roland W. Hayes, Tenor. Recitals, Concerts, 
Oratorio, Opera, Booking engagements for 
Continental Tour, season 1919. For terms, 
dates, eto. please write. 
Roland W. Hayes 3 WARWICK ST. BOSTON, MASS. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 308 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
RECITA L by 
Wilso n Lam b BARITON E 
at AEOLIAN HALL 
34 W. 43d St., New York City 
Thursday Evening, May 5, 1919 
at 8:15 
Management: M. G. T. 
Hansef & Jones, 33 W. 42d St., New York City 
BUST S O F 
Booke r T. Washington , 
Fred Douglass , Paul 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.50 EACH. THE 4 BUSTS FOR $5.00 
AGENTS WANTED. SEND AT ONCE. 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKORY STREET PINE BLUFF, ARK. 
DON'T FAIL! T O REA D TH E 
GREAT 
SERIES OF ARTICLES WRITTE N EXCLUSIVEL Y FOR 
. AN D 
PUBLISHE D EXCLUSIVEL Y IN THE . 
BY 
R0SC0 E 
GONKLIN 
SIMMONS The 
Celebrated 
Lecturer and 
Writer, 
The 
Defender's 
Special 
Envoy to 
The Peace 
Conference REPORTIN G TH E 
Racial Conditions in Devastated Europe AN D OTHE R MATTER S O F 
VITAL INTEREST! These articles are copyrighted and 
will appear only in 
CHICAGO DEFENDER The World's Greatest Weekly 
BEGINNIN G IN TH E ISSUE O F 
SATURDAY, MARCH 15T H GRIPPIN G IN INTERES T 
COMPLET E IN DETAI L 
OVERFLOWIN G IN FACTS 
READ THEM ALL ! 
3159 State Street, Chicago, III. 
STORIES of JESUS 
THE CHRIST B Y FRAN K HARRI S 
INCLUDIN G 
JESU S By GEORG E BERNAR D SHA W 
27c postpaid anywher e 
PEARSON LIBRARY 39 Unio n Squar e Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 309 
Colored Dolls for 
Your Children 
Teach your children pride of race and appreciation of race. Early impressions are lasting. These beautifully dressed, unbreakable, 
brown skin dolls designed and made by colored 
girls in a factory owned and controlled entirely 
by colored people. These are not the old time, 
black face, red lip aunt Jemima colored dolls 
but dolls well made and truly representative of 
the race in hair and features. 
16 inches with long flowing curls, beautifully dressed $3.50 
16 inches with marcel wave, nioely 
dressed 3.00 
16 inches Buster Brown style hair, very 
neat 2.50 
Soldier boy in full uniform 1.50 
So far as we know this is the only Negro 
doll factory in the world. 
BERRY & ROSS, Inc. Factory: 36-38 W. 135th St. 
NEW YORK CITY 
H. 8. Boulin. President, 
Or. E. Rawlins, Vice President, 
Counsellor P. Ifleld. General Manager, 
B, Eeid, Business & Sales Manager. 
AGENTS WANTED WRITE FOR TERMS 
Only those who mean business need write us. 
ADVERTISE 
SOMETHING NEW — USE 
FANS this Summer 
with interesting NEGR O SUBJECT S 
Your ad. tastefully printed on one side of 
as many as you order; carefully distributed 
among Churches, Halls, Business places, etc., 
will pay you 100%. A liberal supply of subjects. 
Send for Samples—Free 
Salesme n wit h Ability—WANTE D 
MERCANTILE CALENDAR CO. 413 Fla. Ave., N. W. Wash, D. C. 
Ear SPEND YOU R VACATION AT n $35.to 10.WEEKLY 
AL L O R SPAR E TIM E 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Ta n Years 
Ton—vourself-can positively make S35 to 1100 a week. I waS ^nThMtling, , enereetfc, ambitious fellows anxioui. to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not for me, but 35b~SrS e you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell ami aoooint local agents for the bumest. most sensational seller in W ROBINSO N FOEDINO BATH 1UB.. Demon­ •bitlns Tub Furnished. Here's an absolute y new invention ^SSaing Hke it. Makes instant appeal. Sells easily. Give, evere home a modern, up-to-date bathroom in any part of the Ws e Noplnmbing.no water-works needed. Folds in small roThandy as Umbrella. Self-emptying, positively unlpakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 10 years. TJemember. fully 70 per cent of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes Two sales a day means 83O0 a month. Breeze, of Haho. made MOOI profit in30davs. Bev. Otto gchulze.Mo.. got n«« to date. B^kholder Mont,, orders »07 2 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of Wyo^madeSMflrrt 'two dara. Hundreds like that Pleasant permanent, fascinating work. Write a post card. Let me SSSTyoafe long letter. No experience needed, no capital. Were * is good « you mean business. OT/00^! ambitious, you must want to make money. That s all. Write J
5ostcard now..I want to pay you S3D to $100 every week. a
H . S. Robinson, Pres. The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 4972 . Factories Buildind Toledo. Objo 
Beautiful Idlewild The mos' wonderfully ideal spot where young and old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do yoa enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, j
progressive people of the day—people who do ihings? *f Do you believe in progress and do you want to y have a part in one of the most progressive move- *f ments of the time? Surelyl * 
Then you will be interested In, and want to * own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild, M Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * A cure a beautiful lot for only $30.00 each; $6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your payments are completed the lot will be transferred to you by an absolute warranty deed with abstract show- * ing clear title.
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford BIdg. . - « So. Dearborn St. Chicago, m. / / gf. 
> ^ 
*f & # e 
* ^ ^ N > 
 o* «? 
Mention THE CRISIS. 310 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
700 Pages. 
50 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 
Pages of other appropriate and 
teresting pictures. 
KELLY MILLER'S HISTORY OF 
TH E WORL D WA R FO R HUMA N 
RIGHT S or 
TH E NEGR O IN TH E WORL D WA R 
New Book Published April 1st, 1919 
TH E KELLY MILLER HISTORY OF THE WORL D WA R 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The author takes up the 
Great Conflict, following it step by step through the thirty excellent chapters, including; the Terms of the Armistice, and General 
Pershing's full report to the War Department, and gives us the 
only condensed History of the Great War that is fair to the 
Negro Race 
The Negro's War for Democratization—He braces Himself and 
Claims to be the Champion of Democracy—Enters the Arena of 
Combat! The German Indigent—The South Sensitive—The North 
Quizzical — The Whole World Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau Thierry—He Help-s Hurl 
Mack I lie Hordes of the Hun— 
Wins His Place and Right to a 
Voice in the Affairs of Mankind 
against Prejudice, Ridicule, Race 
Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles! 
Kelly Miller, Dean of Howard 
University, residing in Washington, D. C., the friend of Government officials in the National Capital, is the best prepared Negro to 
give a complete record of what 
the soldiers and sailors of his race 
have accomplished in the World 
War for Human Rights. It is the 
most satisfactory and impartial 
War History yet written. 
The book is bound in durable 
cloth, with substantial head band, 
price $2.50. In Full Kerotol 
Morocco (similar to cut) $3.25. 
Copy mailed to any address upon 
receipt of the price. Satisfaction 
guaranteed or money refunded. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
The Book is a RECORD 
BREAKER! 
Send 25 cents for a_ prospectus 
—It will be the best investment 
you ever made—Grasp the Opportunity of Making Money faster 
than you have ever done before! 
Our agents are sending us thousands of orders weekly—There 
will be A MILLION copies of the 
book sold during the next six 
months and A MILLION DOLLARS profit made by agents—Are 
you going to get your share ? 
Many Agents are leaving -high 
salaried positions to canvass 1 
We will quote you agent's prices 
that will surprise you—Our agents 
consider a day lost when they fail to make at least $10.00—Get in 
touch with us and let us tell yon 
about our liberal terms, large 
profits and free book offers. 
"We are a live company and are 
looking- for live wires to represent us. If you are a hustler you 
can make an income that will 
cause your friends and neighbors 
to sit up and take notice and 
gain you the respect and serious 
consideration of your community. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 523 9th St.. WASHINGTON, D. C. Prof. Kelly3MilIer,3Author,lHoward University, WashingtonJD. C.|__ The Largest Publishers of special Dean Miler's Picture I! x 14 Given with the book, or Picture Mailed for 25c books for Negroes. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY , (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S OF BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.25 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (B. G. Brawley) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.25 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.50 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G. Steward) , 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 7 5 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.2 5 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS, : : : : : 7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York KASHMIR PREPARATIONS 
FOR HAIR AND SKIN 
It's easy to have clear, smooth skin and pretty 
hair if you learn "TH E KASHMIR WAY " 
George: Look Johnny, 
Who's that ? 
Johnny: Just wondering myself. 
Classy all right. 
Must be a 
Kashmir Girl. 
For Sale at Beauty Shops and Drug Stores Everywhere 
FRE E FRE E 
Illustrated de luxe beauty book. Tells all about 
the KASHMI R WA Y 
Kashmir Skin Preparation 50c. each 
Kashmir Hair Beautifier postage 8c. 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO., Dept. K, 312 S. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 