THE CRISIS 
Albert 
Smith 
Rene MaranMay, 1922 15 cents a copy Another Lighthouse to Help 
Chart Negro Business into 
The Right Channel. 
The Southern Aid Society's 
New Modern 3 story and 
basement building located 
at 106 and 106A South Ave., 
Petersburg, Va . 
Petersburg's first colored 
bank and its leading professional and business interests now have modern 
quarter s withi n which to 
display thei r talents and 
wares. The Society's District Office is located on 3rd 
floor. 
In addition to providing a superior policy of protection to 
its policyholders — the Society renders a threefold service to 
the race: 
It gives employment to hundreds of young women and 
men—It provides ready cash to its policyholders in times of 
sickness, accident and death—It provides, in the largest cities 
in its field of operation, modern office facilities to the colored 
professional and business interests. It is indeed a Servant of 
the People. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND , VA . 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
J, T . CARTER , Pres. and Gen' l Counse l B . L . JORDAN , Sect? . 
W . A . JORDAN , Asst . Secty. THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET . LITERAR Y EDITOR : 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 24-No. 1 MAY , 1922 Whole No. 139 
Page 
COVE R 
Painting by Alber t Smith. 
OPINION 
The Worl d and Us; Fighters or Cowards; Social Equality; Ar t for Nothing; Publicity; The Negro Farmer; Kicking Us Out; Wanted 7 
TH E SYMBOLIS M O F BER T WILLIAM S . Illustrated. Jessie Fauset. . . . 12 
TH E LIBERIA N EXCURSION . Dr . L. G . Jordan 15 
MA Y AGAIN . A Poem. Leslie Pinckney Hill 16 
TH E FOOLIS H AN D TH E WISE. A Story." Leila Amos Pendleton 17 
SOM E FRATERNA L ORDERS . Illustrated • • , 23 
T O A DEA D FRIEND . A Poem. Langston Hughes 21 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E 22 
TH E HORIZON . Illustrated 26 
M Y LOVES . A Poem. Langston Hughes 32 
A N AFRICA N PROGRAM . I. M . Obadende 33 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 31 
FIFTEE N GENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The dato of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new addres4 must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3. 1879. 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution fecit a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STAT E OF NE W JERSE Y 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution for till training at colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses In carpentry. agriculture and trades for boys, 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic science and domes tie art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New» girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana. Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1910-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN, President 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B. Kendall, S.D., Lincoln University, 
Chester County, Banna. 
The Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
A Pennsylvania State Normal School offering, in addition 
to the regular Normal Course of two years, professional 
three year courses in Homo Economics and Shop Work. A 
diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate 
eligible to teach in the public schools of Pennsylvania. 
A three-year High School Course is offered to all who 
have completed the. eighth grammer grade. 
NEXT TERM BEGINS SEPTEMBER 18, 1922. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal 
Cheyney, Pa . 
There Will Be No Summer School for 1923 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 5 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include Hig h School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
Fo r further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta , Ga . 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments. College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term will open September 13, 1922. 
For eatalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville , Tenn . 
Founded 1870 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
wltb new (150,000 administration building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use in 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphère —Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd years' High School Courses, with certificate, 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlcal Course 
54th year of nine months opens September 20, 1922. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING. President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the Stats having tor its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training in Insurance. Social Service. Nursing and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal, Commercial, Music. Domes tin Science. Missionary 
training class. 
©renins «lasses, •orrersondenoo esoise. Degrees efewd. 
Präsident C . 13. Parrlsh 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address. 
JOH N HOPE , President: 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHAKLOTTE , N . C 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices Of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, baa four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the irst year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely KLngHwh, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. an required 
te take trades in the Industrial- Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MeCrarey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning i n the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained i n some of the best universities i n the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses rea 
sonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Hig h School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
Fo r further information address 
JOHN H . LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J , S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Howard University 
Washington. D. C. 
Founded by GENERA L O. O. HOWAR D 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE, A.M., Ph.D., D.D., President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT, A.M., LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
REGISTRATIO N 
Autumn Quarter Friday, -Sept, 29, and Saturday, Sept. 30, 1922 
Winter Quarter Tuesday, January 2, 1923 
Spring Quarter Saturday, March 17, 1923 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F . D . WILKINSON , Registra r 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1901 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave. and N. 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Spring Term Opening April 4th, 1922 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D . 
1926 S. College Avenue , Philadelphia , Fa . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
Register NOW SEASONABLE TEEM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce , 0 . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood. 
For further information address 
F. A. SUMNER, President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Idea l 
It offers courses i n the Libera l Arts, Normal, Aca ­
demic and Musica l departments. 
Fo r further information write 
SAMUE L A . OWEN , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Student! 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
.O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the slaters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGI, 6188 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten. Primary, Grammar, High, Noraaal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MARY McLEOD BETHUNE, - - Principal. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 24. No. 1 MAY , 1922 Whole No. 139 
Opinion 
TH E WORLD ANof W. E. B. Du Bois D U S 
THER E has been wa r i n South 
Africa . Th e editor of the 
Times tells us, "It was the 
blacks of the Ran d who stood 
by the government best, for amon g 
the strikers they could not look for 
friends" . An d there yo u are again. 
I n Chicago, i n St. Louis, i n Ne w Orleans and Oklahoma , i n Liverpoo l and 
South Africa , it has been the whit e 
laborer wh o has drive n the black ma n 
out into the desert and then stands 
stupidly wonderin g wh y black folks 
are "scabs " and do not "understand" 
the labor movement. 
Whit e Christianit y stood before 
Gandh i the other day and, let us all 
confess, it cut a sorr y figure. This 
brown ma n looked into the eyes of the 
nervous whit e judge and said calmly, 
"It is you r business to enforce the 
law and send me to jail ; or i f you do 
not believe that the law is right, it 
is you r business to resign. " Ca n yo u 
imagine such a judge resigning? 
Gandh i is i n jail . So is Englis h Christianity. 
Agai n there is a Kin g i n Egypt . It 
is 6699 years ago since Menes, the socalled first king , reigned. Since his 
day man y a Pharoa h has ruled, black 
and red and white . Th e land has seen 
conquest and destruction, glor y and 
misery ; slavery unde r the Hyksos, 
the Greeks, the Persians, the Arabs, 
the Turks, and the English . It is 
filled today wit h Arabs, Negroes and 
Negroids, Turks, Jews, Armenians, 
and the mixtur e called "Egyptians" : 
Its partia l rebirt h bring s a new dark 
nation to the worl d ; but Englan d still 
remains its profit-taking master. 
In the Nea r East trouble still 
broods. The Turk s are fighting for 
Constantinople backed b y the French , 
against the ambitions of the Greeks 
backed more or less openly b y Eng ­
land. Beneath lie the miserable mil ­
lions of the Balkans, crushed and 
raped fo r a thousand years. 
A bonus fo r soldiers or for sailors, 
fo r carpenters or for housewives is 
wron g i n principl e and illogica l i n 
practice. It is robbin g Pete r to pay 
Paul . It is takin g from one pocket 
to fill another. It is setting false 
standards of justice and right. Bu t 
the men who are to blame i n the 
present demand for a soldiers' bonus 
are not the soldiers. The y are the 
suave and lyin g politicians wh o promised the bonus and anythin g else, 
easily, durin g the last campaign. 
Ther e is a singula r fight i n the 
Methodist Churc h i n whic h the black 
ma n is arbiter. The majorit y of 
whit e Methodists have realized long 
since that, it is false to say that al l 
dancing, all card-playing, all theatregoing, and all "worldl y amusements " 
are wrong . The y wis h to change the 
dictum of the church so as to accord 
wit h universa l Christia n practice. 
Th e black win g of the Methodist 
Churc h has long prevented this 
change. This is not only wrong ; i t 
is dangerous. 
7 8 TH E CRISIS 
FIGHTER S O R COWARD S 
NEVE R has there been a time 
whe n the Nationa l Associa ­
tion fo r the Advancemen t of 
Colored People mor e sorely 
needed undivided support tha n today. Th e America n Negr o must 
learn, and indeed is learning, that the 
achievement of his aims i n this countr y necessitates the possession and 
the use of power. Some few crumbs 
ma y be throw n to hi m through philanthropy, some few privilege s ma y 
be granted hi m because of his pray ­
ers and petitions, but the funda ­
menta l and endurin g rights whic h he 
seeks can come only throug h the exercise of power, powe r possessed by 
the Negr o and exercised by him. 
Fo r nearly eleven years, against 
wha t appeared at times to be insurmountable opposition and unmovable 
apathy, i n the face of numerous defeats and discouragements, wit h 
meagre funds at ou r command, we 
have fought on i n our efforts to arouse 
the publi c conscience o f Americ a to 
the dangers of the lynchin g evil. Ou r 
most signa l victor y i n this struggle 
thus fa r was the passage of the Dye r 
Anti-Lynchin g Bil l by the Hous e of 
Representatives i n January . 
Ther e are those wh o feel that the 
fight is over wit h the gainin g of that 
result. Fa r from it ! Ou r most difficult and bitte r fight is now upon us ! 
Nearl y everythin g tha t we have wo n 
can and wil l be lost i f the Senate does 
not pass the bill ! W e have some 
friends i n that body but we also have 
man y enemies. The y are workin g 
night and day to prevent the bil l from 
ever being brought to a vote. 
Th e N . A . A . C. P . is determined 
that there shall be no defeat—no 
equivocation—no compromise ! T o 
that end it is launchin g its membership driv e tha t mor e members, more 
money, more powe r ma y see the Dye r 
Bil l passed b y the Senate, and this 
great step forwar d taken towar d the 
wipin g out of mob murder. W e urge 
—we plead—we pra y that every lib ­
erty lovin g ma n and woma n i n 
Americ a ma y hea r our cr y and wor k 
wit h us towar d the reaching of our 
goal : the end of lync h la w i n America ! 
R . W . BAGNALL . 
SOCIA L EQUAFCLTY 
DO I wan t Socia l Equality ? 
Certainl y I do. Ever y norma l decent huma n being 
wants to associate wit h his 
fellowmen on terms of equality. W e 
like to be invited out. W e wan t people to wan t us. W e are unhappy if 
we are ostracised and ignored and 
despised and forgotten. Booke r T. 
Washingto n wanted social equality 
and got it. R. R. Moto n accepts it 
whenever and whereve r it is offered. 
I, he, they, everybody wants men to 
wan t us. 
If they do not wan t us—if they 
hate and despise us, ver y well. Ther e 
ma y be littl e o r nothin g whic h we 
can do to change their attitude. Bu t 
one thin g we can do : we can refuse 
to hate and despise them or to say 
that we thin k hatred and contempt, 
are fine huma n habits. 
W e wil l surely never stultify our 
souls b y seeking those wh o despise 
us, but equally we wil l refuse to lie 
and say that we wish to be despised. 
The despising of men, regardless 
of gift and character, is a crue l crime . 
It must be abolished wit h other 
crimes and barbarities. O f course, 
we wan t it abolished. O f course, we 
wan t social equality and we know 
that we wil l never be rea l men until 
we get it. 
AR T FO R NOTHIN G 
THER E is a deep feeling among 
man y people and particularl y 
among colored people that Ar t 
should not be pai d for. The 
feeling is based on an ancient and OPINION 9 
fine idea of huma n Freedom i n the 
quest of Beaut y and on a dream that 
the artist rises and should ris e above 
paltr y consideration of dollars and 
food. 
A t the same time everybody knows 
that artists must live i f their art is 
to live. Everybod y knows that i f the 
people who enjoy the artist's wor k do 
not pay for it, somebody else must 
or his wor k cannot go on. Despite 
this practical, obvious fact, we are 
united wit h singula r unit y to starve 
colored artists. 
Mrs. Met a Warric k Fuller, the 
sculptor, recently did a beautiful piece 
of wor k fo r a great social movement. 
She wa s wretchedly and inadequatel y pai d fo r it ; i n fact, it woul d not 
be too muc h to say that she wa s not 
pai d at all. An d the movement congratulated itself upon its economy. 
Mrs. Ma y Howar d Jackson, whose 
portrait busts are a marvelous contributio n to the histor y of the Negro , 
i n years of wor k has not received a 
month's decent income. Mr . Willia m 
A . Scott, whose paintin g is one of 
the finest things the Negr o race has 
produced i n America , has had a desperate struggle to make a living . 
Richar d Brow n died of privatio n 
whil e yet a boy. 
Onl y i n the case o f our musicians 
have we been willin g to pay anythin g 
like a retur n fo r their services, and 
even i n their case we continually 
complain i f they do not give their 
services for "charity" . W e have a 
few men who are tryin g to entertain 
and instruc t the publi c throug h the 
writin g of books and papers and by 
carefully prepared lectures. Fe w 
buy their books—they borrow them. 
Th e men are severely criticize d by 
man y because they ask pay fo r lectures. 
Al l this is wron g ; it is miserably 
wrong ; it is warnin g away exactly 
the type of men who would do more 
tha n any others to establish the righc 
of the black race to universa l recognition . If wor k is honorable, then 
pay is honorable, an d wha t we should 
be afrai d of is not overpayin g the 
artist; it is underpayin g and starvin g and killin g him . 
PUBLICITY 
WE learned durin g the Grea t 
Wa r wha t Publicit y could 
do. W e saw its good effects i n bringin g the trut h 
before the people; we saw its bad 
effects i n makin g million s believe lies. 
W e are thinkin g of these bad effects 
so persistently since the wa r that 
Propagand a is i n bad odor. Bu t let 
us remembe r that i n pitiless Publicit y 
we have perhaps the greatest militan t 
orga n of social reform at our hands. 
I n our own problem, the N . A . A . 
C . P . at the ver y beginnin g looked 
upon TH E CRISIS as a first and absolutely necessary step. Unti l the best 
black and whit e people realized the 
facts concerning the Negr o problem, 
there was no use discussing remedies. 
It is as true today as it wa s then. 
Bu t furthe r tha n that, i f we wan t 
the economic conditions upon whic h 
modern lif e is based to be changed 
and changed fo r the better, we need 
first of al l Publicity . Th e mass of men 
do not kno w the facts and there is 
not today any adequate effort to make 
al l these facts know n to the public. 
No t only that, but law an d custom 
conspire to conceal the truth . 
Wha t is the first knowledge whic h 
any reforme r should have who wishes 
to improve or rebuil d modern industry ? It is the facts concerning Income. Th e income of every huma n 
being, fa r from being a closely 
guarded secret, should be the most 
easily ascertainable economic fact. 
Secondly, the basis of that income 
should be known . It should be 
a matte r of publi c knowledge by 
wha t wor k each individua l gains his 10 THE CRISIS 
income and the character and extent 
of this work everybody should know 
or be able to find out. 
If the institution of private property is to persist and if it ought to 
persist, the fundamental fact concerning it should be easily ascertainable; and that is, its exact and precise ownership and whence that ownership came; and if the property is 
alienated, to whom the ownership is 
transferred. 
If individuals must be called upon 
to support the government, as they 
certainly must, it should be a matter 
of public information as to how much 
each individual contributes toward 
the public support. 
These are all simple fundamental 
facts. Progress, to be sure, has been 
made in the last few years in making these facts known. It is not too 
much to say that economic reform 
has succeeded in so far and only m 
so far as it was based upon the revelation of such facts. There was a 
time when a man's income was considered an absolutely private matter. 
Today it is at least partially public 
through the working of the income 
tax. Tomorrow it will be absolutely 
public. Today it is only with great 
difficulty that we can surmise the 
ownership of anonymous corporations. Tomorrow we will allow no 
corporation to exist whose ownership 
and control is not always a matter of 
accessible public record. Today a 
man's occupation is considered his 
own business. Tomorrow it will be 
the business and the prime business 
of each one of his neighbors. 
TH E NEGRO FARMER 
IN 1920 there were 218,612 
farms owned by Negroes. The 
Negroes owned in 1920, 13,-
948,512 acres of land. The 
land and buildings were valued at 
$554,158,003. In numbers of ownerships and acreage the Negro farmer 
has apparently just held his own in 
the war decade, but in value his land 
and buildings have increased as follows : 
1900 $123,754,396 
1910 275,323,227 
1920 554,158,003 
The figures for 1920 are, of course, 
largely due to the prevailing price inflation. The colored sub-committee 
of the National Agricultural Conference have made a report in which 
they say among other things : 
"Due to the fact that slightly more than 
75 per cent of the Negro farmers are i n 
the tenant class, we feel that an intensive 
and sympathetic study should be made of 
all conditions peculiar to this form of land 
tenure, to the end that we may be able to 
offer recommendations for the social and 
economic betterment of this class of our 
farming (population. 
"A s there is great suffering throughout 
the country among Negro farmers on account of the lack of ready money, and as 
there are large quantities of farm products 
on hand for which they have not been able 
to find a market, we urge that special attention be given to the formation of cooperative marketing associations among 
this group, and wherever possible these 
farmers be accorded the same advantages 
i n existing organizations i n their respective communities as other subscribing 
members. 
"There is much dissatisfaction among 
the rura l districts on account of poor school 
facilities which, i n many cases, have been 
the cause for a general migration from the 
farms to the cities. Because of this we 
urge a more liberal support from the state 
and local governments. 
"We need a more generous Federal and 
State support of our Negro agricultura l 
colleges and a closer supervision of their 
activities, as they constitute the principal 
sources for intelligent agricultura l leadership. 
"There should be a more adequate distribution of Federal funds that are allocated to the different states under the 
Smith-Lever and the Smith-Hughes Acts so 
that Negro farmers may receive a greater 
benefit, to the end that we may have a 
larger number o f well-trained men and 
women to advise and to work i n the rura l 
districts. This is especially necessary because of the fact that this class of our 
farming population has had less advantage 
than most of the other farming groups. 
This is, of course, a mild and temperate statement of the fact that 
there is widespread effort in the OPINION il 
South to keep Negro farmers ignorant, to hold them in peonage, and to 
refuse them their share of Federal 
funds. 
KICKIN G US OU T 
FRO M Emancipation in 1863 
up until 1912 Negroes voted 
the Republican ticket as a 
matter of religion. The effort of Taft to get ri d of his obligations to the Negro vote so disgusted 
black men that a concerted effort, led 
by the late Alexander Walters, was 
made to get Negro support for the 
Democrats in 1912. A special section of the National Democratic 
Campaign organization was devoted 
to this work and Candidate Wilson 
promised the Negro "Justice, and not 
mere grudging Justice." He was 
elected and did as near nothing to 
help the Negro as he possibly could. 
Some concessions came by sheer compulsion and war necessity but the net 
result was that the Democratic party 
said: We do not want Negro votes. 
In 1916 the Negro was between the 
Devil of Wilson and the Deep Sea of 
Taft, while Roosevelt rejected them 
from Bull Moose and catered to 
Louisiana. In 1920 Cox refused even 
to receive a Negro delegation and 
Harding got the Negro vote. Immediately he went to Texas and Florida and consorted with the white 
southern politicians. Since then it 
has been reported again and again 
that he is very desirous of building 
up a white Republican party in the 
South; that he advises the Negro to 
follow white leaders and not aspire 
to lead himself. Finally Mr. Harding 
has openly and authoritatively invited 
at least half the Negroes to leave the 
Republican party. 
To some of our bewildered race 
this may appear not simply as a calamity but as the absolute nullification 
of our political power. The Democrats won't have us and the Republicans don't want us. Is there anything to do but impotently wring our 
empty hands? 
There is. This is our opportunity ; 
this spells our political emancipation. 
Mr. Harding's sincere invitation 
should be accepted forthwith, and Mr. 
Cox's rejection should not be forgotten. We are invited not to support 
either of the old, discredited and 
bankrupt political parties. In other 
words, we are being compelled to do 
what every honest thinking American 
wants to do—namely, support some 
third party which represents character, decency and ideals. Just as 
the two old parties have combined 
against us to nullify our power by a 
"gentleman's agreement" of non-recognition, no matter how we vote— 
in the same way they have agreed to 
nullify the vote of every forwardlooking, thinking, honest American. 
The revolt against this smug and 
idiotic defiance of the demand for 
advanced legislation and intelligence 
is slowly sweeping the country. 
The longer it is held back by Czaristic methods the more radical and 
bitter will be the eventual recoil. We 
are invited to join this radical reaction. We are compelled to join. 
We accept the invitation and rejoice 
in the compulsion. May God write 
us down as asses if ever again we are 
found putting our trust in either 
the Republican or the Democratic 
Parties. 
WANTE D 
A YOUN G colored man of education and character to become travelling representative of TH E CRISIS 
throughout the United States and to 
supervise our 800 agents and the renewal of subscriptions. Apply by letter, giving the facts as to training 
and experience and copies of testimonials. 
W . E . B . DUBOIS.. TH E SYMBOLISM OF BERT WILLIAMS 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
TO say that the average Negro is the Ne -
gro artist's harshest critic would be undoubtedly to state a truism whose deepest 
meaning would not be immediately apparent. Thus among many colored theatregoers Charles Gilpin's rendition of The Em ­
peror Jones caused a deep sense of irritation. They could not distinguish between 
the artistic interpretation of a type and 
the deliberate travestying of a race, and 
so their appreciation was clouded. Our 
great fault is our inability to distinguish 
between a horizontal or class and a vertical 
or racia l section of life. I need hardly add 
that the character of Emperor Jones is a 
class type. 
No such irritation bemused our understanding of Bert Williams, for he was to 
us the racia l type itself. Tha t is why he is 
symbolic. 
B y a strange and amazing contradiction 
this Comedian symbolized that deep, in ­
eluctable strain of melancholy, which no 
Negro i n a mixed civilization ever lacks. 
He was supposed to make the world laugh 
and so he did but not by the welling over 
of his own spontaneous subjective joy, but 
by the humorously objective presentation of 
his personal woes and sorrows. His rôle 
was always that of the poor, shunted, cheated, out-of-luck Negro and he fostered and 
deliberately trained his genius toward the 
delineation of this type because his mental 
as well as his artistic sense told him that 
here was a true racial vein. 
This does not mean that he leaped by in ­
spiration into the portrayal of the black 
roustabout. Mr . Williams first took stock 
of his own limitations. He was used to 
The Man 
EGBER T AUSTI N WILLIAM S 
The Child 
12 BERT WILLIAMS 13 
considering these as a boy i n the Hig h 
School in Californi a whence he had been 
brought some years after leaving his home 
i n Nassau i n the Bahamas. His first glance 
at those limitations revealed that he could 
not afford to attend Leland Stanford Uni ­
versity as he had dreamed; his second revealed that though he had a decided likin g 
for the stage and even a slight possibility 
of gratifying his liking , color would probably keep him from ever making "the legitimate." 
The field that? lay open to him then and 
i n which he started was that of minstrelsy. 
Durin g those first few months wit h his 
troupe it fell to his lot to brush shoes and 
press dress-suits, to polish the nickel on the 
banjos, to arrange the chairs i n a semicircle and finally to take his place i n that 
same semi-circle. How his youthful eyes 
would have stared if he could have looked 
forward to the setting of a Ziegfeld production! Could he but have foreseen the 
weariness of the way ! 
One day he took i n as partner George 
Walke r and the two appeared i n vaudeville 
at the Midwa y Plaisance i n San Francisco 
where they tasted the beginning of a fame 
destined to spread the world over. A t first 
Williams was the clever man and Walke r 
the fool, but very shortly they reversed their 
positions: "I'm funnier along this line than 
you, " Williams said to his partner and so 
he proved himself. Fro m that day on he 
never forsook the character of the shambling, stupid, Wholly pathetic dupe. 
A s his success grew, his ambitions soared, 
but always they brought him up against his 
boundaries, the wall of prejudice. Subjectively his power was limitless ; objectively it 
had to soar up but not outwards. Wit h that 
most fundamental characteristic of true 
genius he took up the task of making the 
most of his restricted opportunities. With ­
out the slightest knowledge of the dialect 
of the America n Negro, he set to work to 
acquire it. He watched, he listened, he 
visited various Negro districts Nort h and 
South, he studied phonetics. He could make 
his listener distinguish between variations 
of different localities. He affected, his admirers wil l remember, a shambling, shuffling gait Which at intervals in his act 
would change into a grotesque sliding and 
gliding—the essence of awkward naturalness. But awkward or graceful, it was not 
natura l to him, but simply the evolution of 
a walk and dance which he had worked out 
by long and patient observation of Negro 
prototypes. 
It took him years of practice and constant 
watchfulness to be able to portray to its 
fullest the shiftlessness, the dolefulness, the 
"easiness" of the type of Negro whose persistent ill-luck somehow endeared him to our 
hearts. He was so real, so simple, so credulous. His colored auditors laughed but often 
wit h a touch of rue,—this characterization 
was too near to us; his hardluck was our 
own universal fate. 
Everyone knows of the dramatic triumphs 
of the Williams and Walke r troupe, from 
Californi a to Chicago, then to New Yor k 
where they played a thirt y weeks' engagement wit h Koster and Biais (a recordbreaker for those days) and finally an appearance before Kin g Edwar d VI I at Buckingham Palace. This triumph would have 
meant to another the zenith of a career, 
not only would he have failed to go beyond, 
he would have thought there was no beyond. 
To Mr . Williams it was only the steppingstone to the attainment of greater perfection. Whil e i n London he studied wit h 
Pietro the art of pantomime and from him 
he evolved those curiously short-ranged, 
awkward but sure gestures which supplemented so well the workings of his face. 
Tha t wonderful face mobile and expressive 
even under its black paint! 
Painstakingly, bit by bit, he made himself 
a great artist; what power of mimicr y he 
possessed natively he used; what he lacked 
he picked up by careful study until that, 
too, was his own ; at last constructively and 
spontaneously he became a great luminary 
i n the world of comic art. Ziegfeld realized 
this and after the death of Walke r took 
him on i n the "Follies " where for a long 
time he struck the truest artistic note i n 
that medley of banality, rich costumes and 
shining flesh. His marriage was unusually 
happy, his coffers were sufficiently full, his 
friends were many, his love of books for 
which he possessed an unusually nice appreciation was gratified. He found pleasure i n 
his music. Bu t something irked. 
He could not forget his color and the 
limitations it imposed on him in his chosen 
field. In spite of his greatness he was unusually modest. He did not push himself, 
he was tolerant in the presence of intoler-14 THE CRISIS 
ance, but he simply could not understand 
"what it was al l about. I breathe like 
other people," he said, " I eat like them—put 
me at a dinner and I'll use the right fork. 
I think like other people. In London I am 
presented to the King , i n Franc e I have sat 
at dinner with the president of the republic, 
while here i n the United States I am often 
treated wit h an air of personal and social 
condescension by the gentleman who sweeps 
out my dressing room or by the gentleman 
whose duty it is to tur n the spotlight on me. 
"An d yet it was here i n the United 
States that a wa r was fought i n the sixties 
about a certain principle. It seems strange, 
doesn't it? " 
Others of us find it strange, too. 
A t last, this very year, he was billed to 
feature i n a play written specially for him, 
i n which he was the star, i n which all the 
action centered about him. "Unde r the 
Bamboo Tree " was a charming farce and 
admirably suited to the quiet drollery of the 
man whom Al Weeks styled our "gentlest 
comedian". An d i n the midst of it after 
he had (sung for a few nights his song 
called "Pupp y Dog " i n which he likened his 
own loneliness i n the play to that of a 
homeless, friendless mutt to whom he said 
"when you die no one wil l care because 
they'll say 'only a puppy dog has gone' "— 
after all this he collapsed one night quite 
suddenly i n the theatre and came back to 
New Yor k to die. 
But everybody cared! 
The press was instant wit h expressions of 
sympathy, regret and appreciation. He was 
called our greatest comedian and compared, 
as indeed he deserved to be, with those 
other great wits of the world, Shakespeare 
and Molière and Mar k Twain. In the bitter 
bleakness of a Marc h day fifteen thousand 
people thronged the streets to his funeral; 
there were two services, one at St. Philip's 
i n Harlem, another at the Temple of the 
Grand Lodge of the Order of Masons. We 
were all proud to know of his plaudits, we 
knew he merited them, but wit h our pride 
was mingled a passionate strain of resentment. If the world knew of his great possibilities why had it doomed this stalwart, 
handsome creature, to hide his golden skin, 
his silken hair, his beautiful, sensitive hands 
under the hideousness of the eternal black 
make-up. Wh y should he and we obscure our 
talents forever under the bushel of prejudice, jealousy, stupidity—whatever it is that 
makes the white world say : "N o genuine 
colored artist; coons, clowns, end-men, claptrap, but no undisguisedly beautiful presentation of Negro ability. " 
The irony of it has made us all a little 
sadder so much so that when this morning 
I;. who unfortunately did not know him, read 
i n the Tribune: "Eddi e Cantor gets a clean 
face", my eyelids stung wit h the prick of 
sudden tears. 
Tha t is a fine concept which Olive r Wendell Holmes gave to mankind from his contemplation of "The Chambered Nautilus" . 
He bids us rear for life one stately mansion 
after another, each embracing and overtowering the preceding one: 
"Le t each new temple nobler than the last 
Shut thee from heaven wit h a dome more 
vast, 
Til l thou at length art free." 
It is pleasant to think of Mr . Williams 
thus building the structures of his life : first 
his little profession of minstrelsy, then his 
partnership and success wit h Mr . Walker; 
his appearance before nobility and royalty; 
bis entré as a feature-artist into the Follies—an unprecedented stride that for the 
colored man;—and finally his triumphant 
emergence as a star—still i n black-face. 
An d beyond and around all these structures 
he reared the unfailing quality and precision of style which was the impress of his 
art. Bu t greater than any of these towered the temple of his character, of that 
disposition which left him for all his greatness gentle, modest, unenvious; which for 
all his heartbreak left him without bitterness, able to oppose to intolerance a mild 
and thoughtful kindliness, and to offer an 
intense appreciation to those who without 
prejudice recognized and loved him. The 
dome of this temple grew so vast that it 
touched the sky—and he "at length is free." 
His resignation to suffering took the 
sting out of the malevolence of fate. 
I have tried jealously to keep Bert Wil -
liams wit h his struggles, his triumphs, his 
heartbreaks and his consolations as the symbol of our own struggling race. Bu t is not 
the part he played as the helpless creature, 
—always beaten, always conquered,:—symbolic of all poor human flesh which is ever THE LIBERIAN EXCURSION 15 
Worsted by life or the things of life, by love 
or the lack of love, by poverty or riches, by 
loneliness or a satiety of companionship? 
Ye t does not this same poor human flesh 
meet all this "with a tear, a sigh, a shrug, 
a brave smile and the realization that this 
is life? Al l that the most unfortunate can 
do—provided he wills to live—is to buckle 
down to life and try it again. 
In one of the plays which Mr . Williams 
shared wit h Mr . Walker, the latter in the 
rôle of the haughty, ungrateful sharper orders his victim from his doors. Bert can 
not believe that he means this but Walke r 
assures him that he does. 
"Al l right, " says Bert sadly, shambling, 
stumbling inimitably across the stage, "I'l l 
go." Bu t as he reaches the exit he straightens 
up and thunders in that wonderful voice of 
his: "Bu t I shall return. " 
It was pitiful, it was funny, it was life. 
Without hope we could not live. An d 
so we hope that Bert has found the answer 
to his song "somewhere the sun is shining— 
but where?"—and that he is basking i n the 
warmth and glow of unstinted artistic comradeship and appreciation. Bu t more than 
that we hope that his death and the stream 
of appreciation which it evoked—alas too 
tardily—will teach this silly, suffering old 
world to la y aside its prejudices, its traditions, its petty reserves and to bestow honor 
where it is due—When it is due. 
Thus at length shall we all be free. 
"FIFTEE N THOUSAND PEOPLE THRONGE D TH E STREETS TO HIS FUNERAL " 
TH E LIBERIAN EXCURSION 
DR. L . G . JORDAN 
AS to our ship proposition, it temporarily failed. The facts are : 
First : We negotiated wit h the American 
Trave l Club of Baltimore to whom we paid 
$4,000, and on a technicality were thrown 
down by them; and wit h boldness they are 
attempting to keep our money. We are sueing them for the $4,000 and damages, and 
a good law firm says we have a fine case. 
Second: We got in touch wit h Mr . An ­
thony Crawford of the Inter-Colonial 
Steamship & Tradin g Company, 198 Broadway, New York . We paid him $2,500 on 
the chartering of a ship, at which time he 
authorized us to advertise our cruise to 
sail on December 10. Wit h faith i n him 
and a belief that all was well, we proceeded 
to advertise the dedication of our boat and 
the sailing; then finally he told us that 
the company refused at the last minute to 16 THE CRISIS 
charter the boat, but would sell for $65,-
000, allowing us eight months to pay for 
the boat. We were to pay $8,125 down, and 
to give a bonding company's security for 
$57,000. We got this Sum together as required; then we were informed that the 
bond must be made by one man, not by the 
company as a whole. We met this demand, 
and were next confronted wit h the notification that the boat could not be turned over 
to us unless we paid $45,000 cash down; 
there we struck. 
However, the promoters, who are Bishop 
Heard, Dr. Jernigan, Dr. Wright, Jr., Major 
R. E . Wright, Sr., D r Callis, Major Yor k 
and the undersigned, are i n duty bound to 
see that those who secured tickets are refunded their money. Some of these have 
already received theirs, and if the Lor d 
spares my life, wit h the co-operation of 
my colleagues, not one shall lose the money 
he paid for his ticket. 
Because of the slowness of the courts, we 
may be tardy; but I believe all wil l come 
right. Nin e of our party have gone forward to Africa , one by England, one by 
France, and seven by Spain. Of the amount 
refunded, I have paid $425 personally and 
only one other of my companions has paid 
$30. 
I hope we shall have the brotherly sympathy of all, since I am reasonably sure 
none of us wishes to do wrong i n the matter. It has been an honest effort to get our 
people i n touch wit h Africa , the oppressed 
and needy Africa . He r redemption wil l yet 
come to pass. I believe from the depths of 
my heart that our coming here i n 1619 was 
directly providential, i n order that a prepared number should i n time return and 
rave the continent from which we were 
stolen. God is just. It wil l yet come to 
pass. 
Meantime we have made arrangements 
wit h the America n and Africa n Tourist 
Company, a Spanish firm, to act as their 
agents i n securing passage for persons wishing to go to Afric a vi a the Canary Islands 
and Cadiz. First-class passage is $460; 
second, $319; and third, $211. Steerage is 
$155. There is a 10 percent reduction for 
round-trip tickets. 
MAY AGAIN 
LESLIE PINCKNE Y HIL L 
A GAI N the southern winds at ease 
Caress the blossom-laden trees, 
Whil e o'er the heavens gay 
Is writ i n gold and hues of wine, 
A brightly-blazoned script divine— 
"Ma y comes again, sweet May. " 
Agai n what glories wake the dawn, 
An d how old warrio r Trouble, wan 
An d weak, is driven out; 
Wit h what clear throats the grackles sing, 
How musical the drone bee's wing , 
An d how the children shout! 
Fou r walls are all too narrow now— 
I follow where the sturdy plow 
Ha s turned the fragrant mead; 
Where growing green things rise in line 
Lik e soldiers, or where soft-eyed kine 
On new-sprung grasses feed. 
An d sweeter than all nature rife 
Wit h song and bloom, that zest of life 
Whic h fills the spirit up 
Wit h joy new-born of homely food, 
An d peace that whispers "God is good," 
An d overruns my cup. 
O what of the dream that faded fast, 
Or the fickle "gleam" that glanced and 
passed, 
Or the wine that turned to rue! 
I hold a wand, as Ma y can vow, 
Wit h magic healing, and somehow 
The heavens and earth are new. 
Reborn of hope, i n courage clad, 
I am a bold Sir Galahad 
On quests that cannot fail ; 
Fo r with new vision now I see 
That One Who daily walks with me 
Holds up the Hol y Grail . 
L'ENVOI 
O wonder love, whose tender might 
Through checkered years of cloud and light 
Ha s been both balm and goad, 
Be thou my Ma y when winters chill, 
M y Sarras set upon a hill , 
The ending of my road! TH E FOOLISH AND TH E WISE 
Sanctum 777 N . S. D. C. O. U. Meets Cleopatra 
A STORY 
LEIL A AMO S PENDLETON 
THE hour for opening had passed but, 
strange to say, Sister Sallie Runner, 
the Al l Highest Mogu l of Sanctum 777, 
"Notable Sons and Daughters of Come On 
Up," had not yet arrived. The members 
stood around in groups and wondered what 
had happened, for Sis Runne r was never 
late. True the Vice-Al l Highest, Sister 
Susan Haslum, was present and technically 
it was her duty to open the meeting; but 
the members of the Sanctum had a very 
poor opinion of her ability. Sally had 
once voiced the general feeling when she 
said to her: 
"Sis Haslum, seems lak to me dat yo 
knowlidge box is alius onjinted an' de 
mentals of yo mind clean upsot. How yo 
spect to rule dis Sanctum wen yo time 
come I cain't tell. Pears lak to me de bes' 
thing we ki n do wil l be to 'lect yo Grand 
Past Al l Highest an' give yo de grand claps 
now an' be done wi d it. Den we won't 
have to worr y wi d yo settin' i n dis cheer 
an' tryin g to zide." 
The suggestion was not acted upon, but 
as the members waited tonight they wished 
very earnestly it had been; for then Sister 
Tuli p Bawle r would have been in line to 
preside (as she was Most Mightiest), and 
no one doubted her ability. When the 
thoughts of the members had reached this 
uncertain state, Notable Brother Brown 
spoke up: 
"Hig h Notables, Sons and Daughters, 
Brothers and Sisters, Officers and Members," he said, " I moves dat we close dis 
here Sanctum tonight befo' we opens it an' 
journey 'round to Sis Runner's house to 
see what all's de matter wi d her." 
"Sho ! Sho! To be certingly," responded 
the Sanctum unanimously, but just as they 
were putting on their wraps, i n bustled 
Sallie, breathless but smiling. 
" I knowd it, " said she, as soon as she 
could catch her breath, " I jes knowd you 
all would git tired a waitin'. I tole Reverai Runner so. But dat man is some sick 
an' whut part ain't sick is scared to death; 
an' no wonder, as much debilmunt as he's 
alius up to. Jes as I were puttin' on my 
hat to come here he dragged i n de doe, 
lookin' lak a ghost. 'Brudde r Runner', 
says I, 'Is dat yo or yo apparatus ?' He 
diden make no answer but jes pinted to his 
chist. Wal , yo orter seen me hop 'round. 
Y o know he already done had newmonny 
twict. I had some creso an' dats good for 
de longs; den I chopped up some Turmooda 
onyuns an' bound him up i n dat an' salt. 
When he mence to feel better I turned him 
over to Obellina. She's jes as gooda nuss 
as me an' she are wrapped up i n her p a 
cause she ain't on to his curbs. Come on, 
chilluns, less open de lodge. We'l l leave 
off de gowns an' crowns an' mit de regular 
openin' cause it's so late, but I gotta fine 
ole anncienty story to tel yo an' dis time 
it's 'bout a cullud lady. " 
A t this the Sanctum was all excitement 
and officers and members hurriedly took 
their stations. Sallie gave the altar i n 
front of her five raps, then said she, "Hig h 
Notibuls, yo ki n pass to de .secertary's 
desk one by one an' pay yo dues. Sis 
Dolum an' Sis Spots tend to passin' de 
cookies. Does yo all think you ki n do all 
dem things an' lissen to me too?" 
"Oh yas, Al l Highest, " came a number 
of voices. "We's jes crazy to hear yo. " 
"Wal, " proceeded Sallie, i n her stateliest manner, "dis here lady I'se goin' to 
tell 'bout tonight were bornd right spang 
i n Egup t an' dats in Afriky . She were a 
sho nuff queen too, wi d lords an' ladies an' 
sojers an' servunts. He r name were Clea 
Patrick. " 
"Al l Highest," cautiously inquired Sister An n Tunkett, Vice-Most Mightiest, "is 
yo rale sho she were cullud? " 
" I is, " responded Sallie. "Cose, Mis 
Oddry beat me down she warnt, but I 
knows better 'cause I were lookin' right at 
her. She were one a dese here high browns 
wid. wavy hair an' rosy cheeks, lookin' jes 
lak dat Donarine Elett whut were runnin ' 
arter Rêverai Runner dat time. Least he 
'cuse her of runnin' arter him wen dey got 
cot up wid , but I knows who were doin' d« 
most runnin'. " 
17 18 THE CRISIS 
"Is Mis Oddry got Clea Patrick's picter, 
Al l Highest? " inquired Sis Tunkett. 
"Yas; an' de nex' time yo come 'round 
I'll show it to yo. Clea Patrick were one 
c f dese here long-haided, long-nosed, longeyed, slim gals dat jes nachel come into de 
world to make trubble. An ' she sho made 
it. Fust off her Kin g pa died wen she 
were only eighteen years ole an' lef his 
kentry fur her an' her li l brudder Tallmy 
to rule over togedder. Bu t whut should 
Tallmy's gardeens do but grab de whole 
bisnss an' leave Clea wid nuffin." 
"No w ain't dat jes lak some men! " exclaimed Sis Bawler. "Seem lak de vurr y 
idear of Wimmi n rulin ' anything but de 
cook kitching sets urn wild. " 
"It's de fack—trufe," replied Sallie. "Y o 
all knows dat as long as I were settin' on 
dis floor Brudder Runner were a jim-dandy 
member of de 'Come On Ups'. Soon as I 
mence to move 'round de cheers, he mence 
to git restless. Den wen yo all 'lect me 
Al l Highest he jes nachel coulden stan' it. 
So he goes off an' jines dat 'Everlastin' 
Order of Hezzakites' an' he aint been back 
here sence." 
"Dats right, Al l Highest. Dats jes whut 
he done, but I nuvver seen through it befo', " said Vice-Most Mightiest Tunkett. 
"Wa l I seen through him. He's jes ds 
same as a winda-pane to me. Bu t ef I'da 
knowd whut I knows now or ef I'da lissened to my ma he'd nuvver got me i n his 
clinches. Longs as I diden do nuthin but 
work fur him an' be a skillyun he were as 
pleased as punch, but jes as soon as peepul 
act lak dey thot I could do sumpin else 
sides dat he got sore. An ' dat was de 
vurr y way dem men acted wi d Clea Patrick. But dey diden know her yit! Ha ! 
Ha ! Dey haden foamed her quaintence. 
She skipped 'round an' got herself a big 
army an' de way she fout um were sumpin 
pretty, 'cause evry one of dem sojers was 
i n love wi d her. Den right i n de middle 
of all dat here come dat Julyus Siezer." 
"Wh o were he, Al l Highest? " inquired 
Sis Haslum. 
"Wh y he were dat great Roaming gineral sumpin lak Elleckzandry, only he were 
borned a long time arterward. Wa l as 
soon as he got in gunshot of her, Clea 
Patrick mence rollin' dem long eyes at him. 
She done a right cute thing doe—she wind 
hersef all up i n a bi g bufull rug an' make 
her servunts carry it to Siezer an' say, 
'Here's a present Queen Clea Patrick 
sont you.' Den wen dey onroll it, out she 
jump an' dat ole jack went crazy over her. 
Now he were ole nuff to be her grandpa 
an' he had a wife at home, sides bein' 
bald-haided, an' dey warn't no scuse fur 
de way he carried on." 
"Wal , Al l Highest," drawled Most Mightiest Bawler, "Y o know whut dey say bout 
a ole fool." 
"Yas, " returned Sallie, "an' I aint nuvver seen dat sayin' fai l yit. Dis here 
Siezer were a good zample of it, too. Wh y 
he took Clea Patrick back to Roam wi d 
him an' put her i n a fine palace an' was 
gittin' ready to go. fum extreemity to extromity. Bu t dem Roamings say, 'Looka 
here, we's tired a dis foolishness. Nuff's 
good as a feast. We all caint die togedder 
—somebuddy is got to die fust an' it 
might's well be yo.' So dey jump on Siezer 
i n de State House one day an' fill him fulla 
daggers." 
"Oh ! Oh ! My ! My! " cried the Sanctum. 
"Ya s indeedyj" replied Sally nonchalantly. "Cose when I fust got quainted wi d 
dem ole anncienties, dat murdiaripi' an' 
momockin' way dey had worried me a lot. 
But Ise usedta it now. Y o know you ki n 
git usedta anybuddy dyin ' but yosef. Wa l 
wen dis here Siezer died, Clea Patrick lit 
out fur home an' took dey li l son Siezeron 
wid her. An ' its a good thing dey got 
away so slick 'cause dem Roamings woulda 
finished um bofe. Bu t it do seem lak peepul nuwe r knows whut dey ralely wants. 
When Siezer were daid evrybuddy got sorry an' when his wil l were read an' dey 
found out dat he had left a whole lotta 
money to de vurr y ones dat had kilt him, 
why dem Roamings rose up an' made dose 
killers fly an' burnt up all dey homes an' 
done urn up so bad dey wisht dey nuwe r 
hada seen dat Siezer, less mo' kil t him. " 
"Wal, " Most Mightiest Bawle r interposed, "doesn't yo think dat were fair an' 
square, Al l Highest? " 
"Oh , I guess so," the A H Highest replied, "but dem ole anncienties done so many 
quare things yo nuwe r coud tell whedder 
dey was comin' or goin'. Wal , arter Siezer 
were daid his main frend name Mar k an 
Tony took up de battle. Arte r fightin' i n 
evry derection he wint sailin' down to 
Egupt. When Clea Patrick heerd he were THE FOOLISH AND TH E WISE 19 
comin' she diden git into no carpet dis 
time. N o indeedy! She puts on her gladdes' rags an' jewls an' fumes an' gits i n 
her fines' boat all kiwere d wi d gold an' 
silver,' an' has her servunts all decked in 
dey grandes' clothes holdin' parasols over 
her an' wavin' fans at her an' way she 
sail to meet Mar k an Tony. She already 
knowd him wen she were i n Roam wi d dat 
Siezer an' mebbe dey lak one another den, 
yo can't tell. Anyhow dey sho lak each 
udder arter at meetin'. Sho did! " 
"E f she look anything lak Donarina an' 
was all fixed up lak you says, I knows she 
were one uwermo hartbreaker," put in 
Sis Haslum. 
Sallie transfixed her wit h a look and 
went on. "Mar k an Tony furgot all erb out 
Roam an' home an' wife an' everything 
but Clea Patrick. He warnt no ole man 
lak Siezer so dey was mo' on a quality. 
Dey played games togedder an' went a 
huntin' an' a fishin' togedder lak li l boy 
an' gurl. Sides, Clea would sing to Mar k 
an' .play fur him an' talk to him in seben 
langwitches." 
"It's a wunder Mark's wife haden got 
onto urn," commented Sis Tunkett. 
"She did. She were one of dem strong-arm 
wimmin an' she starts up a great war, 
hopin' dat Mar k wil l come on home an' 
git into it; but he were too busy. He an' 
Clea useter dress up i n masks an' servunt's 
clothes at nights an' run up an' down de 
streets an' play Holle r Ween pranks on 
peepul when it warnt no Holle r Ween. 
Den agin dey would put on dey grandes' 
robes an' crowns an' give de bigges' kinda 
ceptions to dey frends an' eat an' drink tel 
dey coulden see. An ' den i n the middle of 
dem doins Mark's wife upped an' died." 
"Ah , de pore soul! " sighed Sis Haslum, 
"Da t Clea Patrick orta be shamed a hersef." 
"Wal, " resumed the Al l Highest, "Mar k 
went on to meet the yuther great Roaming 
gineral name Tavius an' what should he do 
but make up a match 'tween his sister an' 
Mark. " 
"Good gosh!" excaimed Sis Bawler, "an' 
Clea Patrick yit livin' ? Now don't you 
know dere's trubble comin' i n lobs an' gobs? 
Diden dat Tavius had gumption nuff to 
know dat a man whut wont be true to one 
wife, won't be true to two? " 
"Wal, " Sallie replied, "pears lak of he 
uvver knowd it he furgot it or else he 
were'hopin' fur de bes'. Anyhow, fur a 
while Mar k kep' rale straight. Bu t arter 
while he hadta leave home to go to de wars 
agin an' when he got not so fur fum Clea 
Patrick—uh ! uh!—he sont fur her an' give 
her not rings an' bracelits an' things lak 
dat, but rivers an' mountings an' cities an' 
countries." 
"Jes whut I knowd! " triumphed Sis 
Bawler. "Dese here madeup matches alus scares me. Lan d knows deres times 
wen its harda nuff to stand a match yo 
done made yosef, less mo 'one dats made 
fu r yo. " 
"Mar k an Tony found dat out aright. 
He done a li l mo' fightin' 'round erbout den 
he hikes hissef spang down to Egup t an' 
dar he stays wi d Clea Patrick. " 
"A h ha! " Sis Bawle r cried. "Tole yo so! 
Tole yo so!" 
"But, " Sallie went on, "dem Roamings 
feel dersef much more degraced by Mar k 
an Tony's doins, an' dey is tired a Clea 
Patric k hoodoodlin' dey bes' ginerals so 
dey clar wa r agin her." 
"Serve her jes right! " Sis Tunkett cried 
indignantly. "Don't care ef she were a 
cullud queen. I don't hole wi d no sich 
capers. She orta lef dem wimmins' husbunds lone." 
"Dats right! Dats right! " chorused the 
Sanctum. 
"Yas, " Sallie agreed. "M y ole mudder 
alius said dat 'Righ t wrongs no one.' Wal , 
Mar k an Tony an' Clea Patrick gethered 
all dey sojers an' sailurs an' off dey go to 
fight de Roamings. We n de battle got hot, 
Clea got scared an' back home she went 
ascootin. Stidda Mar k an Tony stayin' 
dere an' fightin' lak a rale sojer, whut muss 
he do but take a fast boat an' lite out arter 
Clea Patrick. Cose wen de leaders lef, the 
sojers stop fightin' an' de inimy captured 
dem all an' den hiked out arter Clea an' 
Mark. " 
"Wa l warn't dat sumpin! " exclaimed Sis 
Haslum. 
"Dem two," continued Sallie, "knowd 
evrything were over den, so dey et an' 
drunk an' carried on wusser dan uwer, 
tel dem Roamingis come clean into de city. 
Den Clea Patrick hide sersef wid her 
maids in a big monimint an' made her servunts tell Mar k she were daid. I caint 
imagine why she done dat 'cause dat news THE CRISIS 
on top a all de res' of his trubbles jes 
nachel broke his heart an' he run his own 
swoad clean fr u his body. Den when dey 
come back an' say Clea Patric k warnt daid 
he made dem carry him to her. I reckon 
dey love one another much as dem kinda 
peepul kin , 'cause when she saw him dyin' 
at her feet, she 'cides she diden wanta live 
widout him. So she put a pizenous wiper 
in her breast to sting her an' i n a li l while 
she were dead." 
"Poe thing, " Sis Haslum sighed. "Poe 
thing. Mebbe ef her ma hada lived she 
woulda been a better gurl. " 
"Mebbe so," answered Sallie, "mebbe so. 
Hig h Notabuls, de hour is late. We wil l 
close by singin' 'D y soul be on dy gard'. " 
SOME FRATERNA L ORDERS 
FRO M an unorganized inchoate group 
which had the church as its sole social center, the Negroes of the Unite d 
States have i n the last thirty years become intricately and effectively organized. 
Muc h of the information concerning these 
organizations is difficult to obtain because 
the written reports have to do with practical matters rather than wit h history and 
development. However, the CRISI S is attempting to gather up some of these most 
interesting facts. 
Next to the church among us come the 
secret and fraternal orders. They date 
back to the 18th century and include not 
only the well known orders current among 
the whites but many new and interesting 
experiments. 
A t the session of the white order of the 
Knights of Pythia s in 1869, an application 
for a charter for colored citizens of Phila ­
delphia was refused. Thereupon certain 
colored men i n Mississippi who had been 
initiated into the order established on 
Marc h 26, 1880, the "Knights of Pythias 
of Nort h America , South America , Europe, 
Asi a and Africa. " In 1887 the order divided into two parts, one keeping the old 
name and the other known as the "Knights 
of Pythias of the Eastern and Western 
Hemispheres." This latter organization 
we shall consider in a future article. 
The origina l order had 27,212 members 
i n 1901; 69,331 i n 1905; 126,227 in 1919; 
158,442 in 1921. In 1921 there were 3,723 
lodges. The national, state and local organizations have invested $2,321,641 in 
real property and their total resources in ­
cluding this property and funds on hand 
amounted in 1921 to $3,920,818. The order 
owns a beautiful national temple i n New 
Orleans, numbers of other buildings, and has 
established a bathhouse and sanitarium i n 
Hot Springs. It has an endowment in ­
surance department with sick and death 
benefits and a department for women 
known as the Order of Calanthe. The Supreme Commander is Mr . S. W . Green, of 
New Orleans. 
The "Independent, Benevolent and Protective Order of Elk s of the World " was 
also founded because the white order refused Negroes. It was organized i n 1899. 
Fo r a while it met difficulties and became 
divided into two parts. Finall y i n 1911 
it was united into one body and the report 
for 1920 shows a total membership of 29,-
143. It has 209 lodges and owns property worth $216,100, together wit h cash on 
deposit amounting to $165,239. It pays 
sick and death benefits and does a good deal 
of charitable work. In 1920, $28,813 was 
paid in , i n sick benefits and $27,525 for 
deaths; $11,565 was expended i n charity. 
Mr. George W . F . McMechen of Baltimore 
is the Grand Exalted Ruler. 
The "Mosaic Templars of America " is 
one of the orders founded by Negroes and 
originating with them. It was organized 
i n 1882, being founded by the late Mr . C. 
E . Bush, of Littl e Rock, Ark . Since 1917 
it has grown steadily and now claims over 
100,000 members. The main office i n Little Rock, has a force of 22 clerks and handles assets of the order amounting in 1921 
to $1,032,981, a large increase over the 
$298,988 income of 1917. It does an in ­
surance business and is regularly examined 
by the insurance commissioners of several TO A DEAD FRIEND 21 
G. W. F . McMechen S. W . Green S. J . Elliot 
states. The order reports 2,115 local organizations added since 1917 but makes no 
report of the number before that time, 
which was probably small. Most of these 
organizations are i n Arkansas, Louisiana 
and Alabama , and the order is chiefly a 
Southern organization. It has paid $850,-
043 i n death claims since Jul y 1, 1917. It 
owns i n real estate, $515,000, of which 
$360,000 is i n Arkansas, $50,000 i n Louisiana, and $85,000 i n Alabama . The Nationa l Grand Maste r is Mr . S. J . Elliott. 
One of the newest organizations is that 
of the "America n Woodmen". It was organized i n the State of Colorado, Apri l 4, 
1921, by white men and patterned after 
simila r societies among the whites. It had 
white officers and went on wit h only fair 
success, until 1910 when the white officers 
resigned and colored ones were appointed 
at the widespread demand of the colored 
members. Mr . C. M . White , of Austin , 
Texas, became the Supreme Commander 
and still holds that position. 
In 1910 the organization had a membership of 1,846 and i n 1920 the membership 
had grown to nearly 60,000. The net 
available funds grew in the same period 
from $7,223 to $621,236. Its total assets 
were estimated at $1,000,000 i n 1921, and 
its membership that year was near 70,000. 
It employs over 600 field officers, deputies 
and clerks. Its headquarters, i n Denver, 
has 25 employees and a finely equipped and 
modern office. 
In future articles we hope to present facts 
concerning the Masons, the Odd Fellows, 
and other organizations. 
T O A DEAD FRIEND 
LANGSTO N HUGHE S 
THE moon still sends its mellow light 
Through the purple blackness of the 
night; 
The morning star is palely bright 
Before the dawn. 
The sun still shines just as before; 
The rose still grows beside my door, 
Bu t you have gone. 
The sky is blue and the robin sings; 
The butterflies dance on rainbow wings 
Though I am sad. 
In all the earth no joy can be; 
Happiness comes no more to me, 
Fo r you are dead. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
T O TH E BRANCHES:_GREETING! 
A YEA R ago I was returning from my 
trip across the continent, filled wit h 
a sense of the extent of the N . A . A . C. P., 
its work, its immense possibilities. There 
were so many new things I had to propose 
to the organization, so many plans for the 
branches! This year I have not gone 
afield, but I want now, when the membership drive is beginning, to greet my old 
friends among the branches, and the 
other friends whom I hope sometime to be 
able to see. 
M y word of greeting is this : There 
was never a time when we had so excellent 
a chance to do constructive work as now. 
We had to spend many years chiefly in 
propaganda to get our idea before the public. Just as men advertise a new product 
for the market for months before they 
expect sales, so we for a long time had 
to be content wit h getting our ideas before the country. Bu t now we are beginning to be able to reckon our returns. 
The passage of the anti-lynching bill by 
the House and the favorable position it 
occupies i n the Senate mark what I mean. 
The position of the Arkansa s cases is another sign of our advancement. The time 
for constructive work is here. 
If the colonels, the captains, the lieutenants, the hundreds of workers who wil l 
go from meeting to meeting and from 
house to house canvassing for membership 
can only sell this idea of constructive work 
the drive must be an enormous success. 
An d that means our work must be a success, for the work depends absolutely upon 
the support that the Negroes and their 
sympathizers give to the drive. We can't 
do our work unless you are back of us. 
Ever y day i n our office, wit h its manifold 
activities, is your day, made possible by 
your support. If you stop, we must stop, 
if you double your energy, if you roll up a 
membership that is really worthy of the 
anti-lynching fight i n Congress that your 
secretary has conducted, then we can quadruple its power. Fo r we are at a point 
where our efficiency would multiply fast 
if we were able to increase our stenographic force, add a new worker here or 
there. We have not been able to do this. 
Our staff in New Yor k is little if any 
larger than it was three years ago, and see 
our need! 
The stars are on our side i n our battle 
today. Oppressed people are rising as 
they have never risen before. Comrades 
i n Ireland, i n India, i n Egypt, hold out 
their hands to us. Ever y effort the American Negro makes to better his position 
in the republic is an effort that helps the 
oppressed of the world. 
The Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People stands for the 
manhood of the Negro race. Ever y selfrespecting colored working man and woman should be i n it. It says to the nation 
that Negroes must be treated as men. So 
many white people like to treat them as 
children. Man y Negroes, the Southern 
white tells us, want to be treated as children. Do they? Our southern branches 
must give the lie to that. We hold to the 
belief that the black child, quite as truly 
as the white child, is capable of the highest 
development, and is entitled to every opportunity offered by the republic. We have 
fought for this for twelve years, and we 
have accomplished much. Wit h a great 
backing behind us we can accomplish immeasurably more. 
Workers i n the drive, see that this great 
constructive work goes on better than ever 
before. Carr y our message to the people 
and i n such a wa y that they must, if they 
are to avoid self-contempt, join i n our 
cause. 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON . 
TH E ANTI-LYNCHING MEMBERSHIP 
DRIVE OF 1922 
AFTE R eleven years of fight, victory 
against the great lynching evil of 
Americ a seems to be i n sight. The antilynching bill has been passed by the 
House; it is now in the hands of the Sen22 N . A . A . C . P . 23 
ate. If it becomes law it wil l end lynching by mobs. Bu t it wil l become law only 
through the united efforts of our people. 
These efforts must be focussed through a 
central body. They must be wisely and efficiently directed by that body. Scattered 
and contrary plans wil l work havoc to our 
cause. The splendid work already done 
by the N . A . A . C. P., through whose efforts sentiment against lynching has been 
awakened and the forces organized that 
pushed the bill through the House, proves 
that this is the logical central body through 
which the race should work i n its fight to 
end lynching. 
Bu t the N . A . A . C. P. must have larger 
numbers and greater funds to help i n its 
efforts to get the Senate to pass the antilynching bill. This is the reason for the 
present Anti-Lynchin g Membership Drive . 
Never before has the N . A . A . C. P. 
been so highly regarded by the public. 
Ever y man not blinded by prejudice, ig ­
norant of its accomplishments, or utterly 
indifferent to the advancement of his race, 
realizes that its work must go on and 
should be willin g to sacrifice for it. 
Our branches all over the country are 
making preparations for the drive—North 
and South, East and West. Over two hundred branches have already indicated that 
their drive machinery is ready or nearly 
so. Other branches are sending i n messages each day stating their preparation. 
The Nationa l Office is as busy as a bee 
hive, sending out supplies and answering 
drive queries and appeals. 
The southern branches are regaining 
their aggressiveness i n their campaigns 
for membership. Houston, Texas, has offered to organize the dormant branches 
i n that state which became inactive after 
the Shillady assault. Houston, itself, 
shows that it is unafraid by using win ­
dow cards for families that join the association wit h this legend: "This Famil y is 
100 Pe r Cent Members of the N . A . A . C. 
P . for 1922." 
New Orleans is already in the midst of 
a vigorous campaign for 5,000 members, 
wit h a splendidly organized canvassing 
team. Shreveport, La. , of notorious K u 
Klu x reputation, is actively engaged i n a 
membership drive. In the extreme North, 
Portland, Me., and Duluth, Minn. , stand 
ready, while i n the extreme West, Los 
Angeles and Northern Californi a along 
wit h many others, are girding up their 
loins for the gaining of great numbers of 
members. Washington, D. C , is out for 
25,000 members and is linin g up 2,000 
lieutenants. New Yor k Cit y is determined 
to gain at least 10,000 members, and Phila ­
delphia is i n the last stages of a campaign 
for 5,000 members. Rochester, N . Y. , in ­
tends to wi n seventy-five per cent of its 
colored population for the Association. 
Al l this is most encouraging, and we urge 
every branch of the Association to fall in 
line, and to begin the preparation for the 
drive. 
Preparation is the key word. We cannot 
emphasize too much that a successful drive 
is impossible without adequate preparation. Man y people imagine that they can 
decide tonight to have a drive and start to 
conduct it the day after tomorrow. It just 
can't be done. Preparation is seventy-five 
per cent of the success i n a drive. If the 
actual drive is to take two weeks, it wil l 
normally need from three to five weeks' 
preparation. If proper preparation is 
made—and that includes the obtaining of 
canvassers who wil l work and the training 
of these, the proper division of responsibility and the awakening of the community to 
interest in and enthusiasm for the drive— 
there is no question of success. Tha t they 
make thorough preparation, we strongly 
urge our branches. Tha t they may receive the aid and help of the Nationa l 
Office i n the methods of preparation, 
we urge that they keep i n close contact 
with the Nationa l Office. We have most 
carefully prepared and are furnishing full 
directions for planning and conducting the 
drive, for the publicity work, the training 
of workers, the management of details, 
and the canvassing campaign. We have 
also prepared interesting propaganda literature for use in the drive in our pamphlet—"Reasons for Joining the N . A . A . 
C. P. " 
Agai n remember—LYNC H LA W MUS T 
GO ! The anti-lynching bill i f it passes 
the Senate and becomes a law wil l stop 
lynching by mobs. This bill wil l not pass 
without the work of the N . A . A . C. P. 
Our Association must have more members 
and greater funds to carry on its fight in 
a larger way. The drive wil l provide this 
for the Association. Wil l you not then 2 4 TH E CRISI S 
enter the Anti-Lynchin g Membership Drive 
wit h the determination that nothing shall 
stop your branch from going over the 
top? 
SHIP STEWARDS 
THROUG H the efforts of the Nationa l 
Office an d the Distric t of Columbia 
Branch a decision has just been secured 
which affects the employment of thousands 
of colored stewards and chief stewards employed on ocean-going vessels under the 
control of the United States Shipping 
Boar d Emergency Fleet Corporation. During the wa r there were employed out of 
the port of New Yor k alone approximately 
5,000 colored stewards and chief stewards. 
Since the Armistice , however, active efforts have been made by certain officials 
at the New Yor k port to eliminate all colored men. In a number of instances colored men who have worked as stewards 
for more than twenty years were discharged and have been out of employment 
for more than a year. When applying for 
assignments they were told bluntly that no 
Negroes would be employed as long as 
white men were available, irrespective of 
length of service or efficiency of the colored stewards. 
The stewards as a last resort formed an 
organization, The Committee for the Relief of Unemployed Colored Chief Stewards, wit h headquarters at 28 Whitehall 
Street, New Yor k City. In Januar y a committee from this organization called at the 
office of the N . A . A . C. P. for a conference wit h Messrs. Johnson and Whit e to 
request that the N . A . A . C. P. aid them 
i n their efforts for reinstatement. A plan 
of action was mapped out and the stewards' committee was requested to secure 
certain information in the form of affidavits proving the charges of discrimination. These affidavits, together wit h copies 
of the records of the various men being 
denied employment were forwarded by 
the Nationa l Office to the Distric t of Columbia Branch, wit h the request that an 
appointment be made wit h the proper official of the United States Shipping Board, 
at which time a demand could be made for 
correction of the conditions complained of. 
On February 17, a conference was held 
with Mr . A . J. Frey , Vice-President in 
Charge of Operation of the United States 
Shipping Board Emergency Fleet Corporation, at which time a representative of 
the Stewards' Committee, together with 
Mr . Davidson of the Distric t of Columbia 
Branch, presented the complaints of the 
stewards. Afte r examining the official 
correspondence and the affidavits presented 
by our committee, Mr . Fre y took action 
as follows: 
First, he stated that R. H . Gregory, 
agent at the New Yor k port, according to 
letters and reports he had received seemed 
to be the chief offender against the colored stewards and he would be removed 
to a more subordinate position. Second, 
Mr . Fre y issued the following order, effective upon issuance. 
"Unite d States Shipping Board Emerg ­
ency Fleet Corporation, Washington, 
Operations Order No. 11 
To Managin g Agents 
Distric t Directors 
Distric t Managers 
Employees of the Emergency Fleet 
Corporation 
Subject: Employment of Colored Men in 
Commissary Department 
Evidence has been laid before me by the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, which indicates that in 
one district at least, there has been discrimination against America n citizens in 
the employment of personnel for the Commissary Department of our vessels; such 
discrimination being purely on account of 
color and without regard to the competency 
of the applicant for a position. Such a 
policy cannot be permitted. 
There are many colored men who have 
spent the greater part of their lives working in the Commissary Department of vessels, and Who from long experience have 
become most proficient in the work of that 
department. When positions i n the Commissary Department are to be filled, there 
must be no discrimination on account of 
color, and employees must be selected solel y on the basis of their competency, honesty and previous good record, but subject 
of course to the provisions of Chairman's 
General Order No. 11 and Operations Order No. 7, directing that preference be 
given to competent American citizens. 
A . J . FREY , Vice-President 
In Charge of Operation." 
Especial commendation should be given N . A . A . C . P . 25 
to the Stewards' Committee which worked 
unceasingly, and to Mr . Shelby J. Davidson, of the Distric t of Columbia Branch. 
TH E STATUS O F TH E DYER BILL 
THE Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bil l after bein g passed by the House of Representatives was read i n the Senate and referred 
to the Senate Committe on the Judiciary. 
It is now i n the hands of a sub-committee 
consisting of Senator Borah, chairman, 
Senators Dillingham, Sterling, Shields and 
Overman. The first three are Republicans 
and the last two are Democrats. This committee has its advantages and its drawbacks. On one hand, no stronger man 
could be found i n the Senate to champion 
the Bil l than Senator Borah and if he can 
be induced to make the sort of fight for the 
Bil l that he is capable of making, its passage may be looked upon as assured. On 
the other hand, not one of the Republican 
members is from a state wit h a constituency 
that would give him any particula r interest 
i n colored people. Senator Borah is from 
Idaho, Senator Dillingham is from Vermont and Senator Sterling is from South 
Dakota. The two Democrats are. the only 
members from states having an appreciable 
colored constituency. However, Senators 
Borah, Dillingham and Sterling have all expressed themselves as being in favor of 
Anti-Lynchin g Legislation and as willin g to 
support the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bil l if the 
committee is satisfied as to its constitutionality. 
The steps yet necessary for the enactment 
of the anti-lynching measure into law are 
the following: 
(a) The sub-committee must report the 
Bil l favorably to the whole Committee. 
(b) The Senate Judiciary Committee must 
report the Bil l to the Senate. 
(c) The Senate must pass the Bill . 
A great deal of work yet remains to be 
done i n order to accomplish these three 
steps. I n order that the question of the 
bill's constitutionality may be adequat e 
established, the Nationa l Office is busily engaged i n gathering the most eminent group 
of constitutional lawyers in the country to 
appear before the Senate Sub-Committee. 
It wil l be good news that Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, our national president and former 
president of the American Ba r Association, who fought and won the famous Louisville Segregation Case i n 1917, wil l personally appear before the committee. Former Unite d States Attorney-General Wade 
H . Ellis wil l also argue the constitutionality 
of the measure, as wil l former Assistant 
Attorney of the Distric t of Columbia, James 
A . Cobb. Other prominent lawyers are being secured. The marshalling of so impressive an array of legal talent augurs well for 
favorable action on the bill by the Judiciary 
Committee. 
Ever y effort must be made to have the 
first two of the above steps taken before 
the summer recess of the Senate which is 
scheduled for June. If all of the steps are 
left for the short session, the chances for 
success wil l be greatly lessened. We must 
use every effort to brin g home to the committee i n charge of the bill and to the Senate as a whole the wide-spread public sentiment which is i n favor of the passage of the 
Anti-Lynchin g Bill . Ever y person who 
reads these lines should, if he has not already done so, send a telegram or letter to 
the members of the Committee on the 
Judiciary and to the Senators from his 
state urgin g the passage of the Dye r Anti -
Lynchin g Bill . In addition to that each 
one who reads these lines: should make an 
effort to induce other individuals and organizations of all kinds, religious, secular, 
fraternal and labor to send letters and telegrams. 
If the Senate fails to pass the present 
bill, we may never again have such a favorable opportunity to secure federal legislation against lynching. Bu t they must not 
fail and if we use the power which is at our 
command they wil l not fail. 
HELPFU L CO-OPERATIO N 
THER E has been no more splendid example of co-operation during recent 
years than the work of a number of colored 
women throughout the country i n their efforts to raise funds for the anti-lynching 
fight of the N . A . A . C. P. Some time ago 
Mrs. Hunton wrote to a number of women of 
her acquaintance in all parts of the country 
asking them i f they would undertake the 
raising of one hundred dollars each. Twentyfive of these letters were sent out. Prac ­
tically every person responded by raising 
more than the amount requested. The Horizon 
COMPILED BY MADELINE G. ALLISON. 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION OF COLORE D BASEBAL L CLUBS 
* Few people realize that in Oklahoma 
there are 23 colored towns where no white 
person lives. These towns are Boley, Vernon, Bookertee, Foreman, Grayson, Lima , 
Langston, Rentisville, Clearview, Tolen, Ran, 
Ineonium, Dover, Red Bird , Taft, Tatum, 
Tullahassee, Wybard , Brooksville, New 
Yorlrie, Summit, Richardson and Tabor. 
The largest of the towns is Boley, which is 
a well-known and enterprising center. Our 
picture shows the Ft . Smith and Western 
depot i n Boley, where E . R. Cavil is ticket 
agent, Eugene Hyder, operator; Herbert 
McCorniick, express agent. 
* The Nationa l Association of Colored 
Professional Base-Ball Clubs wa s organized 
i n Kansas City, Mo., February 14, 1920. Its 
second annual convention was held recently 
in Chicago. The president, Andrew Rube 
Foster, in submitting the secretary's report 
IN TH E DEPOT , A T BOLEY , OKLAHOM A 
26 THE HORIZON 27 
said: Dealing wit h the 10 leagues and associated club presidents, and the 30 club 
officers and managers, together wit h communications received from the many players, and i n getting evidence i n many disputed cases for submission to the Nationa l 
Board, more than 2000 letters have been 
handled, 350 telegrams received and 300 
transmitted; 210 players' contracts were 
recorded and promulgated ; 12 releases were 
promulgated; 10 official bulletins were issued; 20 players were released by purchase 
from one club member of the association 
to another. The record established the first 
year under organized effort was 565,000 
paid admissions. Last year the league 
played withi n 20 per cent, of this number, 
under the readjustment period, and paid 
i n salaries to its players, $166,000. Dave 
Wyat t is publicity agent. 
* The Committee of Three Hundred of New 
Yor k Cit y Whose recent entertainment 
netted $2000 for the N . A . A . C. P. is much 
too modest to be photographed. We have, 
however, surreptitiously obtained the pictures of a few. Mrs. Helen Curtis was 
General-Chairman, Mrs. Owen M . Walle r 
was at the head of the committee on prizes 
and Mrs. Nin a G. DuBois was assistanttreasurer. Mrs. Grace N . Johnson was 
Chairman of the Publicity Committee, Mrs. 
Laur a Rollock of the Committee on Tables, 
while Mrs. Bernie Austi n and Mrs. Lottie 
Cooper were among the most active of the 
workers. An d there were 293 others whose 
pictures we anxiously await. 
* Benjamin Frankli n Davis, Post Quartermaster Sergeant of the United States Army , 
retired, died November 9, 1921. He was 
born i n Chester County, Pa., i n 1849, and 
was in the militar y service of the United 
States for more than 31 years, being a 
veteran of the Civi l War. In 1885 he was 
made Post Quartermaster Sergeant and 
was retired i n April , 1895. He served i n 
Cuba during and after the Spanish-American War, and the Quartermaster said, " I 
cannot speak too highly of the assistance 
he has rendered me in establishing the 
treasury system of Cuba. " He was buried 
MESDAME S DIT BOIS, W ALLE E AN D CURTI S 
Mrs. Cooper Mrs. Johnson Mrs. Austin Mrs. Rollock 28 TH E CRISIS 
Mr . Davis Mr. Samples Dr. McClennan Mr . Gunner 
with full military honors at the Soldiers' 
Home Cemetery i n Washington. A wife, 3 
daughters and 3 grandchildren survive him. 
He was a member of the N . A . A . C. P. 
• Walte r Wentworth Samples, who has 
just died i n Springfield, Mass., was a 
worthy citizen, and member of the Republican Town Committee. His father was a 
Civi l Wa r veteran and served as sailor on 
the famous "Monitor" . One grandfather 
served i n the wa r of 1812 and another i n 
the Revolutionary War. 
• Dr. Ridley U . McClennan was the son 
of the noted physician A . C. McClennan of 
Charleston, S. C , and was born i n Charleston i n 1887. He was trained at Aver y Institute, Howar d University and Claflin College. He succeeded his father eventually as 
surgeon-in-chief of the local colored hospital, and had a large practice at the time 
of his sudden death November 29, 1921. 
• The Rev. Byro n Gunner was born in 
Alabama i n 1858 and recently died at Reading, Pa., where he was pastor of the colored Presbyterian Church. He had a 
varied and interesting career, beginning 
his work i n Louisiana where he was driven 
out by a mob and his church burned. He 
afterward served i n Newport, R. I., and 
Hillburn , N . Y . His last church service 
was devoted to the work of the N . A . A . 
C. P. 
• St. John's A . M . E . Sunday School i n 
Cleveland, Ohio, has an enrollment of 1650 
wit h an average attendance of 900. There 
are 87 classes and 140 officers and teachers. 
Fo r the past 15 years Mr . Peyton W . Lemon 
has been superintendent of the Sunday 
School. The pastor is the Rev. Edwar d A. 
Clark. 
ST. JOHN'S A. M . E . SUNDA Y TH E HORIZO N 29 
TH E BESMANBOMAK A LITERAR Y SOCIET Y 
• The Besmanbomara Literar y Society has 
been organized by colored students at Colgate University, Hamilton, N . Y . Its object is the production of a deeper knowledge 
and appreciation of the achievements of the 
Negro i n all the higher pursuits of life. Al l 
men who fulfill the following requirements 
are eligible for membership: "Sympathy 
wit h the objects of society and affiliation by 
blood wit h the darker races." The society 
meets weekly, each meeting being featured 
by a paper on some phase of racial progress. 
It is the hope of the members that each 
paper presented shall show original, constructive research work) i n some particular 
field. The organization has met with much 
success and is filling an important place 
i n the life of Negro students at Colgate by 
giving them a real understanding of the 
geat past and even greater future of the 
Negro race. The officers are: N . M . Smith, 
president; W . S. Ravenell, secretary-treasurer; M . B . Anderson, corresponding secretary. 
• The Ladies' Group for Service is one of 
the latest organizations i n Washington, D. 
SCHOOL, CLEVELAND , OHIO 30 TH E CRISIS 
TH E WASHINGTO N LADIES ' GROU P FO R SERVIC E 
C. It is composed of the wives of prominent 
professional and business men of the city 
and gives itself to social service. Once a 
month a meeting of one hour and a half is 
devoted to sewing and the articles are distributed to needy persons. Last fall the 
Group arranged an entertainment for the 
benefit of the N . A . A . C. P. from which 
there was a substantial donation made to 
both the Nationa l and the Home Offices. 
The Washington Group for Service is composed of Mesdames James C. Dowling, Mil ­
ton A . Francis, B. Price Hurst, John R. 
Francis, Jr., Clifford C. Fry , Robert W. 
Miss Johnson Miss Taylor Mrs. Bryant-Jones Miss Reeves TH E HORIZO N 31 
Rutherford, N . W . Cuney, W . J. Howard, 
Jr., Roy W . Tibbs, Montgomery Gregory, 
and E . C. Williams. 
• When Mildre d Bryan t Jones, formerly 
of Louisville and now of Chicago, sought to 
take the examination for musical director 
i n the high schools of Chicago, every effort 
was made to persuade her not to do so. 
Whe n she finally appeared before the examiners they sat fully five minutes quite 
dumb looking at this apparition of a petite 
brown woman. Finall y she said, "Is it really 
as bad as all that?" Then someone smiled 
and the examination took place in December, 
1918. A t first they Wanted to segregate 
her and have her examined in a room by 
herself without supervision. This she refused. There was a two days' written examination i n music, history, harmony, Eng ­
lish and civics; and afterward practical 
tests before five judges i n singing, piano 
and sight-reading. Mrs. Bryant-Jones had 
had experience as a teacher for many 
years i n Louisvill e and was certain she 
had passed, but she received no report 
from her examination. Finall y she went 
to ask about it and was told that she had 
not passed. She asked to see her papers so 
as to apply for a revision of the examination according to the rules, but the papers 
were refused. She then applied to the colored Assistant Corporation Counsel, E . H . 
Wright, and got an audience wit h the president of the Board of Education. He sent 
for the southern man who was the examiner and ordered him to produce the 
papers. The examiner assented but after 
leaving the president's office calmly told 
Mrs. Jones that the papers had been destroyed ! Mrs. Jones immediately offered to 
take the examination again which she did 
in June, 1919. Thereupon she received a 
notice that she had passed but was not 
told what percentage she had made. She 
was appointed to night work i n the Wendell 
Phillips Hig h School i n September, 1919, 
and was refused even substitute day work. 
In April , 1920, i n spite of the opposition 
of the white principal, Mrs. Jones was 
finally appointed musical director in that 
school, January 31, 1921. Thereupon she 
learned that all the time she had stood 
highest i n the examination but that she 
was not appointed because "such matters 
were difficult of adjustment"! 
(I Miss Ida L . Taylor is a graduate of the 
Chicago Norma l School and of the University of Chicago. Last year she was appointed to the Department of Englis h and 
Mathematics in the Wendell Phillips Hig h 
School i n Chicago. 
(I Two young women of Boston have recently gained attention. Leanna S. Johnson 
of Norfolk, Mass., a graduate of Simmons 
College, won some time ago a $200 prize 
offered by Charles Sumner Bir d at the Walpole Hig h School. The authorities were so 
astonished that they refused to offer the 
prize for another year. Miss Johnson studied law at the Porti a La w School in Boston and recently passed the Ba r examination, becoming a full fledged lawyer and 
notary public at the age of 24. She is now 
law clerk i n Clark Rudnick's office. 
(I Miss Maryros e Reeves is a student of 
the Sargeant School i n Cambridge. A t the 
athletic meet i n the summer camp she 
gained first place in the running broad 
jump, the high and low hurdles and the 75-
yard dash, and second place in the high 
jump, the high step and jump and the shot 
COLORE D DELEGATE S A T TH E NATIONA L COUNCI L OF WOME N 32 TH E CRISIS 
put. In some of these events she broke 
the camp record. She was winner of the 
highest number of points and was given a 
loving-cup and her letter "S" . She also 
has the highest "pep" test in the school, 
which is one of Dr. Sargeant's inventions 
for testing energy. 
• A t the Nationa l Council of Women, held 
at the Bellevue-Stratford Hotel i n Phila ­
delphia, there were 4 colored women delegates, Mrs. Dickerson and Mrs. Bennett of 
Pennsylvania, Mrs. Hun t of Georgia, and 
Mrs. Hunton of New Yor k who was chairman. Others who attended were Mrs. Johnson, New York ; Mrs. Carry , Oklahoma ; 
Mrs. Griffin, Mrs. Jackson and Mrs. Wright, 
Pennsylvania. 
• Charles Keck has made a statue of 
the late Dr. Booker T. Washington. The 
monument was unveiled at Tuskegee last 
month. 
• New Yor k Cit y has a Women's Police Reserve of 62 members, some of 
whom were stationed recently to regulate 
traffic i n the Negro section. Notable among 
these women are Lt. Rosa Hall , who conducts a modiste establishment; Sergt. Mar y 
Simmons, a notary public and Commissioner 
of Deeds; Sergt. Matti e B. Taylor, a dress 
designer and Pvt. Ruth Whitehurst, a reporter. The Captain of the unit is Mrs. 
Elizabeth Mayfair. She is also chairman 
of the colored Red Cross center, organizer 
of ushers for the colored churches and the 
highest official i n several fraternal and 
political organizations. The women organized i n 1918 to help the Red Cross during 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTO N MONUMEN T 
the influenza epidemic. They are volunteer 
workers. 
• The Alpha Beta Fraternit y of New 
Bedford, Mass., has held a promenade and 
dansante. 
M Y LOVES 
LANGSTON HUGHE S 
I LOV E to see the big white moon, 
A-shinin g i n the sky ; 
I love to see the little stars, 
When the shadow clouds go by. 
I love the rai n drops falling 
On my roof-top i n the night; 
I love the soft wind's sighing, 
Before the dawn's gray light. 
I love the deepness of the blue, 
In my Lord's heaven above; 
Bu t better than all these things I think, 
I love my lady love. A N AFRICA N PROGRA M * 
IBIDUNNI MORONDIPE OBADENDE 
IN my opinion, the best way to secure our 
political emancipation is to try to establish i n Africa , our native Continent, a 
sort of Africa n Nationa l home, where alone 
we can hope to enjoy in full not only all 
the primordia l rights of man but also all 
civic rights. Besides, it is a natural and 
legitimate aspiration of every group of 
races to maintain an independent national 
entity, and in our case there is nothing to 
make this impossible. History furnishes 
numerous examples and the recent Zionist 
Movement to re-establish the Jewish Nation 
i n Palestine is an object lesson. 
The opportunity and materials to make a 
start are not wanting. The Republic of 
Liberi a and the West Africa n Colonies and 
Protectorates as well as the educational 
and financial assets we possess in our 
midst are quite enough to make a start, i f 
they are judiciously employed; and i n my 
opinion the following methods of procedure 
may be tried wit h advantage, namely: 
(1) A League, of as many Negroes of 
the world as are willing , can be formed 
wit h its headquarters in Liberi a and 
branches i n the various important parts of 
the world where Negroes are. In Liberi a 
as well as i n the other centres executive 
committees can be" created and funds collected. 
(2) Fro m the funds collected, loans can 
be given to Liberi a to pay her debts and 
develop her natura l resources. In the 
work of development the League can help 
through the Committee there. 
(3) In Liberi a a University can be established in which all the different branches 
of education and trainin g wil l be provided: 
i n this institution as well as in the colleges and schools i n the other places, the 
study of a language, which will, in due 
course, become a sort of Franca Lingua, 
may be made compulsory and the Africa n 
youths from every part of the world should 
be sent to the University, even though they 
may have to go abroad for further qualifications. 
(4) Through the local branches in the 
other places education in every sense can 
*Read at the London session of the Second fanAfrican Congress by a native student of Lagos, 
Southern Nigeria, British West Africa. 
be encouraged among the people. These 
branches can work i n cooperation wit h the 
respective local governments, and, if need 
be, establish private schools. 
(5) Scholarship systems may be provided 
to afford youths of poor parents the opportunities of attending the University. 
(6) Through the League, immigration 
into Liberi a and the other places in West 
Afric a of the African s in Americ a and the 
West Indies can be encouraged and facilitated. This wil l no doubt lead to increase 
of population and conduce to the development of the places educationally, commercially and industrially. 
(7) When Liberi a has sufficiently developed, each of the Colonies or Protectorates 
in due course may enter into federation 
wit h her, and gradually there can be formed 
a union of al l these West Africa n countries, extending from Senegal to Portuguese West Africa , including Belgian Congo, 
or as fa r as possible, under the name of 
The United States of West Afric a on the 
basis of alliance with the European Powers 
who have helped in developing those Colonies and Protectorates. 
In my opinion nothing short of an independent national entity can satisfy our 
needs; the possibility of being assimilated 
into any other group of races or nations is 
illusory and even undignified; as long as 
human outlook is limited by geographical, 
historical, and racia l consideration, it is 
self-deception to persuade ourselves that we 
can secure real rights of citizenship in case 
of such eventuality for experience has 
clearly shown that (a) good government is 
no substitute for self-government; (b) opportunity of equality is not the same as 
equality of opportunity; and, above all, 
(c) kin d and considerate treatment is no 
substitute for "respectful" treatment. 
Ma y the ashes of our fathers and the 
spirit of combination descending from on 
high help us i n this noble course. In this 
connection, it wil l be well if we ponder over 
a Yorub a proverb which, when put into 
Englis h may ru n as follows:—"He who 
sells his kit h and ki n for a paltr y sum 
wil l live to regret his inability to redeem 
him, even if he had the whole world to 
offer." 
3 3 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
BUIL D thee more stately mansions, oh 
my soul, 
Whil e the swift seasons roll! 
Leave thy low-vaulted past! 
Le t each new temple, nobler than the last, 
Shut thee from heaven with a dome more 
vast; 
Til l thou at length art free! 
Leaving thine out-grown shell by life's unresting sea! 
OLIVER W ENDEL L H OLMES . 
The Macmilla n Company issues Dr. Al ­
bert Churchward's The Origin and Evolution of the Human Race. Austi n Ha y says 
in a review in the New Yor k Times: 
From studies made by Dr. Churchward 
during many years, he is fully convinced 
that the hitherto preconceived ideas of 
many scientists regarding the origin of the 
human race, both as to place and date, are 
erroneous. His purpose is to prove that 
the first men were pigmies, evolved from 
the pithecanthropus, or anthropoid ape; 
that the human race did not originate i n 
Asia , but i n Africa , and that its beginnings 
date back about two million years. The 
region in which the pigmy first made his 
appearance was i n the Nil e Valle y and 
around the lakes at the head of the Nile , 
whence he spread to every quarter of the 
globe. From the pigmy, evolution continued through the Masaba Negro and then 
the Niloti c Negro. . . . 
The term "Masaba Negroes" is used to 
denote "those prognathous types of the human race which were evolved from the true 
pigmy, and from which we trace the next 
development of the human race, namely, 
the low type of Negro to the northeast and 
the true Negro to the west and southwest 
and which now exist under various names 
i n Africa . To the south the Bushman developed and from the Bushman the Hottentot." Then came the Niloti c Negroes, who 
were the founders of ancient Egyp t and 
among whom we find for the first time a 
system of totemism, distinguishing human 
groups by natural objects, such as animals 
and plants, with which they are supposed 
to have some intimate connection. "These 
totemic Niloti c Negroes both here i n Afric a 
and outside Africa—al l over the world— 
proved by their traditions that 'their beginning' is immeasurably earlier than the 
Egyptia n tradition preserved i n the astronomical mythology. Their beginning, in 
fact, is with totemism." The Heidelberg 
and Neanderthal types, i n Dr. Churchward's opinion, were early Niloti c Negroes, 
probably among the first who migrated 
north from ancient Egypt. They probably 
inhabited most of Europe and Asia , and 
existed for many thousands of years after 
the next exodus from Egypt, before they 
were exterminated by the more highly 
evolved Niloti c Negroes, who later set out 
for the north. 
* * * 
René Maran's prize-winning novel has 
stirred excitement i n unexpected quarters. 
The Paris correspondent of the Brooklyn 
Eagle writes: 
"Batouala" , the prize story of the life of 
a Congo chief, written by a coal-black Ne ­
gro from Martinique, has roused a furore 
i n Franc e by its criticism of white rule in 
Africa . . . . 
Pierr e Mille , on the other hand, writes 
to L'Oeuvre, a Libera l daily, indicating 
that there is some truth in Maran's 
charges : 
"Whil e the régime of the great robber 
concession companies existed in the Congo, 
forced labor was the rule. These companies 
fixed the prices at which they bought their 
rubber, levied their own taxes from the natives in goods and sold the goods to turn 
them into gold. 
"There were no railroads, no roads, no 
pack animals. Everythin g was carried on 
the backs of men. .. . 
"I n French Equatoria l Afric a the packman system still exists wit h disastrous consequences. The tsetse fly, brought by carriers into regions hitherto free from it, 
continues to destroy the natives." 
Mill e declares that the system of white 
rule, depending on pack carriers, has caused 
the death of more than 1,000,000 Negroes, 
and cites the case of one village i n which 
the blacks rebelled against the portage 
service, declaring that it was "better to 
die than to be a carrier" . According to 
Mill e 70 were shot. 
This write r declares that the remedy for 
these abuses is to refuse to renew the concessions granted to private companies, but 
to introduce free trade as i n other colonies and "to let nature repair the damage 
done by white men." 
* * * 
James Weldon Johnson's "Book of American Negro Poetry" Harcourt, Brace & 
Co.) has been issued and wil l be reviewed 
at length i n the June CRISIS. In an un3 4 THE LOOKING GLASS 35 
usually well-written and informative preface the author declares: 
A s for ragtime, I go straight to the 
statement that it is the one artistic production by which Americ a is known the 
world over. It has been all-conquering. 
Everywhere it is hailed as "America n music." 
Fo r a dozen years or so there has been a 
steady tendency to divorce ragtime from 
the Negro; i n fact, to take from him the 
credit of having originated it. Probably the 
younger people of the present generation 
do not know that ragtime is of Negro origin. . . . Once the text of all ragtime 
songs was written i n Negro dialect, and 
was about Negroes i n the cabin or i n the 
cotton field or on the levee or at a jubilee 
or on Sixth Avenue or at a ball, and about 
their love affairs. Today, only a small proportion of ragtime songs relate at all to 
the Negro. The truth is, ragtime is now 
national rather than racial. Bu t that does 
not abolish i n any way the claim of the 
American Negro as its originator. 
Ragtime music was originated by colored 
ipiano players i n the questionable resorts 
of St. Louis, Memphis and other Mississippi Rive r towns. These men did not know 
any more about the theory of music than 
they did about the theory of the universe. 
They were guided by their natura l musical 
instinct and talent, but above all by the 
Negro's extraordinary sense of rhythm. 
An y one who is familia r wit h ragtime may 
note that its chief charm is not i n melody, 
but in rhythms. 
Survey of periodical literature on the 
Negro for 1921: 
"I'd Lik e to Show Yo u Harlem" , R. L . 
Hartt, Independent, Apri l 2, 1921. 
"Serving New York's Black City" , E . 
Rose, Library, Marc h 15, 1921. 
"Fruits of Peonage", New Republic, 
Apri l 20, 1921. 
"Georgia Declares Wa r on Peonage", 
Literary Digest Ma y 14, 1921. 
"Georgia's Indictment", The Survey, 
Ma y 7, 1921. 
"Georgia's Death Farm" , Literary Digest, Apri l 6, 1921. 
"Governor Dorsey Stirs U p Georgia", 
Independent, Ma y 28, 1921. 
"Lik e a Thief", M . Evans, New Republic, August, 1921. 
"Open Letter to Governor of Arkansas" , 
R. T. Kerlin , Nation, June, 1921. 
"Peonage and the Republic", H . H . Hart, 
Survey, April , 1921. 
"Slavery i n Georgia A . D. 1921", H . J. 
Seligmann, Nation, April , 1921. 
"Southerners Solving the Negro Problem", Literary Digest, January, 192.1. 
"Traits of M y Plantation Negroes", H . 
Snyder, Century, July, 1921. 
"Americanization of the Negro" , T. B. 
Maroney, Catholic World, August, 1921. 
A NAVAL APPOINTEE 
EMIL E TREVILL E HOLLEY , a 17-
year old colored boy of New Yor k 
City, has been nominated for admission to 
Annapolis by Representative Marti n C. 
Ansorge, a Republican of the 21st Congressional District. Mr . Ansorge discusses the nomination i n the Boston Evening Transcript : 
I have distributed my appointments 
throughout the district. There were four 
principals and twelve alternates to be 
named. I am happy to say that every boy 
i n my district who applied received an appointment as principal or alternate. I n the 
Worl d Wa r just won colored boys enlisted 
or were drafted irrespective of race. There 
were 500,000 colored boys i n the Arm y and 
Navy . A s a matter of simple justice and 
in recognition of the valor and Americanism of the colored boys i n the wa r I have 
nominated one to the Nava l Academy. Three 
colored boys already have graduated from 
West Point. Holley is a fine clean-cut 
young man, is physically and mentally qualified and was highly recommended by prominent people of both races. 
Henry Suydam, a correspondent of the 
Brooklyn Eagle thinks that hidden forces 
ME. HOLLE Y AND FELLOW-STUDENTS 36 TH E CRISIS 
wil l prevent Holley's entrance into Annapolis: 
The examining officers are carefully supplied wit h technicalities wit h which they 
may trip up undesirable candidates for a 
naval commission, and, while not divulging 
their methods, they display a certain calmness which leads one to the conviction that 
they are not worryin g about a Negro candidate at Annapolis. 
Eve n if Holley should reach the academy, 
as officers today pointed out he would have 
to face there the overwhelming force of 
precedent. It is held by some that the 
Nava l cadets wil l not hesitate to Use "Coventry" upon the newcomer i n an effort to 
sustain the color line within the Navy . 
* * * 
The Boston Post shows more optimism: 
Wh y should this young man, described as 
a fine fellow, mentally, physically and 
morally—why should he be treated wit h in ­
solence at Annapolis, simply because of his 
complexion? Thousands of men of his color 
served the United States i n the great war, 
and served her well. Is this country, which 
supports the naval academy and all students 
i n it, going to permit it to be said that a 
man like Holley cannot go to Annapolis except to endure a life of insult and persecution? 
We do not conceive that such a thing is 
likely. If Holley passes his examination, 
the over-select young midshipmen from the 
South wil l be compelled to treat him decently, or something wil l happen. 
* * * 
How shameful that such a discussion 
need take place! 
FIRST AID TO DENMARK 
THE Nordi c races of whom Mr . Madison Grant has been writing , are learning about us, at least i n Denmark. The 
Copenhagen Berlingske Tidende reports: 
A young Negro, Mr . (E) Frankli n Fra -
zier, Who is at present studying at the Uni ­
versity of Copenhagen, delivered a lecture 
last evening i n the Englis h Debating Club 
on the Race Problem i n Americ a and other 
countries. 
Mr . Frazier, who spoke excellent, clear 
English, impressed one as an intellectual 
young man wit h a keen sense of humor. 
He began by giving an abundance of statistical information on the number of Negroes i n Americ a and their occupations, and 
mentioned among other things that i n the 
Worl d Wa r a large number of Negroes, both 
as officers and privates, served on the American side i n France. 
He mentioned distinguished artists and 
scientists which the black race had produced, and said that in American universities there were many Negro instructors and 
some professors. 
Mr . Frazie r spoke next of the relation of 
Negroes to whites and in this connection, 
forcibly attacked the southern states for 
their inhuman treatment of the black race. 
In the southern states Negroes have no 
rights and are constantly treated as beasts, 
being pursued and murdered by the whites 
without cause, the latter going unpunished. 
Negroes are lynched and burned out of pure 
love of killing : indeed, i n present times the 
number of Negroes burned nearly averages 
one a month. 
Mr . Frazie r justly satirized this type of 
American civilization, though such things 
occur in the southern states, the people i n 
the Nort h showing more humanity towards 
colored people. 
Mr . Frazier's well delivered lecture was 
received wit h warm applause by the members of the Englis h Debating Club, who 
filled every seat i n the lecture hall of the 
Kvindelig Laeseforening. 
OPEN CONFESSION 
SOMETIME S the South listens to the 
voice of conscience. No t long ago a 
Negro minister charged wit h teaching 
Catholicism among Negroes was whipped 
and run out of Barrow County, Ga . The 
Columbus, Ga., Enquirer-Sun opines: 
It wil l be only a question of time before 
the mob rules completely i n Georgia, in ­
stead of constituted authority. Indeed, it 
has almost come to that now. An d why 
not? Haven't we permitted the seeds of discord and prejudice and mob violence to be 
sown uninterruptedly i n this state for 
years past? Hasn't the mob spirit been 
glorified in Georgia, year in and year out, 
until the chief exponent of it was finally 
sent to the United States Senate as a reward for his devilish work? Haven't we 
seen also, this same mob spirit chartered 
and capitalized right here i n Georgia, under the name of K u Klux , and the right to 
raid and maraud sold by its hired organizers at ten dollars per head?—with gown 
and mask, i n which to conceal one's identity, thrown-in for six dollars extra. 
Is it any wonder, then, that a dozen or 
so ignorant men i n Barrow County feel 
free to take a Negro Methodist preacher out 
and beat him and drive him out of the county? Or that a simila r number of "hil l 
billies " in Schley County, only a few weeks 
ago, felt free to murder an excellent and 
thrifty Negro farmer for no reason at all? 
An d we could mention hundreds of other 
cases, all occurring right here i n Georgia, 
if we but had the time and space. Al l of 
them the direct outcome of utter disrespect 
for law. Whic h is to say, also, the direct outcome of ignorance. 
But, over and above all this, the direct 
outcome to the teachings of such men as 
Watson and Simmons, who have played 
upon and capitalized this lawless spirit and 
this ignorance for their own devilish ends. 
Fo r months and years past, these men TH E LOOKING GLASS 3 7 
have flooded the mails with their incendiary 
publications—the only kind of literature 
that some of these ignorant people ever 
see—until they have made tens of thousands of converts, who have no better 
sense than to try to put into effect, every 
now and then, the teachings of these hellinspired leaders of mobocracy. 
Fo r proof positive of this, we need only 
look back a few years to the lynchings that 
Watson openly encouraged and the dip-vat 
outrages that he publicly advocated; as 
well as to the K u Klu x crimes that have 
been perpetrated throughout the South, 
either by Simmons' chartered bands direct, 
or as the result of his infamous teachings 
and example. 
* * * 
The deluge is at hand is this editor's 
conclusion : 
Things can't go on much farther i n Georgi a as they are. The state has failed, and 
continues to fail , to enforce its authority 
and uphold its sovereignty. The mob takes 
possession whenever and wherever it 
pleases. The law is nothing; the whim 
of the mob is everything. Whether its victim be white or black, the mob commits 
its crime, and it is soon forgotten. Nobody is punished and, soon, nobody cares. 
Knowin g this, there is nothing to deter the 
next mob. 
* * * 
The Negro deserves a new abolition 
thinks the New Haven, Conn., Register: 
Not abolition of the old intolerant and 
militant sort, but abolition revised as well 
as revived. Bu t it is something somewhat 
more than a gradual growth. The wa r has 
done it. The wa r has opened the eyes of 
some Americans to the fact that he who 
was a slave, whom because of the misfortune 
into which our selfishness and sin cast him 
we regarded as a lower order of creature, 
trul y is a man. We found i n the war, some 
of us, that he was responsive to the same 
thrills and impulses of patriotism and 
service—and decidedly more effective as a 
fighter, by the way—than most of the 
whites of us. An d it dawned on some people, as it dawned on Mrs. Margare t Deland 
on an occasion which she recalls at Brest 
i n 1918, that if the America n Negro was 
good enough to die for her, he was good 
enough to eat wit h her. 
Now what is this bondage from which 
deliverance now is needed? It is the bondage of ignorance. The Negro i n the South 
ever needs more schools, and better support of the schools he has. It is the bondage of class lines. The thinking white 
people of this country need to face as never 
yet they did their fault and its results, and 
get over their notion that this civilization 
can go on wit h a great wall between the 
races any more than this nation could 
exist half slave and half free. Finally , it 
is the bondage of injustice. The Negro 
must have a fair tria l by the law, he must 
have the protection for himself and his 
loved ones that the white man has, he 
must have the same chance i n business and 
industry. When these things are accomplished, the new abolition wil l begin to see 
its fruits. 
THREE MUSICIANS 
TURNER LAYTO N has recently made 
an excursion from the field of ragtime 
in which he was so conspicuously successfu l into the realm of more serious composition. Two of his songs, "The Littl e 
Gra y Road of Love " and "Than k God the 
Drums Ar e Silent " have scored a triumph. 
Musical Courier writes: 
Turne r Layton has here turned out two 
of the best songs that have come to this 
office i n a long time. It is an unusual occurrence that simultaneous publications by 
a single composer are of such equal excellence. It is not too much to say that they 
are both masterpieces, and it would be difficult, if not impossible, to choose between 
them. Both are short, only three pages, and 
both are melodic i n the best sense of the 
word. The accompaniments are excellent 
and the harmonies modern and effective. 
The chromatic opening of 'The Littl e Gray 
Road of Love " (expressive of the Oriental 
suggestions carried i n the words "Th e red 
roads of Rangoon win d through the grand 
bazaar and there are eyes like velvet skies 
to lure a man afar" ) is of great originality 
and force, and the change into major with 
the change of mood is most skilfully and 
naturally accomplished. The voice part is 
intelligently conceived, admits of clear diction and phrasing, and winds up to a fortissimo climax on a high G at the end. This 
is a love song of the best sort. 
The other is a song of peace, the great 
peace that follows great wars. It is a love 
song too, a song of the love of friends and 
of peoples, the universal love. It is a song 
that is sure to be a favorite with concert 
singers, and, although not, strictly speaking, 
a sacred song, it would seem to be suitable 
to the church. It certainly has a strong 
spiritua l flavor. The accompaniment is in 
march tempo, big, sonorous chords admirably supporting the voice. The accompaniments to both songs are easy to play and 
will not tax the capabilities of the most 
modest player. They are built to be popular 
favorites and they wil l be. 
* * * 
Meanwhile Roland Hayes reaps distinction abroad. A Paris correspondent tells 
us: 
Hayes is at this moment in Paris having 
a most brilliant time. M . and Mme. Joseph 
Salmon,—the husband a cellist, and in the 
front rank of musicians i n Paris,—presented him last night to the musical and 
aristocratic people of Paris and Hayes received a tremendous ovation. He was pre-3 8 THE CRISIS 
sented at their house in their drawing 
room. This has given him a real entré 
into the musical and social life of Franc e 
and already he has been engaged by several 
people to sing here next month. He is singing tomorrow for Monsieur Pierne, conductor of the "Colonne Orchestra" and he has 
three other professional engagements which 
be is filling on this trip. His work i n Eng ­
land is going ahead i n leaps and bounds. 
He is quite full of engagements for the 
spring and many for the autumn of next 
year. Some of the people before whom he 
sang i n Paris were: Princesse de Caraman 
Chimay, Mme. Miche l Ephrussi (Aun t of 
Rothschild), Mme. Alexandr e Dumas, Le 
Baron Theodore de Bereheim (Diplomat), 
Mr . and Mrs. Stanley-Park (of New York) , 
Mr . Bateau, Ministr e de l'Institut Inventeur, Mme. Jacques Thibaud, and Prince 
Jovalou Quenum, of Dahomey. 
* * * 
The Diapason writes of a recent composition for organ by Carl Diton : 
His arrangement of the old Negro melody, "Swin g Low, Sweet Chariot " (made 
popular years ago by the Fis k Jubilee 
Singers), is one of the outstanding organ 
compositions of recent years. He has 
taken another Negro melody and treated it 
i n much the same way—has written it into 
a most interesting and delightful composition for the organ. The piece is misnamed 
"transcription" . It is much more than 
that. There is much origina l matter i n it 
and the subject is developed and worked 
out wit h great variety and skill. We do 
rot believe that "Keep Me Fro m Sinkin g 
Down " is as good a melody as "Swin g Low, 
Sweet Chariot" , which is undoubtedly one 
of the most beautiful of all the Afro-American folk-tunes—is, indeed, one of the loveliest folk-melodies of the world. Whil e not 
so distinctive as "Sweet Chariot" , "Keep 
Me From Sinking Down " is good material 
for just such a purpose as this. It is not 
obviously Negroid in its style, except for 
the irregular final phrase. It bears a fleeting resemblance i n its opening phrases to 
the hymn tune "Vesper" , usually sung to 
the words, "Saviour, Breathe an Evening 
Blessing" . 
* * * 
The American Organist adds : 
The piece is interesting and bears a 
stronger resemblance to the typical folk 
tune than to any Negro melodies that could 
be recognized as such by any substantial 
proportion of the hearers. On this account 
it wil l be the more welcome to audiences. 
It is comparatively easy to play. , . . 
The church organist could use it most effectively as a prelude to either morning or 
evening) service, preferably evening. It 
rises to a stirring climax quite naturally; 
the player's feet wil l have to be ready and 
willin g servants. On the recital program 
it should be used as folk-tune music in the 
latter half of the program in contrast to 
other pieces of entirely different type. 
Photoplayers wil l find it valuable for pictures of southern life, or for any drama 
dealing with early Americ a after the Pil ­
grim Fathe r stage. It could well be used 
for home scenes of high character (which 
manifestly does not mean society dramas) 
where the true qualities of home life are 
apparent. 
* * * 
Mr . Diton's composition is published by 
Schirmer; Mr . Layton's by T. B . Harms, 
New York . 
HAITIAN AFFAIRS IN A NUTSHELL 
TH E Current History Magazine furnishes this précis of affairs i n Haiti : 
Professor Pierr e Hudicourt, a member of 
The Hague Court o f Arbitratio n and a native of Haiti , told the Nationa l Popular 
Government League i n Washington on Feb. 
2 how his country is being bled b y financial 
sharks and lesser grafters, wit h very little 
incidental benefit i n the way of public improvements. He charged John A . Mc -
Ilhenny, financial adviser to the Republic 
of Haiti , appointed by President Wilson, 
with being interested i n a scheme to force 
upon Hait i a loan of $14,000,000, which the 
people there do not want. He said McIlhenny gets $10,000 a year and $6,000 for 
traveling expenses from the Haitia n Government for doing work which the Haitians 
do not want done. The Nationa l Cit y Bank 
of New York , the Haitian-America n Sugar 
Corporation and R. E . Forrest, President of 
the West Indies Tradin g Company, he said, 
were interested i n the loan. He continued: 
"The proposition is made to the Haitia n 
Government that the Nationa l City Bank 
shall loan it $14,000,000, of which the Hai ­
tians would get $12,880,000, for it is to be 
sold at 92. Out of this the railwa y interests represented by Vic e President Farn -
ham of the Nationa l Cit y Ban k are to get 
$1,621,500 immediately i n payment for a 
railway which the Haitians never bargained 
for. The Americans who have invaded 
Hait i propose to pay off the French debt, of 
$6,668,980 and the $965,000 of internal debt. 
Of the proposed loan there wil l be left $1,-
545,800. This, if the plans of the schemers 
go through, is to be devoted to irrigation 
projects and roads, not for the Haitians, 
but for the benefit of the American landgrabbers. I am here to protest against a 
treaty imposed by military pressure against 
the wishes of the people." He added: "The 
Haitian, gourde, which was worth $1 i n 
American money, Admira l Caperton has 
arbitrarily fixed at 20 cents. The sugar 
and cotton and other interests may pay their 
labor little more than 20 cents a day. B y 
the most bruta l and arbitrary methods these 
interests, workin g through the United 
States Government, have forced a new 
treaty, providing complete control of my 
country's finances and a Receiver General, THE LOOKING GLASS 39 
who is a carpet-bagger from Louisiana. The 
country is now i n complete vassalage." 
* * * Dr. Hudicourt was summoned before 
the Senate Investigating Committee on Feb. 
8 and repeated his charges substantially as 
given above i n his address of Feb. 2. Senator Kin g on Feb. 6 introduced a resolution 
calling on the Secretary of State to inform 
the Senate by what authority a loan o f 
$14,000,000 was being negotiated i n behalf 
of Haiti . * * * Brig . Gen. John H . Russell, it was stated on Feb. 8, would go as 
Hig h Commissioner of Hait i to clear up the 
situation involving America n occupation. 
* * * 
The appointment of a Hig h Commissioner 
is i n itself a most amazing departure. The 
New Yor k Nation comments: 
A s the appointment is without precedent 
i n America n history, both i n the creation of 
the office of Hig h Commissioner over a technically still free and independent nation 
and i n the failure to send the appointment 
to the Senate for confirmation, a resolution 
of inquiry was introduced by Senator Walsh 
of Montana. I n reply President Hardin g 
sent a copy of Ambassador Russell's commission, adding "that it would not be compatible wit h the public interest" to make 
public his instructions. Amon g them, The 
Nation has good reason to believe, are orders to put through the loan which the 
State Department and the bankers are tryin g to fasten on Haiti—whic h wil l serve 
to copper-rivet the Occupation on the Hai ­
tian people for at least forty years—in 
other words i n perpetuity. A resolution 
challenging the constitutionality of General 
Russell's appointment was introduced by 
Senator Kin g following the receipt of President Harding's response, and was referred 
to the Committee on Judiciary. 
Evidently the President has forgotten his 
campaign pledges. The Nation reminds 
him : 
On August 28„ 1920, speaking from the 
front porch at Marion , he said: 
So many things have been done by the 
present expiring Administration that no 
power on earth could induce me to do that 
I cannot even recount them. I may remark 
casually, however, that if I should be, as 
I fully expect to be, elected President of this 
just and honorable Republic, I wil l not empower an Assistant Secretary of Nav y to 
draft a constitution for helpless neighbors 
in the West Indies and jam it down their 
throats at the point of bayonets borne by 
the United States marines. We have a 
higher service for our gallant marines than 
that. No r wil l I misuse the power of the 
Executive to cover with a veil of secrecy 
repeated acts of unwarranted interference 
i n domestic affairs of the little republics 
of the Western Hemisphere, such as in the 
last few years have not only made enemies 
of those who should be our friends, but have 
rightfully discredited our country as their 
trusted neighbor. 
General Russell, dictator of Hait i without 
the consent of the Senate, is the officer 
who jammed down the illegal constitution 
at the point of bayonets borne by United 
States marines. An d when the Senate asks 
for light on another act of unwarranted 
- interference i n that little republic, the Ex ­
ecutive covers this act "wit h a veil of 
secrecy." 
BY THE WAY 
A MA P OF SORROW TAK E a school child's outline 
map of the United States and 
place a dot i n each state for every 
lynching that has occurred within 
its bounds in the 32 years that began wit h 
1889 and ended with the last day of last 
year. 
Six states wil l stay all white, and of these 
five are i n the New Englan d group. Uta h 
alone, wit h the Distric t of Columbia, shares 
the proud distinction that has been earned 
by Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, 
New Hampshire and Massachusetts. Maine 
has had a single lynching, also Ne w Jersey 
and Delaware. Nort h Dakot a has had two 
lynchings. Yo u must give three dots to 
New York , four each to Michigan, Nevada, 
Oregon and Alaska ; seven to Minnesota, 
and eight each to Iowa and Arizona . Littl e 
groups of dots must be placed in several of 
the Mississippi valley states. Washington 
wil l have 17 and Californi a 29. 
Bu t when you finish the long task of 
dotting the map with the lynching records 
of the states south of the Ohio rive r and 
study the general effect, all the map wil l 
look almost white except that southern 
group, and they wil l look almost black. Here 
is the record: Nort h Carolina wil l have 63 
dots, Virgini a 80, Missouri 85, Oklahoma 99, 
South Carolina 128, Kentucky 171, Tennessee 199, Florid a 201, Arkansa s 231, Ala ­
bama 292, Louisiana 326, Texas 354, Mississippi 405 and Georgia 429.—R. L . O'BRIE N 
i n the Boston Herald. 
9|e $ • . $ 
TH E WHIT E PROBLEM AGAI N we have the white 
problem which has grown 
out of the Negro problem - the 
problem of the great American desert, the 
vast region of spiritua l aridity from which 
comes nothing but the southern gentleman. 
A s long as the Negro problem persists we 
shall also be confronted with the task of 
conducting a democracy i n the face of the 
fact that from one vast bloc of States we 
can seldom expect representation except 
through Bourbons or demagogues. 
The Negro problem concerns the South 
more vitally than any other section of the 
country and unfortunately it has forced 
out of consideration practically every other 
public question. Unde r this intensive specialization the mind of the South has atrophied to such an extent that it is no longer 
competent even to deal wit h this single 
question which it has called its own. — HEY -
WOOD BROU N in the N . Y . World. 40 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSITY 
Richmond Virginia 
is offering young men an excellent 
opportunity to secure a liberal education. We are offering work in the 
High School Department 
College of Liberal Arts 
Pre-Medical Scientific Department 
Pedagogical Department 
Theological Department, and in 
the Department of Public Health 
Nursing 
Strong faculty—healthy and attractive surroundings. Reasonable rates. 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMA L SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a first-class Hig h School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art , Agriculture, Wor k in Wood , Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music , 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 350; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 14. 
School farm, 1,129'A acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Ou r postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
Fo r further information write 
T . S. INBORDEN , Principal , BRICKS , N . C . 
Wilberforce University 
Summer School 
9th ANNUA L SESSION 
June 19th to July 29th, 1922 
Wonderful natural beauty. Ideal place for health, recreation and study. Large faculty, inspiring lectures, splendid 
educational equipment and excellent cuisine. 
Courses: College, Normal, High School, 
Special Features: Bible School and School of Philanthropy. 
Catalogues sent on application. 
Address all mail to the Director of the Summer School. 
Gilbert H. Jones, Director. 
HAMPTON INSTITUTE 
AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL 
HAMPTON , VIRGINI A 
Opportunity Knocks at the Door of 
the Mian Wh o Knows and Can Do 
If you wish to prepare yourself to fill a responsible position of wide usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teacher of vocational agriculture 
Rural-school principal 
Hampton Now Offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEGE COURSE 
Leading to the Degree of B.S. in Agricultural Education With Work in WellEquipped Classrooms, Shops, and Laboratories; With Summer Field Practice; With 
All-Round Training Under High-Grade Instructors. 
James E. Gregg, Principal 
Warren K. Blodgett, Director 
St. Philip's 
Normal and Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Musi c Courses, 
Teachers' Training , Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Writ e for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
TALLADEG A THEOLOGICA L 
SEMINAR Y 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Frederic k A . Sumner , President 
Is training men for the Gospe l Ministr y at 
home and abroad. Students are also being 
trained for work in the fields of 
SOCIA L SERVIC E 
RELIGIOU S EDUCATIO N 
TH E Y. M . 0. A. , AN D 
TH E T . W . C . A . 
The Seminary has an enviable record of 49 
years of service. Fo r full information address 
JAME S P . O'BRIEN , Dean 
399 W . BATTL E ST. , TALLADEGA , ALA . 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 41 
AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND THE NEGRO 
(ILLUSTRATED) By C . V . ROMA N 
"Th e soul of a ma n has gone into this book." (Dial.) 
"W e especially commend the volume to those of colored blood." (Independent, Ne w York. ) 
"Th e most comprehensive work on this subject writte n by a colored man. " (Crisis.) 
Postpai d $3.00 Ne t 
Address L. E. BADGER, 1303 Church St., Nashville, Tenn. 
KINDERGARTE N DEPARTMEN T 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course, of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlant a Universit y Atlanta , Ga . 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 291 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct 
railroad connections. 
The only school of its kind in historic Northern Virginia. 
State standard Four-Tear High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepare boys and girls to become 
useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
EDWARD D. HOWE, PRINCIPAL 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
Th e only establishment dedicated to collecting 
and distributing the history and literature of 
the Africa n and his descendants. Books out 
of print a specialty. 
135 WEST 135th STREET 
NEW YORK, N. Y . 
A MONE T GETTE R because it is A CROWD GETTE R 
Churches and Clubs looking for a »l»y that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splltttng Fun, should hare 
The Slabtown Convention 
Ai entertainment la on tit: full tt Mit 
aid good, humor. Scores of churches hare cleared fragt 
One to Tw» Hundred Dollars Ig One Night. PRICE, 10s. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
Llgealn Height*. Washington. D. n 
THE PSYCHIC CIRCLE 
A MAGAZINE'OF MONTHL Y 
LESSONS IN APPLIED 
PSYCHOLOGY 
Ho w to use MENTA L and PSYCHI C 
POWE R for SUCCES S in Business. 
Ho w to Thin k for Thing s to come your 
way. 
Th e latest, the simplest, the most practical 
Business Course ever published. 
In this day of Rac e Prejudic e and Com ­
mercial Competition, the Individual or Race 
who neglects to Cultivate and use MENTA L 
and PSYCHI C POWE R will be a Back Num ­
ber—a Servant—a Subject Race—will have 
to recognize others as Superiors. 
Writ e for Sample Copy and explanation 
free cf charge. 
TH E PSYCHIC MEMO INSTITUTE 
4412 West Bell e Plac e 
St. Louis, Mo . 
NE W YOR K WANTS TEACHERS ! 
No discrimination on account of color. 
Correspondence Courses for success in New York City 
examinations offered by experts. 
Salaries in New York 1st to 6th year $2875. 7th and 8th 
year $3250. Six week's Lecture Course during July and 
August prepares for January examinations. 
Four evenings each week. Information Free 
Day's School of Pedogogy working in conjunction with the 
famous MeEVoy School. 
Address HOWARD DAY, Prin. 
186 West 135th St., New York, N. Y . 
"AR E YOU R HAND S TIED" ? 
Lear n Show Card Writin g ur Poster Painting. One 
of the great professions not overcrowded. Wit h 
little capital you can become your own boss. Diploma awarded for full time course. (Thre e 
months.) 
PROGRES S VOCATIONA L INSTITUT E 
Licensed by The Regents of the University of the 
State of New York 
Knickerbocker Bldg. Broadway at 42d Si. New York, N . Y 
The Child and the Home 
Essays on the Rational Bringing 
Up of Children 
A Book for Parents 
B y BENZIO N LIBE R 
B.A., B.Sc, M.D., Dr. P.H . 
A Book in Five Parts: (1) Fundamental Errors, (2) Practical Advice v (3) Instances from Life, (4) Sex and the 
Child, (5) Health and the Child. 
Prefaces by UPTO N SINCLAIR and AIRS'. AN D MR, 
FFRM , Principal Teachers of the Modem School, 
Stelton, N. J . 
Cloth $2.50, including postage 
PUBLISHER: RATIONAL LIVING 
61 Hamilto n Place , Ne w York , N . Y . 
AGENTS WANTED 
A wonderful opportunity to earn big money 
is offered to men and women who are real 
workers and who want to connect with a high 
class proposition. W e have several good openings for agents to sell ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
at $29.50 each, on VER Y EAS Y TERMS , 
also 10 and 20 acre tracts of good farm land 
at $32.50 per acre. Read our ads elsewhere 
in this publication and then send for details 
regarding our attractive offer to agents. 
WRIT E TODAY . 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO , 111. 42 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. He r singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEOEG E LACY , Manager , 
116 Hamilto n Avenu e Columbus, Ohio 
Send at once for busts of 
Frederick Douglass, Booker T. 
Washington. Paul Laurence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen 
and Rev. C. T. Walker, D.D. 
About I ft in height, antique 
bronze color. Price $2.50 each, 
or 5 busts for $11.25. Heroicsize bust of Douglass, 35 inches 
In height, for schools, libraries 
and auditoriums. Agents wanted. 
The Isaac Hathaway 
Art Company 
810 S. Hickor y St., 
Pin e Bluff, Ark . 
WH Y OPERATE A N ELEVATO R 
AL L YOU R LIFE? 
Lear n Show Car d Writing , Sign Painting or Poster 
Design. Congenial work for young ladies and men. 
Easy hours. Bi g profits. Good, positions everywhere in the United States. 
PROGRESS VOCATIONAL INSTITUTE 
Knickerbocke r Building , 
Broadwa y at 42nd St. NE W YORK , N . Y . 
The Stenographers' Institute 1226 S. 17th Street 
PHILADEAPHIA, PA. 
Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeeping and Business Law . 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , Principa l 
AGENTS WANTED 
For a high grade line of Calling Cards, Business Cards, 
Invitations, Social Stationery, etc Big demand everywhere. 
Liberal commissions. Prompt deliveries. Write for samples 
and terms. 
THE H0U8F OF CHOWNING. INDIANAPOLIS INn 
^Announcing 
One Hundred Etchings 
OF 
Col. CHARLE S YOUNG , U . S.A . 
Size, includin g Margin , 12 x 16 inches. 
Specia l Subscription Pric e $10.00 pe r Prin t 
Half-Ton e Reproduction Upo n Request 
WILLIAM M . KELLEY . Publisher 
3 Quinc y Street Brooklyn , N . Y . 
FE W MOR E AGENT S WANTE D 
{Write, enclosing 2c Stamp _/or terms.) 
TH E FAMOU S COSMO S LABORATOR Y 
A Worl d of Perfume Harmon y in our Special Lin e 
of Cold Creams for Milady's Toilette. 
Exquisite Vanishing Day Cream (Greaseless) 50c 
Dainty Lemon Night Cream (Cold Cream)...! 50c 
Vegetable Massage (Rolling Cream) 50c 
Trial sets of 3 Postpaid ; $1.25 
Special Prices for gross lota or bulk orders. 
C . D . CAMPBELL , Analytica l Chemist 
P. 0. Box 204 Dent C Newport, R, I. 
Armstrong Correspondence College 
ANNOUNCES 
Courses (or Teachers and Business Men by Mail 
Our system enables You to take Business and Educational work at Home at small cost. Why spend Three 
or Four Hundred Dollars when we can give you the 
same work at little expense? 
The following are a few of the courses we offer to: 
EDUCATION 
Educational Psychology. 
Methods in Grammar and High 
School Subjects. 
Educational Tests and Measurements. 
History of Education. 
History of Negro Education. 
Psychology : General, Childhood, 
Vocational, etc. 
Industrial Education. 
Principles of Negro Education.. 
BUSINESS 
Principles of Business. 
Salesmanship. 
Stocks and Bonds. 
Insurance. 
Accountancy, 
Banking. 
Book-keeping. 
Advertising.. 
If you do not see what 
you want, write us. We 
Hive it. Write to-day. 
BYRON K. ARMSTRONG 
Westheld, Indiana 
A RACE COLLEGE FOR RACE PEOPLE. 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Asbolutely Free Fro m Gri t an d Aci d 
An d Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E . Â . Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth. "BLEACHING" the Teeth. Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 43 
HOTEL DAL E 
CAP E MAY , N . J . 
Open March 15 
Rates reduced in keeping with the times. This 
magnificent Hotel, located i n the heart of the 
Most Beautiful Seashore Resort i n the world, 
is replete with every Modern Improvement. 
Superlative i n Construction, Appointments, 
Service and Refined Patronage. Orchestra 
daily. Garage, Tennis, etc., on Premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Booklet. 
E . W. DALE , Owner. 
SOUTHERN SALESMAN WANTED 
A n established Northern Corporation doing a national business desires the services of a live, honest and trustworthy salesman (or woman) i n the 
Southland. 
Only persons with ability and experience need 
apply. 
Salary and commission paid. Address 
BERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATIO N 
No . 413 S. Broa d St. Philadelphia , Pa . 
DRESS SHIRT FREE " 
FineSerge Pants 
BARGAIN 
$7.00 Now $3.98 
Postage 
Paid 
SEN D N O MONE Y 
Her e is one o f the biggest values offered to readers o f this 
paper. Wil l send this splendid 
pair o f serge pants and wit h i t 
this fine negligee shirt FREE-- -
without asking fo r one cent 
wit h the order. PANTS are 
made o f extr a quality blue serge, 
wel l tailore d i n every way. 
Extr a heavy pocketing, all seams 
serged, no ra w edges, bar tacking , strong belt straps. Waist 30 
t o 44, inside seam length 80 to 36 
inches Be sure t o giv e inaeam 
length. SHIRT we give free is 
made o f striped fine material, cut 
ful l an d wefi made. COLORS — 
Blue , Lavender, Green striped* 
SIZES»14M to A 
GE T A SHIR T FRE E 
Just send you r name and address, 
givin g sizes wanted. We'l l send 
both pants and shirt by parce l post 
prepaid. Yo u pay mailma n when 
delivered. You r money back i f not 
pleased. Her e is positively a bi g 
W.OOvalueforonly$$.98. Send 
MO W as the number o f free 
shirts is limited. Orde r 
__j fay No. 191 C .4 0 
HOWAR D LU X CO. , DEPT . 181 fcUVSLANh,.Ob 
Right Now is the 
Time to Buy 
ORCHARDVILLE 
LOTS 
WHIL E YO U CA N GE T THE M AT 
$29.50 
$3.00 DOWN AN D $1.50 PE R MONT H 
Wit h tke coming of better times comes an increased demand for lots in beautiful Orchardville, where hundreds of people have already 
bought lots and where many, many more are 
doing so right along. Soon the big rush for 
lots will be on i n full force, and there are 
apt to be many disappointed people because 
only a limite d number of lots are going to 
to be sold a t the present low price. 
The fact that Orchardville is so well known 
now means much towards the increasing demand, and makes it necessary for each prospective purchaser to act as quickly as possible. 
A s stated in previous announcements, the lots 
are sized 30 x 144 feet and are sold under a 
MONE Y BAC K GUARANTE E to protect the 
purchaser against misrepresentation. The terms 
are only $3.00 down and $1.50 a month per 
lot. N O INTERES T at any time.-
Ou r FRE E BOOKLE T tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to you without any obligation on your part. Simply write your name 
and address on the coupon below, and send it 
to us TODAY , before you forget it. The 
booklet, with other interesting matter, will be 
sent to you promptly. We are sure you will 
find them interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, III. 
(Coupon) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realt y Dev'pt Corpn., 
19 S. L a Salle Street, Chicago, 111. 
Gentlemen :— 
I am interested in your Orchardvill e lot 
offer and would like to receive full details without obligation to me. 
Name :.-
Address 
Town and State 
CRI-5-22 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
First Anniversary 
Presents two Operatic Numbers by 
ANTOINETT E GARNE S 
The Only Colored Member 
of the Chicago Grand 
Opera Company 
7101 { Caro Nome 7102 { Ah, Fors E'Lui 
$1.00{ (Dear Name) $1.oo{ (Ah, It Was He) 
Two Everlasting Folk Songs 
2045 { Deep River } Nettie Moore 
75c. { Song of India } Contralto with Orchestra 
Two Corking Good Blues Songs 
2044 
75c 
You Missed a Good Woman 
(When You Picked All Over Me) 
Long Lost Weary Blues 
Trixie Smith 
Soprano with Orchestra 
Our releases for next month will include two Jubilee numbers 
by a Mixed Quartette and three numbers by a native South 
American Orchestra. 
The Only Colored Phonograph Company in the World 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
Makers of 
BLAC K SWA N RECORD S 
228 9 Sevent h Avenue . Ne w York , N . Y . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
A NEW WAY 
TO GET YOUR CLOTHES 
ABSOLUTELY FREE 
and a New Plan to Make Big 
Money During Your Spare Time 
Something different, better, bigger, more 
liberal than any offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes—bigger cash profits 
—express or postage prepaid on everything. 
If you are a live, wide-awake man, we 
want you to get one of our elegant suits 
made to your measure, ABSOLUTEL Y 
FREE . Al l we ask you to do is to wear 
it, show it to your friends, and take a 
few orders for our high-grade, made-tomeasure clothes. 
DOUBLE PAY 
Free Clothes and Cash Profits Besides 
You can easily earn $30.00 cash extra, 
every week, during your spare time, taking 
orders for our made-to-measure clothes. Other houses make their 
agents use their cash profits to get their own clothes. That's 
not our way of doing business. When we say "FREE " we mean 
"FREE" . OURS IS TH E GREATES T OFFER EVE R MADE . 
FREE Fifty-six, real cloth samples—colored fashion plates, 
inside wholesale prices—everything FREE . Just drop 
us a line today and we will send you COMPLET E OUTFIT FREE . 
SPENCER MEAD COMPANY 
Wholesale Tailors Dept. E-217 Chicago 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BE A LAND OWNER 
PREPAR E FOR YOU R FUTUR E 
INDEPENDENC E by SECURIN G 
A WOODVILL E ESTAT E 
of 10 or 20 Acres or more, on 
very easy terms, at 
$
32. 5 0 per Acre 
Libera l reduction on 20 acres or more. 
SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUN T TO 
THOS E WH O AC T QUICKLY . 
A LO T FRE E wit h each 10-acre tract. 2 
lots wit h 20 acres. Eac h trac t sold under 
a MONE Y BAC K GUARANTEE . 
The cry heard everywhere is "Back to the 
farm". People are disgusted with the uncertainty of city life, with its strikes, lay-offs, 
high cost of living, congestion, etc., and are 
anxious to get out into the country where they 
can enjoy the life of the country gentlemen. 
The desire for farm land was never greater 
than at the present time because the working 
man realizes how much better off he would be 
on a farm of his own than grinding away the 
rest of his life as a city laborer. 
That is why this offer is meeting with such 
favorable response. Our Woodvill e tract is 
nicely located in the wonderful state of Michigan, and is being sold under a plan that makes 
it very easy for anybody to secure 10 acres or 
more. 
Ou r FRE E booklet tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to you on receipt of the 
coupon below, properly filled in . Mai l it T O 
DAY . The booklet will be sent to you promptly and we are sure you will find it interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. 
_ _ (Coupon) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realt y Dev'pt Corp., 
19 S. L a Salle Street, 
Chicago, III. 
Gentlemen :— 
I am interested in your "Woodville offer and 
would like to receive full details without obligation to me. 
Name 
Address , 
Town and State 
CRI-5-S2 
Agents Wante d 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PA Y 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAST INDIA 
TOILE T GOOD S 
MFG . CO . 
316 N . Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY, OKLAHOM A 
Quino Prices Cut—Quality Raised 
Lila c & Kose Tollet Water (75c). Delightful Fac e Powder (25c). Bouquet Talcum Powder (15c). Col d Cream 
(35c). Vanishin g Cream (35c). Beauty Rouge (25c). 
Witch Haze l Cream (35c). Liqui d Shampoo (75c). ShamBoo Soap (25c). QUIN O Hai r Grower (50c). Temple Oi l 
<75c). Tetter Salvo (75c). Hairtone ($1). Hai r Tonic 
(75c). Ta r Lotion (50c). Vegetable Hairtone ($1). Sent 
postpaid. Agents Wanted. 
Gantt , QUIN O School , Nashville , Term . 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. 
Est. 1916. Capitalized »76,000 
$60,000 common, $25,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Film Corporation in the Worl d Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
1121 CENTRA L AVE. , LOS ANGELES 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L . JONES, Pre.. 
641 W. 9th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
YO U CA N BAN K B Y MAI L 
FIRS T STANDAR D BAN K 
Louisville , Ky . 
Capita l and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilso n Lovett , President 
MME . G . B . NEEDLES 
FINE FURS 
FU R GARMENT S MAD E T O ORDE R 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morning.ide 7590 
Tel. 6417 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTOIMI T m COUHIKLLO«-AT-LAW 
M ScfcMl Street Boston, Hau . A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) •. 1.50 
TH E SOU L OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) ...... . 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) — 2.00 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHER PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
UNSUN G HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINCE HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOICE OF TH E NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS. (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKER T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.00 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
TH E NEGRO I N LITERATURE AN D ART . (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTY YEAR S AN D OTHER POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
TH E HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO CHURCH . (Carter J. Woodson).. 2.1 5 
TH E UPWAR D PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S I N TH E GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G. Steward)... 2.70 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : i 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N . Y. A FAIRY TOUC H 
More than a fairy touch is required to obtain and preserve the beauty 
of youth. 
The following superfine preparations have been especially prepared 
to aid you. 
MADA M C. J. WALKER' S 
Dental Cream Cold Cream 
Vanishing Cream Cleansing Cream 
Witch Hazel Jelly Complexion Soap 
Antiseptic Soap Floral Cluster Talc 
Superfine Face Powder (white, rose-flesh, brown) 
Compact Rouge 
The Madam C. J. Walker Mfg. Co. 
640 North West Street 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Makers of Madam C. J . Walker's World Renowned 
Hair Preparations 