The CRISIS 
Vol. 21—No. 3 JANUARY , 1921 Whole No. 123 
ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENT S A COP Y A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S OF BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.50 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) ... . 1.10 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE . (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein) .. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (B . G. Brawley) 1.50 
TH E SHADOW . (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.75 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford) . . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T . G. Steward) 1.50 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 3.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B. DuBois) ;2.0 0 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyma n 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO B TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE . NE W YORK-CITY . COWDUCTE D B Y W . E . BUBGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET . LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol . 21-No . 3 JANUARY . 1921 Whole No . 123 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . "AFRICA. " From the Group on the New York Custom House 
COLORE D TEACHER S OF CAP E COLONY , SOUT H AFRIC A 105 
NEGRO LEGISLATORS 120-1 
ARTICLES 
ELECTION DA Y IN FLORIDA. Walter F. White 106 
MARGARE T GARNER. A True Romance. Lillie Buffurm Chace Wyman. . . 110 
MARCU S GARVEY . W. E. B. DuBois 112 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T
PEOPLE
MEN OF TH E MONT H
TH E LOOKING GLASS
TH E OUTE R POCKE T
TH E HORIZON
 OF COLORE D 
 101 
 116 
 120-1 
 122 
 126 
 127 
TH E FEBRUAR Y CRISIS 
Th e Februar y CRISI S wil l contai n a splendi d articl e o n the business reviva l i n Washingto n 
D . C , an d ou r annua l summar y o f lynchings. 
Th e CRISI S Calenda r o f Negr o Author s i * the most inspirin g o f ou r whol e series. No w ready . 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e dat e of expiratio n of eac h subscriptio n is printe d on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscriptio n is due , a blu e renewa l blan k is enclosed . 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address o f a subscribe r ca n be change d as ofte n as desired . 
In orderin g a chang e o f address, bot h the ol d an d the ne w address must be given . Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S an d drawing s relatin g t o colore d peopl e ar e desired . The y must be accompanie d by retur n postage . I f foun d unavailabl e they wil l be returned . 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at New York , Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of Marc h 3, 1879. 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Mask The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING and 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J. 
A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
trades for boys, including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly 
equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
modernly equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term opened September, 1920. 
For information address 
W . R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Lincoln University 
Ranked in Class 1 
among colleges for colored students 
by the America n Medica l Associatio n 
College and Theological Seminary 
opened Sept. 21, 1920 
Address: 
President, Joh n B . Rendall, D.D . 
Lincoln University, 
Chester County, Pa. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
Cheyney , Pa. 
Mad e i n 1920 a n accredite d Stat e Norma l School , 
offerin g i n additio n to the regula r Norma l cours e 
o f tw o years professiona l thre e yea r course s i n Hom e 
Economic s an d Manua l Training . A diplom a from 
an y o f these course s make s a graduat e eligibl e to teach 
i n the publi c schools o f Pennsylvania . A three -yea r 
Hig h Schoo l Cours e is offered to al l wh o hav e completed the eight h gramma r grade . 
Boar d an d Tuitio n $153.00 
1st Semester. Septembe r 13 , 1920 
2n d Semester, Januar y 26, 1921 
For further f^atticulars and catalog, write— 
LESLI E FINCKNE Y HILL , Principal , 
CHEYNEY . PA . 
Mentio n THE CRISIS . TH E 99 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University Is beautifull y locate d i n the Cit y o f Atlanta , 
Ga . Th e course s o f stud y includ e Hig h School , 
Norma l Schoo l an d College . Specia l emphasis 
is lai d upo n the trainin g of teachers. Students 
come fro m al l parts o f the South . Graduate s 
hav e a fine recor d fo r successful work . 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
President Edward T. Ware Atlanta . Ga . 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Beat Mora l and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Trainin g and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable. 
Began September 15, 1920. 
Fo r catalog- and other Information address 
PRESIDEN T J , KELL Y GIFFE N Knoxville. Tenn . 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1920 ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $100,000 administration building with modem 
chapel and gymnasium under construction. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Ad ­
mission only by application. 
REARRANGE D COURSE S OF STUD Y 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd Tears' High School Courses, with Certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course with degree of A.B . 
Domestic Science— Commerce— Normal— 
Pre -medica l Course 
51st year of nine months opened September 22. 19U0 
$16.00 per month pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STAT E UNIVERSITY , Louisville, Ky . Founded 1879. 
The only Institution in the State having for Its objen 
Collegiate. Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizen* in Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal. Commercial, Mode, Domestic Science, Miss 1 on ary 
training clam 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C . H . Parriah 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Biddle University operated under the auspices of the Northern F- lbyteriao Church, baa four Depart­ menu—High School. Art* and Sciences Theological and Industrial. The come let ion «f s Grammar School course is the require men* for entrance u» the first rear of the High School 
The School of Arm and Sciences offers two courses of study, the Classical and the Scientific- in the scientific. German u substituted for Greek or Latin. The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 16 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each consisting of three years The first is purely English. Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
Al l students in the High School Dept. are required u> take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
Fer further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrerey. 
Chsrlotts, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational Th e largest institutio n o f learnin g i n the Sout h 
owne d an d controlle d by Negroes. Facult y o f specialists, traine d i n some o f the best universitie s i n the 
Nort h and i n the South . Note d for hig h standar d of 
scholarship ; industria l emphasis an d positiv e Christian influence . Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletic s unde r facult y supervision . Expense s reasonable. Locatio n centra l an d healthful . 
Departments: Theology , College , Hig h School , Nor ­
mal , Commercial , Musical , Domesti c Science , Sewing , 
Printin g an d Tailoring . 
First Semeste r began September, 1920. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
JOHN H . LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J . S. FLIPPER, Chairman Tru.te* Board 
Mentio n THE CRISIS 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven, in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthfu l Location . 
Literary , Scientific, Educational, Social Service. Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration. Journalism, 
Nurse Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood . 
Fo r further information address 
F . A . SUMNER , President 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona. Fla. 
Beautifu l location , idea l hom e life , fine , moder n equipment . 
Course s includ e Kindergarten , Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational . 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospita l a specialty . Term s reasonable . 
Sen d fo r Catalog . 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal 
HAL E INFIRMAR Y AN D NURS E TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. Offers to Hig h Schoo l graduate s an d youn g 
wome n o f highe r educatio n an d goo d mora l 
character, betwee n the ages of 18 an d 35, a 
thre e years' cours e i n the professio n o f nursing . Fo r furthe r informatio n appl y to th e 
Superintenden t enclosin g a stamp . 
Both of Us Lose, Young Man 
If you fail to study the superior advantages North Carolina 
offers you through The Agricultural and Technical College 
for securing good, practical and 
technical training. 
Four Strong Departments: 
Agricultural Academic 
Mechanical Teacher-Training 
Night School for those who 
desire to work in the day. 
Fall Term began September 1,1920 
Address: 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , President 
A . & T. College 
Greensboro, N . C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman' * Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicag o and Boston and 
A . B. E . Society of Ne w York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL A n Episcopa l boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 6138 Germantow n Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately 
Addres s 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 11 ATLANT A GA . 
Mentio n THE CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 21. No. 3 JANUARY , 1921 Whole No. 123 
Opinion of W. E. B. DuBois 
It's better to be Right than White— 
PAN-AFRIC A 
THE Second Pan-African 
Conference under the Presidency 
of Blaise Diagne, Deputy 
from Senegal to the 
Parliament of France and Commissioner of 
African French Troops in the late 
war, has been called by the executive 
committee through its secretary, W . 
E . B. DuBois, to meet in Paris, in the 
early fall of 1921. Al l Negro governments and groups and all Negro 
organizations interested in the peoples of Africa n descent will be invited 
to participate. Governments with 
colonies in Afric a wil l be invited to 
send official spokesmen. The N . A . 
A . C. P. financed the first Congress 
and wil l underwrite the call for the 
second. Its official connection will 
thereupon cease and the Pan-African 
Congress will, it is hoped, become 
thereafter a permanent, self-supporting body. Further information can 
be had at the office of TH E CRISIS, 
from which official invitations will 
soon issue. 
THRIF T 
A TEACHE R writes us from 
Texas: 
"No w that prices are on the decline and there is a consequent 
ris e i n the value of money, it occurs to me that this is an opportune time 
to start a nationa l thrift movement among 
our people. 
"Suc h a note should be sounded by our 
newspapers, magazines and periodicals of 
every kind . The preacher should proclaim 
it from the pulpit ; the teacher from the 
lecture platform. It ought to be the watch 
wor d of every household. 
"T o have such a movement suggested by 
you i n TH E CRISIS, I think, would be timel y 
and fruitful. " 
This is a wise word. Durin g the 
last five years American Negroes 
have handled more money than in the 
preceding twenty years. Wit h it they 
have bought millions of dollars' worth 
of property and invested other millions in business, insurance and education. But for every dollar thus 
wisely used, five dollars have been 
foolishly wasted. 
We are not of those who decry the 
extravagance of the poor and see economic salvation in the luxury of the 
rich. Waste is waste whether i n 
Harlem or on Fift h Avenue or in the 
poppy fields of Flanders, and the antidote for waste is not miserliness but 
wise expenditure. 
Now, wise expenditure for Negroes 
today includes not simply good homes 
but good bank accounts. Money is 
rising in value. A dollar saved todays means much more than a dollar 
tomorrow. We need to earn and control capital. Al l poor folk need to 
save and learn how to control capital. 
The capital which is today ruling the 
world is not the capital of the rich— 
it is the capital of the middle class 
and poor. The control of it is in the 
hands of the rich and that is the reason they are rich. The control must 
through democratic methods gradually shift to the hands of masses as 
the masses are taught or teach themselves the science of capitalistic production. 
But the anger of the poor against 
those who control wealth must not, as 
it so often does, become anger against 
wealth. The world needs and must 
have capital if present culture is to 
be maintained. The Negro race needs 
101 102 TH E
and needs desperately larger and 
larger amounts of capital for its 
emancipation. While then we strive 
to learn to control capital, we must 
simultaneously strive to save it. 
Thrift, saving, care and foresight 
are the watchwords for black folk today as never before. We are not going to be saved by high-powered 
automobiles and sables but rather by 
the canny savings balance, the wise 
investment, and the wide surplus of 
income over expense. 
Much of what we save is thus put 
into the control of our white enemies. 
There are white banks in Texas, i n 
Atlanta and in black Harlem that 
with millions of Negro money would 
sooner lend to the devil than to a 
Negro business enterprise. But the 
race is not to the swift nor the battle 
to the strong: our business enterprise 
is rising and thriving and it is a 
democratic business and not an oligarchy of millionaires. We are gradually learning as a race to control 
capital and therein lies salvation for 
us and the Poor. But to control capital there must be capital to control: 
Save then, brothers,—save and invest. Remember Poor Richard, how 
he said: 
"A penny saved is a penny earned." 
"Waste not, want not." 
"Plough deep while sluggards sleep." 
"Remember that time is money." 
"A man may, if he knows not how to 
save as he gets, keep his nose to the grindstone." 
"It is hard for an empty bag to stand 
upright." 
CHICAG O 
WE would advise our Chicago 
friends to watch narrowly 
the work and forthcoming 
report of the Inter-racial 
Commission appointed by the 
Governor of Illinois after the late riot. 
The Commission consists of colored 
men who apparently have a much too 
complacent trust in their white 
friends; of white men who are too 
busy to know; and of enemies of the 
Negro race who under the guise of 
 CRISIS 
impartiality and good wil l are pushing insidiously but unswervingly a 
program of racial segregation. They 
have, for instance, sent a "questionnaire" to prominent colored men, consisting of 15 questions, which with all 
their surface frankness and innocence seek to betray black folk by 
means of the logical dilemma of "segregation" and "racial solidarity". By 
subtle suggestion these queries say: If 
you believe in colored churches, why 
not in colored ghettos ? Does not 
Negro advancement increase anti-Negro 
hatred? Ar e not Negroes prejudiced 
against whites? Ar e not the mistakes of Negro leaders manifest? An d 
so on. 
Indeed if a professed enemy of 
black folk and their progress had set 
out to start a controversy so as to divide the Negroes and their friends in 
counsel and throw the whole burden 
of such nasty outbreaks of race hate 
as the East St. Louis, Washington and 
Chicago riots upon them, he would 
have framed just such a questionnaire 
as has been sent out by this 
Commission. 
MOUN T HERMO N 
WE have just learned from a 
curious source of the 
excellent educational 
opportunities of American Negroes 
and the rich endowments of Negro 
colleges. Our informant is none other 
than the distinguished evangelist's 
son, William R. Moody, President of 
Mt. Hermon School at East Northfield, Mass. Writes Mr . Moody July 
30, 1920, (the italics are ours) : 
"Yours of the 28th just at han d i n respect 
to the son of the late Bisho p Alexande r 
Walters. Whil e we alway s have a few colored boys in the school at Moun t Hermon , 
we do not encourage their makin g applica ­
tion. Ther e are, as you know, many richly 
endowed and well equipped schools for the 
colored race throughout the South. Racia l 
needs have been a study in these schools, 
and the curriculum is especially adapted to 
these needs. It hardl y seems to us advisable for a youn g person to come to a school 
like Moun t Hermo n or Northfield where the 
expense to us must of necessity be more 
than it is in a southern school, and wher e OPINION 103 
the acceptance of a colored boy would mean 
the exclusion of some white boy for whom 
no adequate provision is made elsewhere. 
O f course there are exceptions. Bu t with 
Fis k and Atlant a doing admirabl e work in 
academic work, whil e Hampton , Tuskegee 
and Calhou n are doing" good work in elementary education and industria l courses, 
we do not think we ought to encourage colored boys to come to Mount Herman, when 
it means that some whit e boy who is now 
applyin g would have to be refused, who 
could net go to these schools which have 
been so munificently provided. " 
This is true philanthropy and our 
hearts bleed at the spectacle of the 
poor white boy begging a chance 
while the idle and impudent Negro 
lads toast their heels in the munificence and wealth of Fisk, Hampton 
and Atlanta. Truth, however, compels us to append these figures: 
Pe r capit a expenditure for Negr o education : 
Pe r year i n South Carolin a $1.44 
Fo r white education 10.00 
Averag e annua l salaries of teachers i n 
Alabama : 
Colored teachers $158.73 
Whit e teachers 355.53 
Colored public hig h schools i n the 
South 64 
Whit e public hig h schools i n the 
South 3,025 
An d finally as to Negro colleges 
there are in all 33 schools of which 
only 3 rank as "colleges", 15 as "colleges and high schools" and the rest 
as giving some college subjects. Of 
these only 10 have total incomes of 
over $20,000 a year as against one 
hundred and ten millions of annual 
income to white colleges. Alas! the 
poor white boy! 
VOTE S FO R NEGROES 
THE astonishing thing about the 
Bourbon South is its intellectual bankruptcy when it comes 
to the Negro. It continually 
assumes that the Negro is a fool. 
Some Negroes are fools but the proportion among them is steadily 
decreasing, while that among the 
Bourbons seems to increase. When 
the average white Southerner faces 
the problem of racial contact he has 
absolutely nothing to offer except 
what he offered in 1861—namely: 
The Wil l of God. 
Force and Bloodshed, and 
"The best friend in the world to the 
Negro is the southern white man— 
the only one who truly loves him! " 
We quote from our ever-delightful 
friend, the editor of the Macon, Ga., 
Telegraph. 
The tragedy of the situation is that 
this man believes what he says. He 
knows absolutely just the "place" for 
which God made "niggers"; but to 
support this sincere belief he spreads 
falsehoods. He says that the woman suffrage party by its secret machinations "probably" caused the 
bloodshed in the Florida elections! He 
threatens murder for black men who 
want to vote and almost weeps over 
the misguided Negroes who have left 
the Empir e State of lynching and 
gone to Chicago. 
There seems to be in this man's 
mind absolutely no conception of the 
tremendous, increasing, unswerving 
development of the Negro. To him 
all aspiration, unrest and complaints 
of black folk, are conspiracies of 
whites. Fo r the blacks he has no 
program, no vision, except that they 
stay where they have always been, 
growing more content with "Jim 
Crow" cars, lynching and disfranchisement. 
It is inconceivable to the mentality 
of this section of the white South that 
such a program is absolutely 
impossible. That if, in the end, the price 
we must pay for aspiration to modern 
manhood is death, and death in the 
most horrible form of public torture 
and burning like that in Florida—if 
to live we must die, then the South 
will have us to kill. An y man who 
does not prefer death to slavery is not 
worth freedom. 
The enemy of those liberal-minded 
white Southerners who truly desire a 
more decent South and a more human 
program of Negro uplift wil l not be 
found in the Negro radical nearly as 104 TH E CRISIS 
much as i n the supporters of the 
Macon Telegraph and their set. The 
black man must vote. Ever y Southerner with brains knows this. The 
Negro is awaiting his enfranchisement with greater patience than the 
South has any right to expect. But 
he wil l not wait forever. If he sees 
gathering signs of sanity—a willingness to let the intelligent and thrifty 
vote, an honest effort to establish law 
and order and overthrow the rule of 
the mob, a desire to substitute honest 
industrial conditions in place of the 
organized and entrenched theft of 
black wealth upon which southern 
industry is today based—such a program, tardy and slow and inadequate 
though it be, may count on the infinite patience and long suffering of 
Ethiopia. 
But a plan of intransigentism built 
on absolute faith in the eternal stupidity and cowardice of Negroes, 
perpetual disfranchisement and the 
threat of mob law to uphold it—is 
there any man of intelligence and conscience who dares in the year of 
Christ, 1921, to lay down such a program for 12 million human beings 
who are more intelligent than the Bulgarians, wealthier than the Russians, 
physically stronger than the Italians, 
and cleaner in body and mind than the 
whole peasantry of Europe? 
POLITICA L REBIRT H AN D TH E 
OFFIC E SEEKE R 
SLOWL Y but steadily and with 
unflinching determination the 
American Negro is returning 
to political power. In the last 
presidential election, black folk put 
13 members of their race into the 
legislatures of the Northern States; 
they have dozens of representatives 
in the city councils, not to mention 
thousands in the civil service. 
Congressional districts in Missouri, 
Illinois, Pennsylvania and New York 
wil l put black men in Congress before 
1925. 
It is time, therefore, for us to consider seriously the use of our new and 
growing political power. We must 
realize that this country is not a 
democracy; that it is an oligarchy 
ruled by the Ric h and Powerful, and 
that the right to vote is the beginning 
and not the end of the dream of 
transferring to the masses of men the 
power now held by the few. This can 
be done only by the study of modern 
political and social problems by colored voters, and above all by the discard of the chronic colored office 
seeker. 
When President-elect Harding 
comes to power he wil l be besieged by 
black men who want to be Recorders 
of Deeds, Registers of the Treasury, 
Assistant Attorneys-General and 
Fifteenth Auditors. Their attitude, and 
too often the attitude of their endorsers, wil l be that "recognition" of 
the Negro by these largely ornamental offices is the aim and object of 
the Negro vote. It is time we disabused our own minds and the minds 
of the whites that the object of our 
voting is to procure bread and butter for a few unemployed politicians 
who have been vociferous during the 
campaign. 
No ! We want from the Republican 
Party and from any other party that 
deserves our votes, not offices but 
deeds. We sit absolutely unmoved by 
the appointment of a few figure 
heads at $2500 salaries, merely remarking that if such men used their 
brains in other directions they would 
spurn these petty offices; we stand 
determined to make some party, sooner or later, stop lynching by effectual 
Federal law; abolish "Jim Crow" 
cars in inter-state traffic; enforce the 
loth amendment by making peonage 
impossible; base representation i n 
Congress on the actual vote cast; 
make education universal and compulsory; free Haiti from the South 
and the National City Bank ; and put 
an effective ballot in the hands of 
every man and woman in the United 
States. This is going to be the price 
of the black vote. Let no politician 
seek to barter it for less. 105 
COLORE D TEACHER S OF CAP E COLONY , SOUT H AFRIC A ELECTION DAY IN FLORIDA 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
AN unknown numbe r of dead, men of 
propert y and standin g forced to leave 
their homes and familie s unde r threa t of 
death, thousands of qualified voters debarred from casting their ballots—these constitute a portion of the results of the elections of 1920 i n the state of Florida . To 
tha t list migh t well be added an increased 
bitterness on the part of both whit e and 
colored people towards each other and another black mar k entered i n the books of 
colored people against the whites for wha t 
the forme r had to suffer. 
It is not possible to writ e of race relations i n the South today without givin g due 
prominence to the reviva l of that siniste r 
organization, the K u Klu x Klan . Ther e is 
hardl y a town or community to be found 
whic h does not have its branch. Certai n it 
is that wherever one goes i n the South one 
hears of the "Klucks " and wha t that order 
is going to do to maintai n "whit e supremacy" . Clothed i n great secrecy and hintin g 
of dire things to come, the pretensions of 
the noble "protectors of southern womanhood" would be ludicrous were it not for 
the vicious deeds already performed by 
branches i n some of the smalle r towns and 
rura l communities. If one looks at the K u 
Klu x Kla n solely from the viewpoint of the 
large r cities o f the South like Jacksonville , 
Atlant a and Birmingha m where the Negr o 
population is concentrated i n certain sections, the efforts of the Kla n are patheticall y amusin g and are treated as such by colored people. Fort y years ago when the 
origina l K u Klu x did effective wor k i n terrorizing, murdering and pillaging the 
Negroes of the South it was dealing with four 
millio n recently emancipated slaves wit h all 
of the characteristic s followin g i n the wake 
of two and a half centuries of huma n bondage. The y were ignorant, superstitious, 
easily frightened, poorly organized, distrustful of each other and still believing 
tha t they were inferior to white men. It 
was a comparatively simple matte r to envelop the Kla n wit h a cloak of supernatura l 
power and to send a colored man shiverin g 
to cover until a parade had passed. 
Today, however, the setting is changed. 
A new generation of Negroe s has arisen 
wit h thousands o f university , college, high 
school and gramma r school graduates 
among them; possessing propert y and the 
respect for self tha t accompanies such possessions. I have talke d wit h man y Negroes 
and wit h man y whit e men i n the South. I 
have found a fa r highe r orde r of intelligence among Negroe s tha n among whites, 
when one compares the two races grade for 
grade. I n regar d to the Klan , even the uneducated Negr o looks upon it wit h amused 
contempt. His whit e brother, i n most cases, 
cherishes a fatuous belief common to provincia l and circumscribe d mind s that terroristi c methods wil l be efficacious i n "keepin g the nigge r i n his place" . 
In Jacksonville , fo r example , a parade of 
the loca l Kla n wa s held on Saturda y night, 
October 30. Larg e numbers of colored people turned out to view the parade. One 
old colored woma n of the antebellum type 
that is fast disappearing , called out derisively to the marchin g Klucks: 
"Whit e folks, yo u ain't done nothin'. 
Them Germa n guns didn't scare us and I 
know them whit e faces ain't goin ' to do it 
now. " 
Tha t remar k epitomizes the feeling. 
Phrase d i n better Englis h it likewis e expresses the sentiment amon g the large r 
number of educated colored citizens of 
Jacksonville. But beneath the amused tolerance 
there is a gri m realization tha t the Kla n 
wil l not spend its energy i n marching— 
that the siniste r purposes of the movement 
betoken no good to colored people. Negroes 
are prepared for trouble i n every part of 
the South where I have been. The y realize 
that they are outnumbered and outarmed 
an d that death is the inevitabl e fate of 
man y i f clashes come. 
Th e situation i n the smalle r towns and 
isolated rura l communitie s where the Negr o 
population is widel y scattered is of a more 
serious nature . Ther e the Klan s can wrea k 
their vengeance on an y Negr o who dares 
offend them b y being too prosperous or 
being suspected of some crime , grea t or 
small, o r by incurrin g the displeasur e of 
an y whit e ma n of the community . This 
vengeance extends to whit e men who offend 
106 ELECTION 107 DA Y IN FLORIDA 
some loya l member of a Kla n or who dares 
show too grea t friendliness fo r Negroes— 
whether fo r selfish or other motives. It is 
not considered imprope r but just the contrar y fo r a whit e ma n or boy to debauch 
or consort wit h a colored woman, but no 
white ma n can trea t a Negr o as an equal. 
A s a case i n point read a Kla n warnin g 
sent to a prominent white lawyer of a 
Florida town who advised Negroes to qualify, 
registe r and vote i n the recent election. It 
reads: 
We have been informed that you have 
been tellin g Negroes to register, explainin g 
to them how to become citizens and how to 
assert their rights. 
If you know the history of reconstruction 
days followin g the Civi l War, you know how 
the "scalawags " of the Nort h and the black 
republicans of the South did much as you 
are doing to instil l into the Negr o the idea 
of social equality. Yo u wil l remember that 
these things forced the loya l citizens of the 
South to form clans of determined men to 
maintai n whit e supremacy and to safeguard 
our women and children. 
An d now yo u know that history repeats itself and that he who resorts to you r kin d 
of a game is handlin g edged-tools. W e shall 
always enjoy WHIT E SUPREMAC Y in 
this country and he who interferes must 
face the consequences. 
GRAN D MASTE R FLORID A K U 
KLUCKS . 
Cop y 
Loca l K u Kluck s 
Watc h this man . 
A n example of wha t can be done and 
wha t has been done i n a small town is the 
election riot at Ocoee, Orange County, 
Florida. For weeks before November 2, word 
had been sent to the Negroes that no colored 
ma n would be allowed to vote. The statement was emphasized wit h the threat that 
any Negr o attempting to cast his ballot 
would be severely punished. One colored 
ma n disregarded the warning . H e was the 
most prominent ma n in, his community, 
owned a large orange grove worth more 
than ten thousand dollars, his own home 
and an automobile. H e had always borne 
the reputation of being a safe and sane 
leader among his people and had never been 
involved i n trouble of any kind . An d therei n la y his unpopularity . H e was too prosperous—"for a nigger" . He , Mose Norman , 
attempted to vote. H e was beaten severely 
and ordered to go home. The press reports 
stated late r that he had not paid his poll 
tax nor ha d he registered. On this point 
and the succeeding events, ma y I quote the 
statement of a whit e man of the town who 
said ; 
" he was denied upon the ground 
that he had not paid his poll tax, when, 
as a matte r of fact', the records of this 
county (if they have not been doctored 
since) wil l show that he had paid his tax. 
The press claimed that he made a threa t 
that he was going home to get his gun, and 
see that he did vote. I do not believe that 
anyone, situated as ho was, would have been 
foolhardy enough to make such a threat. 
Afte r the polls closed, a number of armed 
men went to his house, withou t a warran t 
and without authorit y of law as is claimed 
by those approvin g their action, to arrest 
this Negro. Two whit e men were shot in 
the Negro's backyard . Fro m that time on 
for three days the communit y ra n riot. I 
do not believe it wil l ever be known how 
many Negroes were killed . Ever y Negr o 
home, schoolhouse, church and lodge-room 
in that community was burned, in some in ­
stances with women and children occupying 
the houses, and thus burned to death. . . . 
The foregoing is a fair sample of 
conditions which exist in most parts of the 
state." 
Th e story is essentially as told above. 
Whe n Norma n left the polls he went to the 
home of Jul y Perry , another colored man, 
who likewis e was unpopula r wit h the whites 
in that he was foreman of a large orange 
grove owned by a whit e man livin g i n Ne w 
England—a job whic h the community felt 
was too good for a Negro . Whe n the mob 
attacked the colored community the colored 
people fought i n self-defense, killin g two 
white men and woundin g two, according to 
news accounts. Citizens of the town told 
me that eight or ten whites were killed but 
that they could not allow the information to 
become known , fearin g the effect on the 
colored population. However, the mob surrounded the settlement, set fire to it, shot 
down or forced back into the flames colored 
men, women and children who attempted to 
flee. Th e number murdered wil l probably 
never be known . The figures generally 
given varied from thirty-two to thirty-five . 
One lean, lank y and vicious lookin g whit e 
citizen of Ocoee of whom I asked the number of dead, replied : 
" I don't know exactly but I know fifty-six 
niggers were killed. I killed seventeen myself." 
Whateve r the number, two of those known 
to have died, were a colored mother and her 
two-weeks old infant. Before the ashes of 
the burned houses had cooled, eager members of the mob rushed i n and sought gleefull y the charred bones of the victims as 
souvenirs. A s I stood on the spot approximately seventy-two hours followin g the 
slaughter, the remains looked as though 108 TH E CRISIS 
TH E SIXTH WARD POLLING-TENT, JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA, COLORED SIDE. ABOUT 400 IN 
LINE DURING ENTIR E DA T 
some one had gone over them wit h a finetoothed comb. 
A n amazin g aftermath of the occurrence 
was the attitude of the whit e inhabitants of 
Orange County. Talkin g wit h numbers of 
them, the opinion of the majorit y seemed to 
be that nothing unusua l had taken place— 
that the white people had acquitted themselves rathe r meritoriously i n checking unholy and presumptious ambitions of Negroes 
i n attempting to vote. Eve n the whit e children of Ocoee felt tha t an event simila r in 
enjoyment to a circus had taken place. One 
bright-faced and alert girl of eleven when 
asked wha t had occurred, told happil y of 
how "we had some fun burnin g up some 
niggers" . Ther e was no thought of horror 
at the deed—it was accepted as a matte r of 
course. 
Some of the methods used i n the smalle r 
towns i n eliminatin g the Negr o vote and 
particularl y the colored woman vote were 
unique. In Orange and Osceola counties, a 
colored woman would attempt to register; 
on being asked he r age, for example, she 
would say twenty-four. She would then be 
asked the yea r i n whic h she was born. 
Man y of them being illiterate , would not 
know. The registra r would then probably 
say, "I f you are twenty-four, you were 
born i n 1892, weren't you? " The applicant, 
seeking to get the ordeal over, woul d repl y 
i n the affirmative. Before she had been 
awa y from the place very long a warran t 
for perjur y had been swor n out against her 
and she had been arrested. I found man y 
cases equally as flagrant where Negr o 
women had been imprisoned fo r such "offenses" as these. 
In the same manne r men woul d be intimidated and threatened. A whit e lawye r told 
me laughingl y of how a Negr o woul d approach a registratio n booth i n his county, 
Orange , and ask i f he could register. Th e officials there, i n most cases of the poorer order of whites, would reply, "Oh , yes, you can 
register, but I wan t to tell you something. 
Some god damn blac k is 
going to get kille d about this votin g business 
yet." 
In Quincy , Gadsden County , the leading 
colored ma n of the town, a physician , owner 
of a dru g store and other propert y includin g 
an excellent home, on election day was surrounded as he approached the pollin g booth 
to cast his ballot, by a crowd who spat i n 
his face and dared hi m to wipe his face. 
His "crime " was tha t of advisin g colored 
men and women to registe r and vote. H e 
has since been ordered to get out of the 
town but remains—determined to die rathe r 
than submit. H e has alway s been a good 
citizen and highl y respected by both whit e 
and colored people. 
Tw o brothers of Liv e Oak, Suwanee 
County, who also were good citizens, prosperous and the owners of a large merchandise business, were called from their homes 
two weeks before election day, beaten almost 
to death and ordered to leave town imme ­
diately for the same offense of urging 
Negroes to vote. One has gone; the other lies ELECTION DA Y IN FLORIDA 109 
SAME POLLING-TENT, WHITE SIDE. 75 IN LINE A T 18.40 P. M. 
There were 1569 colored women alone registered in this ward and yet only 2633 votes 
in all were reported 
at the point of death from a stroke of 
paralysis brought on by the beating. 
No r are these isolated cases but rathe r 
are they typica l of wha t took place i n many 
parts of the state. The West Pal m Beach 
Post of October 30 carried an article wit h 
the significant statement, "Sheriff R. C. 
Bake r wil l have several deputy sheriffs at 
the polls to arrest black violators of the election laws as fast as they appear and ask for 
ballots." The inference is that only 
Negroes violated the election laws while it is 
generally known that white Democratic 
voters openly carried memoranda into the 
booths, whic h is directly contrary to law. 
Onl y Negr o Republicans were arrested for 
this violation. 
In Jacksonville , where Negroes form 
slightl y more than half of the population 
of 90,000, the situation was different. In 
spite of parades of the K u Klu x Klan , 
vicious newspaper propaganda designed to 
intimidat e Negr o voters, and the announcement two days before election tha t 4,000 
warrants had been sworn out i n blank form 
for the arrest of Negroes, the colored vote 
turned out en masse. Most of the colored 
people live i n the second, sixth , seventh and 
eighth wards. A n active campaign was 
carried on after the passage of the suffrage 
amendment which resulted i n the registra ­
tion of more colored than white women i n all 
four of the wards. Franti c stories threatening domination by "Negr o washerwomen 
and cooks " failed to brin g out the white 
women to register. To the number of 
women was added the large registration of 
men, white and colored, i n the sprin g of 
1920. Yet , i n the second, seventh and 
eighth wards the total vote did not equal the 
registration of colored women alone, whil e 
i n the sixth war d the total number of votes 
cast was only a few more than the number 
of women, whit e and colored, registered. 
Ever y possible effort wa s made to hampe r 
the voting of Negroes. The pollin g places 
were arranged wit h four entrances—one 
each for whit e women, whit e men, colored 
women and colored men. N o delay was 
caused to white voters. Mor e than four 
thousand colored men and women, whose 
names, addresses and registration certificate numbers are i n the hands of responsible colored citizens of Jacksonville , stood i n 
line from 8:00 A . M. , the hour of opening, 
to 5:40 P. M. , the hour of closing the polls, 
and were not allowed to vote. 
Unless the problem of the ballot is solved, 
either through reduction of Southern representation, a force bil l or by some other 
means, and the entire problem of race relations solved through clear thinkin g and 
just dealing, our race riots and simila r 
disturbances are just beginning. This ma y 
sound pessimistic and as though the problem were viewed only from the standpoint 
of an alarmist. Tha t is not the case. It is 
based upon the innermost feelings and 
thoughts of twelve millio n American s who 
seek to be free. MARGARE T GARNER 
A True Romance 
LlLLI E BUFFU M CHAC E WYMA N 
THE Ohio Rive r was frozen across i n the 
winte r of 1856 and seventeen slaves i n 
Kentucky , seeing their opportunity, took 
horses and a large sled belonging to one of 
their owners, and one Sunda y nigh t drove 
to the river-side below Covington . Ther e 
they left their conveyance and walke d 
across the stream on the ice. Desperate 
women and tire d children were i n tha t 
party. The y reached Cincinnat i i n the 
early morning , where nine of them left the 
others, took another route, and did finally 
escape to Canada . Th e remainin g eight 
walked unti l they found the house of a colored ma n named Kite , of whom they knew. 
This company of fugitives consisted of an 
elderly couple named Simon and Mary , their 
son Robert Garner, his wife Margare t and 
four littl e children. Simo n and Mar y had 
once been separated for years, as an incident of slavery. Some accounts indicate 
that Margare t had been the occasional 
victim of the customary and world-wide , 
avi d lust of the whit e ma n fo r the dark 
woman. Howeve r that ma y be, Robert and 
she had fled, together, wit h all the children, 
i n search of a home where they migh t safel y continue their famil y life . Margare t was 
about twenty-five years old and not ver y 
dark. Luc y Stone, who saw her, described 
her as havin g a dignified presence, and as 
being "one of the most beautiful women I 
had ever seen". He r oldest child was a little girl , ver y pretty and nearl y white. 
Nex t came "two woolly-headed littl e fellows wit h fat, dimpled cheeks"; then there 
was a baby white r than its mother. Its 
sex is not recorded. 
Afte r the fugitives arrived , Kit e went to 
consult Lev i Coffin, the great slave rescuer 
of Ohio. H e returned to find Unite d States 
Marshal l Ellis, wit h constables already 
surroundin g his house. Wit h them was 
Archibal d K . Gaines, who owned some of 
the fugitives. He had discovered the sled 
immediately after it was left on the 
Kentucky shore, and had followed on the track 
of the runaways. 
The refugees in the now beleaguered 
house had barred the doors and windows, 
and refused to surrende r when called upon 
to do so. The n the red horro r whic h stains 
every page of the Republic's story, began to 
crimson the scene. A window wa s broken, 
blood trickle d from the Marshall's wrist ; 
shots were fired into the house, shots were 
fired out from within . Robert Garner, colored, was, to use our late r phrase, a redblooded American—a ma n who woul d defend his women and children. Bu t the 
struggl e could have but one end. The 
assailants broke their wa y into the house. 
The n the crimson flood bore the moment up 
from the valle y of squalid miser y to the 
highest peak of huma n tragedy. A mother 
was there ! 
Margare t ha d already caught up a knife, 
and wit h one deft stroke had cut the throa t 
of he r lovely gir l child . N o lustfu l wooing , no rapine for her! Th e constables 
dragged Robert out. Margare t made an in ­
effectual effort to kil l the littl e boys, but was 
overpowered by her assailants, and all the 
fugitive s were taken into custody. Durin g 
the day they were moved about from office 
to office to find out unde r wha t jurisdictio n 
they belonged, fo r there wa s a question 
where on this earth these fugitive s di d belong—tha t is, all except the chil d who the 
night before had walked wit h littl e feet 
across the stream whic h was to be her 
rive r of death. 
Th e lega l situatio n was peculiar. A s an 
ordinar y huma n being, Margare t ha d become a murdere r and as such, amenable to 
the state of Ohio. A s a runawa y slave she 
was a piece of propert y of a kin d whic h the 
Federa l Government ha d undertaken to retur n to its owners. The Abolitionists of 
Cincinnat i trie d to have he r held as a crimina l who must stand tria l i n Ohio. Th e 
intention was, after tria l and sentence, to 
induce the Governor of the State, Salmo n P . 
Chase, to pardon her, and then he r friends 
would rus h her off to Canada . 
Durin g this period of lega l worry , the 
captives were kept i n jail , but Margare t was 
often brought into courtrooms wher e man y 
people saw her. She wore a dar k calico 
dress, a whit e kerchie f around he r neck, and 
a yellow turba n on he r head. He r littl e boys 
110 MARGARE T GARNE R 111 
played carelessly around her knees. She 
held her baby i n her lap and it kept puttin g 
up its tin y hands to caress her face. Thin k 
of it—the sweet touch of her baby's fingers 
on this woeful mother's cheek! Most of the 
time Margare t stared blankl y at the floor, 
but once i n a whil e she looked timidl y 
around the room. She had a scar on her 
forehead and another on her cheek. 
Someone asked how she got these scars. "White 
man struck me," she answered. 
Luc y Stone visited her in prison and 
found her i n a state of dumb despair. She 
did, however, rouse herself enough to say 
that she had meant to kil l all her children, 
but began wit h the girl so as to make sure 
at least of her, 
because she 
thought "boy3 
could bear slavery better than 
girls could. " 
Luc y Stone told 
her i n return 
that i f she had 
no weapon, she 
could at any 
time end her lif e 
by tearing open 
an artery wit h 
her teeth and 
letting herself 
bleed to death; 
" I would do it 
myself, " sai d 
Luc y Stone. 
It was decided, after several 
weeks, that the 
fugitives were 
primaril y the 
captives of the Unite d States whose business it was to deliver them safely into the 
hands of their individua l owners. Therefore, 
they were sent into Kentucky ; but Mr . 
Gaines had made some sort of a promise to 
Luc y Stone, and it was understood that he 
would keep Margare t near the southern 
shore of the rive r long enough to enable 
Governor Chase to make a forma l requisition upon Governor Morehead of Kentuck y 
for her retur n to Ohio for tria l there as a 
murderess. 
One "Joe Cooper " followed quickl y across 
wit h Governo r Chase's requisition, but before al l lega l requirements could be met, Mr . 
Gaines started wit h his slaves for Louisville . 
Cooper pursued them i n gallant endeavor, 
but they were handcuffed and delivered to 
one Marshal l Butts from Covington . 
Accounts var y as to the details of what 
happened next, but the essential facts stand 
out clearly enough. The Henry Lewis collided with another boat, and Margaret 
Garner's baby was drowned. The statement 
that the slaves were "handcuffed" makes it 
uncertain wha t Margare t herself did , but 
perhaps the handcuffs had been removed; 
for one story is tha t she threw the baby 
overboard, and another tha t she let it slide 
from her lap into the water. The probabilit y is that she herself either plunged 
with , or after, it 
into the stream, 
out of whic h she 
was pulled by a 
colored man and 
placed on the 
Hungarian to 
which the other 
slaves had been 
removed. Sh e 
cried out wit h 
franti c joy when 
told that the 
baby was really 
drowned, and 
declared that 
she herself 
would never 
reach their destined port alive . 
Some one threw 
a blanket 
around her and 
she was described by an 
eye witness as crouching "lik e a wil d animal " on the floor of the boat's deck. 
Fo r man y years no printed record reported her after-fate. Lev i Coffin, nearly a 
quarte r of a century later, wrote sadly that 
Margare t was lost in the hell of America n 
slavery. Some thirt y years had elapsed 
when Luc y Stone told me that before the 
abolition of slavery a letter had made its 
hazardous way to her. It was signed Robert 
Garne r and said that he thought Mrs. Stone 
would be glad to know that Margare t had 
died. 
A s I thin k of the crouching figure she does 
not seem "lik e a wil d animal " but like an 
image of sublime motherhood. MARCUS GARVE Y 
W . E . B . DUBOI S 
(An article in the December CRISIS gave 
Mr. Garvey's personal history. This article 
considers his industrial enterprises and the 
feasibility of his general plans.) 
WHE N it comes to Mr.Garvey's industria l 
and commercia l enterprises there is 
more ground for doubt and misgivin g than in 
the matte r of his character. First of all , his 
enterprises are incorporated i n Delaware , 
where the corporation laws are loose and 
where no financia l statements are required. 2 
So fa r as I can find, and I have searched 
wit h care, Mr . Garve y has never published a 
complete statement of the income and expenditures of the Negro Improvement 
Association or of the Black Star Line or of 
any of his enterprises, which reall y revealed 
his financia l situation. A courteous letter 
of inquir y sent to him Jul y 22, 1920, askin g 
fo r such financia l dat a as he was willin g 
for the public to know, remains to this day 
unacknowledged and unanswered. 
No w a refusa l to publish a financia l statement is no proof of dishonesty, but it is 
proof that either Garve y is ill-advised and 
unnecessarily courting suspicion, or tha t his 
industria l enterprises are not on a sound 
business basis; otherwise he is too good an 
advertise r not to use a promisin g balancesheet for all it is worth . 
Ther e has been one balance sheet, published Jul y 26, 1920, purportin g to give the 
financial condition of the Blac k Sta r Lin e 
after one yea r of operation; neither profit 
or loss is shown, there is no wa y to tell the 
actual cash receipts or the true condition 
of the business. Nevertheless it does make 
some interesting revelations. 
The total amount of stock subscribed for 
is $590,860. O f this $118,153.28 is not yet 
2
 Mr . Garve y boasts Feb . 14, 1020 : 
"Thi s week I present yo u wit h the Blac k Sta r 
Lin e Steamshi p Corporatio n recapitalize d at ten mil ­
lio n dollars. The y tol d U3 whe n we incorporate d this 
corporatio n that we coul d no t mak e it, bu t we ar e no w 
gone from a $5,000,000 corporatio n to one o f $10,-
ono.ono." 
1
 Thi s sound - impressive , but mean s almost nothing . 
Th e fee fo r incorporatin g a $5,000,000 concer n i n 
Delawar e is $350. B y paying $250 more the corporation may incorporate with $10,000,000 authorised 
capita! without having a cent of capital actually paid 
in! Cf . "Genera l Corporatio n Law s of the Stat e o f 
Delaware" , editio n o f 1917. 
paid for, leavin g the actua l 
amount of 
paid-in capita l 
charged 
against the 
corporation, 
$472,706.-
72. Against 
this stands 
only $355,214.-
59 of assets (viz.: $21,985.21 i n cash deposits and loans receivable ; $12,975.01 i n 
furnitur e and equipment, $288,515.37 whic h 
is the alleged value of his boats, $26,000 i n 
rea l estate and $5,739 of insuranc e paid i n 
advance). To offset the assets he has 
$152,264.14 of other liabilitie s (accrued salaries, $1,539.30; notes and accounts paya ­
ble, $129,224.84; mortgage s due $21,500). 
I n other words, his capita l stock of $472,-
706.72 is after a year's business impaire d to 
such extent that he has only $202,950.45 to 
show for it. 
Even this Joes not reveal the 
precariousness of his actual business condition. 
Bank s before the wa r i n lending their credit 
refused to recognize any business as safe 
unless for every dolla r of current liabilitie s 
there were two dollars of current assets. 
Today, since the war, they require three dollars of current assets to every one of current liabilities. The Blac k Sta r Lin e had 
Jul y 26, $16,485.21 i n curren t assets and 
$130,764.14 i n current liabilities, when recognition by any reputable bank called for 
$390,000 i n current assets. 
Moreover, another siniste r admission appears i n this statement: the cost of floating 
the Blac k Sta r Lin e to date has been $289,-
066.27. In other words, it has cost nearly 
$300,000 to collect a capita l of less than 
half a million . Garve y has, i n other words, 
spent more fo r advertisement than he has 
for his boats! 
This is a serious situation, and even 
this does not tell the whole story : the 
rea l estate, furniture , etc., listed above, are 
probably valued correctly. Bu t how about 
the boats? The Yarmouth is a wooden 
steamer of 1,452 gross tons, built i n 1887-
It is old and unseaworthy ; it came near 
MARCUS GARVE Y 
112 MARCU S 113 GARVE Y 
sinkin g a yea r ago and it has cost a great 
deal fo r repairs. It is said that it is now 
lai d up for repairs wit h a large bil l due. 
Withou t doubt the inexperienced purchasers 
of this vessel pai d fa r more than it is worth, 
and it wil l soon be utterly worthless unless 
rebuilt at a very high cost." 
The cases of the Kanawha (or Antonio 
Maceo) and the Shadyside are puzzling. 
Neithe r of these boats is registered as belongin g to the Blac k Sta r Lin e at all. The 
former is recorded as belonging to C. L . 
Dimon , and the latte r to the Nort h and 
East Rive r Steamboat Company. Does the 
Blac k Sta r Lin e reall y own these boats, or 
is it buyin g them by installments, or only 
leasing them? We do not know the facts 
and have been unable to find out. Unde r 
the circumstances they look like dubious 
"assets". 
The majorit y of the Blac k Sta r stock is 
apparently owned by the Universa l Negr o 
Improvement Association. There is no reason wh y this association, if it wil l and can, 
should not continue to pour money into its 
corporation. Le t us therefore consider then 
Mr . Garvey's other resources. 
Mr . Garvey's income consists of (a) dues 
from members of the U . N . I. Association ; 
(b) shares i n the Blac k Sta r Lin e and other 
enterprises, and (c) gifts and "loans " for 
specific objects. If the U . N . I. Association 
has "3,000,000 members " then the income 
from that source alone would be certainly 
over a millio n dollars a year. If, as is 
more likely , it has under 300,000 payin g 
members, he ma y collect $150,000 annually 
from this source. Stock in the Blac k 
Sta r Lin e is stil l being sold. Garvey 
himself tells of one woman who had saved 
about four hundred dollars i n gold : "She 
brought out all the gold and bought shares 
i n the Blac k Sta r Line. " Anothe r man 
write s this touching letter from the Cana l 
Zone : " I have sent twice to buy shares 
amountin g to $125, (numbers of certificates 
3752 and 9617). No w I am sending $35 
for seven more shares. Yo u migh t think I 
have money, but the truth , as I stated before, is that I have no money now. Bu t if 
I'm to die of hunge r it wil l be al l right because . I'm determined to do all that's i n 
3
 Technically the Yarmouth does not belong to the 
Black Star Lin e of Delaware, but to the "Black Star 
Lin e of Canada, Limited," incorporated in Canada, 
Marc h 23, 1920, with one million dollars capital. This 
capital consists of $500 cash and $999,500 "assets." 
Probably the Black Star Lin e of Delaware controls 
this corporation, but this is not known. 
my power to better the conditions of my 
race.' " 
In addition to this he has asked for specia l contributions. In the sprin g of 1920 
he demanded for his coming convention in 
August, " a fund of two million dollars 
($2,000,000) to capitalize this, the greatest 
of all conventions." In October he acknowledged a tota l of something over $16,000 in 
small contributions. Immediately he announced " a constructive loan " of $2,000,000, 
which he is presumably still seeking to 
raise. 5 
Fro m these sources of income Mr . 
Garve y has financed his enterprises and 
carried on a wide and determined propa ­
ganda, maintained a large staff of salaried 
officials, clerks and agents, and published a 
weekly newspaper. Notwithstandin g this 
considerable income, there is no doubt 
that Garvey's expenditures are pressin g har d on his income, and that his 
financial methods are so essentially unsound that unless he speedily revises them 
the investors wil l certainly get no dividends 
and worse may happen". H e is apparently using the familia r method of "Kiting " 
-—i. e., the money whic h comes i n as investment i n stock is being used i n current expenses, especially i n heavy overhead costs, 
for clerk hire, interest and display. Eve n 
his boats are being used for advertisement 
more than for business—lying i n harbors as 
4
 P. N . Gordon. 6
 "The Universal Negro Improvement Association if 
raising a constructive loan of two million Hollars from 
its members. Three hundred thousand dollars out of 
this two million has been allotted to the New York 
Local as its quota, and already the members in New 
York have started to subscribe to the loan, and in the 
next seven days the three hundred thousand dollars 
will be oversubscribed. The great divisions of 
Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Boston. Chicago, Cleveland, 
Wilmington, Baltimore and Washington will also oversubscribe their quota to make up the two million dollars. 
"Constructive work will be started in January, 
1921, when the first ship of the Black Star Line on 
the African trade will sail from New Yor k with materials and workmen for this constructive work." 
Eleven days later, November 6th, the Negro World 
is still "raising the loan" but there is no report of 
the amount raised. 8
 It might be argued th;it it is not absolutely necessary that tilo Black Star Line, etc., should pay 
financially. It is quite conceivable that Garvey should 
launch a business philanthropy, and that without 
expectation of return, colored people should contribute 
for a series of years to support Negro enterprise. But 
this is not Garvey's idea. He says plainly in a 
circular: 
"Th e Black Star Line corporation presents to every 
Black Man , Woman and Child the opportunity to 
climb the great ladder of industrial and commercial 
progress. If you have ten dollars, one hundred dollars, or one or five thousand dollars to invest for 
profit, then take out shares in The Black Star Line , 
Inc. This corporation is chartered to trade on every 
sea and all waters. Th e Black Star Line will turn 
over large profits and dividends to stockholders, and 
operate to their interest even whilst they will be 
asleep." 114 TH E CRISIS 
exhibits, takin g excursion parties, etc. These 
methods have necessitated mortgage s on 
property an d continuall y new and more 
grandiose schemes to collect large r and 
large r amounts of ready cash. Meantime , 
lackin g business men of experience, his 
actua l business ventures have brought i n 
few returns, involved heavy expense and 
threatened him continuall y wit h disaster or 
lega l complication. 
On the other hand, ful l credit must be 
given Garve y for a bold effort and some success. H e has at least put vessels manned 
and owned by black men on the seas and 
they have carrie d passengers and cargoes. 
The difficulty is that he does not know the 
shippin g business, he does not understand 
the investment of capital, and he has few 
trained and staunch assistants. 
The present financial pligh t of an inexperienced and headstrong promoter ma y 
therefore decide the fate of the whole movement. This would be a calamity. Garve y 
is the beloved leader of tens of thousands 
of poor and bewildered people who have 
been cheated all their lives. His failur e 
would mean a blow to their faith , and a loss 
of their littl e savings, whic h it woul d take 
generations to undo. 
Moreover, shorn of its bombast and exaggeration, the mai n lines of the Garve y 
pla n are perfectly feasible. Wha t he is 
tryin g to say and do is this: America n Ne ­
groes can, by accumulatin g and ministerin g 
their own capital, organize industry, joi n 
the black centers of the south Atlanti c by 
commercia l enterprise and i n this wa y ultimately redeem Afric a as a fit and free home 
for black men. This is true. It is feasible. 
It is, i n a sense, practical ; but it wil l take 
for its accomplishment lon g years of painstaking , self-sacrificing effort. It wil l call 
fo r every ounce of ability, knowledge, experience and devotion i n the whole Negr o 
race. It is not a task for one ma n or one 
organization, but fo r co-ordinate effort on 
the part of millions. The pla n is not origina l 
wit h Garve y but he has popularized it, 
made it a living , voca l idea l and swept thousands wit h him wit h intense belief i n the 
possible accomplishment of the ideal. 
This is a great, huma n service ; but whe n 
Garve y forges ahead and almost singlehanded attempts to realize his dream i n a 
few years, wit h large words and wil d gestures, he grievously minimize s his task an d 
endangers his cause. 
T o instance one illustrativ e fact: there 
is no doubt but wha t Garve y has sought to 
import to Americ a an d capitaliz e the antagonism between blacks and mulattoes i n the 
West Indies. This has been the cause of 
the West India n failure s to gai n headway 
against the whites. Ye t Garve y imports it 
into a lan d where it has never had any substantia l footing and where today, of al l days, 
it is absolutely repudiated by every think ­
in g Negro ; Garve y capitalize s it, has sought 
to get the cooperation of men lik e R. R. 
Moto n on this basis, and has aroused more 
bitte r color enmit y inside the rac e than has 
ever before existed. Th e white s are delighted at the prospect of a divisio n of our solidifyin g phalanx , but their hopes are vain . 
America n Negroe s recognize no color line i n 
or out of the race, and they wil l i n the end 
punish the ma n who attempts to establish 
it. 
The n too Garve y increases his difficulties 
i n other directions. H e is a Britis h subject. 
H e wants to trade i n Britis h territory . Wh y 
then does he needlessly antagonize and even 
insult Britain? He wants to unite all 
Negroes. Why then does he sneer at the work 
of the powerful group of his race i n the 
Unite d States where he finds asylum and 
sympathy ? Particularly , wh y does he decry 
the excellent and risin g business enterprises 
of Harlem—intimatin g tha t his schemes 
alone are honest and sound when the 
facts flatly contradic t him? H e proposes to settle his headquarters i n 
Liberia—bu t has he asked permission 
of the Liberia n government ? Does he 
presume to usurp authorit y i n a lan d 
whic h has successfully withstood England , 
Franc e and the Unite d States,—but is expected tamely to submit to Marcu s Garvey ? 
How long does Mr. Garvey think that 
President King would permit his anti-English 
propaganda on Liberia n soil, when the government is strainin g every nerve to escape 
the Lion's Paw ? 
And , finally, withou t arms, money, effective organization or base of operations, Mr . 
Garvey openly and wildly talks of 
"Conquest" and of telling white Europeans in 
Afric a to "get out! " and of becoming himself a black Napoleon ! 7 
7
 He said in his "inaugural" address: 
"The signal honor of being Provisional President of Africa is mine. It is a political job; it is a political calling for me to redeem Africa. It is like asking Napoleon to take the world. He took a certain por­ tion of the world in his time. He failed and died at St. Helena. But may I not say that the lessons of Napoleon are but stepping stones by which we shall guide ourselves to African liberation? MARCU S GARVE Y 115 
Suppose Mr . Garve y should drop from the 
clouds and concentrate on his industria l 
schemes as a practica l first step toward his 
dreams: the first duty of a grea t commercia l 
enterprise is to carr y on effective commerce. 
A ma n who sees i n industr y the key to a 
situation, must establish sufficient businesslike industries. Her e Mr . Garve y has failed 
lamentably. 
The Yarmouth, for instance, has not been 
a commercia l success. Stories have been 
published allegin g its dirt y condition and 
the inexcusable conduct of its captain and 
crew. To this Mr . Garve y ma y reply 
that it was no easy matte r to get efficient 
persons to ru n his boats and to keep a schedule. This is certainly true, but i f it is 
difficult to secure one black boat crew, how 
much more difficult is it goin g to be to 
"buil d and operate factories i n the bi g in ­
dustria l centers of the Unite d States, Centra l America , the West Indies and Afric a to 
manufactur e every marketabl e commodity" ? 
and also "to purchase and buil d ships of 
large r tonnage fo r the Africa n and South 
America n trade" ? and also to raise "Fiv e 
Millio n Dollars to free Liberia " where "new 
buildings are to be erected, administrative 
buildings are to be built, colleges and universities are to be constructed"? and finally 
to accomplish wha t Mr . Garve y calls the 
"Conquest of Africa" ! 
To sum up : Garve y is a sincere, hardworkin g idealist; he is also a stubborn, 
domineering leader of the mass; he has 
worthy industria l and commercia l schemes 
but he is an inexperienced business 
man. His dreams of Negr o industry, commerce and the ultimat e freedom of Afric a are feasible; but his methods 
are bombastic, wasteful, illogica l and in ­
effective and almost illegal. If he learns by 
experience, attracts strong and capable 
friends and helpers instead of makin g needless enemies; if he gives up secrecy and suspicion and substitutes open and fran k reports as to his' income and expenses, and 
above all if he is willin g to be a co-worker 
and not a czar, he may yet i n time succeed 
i n at least startin g some of his schemes toward accomplishment. Bu t unless he does 
these things and does them quickly he cannot escape failure . 
Le t the followers of Mr . Garve y insist 
that he get down to bed-rock business and 
make income and expense balance; let them 
gag Garvey's wilde r words, and stil l preserve his wide power and influence. 
America n Negr o leaders are not jealous of 
Garvey—they are not envious of his success; they are simpl y afraid of his failure , 
for his failur e would be theirs. H e can 
have all the power and money that he can 
efficiently and honestly use, and if i n addition he wants to prance down Broadwa y i n 
a green shirt, let him—but do not let him 
foolishly overwhelm wit h bankruptc y and 
disaster one of the most interesting spiritual movements of the modern Negr o world . 
FIV E GENERATIONS 
The Faucett-Batie-Smith-Wilson Family of Durham, N. 0. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
A GREETIN G FRO M TH E NE W SECRETAR Y 
I ENTE R upon my new wor k as secretary wit h a ful l realizatio n of the importanc e of 
the task before me. I n my four years of wor k as field secretary i t has been my privilege to meet and know large numbers of the members and friends of the Associatio n i n 
all parts of the country. Because of the deep insigh t gained thereby into the loyalt y and 
sincere devotion of those who have given so much of themselves to the cause, I assume the 
new responsibility wit h unbounded hope and enthusiasm. I feel supremely confident that 
wit h your support and co-operation, the Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Advancemen t of 
Colored People is destined to become the irresistibl e force i n Americ a fo r freeing the 
Negr o from the bonds whic h bind him. 
Ther e is no greater cause than ours—it is a fight fo r the rights whic h belong to all 
free men. Fo r eleven years we have been buildin g the efficient machine for sustained and 
organized effort; wit h loyalty, steadfast courage and unit y the goa l before us wil l be 
achieved. JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . 
TH E THOMA S RA Y CAS E 
THE Detroit Branc h has been engaged 
for several months i n one of the most 
spectacular and importan t extradition cases 
of recent years. 
I n June , Thoma s Ray , a young colored 
man, was living in Wilkinson County, 
Georgia. While passing the home of Dewitt 
Faulkner, a whit e man of that county, he 
was called into the house by Faulkner. 
Whe n Ra y entered the house Faulkne r stated that he was not i n a good humor and 
felt like cuttin g Ray's throat. Ra y ra n 
from the house and went home. Knowin g 
Faulkner's vicious reputation i n the county 
for mistreatment of Negroes, Ra y avoided 
an encounter wit h him. A few Sunday 
nights late r Faulkne r shot five times into 
Ray's home, barely missing Ray's wif e and 
children. The followin g mornin g Faulkne r 
approached Ra y i n the field where he was 
working , tellin g him that he regretted his 
action and had come to apologize. H e then 
asked Ra y if he had a gun and received a 
negative reply. Faulkne r thereupon drew 
his own gun and declared tha t he was going 
to kil l Ray , but Ra y who, i n spite of his 
statement did have a weapon, was quicke r 
and, firing five times, kille d Faulkner. 
Knowin g that he would be lynched i f 
caught, Ra y escaped from the county and 
succeeded i n reaching Canada . Late r he 
went to Detroit and secured employment 
there. 
On September 5, the home of Ray's 
brother-in-law, where Ra y was living , was 
raided spectacularly by two officers of the 
Polic e Department of Detroit, aided by 
Sheriff L . P. Player, of Wilkinso n County, 
Ga. , and V . W . Faulkner, a brothe r of the 
late Dewit t Faulkner. The y broke into the 
house wit h draw n revolvers and arrested 
Thoma s Ray , sent i n a riot cal l and surrounded the house wit h police and detectives. Ra y was not allowed to communicate 
wit h his friends or attorneys for two days, 
when arrangements had been almost completed for turnin g him over to Sheriff 
Playe r and Faulkne r fo r retur n to Georgia . 
In the meantime Attorneys Willis and 
Hinton, of Detroit, had been retained to defend 
Ray . The case also wa s reported to the 
Detroit Branc h of the N . A . A . C. P., which 
immediately associated its attorney, W . 
Haye s McKinney , wit h the two lawyers and 
started to raise a fund for the fight to prevent Ray's extraditio n to Georgia . 
Then the long legal fight was begun. 
Application was made and approved for a hearin g on the extraditio n wri t before Governor 
Albert E . Sleeper. Althoug h the attorneys 
for Ra y proved conclusively tha t i f Ra y was 
taken back to Georgi a he woul d undoubtedly 
be lynched, Governo r Sleeper granted the 
extraditio n upon the warran t fo r Ray's 
arrest whic h had been sent on from Georgia . 
Governo r Sleeper di d this i n spite of the 
fact tha t but a few months before he had 
granted the extraditio n of a colored ma n to 
the state of Kentuck y and tha t ma n had 
been lynched less than twelve hours after 
he had been returned to Kentuck y fo r trial . 
The lawyers thereupon applied for a wri t 
of habeas corpus from the Circui t Court of 
Wayn e County. Th e hearin g on the wri t 
was held before Judg e Ormon d F . Hunt , 
116 N 117 . A . A .
who found the demand and rendition for 
extraditio n not i n conformity to law, granted the wri t of habeas corpus and ordered 
the prisone r released from custody. The 
officers, actuated by the rewar d o f $500 
which had been offered by Faulkner's family , attempted to re-arrest Ra y on a telegraphed communication from Georgi a statin g that a n indictment was being forwarded 
by mail . Wishin g to have the case thoroughly aired, the attorneys for Ra y submitted to his re-arrest, although legally he 
was a free man . 
A new demand was made upon Governor 
Sleeper for a new hearin g on the wri t of 
extradition based on the indictment which 
was held at Lansing on October 20. 
Assistant Secretary Walter F. White, of the New 
Yor k office, appeared at this hearin g wit h 
the lawyers for Ra y and testified regardin g 
the vicious conditions in the state of 
Georgia and the danger of lynching in the case 
of Ray , these facts being based on personal 
investigations whic h Mr . Whit e had made 
i n the state. 
Governor Sleeper agai n declared that he 
saw no reason wh y Ra y should not be returned to Georgi a and accordingly granted 
new extradition papers. 
The next step was the application for another wri t of habeas corpus i n the Circui t 
Court of Wayn e County. The hearing on 
this application was held on Friday, 
November 19, before Judge Goff, being adjourned to Tuesday, Novembe r 23. The 
attorneys fo r Ra y presented on the 23rd a 
numbe r of witnesses, includin g Mr . White , 
who was brought on from Ne w York , to 
prove that Ra y could not be given a fair 
tria l i n Georgia . Judge Goff stated that he 
had ver y great sympath y for Ray ; that he 
felt tha t there was danger of Ray's not receiving a fair trial , but that he could only 
abide by the Constitution and refuse the 
writ . 
Judge Goff allowed considerable latitude 
i n the givin g of testimony so that the lawyers fo r Ra y could place sufficient materia l 
i n the records on which to base an appeal 
to the State Supreme Court of Michigan , 
and allowed until December 13 to file an appeal to the State Supreme Court. There 
the matte r rests. Th e case wil l be fought 
to the last court of resort. 
The Detroit Branc h and the attorneys for 
Ra y are not averse to Ray's being tried, but, 
being convinced that conditions i n the state 
 C. P . 
of Georgi a where, durin g the past thirtytwo years 384 Negroes have been lynched by 
lawless mobs and the impossibility of any 
Negro's receiving a fair tria l i n that state 
when accused of a crime against a white 
man, they are determined to save Ra y from 
being returned. A pathetic note enters the 
case i n connection wit h the aged fathe r of 
Ray , a poor man, who has spent al l tha t he 
has to prevent extradition of his son and 
who is now suifering from an attack of 
nervous prostration as a result of the strai n 
he has undergone. The Detroit Branc h has 
done excellent work, aided by the churches 
and citizens of the city, i n raisin g a fund of 
more than one thousand dollars fo r the 
prosecution of this case. Messrs. Willis, 
Hinto n and McKinne y have done splendid 
work i n fighting the case. A late r issue of 
TH E CRISI S wil l tell of the final outcome. 
LOUISVILL E BRANC H DEFEAT S 
BON D ISSU E 
THE power of the Negro vote in 
Louisville, Ky., in defeating a bond issue for 
one millio n dollars from whic h the colored 
citizens were to reap no benefit, formed one 
of the brightest spots i n the recent election. 
Agitatio n was started i n Ma y for the issuin g of this amount i n bonds for the purpose 
of improvin g the Universit y of Louisville , 
a white institution supported by the city. 
Bein g i n Kentucky , it does not admit Negr o 
students. Ther e is no institution i n the city 
supported by the city's funds for the highe r 
education of colored students. 
Th e colored schools for the most part are 
in a deplorable condition—poorly housed, 
inadequately ventilated and greatly overcrowded. Althoug h the colored population 
of Louisvill e formed one-fourth of the population, they were to be taxed equally wit h 
the white citizens for the support of the 
Universit y of Louisville , and no part of the 
amount of the bonds was to be expended on 
colored schools. The matte r was first taken 
up by Mr . Wilso n S. Lovett, Chairma n of 
the Executiv e Committee of the Louisvill e 
Branch . In an extensive correspondence 
with Dean J. L. Patterson, of the 
University of Louisville, Mr. Lovett pointed out that 
colored citizens of Louisvill e were glad to 
see the Universit y of Louisvill e improve, but 
that they objected to being taxed to provide 
such betterment of school conditions for 
whites when the colored schools were so 
woefully inadequate and i n fa r greate r need 
than the whit e schools. Th e discussion pre­118 TH E CRISI S 
cipitated a bitter fight whic h culminated 
i n the elections of Novembe r 2. 
Th e charte r of the city of Louisvill e provides that i n order to pass a bond issue, 
two-thirds of all the votes cast must be i n 
favor of the bonds. Afte r havin g given 
every reasonable opportunit y to the 
sponsors of the bond issue to make 
some provisio n fo r colored schools 
and after havin g been unsuccessful i n 
securing any such provision, the colored 
vote was cast solidly against the bonds. A 
total of 54,645 votes was cast; the affirmative vote was 32,214 whil e the negative vote 
was 22,431. The necessary numbe r to secure passage was 36,763 votes, so that the 
margi n by whic h the bond issue was defeated wa s 4,549. The vote i n the so-called 
"black wards " was 12,000 against the bonds, 
which means that the Negr o vote-decisively 
defeated the issue. A s a result of this 
achievement, the Negroes of Louisvill e have 
put themselves on record as being a unified 
group whic h must be reckoned wit h and 
which wil l fight relentlessly the discrimina ­
tory methods used i n denying adequate educationa l institutions for their children. 
Mr . Lovett, who was most active in the 
defeat of the bond issue, was likewis e a 
candidate for the school board. This board, 
whic h controls the schools of Louisville , is 
composed of five members, candidates for 
whic h are usuall y selected by the School 
Electio n League . The memberships of these 
expir e at different times. Two such positions were to be filled i n the elections this 
year; since Negroes compose one-fifth of the 
population the colored voters felt that they 
were entitled to one membership on the 
board and nominated Mr . Lovett for that 
position. This was done after forme r Postmaster Robert E . Woods, who had shown a 
particularl y prejudiced attitude towards colored people whil e postmaster, had announced his candidacy as an independent 
candidate. The local white Republican leaders bitterl y opposed Mr . Lovett's nomination, stating that i f he won, the Democrats 
would use the threat of "Negr o domination " 
i n the next election. Offers were made to 
Mr . Lovett to name his own price to with ­
draw, but to his great and everlasting 
credit, Mr . Lovett proved that he was not 
purchasable and announced tha t he was i n 
the race to stay. 
This action caused consternation among 
the old line politicians. Twelve hours before 
election Mr . Woods withdrew i n order to 
make sure the defeat of Mr . Lovett. In 
spite of the vicious tactics used, Mr . Lovett 
polled 11,266 votes, but was defeated. Two 
achievements stand out, Woods was forced 
to quit and the bond issue wa s killed . It is 
highl y probable that the Negr o vote wil l 
never be disregarded agai n i n Louisville . 
TH E MAURIC E MAY S CAS E 
ONE of the regrets of the Nationa l Office 
is tha t lack of adequate finances prevented it from aidin g i n the defense of 
Mauric e Mays, a colored ma n of Knoxville , 
Tenn., who, i n August , 1919, was accused of 
murderin g Mrs. Berti e Lindsey , white , of 
the same city. Ther e are stron g reasons for 
doubting Mays' guilt as subsequent investigation showed tha t at the time of the murder, May s wa s at his own home asleep, 
more tha n a mil e from the scene of the 
crime . The Chattanooga and Knoxvill e 
branches, however, have been actively at 
wor k seeking a new trial , both because 
of the gatherin g of additiona l informatio n 
since the tria l and because the mob spirit 
was very intense at the time May s was convicted and sentenced. Mone y has been 
raised though not enough to complete the 
case i n the event that it is carrie d to highe r 
courts. 
On Saturday , Novembe r 20, the decision 
of the lower court was reversed by the 
Tennessee State Supreme Court and Mays remanded for a new tria l This encouraging 
step was secured on the groun d tha t the 
jur y should have named the punishment in ­
stead of the presidin g judge . Whe n the papers for the new tria l are filed, opportunity 
wil l be given to place al l of the points i n 
controversy before the Supreme Court of the 
State of Tennessee. 
ANOTHE R VICTOR Y I N ARKANSA S 
THE Supreme Court of Arkansas has 
held that discrimination against 
Negroes in the selection of both grand and 
petit juries is in contravention of the 
Fourteenth Amendment and of the. Civil 
Rights Act of 1875, and it has consequently 
reversed the decision of the lower court 
in condemning to death for the Elaine riots 
Ed Ware, Will Wordlow, Albert Giles, John 
Fox, John Martin and Alfred Banks. This 
is the second time that the court has reversed the sentences of death passed on 
these Negroes. 
Death sentences on six other Negroes 
which have been affirmed by the State Su­N 11 9 . A . A. C. P. 
prone Court loill now probably be held up 
by the Governor until the present cases are 
decided. 
Governor Brough has made every effort 
to hang these Negroes, even attempting to 
influence the court by newspaper articles in 
which he cited the various Arkansas organizations which were demanding their death. 
A LA W MAKIN G LYNCHIN G A 
FEDERA L OFFENS E 
SINC E 1911, the N . A . A . C. P. has made 
a concerted fight against lynching . Its 
appeal to the nation i n 1918, coupled wit h 
its publication of "Thirty Years of 
Lynching in the United States," brought the attention of the civilize d worl d to this crime. 
Ou r figures are quoted i n literatur e 
emanating net only from the America s but 
from Europe , Asi a and Africa . Havin g 
acquired this data we shall now proceed to 
put our whole effort into the securing of a 
federal law that shall insure the tria l of the 
lynche r i n a federal court. A s long as no 
one is ever punished by the state for lynching, which has been the case fo r over thirt y 
years c f lynchin g i n the South, so long 
lynchin g wil l continue. Today any white 
man of the South can kil l any Negr o wit h 
the perfect assurance that the state wil l 
never mete out punishment to him. It is to 
puncture this assurance that the 
Anti-lynching Law is pressed. 
SECURIN G TH E VOT E 
AS in the case of lynching, the 
Association is first making a thorough study 
of Negr o disfranchisement. It expects 
shortly to publish an authoritative statement on the subject. It is doing other important wor k regardin g the recent vote 
whic h it cannot yet give to the public. 
These are the two most important single 
tasks that we have to attack wit h the comin g year. Ther e is wor k still unfinished,— 
the Arkansa s cases, the conditions i n Haiti ; 
there are also the new cases tha t wil l in ­
evitably sprin g up ; there is the vigilan t 
study of the best means fo r publicity ; there 
is the every-day-in-the-week task of keeping 
this great organization moving , of losing 
no unit i n the mass tha t shall make us irresistible i n the end. 
It is this last task tha t we ask every 
reader of TH E CRISI S to help us to undertake. If yo u belong to a branch, wil l you 
not help to make tha t branc h a power ? If 
you are i n a communit y where there is no 
branch and you believe that a branch can 
operate in your community, wil l you not 
establish one there? 
Above all , wil l not every person who reads 
this and believes in wha t the Association 
stands for, if he is not a member, send us 
his one- or five- or ten-dollar membership? 
We shall wit h the Ne w Yea r enter upon 
a drive for a quarter of a millio n membERS. 
Wit h that number we should be an irresistible force, able to affect legislation, : hie to 
brin g to the twelve millio n Negroes of this 
country justice and common humanity. 
TH E BISHO P O F NIGERI A A T TH E UNVEILIN G 
O F TH E ABRAHA M LINCOL N STATUE , 
LONDON , ENGLAN D THIRTEE N NEGRO 
Elected 
i. Adelbert H . Roberts, Illinois, lawyer, Republican 
yer, Republican. 3. Andrew F. Stevens, Pennsylvania 
lawyer, Republican, re-elected. 5. Harry J. Capehart, 
Sheadrick B. Turner, Illinois, lawyer, Republican, sec 
publican, re-elected. 8. T. Gillis Nutter, West Virgin 
New York, lawyer, Republican, second re-election. 10. 
can. 11. J. H . Ryan, Washington, editor, Farmer-Lab 
13. W . M . Moore, Missouri, R 
120 AMERICAN LEGISLATOR S 
November 2, 1920 
re-elected. 2. John C. Asbury, Pennsylvania, lawyers 
banker, Republican. 4. Warren B. Douglas, Illinois, 
;st Virginia, lawyer, Republican, re-elected. 6. 
 re-election. 7. Harry E . Davis, Ohio, lawyer, Relawyer, Republican, re-elected. 9. John C. Hawkins, 
Walter G. Alexander, New Jersey, physician, Republi12. Frederick M . Roberts, California, Republican, 
Republican. (Picture missing). 
i
121 THE Lookin g Glass 
ANISE i n the Seattle LITERATURE , Wash. , Union 
Record: 
Whe n the SUFFRAG E law 
Wa s passed 
* * * 
An d the colored women 
* * * 
O f the South 
* * * 
Came out to registe r 
* * * 
Man y were the humiliation s 
* * * 
Tha t met them. 
* * * 
On the first da y 
* • * 
The y were kept standin g 
Man y hours i n line 
To DISCOURAG E them, 
* * * 
Whil e the whit e women 
* * * 
Wer e called forwar d 
* * * 
A s fast as they entered. 
* * * 
Bu t stil l the colored women 
* * * 
Kep t on coming ! 
* * * 
On the second day 
The y were examined 
* * * 
Wit h difficult questions, 
On law and politics; 
* * * 
The y were tested i n reading 
* * * 
An d were yelled at: 
* * * 
"Heah , girl , 
* * * 
Yo ' misponounced two words. 
* * * 
Yo ' git out o' here! 
* * * 
Yo ' can't vote,— 
* * * 
Yo ' ain't got sense enough! " 
* * * 
Bu t stil l the colored women 
* * * 
Kep t on coming ! 
On * * * Th the e "high thir " sheriff d da* • y " * 
Gre w impatient. 
* * * 
H e shouted: "Yo ' niggers 
* •* * 
Ge t out and stay out! 
* * * 
An ' i f yo ' don't stay out, 
* * * 
Dey'l l be some BUCK-SHO T 
* * * 
To KEE P you out! " 
* * * 
Bu t stil l the colored women 
* * * 
Kep t on coming. 
* * * 
An d somebody cried : "WH O 
* * * 
STIRRE D U P 
* * * 
Al l these colored women 
* * * 
To come an d register? " 
* * * 
An d nobody told hi m WHO ; 
* * * 
Bu t I guess it was GOD , 
* * * 
O r whateve r power i t wa s 
* * * 
Tha t put i n man's soul 
* * * 
Fro m the ver y beginnin g of time 
* * * 
DREAM S 
* * * 
An d hunge r fo r FREEDOM ! 
* # * 
Anyway , 
* * * 
The y stretched out their hands 
* * * 
Fo r the littl e whit e ballot, 
* * * 
The first sligh t sign 
* * * 
Tha t they who ha d been 
* * * 
Th e slaves of slaves 
* » * 
Wer e self-governing citizens! 
* * * 
An d SOM E of them 
* * » 
SUCCEEDE D 
* * * 
I n getting registered, 
* * * 
An d the other day at election BuThet I y VOTED hear th, e* judg * * e is going 
12 2 TH E LOOKIN G
To throw the ballots OUT , » * • 
O n some technica l reasons, 
* • • 
Fo r fea r those colored women 
* * * 
Migh t reall y come 
* * * 
To BELIEV E 
* « « 
Tha t representative government 
* • • 
EXIST S 
* * * 
In America ! 
» • • 
In our Novembe r numbe r the name E . R. 
Jackson as quoted from the Seattle UnionRecord should have been E . R. Franklin . 
VIEWS AND REVIEWS 
FRAN Z BOA S write s i n The Nation on 
Stoddard's Rising Tide of Color: 
Mr . Stoddard's book is one of the long 
series of publications devoted to the selfadmiration of the white race, which begins 
wit h Gobineau ' and comes down to us 
through Chamberlai n and, wit h increasingl y passionate appeal, through Madiso n 
Gran t to Mr . Stoddard. The newe r books 
of this type tr y to bolster up their unscientific theories by an amateurish appeal to 
misunderstood discoveries relatin g to heredity and give i n this manne r a scientific 
guise to their dogmatic statements which 
misleads the public . Fo r this reason the 
books must be characterized as vicious 
propaganda , and deserve an attention not 
warranted by an intrinsi c merit i n their 
learnin g or their logic. 
The fundamenta l weakness of al l books 
of this type, and eminently so of Mr. 
Stoddard's book, is a complete lack of understanding of the hereditary characteristics 
of a race as against the hereditary characteristics of a particula r strai n or line of 
descent. Eac h race is exceedingly variabl e 
in all its features, and we find i n the white 
race, as well as i n all other races, al l grades 
of intellectual capacity from the imbecile to 
the man of hig h intellectua l power. It is 
true that intellectua l power is hereditary in 
the individual, and tha t the healthy, the 
physically and mentall y developed individ ­
uals of a race, i f they marr y among themselves, are liable to have offspring of a 
simila r excellence; but it is equally true 
that the inferio r individuals i n a race wil l 
also have inferio r offspring. If, therefore, 
it were entirely a question of the eugenic 
development of humanity , then the aim of 
the eugenist would be to suppress not the 
gifted strains of other races, but rathe r the 
inferior strains of our own race. A selection of the intelligent, energetic, and 
highl y endowed individuals from all - over 
the worl d woul d not by any means leave the 
whit e race as the only survivors, but would 
leave an assembly of individuals who would 
 GLAS S 12 3 
probably represent al l the different races 
of man now in existence. 
* * * 
In a second edition of her pamphle t on 
Southern Women and Racial Adjustment, 
the author, Mrs. L . H . Hammond , write s in 
the preface : 
One must welcome the multiplyin g signs 
that the women themselves are growin g 
ready for large r concerted effort, i n behalf 
especially of the Negr o woma n and her 
home. The southern Presbyterian and the 
southern Methodist women have both recently taken forwar d steps withi n their 
own organizations. Th e Presbyterians 
have undertaken a girls' department at 
Stillma n Institute, and are plannin g a multiplication of the institutes for women now 
held yearl y at Stillman , as told i n the followin g pages. The Methodist women have 
just created a Commission to deal wit h 
their colored work, the first body of whit e 
women so set aside by any organization in 
the country. Tw o farm schools, one fo r 
boys and one for girls, are to be operated 
by these women, and the work already 
undertaken wil l be enlarged an d extended. 
The Commission is also charged wit h the 
duty of cooperating wit h any and al l agencies whic h are workin g towar d Christia n 
solutions of racia l questions. This is one 
of several indications that the time is approaching when southern women wil l unite 
as the men are doing, and wil l create 
throughout the South points of contact between the best women of both races for the 
better protection of Negr o womanhood, and 
to secure broader opportunities for Negr o 
children. 
* * * 
A recent number of the Frenc h magazine 
Le Correspondent, i n a long and interesting 
article entitled "Th e Negr o Question and 
The Nex t Elections, " shows how well acquainted Franc e is becoming wit h the color 
problem i n the Unite d States. This author 
knows his subject and speaks of Dunbar, 
Braithwaite , Johnson, D u Bois and Tanner. 
Her e are some of his views: 
Today, i n spite of every resistance and 
every difficulty, the Negr o has succeeded i n 
becoming a part and a recognized part of 
the America n government. . . . Since 
the emancipation Negroes have learned 
self-organization and their manne r of 
learnin g this is the more interesting from 
the fact that the state of servitude i n whic h 
they had been livin g for more than three 
centuries was the veritable negation of in ­
itiative and responsibility. . . . 
Th e Negr o is very sensual and the whit e 
woman possesses a special attraction fo r 
him. It may be said, however, tha t the 
black man possesses the same attraction for 
certain whit e women as ma y be proved by 
the recent brawls i n certain harbors of 
Grea t Britain , Liverpoo l among others, an d 
i n the East En d of London . It migh t 124 TH E
equally as well be said that likewis e i n 
the Unite d States the colored woma n possesses this attraction for the whit e man . 
Proo f of this is furnished by the considerable numbe r of mulattoes. 
HAITI 
ADMIRA L MAY S and his boar d have 
concluded their farce i n Port-au-Princ e 
wit h the finding tha t "al l but 10 of the 1,14 2 
Haitian s killed i n the last two years died i n 
open battle. " Wilbu r Forrest write s i n 
the Ne w Yor k Tribune: 
It is a certainty that the departur e of the 
board of inquir y leaves the situation more 
muddled than ever. 
* * * 
It is understood that the board acted on 
the instructions of Secretary Daniels. Bu t 
Secretary Daniels represents the attitude of 
a people i n the mai n hostile or at best in ­
different to the interests and wishes of a 
dark race. Senator Medil l McCormick , 
whil e blamin g Mr . Daniels, sees the fault of 
the America n Occupation only i n its methods of administration . H e write s in The 
Nation: 
W e have seized control of Hait i and 
Santo Doming o and of their administration. 
Indeed, i n Santo Domingo there is not even 
a Dominica n president. The constitutional 
legislatures of the two countries are not 
functioning even by fiction, as the Egyptia n 
Assembl y was permitted to function under 
the Britis h occupation. We took over the 
Government of the two countries but i n retur n set up no responsible authority—re ­
sponsible i n law, responsible i n fact—either 
to the peoples of the island or to public 
opinion i n the Unite d States. A government of anomalies, such as exists i n Santo 
Domingo or Haiti , one whic h lives by the 
very contradictions of its being, one which 
asserts the present sovereignty of the 
quondam republics whil e it denies its actuality, ought to be staffed by able and experienced men and guided by a definite 
politica l and economic policy. I n Hait i we 
have a Ministe r Plenipotentiary, Mr . 
Bailly-Blanchard , and a fiscal adviser, Mr . 
Mcllhenny , both of Louisiana , both socially 
attractive and personally charming , but 
how otherwise qualified to meet the difficulties of their posts I am not informed. Ther e 
is besides and independent of them, the 
Commandant of Marines. Wh o is responsible i n Haiti , as Crome r was i n Egypt , or 
as Woo d and Taft were in Cub a and the 
Philippines, or as Lyaute y was i n Morocco? 
Wh o i n Santo Doming o is responsible for 
a fiscal policy whic h i n an era of eight per 
cent interest prefers to anticipat e the payment of the nationa l debt instead of reducin g the burden of taxation and more especiall y the Dominica n tariff? Wh o i n Hait i 
is there who ma y be punished for authorizin g the corvee, and severely punished 
 CRISI S 
therefore, because it was a n erro r of judg ­
ment crimina l i n its consequences? Wh o 
wa s responsible fo r the wan t of any comprehensive agricultura l policy i n the two 
so-called republics, fo r the failur e to take 
adequate steps to improv e the liv e stock of 
the island o r to increase the numbers of 
swine , cattle, and draft animals ? There 
are officers i n Hait i an d Santo Domingo 
who have faile d i n their duty from incompetence or wan t of experience, and I am 
afrai d there are others who have abused 
their powers. Bu t the gross failure , the 
rea l culpability , is tha t of the Secretary of 
the Nav y and the President of the Unite d 
States, who together faile d to vest i n a 
single responsible officer i n each of the 
countries the authorit y to speak for the 
Unite d States i n al l matters, fiscal, military, political, or diplomatic . . . . W e are 
there and i n my judgmen t we ought to 
stay there for twenty years. 
* * * 
Bu t do the Haitian s wan t us to stay there 
twenty years ? O r do they wan t authority 
vested i n a single responsible officer, or inU. S. MARINE: "NOW, JACQUES, TELL THE 
ADMIRAL HOW MUCH YOU LOVE ME" 
deed any officer at all ? Does any America n 
believe tha t the Unite d States would stay 
i n Hait i twenty days i f she were poor in 
trade and agricultura l possibilities ? There 
is only one just answe r and tha t is the one 
made to Senator McCormic k b y the editors 
of The Nation. The fault lies not i n the 
method of the America n Occupation but in 
that Occupation itself. W e read : 
W e feel tha t Senator McCormic k is misinformed on Haitia n history. An d when 
he suggests tha t the "gross failur e and the 
rea l culpability " lie i n the failur e of the 
Democrati c Administratio n to vest all 
power i n Hait i and Santo Doming o i n a 
"singl e responsible officer," a virtua l die­TH E 125 LOOKIN G GLAS S 
tator, The Nation must part company wit h 
him. Th e gross culpability , the editors of 
The Nation believe, lies i n the fact of our 
alien occupation rathe r than i n the details 
of Democrati c maladministration . They 
are not convinced that Republica n administration wil l solve the problem; they do 
not believe that we should stay i n Hait i 
for twenty years. No r can they agree wit h 
Senator McCormick's description of the 
Haitian s as "primitiv e Africa n peasants 
who have managed to live and to multipl y 
despite the anarchy into whic h their countr y had fallen. " Man y Haitian s are primitive, but the nation whic h built the splendid 
Gothi c cathedra l i n Port-au-Princ e i n the 
years 1903-12 cannot be described as "barbarous." Ther e has been voodooism in 
Hait i just as there has been lynchin g and 
as there is superstition and degeneracy in 
parts of the Unite d States. 
Ther e has been occasional anarchy in 
Haiti , but never such genera l anarchy as 
since the America n occupation; it is generall y believed that at least some of the 
Haitia n revolutions were aided by capita l 
from the civilized Unite d States. 
AS EUROPE SEES US 
IN view of the fac t that there is talk of 
sending a commission from the Unite d 
States to investigate Britis h outrages in 
Ireland, it is interesting to learn what 
England and other countries think of our own 
governmental methods. The San 
Francisco, Cal., Call and Post says: 
Stephen Graham, an Englis h write r who 
has been travelin g i n America , found the 
northern and eastern States very like his 
own country. Bu t he found the Southern 
States ver y different—with their warm, 
lazy social lif e restin g on wha t he calls "the 
vast feudalism Negr o labor. " The Negroes 
were more interesting to him than the white 
people, for he found the whit e people content and Negroes restive. 
An d he also learned why. Whe n they 
trave l they are compelled to sit i n special 
coaches. Thoug h Negroe s ma y have the 
money to pa y for fine automobiles, agencies refuse to sell to them—sacrificing profit 
to prejudice. Negroe s are excluded from 
Carnegi e libraries. Negr o schools are dingy 
and ill-equipped and, though Negroes pay 
taxes, the streets of their sections are ill -
paved and dangerous. Negroes ma y have 
telephones i n their homes, but their color 
is indicated i n the telephone director y by 
a n asterisk. Negroe s are lynched and 
burned : when the first crime occurs 1,000 
more subscribers are added to the circula ­
tion of TH E CRISIS , a radical, courageous 
and defiant Negr o periodical. Te n thousand new subscribers are supposed to come 
when a Negr o is burned. . . . 
Circumstance s like these, visible to any 
stranger, are not ver y good tourist attractions fo r the Unite d States. The America n 
people, stumblin g and gropin g throug h the 
crude but vita l years of its history, has left 
many painfu l problems for its children to 
solve. An d "the Negr o problem" wil l never 
be any easier as long as men are content 
wit h substitutes for justice to this race. 
• * * 
An Associated Press despatch from 
Moscow shows a knowledge in Russia of 
American affairs: 
The note sent recently by Bainbridg e 
Colby, the America n secretary of state, to 
the Italian Government regardin g the 
Russo-Polish situation, has been much discussed i n official circles. 
The write r defends the thir d Internationale as legitimate propaganda , i n no wise 
differing i n methods from the counter-propaganda employed i n capitalist countries. 
He repudiates the accusation that Russi a is 
governed other than by the wil l of the 
workers, peasants and soldiers, and declares 
that the great America n democracy, "whic h 
has practicall y disfranchised the Negr o 
masses and arrests and persecutes radica l 
parties and organizations, " has no righ t to 
protest against "the brute force of the 
Soviet Government. " 
The late Joh n Reed at the Moscow meetin g of the Communist International, where 
both Lenin e and Trotzk y spoke, urged the 
Unio n of America n Negroes wit h the radicals of all nations to further world 
sovietism. 
Describin g the position of the Negr o i n 
the Unite d States, especially i n the Southern 
States, as "terrible, " Reed declared, the 
Negr o offers a two-fold opportunity to the 
spread of communism i n this country, first, 
a strong race and social movement, and, 
second, a strong proletarian movement. 
Race consciousness has steadily increased 
among the Negroes, he said, " a certain section of whom are now carryin g on a propaganda i n favor of an armed revolt against 
the whites, " and Socialisti c ideas are rap ­
idly developing among the blacks employed 
i n industria l establishments. 
Whit e and Negr o labor i n both the northern and southern parts of the country must 
be joined i n common labor unions, Reed 
proposed as the quickest wa y to destroy race 
prejudice and develop class solidarity. 
Until recently, Negroes "were not admitted to 
membership i n the majorit y of unions whic h 
comprise wha t is known as the America n 
Federation of Labor," he said. "The 
Communists must not, however, stand aloof 
from the Negr o movement for social and 
politica l equality, which is developing so 
rapidly at the present time among the 
Negro classes," Reed told the meeting. " 
Communists must avail themselves of this movement in order to prove the emptiness of 
Bourgeois equality and the necessity for a 
social revolution, not only to liberate al l 
laborers from slavery, but also as being 
the only effective means of liberatin g the 
oppressed Negr o people." The Outer Pocket 
WOOLASTON , Mass. 
I FEE L that a letter of endorsement migh t 
encourage you, even if from a plai n citizen. I wis h to prais e and to signif y my 
entire agreement wit h you r articl e in the 
Novembe r CRISI S on "Th e Socia l Equalit y of 
White s and Blacks. " I do not see how the 
case could be better put, or how any free 
whit e ma n can look at it any other way. 
However, there are forces at wor k i n the 
worl d whic h wil l brin g about a change and 
a n end of hypocrisy, although perhaps not 
i n our day. Facts are stubborn things. 
C. H . BARSTOW . 
ARTESIA , Ne w Mexico . 
Nea r here is a settlement of Negroes—a 
little town called "Blackdom" , consisting of 
farmers who have wrenched every bit of 
good out of our bitte r soil. The y are quiet, 
good citizens and molest nobody. The y have 
had littl e chance for the cultura l things of 
lif e and I believe they would welcome an 
opportunity to take you r papers and maga ­
zines. Of course, they ma y already know 
about them. The y have a little school and 
a church. 
Once in Omaha , I had an argument wit h 
a ma n who insisted that any woman's lif e 
was in danger who went alone on the streets 
of the city after night. I maintained that 
the danger would be from thugs or mashers. 
I have been accosted by whit e mashers on 
the city streets, but I have never been noticed by Negroes. In order to prove my 
point, I offered to walk the length of 
Cummings Street alone after nine o'clock. It is a 
street upon whic h a large numbe r of colored 
people live , presumably of the worst class. 
Fo r three nights I walked home the length 
of this street, before boardin g the street 
car for Pinckney , and met man after man 
of the colored race without the slightest 
effort on his part to even tur n and look 
after me. 
RUT H LOOMI S SKEEN . 
DAYTON , Ohio. 
I am just sad and sick at heart over 
Tuesday's lynchings. Will you tell me why can't 
a wa y be found to stop this? Wha t is i n the 
wa y of stopping such ruinous barbarism? 
Wil l you tell me wha t I can do to help stop 
it ? 
I have wondered wh y couldn't Alic e Pau l 
who was chairma n of the Nationa l Woman's 
Party—whic h picketed the Whit e House 
and whose members endured priso n sentence 
—be engaged to form a Woman's Part y to 
stop lynchings ? Woul d this be effectual: 
to have every Negr o leave a town i n which 
a lynchin g has taken place—at once—every 
man, woma n and child—withou t harmin g 
anyone or thing . Wouldn' t tha t create, fo r 
that town, an economic problem tha t other 
towns woul d hesitate to brin g down upon 
themselves? HELE N BUCKMILLER . 
PARIS , France . 
I am livin g wit h a Frenc h famil y .and 
my Frenc h is improvin g rapidly . I am told 
that I am ver y fortunat e as Frenc h people 
do not take strangers into their homes and 
if they do they never see them except to pay 
their bills. I am treated as one of the famil y and am taken everywher e they go. The 
daughte r is m y own age and is a musician. 
It is very pleasant fo r me. 
Afte r readin g "Darkwater " I know that 
you understand wha t is in my heart and 
how glad I am to get awa y just for a little 
while ; and to be treated as a littl e girl to 
whom everyone is anxious to be kin d and 
not as " a colored gir l who think s she is as 
good as the whit e girls i n the office." 
BERTH A MOXLEY . 
NE W YOR K CITY . 
I have just finished readin g you r book 
"Darkwater. " I am takin g a copy back 
wit h me, for I feel tha t so much of wha t 
you have said applies to us who are an oppressed people also, an d I wan t our people 
to realize that to gai n our rights we must 
joi n wit h al l who are similarl y oppressed, 
by the same causes. 
Yo u wil l be interested to hear a littl e in ­
cident on the train . Th e porte r i n charge of 
our ca r was a medica l student who was 
workin g his wa y throug h college, and he 
told me tha t your book ha d helped hi m to 
see things mor e clearly, tha t whereas before he was conscious only of a blin d hatred 
—now he saw definite goals, and definite 
causes opposing these. H e was ver y interested i n wha t I told him of India , and our 
common struggle . 
LIL A SINGH . 
126 THE HORIZON 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G ALLISO N . 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
ETHEL HARD Y SMITH , soprano, and 
Kempe r Harreld , violinist, have given 
a recita l at Morehous e College ; Frederic k 
Hal l was accompanist. 
C Haze l Harrison , pianist, and Willia m 
Service Bell , baritone, have appeared i n 
Detroit, under the iEolia n Concert Course ; 
Lornett a Henderson was accompanist. 
C The Princ e of Wale s and the Duk e of 
Yor k have attended the concerts of the colored Southern Syncopated Orchestr a at 
Philharmoni c Hall , London . Th e Princ e 
attended twice durin g one week. 
C Justi n Elie , a Haytia n pianist and composer, has given a recita l at Carnegi e Hall , 
Ne w Yor k City ; he was assisted by Mr . 
Josef Adler. On the program of 11 numbers, 8 were compositions of M . Elie . 
C "A n Evenin g Wit h Negr o Composers " 
has been given at Texarkana , Tex., by a 
chorus of 200 directed by Prof. H . B . P . 
Johnson, of Nashville . The concert was repeated at a whit e church, First Baptist, 
marking the first time for a chorus of 
Negro singers to appear before a white audience. 
([ J. W. Boone, the well-known blind 
Negro musician, is on his 41st tour. He is 
assisted by Mme . Marguerit e Day , soprano, 
who studied at the Kansa s Cit y Studio of 
Music . 
C Amon g Negr o musicians appearing i n 
recita l this season are Harve y Baker, tenor, 
who is a graduat e of the Cincinnat i College 
of Music ; Mme . M . Walle r French , soprano, who has traveled extensively and 
given recitals i n South America ; Willia m 
Holland , bass soloist, who received his mu ­
sical education at the School of Musica l 
.Art i n Ne w York ; W . Arthu r Calhoun , a 
graduate of the Oberli n Conservatory of 
Music, who wo n first priz e for the best 
execution on the pipe organ at the 
Jamestown Exposition, and for many years was 
bead of the Music Department at 
Wilberforce University. 
(1 Nelli e Moore Mund y and Minni e Brown , 
colored women of Ne w York , give recitals 
on Negro music for the Board of 
Education. Miss Brown, soprano, is a pupil of 
Harr y A . Williams and Mrs. Mundy , pian ­
ist, is a pupil of Leopold Wolfsohn . 
0 In the Harding-Coolidg e parade i n Ne w 
Yor k City , the band of the colored 15th 
Infantry led the Music Publishers' 
Protective Association, with Pace and Handy's 
" A Good Ma n Is Har d to Find. " The selection created much applause. 
C Mme . Rachae l Walker, a colored pupil 
of Mme . Marchese, has sun g i n Columbus, 
Ohio. Mme . Walke r is tourin g the Unite d 
States before returnin g to Europe , where 
she has sung before crowned heads. 
G O f Charle s S. Gilpin , the Negr o star actor 
i n "Th e Empero r Jones " produced by the 
Provincetown Players i n Ne w Yor k City , 
Heywood Broun , of The Tribune, says: 
"One performance is not enough to entitle 
a playe r to the word great even from a 
not too careful critic , but there can be no 
question whateve r that i n 'The Empero r 
Jones' Gilpi n is great. It is a performance of heroic stature. It is so good that 
the fact that it is enormously skillfu l seems 
only incidental. " Mr . Gilpi n played last season in John Drinkwater's "Abraham 
Lincoln." 
0 Florenc e Cole Talbert, soprano, has 
given a recital at the University of 
California, being the first Negro to appear at 
this institution. He r numbers included selections i n Frenc h and Italian . Mabell e C. 
Clark , of Xenia , Ohio, assisted as pianist. 
A correspondent says: "Th e Greek Theatr e 
is an open air structur e wit h a seating capacity of 10,000, requirin g a good strong 
voice to fill it. Mme . Talbert's voice not 
only filled it wit h ease, but he r hig h staccato notes showed the sustainin g qualities 
of her voice. He r art of phrasin g and tone 
paintin g proved she is an artist. She 
sang with soul and art combined." 
Several thousand white people were in the audience. 
127 128 TH E CRISIS 
EDUCATIO N 
CHEYNE Y TRAININ G SCHOO L FO R 
TEACHERS , at Cheyney, Pa. , has 
been raised to the status of a state norma l 
school, whic h qualifies its graduates for 
teachers in the public schools of 
Pennsylvania. Leslie Pinckney Hill is principal of 
the school. 
C Since 1912 the Joh n F . Slate r Fun d has 
aided i n the establishment of 331 county 
trainin g schools fo r Negroes and placed 
1,890 teachers; there have been 5,363 pupils 
i n hig h school grades. Salarie s have been 
paid as follows: from public ta x funds, 
$577,996; through the Slate r Board , $170,­
483. Since 1916 the Genera l Educatio n 
Boar d has appropriated $110,381 for buildin g and equipment of these schools. 
C I n a contest between the junio r and 
sophomore hockey teams at Wellesley 
College, the sophomore team won with Clarissa 
Ma e Scott, daughter of Emmet t J. Scott, 
playin g "ful l back" . 
0 Alic e Munday , a graduat e of Howar d 
Universit y and Prat t Institute, has passed 
the examination of the State Boar d of 
Indiana as Superviso r i n Domestic Science 
wit h an average of 927c. Miss Munda y is 
21 years of age and a teacher of the 
Vocational School at Gary, Ind. 
G A series of 14 Fre e Publi c Lecture s is 
being conducted at Howar d University . 
Amon g the speakers are 10 professors, 3 
deans and President J . Stanley Durkee . 
G The Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority at 
Howar d Universit y has been granted a sororit y house on the campus. 
0 Mr . R. R. Wright , Sr., has celebrated 
50 years of educational service. H e is 
president of Georgia State Industrial 
College at Savannah. 
G I n a contest wit h pupils from 26 schools 
of Ne w York , two Negroes, Counti e Porte r 
Cullen, of DeWitt Clinton, and Alma 
Rochford, of Manual Training, were awarded 
prizes by the Hig h School Poetry Society 
of Ne w York . 
C Dr . George W . Prince , a Negr o specialist in diseases of children, has returned 
from Europe to resume his practice in 
Chicago. Dr. Prince is a graduate of 
Northwestern University; he pursued post-graduate study at the Universit y of Vienn a 
from 1914 to 1915, and has specialized at 
the Universit y of Paris. 
C F . E . Corbie, a Negr o freshman at the 
College of the Cit y of Ne w York , is win ­
ner of the highest awar d in an oratorical 
contest. His subject wa s "Justic e to the 
Negro. " Mr . Corbi e is captai n of the debatin g team. 
CFiv e Negroe s have been elected regula r 
teachers i n the publi c schools at Baltimore , 
Md.,—the Misse s Leoni a Hall , Rut h 
Brownley , Fanni e R. Glascoe and Messrs. 
W . Deave r Brow n and Lawrenc e Queen. 
G Th e Colored Teachers' Associatio n has 
been organized a t Aiken , S. C. Professor 
A . W . Nicholso n is president. 
C Professor Harr y T. Pratt , principa l of 
Benjami n Banneke r School a t Baltimore , 
Md. , has returned to the Unite d States 
after several months' study i n Paris. 
C A n Alumn i Associatio n of Bordentown 
Industria l School has been formed, with 
the Rev. J. Frankli n Jones as president. 
C After examination of 518 students, 
Elliot Douglass, a Negro, has been placed on 
the Judgin g Team of five members who wil l 
represent Ohio State University at the 
International Live Stock Exposition in 
Chicago. 
G Throug h Y . M . C. A . organizations and 
the Inter-racia l Committe e of Kentucky, 
Howar d Universit y has been awarded 55 
scholarships, amountin g to $4,465, from 19 
states; the Federa l Boar d fo r Vocationa l 
Educatio n has provided for the trainin g of 
58 students i n the college, music, architecture, law, dental and medica l departments. 
G G. Callowa y has 
played tackle on 
Columbia 
University's Varsity 
Eleven. 
C John 
Shelbourne 
Dartmouth's Negro 
football full back, 
has gone to Seattle, 
Wash. , wit h the 
team. In the 
Dartmouth - Brown 
game, Dartmout h 
won by a 14-6 G . CALLOWA Y 
score, with 
Shelbourne making the first 6 points. 
G Howard has had the champion football 
team among colored schools, havin g defeat 
ed Shaw, Virgini a Norma l and Industrial, 
West Virgini a Collegiate , Union , Hampto n 
and Lincoln ; she was scored against but 
once, by Virgini a Norma l and Industrial. 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute stands 
second, havin g played 6 games, defeating 
Louisville , Bluefield, Virgini a Norma l and TH E 129 HORIZON 
TH E HOWARD-LINCOL N GAM E 
Industria l and Wilberforce . and being defeated by Howard . Talladega apparently 
stands next, havin g defeated Miles, Clark , 
Atlanta, Florida and Tuskegee; only 
Atlanta and Florida scored. Hampton played 5 
games, winnin g 2 from Virgini a Norma l 
and Industria l and Lincoln , and being 
defeated by Shaw, Howar d and Union . 
Virginia Union defeated St. Paul , Morgan , 
Morehouse and Hampton , and was defeated 
by Greensboro and Howard . Fish defeated 
Knoxville, Kentucky State, Lane, Rust, 
Kentucky and Tuskegee, and was defeated by 
Morehouse. Shaw defeated Hampton, 
Virginia Normal and Industrial, Greensboro 
and Biddle , and was defeated by Howar d 
and Lincoln . Colleges not listed above have 
failed to answe r our inquiries. 
MEETINGS 
THE Delta Sigma Theta Sorority wil l 
• hold its annual convention at 
Wilberforce, Ohio, December 28-30. 
C Omega Psi Phi Fraternity wil l hold its 
9th annua l convention December 27-30 at 
Fisk University and Meharry Medical 
College, Nashville, Tenn. 
C The annua l convention of the Alpha Phi 
Alpha Fraternity wil l be held December 27­
31 at Kansa s City , Mo . The fraternit y has 
900 undergraduat e members and 1,200 
graduate members. A reduced rate of 1 1/3, 
round tri p fare, has been granted by railroads on the "Certificat e Plan. " Norma n 
L. McGhee, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C, is secretary. 
C The 36th annua l session of the Colored 
Teachers' State Associatio n has convened 
at Houston, Tex . The organization has 366 
members. Mr . A . E . Holland , principa l of 
Lincol n Hig h School, at Palestine , Tex., is 
president. 
C The Georgi a State Baptist Convention 
has met wit h 1,500 delegates. Durin g the 
year $110,226 was raised. The Rev. M . W . 
Reddick, of Americus, is president, and the 
Rev. C. T. Walker, of Augusta , vice-president at large. 
C There has been a meeting of the officials 
of the colored Land Grant Colleges at 
Atlanta, Ga., at the call of the United States 
Commissione r of Education . The Unite d 
States Lan d Gran t funds, which formerl y 
went to Hampto n Institute, have been transferred over the protest of Hampto n to the 
Virgini a Norma l and Industria l Institute. 
They amount to about $27,000. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
AT Tallapoosa , Ga., Bisho p W . Sampson 
Brooks has preached i n a whit e church 
to a white congregation, being the first 
Negro in that pulpit. 
C Governor Morro w at Kentuck y recently 
designated an "Inter-racia l Sunday" , in order that the religious, moral, physica l and 
educational needs of the Negr o may be discussed from the pulpit and receive 
Christian consideration. 
G The Communit y Service is conducting a 
"Play Leaders' Institute" at Howard 
University. Registrants are teachers, church, 
social and playgroun d workers and communit y center secretaries. The wor k is 
under the direction of Lawrenc e A . Oxley, 
who durin g the wa r was the only Negr o 
Moral e Officer in the Unite d States Army . 
The courses include departments i n social 
and physica l education, drama and pageantr y and community music. 
G A Negr o fire company, No . 8, has been 
established in Atlantic City, N. J. The 
Negro population of 10,698 is a gain of 864 
since 1910. 
G Juliu s Rosenwald has contributed $25,­
000 toward a Y . W . C. A . buildin g fo r col­130 TH E CRISIS 
ored women i n Philadelphia , whic h is the 
fourt h to be erected withi n a year; the 
other buildings are located i n Ne w Yor k 
City , Washington , D . C , and Littl e Rock, 
Ark . The Y . W . C. A . at the beginnin g of 
the wa r had 16 centers for colored girls; it 
now has 58 centers wit h a membership of 
over 50,000, of whom 2,000 are girls of 
high school age who belong to the Girl 
Reserves. 
G The Nationa l Wa r Relie f Committe e has 
given $5,000 to the Circl e for Negr o Wa r 
Relief. 
C Harol d E . Simmelkjaer, a Negr o i n Ne w 
Yor k City , has been awarded a verdic t of 
$50 against Keith's Alhambr a Theatr e for 
discrimination . 
G Colored nurses have been installed i n the 
colored section of the Count y Hospita l at 
Macon , Ga . 
C I n the Distric t of Columbi a durin g the 
week ending October 30, 38 Negroes died, 
whil e births totaled 46; among whit e people 
there were 62 deaths and 98 births. 
O Negroes at Montgomery , Ala. , have suffered a property loss of $100,000 through 
"nigh t riders" ; 3 Negroes have been killed 
and 11 arrested i n an effort to check an 
"uprising" . 
C Mrs. A . L . Turner, a colored woman, has 
been elected a member of the Cit y Boar d of 
Directors of the Detroit Y . W . C. A . Othe r 
cities havin g colored representation on their 
boards are Ne w Yor k and Philadelphia . 
G The Herndo n Socia l Center and Da y 
Nurser y has been opened i n Atlanta , Ga . 
Mr . Herndon , a Negro, at a cost of $10,000 
purchased property and equipment for the 
project which he has deeded to the Gate 
Cit y Fre e Kindergarte n Association ; he has 
also assumed the salar y of a worker. 
G Phili p A . Armstead , a Negr o i n Ne w 
Yor k City , has passed the physica l examination for patrolman wit h 1009o. H e is 
5 feet 11% inches and weighs 180 pounds. 
G Wit h the dismissa l of the officers i n 
charge of cadets at Howar d and Hampton , 
the last of the colored A . E . F . officers have 
been dismissed from the U . S. Army . 
TH E CHURC H 
MR. N . B. DODSON , Superintendent of 
the Sunday School of Concord Baptist 
Church , Brooklyn , N . Y. , has retired after 
28 years of service. Mr . Dodson received 
$100, the gift of the church, and a gold 
watch and chain from the Sunday School. 
C A t Unio n Baptist Church , Baltimore , 
Md. , the 48th anniversar y of Dr . Harve y 
Johnson, as pastor, has been celebrated. 
G St. Philip s Protestan t Episcopa l Churc h 
i n Ne w Yor k Cit y has celebrated its 100th 
anniversary . Th e Rev. H . C. Bisho p has 
served as rector fo r 40 years. Th e church 
has 2,500 communicants and $8,000,000 in 
rea l estate. 
C Th e 91st anniversar y of Fift h Street 
Baptist Churc h i n Louisville , Ky. , and the 
34th anniversar y of its pastor, Dr . Joh n H . 
Frank , have been celebrated. 
G St. Mark s Methodist Episcopa l Church 
i n Ne w Yor k Cit y durin g October had an 
offering of $10,000; at a Sunda y evening 
rall y service, $9,092 i n cash was raised. A 
new edifice wit h a seating capacit y of 2,000,­
a paris h house and a parsonage have been 
contracted fo r i n Harlem , on Edgecombe 
avenue. Th e propert y is 34 feet i n the rear, 
67 feet front and 200 feet deep. The Rev. 
Willia m H . Brook s is pastor. 
POLITICS 
THOUG H he wa s defeated, Mr . J. H . 
Blount, the Negr o at Littl e Rock, Ark. , 
who ra n for Governor, outra n his lily-whit e 
opponent two-to-one to ten-to-one i n some 
centers; i n Pulask i and Jefferson counties 
he was returned winne r by a decided majority. 
G At Brooklyn, 111., Negroes cast 641 
Republican votes and one Democratic vote. 
G Mr . H . E . Scotland, a Negro , has been 
elected for a term of 5 years as Justice at 
Irvington , N . J . Mr . Scotland has been 
Justic e of the Peace for 16 years. 
C Dr . Darringto n Weaver, a Negr o at St. 
Louis, Mo. , has been appointed post-mortem 
physicia n i n the office of Corone r Edwar d 
Richter, elected on the Republica n ticket. 
Dr . Weaver, who is 31 years of age and a 
graduat e of Meharr y Medica l College, 1914, 
wil l receive a salar y of $5,000 per year. 
CRIM E 
THE followin g lynching s have taken 
place since our last record : 
Johnson City , Tenn., October 28—Cooksey 
Dallas; refusa l to sell whiske y to white 
soldiers. 
Ococee, Fla. , Novembe r 2—Jul y Perr y 
and others, shot and burned ; woundin g an 
officer at registration booth wher e Perr y was 
refused a ballot. 
Tylertown , Miss. , Novembe r 6—Harr y 
Jacobs; assaultin g a farmer. 
Bristol , Va. , Novembe r 18—Dav e Hunt ; 
assaulting whit e woman . TH E 131 HORIZON 
Douglas, Ga. , Novembe r 18 — Minni e 
Ivory , Wil l Ivory , Wil l Perry ; accused of 
collusion i n the murde r of a planter. 
INDUSTRY 
CHARLE S GANT , a Negr o laborer at 
Carbondale , 111., has earned $148 fo r 6 
days' labor. Th e wor k was that of carryin g 
5,927 ties, weighin g 150 pounds each, a distance of from 10 to 45 feet. He worked 9 
hours a day and carried over 100 ties per 
hour. 
C The Department of the Interior has approved plans by Mr . W . T. Bailey , a colored 
architect at Memphis, Tenn., for the $200,­
000 Pythia n Bathhouse and Sanitarium and 
the $125,000 Woodmen of Unio n Bathhouse 
and Sanitarium at Ho t Springs, Ark . Mr . 
Baile y was awarded the degree of Maste r of 
Architecture from the University of 
Illinois in 1910; for 9 years he was head of the 
Architecture Department at Tuskegee 
Institute; he now has more than a million dollars 
worth of buildings under pla n and i n the 
course of construction. 
G J. France s Rickards, a Negr o at Detroit, 
Mich. , has been retired by the Post Office 
Department after 40 years of continuous 
service. Mr. Rickards is Supreme 
Sovereign Grand Commander of the Northern 
Masoni c Jurisdiction . 
C Samue l L . Burton , a Negr o i n Baltimore , 
Md. , started a clothing business i n 1917; his 
first year's business amounted to $17,000; 
i n 1918, $35,000; 1919, $45,000; fo r 1920 
his business is estimated at $60,000. 
C Thoma s R. Crawford , a Negr o of St. 
Louis, Mo. , has been an employee of the 
Handla n Bus h Manufacturin g Compan y for 
53 years; he wa s retired recently and given 
a $1,000 Libert y Bon d from his employer 
and a gold watc h from his fellow workers. 
Mr . Crawford , who is the fathe r of 3 children, has accumulated rea l estate and is 
considered wealthy. 
G Th e Rock Island Railroa d has assigned 
Thoma s J . Johnson, a Negr o of Chicago, 
111., on a regula r ru n as a brakesman. 
C Negroes at Birmingham , Ala. , have 
opened a $25,000 steam laundry,—the 
Climax Laundry and Dry Cleaning Company. 
Mr . C. W . Carns, Jr. , is manager. 
C St. Luke Penny Savings Bank at 
Richmond, Va., has completed 17 years of business. A t the end of the first yea r there 
were resources of $19,000. Durin g its existence the bank has paid to stockholders 
$20,000 in dividends and $51,000 i n interest 
to depositors; it has resources of a half 
millio n dollars and undivided profits and 
surplus totalin g $15,000. 
G Colored farmers at Madiso n County, 
Ala., have organized a branch of the 
American Cotton Association. Mr. W. A. Love is 
president and the branch has 200 members. 
G A t Florence , Ala. , Robert Buckingham, a 
Negro, owns a store and 34 dwellings. 
G Gran d Lodge, Knights of Pythias, at 
Houston, Texas, reports, assets: office 
building, $250,000; cash in endowment 
fund, $44,738; cash in Gran d Lodge fund, 
$17,982, a total of $312,720; the liabilitie s 
are $2,000. Mr . W . S. Willis is grand chancellor. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
THE Federal Bureau of Juvenile 
Placement has appointed Mae B. Maxwell, 
formerl y Director of Survey and Room 
Registr y for the Atlant a Urba n League, to 
the position of Vocationa l Counselor for the 
colored public schools of Atlanta , Ga . 
C Seventy-five women clerks, bookkeepers 
-and stenographers comprisin g a Business 
Women's Association were recently organized i n Atlant a wit h the assistance of the 
Atlant a Urba n League, for the purpose of 
developing themselves i n business acumen, 
securing better recreational facilitie s and 
promotin g friendly acquaintance. 
C The owner of Theatre "81 " on Decatu r 
Street, Atlanta , a thickl y populated colored 
district, has turned the theatre over for use 
on Sunday afternoons to the Urba n League. 
A variet y program is given, consisting of 
community singing, health and educational 
movies and talks. 
G The Educational Department of the 
National Urban League has made the followin g placements: R. M . Moss (Columbia , 
1918, Fellow at the New York School of 
Social Work, 1920), Boys' Club Worker at 
Frederick Douglass Recreation Center, 
Toledo, Ohio; Anna L. Holbrook, Community 
Worke r for Children's Ai d Society, Buffalo, 
N. Y. The workers placed by this 
Department during the past 16 months received 
salaries tha t annuall y total $28,400. 
G The Cambridge Urba n League is employin g a ful l time Executive . 
G The Louisvill e Urba n League has been 
reorganized, approved by the Communit y 132 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Chest and financed through its genera l budget. 
C Depression i n industr y caused by post-war 
readjustment is resultin g i n the dismissa l 
of large numbers of Negr o workers along 
wit h whit e workers. The industria l departments of the Urba n Leagues of Chicago, 
Milwaukee , Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh , 
Philadelphia , Atlanta , Ne w York , Boston, 
and Newar k are especially burdened wit h 
the problems of unemployment at this time. 
The y are holdin g noon-day and evening 
meetings of groups of employees i n an effort 
to stimulat e production and increased efficiency as a means of keeping the men on their 
jobs. 
PERSONAL 
THE late Mr. J. C. Harrington, of 
Osborne, N. C, was an agent of the North 
Carolin a Mutua l Lif e Insurance Company, 
and wrote $100,000 wort h of insuranc e for 
them. 
C Scipio Young , a Negr o 101 years of age, 
is dead at Kane , Pa . H e leaves an estate 
valued at $50,000, whic h is wille d to his 6 
children. 
O Joh n C. Dancy, forme r Recorder of Deeds 
at Washington , D . C , is dead. 
C Charle s R. Douglass, the only survivin g 
son of Frederick Douglass, is dead at 
Washington, D. C. 
C Bisho p Evan s Tyree , of the A . M . E . 
Church , is dead at Nashville , Tenn . 
(I The 4 sons of Joh n H . Selby, a Negr o at 
Seaford, Del., took out $10,000 each i n wa r 
risk insurance ; the 4 men were kille d and 
Mr . Selby is beneficiary to $40,000 wort h of 
Government insurance, whic h is paid to him 
at a rate of $200 per month. 
FOREIGN 
THE Honorable Hector A. Josephs, a 
Negro, has been appointed Assistant 
Attorney General of Jamaica by Lord Milner. 
Mr . Josephs was educated at Yor k Castle 
and at Cambridg e and London Universities. 
C Whe n the 372nd colored Infantr y left 
France , a sum of money was collected among 
the men and given to Genera l Quille t for 
the erection of a shaft i n memor y of their 
fallen comrades. A t Monphois, on October 
25, a stone monument was dedicated. 
Cardinal Coadjutor Nevu of Rheims celebrated 
mass on the field. 
THE BROWNIES' BOOK 
A monthly magazine designed especially for our children which attempts to bring to them: 
1. The best in pictures and stories 
of Negro life. 
2. The life and deeds of famous 
men and women of the Negro 
race. 
3. The current events of the world 
told in beautiful language which 
children can understand. 
SPECIA L OFFER : Fiv e paid-up 
yearly subscriptions to the BROWNIES ' 
BOO K sent in at one time will entitle 
the sender to a year's subscription free. 
This offer holds good until midnight of 
February 15. 1921. 
15 Cents per copy $1.50 per year 
Agents Wanted Subscribers Wanted 
Sample copies sent on request. 
DuBois and Dill , Publishers 
2 West 13th St., New York, N.Y. 
TH E 
Crisis 
Calendar 
1921 
Contain s excerpts from the 
writings of foremost authors 
of the Negr o race. 
Ther e is a cover pictur e b y 
Battey . 
Price 50 cents TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 133 
"1920 
Th e Souther n Ai d Societ y of 
Va. , Inc., has striven durin g 
1920, as alway s heretofore, to 
rende r to its policyholders a 
superior service durin g sickness, accidents an d the dar k 
hour of death. A s a result of 
its efforts to keep faith wit h the 
people, the society has done a 
large r an d mor e satisfactory 
business durin g 1920 than ever 
before. 
Therefor e at this joyou s season of the yea r we first give 
thanks to Hi m from who m Cometh al l goo d things; then to the 
goo d people wh o have so will ­
ingl y an d consistentl y entrusted to ou r care an d keepin g the 
sacred dut y of protectin g their 
firesides i n the time of sickness, 
accidents an d death ; and last, 
but not least, to that ban d of 
ever faithfu l co-workers—ou r officers, superintendents, agents 
an d clerks—fo r their loya l devotio n to the interests of bot h 
the policyholders an d the Society . 
Th e success of 1920 inspire s and prepares us for bigge r 
an d better service durin g 1921. 
If you live i n Virginia—you shoul d have the superior protection provide d only by the unmatche d polic y of the 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies Throughout the State 
OFFICER S AN D BOAR D O F DIRECTOR S 
A . D. PRICE , Pres. 
EDW . STEWART , ist 
Vice-Pres. 
JAS . T. CARTER , 2nd 
Vice-Pres. & Atty. 
A . WASHINGTO N 
C. N . JACKSO N 
W . E. RANDOLP H 
B. A . CEPHAS , 3rd VicePres. 
W . E. BAKER , Treas. 
B. L . JORDAN , Sec. 
W. A . JORDAN , Asst. 
Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 134 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Are YOU a Man with a VISION? 
Can YO U look into the future and see yourself 
building ESTATE S for unborn children? 
Do YO U understand the principle upon which 
Life Insurance was founded? 
If YO U are - If YO U can - If YO U do -
W E WAN T YOU 
W e are literally searching the country for men 
big enough to share their burdens and shoulder 
responsibilities. Not necessarily brilliant, but 
sound, thinking men, who have grasped the 
fundamental principles of Life Insurance; who 
see it as the ultimate salvation of the race; 
who can develop their ability to manage. 
Make up your mind right now to acquire that 
broad mastery of business as applied in modern 
Life Insurance. 
Then write to: — 
Wm . H. KING , Director of Agencies, 
STANDAR D LIF E INSURANC E COMPANY , 
Atlanta , Georgia. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS , TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 135 
Soothing the 
" after-smart ofshaving 
Madam C J. Walker's 
Witch Hazel Jelly <J A sharp razor and good lather are not enough 
to prevent a tingling smartness after the 
morning shave. 
C[| A n application of Madam Walker's Witch 
Hazel Jelly soothes the skin, prevents chap and 
assures comfort after shaving. 
35 cents of Agents and Druggists 
Madebythe Mme. C. J.Walker Mfg. Co.,
640NorthWest St., Indianapolis. Ind 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 136 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MISS MADELIN E ALLISO N 
SHOPPE R 
HAV E yo u ever shoppe d b y mail ? It is 
easier an d mor e satisfactor y tha n yo u 
think . If yo u wis h an y of the article s liste d 
below, writ e me an d let me explai n price s an d 
descriptions, qualities, etc. 
Ki d gloves, $2.75-$3.39; cotton, woolen and suede, 
$.2Q-$i.5o; mittens, $.35-$-89. 
Cotton hosiery, $.35-5.69; lisle and silk, $.39~$4.25; wool, $.59-52.69. 
Ties, $49-$i.65 ; collars, $.2o-$.35; shirts, $i.89-$5.25. 
Slippers, $1.69-52.89; Flanne l gowns, pajamas and nightshirts, $1.98­
$4-25 • 
Sil k jersey petticoats, 57-i5-$8.79; bloomers, $7.i5-$8.45; glove silk 
camisoles, $2.60; bloomers, $5-53-$7-15 ; vests, $4.55-$4.8g. 
Sweaters, $2.88-$i5-6o; scarfs, $1.9846.95. 
Rubbers, artics an d boots, $.65-55.63; umbrellas, $i.85-$4.79. 
Woole n underwear, union suits, $3.25-$4.89; shirts and drawers, 
$i.49-$4.25 each. 
Apron s and housedresses, $.49-52.65 ; boudoi r caps, $.49-52.89. 
Philippin e embroidered chemise and gowns, $4.42-55.85 each; musli n 
chemise and gowns, 5!-39-$3- 2
5 each; petticoats, $i.49~$3.89; drawers, 
$.98-$i.i9; corset covers, $1.25-$:.49. 
Waists, $1.39-59.75; skirts, $5.98-514.50. 
Children's coats, $4.29-518.85; juniors' $11.50-523.40; ladies' 512.00­
554.6o; men's 518.25-545.50. 
Men's suits, $19.50-539.00; boys' knickerbocke r $5-25-$i6.58; trousers, 54.55-59.43. 
Infants' dresses, $1.19-52.99; caps, $.g8-$1.95. 
Ladies' shoes, $4.68-$9.88; men's, $3.50-511.50; children's, $1.59­
54.68. 
MISS MADELIN E ALLISO N 
Roo m 622, 70 Filt h Avenu e NE W YORK , N . Y . 
(Refers b y permissio n to the Edito r o f the Crisis.) 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 137 
THIS MAY BE YOUR LAST OPPORTUNITY 
TO SECURE ORCHARDVILLE LOTS UNDER 
OUR ATTRACTIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
FOR 
ONLY $5 6 ON VERY 
EASY TERMS 
ACT NO W BEFOR E IT'S TOO LATE ! 
Don' t trea t this announcemen t lightl y because we 
mea n ever y wor d of" it. Th e remainin g numbe r of 
lots set asid e fo r this projec t wil l soon be al l sol d 
whic h mean s tha t onl y thos e wh o act quickl y wil l 
be abl e to ge t them. 
Bea r i n min d tha t w e plant . FIV E HIG H GRAD E 
FRUI T TREE S o n each o f these lots an d take 
car e o f the m fo r FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T EX ­
TR A COST . Whe n the trees come int o commercia l 
bearin g the y shoul d ear n you EXCELLEN T 
YEARL Y RETURN S O X YOU R INVESTMEN T 
WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N YOU R PART . 
Th e lots ar e siz e 30 x 144 feet an d hav e plent y 
o f roo m fo r a house , garden , chicke n yard , shed, 
etc., beside s the roo m take n up b y the frui t tree-'. 
Eac h lo t is GUARANTEE D T O E E HIG H AN D 
DR Y UNDE R A MONE Y BAC K GUARANTEE , 
an d the titl e to the propert y is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . It is conveye d b y WARRANT Y DEE D 
withou t extr a cost. 
Al l those wh o visite d Orchardvill e wer e so wel l 
pleased wit h everythin g that o n their retur n the y 
eithe r purchase d mor e lots themselve s or advise d 
their friend s to do so, provin g that the y foun d 
condition s exactl y as represente d by us. 
Th e terms are onl y $3.00 a mont h o n one lot. 
Smalle r terms whe n mor e tha n one are purchase d 
N O INTEREST . W e hav e a beautifu l bookle t 
that give s al l the details &f this offer, also one 
that contain s a numbe r o f letters fro m peopl e wh o 
visite d Orchardville . Sen d fo r you r copies* 
TODAY . 
Simpl y writ e you r name an d address o n the coupo n 
belo w an d mai l it RIGH T AWAY . Don' t wai t 
becaus e the limite d numbe r o f lots make s it a 
case o f FIRS T COME—FIRS T SERVED . 
Address 
Arenson Realty Development Corporation 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO , ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSON REALT Y DEV'PT. CORP. 
Chicago, 111. 
Date , 1921 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in your Orchardville offer and would like to receive a copy of each of 
your booklets without any obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town State. 
CRI-1-21 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 138 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
30-DAY SYSTEM Positions Secured 
DERRIC K 
BUSINES S SCHOO L 
Th e Schoo l o f Result s 
Th e Onl y On e o f Its Kin d 
SHORTHAN D TOUC H TYPEWRITIN G 
BOOK-KEEPIN G OFFIC E TRAININ G 
W e ar e no w i n OU R OW N NE W 
BUILDING . 
Spaciou s class rooms equippe d wit h 
ever y moder n office device . 
Derric k Students lear n quickl y an d 
ear n whil e the y ar e learning . 
ENROL L IMMEDIATEL Y 
to insur e Class Placemen t 
Comfortable Dormitories for Young Women 
Write for Catalog 14— Full information of 
Fall Term. 
1514 PINE ST., PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
M . J. DERRICK , Prin. & Mgr. 
The Stenographers' Institute 
Shorthand , Typewriting , 
Bookkeeping , Commercia l La w 
Edwar d T . Duncan , Pres. , 1227 S. 17t h St. , Phila , Pa . 
A MONEY GETTER because it Is A CROWD GETTER. 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
A n entertainment In one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night PRICE, 60c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, D. G. 
ACT QUICK Snap op this profit smashing 
bargain now. SEN D N O 
MONEY , just your name, address, size and color. 
We will send you delivery charges paid, 6 pairs of 
the swell est heavy weight brown or clack genuine 
duo-web mens* silk socks, worth $1.00 each. 
SEND NO MONEY 
S Pairs of Sil k Socks-Guar . $6 Value 
You pay S3.19 on arrival, delivery charges paid. 
Don't wait. Get yours today. Limited quantity 
left. Only 6 pairs to a customer. Money cheerfully refunded if you CAD match Lhem for $6. 
BERNARD * HEWIT T & CO . 
Dept. L 044 CHICAGO 
EXTRA 
QUALITY 
-SIL K 
6 prs. $3.19 
delivered Free 
RATIONA L LIVIN G 
61 Hamilton Place, New York, N. Y . 
Health Conservation—Social Hygiene—Industrial Hygiene— 
Personal and Sexual Hygiene—Child Hygiene—Drugless Treatment of Disease—Birth Control—All Truths from all Medical 
Schools—Fighting Dishonesty in all the Healing Professions— 
Freedom in the Bringing Up of Children. An Independent 
monthly, scientific but popular. Saves you money. 
Our December issue is sold out. New subscriptions must 
begin with the January issue which contains many interesting articles. Here are hut a few: Fighting Disease in 
Soviet Russia; Exercise, Good and Bad: Drugless Treatment; 
Labor and Health; Stammering; The Breakfast; Sex Morality. 
The opinion of one reader: "I feel throughout the magazine that it is directed with a sort of divine fury, that you 
are raging, burning with fire and indignation and sarcasm." 
A doctor writes: "I am gratified as well as amazed to discover that there is a doctor in New York with courage 
enough to start such a magazine." 
Forty cents a copy. Four dollars a year everywhere in 
U. S. "Value. Corresponding rates for shorter periods. No 
free sample copies. 
"Th e Newspape r of the Hour " 
New York Dispatch 
Featuring— 
Less Crime 
Less Scandal 
MOR E SUBSTANTIA L NEWS—Belte r Written 
Also— 
Fearless Editorials 
A Woman's Page 
Liv e Sporting and 
Theatrical News 
SAMPLE COPY FREE 
Subscription: $1.50 per Yea r 
NE W YOR K DISPATC H 
21 W . 134th Street, Ne w York , N. Y . 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE 
Louise Reynolds Robinson 
DRAMATIC READER 
ENGAGEMENT S :-: RECITAL S 
1515 S. Woodstoc k St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Bell Telephone Dickinson 4140 R 
TW O GREA T BOOK S for $2.50 
NO LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y o f th e Negr o Rac e an d Negr o Soldiers I n th e 
Spanish-America n War , Datin g Bac k t o Egyp t an d the 
Pharoas—10 0 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alon e fo r 
$1.25.) Wa s adopte d as a textboo k b y Nort h Carolin a 
Stat e Boar d o f Education . 
(2) Th e Pictoria l Histor y o f th e Negr o i n th e Grea t Worl d 
War , givin g a brillian t historica l sketch , a descriptio n o f 
battl e scene s by Colone l Haywood , o f the Fightin g Fif ­
teent h New . York , Capt . Marshall , Sergean t Steptoe , Ralp h 
Tyle r an d others, wit h 160 excellen t picture s o f officers 
an d me n an d wa r views. (Sells alon e fo r $-2.00.) 
Just Think , onl y $2.6 0 fo r thes e tw o grea t books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRES S E . A . JOHNSON , 1 7 Wes t 132N D Street , NE W YORK , N.Y . 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 139 
ESTABLISHED 1900 
INVESTMENTS 
CONSERVATIV E AN D PROFITABL E INVESTMENT S FO R LARG E AN D 
SMAL L INVESTORS . FRE E MARKE T LETTE R O N APPLICATION . 
HENR Y SACHS 
(Formerl y of Boston ) 
Member, N . A . A . C . P. 
C . M . BALKA M M . A . ESMIO L 
FIRS T NATIONA L BAN K BUILDING , COLORAD O SPRINGS , COLORAD O 
References furnished from various sections of the United States. 
B E INDEPENDENT ! 
Own a farm and enjoy the independent life of 
the modern farmer. Get away from the turmoil of the city, the strikes, the lay-offs and 
the high cost of living. If you act QUICKLY 
you can secure a Woodville country estate 
consisting of 10, 20 or 40 acres in a fine location in Michigan, for only 
$32.50 
per Acre 
O N VER Y EAS Y TERM S 
FREE TOWN LOT with each 10 acre tract, 
also a SPECIAL ADVERTISING DISCOUNT 
to those who act AT ONCE. The tract is 
well located, right on a railroad, with the 
station right there. The land is high and 
dry and sold under a MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE. The TITLE IS ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR and is conveyed by WARRANT Y 
DEED WITHOUT EXTR A COST. Send for 
our beautiful booklet and get all the details 
without any obligation on your part. Simply 
ask for a WOODVILLE booklet and mention 
the Crisis. Send for it TODAY because the 
tracts are GOING FAST. Address 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
19 So. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. 
Send No Money 
Snap this bargain up right now before it is too 
late. Only limited quantity. Amazing underwear 
bargain. Greatest offer ever made. Two Guaranteed $ 4 Each, Wool Union suits, $5.75. 
Save big money on your underwear. Send 
postcard or letter today — this very minute, for 
these2 beautiful perfect fitting heavy weight gray 
elastic rib union suits. Full cut. Seams reinforced 
and overcast. Send No Money—pay only $5.75 
on arrival, no more; we pay delivery charges. 
W e Guarante e to refund your 
money if you can 
match these 2 wonderful wool union suits for 
$8.00. Order this amazing bargain this minute 
before it is too late. Just give name, address 
and breast measure. 
BERNAR D •HEWIT T & COMPAN Y 
Dept . V 044 900 W Van Buren, Chicago 
WANTE D WANTE D 
Live Agents At Once To Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hardwood floors and hundreds of other things 
that have a varnished surface. Makes them 
look like new. Agents can make $50.00 to 
¥75.00 per week selling Dudley's Polish to 
furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile 
Btores, paint stores and grocery stores. 
Special Offer: For 90 days we will ship to 
all new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's 
Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this 
special offer at once. 
Dudle y & Porte r Manufacturin g Co . 
11 6 SOUT H MAI N ST. , MUSKOGEE . OKL A . 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lire* and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries T 
Do you want a place to go where you can buil d up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency T 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things T 
D o you believe In progress and do you want to * 
have a part In one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely I 
Then you wil l be Interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild 
Michigan. If you act at once you can Benin ) a beautiful lot for only I35. M each; 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot wil l b i 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford BIdg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH E Crisis 140 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Cleota J. Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
''Judgin g fro m the appearanc e o f a larg e numbe r o f 
musi c lovers, he r swee t lyri c 
voic e hel d them ipellbound . 
Sh e wa s applaude d agai n an d 
agai n afte r eac h number." — 
Boston Chronicle. 
Address : 
156 HAMILTON AVENUE, 
COLUMBUS, OHIO 
Clarence Cameron White 
Violinist 
Recitals, Concerts. Instruction 
Studio: 
616 Columbus Avenue Boston, Mass. 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Organist-Directo r o f Musi c o f St . Mark s M . E . 
Church ; Concer t Accompanist ; Piano , Voice , 
Theory , Instruction , Conducting , Coaching . 
Harmon y taugh t fro m beginnin g to completion . Privat e o r correspondence . 
Geothiu s system. 
Studio : 250 W . 138t h St. , Ne w York , N . Y . 
Telephon e Morningsid e 1708. 
GENUIN E $12.00 IMPORTE D 
VELOU R HA T $6.8 9 
A 
Stunning, 
Stylish 
Ha t 
Delivered 
Free 
FUL L O F JAZ Z 
AN D PE P 
BECOMIN G 
T O YOUN G 
AN D OL D 
Write quick for 
this amazing1 bargain. Only limited 
lot. Wonderful quality, imported velour, 
record-breaking cot 
PA Y O N 
ARRIVA L 
ONL Y 
J6.89 
FO R 
THI S 
GREA T 
$12 
HAT 
SEND NO MONEY Just send address 
and size for this 
wonderfu1 im ­
ported genuine black velour hat. Beautiful fedora style. Flexible brim. Oan be turned up or down. Made of the finest quality, very silky, imported black velour. Fine wide grosgrain black 
eilk ribbon band. Genuine leather, non-soilable sweat band. A 
hat you can wear, season after season, for years. Don' t Sen d a 
Penny—Pay onlv S6.89 O. O. D. We pay delivery charges. W e 
Guarante e to refund your money immediately, if you can match 
it for less than §12.00. Sav e Money—Writ e Toda y before this 
astounding offer is withdrawn. Be sure to give size. 
BERNARD-HEWIT T & COMPAN Y 
Dept. H 044. 90 0 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, ILL. 
$1.10—Get These Famous 'BLUES' For Your Player 
SOMEBODY' S GO T M Y MA N 
The Tom Cat Blues - Pee Gee Blues - Campmeeting Blues 
Oh ! Yo u Darktown Regimental Band 
Early Mornin ' Blues I'm Goin ' Back To My Use To Be 
Yo u Can't Keep A Good Man Down 
Blind Ma n Blues - Lonesome Road Blues 
Agents: Williams & Piron, 4404 So. State St., CHICAGO , 111., or Pace 
& Handy, 232 W . 46th St., NE W YORK , N. Y. , or sent direct from 
our plant. Order today or send for general Bulletin. 
OWEN S PLAYE R ROL L COMPANY , INC. 
Dept. 10 5 KANSA S CITY , MO . 312 East 12th St. 
REFERENCE : DUN N O R BRADSTREE T 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 141 
Made to Measure 
$15.00 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $13.50. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
make you a suit for $13.50, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
save 50 % on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials in such large quantities and have such a perfect organi­ zation that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or your money back. 
Yo u Sav e$8 to $11 
This suit for S13.50 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell 
you about them. W e would rather you did 
not send us any money until we send ourBIGSAMPLEOUTFIT 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the excep­ tional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 606 , CHICAGO 
Mentio n T H E CRISIS 142 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Patti's Xmas Suggestions 
Send $2.50 and postage for 
4 PERFECTLY MARVELOUS SKIN TOILETTES 
Or $2.25 for Patti's Columbia Record 
Bleaching, Vanishing and Cold Cream. Also "La Traviata" Powder, 
68 cents each. "Patti's Special" Perfume, $1.25 an ounce. 
Sen d 10c postage for mailin g one article . 2c eac h additional . 
$5.00 for 6 Toilettes and Patti's Beauty Secrets 
BI G MONE Y FO R AGENT S WRIT E QUIC K 11 
Send All Money Orders to 
A. A. BROWN, Manager, PATTI BEAUTY EMPORIU M 
Phone Kenwoo d 9538 472 3 St . Lawrenc e Ave. , Apt. 3, CHICAGO , ILL . 
TEACHER S AN D SCHOOLS 
Typewriters ar e neede d i n you r business. W e 
furnis h them at lowest cash price s or on de 
ferre d payments. Fre e tria l privileg e granted . 
Ou r Lin e 
o f Diplomas, Certificates, Class Pin s an d Com ­
mencemen t Invitation s ar e hig h grad e an d 
cheape r tha n thos e yo u hav e bee n using . 
Yo u ca n bu y o r ren t Cap s an d Gown s fro m us. ) 
Ou r Suppl y Departmen t 
ca n furnis h yo u wit h AN Y SCHOO L BOOK S 
O R AN Y BOOK S B Y NEGR O AUTHORS . 
As k for Brawley's "Shor t Histor y o f the 
America n Negro" ; Cromwell' s "Th e Negr o i n 
America n History, " an d Huggin s "Ho w to 
Stud y an d Teac h Negr o History. " Yo n 
shoul d subscrib e fo r 
The Up-Reach Magazine 
A Journa l of Educatio n an d Socia l Wor k De ­
vote d to the Interests o f Negr o Teachers an d 
Socia l Worker s an d Promotin g the Stud y an d 
Teachin g o f Negr o Histor y i n Schools, 
Churche s an d Clubs. $1.00 pe r year, £0 cents 
per copy . 
Sen d us orders fo r Ar t Materials an d Schoo l 
Supplie s of al l kinds. \Y e ca n save yo u 
money . I f yo u wis h to ear n mone y durin g 
vacatio n or i n you r spar e time writ e us. W e 
ca n direc t yo u to reputabl e firms. Address: 
UP-REAC H MAGAZINE , wniu N. Hunt" , Edito r 
434 5 Vincenne s Avenue , Chicago , IU . 
Special CRISIS Offer Five paid-up yearly subscriptions to the 
CRISIS sent in at one time will entitle the 
sender to a year's subscription free. This offer 
holds good until midnight of January 31, 
1931. 
Extraordinary Special Offer 
DARKWATE R , th e ne w boo k b y Dr . 
W . E . B . DuBoi s $3 00 
Th e CRISIS , one year's subscriptio n 1.50 
Tota l $3.50 
SPECIAL , i f ordere d togethe r $3.00 
Addres s 
Th e CRISIS . 70 Fift h Avenue . Ne w York . N , Y . 
Agents $8 5 Weekly Ge t a Robinso n Foldin g Bat h Tu b FREE . Big seller. Cost little, no plumbing. Weight 15 pounds, folds into small roll. Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Guaranteed 10 years. $15 to $20 a day easily made. Write quick for special offer. Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co., Factories Bldg., Toledo, O 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
SendNo Money 
fo r t w o ONLY $4.59 finest quality, beautiful patterns regular$3.50maaraadressshirts,$7.00value —bent on approval, no money in advance, payable C. O. D . Madeofthe anest quality Styltex Corded Madras, very durable, very dressy, cut extra full, roomy armholes. coat front style, soft French turn back cuffs, fine pearl buttons, double stitched, finest workmanship. In latest strip effects, lavender, blue and black stripes <f ast color) on white background. Sizes 14 to 17lg. State size and color preferred. We Guarante e to return your money lo fall, if you can match these c 7 T, , C C two fine Shirts anywhere for less than $3.50 each, 
bend no Money, just your name address and size, and we will ship at ODce, delivery cnartrea prepaid. Pay only $4.69 on arrival, no more. Write today for thia won­ derful bargain. Be sure to state neck-band size. 
BERNARD-HEWIT T AN D COMPAN Y 
Dept. S 044 9 00 W . Van Bllren St., Chicago, III. 
A Real Holiday Gift The whole family wil l enjoy a Myers Replayer all the year. Re­ plays Victo r and Columbia Records. Great for Dances, Dinners and Farties. 
$10.01) REPLAYER-HOLIDAY PRICE $7.50 
Postage paid. Money back if not 
satisfied. Get your Replayer for 
the holidays. Order at once. 
TH E MYER S REPLAYE R CO . 
1125 Nicholas Bid?., Toledo, Ohio 
SEND NO MONEY Write quick for this amazing sock bargain, 
Only limited lot. Men's fine quality black or 
gray wool socks. Full seamless, double sole, 
toe and heel. Guaranteed wear-proof. 
6 PAIR OF GUARANTEE D $3.00 
$1.00 WOO L SOCK S New 
Guaranteed Six Months Socks 
FREE 
SEN D NO MONEY—write quick. If you 
Socks sent delivery charges paid. get
less Pay$3on arrival, no more. Money back if than 
not more than pleased. Give size, color. 6 mos. 
wear. 
BERNARD, HEWITT SCO. Dept. X 044 Chicago 
Mention THE CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 143 
OU R LATES T CATALO G WIL L B E 
MAILE D T O YO U UPO N REQUES T 
We are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAI R GOOD S who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME . BAUM , by the most skillful artists in the 
trade. 
Try Mme. Baum's Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made 
of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using 
them. 
W e carry the largest selection of Hairdressers' Tools and Accessories. 
MME . BAUM' S 
MAI L ORDE R HOUS E 
Our Factory is Located at 
80 FOURT H AVE . NEW YORK , N . V . 
When writing, mention this paper. 
Mme. Baum's Bob 
gives the appearance of wearing the 
hair bobbed, but 
makes cutting unnecessary. M a d o 
of strictly Supreme 
Quality huma n 
hair, with natural 
waves, sewed on 
Velve t Ribbon, 
fitted with three 
tuck Comb s to 
hold secure. In 
all shades. Price, 
{5.50. 
2 fo r $5.2 5 
Send No Money! 
Two wonderful $4.00 shirts for only $5.25. ^ 
Save at least $2.75. Everybody wearing these semidress Gray Flannel Shirts for business, work and sport. 
Cadilla c Broadclot h Flanne l Shirt s 
Tw o $4.0 0 Shirt s fo r Onl y $5.2 5 
Made of fine quality Cadillac Broadcloth Gray Flannel. 
Special Winter we iglit. One large pocket, face d uleeve* mi d 
matched pear] buttona Cu t Extr a Full . Coa t Fron t Style . 
Double-St itched thru-out. Soft turn down collar with sateen 
faced neckband. Thoroughl y Shrunk . Try to match theBO 
•hirt* in any store at (4.00. Yet we offer you two for only $5.25. 
Send No Money 
Write today. Shirts will be sent at 
once, transportation prepaid. Pay only 
$6.26 on arrival—no more. Money back at once If not more than pleased 
with the wonderful value. Be sure to give neck-band size. 
BERNARD-HEWITT 8 CO. CHICAGO 
Desk F . S. 044 
90 O W.Van Buren St., 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 Nort h 42nd Street , Philadelphia , Pa . 
TeL 6487 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D C OUNSELLOB-AT-LA W 
84 School Street Boston, Mass. 
SOM E DON'T S For Holiday Gifts 
The y have commande d the attentio n o f the people s 
o f Easter n an d Wester n Continents. Sen d me 10c fo r 
a copy . A . R. Gillespie , 2272 Eis t 97t h St. , Cleve ­
land , Ohio . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help Yon Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW SEASONABLE TEEMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
Fo r al l Lodg e an d Churc h Societie s 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES , PR.. . 
641 W . 9th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 144 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Kelly Miller's Authentic History of Negro in World War 
A NEW AND UP-TO-DATE 
WAR HISTORY 
JUST OFF THE PRESS 
200 pictures 700 pages 
Price, cloth . . $2.50 
morocco $3.50 
Sen t rjy insure d parce l post . 
Siz e 6'.. x 8>;. inches, 700 Page s 
Yo u shoul d rea d this book , i t wil l 
mak e a valuabl e additio n to you r 
library ; sen d fo r i t today . 
The 
Only 
War 
History 
That 
Will 
Folly 
Satisfy 
The 
American 
Colored 
People 
This Boo k appeals to the Colore d People . The y are 
eager to buy it. Why ? Becaus e it is the only War 
Boo k published that thrillingly, graphically , yet faithfully describes the wonderful part the Colored Soldier has taken in the Worl d Wa r and is absolutely fair to 
the Negro . 
It relates to the worl d how 300.000 Negroe s crossed 
the Nort h Atlantic , braving the terror s of the Sub­ marine Peril, lo battle for Democrac y against the bloodthirsty hordes of a wa r ma d Lor d of the Hous e of 
Hohenzollern. 
Mor e than fifty pages of the Boo k devoted to the 
ACHIEVEMENT S O F TH E NEGR O I N TH E 
AMERICA N NAVY—Guardin g the Trans-Atlanti c 
Rout e to France—Battlin g the Submarine Peril—Th e 
Best Sailor s in any Nav y in the World—Makin g a Nav y 
in Thre e Month s from Negr o Stevedore s and Laborer s 
—Wonderfu l Accomplishments of Ou r Negr o Yoeme n 
and Yeowomen . 
AGENTS WANTE D Millions of these books will be sold. BIG MONEY is being made by our sales people 30 000 <old in one month. Our offer will pay you from $3 to $9 per day. One agent made $317 last month. AGENTS ' SAMPL E showing speci­ men pages and all the pictures and covers of book will be mailed to you for 28 cents (stamps to pay postage. It represents exactly the complete book Send 28 cents for outfit TODAY. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. (Book and Bible Publishers) 
No . 523 9t h Stree t Washington , D . C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S Let Us Send You A Suit 
Made to your measure, payable after 
received, with the clear understanding that if 
the fit is not perfect, or if you are not satisfied 
in every way; if you are not convinced that 
you have received a fine, high-grade, stylish, 
splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your 
measure and have saved at least $15.00 to 
$20.00, you are not under the slightest 
obligation to keep it. Don't hesitate or 
feel timid, simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. You are not out one penny. 
Any money you may have paid us • 
is refunded at once. 
SEN D N O MONEY — just your 
name and address for FRE E 
samples and latest styles, beautiful 
NE W samplebook all sent FRE E 
— if you answer now. 
All Wool Suits $25.00 
SAMPLES FREE 
Any man, young or old, interested 
in saving money, who wants to 
dress well and not feel extravagant, is invited to answer at once and get our free 
book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply mail 
the coupon, or write letter or postal today, just say, "Send me your samples" and 
get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have a big NEW 
agency deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FRE E 
SAMPLE S and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Write today. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO., Dept. 1083, CHICAGO, ILL TEAR OUT HERE-MAI L TODAY 
FREE SAMPLE BOOK COUPON 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Company. 
Dept. 1 083, Chicago. 111. 
Gentlemen: Please send me your complete big book of Samples & Styles showing your all-wool 
suits as low as $25.00, and Agents big new money-making deal. Everything free and postpaid. 
Name 
Address A WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITY 
To become a subscriber to and own part of 
the most progressive Negro Chemical Company. 
Th e NIL E QUEE N CORPORATIO N wit h a capital of $200,00 0 
is now being organized under the laws of the State of Illinois to 
provide a greater scope and opportunity for operation i n the ric h 
field of commercia l chemistry, particularly i n the manufacture and 
distribution of toilet articles. 
Acquire Kashmir Chemical Company 
Th e entire holdin g of the Kashmir Chemica l Compan y of Chicago, 
the wel l know n and successful leader i n this field, includin g its 
building , fixtures, furniture, machinery, accounts and assets of 
every character, wil l be taken over and form the nucleus of the new 
organization, whic h wil l be country-wide i n scope. 
Sharing the Profits 
If a Beaut y Culturist, Druggist, Agen t or Privat e Individua l own s 
a few shares of stock, naturally he or she woul d exert every effort 
to make NIL E QUEE N Preparations supreme i n his particula r 
community . T o share the profits of the business wit h those wh o 
help to make it a success is one of the basic ideas of this new organization. 
Your Chance 
Yo u are being offered this opportunity to become a subscriber to 
this great new organization. D o not overlook this unusua l opening 
for a business investment whic h promises such great returns. Safe, 
conservative—and yet earning bi g dividends for you . Guarantee of 
6 per cent. Practica l certainty of muc h greater returns. 
Price of Shares 
Th e shares of the Corporation are $25 .0 0 each, payable $5 .0 0 dow n 
and $5.(80 per mont h for four months. Subscriptions no w bein g 
received. POSITION S OPE N FO R CAPABL E REPRESEN ­
TATIVES . 
Send subscription or request for details to INCORPORATORS, 
NILE QUEEN CORPORATION or 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L COMPAN Y 
3423 INDIANA AVE . CHICAGO , ILL. 