THE CRIS
EASTER 
1914 PUBLI C OPINIO N 
AL L OVE R TH E WORL D 
ENDORSE S TH E 
Underwood 
I N PREFERENC E T O AN Y 
OTHE R TYPEWRITE R 
Because 
It has prove d itself b y winnin g all 
world's award s for meri t 
It holds all record s for SPEED -
ACCURACY—STABILIT Y 
It holds the Elliott-Cresso n meda l 
awarde d b y the Frankli n Institute 
of Pennsylvani a — the highest 
mechanica l awar d 
These Ar e Features No Other 
Writing Machine Can Offer 
UNDERWOO D 
"The Machine Yo u Wil l Eventually Buy " 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for April, 1914 
PICTURE S 
COVER . Photograph from life. Copyrighted by W . L . Brockman. 
(For reproductions write TH E CRISIS.) 
MEN' S BIBL E CLASS , METROPOLITA N A. M . E . CHURCH , 
Page 
WASHINGTON , D. C 272 
COLORE D RAILWA Y MAI L CLERK S 276 
ARTICLE S 
SPRING. A Poem. By William Moore 288 
TH E NE W ABOLITIO N AN D ITS WOR K 289 
OU R LEGA L BUREAU . By Chapin Brinsmade 291 
JIMMY . A Story. By French Wilson 293 
TH E NEGR O A S A LAN D OWNER . By Henry W . Wilbur 297 
IN MOSLE M SPAIN . By Joseph F. Gould 298 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 267 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 273 
OPINIO N 277 
EDITORIA L 285 
SON G AN D STOR Y 300 
BURDE N 302 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be chanced as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 26 4 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
mal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale . Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School. Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1914. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOSVELLE . TESTN . 
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Morehouse College 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly 
development—the only institution in the far 
South devoted solely to the education of 
Negro young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by 
greatest Northern universities. Debating, 
Y . M . C. A. , athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mar>r. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa 
Fis k University 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founde d 1866 C. W. Morrow , Dean 
Thoroug h Literary . Scientific, Educa ­
tiona l and Socia l Science Courses. Pionee r 
in Negr o music. Special study i n Negr o 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds, 
Well-equippe d Science building . 
Christia n home life. 
Hig h standards of independent manhoo d 
and womanhood . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintaine d b y the governments of Nort h Carolin a an d of 
the Unite d States. Ope n all the 
yea r round . Fo r males only. 
Sprin g term began Marc h 2, 
1914. Board , lodging an d tuition, 
$7 per month . Best opportunitie s 
for Negr o youth . Nigh t school 
for indigent but ambitious youn g 
men . Fo r catalog o r furthe r 
information , address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A . & M . College Greensboro, N . C. 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
Jefferson City , Missouri 
Founded by the Negro soldiers of 
the 64th and 65th Regiments. Supported by the State of Missouri. 
One of the best-equipped schools 
in the country for the education of 
Negro boys and girls. Normal, 
Collegiate, Agricultural and Industrial Courses. Normal diplomas 
carrying with them the degree B. Pd. 
are life certificates to teach in the 
public schools of Missouri. The 
degree A. B. conferred upon those 
who complete the collegiate course. 
Four teachers of Music: Voice Culture, Piano. Violin. Band and 
Orchestra Practice. Elocution and. 
Athletics. 
Boar d $9.50 a month. Tuitio n $3.00 the 
yea r to Missour i students. Al l others pay 
$13.00 a year . Catalo g free. 
B. F. ALLEN , A. M. , LL . D. 
President. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 265 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commen d the school's interest and needs to all wh o believe 
in the Negr o race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, 
mora l and religious uplift." 
— REV, DR. C HARLE S H. P AKKIIURST , New Yor k City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M . C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced 
co-workers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIA L 
SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School --------- - Durham, N. C. 
Th e school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance 
fund of S15.000 for run nin g expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifull y 
located, healthful, wel l appointed, and withi n easy reac h of a great 
variet y of educationa l institutions, publi c and private , extending from 
West Cheste r to Philadelphia ; representing a wid e range of educa ­
tiona l problems an d practice . 
This school offers to youn g colore d me n an d wome n wh o have a 
reasonabl e secondary school preparation, an d wh o earnestly desir e 
to become teachers, carefull y graded courses i n academi c work , 
domesti c science, domesti c art, manua l crafts and agriculture . Fo r 
teachers of experienc e and intendin g teachers it offers also a six 
weeks' summer-schoo l course , extending from Jul y 1 to August 12. 
Tuitio n is free. Board , lodging, heat, light an d laundr y privilege s 
are offered for nin e months for $100. Th e charge, for the same 
durin g the summer-schoo l cours e is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 266 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
i n Singing, Tryin g the Voice , the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Teno r Leggiero or Hig h 
Tenor , the Baritone , the Bass, 
Parts of the Voca l Apparatus, the 
Mouth , the Tongue, Position Whe n 
Practising, Position Whe n Singing, 
Ho w to Practice , Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choi r of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first priz e awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tlnsley: 
"I take great pleasure In commending your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Plaolno and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially youre, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN. C. 8. P.. 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago.'' 
From "Musical Courier," N. T. : " A very practical little 
book Is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development.' by Pedro T. 
Tlnsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be In the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly his 
'Practical Method of Singing' Is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
eannot fall to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
'"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice " Prof. John T. La y ton, 
Directo r Coleridge-Taylo r Musica l Society, 1722 10th 
St., N . W. , Washington, D . C. 
PRIC E 51-00 
Address the publisher : Pedro T. Tinsley, 64-18 
Drexe l Ave., Chicago, 111.; or Clayton F . Summy, 
64 E . Va n Bure n St., or Lyo n & Healy , Adams 
and Wabash Ave.. Chicago. 111. 
Agents Are Making $10.00 Per Day 
and more selling our famous Negro picture, ' ' A 
Joyful Welcome Into Heaven,' * the finest painting 
ever produced with the Negro as a subject. Semireligious. Sells at sight. Send 15 cents in stamps 
or coin for 50-cent sample and agent's terms. 
TH E DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S COMPAN Y 
3548 Verno n Ave . Dept. K Chicago, 111. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, givin g your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO . 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ame s Bldg . Muskogee . Okla . 
Facts of Reconstruction 
By MAJO R JOH N R. LYNC H 
In this book Majo r Lync h presents the 
readers and thinker s of the present generation with accurate, reliable and impartia l 
information, based upon his knowledge and 
experience, about Reconstruction, the most 
important and eventful epoch in our country's 
history. 
Majo r Lync h has been prominentl y before 
the publi c during the last forty years. H e 
was a member of Congress in 1876-7 and 
was an active participant in the decision of 
the closely contested election between Haye s 
and Tilde n for the Presidency of the Unite d 
States. Man y interesting points in that contest not heretofore published will be found 
in this book. 
A s a member of Congress, member of the 
National Republican Committee, auditor for 
the Nav y Department, a member of many 
National Republican Conventions, over one of 
which he presided as temporary chairman, 
Majo r Lync h was brought in contact with 
many of the most prominent and influential 
men of the country. The chapters giving an 
account of his interviews with Presidents 
Gran t and Cleveland, and with Messrs. Blaine . 
Lama r and Gresham, are both interesting and 
instructive. The book ought to be in the 
library of every home. 
Price , net 51.50. B y mail, $1.65. 
Address: 
MAJO R JOH N R. LYNC H 
4321 ForestviUe Ave . Chicago, 111. 
A Day 
$10 FOR YOUR 
SPAR E TIM E 
AGENTS WANTED 
Hundreds of our agents are making $10 a day in 
their Bpare time. Many are beating that and are 
getting their own clothes FREE. We are dead 
Bure you can do it. Such a thing as failure is 
utterly impossible with our new and complete 
outfit which we send you—all charges prepaid. 
Our fine line of stylish, well made, carefully finished clothes, guaranteed fit—beats everything 
ever offered. Lowest prices. Our Outfit is magnificent—our styles and fashions simply wonderful. 
Strong selling plans that bring the orders and 
Big Money for you every week, in hard cash. 
Pant s $25 ? 
Can you beat it? Be a PROGRESS agent. Earn v 
$5 to $10 a day In your spare time while doing V ' 
other work. Send no money. Everything is FREE . 
No experience necessary. Get the Outfit, order 
blanks, stationery, tape-line and everything necessary 
to start you in a Bi g Money Making Business of 
your own. Write today. Be ready for the largest i 
Spring business ever known. Land the early 
orders in bunches. 
Progress Tailoring Co Dcpt. 683, Chicago 
Suit s $9S 2 \ \ 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 7—No. 6 APRIL . 191 4 Whole No. 42 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
ON Februar y 12, at the Parkwa y Build -
ing , Philadelphia , Pa. , the Bel-canto 
Singers, a chorus composed of well-known 
artists of Philadelphia , gave a concert under 
the direction of Mr . Willia m A . Cowderey. 
The chorus was recently established for 
the purpose of maintainin g a vocal scholarship i n one of the leading conservatories of 
music for talented youn g singers of color. 
The committee is composed of six representative citizens, wit h Hon . George H . Whit e 
treasurer of the scholarship fund. 
*J Mrs. Mari e Burton-Hyram, dramatic 
soprano, of Chicago, 111., gave a song recital 
on Februar y 23 i n Philadelphia , Pa . Mrs. 
Hyra m is a graduate of the Chicago Musi c 
College. 
<I O n Februar y 6, at Musica l Fun d Hall , 
the Business Clerks' Association, of Phila ­
delphia , Pa. , presented the "Legend of the 
Flamin g Arrow, " a music drama i n three 
acts written by W . H . Cole. 
*I Mr . Wm . Speights, tenor, of Washington, 
D . C , teacher of voice at the Washingto n 
Conservatory of Music , was heard i n a song 
recital at Trinit y A . M . E . Churc h on Janu ­
ar y 23 at Pittsburgh, Pa . 
*! Joao do Rego Barros, of Brazil , is makin g 
an effort to preserve the native Brazilia n 
songs. A t the Sao Pedro Theatre, i n Febru ­
ary, a concert was given to encourage this 
attempt, and was a great success for the 
poets and national composers who were represented on the program. 
*$ Miss Victori a Kemp , a senior of the 
Centra l Hig h School, at Minneapolis, Minn. , 
has contributed several drawings to the 
daily newspapers, and is among the priz e 
winners i n one of the papers fo r the 
children's page. The December high-school 
Spectator bore a frontispiece drawn by Miss 
Kemp . 
^ The annual "pre-Lenten" given under the 
direction of Mr . Walte r Crai g was held on 
Februar y 19 i n New Yor k City . The 
soloists were Mme . Katharin e SkeeneMitchell, of Cleveland, 0., soprano; Mr . 
Clark , of Pittsburgh, Pa. , baritone; Mr . 
Hill , of Philadelphia , Pa. , violinist, and Mr . 
Richar d B . Harrison , of Chicago, 111., reader. 
The enjoyment of the program was enhanced 
by the fine accompaniment of Mr . Melvill e 
Charlton. 
<J The Negro Chora l Society of Greater New 
Yor k had its initia l appearance at Carnegie 
Hal l on Februar y 11. A n effort is being 
made to make this organization a permanent 
connection of the Musi c School Settlement 
for Colored People. Mr . Harr y T. Burleig h 
and Mr . Wil l Mario n Cook assisted i n 
organizing the society. 
<I On Februar y 5, at St. Paul's parish house, 
at Erie , Pa. , a song recital was given by 
Mr . Harr y T. Burleig h under the direction 
of the Viorou s Club . The assisting artists 
were Mrs. Louise Alste n Burleigh , reader, 
and Mrs. C. C. Colby, accompanist. 
1 The fiftieth anniversary of the death of 
Stephen Foster, the composer of "Ol d Blac k 
Joe, " "The Ol d Folk s at Home " and other 
America n songs of like sentiment, was commemorated by a concert g h en by the Moder n 
Musica l Society of New York , at Aeolia n 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 268 TH E CRISIS 
Hall , on Februar y 13. A chorus under the 
direction of Benjami n Lanbord , an orchestra 
and Maggi e Teyte, soprano of grand opera 
and concert fame, were engaged fo r the 
occasion. Henr y F . Gilbert's "Humoresque, " 
i n which Negro melodies wit h banjo effects 
are employed, was one of the interesting 
numbers on the program. 
*I The distinguished pianist, Mr . R. 
Augustus Lawson , of Hartford , Conn., appeared with the Hartfor d Philharmoni c 
Orchestra on Januar y 29 at their second 
concert of the season. Leopol d Godowsky 
was the piano soloist. Mr . Lawso n played 
the harp parts i n the "Reverie, " on the 
piano—a Debussy number transcribed by 
Mr . Prutting , the conductor. Mr . Lawso n 
had the distinction a year ago of appearing 
as piano soloist with the orchestra. 
^ The , Howar d Universit y dramatic club 
presented Sir Edwar d Bulwer-Lytton's 
"Richelieu " at the Howar d Theatre, Wash ­
ington, D . O , on Februar y 21, before a 
capacity house. The histrionic ability displayed by Mr . L . A . Howard , '14, as Cardina l Richelieu, and Mr . C. E . Lane , '14, 
as Chevalier de Mauprat, is deserving of 
special mention. 
*I The Prairi e Vie w Chorus, of the Texas 
State Norma l School for Colored Youth , 
sang i n Houston, Tex., early i n Februar y 
for the benefit of the proposed general hospital. The chorus, which numbers .115, is 
directed by Miss Wilhelmin a Patterson. The 
program was divided between Negro folk 
songs and compositions of colored composers. 
^ Mrs. George Brackett Rice , of Brookline , 
Mass., followin g her usual custom of observin g Lincol n Day , held, on Februar y 12, a 
"Lincol n Day " reception at her home i n 
Brookline , Mass. The program for the 
pleasure of the guests included a short address by Rev. Charles F . Dole, D . D. , of 
the Unitaria n Church of Jamaic a Plain , the 
reading of poems and unpublished famil y 
letters of Lincol n by Dr. Fran k C. Richard ­
son, the singing of appropriat e selections 
by a quartet composed of Mrs. Alic e Bates 
Rice , soprano; Mrs. Rice, the hostess, contralto; George J. Parker, tenor, and Dr . 
George B . Rice , bass. Cornet, solo by Miss 
Ann a Wise , witli Mme . Edit h Noyes Greene 
accompanist, and baritone solo by Mr . Wm . 
H . Richardson, of Boston, assisted by Mrs. 
Maude Cuney Har e at the piano. A n interesting feature of the reception was the 
exhibit of Mrs. Rice's large collection o f 
Lincol n mementoes. Mrs. Ric e was assisted 
i n her hospitality by Mrs. Eugene N . Foss, 
wife of ex-Governor Foss, of- Massachusetts, 
and other ladies of social prominence. 
*! It is rare that Negro music gets so favorable mention and presentation as was the 
case i n the recent Lincoln-week celebration 
at the Joh n Wanamake r store i n New 
Yor k City . Alexande r Russell, the concert 
director, spoke i n glowin g terms of the place 
of the Negro i n America n music. A chorus 
of twenty-five voices, picked from the Negr o 
employees of the Wanamake r store, sang 
their folk songs under the direction of 
Dais y R . Tapley, wit h Mrs. Taple y at the 
pianoforte and Mr . Russell at the organ. 
Mrs. Taple y was especially pleasing i n 
her solo work from Negro composers. A n 
orchestra of thirty pieces, also chosen from 
Negro employees of the Wanamake r store, 
was another worthy feature of the program. 
*J A concert was given on Februar y 28, at 
the Howar d Theatre, Washington , D . C , 
by the Folk-son g Singers, under the direction 
of the conductor-composer, Mr . Wil l Mario n 
Cook. The chorus was organized early i n 
the season by Mrs. Harrie t Gibbs-Marshall, 
director of the Washingto n Conservatory of 
Music , fo r the cultivation of the singin g of 
Negro folk music. Mr . Cook had as assistant 
conductors Mr . Reese Europ e and Mr . 
Harr y T. Burleigh , of New York , wit h Miss 
Mar y Europe , the excellent accompanist, of 
Washington , at the piano. The soloists were 
Mme . Abbi e Mitchell, soprano; Miss Lotti e 
Wallace , contralto, and Mr . Harr y T. Bur ­
leigh, baritone. The purit y and sweetness of 
Miss Wallace's voice, added to her unaffected 
stage bearing, gave much pleasure to an 
enthusiastic audience. The program consisted 
of Negro folk songs, characteristic songs by 
Wil l Mario n Cook, modern songs and selections from the operas by Mr . Burleigh . 
*( The third annual concert of Negr o music, 
under the auspices and for the benefit of the 
Musi c School Settlement for Colored People , 
of the city of New York , was held on 
Marc h 11 at Carnegie Hall . Mr . Harr y T. 
Burleigh , baritone, and Miss Abbi e Mitchell , 
soprano, were the soloists. 
Mr . Rosamond Johnson sang, an d the 
Negr o Symphon y Orchestra, under the direction of James Reese Europe , and a chorus 
of eighty voices, conducted by Wil l Mario n 
Cook and Harr y T. Burleigh , furnished the ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 269 
other numbers on the program. Al l of the 
selections were by Negro composers. The 
annua l prizes fo r composition given by the 
Musi c School Settlement were awarded to 
Carl Dito n and R . Nathanie l Dett. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE report of the wor k of the Youn g 
Women's Christia n Association fo r the 
past year shows that six new secretaries have 
been employed; there have been two large 
successful buildin g campaigns and more than 
1,500 members have been added. The Kansa s 
Cit y association, which has been established 
less than a year, began this year wit h $300 
i n the treasury and recently received a testimonia l of $87 from the teachers i n the city. 
The organization of girls' work i n most of 
the associations has had good results. 
<I The Kaufman n department store, i n Pittsburgh. Pa. , i n which colored men were 
recently employed to ru n the elevators, has 
installed forty colored men as waiters i n the 
large dining: room. 
•I The Players' Club , a white dramatic 
organization of Atlanta , Ga. , presented a 
pla y durin g the week of Februar y 23, the 
proceeds of which wil l be used to build a 
hospital for colored people suffering wit h 
contagious diseases. 
*i "When a huge wildcat had been found on 
a farm adjoining the village of Stephenson, 
Va. , Ernest Jones, a young colored man, 
was the only one to volunteer to capture the 
animal. Afte r a desperate battle between 
the man and the wildcat, i n which Jones' 
gloves were torn off and he was badly 
scratched, the animal was overpowered and 
caged. 
Durin g the two weeks beginning Marc h 
23 objects relating to the history and condition of Liberi a wil l be exhibited at the 
Historica l Society Buildin g in Chicago. 
<3 The Francis E . W . Harpe r Club , of An -
sonia, Conn., a branch of the Northeastern 
Federation of Women's Clubs, pays for 
yearly subscriptions to T H E CRISIS for the 
three publi c librarie s i n that city. 
<3 Durin g the six years that the colored 
branch of the Louisvill e Fre e Publi c Librar y 
has been established the attendance has been 
280,941 and the total number of books drawn 
has been 258,438. 
<J Mrs. Lizzi e Reid , a colored woman, saved 
the lives of two little white children who 
were playin g on the railroad tracks i n 
Greensboro, N . C. A freight train was 
coming unnoticed by the children and Mrs. 
Reid, droppin g her bundles, ran and jerked 
them off of the track just as the train 
lumbered by. 
*! Walte r R. Wright , a colored man, is 
secretary to the president of the New York , 
Chicago and St. Louis Railwa y Company . 
*J In spite of the long-continued fight of 
the wealthy residenls of Riverdale, N . Y. , 
for the exclusion of all colored people, 
several of the while churches have established Sunday-school classes for colored 
children from the orphan asylum. 
1 Juliu s Rosenwald wil l be responsible fo r 
one-fourth of the annual budget of the Wen ­
dell Phillip s Socia l Settlement i n Chicago, 
provided that colored people are among the 
contributors to the remainder of the budget. 
*i The Unio n Rescue Home of New Yor k 
Cit y is to give unfortunate colored girls a 
good environment, at least for a little while , 
and then to procure work for them i n prope r 
places and at livin g wages. Twenty-four 
new cases were received durin g the month 
of Januar y and sixteen cases were sent out. 
Miss Grace Campbell is i n charge. 
<& President Wilso n received the Knights of 
the Khorassan on the first day of the 
golden jubilee celebration of the Knights 
of Pythias, which began in Washington on 
Februar y 19. 
MEETINGS. 
A LARG E number of colored newspaper 
men attended the midwinter session 
of the executive committee of the Negro Press 
Association, held in Nashville , Tenn., Febru ­
ary 13-14. Plans were made for the annual 
meeting at Muskogee in August, and many 
subjects, such as advertising, plate service, 
etc., were discussed. 
*I A meeting was held on Februar y 17, at 
McCo y Hall , Johns Hopkin s University, fo r 
the purpose of familiarizin g the people of 
Baltimor e with the work of Hampto n Institute. Several of the speakers, among whom 
were Dr. Frissel, Dr. G . A . Griffiths and 
Majo r Moten, took occasion to protest against 
segregation and point out its many evils. 
*I On Februar y 18 the sixteenth annual 
farmers' conference of Georgi a convened i n 
Savannah. The meetings were held i n the 
State Industria l College. 270 TH E CRISIS 
^ The council of bishops of the Africa n 
Methodist Churc h met i n Atlant a on Feb ­
ruar y 4. 
*I Governor Dunne , i n an address before a 
colored audience celebrating Lincoln's Birth ­
day, declared that he intended to do all i n 
his power to brin g about politica l equality 
fo r them. 
A meeting was held at the Robert Goul d 
Shaw Hous e on the Sunda y followin g 
Lincoln's Birthda y to protest against segregation i n the Federa l departments at Wash ­
ington. Mr . Rolf e Cobleigh, of the Congregationalist, stated the facts of segregation, 
Mr . Moorfield Storey urged all factions to 
unite i n the cause of justice and Dr . D u 
Bois told of the work of the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People. Other speakers were Miss Mari a 
L . Baldwi n and Dr. Francis H . Rowley. 
•J The second worl d conference wil l be held 
i n Paris i n 1915. Amon g the subjects discussed wil l be race discrimination, methods 
of promoting an amicable interracia l spirit 
i n the universities and i n the press, and cooperation of organizations interested i n 
friendship among peoples. 
EDUCATION. 
THE Nationa l Kindergarte n Association 
has recently established a demonstration kindergarten for colored children i n 
Chattanooga, Tenn. The kindergarten wil l 
be temporarily supported by Miss Bessie 
Locke , of New York , i n memory of her 
mother. 
1 A n industria l school for colored Catholics 
i n Lafayette, Tex., costing $30,000, has been 
completed. 
*J Boynton , Va. , has a new modern school 
buildin g for colored children. 
*$ The late Mrs. Francis A . Hackley , who 
was head of the boys' school at Tarrytown , 
N . Y. , bequeathed $5,000 to Manassas 
Industria l School for Colored Youths and 
the same amount to the Fort Valle y Industria l School. 
^ Col . George W . Breckenridge , of Sa n 
Antonio , Tex., wil l give $35,000 to Guada ­
lupe College, at Seguin, Tex., conditional 
upon the school raisin g $10,000. 
<J The report of the board of education of 
Kansa s City , Mo. , says that each colored 
student costs the publi c $41.54 while only 
$39.66 is spent for each white child. 
•1 Courses i n methods of teaching agriculture, home economics and the common school 
branches wil l be given at the Florid a A . an d 
M . College from Jun e 15 to August 1. 
*I A tract of about eighteen acres of lan d 
has been acquired i n Sa n Antonio , Tex., 
upon which an industria l school fo r Negroes 
wil l be built. 
POLITICAL. 
THE President has reappointed Robert 
H . Terrell as justice of the municipa l 
court of the Distric t of Columbia . Hi s appointment has not yet been confirmed by the 
Senate. 
<I George W . Dawley , a colored politicia n 
of Philadelphia , has been appointed clerk i n 
the municipa l court of that city. This is 
said to be the first appointment of a colored 
man to that position. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE Wag e Earners' Loa n and Invest-
•~ ment Compan y of Georgi a has completed arrangements fo r a new $40,000 build ­
in g i n Savannah, Ga . The contract fo r the 
buildin g has been given to the Pharro w 
Construction Company, a colored concern, 
of Atlanta , Ga . 
<I Mr . Stewart, a colored real-estate dealer 
i n Evansville , Ind., wil l place a 56-lot pla t 
on the market soon and wil l contract to buil d 
on the lots when they are sold. These lots 
are only a few minutes' wal k from a car 
line and the plat wil l be known as Stewart's 
Enlargement. 
*I The Hardric k Brothers are the colored 
owners of a large grocery store i n Spring ­
field, Mo . The firm employs ten clerks, one 
bookkeeper, one cashier and four delivery 
men and eaters to a large white and colored 
patronage. 
<3 Negroes i n Ne w Yor k are said to be 
makin g plans for the erection of a hotel fo r 
colored people i n Harlem. 
1 On Januar y 15 the Enterpris e Buildin g 
and Loa n Association was incorporated 
under the laws of the State of South Caro ­
lin a by a company of colored men of Charleston, S. C. 
^ I n Ellis County, Tex., the colored popula ­
tion has increased at the rate of more than 
4,000 i n ten years. This section is an 
excellent farmin g country and the lan d is 
assessed at a higher rate than any other i n ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 
that section of the country. Whit e farmers 
seem disturbed because Negroes are acquirin g some of this excellent land. 
TH E CHURCH. 
A YOUN G men's Bibl e class of 100 members meets weekly at the Metropolitan A. M . E . Church , Washington, D. C., 
under the leadership of the Rev. I. N. Ross, 
the pastor; Lewis E . Johnson, secretary of 
the Y . M. C. A. ; E . W . Harriso n and M . J . 
Key . The class has studied and discussed 
current topics and has contributed durin g the 
year over $13o to charitable work. 
Colored Methodists have contributed 
$40,000 i n cash and $00,000 in subscriptions 
durin g the past year as a jubilee gift to the 
Freedmen's Ai d Society. There are still nine 
conferences to meet and report. Man y of 
the schools under the society wil l have new 
buildings and improved facilities. 
TH E GHETTO. 
YETTA LEVENTHAL , a 13-year-old 
* schoolgirl, of Brooklyn , N . Y. , failed 
to pass in her examinations, was afraid to 
go home and remained out all night. Whe n 
she was found, dirt y and torn, the next 
morning she claimed that she had been kid ­
napped and mistreated by some colored men. 
Unde r the cross questioning of an officer, 
however, she finally confessed that she had 
not been molested at all, but had slept in a 
doorway all night because she was afraid 
to go home. A simila r case, and one which 
might have had very serious results, was 
that of a farmer's wife i n Chestertown, Md. , 
who, i n order to keep her husband home 
nights, claimed that she had been attacked 
by a Negro. She smeared the blood of a 
chicken around the place to make her story 
seem real, but finally admitted that it was all 
untrue. 
Cj It is reported that not only the mail carriers, but all the colored men employed i n 
general postal service have been dismissed 
from the postoffice in Americus, Ga . 
<J The Seamen's Church Institute in New 
Yor k Cit y is called " A Harbo r for Seamen 
and Boatmen of the World. " I n spite of this 
the assistant superintendent, Rev. C. P . 
Deems, has stated that Indians and Negroes 
are barred because the white sailors object 
to them. Recently Arthu r R. Stamen, an 
Indian , who has been a sailor for five years, 
was refused admittance into the institute. 
27 1 
<I Mi-. W . B. Windsor, a colored citizen of 
Greensboro, N . O , bought a home i n a 
while neighborhood, but when he attempted 
to occupy it the while occupants of the 
block demanded Hint he move and protested 
to the city commissioners. A segregation ordinance was passed and put into effect immediately and Mr . Windso r was compelled 
to' sell his home at a loss of $400. 
^ The mayor of Boston has ordered that all 
discrimination against Negroes i n municipa l 
gymnasiums, baths, etc., must be stopped. 
CRIME. 
H E followin g lynchings of Negroes have 
taken place since the last account: 
<! At Belaud, Miss., Samuel Petty, charged 
with killin g a white sheriff, was shot to death 
and his body was burned. 
<I At Love Station, Miss., Buc k Johnson, 
accused of wounding a white man, was taken 
from the train which was carryin g him to 
prison and lynched. 
^ Wor d comes to us from one who has 
made personal inquiry that the two Negroes 
who were lynched i n Mulberry , Fla. , for 
cutting a man some weeks ago were not 
guilty. The wounded man exonerated the 
two men, saying that a Greek had done the 
cutting. The colored men were released from 
jai l and the next night a mob formed and 
lynched them. 
fjh Two colored men and one white man were 
killed in a race riot near Robinsonville . 
Miss. The white man who was killed was 
the leader of a posse sent to arrest 
colored men assembled at the house of a 
Negro. The posse fired and continued to fire 
until ammunition gave out and then they 
retired. The next day bloodhounds were 
sent out on the trail of the Negroes and 
ran down two. One died from his wounds 
anil the other, whose name or connection 
with the riot was not known, was killed by 
I he posse. 
*! Joseph Zitz , a Hungarian , has been sentenced to no less than two years and no 
more than four for crimina l assault upon 
Elizabeth Jeter, a 14-year-old colored girl 
of Kingsbridge , N . Y . 
<J S. S. Robinson, a Negro, of Fort Madison , 
la. , has been sentenced to ten years i n the 
penitentiary for a theft amounting to 94c. 
*I The Mexica n lieutenant who killed a 
colored ex-United States soldier has been 
found guilty and shot. MEN' S BIBL E CLASS , METROPOLITA N A . M . E . CHURCH , WASHINGTON , D . C . A N ELECTRICA L ENGINEER. 
LAURENC E DEWIT T SIMMONS , a 
youn g man 33 years old, holds a 
responsible position i n his profession. H e 
was born i n New Orleans, La. , and received 
bis education at Talladega College, Alabama , 
graduating i n 1903. Upo n graduation he 
immediately took up mechanical engineering 
at the Sheffield Scientific School of Yal e 
University , from which he was graduated i n 
1906. 
H e was employed by the Genera l Electri c 
Company , of Schenectady, N . Y. , and has 
remained there ever since wit h frequent promotions. Fro m 190C to 1908 he was employed i n the experimental turbine department, doing research and experimental work 
LAURENC E D E WIT T SIMMONS . 
TH E LAT E EAR L EDWAR D FINCH . 
on steam turbines and steam meters; from 
that time to 1910 he was i n the turbine 
engineering department, and fo r the past 
three years has been engineer i n the consulting engineering department. 
A N EARNEST LIFE . 
EARL EDWAR D FINC H was born i n 
^ Marion , 0., Februar y 28, 1877. H e 
was graduated from the Bellefontaine high 
school wit h first honors. H e sought to enter 
Wilberforc e Universit y and asked for work, 
saying : "Yo u just must give me something 
to do ; I cannot attend school unless I work. " 
H e was graduated i n 1900, and finally 
MEN OF THE MONTH 274 TH E CRISIS 
attended the Universit y of Chicago for four 
summer quarters, graduating from the arts 
course magna cum laude i n 1909. H e was 
a wide reader and careful student and his 
paper at the races congress i n London , 1911, 
brought him much sincere praise. 
H e became a professor and dean of the 
college department of Wilberforc e and gave 
his youn g lif e to the work. Often his salary 
was not paid, his work received scanty 
recognition and petty jealousies embittered 
his soul. His young wife died and left a 
lonely baby. 
Ye t the man never faltered. Wit h splendid sacrifice and unswerving loyalty he 
forged on and di d splendid work for the 
students and for the community. A t last 
the baby sickened. H e went to nurse him, 
caught the same fever and died at the age 
o f 36. 
A CITY COUNCILMAN. 
JOHN OLIVE R HOPKIN S was born i n 
1886 at Chestertown, Md. , and reared 
i n Wilmington , Del. H e attended Howar d 
Hig h School, leaving i n the second year to 
enter the Philadelphi a College of Pharmacy, 
from which school he was graduated i n 1908. 
H e was early noted for thrift and industry. 
JOH N OLIVE R HOPKINS . 
ROBER T CURTI S OGDEN , 
and durin g his school lif e he had the largest 
pape r route i n the city. Afte r graduating 
he opened a drug store i n partnership wit h 
Dr. Conwell Banton , i n 1909, and this is now 
,the most successful and prosperous Negr o 
business enterprise i n the city. H e is also 
proprietor of a vaudeville theatre, which 
does a good business. H e was marrie d i n 
1909 to Miss Josephine Fisher, and has 
two children. I n June , 1913, he was elected 
to the city council from the sixth war d by 
an overwhelming . majority, and is its 
youngest member. H e is the second Negr o 
to sit i n the council. Durin g his term i n office 
he has already secured a public'bathhous e 
fo r Negroes and a Negro detective on the 
police force. 
A WEL L WISHER. 
IT is difficult for a Negr o before whom 
the vision of race ideals stands to writ e 
of Robert Curtis Ogden. The facts of his 
life are simple : H e was born i n Phila ­
delphia i n 1836. H e di d not attend college, 
but went into business and eventually became 
a member of the firm of Joh n Wanamaker. 
H e died i n August, 1913. ME N O F TH E MONT H 275 
Mr . Ogden's greatest work was accomplished as the president of the hoard of 
trustees" of Hampto n Institute and as 
founder of the "Ogden parties " of Northern 
and Southern whites who annually took 
journeys into the South. 
These things Were worth doing : Mr . 
Ogden added over $2,000,(100 to Hampton's 
endowment; he founded the Southern Edu ­
cation Board ; but he did both these things 
and especially the latter at a great and 
serious sacrifice. W e doubt i f he was 
conscious of the sacrifice. Mr . Ogden looked 
on the Negr o as an incomplete man. H e 
was willin g to help him and he thought he 
wanted the Negro to help himself. Bu t he 
did not. A self-conscious, self-helping 
Negro was beyond Mr . Ogden's conception. 
Such a phenomenon irritated him unreasonably. H e wanted Negroes to be satisfied and 
do well i n the place which he was sure they 
must and on the whole ought to occupy. H e 
could not sympathize wit h the revolt of 
honest far-seeing men against such caste. 
The result was that the white-' South captured Mr . Ogden. H e saw their side of the 
race problem and strongly sympathized with 
them. The Southern Education Boar d 
came to be a movement "fo r white people 
only, " and the color line appeared i n his 
interests i n new and hitherto unheard-of 
form. 
Ho w shall the Negro race judge such a 
man? " H e was sincere and unselfish. H e 
wanted the right. Bu t he lacked vision—he 
lacked human understanding. H e did great 
good, but he also di d great harm. 
M ' 
A LIAR. 
THE CRISI S is so eager to record the 
achievements of Negroes, and particularly youn g Negroes, that sometimes it 
errs. I n the case of Joseph Fareir a we must 
confess to have been victims of astonishingdeception. The case was reported to us by 
a Philadelphi a professional man of unimpeachable standing who himself collected the 
data for the article i n the Februar y number. 
H e now writes us: " I regret to have to 
report to yo u that my entire account of 
youn g Fareira's remarkable career i n the 
Boys' Centra l Hig h School here was all 
false. O f course I had every reason -to believe that what I wrote was the truth. This 
young fellow had not only fooled me and his 
numerous friends, but he had fooled his 
parents and his sister. 
"Fo r three and a half years he has been 
leaving home regularly for school in the 
morning and returning promptly in the 
evening. H e managed, somehow, to secure 
blanks for reports. These he has been fillingout himself and showing them to his parents 
regularly. Not only that, he has brought new 
books home regularly, also drawings in 
geometry and trigonometry and has constantly reported names and conversations that 
went on i n the classes at the school. 
"The commencement for the midyear section of the school was held Friday . Youn g 
Fareir a had sent out numerous invitations 
to his friends and had received presents from 
dozens of them. H e even went so far as to 
issue tickets for' the commencement. The 
tickets were written i n his own handwriting, 
hut he - explained this fact to his parents, 
saying that the authorities were dilatory i n 
getting out the tickets and programs and 
consequently each student had been allowed 
so many seats .and were authorized to issue 
their own tickets. His parents and sister 
went to the commencement with these tickets, 
also Mrs. , who was his kindergarten 
teacher in Germantown. They were all dumfounded upon reaching th,e school to be 
informed that their tickets were no good. 
Whe n they sought the principa l of the high 
school they were informed that ,young 
Fareir a had not been. i n the high school 
since June, 1911. 
"His mother is prostrated and his family 
is simpl y paralyzed by the awful humiliation. 
The matter has not reached the press as yet. 
I do not know whether you think it advisable to correct the statement i n the next 
issue of TH E CRISIS . It may do us more 
harm than good." 
TH E CRISI S has no fear of the truth. ' 
MAI L CLERKS . 
WHO are the persons against whom so 
strenuous effort has been made i n 
the railwa y mail service recently? Mr . 
Burleson wishes to reduce them to menial 
service. Mr . Stephens is segregating them 
in the South by givin g the whites the best 
runs. Mr . Edward s wishes to eliminate 
them from the civil service entirely. Fro m 276 
such facts most persons woul d conclude that 
these clerks must be personally the most 
objectionable kin d of folk. It is characteristic of the Negro "problem" that the conTH E CRISIS 
trary is true. Fo r example, there are fiftytwo colored mail clerks trainin g out of St. 
Louis. Onl y one lias less than a high-school 
education; fourteen have college degrees; 
twenty-one own or are buyin g rea l estate, 
and the average assessed value of these holding's is $2,700; thirty-two have families; all 
belong to civic organizations; one, Mr. 
Willia m Humphries, has the best examina ­
tion record of any clerk i n the Unite d States, 
having to his credit twenty-one examinations 
of 100 per cent. each. SOME POLITICA L ECHOES. 
THERE are signs that the Republica n 
party, out of powe r and severely put 
to it for defense, is beginning to note the 
Democratic asset i n the "Soli d South " with 
something of the same nervous interest that 
the Englis h Liberals showed i n their remarks 
on the Hous e of Lords. The Pittsburg h 
Gazette-Times, indeed, gets real sarcastic and 
says: 
"I n all Southern States, while the Negro 
is theoretically protected by the Federa l Con ­
stitution to and from and at the ballot box, 
the protection is an iridescent unreality, un -
perceivable and non-existent i n practice. It 
was i n these States that President Wilso n 
was given popula r majorities of the recorded 
vote. I n other States the electors were won 
fo r him by mere pluralities, and i n the whole 
nation he received a mere minority of the 
popula r vote. Onl y i n the 'sweet, sunny 
South,' where the Negro was first kept from 
the ballot box by the persuasive shotgun and 
then legislated away from it notwithstanding 
the Constitution of the Unite d States, di d the 
election returns show a 'popula r uprising ' 
fo r Wilson. " 
The editor, animadverting to the proposed 
woman's suffrage amendment, points out 
President Wilson's dependence on the South : 
"Ho w could he plead for enfranchisement 
o f white and colored sisters wit h a Congress 
yoked by men who have disfranchised hundreds' of thousands o f colored brethren, first 
by violence and then by legislation which 
skilfull y evades the terms of the supreme 
organic law? To do so would have been a 
slap i n the face of the persons upon whom 
he has relied and expects to rely fo r the 
success of his legislative policies and his 
administration. " 
This same woman-suffrage matter has, as 
TH E CRISI S predicted, led to a widespread 
discussion o f Negr o suffrage, Nort h and 
South. The Boston Advertiser and the New 
Yor k World have wrestled merrily wit h the 
problem. Says the former: 
"I n attempting to war n the women to cease 
troubling Congress, lest disaster befall them, 
the World goes on to point out that the only 
time that the nation departed from the 
principl e of State control of the franchise 
it reopened the issue of the Civi l Wa r and 
created new causes for race hatred and race 
strife, which still perplex it, despite the fact 
that Southern constitutions have practically 
nullified the Fifteenth Amendment. The 
warnin g is given that i f an equal-suffrage 
amendment to the Constitution were secured 
by its advocates, it 'would not be long before 
some of the States began to enact grandmother clauses, to disfranchise women, like 
the grandfather clauses by which Negroes are 
disfranchised i n the South.' So the mora l 
is drawn that 'the Democratic majority i n 
respect to equal suffrage is standing on the 
solid ground of the Constitution and 125 
years of experience.' 
"It seems to us that this goes pretty fa r 
i n defense of national dishonesty. The 
women are warned to desist from troubling 
Congress, lest Congress disfranchises them, 
as it has consented to the disfranchisement 
of the Negroes. Bu t i f the sentiment of the 
nation should demand the enforcement of 
the constitutional provision for the penalty 
of such disfranchisement, there would be no 
disfranchisement. Is this not a plai n hint 
to the suffragists that they cannot expect 
national recognition, until they force Con ­
gress to obey the Constitution, which demands 
that the representation of every State, which 
disfranchises any of its citizens, shall be reduced i n the Hous e of Representatives and 
i n the Electora l College? " 
The August a (Ga.) Chronicle sees several 
disquieting symptoms: 
"The Maco n Telegraph holds that 'votes 
for Negro women wil l mean votes fo r Negro 
men, the abolition of the present restricOPINION 278 TH E CRISI S 
tions—an uninspirin g prospect in view of the 
fact that the Negroes have a majority i n 
two Southern States and i n man y counties 
of all the Southern States.' Senator B . R . 
Tillma n takes about the same view of the 
matter. 
"Southern women who have allied themselves wit h the suffragette movement main ­
tain that the Southern Negro woman wil l not 
expect to vote. Bu t the Telegraph does not 
rest the matter there, and turns to the 
"men's league.' saying : 
" 'Bu t the members of the "men's league" 
must know that many years were required 
to reach even a temporary solution of the 
problem of the Negro man's vote, and they 
ought to know that for the problem of the 
Negro woman's vote there wil l be no solution, 
at all—against the shrill protest of Norther n 
woman suffragist teachers from Main e to 
California. ' 
"There is i n many thing's before the publi c 
now much fo r the people of the South to 
well deliberate. Direc t elections of Unite d 
States Senators, including the Bristow 
amendment, has its dangers. So has the 
proposition of direct presidential primaries, 
the forerunner (as already pointed out) of 
elections of Presidents by direct vote. So 
is there danger i n the enfranchisement of 
the Negro women i n the South, carryin g with 
it, as the Telegraph suggests, ballot rights 
for Negro men i n the Southern States not 
now enjoyed. A pretty good suggestion just 
now. when 'the South is i n the saddle.' is, 
'Go slowly.' " 
St. Luke's Herald, edited by a sturdy 
Virgini a colored business woman, declares 
that: 
"The Negr o has not even as yet realized 
the value and the importance of the ballot. 
W e have been taught to eschew the ballot; 
but the first thing that the foreigner is taught 
as soon as he gets here is to learn how to use 
the ballot, even i f it be i n a dumb, automatic 
way. 
"The women of the worl d are demanding 
and receiving the ballot: they are battling 
for it i n every civilized country. The white 
women i n the Unite d States, ric h and poor, 
high and low, educated and uneducated, are 
workin g for the ballot—save the white women 
of the South. I n the South white women 
want to joi n their sisters, but they are afraid 
lest i n strivin g fo r the ballot for themselves 
they should i n some wa y help the Negro 
woman. " 
The Bosto n Advertiser returns again and 
again to the fra y i n its attempt to force 
mora l issues on the Republica n party. It 
declares the Democrati c party's treatment of 
the Negr o i n the South is simpl y barbarous: 
"Fo r that matter, the record o f the Pro ­
gressive part y is just as bad. It has been put 
on record (against the protests of man y 
honest, sincere Progressives, it is true) i n 
favor of the polic y of militarism; the polic y 
of spending on the show an d the 'graft' of 
the wa r materials trust, hundreds of millions 
wrun g from the pa y of al l America n wage 
earners. It has placed itself on record i n 
favor of the disfranchisement of the Ameri ­
can Negro, i n fa r more public- and determined 
fashion than the Democrati c part y has done. 
I n Californi a it has gone on record i n favor 
of other kinds of race discrimination, founded 
on no other test than ancestry, and excludin g 
even the ablest men of Asiati c races.'* 
Some Democrats are refusing to be catalogued wit h Negro haters, and the Marylan d 
editor who tried to put Governo r Baldwi n 
on record succeeded beyond his desire: 
" I am not i n favor of repealing the 
Fifteenth Amendment to the Unite d States." 
writes the governor. 
"The Negr o is a citizen of the Unite d 
States and of the State i n whic h he ma y 
reside. The grant of suffrage to a citizen 
ought not. i n my judgment, to be predicted 
on his color, but on his capacity for using 
his vote with intelligence and fidelity to his 
duty to his country. 
"Suc h intelligence may reasonably be in ­
ferred as a general rule, from abilit y to read 
the Englis h language. I am i n favor of such 
a test i n every State. Whereve r it is im ­
posed the State has secured itself from the 
control of the uneducated. Educate d Negroes 
can be trusted wit h a share of politica l powe r 
more safely than illiterate white men.'" 
TH E FORTNE R BILL. 
THE South Carolin a bil l to "prevent the 
possibility of equality between the 
races" by drivin g white teachers out of 
colored schools and other simila r measures 
have provoked a storm even i n the South. 
The Lexingto n (Ky. ) Herald cries: 
"Sout h Carolin a was a glorious State ; 
South Carolin a is a glorious State : but by all 
that's holy, the good people o f South Carolin a 
ought to take hold o f their State government. 
The impossible Blease is a blot on the splen-OPINIO N 279 
di d history of the Palmetto State. Those 
who follow his lead deserve, as they wil l i n 
time receive, the condemnation of the better 
people o f the South, irrespective of color. 
To defeat Hampto n and Butler, and the type 
o f gentleman-statesmen of whom they were 
representative, Tillma n and his followers 
sowed the dragons' teeth, which in the fertile 
soil of prejudice fructified and grew, until 
to-day there is a harvest of blind passion and 
brutal prejudice rampant in the State that 
for years was i n the forefront of America n 
civilization. " 
Variou s changes are run g on this theme 
of the mora l deserts of the aristocrats and 
the "poor white trash." 
"Hampto n and his friends, when they 
were in power, " says the Greensboro (X . C.) 
News, "scourged the 'vulgar' with whips. 
Never did Augustales ride more ruthlessly 
over the herd than di d the aristocratic 
regime, led by Hampton , trample under foot 
every consideration of right and justice 
toward hill billies. The wood-hat boys simpl y 
did not exist, politically, and that was all 
there was to it. 
"Lik e every other aristocracy, they stored 
up vials of wrath against the days of wrath, 
foolishly bent upon makin g more swift and 
terrible their own undoing. Whe n Tillma n 
finally struck the match he had the mine 
ready laid to his hand ; all that was necessary was to light the fuse to loose a cataclysm that no earthly power can control. The 
'vulgar' are i n powe r now, and they are 
scourging the aristocrats wit h scorpions." 
The News thinks that "the lamentable 
phase of the situation is the fact that the 
responsible people of the State even yet do 
not appea r to have waked to the true meanin g of the situation. " 
O f course not; wh y should they? They 
are getting their part of the blood money 
that disfranchised the Negro and sowed 
hatred between two workin g classes. They 
have an idea l workin g class workin g for 
next to nothing i n factory and field—why 
should they disturb this idylli c situation just 
because of Blease? 
Bu t the champions of Bourbonism, like the 
Outlook and that hoary old sinner, the 
Charleston (S. C.) News and Courier, approach the subject wit h due solemnity and 
sermonizing. The Outlook learns that "the 
passage by the house of representatives 
of South Carolina of the Fortne r bill, 
prohibiting white men and women from 
teaching in colored schools, may bring about 
the collapse of Bleaseism and all that it 
portends." 
An d then its Southern editor proceeds to 
write of the superior merits, as compared 
with Blease, of a "son of the famous Con ­
federate chaplain, " of "women wit h the 
purest blood of the South i n their veins," of 
"famous livin g Southern artists," and so 
forth, using the usual Southern rhetoric. 
The News and Courier approaches "the 
Negro question again"—why "again, " pray ? 
This bill and another to prevent Negroes 
and whites workin g in cotton mills together 
supplies the motive here: 
"Wha t a confession ! Hav e we reached the 
point i n South Carolin a where we must legislate Negroes, out of their jobs or out of 
getting them i n order to take care of white 
men who could not otherwise take care of 
themselves?" 
Havin g thus disposed of this horrible legislation, the News waltzes about and says that 
if real pressing subjects of legislation were 
needed why not listen to "Lan d Segregation" 
Poe of Nort h Carolina : 
"There is, for example, no apparent 
interest i n the tremendously important facts 
which Mr . Clarence Poe is constantly dinnin g 
into the ears of all he can reach, namely, 
that durin g the last census period the Negro 
farm acreage i n every part of the South 
showed an increase and the white farm 
acreage a decrease; that the Negro 'already 
owns five acres i n every fourteen he cultivates and has to acquire but one-seventh more 
of his farm acreage i n order to own onehalf the land he tills; ' and, finally, that from 
1900 to 1910 'the Negro farm acreage gained 
on the white farm acreage a millio n and a 
half acres a year, and the increase i n number of white tenants durin g the decade was 
nearly twice the increase i n number of 
Negro tenants—118,000 Negroes to nearly 
200,000 whites.' 
"Mr . Poe argues from these facts, and 
others of the same nature which we have 
not the space to present, that certain legislative action which he proposes is necessary 
i f we are to save the agricultura l lands of 
the South for the whites. W e have not 
regarded his plan as practicable, but nevertheless we have great respect for his judg -280 TH E CRISIS 
ment as well as fo r his sincerity, and we 
cordially agree that the situation to which 
he calls attention merits the most careful 
investigation and study. " 
Bu t alas! South Carolina's legislature has 
not been moved by this bit of philanthrop y 
and the News is fearful : 
"Fo r years the people of the South pleaded 
that i f they were only let alone they could 
handle the race question without difficulty. 
The y are being let alone. They have never 
been so free from disturbing outside in ­
fluences as at the present time. Is the South 
Carolin a legislature determined to arouse 
once more the fanaticism against which we 
all protested so bitterly when we were sufferin g only a few years ago from its 
onslaughts'?" 
Meantime a Southern correspondent i n the 
Boston Transcript pictures the real 
situation: 
"Th e mill population is the answer to the 
economic pressure of the Negro i n the 
agricultura l regions. H e has driven the poor 
whites out. They cannot compete. I n all 
the Charleston district there probably cannot be found one white man who is doing his 
own farm work. H e is an employer of labor 
or he is not i n agriculture. It is i n the up -
country, however, where the mills are, that 
the 'red necks' or 'hil l billies' have flocked 
to the towns. They are workin g fo r a wage. 
They hate the Negro fo r economic reasons." 
Thus the effort to boost the white race by 
special legal privilege goes on, despite the 
hysterical denial of the Columbi a (S. C.) 
Record: 
"W e deny that the white ma n needs any 
law to prevent the Negro from measuring u p 
to a plane of equality wit h him. I f that 
proposition is once admitted and entered on 
our statute books it wil l stand as an ineffaeable libel on our South Carolin a manhood. 
"I n addition, the measure proposed to 
prevent race equality, i f enacted into law, 
wil l open the doors fo r the very evils which 
we most fear, and have reason to fear. I f 
white teachers are removed from our publi c 
schools and the youthful Negro , min d is 
turned over to the mercy of vicious Norther n 
Negro teachers to implant therein the seeds 
of race hatred, we wil l soon be face to face 
wit h incendiary conditions that may burst 
forth at any moment of the night or day 
wit h terrible consequences." 
IS TH E SOUTH AWAKENING ? 
THE CRISI S is not among those who 
•*• greet every manifestation o f ordinar y 
decency on the part of a Southerner as a 
foreshadowing of the millennium. O n the 
other hand, we are gla d an d eager to note 
every sign of the weakening of Southern 
provincialism and narrowness. 
One o f the most interesting of such signs 
is an article i n the Outlook by ' a Southern 
woman' who is naturally anonymous. She 
arraigns the lack of community conscience 
i n the South on the Negr o problem: 
"Ou r criminals, lik e the criminals of every 
country, come chiefly from the economic 
class which lives on, or over, the poverty 
line—our 'submerged tenth.' The large 
majorit y of those i n this economic class i n 
the South are Negroes—a fact whic h has 
resulted i n our confusing the poverty line 
wit h the color line, an d charging Negroes 
raciall y wit h sins and tendencies whic h belong the worl d over to any race livin g i n 
their economic condition. Bu t it is just the 
Negroes who belong i n this economic class, 
those Negroes who form our submerged tenth 
and who furnish most of our crimina l supply , whom we white people do not know, and 
who consequently have no white folks to send 
to, to see that they are protected i n the courts. 
Oh, there is the Negr o problem, and the solutio n of it! The poorest, the ones least able 
to resist temptation, the most ignorant, the 
fol k unhelped, untaught, who are bor n i n 
squalor, who live i n ignorance and i n want 
of all things necessary fo r useful, innocent, 
happ y lives—they do not know us, nor we 
them. * * * 
"No r does the administration of crimina l 
law i n our courts always tend to lessen this 
distrust of white people. A t each session 
of the Southern sociological congresses 
Southern men hig h i n office among us— 
judges, professors i n our great universities, 
Youn g Men's Christia n Associatio n leaders 
and others—stated that despite individua l 
exceptions the trend o f our court is to mete 
out heavier punishment to black offenders 
than to white. It is not, they say, that 
Negroes are illegally sentenced, but that fo r 
simila r offenses the Negr o gets one o f the 
heavier sentences permissible under the law, 
and the white man gets one of the lighter. 
Mor e than one Southern governor has defended his wholesale use o f the pardonin g OPINIO N 281 
powe r on the express ground 'that the proportion o f convictions is greater, and the 
terms o f sentences longer, fo r Negroes than 
fo r whites.' * * * 
"Wh y should a colored woman who loves 
cleanliness as much as I do, and who is quite 
as willin g to pa y fo r it, be forced to travel 
i n that disgusting filth? I know that i f I 
were forced to do it my husband and my 
children and all my friends would feel outraged about it, and would never have any use 
fo r the people who made me do it. Wh y 
should these people feel differently? * • • 
"There is no sense i n mincin g matters. W e 
are no longer children. It is the first step 
that costs, always; but the first step is very 
plain . It is to put away childish things— 
unreasoning prejudice and unreasoning pride 
—and to look truth squarely i n the face, as 
men and women who love it at all costs. 
There is no truth i n a detached view of the 
Negro or of any human being. Everybod y 
on earth is human first and racia l afterward. W e must see i n the Negro, first' of 
all, deeper than all , higher than all , a man 
made i n the image o f Go d as trul y as we 
ourselves. I f i n the race that image be less 
developed than i n our own, i n some individu ­
als of the race it is certainly more highly 
developed than i n some individuals of ours. 
An d whatever grows is growable. 
"M y only fear fo r white supremacy is 
that we should prove unworthy of it. I f 
we fai l there we shall pass. Supremacy is 
fo r service. It is suicide to thrust other races 
back from the good which we hold i n trust 
fo r humanity. Fo r him who woul d be 
greatest the pric e is still that he shall be 
servant of all. " 
The Maco n Telegraph is still wrestling 
manfull y wit h its own conscience: 
"I n nearly al l discussions of an ever timely 
subject," complains the editor, "we observe 
a failur e to discriminate between the in ­
justice or crime that results from race preju ­
dice combined wit h wickedness and that 
instinctive race exclusiveness which would 
make a color line inevitable even i f we all 
dail y practised the Christia n virtues. The 
one should be uncompromisingly condemned 
both b y law and the universal sentiment of a 
civilize d public . The other we may deplore 
but cannot condemn as conscious wrong . 
"W e might as well attempt to reconstruct 
the laws governing the universe, as well 
attempt to cause water to ru n up hill , as to 
attempt to eradicate that instinctive and 
unconscious feeling that holds the grand 
divisions of the human race apart and produces the color line ; for it is the barrier 
erected by nature itself i n order to prevent 
the distinct races of men from being merged 
into one inferior and undesirable amalgamation. The analogue of the color line is 
seen throughout nature, yet it does not occur 
to us to disapprove. Robins and wrens, for 
example, nest and flock apart, but not even 
the most enthusiastic and determined 
'reformer' among us is offended." 
Yes, but, 0 Simplest of Brothers, there is 
no line between human beings like that 
between robins and wrens, and the knottiest 
of race problems comes not from separation, 
but from the minglin g which whites have 
insisted on and still insist on. Who , for 
instance, began the minglin g of white and 
black? An d when di d Dumas, Pushkin , 
Coleridge-Taylor and Booke r Washing ­
ton become "inferior and undesirable 
amalgamations " ? 
A Tennessee paper quoted i n La Follette's 
says: 
"The Negro is at present the heavy labor 
power i n the South. The Negroes nurse 
children, cook, wor k on the streets, drive 
automobiles, wor k i n homes, wor k i n the 
factories and work everywhere else. A s a 
rule the Negro works wit h his hands and 
the white man bosses. 
"I f we are to continue to use Negro labor, 
we must see to it that it is effective, and it 
wil l be effective only to the point that the 
Negro remains healthy and strong. 
"I f we would protect our children, we have 
got to see to it that Negro men and women 
do not have tuberculosis and do not fal l 
victims to other diseases. 
"Fro m a purely commercial and sanitary 
point of view, then, the Negroes should have 
opportunity to live under conditions conducive to health, and there is nothing so 
health givin g as plenty of fresh air. 
"W e denounce Negroes fo r herding in 
dives, and yet the presiding genius of the 
craps table is usually some low-down but 
thrifty white man. 
"W e denounce Negroes for frequenting 
dives, and yet they are about the only places 
where they can have amusement of any sort. 
An d the Negro is an amusement-loving 
person. 282 
"The Negro, then, ought to have a separate 
par k and he should have reasonably convenient means of access to that park. 
"There is a higher cause than that of 
commercial prosperity for a Negro recreation 
park. It is a part of humanity to give to 
the Negroes opportunity fo r innocent 
amusement. 
"The Negro is the great wealth producer 
i n this territory, and an appreciation of this 
fact i n the shape of improved livin g conditions for him would be responded to by 
more generous effort on his part to observe 
the law and to merit the trust that is put i n 
him. " 
This same line of argument is being pressed 
in Georgia : 
" A great dinner of 2,000 representative 
citizens of Georgi a was recently given in 
Atlanta, " says the Seattle Intelligencer, "one 
feature of which was that the tables were 
spread exclusively wit h products of that 
State. The menu contained many epigrams 
upon conditions i n Georgia. One of the 
notable ones was to the effect that the 
presence i n that State of the greatest body 
of Negroes and the least progressive was 'at 
once the white man's burden and the white 
man's opportunity. I f the Negroes are 
allowed to remain i n this condition they wil l 
continue to be a brake on the progress of 
the State. I f they are taught and led into 
such a state of efficiency as this race formerly 
developed, with the added value of freedom 
and practical education, they wil l reward all 
of the care and money expended on them.' 
"The Houston Post comments approvingl y 
upon these utterances and adds a number of 
its own along simila r lines, concluding thus: 
" 'The Southern white people are simpl y 
neglecting their own welfare and impedin g 
their own progress so long as they do not, i n 
every possible way, encourage the Negroes 
to become intelligent, efficient, industrious 
and thrifty people. They are going to be 
here always and we cannot afford to permit 
them to drift. Their labor is needed and 
always wil l be needed, and when they learn 
how to do -things well they wil l be a tremendous factor in the South's progress and 
civilization.' " 
Al l this argument is encouraging, but not 
altogether satisfactory. That bit, for 
instance, on the "state of efficiency" which 
"this race formerly developed," is delicious. 
TH E CRISIS 
"This race" was formerly 90 pe r cent, 
illiterate and raised crops worth about 
$100,000,000; to-day they have 36.5 per cent, 
of illiteracy and the crops of Georgi a (1909) 
were worth $226,000,000. Bu t they are not 
so "efficient" as formerl y because now the 
Negro gets wages, albeit low ones. Thus the 
whole argument above is the argument o f 
employers and exploiters lookin g after their 
money-making machines. It is better than 
no argument, but it is not much better. 
The Tamp a (Fla.) Tribune sounds a 
clearer note on an evil characteristic of nearly 
every Southern city : 
"The Negro population of Tamp a suffers 
a serious handicap i n its desire to establish 
a higher standard of morality and citizenship for itself. The section of the city which 
embraces its churches and its homes is also 
the section devoted by the illicit resorts fo r 
the practice of their demoralizing 'trade.' The 
Negro of good purposes and better sentiment cannot hope to rear his children prop ­
erly amid such surroundings. 
"W e may cease to wonder that the Negro 
furnishes the majority of our criminals and 
occupies the major attention of our officers 
and courts, when we realize that he is forced 
to establish his famil y altar, to brin g u p his 
children and even to worship his Make r i n 
the shadow of the 'sporting house,' where 
dissolute whites parade their shame wit h the 
tolerance i f not the outright protection of the 
civil authorities." 
The Miam i (Fla.) Herald seconds this 
motion : 
"It is doubtful whether any community i n 
the State, or of the South, for that matter, 
has a more orderly, industrious and respectable Negro population than has this city. 
The members of that race live by themselves, 
have their own separate communities, their 
own businesses and their own special activities. They are struggling to elevate their 
race i n all the civic virtues. 
"An d yet, it is painfu l to chronicle, there 
is frequent complaint on the part of the 
better class of colored people that they are 
often most unjustly used by unscrupulous 
white men. Defenseless Negroes are assaulted 
by white men and practically have no defense or protection. They are imposed upon 
i n business transactions and it has been circumstantially related that they are often subjected to official tyrann y by overbearing and 
brutal officers." OPINIO N 283 
O n the other hand, read these two bits of 
Southern humor—for joy , like grief, reveals 
the real man. The Greensboro (N . C.) 
Everything says: 
"Th e race question bobbed up a little i n 
Greensboro this week. A Negro wanted to 
move i n a house he had bought, located 
among the whites, and the whites simpl y said 
it wouldn't do. The matter wil l be amicably 
settled. It must be. This is a white man's 
town, and the Africa n knows it. Fo r the 
most part he is willin g to admit it. There 
may be no written law saying where a Negro 
shall live and where a white man shall live , 
but in a white man's town there need be no 
law, because the Negroes cannot mix with 
the whites. That is the long and short of 
it. The whites are always willin g to treat 
the colored brother right—but i f he tries to 
butt i n i n any way he is going to be made 
butt out either legally or illegally. " 
This is from the Taylo r (Tex.) Journal: 
"Car l Schulenberg, a farme r livin g near 
Taylor, has started a new method of collecting. H e had advanced goods to a Negro man 
to be paid fo r i n pickin g cotton. The Negro 
left him before payin g up. Monda y mornin g he found him on Mai n Street at the 
crossing of Broad . The Negro was very 
independent and seemed to feel that Mr . 
Schulenberg was a soft egg because he gave 
him credit. This made the axe handle i n Mr . 
Schulenberg's hand very mad and it began 
to lambast the Negr o in the latest improved 
style. The Negro ran up the street and the 
axe handle, accompanied by Mr . Schulenberg, 
ran after him and interested the Negro 
greatly. 
"Don't know what the officers did about 
it, but guess they put the Negro to work on 
the rock pile and rewarded the axe handle." 
TH E SMITH-LEVE R BILL AN D 
JUDG E TERRELL . 
THERE is a strong suspicion that the 
South is not so anxious to debate the 
Negro question as it used to be. Certainly 
the debate on the Smith-Leve r bil l was anything but encouraging to the Bourbons. One 
pape r (we do not know its name) says: 
"Wheneve r the. Bleases and the Varda -
mans of the South are overhauled fo r their 
intemperance of speech on the Negro question, they invariably point to the colored race 
as needing instruction i n agriculture and 
other forms of manual labor, rather than 
book learning. 'Teach the Negro to use his 
hands i n honest labor and not his head in 
scheming how to avoid labor,' is believed to 
be an extract from an address by Senator 
Vardaman . An d yet, when the opportunity 
arises to teach the Negro on the lines laid 
down by the Senator, and on the lines of 
greatest economic benefit to the race and to 
the South, Mr . Vardama n is the first to 
object ! 
"Suc h an exhibition of racial antagonism 
as the Mississipp i Senator gave in the Senate 
last week is not calculated to strengthen faith 
in the sincerity of his previous utterances. 
It displayed his mental limitations in dealin g with a subject which the South, and 
especially his own Slate, must face with an 
open mind and without prejudice. " 
The Boston Transcript says: 
"Some of the speeches delivered by Varda ­
man and his sympathizers read like extracts 
from the harangues of the secession Senators 
of 1S60, not the men who fought for the 
Southern Confederacy, but those who talked 
other men into fighting for it. The spark 
which has kindled the blaze of antiquated 
Negrophobi a is the amendment offered by 
Senator Jones, of Washington, to the effect 
that the color line shall not be drawn i n the 
application of Federa l aid. I n reply to this 
very reasonable stipulation Vardama n has 
declared that to give Negroes the benefit of 
the funds for agricultura l colleges is like an 
offer to guide a man through a powder magazine wit h a lighted torch. Senator Martin , of 
Virginia , 'argued' that the Negroes were 
better off under slavery than they have been 
since emancipation. 
"The Northern reader has to rub his eyes 
as he reads such harangues delivered in this 
year of grace li) 14, to be sure that he is not 
dreaming. " 
Eve n the Wac o (Tex.) News: 
"W e agree thoroughly with Senators Jones, 
Clap p and Gallinge r that the Negro industria l and agricultura l schools of the South 
should share some of the Federa l appropria ­
tion for farm demonstration work i n this 
section of the country. They are citizens 
the same as the whites. Man y of them own 
property. Those who own property pay their 
taxes. The large majority of the Negro 
citizens are law abiding, and the gentleman 
from Mississipp i was playin g politics—and 284 TH E CRISIS 
very small politics at that—and catering to 
a reprehensible race prejudice when he opposed such a measure." 
O n the Terrell appointment the Evening 
Post says sarcastically: 
"Ca n a black judge know the law? Ar e 
prou d white men who violate the city ordinances or who cheat and steal to be compelled 
to hear a Negro judge define their misdemeanors and pass sentence upon them? No t 
i f Vardama n and Hok e Smit h can prevent 
it. A s for President Wilson , he could not 
have done other than name Judge Terrell 
again without stultifyin g himself. " 
The Ogdensburg Journal adds: 
"Senator Vardama n is preparin g to fight 
confirmation. The performance may be in ­
teresting i f not edifying, fo r Mr . Vardama n 
has long, glossy hair and might be mistaken 
by some for a medicine man. Whe n he dons 
his wa r paint he wil l present just such a 
picture as one would expect from a white 
man who would so fa r forget himself as to 
use his position i n the greatest forum of 
the worl d i n an effort to arouse racia l 
hatred." 
A FOLLOWE R OF JESUS CHRIST. 
IT is so seldom that the Christian church 
to-day speaks a clear true wor d on the 
Negro problem that it is all the more welcome when it comes. The Congregationalist 
says: 
"W e are confronted to-day by a race problem which is rapidl y becoming more acute 
and menacing. It demands the immediate 
action of those who love their country and 
would prevent disaster. * * * 
"I f the recommendations of Governor 
Blease are followed South Carolin a wil l lead 
i n the movement, which other Southern 
States promise to support, for the repeal of 
the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution 
of the Unite d States. This would complete 
the disfranchisement of Negro-America n 
citizens. Nort h Carolin a is seriously considering the proposa l of Clarence Poe, of 
the Progressive Farmer, to exclude colored 
farmers from land ownership i n any district 
where a majority vote could be polled against 
them. 
"The lynchin g record, which declined from 
1908 through 1912, rose i n 1913 above every 
year but one since 1904. Last year's terrible 
record was seventy-nine. Onl y twenty-four 
were accused o f the 'usual crime' of assault 
or attempted assault on women. 
"These recent events, to whic h man y others 
could be added, reveal a state o f affairs so 
brutally unjust, so undemocratic, so un ­
christia n and false to our nationa l ideals 
that no class of our citizens can lon g be 
safe i f such conditions are tolerated i n this 
country. 
"Th e Bleases and Vardaman s ma y retard 
the Negro race, they may increase the number o f indolent and vicious blacks by 
denying them knowledge and a fair chance; 
but the Negr o race i n Americ a is advancing 
rapidl y i n spite of all opposition ; increasing 
thousands of them are virtuous, wise and 
useful Americans. A s fa r as those who seek 
to submerge the Negr o succeed i n their 
efforts, so fa r they impoverish an d corrupt 
our country and injur e us all. Whe n Ameri ­
cans insult the Japanese who come to the 
Unite d States, we stimulate personal enmity 
and offend a great friendl y nation, an d the 
effects of that form of race prejudice hurt 
us more than Japan . The same rules appl y 
to all our manifestations of race prejudice. 
"The gospel that we proclaim and which 
we send and carry to distant lands is the 
gospel of universal brotherhood; but when 
people of the races to whom we have sent 
that gospel move into our neighborhood, we 
forget that they are brothers and let them 
alone so severely or treat them as so fa r 
inferior to ourselves that the missionaries 
and the members of the- churches whic h sent 
them to convert the heathen seem to have an 
entirely different kin d of religion. 
"W e may be brothers to the little brown 
man i n Japan , but the relationship is dissolved when he comes to live i n California . 
W e may be brothers to the black ma n i n the 
Congo, but when we meet a black man i n 
South Carolina , or perchance i n Chicago or 
Boston, we are sometimes so fa r from pro ­
claimin g our kinshi p that we fai l to recognize his rights as a man. 
"God , give us vision to-day! Ou r greatest 
prophets i n the twentieth century carr y forward as a torch to light our pathwa y the 
ideals of Washingto n and Lincoln . They 
proclaim the brotherhood of man. The supreme test of our lives comes i n being 
brothers." EDITORIAL 
DOES ORGANIZATION PAY? 
THE colored Americans 
have not yet realized the 
strength or efficiency of 
organization. They continuall y complai n of 
inabilit y to co-operate, 
of disintegrating tendencies, of ineffective beginnings of union. 
Ye t even i n the midst of complaints 
union has been accomplished, organization has become effective. W e have 
passed those pitiable years of interna l 
turmoil when half the race seemed to 
have their faces turned back toward 
slavery. We have entered an epoch when 
so great an enemy of the Negro race as 
Clarence Poe, of Nort h Carolina , can 
write : "Everybod y knows that the 
Negroes stand together! " 
Havin g thus taken the first steps 
toward effective organization, let us go 
forward. Le t us not halt and bicker 
and criticise, like Harr y C. Smit h i n the 
Cleveland Gazette, because we have not 
i n a few years undone the structure 
reared by prejudice i n a half century. 
We have not, to be sure, even stirred 
the foundations of disfranchisement and 
"Ji m Crow " legislation. Bu t we are 
welding the hammers and we mean 
business. 
But , reader, do yo u mean business? 
Do yo u realize what 10,000,000 united 
people can do? Hav e you joined the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People and sent your 
dolla r to do its duty? 
Or are yo u drifting, wit h so many 
white Americans, under the excuse that 
' ' Nothin g can be done. " " It's no use.' ' 
"Le t prejudice alone. " Nonsense! 
Weak and slow though our cause still 
may be, yet remember: 
No t to the swift nor to the strong 
The battles of the right belong, 
Fo r he who strikes for freedom wears 
The armor of the captive's prayers. 
An d Natur e proffers to his cause 
The strength of her eternal laws. 
Whil e she whose arm essays to bind 
An d herd wit h common brutes, his kind , 
Strives evermore at fearful odds 
Wit h Natur e and the jealous gods, 
An d dares the dread recoil which late 
O r soon, their right shall vindicate. 
There are 36,000 copies of this issue 
of TH E CRISI S being read this month. 
There are at least 100,000 readers. If 
every reader becomes a member of the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the battle for 
Negro rights is won ! 
TH E CIVILIZATION OF MISSISSIPPI. 
IN the Western part of the 
State of Mississippi, on 
the low banks of the 
Fathe r of Waters, and 
about fifty miles above 
Vicksburg, is the quiet 
and beautiful county of Washington. 
Fift y thousand people live there, of 
whom 41,500 are colored and the rest are 
whites of good native America n parentage. I n the county seat—Greenville— 
live 10,000 people, largely white, and 
ten miles west of Greenville is the little 
village of Leland, wit h a thousand souls 
or less. 286 TH E CRISIS 
It is a typica l Southern country vil ­
lage. Doubtless the Methodist Church. 
South, has one of the Lord's Shepherds 
there and, of course, there is a Baptist 
Churc h for whites, not to mention one 
or two colored churches. 
Afte r this preliminar y information 
we append this society note from Lelan d 
sent by the Associated Press: 
LELAND, "MISS. , February 24—Sam Petty, 
a Negro, accused of having' killed a deputy 
sheriff. Charles W. Kirkland, was shot by a 
mob of 300 men to-night and his body 
burned. 
Petty, wanted on a trivial charge, killed 
Kirkland with a shotgun when the officer 
entered a cabin late to-day in which the 
Negro had taken refuge. Petty was captured by a posse, bound and placed in an 
oil-soaked dry-goods box and the match applied. A moment later the man, his clothing 
aflame, broke from his fastenings and started 
to run. but before he could gain headway 
was shot dead. 
The body was put back in the box, fresh 
inflammables were piled about it, and within 
half an hour it was burned to ashes. 
Nothing has been done i n this matter. 
The President is busy i n Mexico and 
Panama and the Reverend G. Campbell 
Morga n is preaching i n Atlant a on the 
evils of the tango. President Elio t is 
toying with woman's suffrage and James 
K . Vardama n is flooding Congress with 
light and hope. I n fact, "God's i n His 
Heaven, all's right with the world. " 
BRAZIL. 
AS a magnificent essay i n 
valiant timidit y we 
recommend Mr. 
Theodor e Roosevelt's 
"Brazi l and the Negro " 
i n the Outlook. The 
story which he has to tell is simple : 
There are in Brazi l 8,300,000 Negroes 
and mulattoes; 3.700,000 Indian and 
mixed Indian-whites and 8,000.000 persons of European descent. Al l these 
elements are fusing into one light 
mulatto race. 
These are the simple facts. Mr . 
Roosevelt has hitherto rather ostentatiously avoided them. H e visited Ri o 
Janeiro, wit h a Negroi d population i n 
the hundred thousands, and almost overlooked them; he visited Bahia , i f we mistake not, which has more Negroes than 
any city i n the world, and quite forgot 
them. 
A t last, however, Mr . Roosevelt coyly 
approaches his subject. The editors war n 
away the frivolous wit h these protesting 
italics: "I t may be noted that i n this 
article Mr . Roosevelt is not attempting 
to justify or condemn the Brazilia n 
attitude toward the Negro as contrasted wit h that of the Unite d States, 
but simply to set forth clearly what the 
Brazilia n attitude is h i fact. " 
Mr . Roosevelt then, i n characteristic 
fashion, states three facts and two 
falsehoods. 
The facts are: 
1. Brazi l is absorbing the Negro 
race. 
2. There is no color bar to advance 
ment. 
3. There is no social bar to advancement, but the mass of full-blooded 
Negroes are still i n the lower social 
class. 
Then come the falsehoods: 
1. The best men i n the Unite d States 
believe "i n treating each ma n of whatever color absolutely on his worth as a 
man, allowing him full opportunity to 
achieve the success warranted by his 
ability and integrity, and givin g to him 
the full measure of respect to which that 
success entitles him. " This is not so 
and Mr . Roosevelt knows it is not so. 
The best men i n the Unite d States believe that their "civilization " can only 
be maintained by compelling al l persons of Negro descent to occupy an 
inferior place. The exceptions to this 
belief are negligible. 
2. That the Brazilian s regard the 
Negro element i n their blood as " a 
slight weakening. " Wha t do Brazilian s 
say as to this "sligh t weakening" ? W e EDITORIA L 287 
quote from Dr. Jean Baptiste de 
Lacerda, director of the National 
Museum of Ri o Janeiro : 
The metis of Brazi l have given birth 
down to our own time to poets of no mean 
inspiration, painters, sculptors, distinguished musicians, magistrates, lawyers, 
eloquent orators, remarkable writers, 
medical men and engineers, who have 
been unrivaled i n the technical skill and 
professional ability. * * * 
•"The co-operation of the metis i n the 
advance of Brazi l is notorious and far 
from inconsiderable. They played the 
chief part durin g many years i n Brazi l 
i n the campaign for the abolition of 
slavery. I could quote celebrated names 
of more than one of these metis who put 
themselves at the head of the literary 
movement. They fought with firmness 
and intrepidity i n the press and on the 
platform. They faced with courage the 
greatest perils to which they were exposed i n their struggle against the 
powerful slave owners, who had the protection of a conservative government. 
They gave evidence of sentiments of 
patriotism, self-denial and appreciation 
during the long campaign i n Paraguay, 
fighting heroically at the boarding of 
the ships i n the canal battle of Ri a 
chuelo and i n the attacks of the 
Brazilia n army, on numerous occasions 
i n the course of this long South American war. It was owing to their support 
that the republic was erected on the 
ruins of the empire. " 
An d what of all this? Is it not a 
plea for intermarriage of whites and 
blacks i n the Unite d States? It is not. 
It is a plea for truth. It is a denial 
that lyin g wil l settle any human problem. Most white people i n the Unite d 
States prefer to marr y white people. 
That is perfectly proper and defensible. 
Most colored people prefer to marr y 
colored people. This is perfectly logical 
and commendable. These facts need no 
defense and need no proof. They are 
the easily understandable desire of both 
races. 
Bu t a vast number of people are not 
satisfied with such bare facts. They 
want to bolster them up with scientific 
lies and social insult. They want to 
scare and beat people into doing precisely what people would do without 
bogies and force, and the result is that 
they not only accomplish what they 
wish, but they also accomplish poverty, 
crime, prostitution, ignorance, lynching, 
mob violence and the rui n of democratic 
government for the unfortunate victims 
of their lies. Al l this is clear, but to 
expect Theodore Roosevelt to say it 
plainl y without twistings and equivocation is to expect the millennium. 
A HELPER . 
THE Nationa l Association 
for the Advancement of 
Colored People regrets 
to lose the services of 
Dr. M . C. B . Mason. W e 
have need, and pressing 
need, of an organizer i n the field, but 
funds are not yet available and it is 
manifestly unfair to ask a man of Dr. 
Mason's standing to serve for a pittance 
or upon a contingent salary. We hope 
still to retain Dr. Mason's interest and 
we wish him all success i n his new work. 
VEILE D INSULTS. 
WE have spoken before of 
the custom i n the United 
States of refusing to 
capitaliz e the word 
' ' Negro.' ' 
Before 1850 the use 
of the capital letter was practically 
universal, but with the determined onslaught upon the Negro-American i n the 
decade previous to the war, the present 
insulting custom was fixed. Note for a 
moment the quite unconscious result: 
The Kansas Cit y Journal publishes an 
admirable little lay sermon on a certain 
much heralded experiment i n racial 
culture. W e abstract three paragraphs: 
"Th e imagination readily responds to 
the effort to bring up representatives of 288 TH E CRISIS 
half a dozen or more races—American, 
Chinese, Indian, negro, Japanese, Jew, 
Russian, etc.— i n an environment which 
shall be uniform, which shall be directed 
to the task of permitting human nature, 
rather than any of its racia l subdivisions, to take its course, subject to the 
modifications of a universa l environment. * # * 
"Wil l the little American , the little 
Jew, the little Italian, the little 
Chinese, the little negro and al l the 
other little ones grow up to be men and 
women who conform to a uniform 
standard of intellectual and spiritua l 
measurement, forgetting i n the new 
knowledge of proper trainin g all the 
heritage of their racia l origin and all 
the evils of an undesirable environment? * * * 
"I n still other words, is not one good 
citizen just as good as any other good 
citizen, regardless of whether he is an 
American , a Jew, an Italian, a negro, a 
Chinese, a Japanese or what not? " 
I n substance nothing could be better 
than these statements; but can anyone 
read them and for a moment think of 
the Negro race as equal to other races? 
Ye t some of the best friends of colored 
people persist i n this species of insult. 
TH E IMITATION MANIA. 
IMITATION is the sincerest flattery." It is 
also a confession of 
inferiority. 
A race even fifty 
years removed from 
slavery surrounded as ours is by "the 
means of grace, " however inconvenient 
i n some instances ma y be the attainment or utilization of these means, is 
a chil d race no more, and nothing short 
of a deliberate intention to subscribe to 
Tillman-Vardamanism an d to help i n 
the propagation of the doctrine of 
ineradicable race inferiorit y should permit us for a moment to designate 
ourselves or each other as "blac k Web -
sters, " "blac k Sousas, " "blac k Emersons, " black this and black that. 
I can think of no reason, inherent, 
acquired or otherwise conditional, wh y 
i n our respective lines of endeavor we 
should not be willin g to be measured 
fairl y by universa l standards, wit h the 
hope of givin g a good account of ourselves, and, i n any event, be content 
wit h the result. 
Wh o ever heard of a "whit e Fred . 
Douglass, " a "whit e Coleridge-Taylor " 
or even a "whit e Jac k Johnson" ? Let's 
stand a little more nearly erect on our 
own feet and be sensible. 
B . F . BOWLES . 
MUSIC. 
ONE of the methods of 
exploiting inexperienced 
persons is to advertise 
for song poems to be set 
to music. The ambitious 
poet is then mulcted of 
$25 or $50 and the "song " published. 
One such fearsome mess comes to us 
from Oklahoma, published b y music 
publishers i n Washington, D . C. The 
music is nothing and the poetry is less. 
W e war n our readers against such 
schemes. They involve a waste of 
precious time and money. 
SPRING. 
B y WILLIA M MOOR E 
I COM E wit h a song and flowers; 
An d green growing grass and ril l 
Of brooks, and spell of showers, 
An d life to your heart's sweet fill, 
Fo r I am spring ! THE New Abolition and Its Work 
TH E ANNUA L CONFERENC E OF TH E 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPLE. 
THE sixth annua l conference of the 
* Nationa l Association wil l be held i n 
Baltimor e Ma y 3, 4 and 5, wit h a postconference meeting i n Washingto n Ma y 6, 
and a meeting wit h the Nationa l Conference 
o f Charitie s and Correction i n Memphis, 
Tenn., durin g the week of Ma y 8. 
The opening session of the Baltimor e conference wil l be Sunda y afternoon, Ma y 3, 
and there wil l be afternoon and evening sessions Monda y and Tuesday. Al l the sessions 
wil l be public , wit h the exception of the 
executive sessions Monda y and Tuesday 
mornings, whic h wil l be open only to 
members. 
Variou s aspects of the followin g subjects 
wil l be considered at the conference: Edu ­
cation, segregation, "Ji m Crow " cars and the 
political rights of the Negro. Amon g the 
speakers are Mr . Charles J . Bonaparte , exAttorney-Genera l of the Unite d States, a 
grandson of a brother of Napoleon Bona ­
parte; Dr . Katherin e Bement Davis, commissioner of correction of New Yor k City ; 
Senator Wesle y L . Jones, of Washington , 
who led the fight fo r the Jones amendment 
to the Smith-Leve r bill ; Mrs. L a Follette, 
wife of Senator L a Follette ; Mr . Oswald 
Garriso n Villard ; Mrs. Corali e F . Cook ; 
Bisho p Joh n Hurst ; the Rev . R . W . Bag -
nall ; Mr . Archibal d H . Grimk e and others. 
The local committee o f arrangements i n 
Baltimor e consists of Dr . Harve y Johnson, 
chairman ; Dr . F . N . Cardoza , vice-chairman; 
Dr . G . R . Waller ; Mr . W . T. McGuinn ; Dr . 
H . S. McCard ; Mr . C. L . Davis; Mr . Joh n 
Murphy , Sr., and Miss Luc y D . Slowe, 
secretary. Additiona l members of the 
various committees are Prof. Maso n A -
Hawkins, Messrs. James Hughe s and Harr y 
0 . Wilso n and Mrs. Jenni e Ross. They have 
already begun their work. Clipping s just 
received at nationa l headquarters announce 
a concert to be given under the auspices of 
the committee at Albaugh's Theatre, Marc h 
19, to raise the funds necessary to meet the 
expenses of the conference. The branch has 
engaged the Williams colored singers for the 
occasion. 
Baltimor e is the furthest South that the 
Nationa l Association has yet called a conference. W e urge every reader of TH E 
CRISI S and every member of the association 
to help us by advertising the conference and 
by being present, i f possible, i n person to 
encourage us i n our work. 
NOTES FRO M BRANCHES . 
ST . PAUL . 
THE officers of the new branch recently 
A
 formed at St. Pau l are : Col . J . H . 
Davidson, president; Mrs. Lillia n A . 
Turner, secretary; Mr . Louis Nash, treasurer; 
executive committee: Mr . Hug h F . Halbert, 
Dr. Parle y P . Womer, Rabb i Rypins, Mrs. 
T. H . Lyles, Mr . Jose H . Sherwood, Mr . 
W . T. Francis, Dr . Va l D o Turner, Mr . 0 . 
C. Hall , Mr . J . H . Loomis, Judge Grie r M . 
Orr, Mrs. Bryant, Mr . George W . James, 
Mr . J . Q. Adams. 
The branch has a membership of over 
100 and includes many of the leading business men and educators of the city, both 
white and colored. The first meeting that 
the new branch held does great credit to its 
enterprise and to the talent of its members. 
The meeting was held i n the Plymout h Con ­
gregational Church. On the platform were 
Dr . George Vincent, president of the State 
University ; Dr . T. Morey , president of 
MacAleste r College ; Dr . Samuel Kerfoot, 
president of Hamlin e University, and the 
Rev. P . P . Womer, pastor of the Plymout h 
Congregational Church. The address of the 
evening was made by Dr . Shaile r Matthews, 
dean .of the divinit y department o f the 
Chicago University. His subject was "Abra ­
ham Lincol n and Fift y Years After. " Dr . 
Matthews was introduced by Governor A . 0 . 
Eberhart. Dr . Matthews said i n part: 
"There, is a disposition to treat the Negro 
as a half personality, a half man ; he must 290 TH E CRISIS 
be considered as a personality, for he is 
unquestionably one of the great factors i n 
tins country to-day. Race antagonism has 
developed withi n the last fifty years. There 
is antagonism between various races, but 
the feeling against the Negro has increased 
to an unusual extent. The difficult phase of 
the present situation, which is approaching 
a crisis, is that the best element of the Negro 
race is not i n the best position to help the 
worse element. They lack education, financial status and influence, and their mental 
state is not developed highly enough. Give 
them the education, give them the opportunity to make good, give the Negro the 
'square deal' to which he is entitled." 
DISTRIC T O F COLUMBIA . 
The Distric t of Columbi a branch keeps 
up its high standard of remarkable meetings. 
On the anniversary of the birthday of 
Frederic k Douglass, Februar y 18, a mass 
meeting was held in the Nineteenth Street 
Baptist Church. The chief speakers were 
Dr. Joe l E . Spingarn , Dr. D u Bois, Senator 
Clapp , the Reverend Mr . Hudso n and Mr . 
Archibal d H . Grinike , who presided. 
The chairman read a paper which Senator 
Clap p called one of the best he had ever 
heard. Dr. Spingar n told of his Western 
trip, and Dr . D u Bois related the history of 
the 'Irish struggle for liberty. Senator 
Clap p and the Reverend Mr . Hudso n aroused 
the audience to prolonged applause by eloquent appeals. There were S00 persons 
present. 
PHILADELPHIA . 
The Philadelphi a branch, which has had a 
most creditable increase i n its members, announces a meeting to be held i n the Friends' 
Sleeting House. Dr . Edga r F . Smith, provost 
of the Universit y of Pennsylvania , is to lie 
the chief speaker. Mr . Henr y Wilbur , 
secretary of the Friends' general conference, 
wil l make the welcoming address, and there 
wil l be other noted people on the program. 
PROVIDENCE . 
The recently elected officers of the Providence branch are : Dr. J. J . Robinson, president; Mr . J. C. Minkins, first vice-president 
and chairman of the executive board ; 
Rev. C. C. Alleyne , second vice-president; 
Mr . Frederi c Carter, third vice-president; 
Miss Roberta J. Dunbar, secretary; Rev. 
Zechariah Harrison , treasurer; executive 
board : Mr . James Dixon , Mr . Willia m A . 
Heathman, Dr. A . L . Jackson, Mr . Willia m 
P . H . Freeman, Mr . Robert L . Smith . 
SEATTLE . 
The officers of the branch recently formed 
i n Seattle are as follows: Mrs. Letiti a A . 
Graves, president; Mr . G . W . Jones, vicepresident ; Mrs. Zoe Graves Young , recordin g 
secretary; Mrs. W . L . Presto, corresponding 
secretary; Mr . G. 0 . Allen , treasurer; executive board : Mr . G . W . Thompson, Mr . Le e 
A . Hankins, Mr . B . F . Tutt, Mrs. S . D . Stone, 
Mr . A . R. Black , Mr . S . H . Stone. 
TALLADEGA . 
The Talladega branch announces the followin g officers elected at their last meeting: 
Prof. Willia m Pickens, president; Mr . E . E . 
Lightner, secretary; Mr . Hampto n Taylor, 
treasurer; executive committee: Dr . E . H . 
Jones, Dr. J. P . Barton , Dr. F . W . Terry , 
Rev. W . L . Boyd , Mr . Y . A . Brockman . Rev . 
A . T. Clark . 
TRENTON . 
The officers of the Trenton branch are as 
follows: Rev. J . A . White , president; Mr . 
Nathan Hovington , vice-president; Sir. T. 
Edwar d Kinney , secretary; Mr . J . Williams, 
treasurer; Rev. R . M . Johnson, chaplain ; 
executive committee: Dr . Solomon Porte r 
Hood , chairman ; Rev. L . 0 . Jones, Prof. 
George W . Clark , Mr . Philij j Logan , Sir. 
D . J. Graham, Dr . Howar d Bundy , Rev . 
L . C. Hurdle , Sir. Joh n Lewis, Sir. Willia m 
H . Salters, Sir. John SI. Herbert. 
SEGREGATION. 
THAT segregation among civi l service is 
still wit h us is indicated by the bills introduced by Congressman Edwards, of Georgia , 
and Aswell , of Louisiana , which propose the 
segregation of the races i n various government departments and throughout the civi l 
service in the Unite d States. A t a hearing 
before the Hous e committee on reform in 
the civil service, held on Marc h 6, Mr . 
Edward s frankl y said that i f he could have 
his way he woul d eliminate the colored 
government employee. 
Sir. Archibal d H . Grimke , president of the 
Distric t of Columbi a branch, represented the 
Nationa l Association. Sir. Grimk e predicted 
that the colored race woul d be a part of the 
governing class of this country withi n fifty 
years. H e declared that the South had 
handled the Negro problem i n the wron g way 
and that this eventually would become apparent. Sir. Grimk e made a deep 
impression. OU R LEGA L BUREA U 
B y CHAPI N BRINSMAD E 
Attorney-in-charge 
IF the Nationa l Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People is 
to obtain the best possible results from 
its legal work we should keep constantly 
i n min d the ultimate object which we 
hope to accomplish by it. This object 
we conceive to be the buildin g up of 
a body o f judicia l decisions which shall 
comprehensively state the law on the subject 
o f civil and politica l rights; which shall 
mold that law, so fa r as possible, along 
lines which admit of no distinctions whatever 
on grounds of race or color; and which, i n 
so fa r as they fail to do this, shall point out 
the direction which legislation calculated to 
supplement these decisions should take. 
Viewin g the matter i n this light, it is 
apparent at once that the work becomes a 
national and not a local problem. O f course, 
each locality has its peculia r needs. Discrimination manifests itself differently i n 
different places, so that one locality necessarily devotes particula r attention to civilrights cases, another to educational matters 
and still another to residential segregation. 
All , however, should look at these problems 
from the same point of view. Al l should 
regard them as different manifestations of 
the one evil which we are fighting, namely, 
race discrimination. That is the principl e 
under which all these seemingly different 
problems can be harmonized. 
I f then we are to regard this matter as 
a nationa l problem it is apparent that close 
co-operation between the various branches 
o f the Nationa l Association fo r the Advance ­
ment of Colored Peopl e and between each 
branch and the national attorney is essential. The national attorney must know at 
all times what cases are being handled by 
the different branches. H e is i n a position to 
view the problem as a whole, to see i n what 
respects the law of race discrimination is 
laggin g behind and i n what directions it is 
keeping abreast of the times. I f having this 
viewpoint he has also the benefit of cordial 
co-operation with the branches, he can not 
only more successfully conduct his own work, 
but also can the better advise the branches 
with respect to their eases. 
In an attempt to put the legal work upon 
this desirable basis, all the branches have 
been asked to send a statement describing 
(1) the organization and personnel of their 
legal-redress committees; (2) the arrangements, financial and otherwise, which they 
have made with attorneys, and (3) the legal 
work which they have recently done, are 
now doing or have i n prospect. The procurin g of this information, it is hoped, wil l 
inaugurate a system of cordial and helpful 
co-operation which should get results. 
The followin g are some of the matters on 
which the attorney is now engaged: 
CIVI L RIGHTS . 
New Yor k has proved a difficult place to 
wi n civil-rights actions. O f the six or seven 
cases recently reported, all but one were 
such that, for one reason or another, we did 
not feel justified i n pressing them. A s to 
the one good case, we are moving slowly. 
Ou r object is not to brin g as many cases 
as possible, but to wi n one or two decisively. 
It is hoped that i n the next issue of TH E 
CRISI S we shall have something of importance to report i n this connection. 
CONGRESS . 
Smith-Lever Bill—Whatever the final 
outcome of our fight for justice i n the 
distribution of funds for agricultura l 
extension work, much wil l have been 
accomplished. The name of the association was brought prominently before the 
Senate and through it before the people of 
the country as a champion of equality and 
justice. The attorney, during his stay i n 
Washington, saw a great number of Senators, 
and i n personal interviews brought clearly 
to their attention the work of the association. A large part of his time was also 292 TH E CRISIS 
spent i n seeing newspaper men and getting 
them to give space to our side of the question. But , best of all, the fact that it was' 
our association which caused the two days' 
debate i n the Senate and forced the acceptance by the South of the Shafroth amendment was made plai n to the Senate. Senator 
Gallinge r read on the floor of the Senate a 
letter of protest from this association, commenting on the fact that such people as Mr . 
Storey, Miss Addams and Mr . Villar d were 
members of our board, and Senator Work s 
read a telegram from the Californi a branch 
of the Nationa l Association fo r the Advance ­
ment of Colored People. Ou r part i n the 
fight was made clear to the people of the 
country through newspaper comments which 
stated that the Jones amendment was instigated by this association. 
The bil l is now i n conference, the Hous e 
havin g declined to concur i n the Senate 
amendments. The personnel of the conference committee is as follows: Fo r the 
Senate: Smith, of Georgia ; Smith , of South 
Carolina , and Brady , of Idaho. Fo r the 
House : Lever, of South Carolina ; Lee, of 
Georgia, and Haugen , of Iowa . Al l the 
Democrats are Southern Democrats. More ­
over, Brad y was one of the two Republicans 
who opposed the Jones amendment throughout. W e have therefore only one friend on 
the conference committee. I n spite of this 
fact, we hope for a favorable conference 
report on the Shafroth amendment. W e believe that the chairman of the committee and 
the man who wil l probably control it, Hok e 
Smith , of Georgia, wil l prevent the rejection of the amendment, not from any fondness fo r it—fa r from it—but from a disinclination which seems to be shared by a 
number of other Southern Senators fo r a 
further debate on the race question i n the 
Senate. 
Should the conference committee reject 
the amendment our friends are prepared to 
make a fight against the report. Shoul d this 
fight fai l our protest wil l be promptl y made 
to the President, urgin g him to veto the bill . 
JUDG E TERRELL . 
Apprise d by newspaper reports of Senator 
Vardaman's announced intention to defeat 
Judge Terrell's confirmation, we promptl y 
sent to Senator Clap p an open letter protesting against such action. The letter has 
received wide publicit y and wil l serve to 
call the attention of the country to the fact 
that Southern Senators are openly makin g 
color a reason fo r declining to confirm a n 
appointment of the President. Judg e 
Terrell's record on the bench has been such 
that the South was unable to find any pre ­
text fo r this opposition. It was forced 
to come out into the open an d oppose him 
on account o f his color. Senator Clap p has 
stated that he wil l do all i n his powe r to 
get the Senate to act favorabl y on the 
nomination. 
PRIVAT E ANDERSON . 
The association has achieved another 
notable success i n the legal-aid work . Some 
months ago Privat e Samue l Anderson , o f 
the mounted detachment of the 25th Infantry , 
a soldier who had served one enlistment 
blamelessly i n the 9th Cavalr y and had never 
had a serious charge against him i n the 
25th Infantrj', was sentenced b y a court 
martia l i n Honolul u to a period of five years' 
imprisonment on the charge of havin g burglariously entered the quarters of a white 
woman, wif e of a soldier, wit h intent to 
do wrong. The testimony was largel y circumstantial and the character of the chief 
witness against him was not what it had 
first appeared. Fortunately , Anderso n found 
a warm champion i n Capt. Charles F . Bates, 
of the 25th Infantry . Captai n Bates lai d 
the matter before the then chairman of the 
association, Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , 
i n September last, and Mr . Villar d personall y interviewed the judge-advocate-general 
of the army. Captai n Bates brought the 
details of the case to Ne w Yor k i n December, 
when he arrived on leave of absence, most of 
which he has devoted i n the most selfsacrificing wa y to this case. I n addition, i n 
connection wit h Captai n Bates, Mr . Villar d 
submitted to the judge-advocate-general three 
opinions on the case obtained from Joh n 
Chipma n Gray , of the Harvar d law school, 
Moorfield Storey, our nationa l president, and 
ex-judge Willia m G . Choate, of Ne w York , 
all of which strongly upheld the view that 
the conviction was an imprope r one. The 
ease was dul y passed upo n by the judge -
advocate-general, the Assistant Secretary o f 
Wa r an d the Secretary of War, an d as a 
result of the association's wor k Samue l 
Anderso n has been released from confinement 
and given his liberty. This does not undo the 
wron g done, but at least it saves him fro m 
four and a half years' imprisonment. JIMM Y 
(A Story) 
B y FRENC H WILSO N 
THE little boy (it was a 
Negro child) stirred and 
tosse d feverishly. The 
woman (and she was also 
"colored" ) knelt by the cot 
wit h all a mother's agony 
showing i n her dark moist 
eyes. He r husband sat beside her, his face 
expressing nothing but the patient, suffering, 
doglike humilit y o f his race. The tall 
physician (he was a white man) straightened 
himself and slowly, sorrowfully shook his 
head. 
"It's too bad, " he said i n his kindl y voice. 
"The lad's lif e is wrecked, physically, and I 
fear mentally. " 
A tear welled u p and dropped from the 
woman's eye. The ma n had arisen, and now 
gazed apathetically down upo n the little 
patient. The doctor paused i n the act of 
reaching fo r bis case. Agai n he shook his 
head as he looked at the figure outlined 
beneath the coverlet. Bandages, he knew, 
covered cruel welts on breast and back. A 
bruise on the li p and a gap i n the row of 
little teeth completed the story. Something 
choking arose i n his throat. H e turned 
swiftl y away. 
"B y God, " he muttered fiercely, "it's un ­
bearable. This sort o f thing can't go on. 
It must stop. " 
H e blindl y grasped his hat and strode 
from the room. A t the door he turned : 
"Don' t forget. Ever y hour while he's 
awake. An d i f anythin g develops don't fail 
to call me." 
The man followed him downstairs. I n 
the hall below they looked into each other's 
eyes and their hands met i n a long, firm, 
comprehensive grasp. An d the doctor left. 
The woman looked u p when she felt the 
man's comforting arm around her. 
"He'l l never have to go through it again, " 
she said. 
"No , Lela , he's ours now. " 
"Jimmy, " she whispered. "M y boy. " 
There was a true love between these two, 
the man and the woman, a love that had 
started i n childhood and remained faithful 
until Monro e had graduated from the law 
school o f H Universit y and returned to 
take u p his practice i n his home town, and 
to. marr y the girl of his heart. It had been 
a lon g uphil l fight for the youn g lawyer, 
but he had borne his burden unfalteringly 
and now was beginning to reap his reward. 
Certainly he was a well-known figure i n 
court circles, and his modern, well-furnished 
home gave token of his material prosperity. 
A staunch supporter of his race, his suspicions were continually on watch, and there 
was never a measure to degrade it that di d 
not receive his bitterest opposition, and never 
one to help or uplift it to which he di d not 
give his utmost zeal. 
Whe n a warden of the State reformatory 
surrendered his position and came before 
the court wit h a horrible tale of the mistreatment of the children at the institution, 
Monro e was one of the first to demand an 
investigation; and when, among other 
things, the committee discovered one little 
Negro la d almost dead and ravin g mad, it 
was Monroe who, i n the fulness of his heart, 
procured the child's immediate release and 
carried him to his own home. 
Twelve years of age was "Jimmy " Brown . 
Twelve orphan years had he lived, and two 
of them had been spent under the bane of 
the "reform farm. " Twelve years, but the 
little figure was frail and the face, thin and 
old lookin g as it was, held nothing of a 
boyish nature. 
"He's only a baby." There was something 
of awe i n her voice. 
The man gulped and nodded. "Onl y a 
baby. " 
The boy awoke. Hi s gaze wandered, 
uncomprehending, over the walls and ceilin g until it rested upon the twain kneeling 
together by the cot. There was a sharp 
exclamation. A wil d terror dawned and 
deepened i n the eyes, and the child shrank 294 TH E CRISIS 
to the extreme edge of the cot, his face 
wincin g i n pain. 
"God, " came i n a hoarse whispe r from the 
man as he turned away. 
Some minutes later his wife found him 
in his study. Desperation was pictured on 
her face and her voice was tremulous as she 
asked: 
"Won' t yo u see what yo u can do wit h him? 
H e won't eat or take his medicine, and every 
time that I come near him he screams and 
looks just awful. " 
Withou t a wor d the man arose and followed her. H e noticed how the terrorstricken eyes fell upon them as they entered 
the door, and followed their every move. H e 
noticed how the thin lip s drew back i n a 
snarl as he approached the bed. Then it 
came to him at once. O f course, force had 
always been used. 
"Jimmy. " he said i n a harsh tone, "be 
quiet." 
It hurt him to see the child cowering into 
whimperin g obedience, but he grit his teeth 
and forced the boy to take and swallow the 
medicine. Not until they had retreated to 
the other side of the room, however, would 
the lad touch the broth which Mrs. Monroe 
had prepared, and then it was pitifu l to see 
the hurried avidity wit h which he devoured 
it, keeping watchful eve, meanwhile, upon his 
benefactors. 
Fo r one whole delirious week they nursed 
him thus. An d sometimes there were cries 
and moans, and cruel laughs, and horrible 
curses, things that issued strangely from the 
boy's lips, those baby lips that should have 
known nothing but childish prattle. An d 
always there was that terrorstricken look 
i n the eyes, and ever anon would come that 
ugly snarl to his lips. 
Bu t one mornin g the woman found a new 
expression on his face. The fear was still 
there, but a curiosity lay back of it and the 
wildness was gone. 
"Dis hyeh fo' me? " he asked hesitantly, 
as she lay his breakfast before him. 
"Yes. Jimmy. " 
An d when he had finished: 
" 'Sense me, but whut's yo' name? A h 
don' know whut to call yo'-all. " 
A great tenderness welled up i n the 
woman's breast. She took the little face 
between her hands and imprinte d a gentle 
kiss on the thin lips. 
"Cal l me mamma. Jimmy, " she said. 
"You'r e my boy now. " 
Jimm y improve d slowly, but the doctor 
stopped leavin g medicine an d his calls became less and less frequent, some restriction 
on the patient's diet being removed at every 
call. 
H e was a lovable little chap, uncomplain ­
ing, grateful. They loved him an d it seemed 
as i f his frai l fingers but drew their hearts 
the closer together. H e was a born story 
teller also, and man y an evening was spent 
listening to his quaint dialect as he told queer 
little tales which he had picke d u p from 
somewhere, or recounted bits of conversation, 
scenes or incidents that he had heard or 
witnessed from his window. Sometimes he 
would break into a boisterous laugh, and 
the woman's hand woul d reach out and 
touch the man's; and he, understanding, 
would return the pressure. Bu t sometimes 
the boy's voice would be grave and there 
would be tears i n his eyes as he told some 
cruel story of the "reform farm. " An d 
sometimes he would tell of his own mistreatment: but then there woul d be no .tears, 
only a light that softly glowed : 
" 'Ah'l l break yo sperit, yo' li' l brack 
bastard,' he sed. 'Yas, ah'll show yo ' who's 
de boss.' An ' he beat me wi d dat hosswhup. 
An ' w'en ah cried, he hollahed: 'Shet up.' 
An ' he hit me i n de mouf, lak dat. An ' den 
ah stahted lafifin'. A h didn ' wantah laff, but 
hit seem lak ah jes' couldn't he'p it. An ' 
dat made him mad an' he beat me a 'hole 
lot mo". An ' somehow 'r othar, ah jes' 
couldn't stop laffin". An ' bimeby ah jes' 
fell ovah an', he kep' on beatin' me. An ' 
den " 
"An d then what, Jimmy? " 
"Don " know, " with a tired sigh. " 'Pears 
lak ah jes cain't ricollec'. " 
Then the man would clench his hands and 
hurriedly leave the room, an d the woman 
would clasp the little waif to her breast. 
"It's all right now, Jimmy . You'r e my 
boy now. " 
A contented smile and a murmured : 
"Yas'm , 's all right now. " 
The summer waned into fall , and though 
his face brightened continually, the patient's 
body remained weak and he still had to be 
carried up and down for his few dail y hours 
i n the mornin g and evening air. Bu t the 
remembrance of his happy , grateful eyes 
lightened Mrs. Monroe's household cares 
considerably, and the sight of them, after 
a hard afternoon's work, was like a tonic 
to the youn g lawyer. JIMM Y 295 
Bu t one day the woman, hearing' a cry 
from the sickroom, hastened to find Jimm y 
on his knees before the window, his form 
stiffened in an attitude of fright. Whe n 
she called him he turned with a wil d 
gratin g laugh that made her heart sink ; she 
fell to weeping softly. H e yielded to her 
comforting arms, but in answer to her 
questions he only shook his head. I n a few 
minutes, however, it was apparently all 
over, and i f she thought it strange she kept 
her ponderings to herself. 
Jimmy's room had now become a settled 
meeting place for the family at bedtime. 
Attire d for the night's rest, they would discuss the day's happenings or lay plans fo r 
the morrow or the next day or for the time 
when Jimm y should have convalesced. Or 
maybe Monro e would talk of some of the 
problems that were confronting him. 
One evening he seemed somewhat more 
morose than usual. Afte r their conversation he told his wife, i n a low tone, of 
several dis couraging happenings, certain bills 
introduced into the legislature that the 
governor had been only too glad to commend: segregation in the civil service, discrimination politically at Washington and 
lynching*—two in Texas, one i n Alabama , 
one in Pennsylvani a and two i n their own 
State. Whe n he had finished there was 
silence for a while and then little Jimm y 
sadly shook his head: 
"De y does treat mah peop'l bad— 
evahwheb." 
H e told of incidents that had come under 
his small ken. Bu t at the last the eyes took 
on a far-away look and the voice became 
weird : 
"Bu t deyl l come a time w'en mah peop'l 
jes' won' stan' fo' it no longah. An ' dey'll 
be fiah, an' shootin' an' men yellin ' and 
wimmen faintin ' an' chillun cryiri', an' 
evahbody'll be jes' wil \ An ' w'en dat time 
gits hyeh " H e trailed off into silence. 
"Wha t then, Jimmy? " 
The boy smiled and shook his head. Bu t 
after the others were asleep- he crawled out 
of bed and over to the window. One small 
finger pointed across the street. 
"An ' w'en dat time gits hyeh," he 
repeated, "I'se gwine ter kil l him." 
A ml into his mind came the picture of a 
big coarse-faced man holding a horsewhip— 
the warden who had nearly finished Jimmy's 
youn g lif e and who was now livin g i n the 
house just opposite. 
The autumn deepened into the haze of 
Indian summer and Jimm y advanced so fa r 
that he was able to walk downstairs. Then 
it was touching to witness his eagerness to 
work, to help with I lie household duties, to 
do something, anything, that might be a 
slight return for the kindness shown him. 
Mrs. Monroe did assign him a few tasks and 
the sight of his happy, busy little self made 
her face her own cares with singing heart, 
while Mr . Monroe , seeing the life shining 
in the little face again, began to lay plans 
for entering him into school at the beginning 
of the next term. 
Came the day when the man, returning 
for dinner, wore a careworn expression on 
his usually stolid face, and would vouchsafe 
no reply to the woman's questions. 
Afte r the meal, in a constrained voice: 
"Coul d you fix me a little lunch? I might 
not be home this evening. " 
Bu t he did return that evening, and 
again : 
"Coul d you fix me another lunch? I'l l 
have to go back." 
Then she caught him by the shoulders and, 
lookin g up into his eyes, said tenderly: 
"Frank , you just must tell me. I f anything should happen. " 
H e sat down and covered his face with 
his hands. 
"It's not much. Henr y Tailo r is hiding i n 
my office." 
"Henr y Tailor—hiding—i n your office? 
Oh, Frank , what is it? " 
"Whit e girl livin g next door was 
assaulted. The family accused Tailor. 
That's about all. " 
A low groan escaped the woman's lips. 
The man arose. 
"Well . I'm tryin g to get him to give himself up. " 
"Frank , do you think " 
H e nodded. 
"I'm going to try. Yo u know the sheriff 
promised me that no client of mine would 
ever get out. Tailor's evidence is clean cut. 
I f - " 
An d upstairs, crouched before the window, 
one tiny finger pointing across the street, 
Jimm y was saying : 
"An ' w'en dat time gits hyeh, I'se 
gwine ter kil l him. " 
Two days later the man burst into the 
house i n midafternoon, with a dark grimness on his lips and a shadowy light i n his 
eyes. 296 TH E CRISIS 
"Oh , there's hell to pay, " he muttered 
hoarsely i n answer to her unspoken question. 
"They'r e tryin g to get him. " 
H e dashed u p the stairs, grabbed his 
cartridge belt wit h the brace of holsters, 
fastened it about him under his coat as he 
hurrie d down, roughly kissed his wif e and, 
wit h a slam of the door, was gone. 
Jimm y awoke wit h noise ringin g i n his 
ears. H e listened eagerly. Yes, there it 
was. H e could hear the shooting and the 
shouting. A t last, at 
last. The time had arrived. H e dressed wit h 
trembling, hastenin g 
fingers and stole softly 
into Monroe's room. H e 
noticed that the brace of 
pistols was gone, but 
what he wanted hun g on 
the wall beside an old 
rifle—a slender, stilettolike hunting knife . 
The woman di d not 
hear the soft opening 
and closing of the door. 
Neither di d she see the 
little figure glidin g across 
the street. No r did she 
witness the disappointment on the face as he 
sensed, somehow, that his 
enemy was out of reach, 
and crouched i n sudden 
weakness beside the fence. 
A discouraging fear 
stole over the boy's soul, 
and the knif e i n his hand 
seemed to mock him. 
Then he starte d and 
looked around the corner 
of the fence, realizing 
that th e nois e that 
awakened him had been 
steadily growin g and now 
was almost deafening. 
H e saw men and boys 
runnin g back and forth, 
and behind, a great crowd of them, yellin g 
like infuriated demons, pushing, pulling , 
dragging, knocking, kickin g along one 
defenseless Negro, one of "his people. " 
H e shivered and a sob arose i n his throat. 
Bu t the next instant the starting tears 
drew back and his muscles tensed. Fo r 
the last ray of the setting sun had fallen 
squarely on the distorted features of a ma n 
who had his hand twisted i n the victim's 
collar. 
"It's him." 
A moment's hesitation and—a small dark 
figure shot out into the street, threading its 
wa y through the legs of the crowd towar d 
the cruel-faced warden. One instant an d the 
flashing blade had buried itself i n the fellow's breast. The next—and the boy was 
knocked down and trodden under the feet 
of the mob. 
* * * 
The woma n moaned 
and it seemed to the 
listening ma n that i n the 
sound of her voice was 
embodied all the pulsin g 
grie f of a mother race fo r 
her sons. The boy on the 
cot la y ver y still. The 
flesh hun g on his bones 
i n quivering shreds, a 
deep furrow showe d 
wher e a bulle t had 
ploughed , along his 
crushed face , an d i t 
seemed to the three who 
watched i n silent woe 
that each feeble breath 
that dragged into the 
shattered lungs must be 
the last. 
"Oh , God , how long? " 
came through the gritted 
teeth of the physician , 
and the man knew that 
the cr y was against the 
prejudice and viciou s 
license that ha d placed 
the boy there. 
A lon g stillness followed whil e they watched 
the lif e ebb i n and out of 
the little body. 
A t last the eyes opened, 
and back of their poig ­
nant suffering la y the 
peace of great content. The lip s essayed to 
move, and three hearts stood still as the three 
heads bent to catch the husky, broken 
whisper. 
"A'—go'—go t 'im. " 
Silence. Then one lon g despairin g wai l 
from the woman : 
"Jimmy ! B y HENR Y W . WILBU R 
Economic prosperity has 
come to all the races of 
men more normally and 
easily by lan d ownership 
and successful tillin g of the 
soil than i n any other way. 
I n short, this is the road 
o f progress fo r men along the line of least 
resistance. This observation is literally true 
applied to the America n Negro, whether 
we consider him i n the Nort h as a transplanted citizen from Dixie , or on his native 
heather i n the Southland, where the sweat 
o f his ancestors contributed so largely to 
the economic prosperity of the master class, 
and indirectly to that hold-over prejudice 
and injustice whic h stares the Negr o i n the 
face i n the South an d unfortunately to a 
considerable extent i n the North . 
Economi c possibility fo r any class of men 
who are practically without capita l demands cheap land. The South has such 
land ; i n the main, the Nort h has not. Fo r 
that reason the combined lan d and Negro 
question has its most natura l application 
i n the South. Bu t conditions are rapidl y 
shifting i n that section. Lan d is increasing 
i n value, and i n all probabilit y the cheap 
land o f the South wil l be either segregated 
or appropriate d withi n a decade. 
Ver y soon the lan d speculator wil l be in 
evidence, an d lan d wil l be secured and held 
fo r the easy unearned increment which 
walks side by side and i n the wake of an 
expanding civilization . The Negro's opportunity as a lan d owner is likel y to be 
further endangered by the growin g disposition to enforce a rule o f race segregation 
applie d to lan d ownership. The purpose 
of this plan,' which is now being vigorously 
pushed i n the South is to put it withi n 
the powe r of the dominant land-owning 
race i n any community to decide by vote 
o f the favored class that men of the proscribed race shall not be allowed to purchase 
or hold lan d i n such community. It is 
bluntl y admitted that the pla n wil l work 
infallibl y to keep the white community 
white, but cannot be employed to keep the 
black neighborhood black. 
The conditions outlined demand a wellorganized and vigorously applie d pla n to 
secure the Negro a share of the soil of his 
native land before it is too late. Such 
pla n can be projected as a business transaction, involvin g practically no possibility of 
loss. Whil e the pla n should contain the 
element of a wise sympathy, it should not 
be philanthropi c to the extent of any 
attempt to pauperize the Negro. Wha t the 
black man wants is not charity, but a 
chance. 
There are colored men i n every Southern 
community who under prope r conditions 
can buy land, produce crops and pay for 
their farms. They are doing it now under 
such an unfavorable handicap as would 
paralyze the average Northern man who has 
had to become a lan d owner by first 
becoming a borrower. Two ways of practically and safely helping the Southern Negro 
to become a successful tille r of his own 
farm present themselves. 
The first thing to do is to face a situation already prevalent i n many communities i n Dixie . That involves helping colored 
men to carry the load of debt under which 
they are now necessarily struggling. I n the 
first place, the interest charges are heavier 
than are warranted by the earning capacity 
of the land, except under the most continuous favorable circumstances. It is 
almost axiomatic that nowhere can the land 
pa y 12 to 18 per cent, interest on the purchase price and permit the debtor owner 
to pa y off the principal, at the same time 
maintaining a famil y i n a self-respecting 
environment. Hel p of the kin d indicated 
means an organized pla n to loan money at 
a reasonable rate of interest, wit h such 
protection involved as would tide the land 
holder over the occasional lean years, which 
are bound to come, until there is an 
approach to economic prosperity. 
The second phase of the Negro land 
movement has immediate and prospective 
possibilities. It involves the same system 
of loans referred to above, but does not 
stop there. It calls fo r the purchase of 
tracts of land to be held and sold to 
Negroes fo r cost plus accrued interest. 
This is vita l i f the Negro is to have any 
place on the land, save occasionally as a 
tenant, but generally as a servant, with the 
TH E NEGR O A S A LAN D OWNE R 298 TH E CRISIS 
dangers of serfdom constantly confronting 
him as a menace. B y a fine-spun interpretation of the character of a financial obligation to the landlord, on the part of the 
Negro tenant, a diluted sort of serfdom is 
already at hand. 
Eithe r the loan scheme or the land-purchase scheme, or both, are financially safe. 
The land i n the South is bound to steadil y 
increase i n value. The only element of 
philanthropy and sympathy i n the plans 
outlined is held i n solution i n the purpose. 
First, to make the interest charge so reasonable and legal that the colored land 
owner, who is a borrower, shall be protected 
from the money loan shark from without, 
and from the paralysis of hope from within . This depression is sure to come to the 
man who is uneasy under the constant 
consciousness that a single crop failure may 
cause him to be dispossessed and lose all he 
had pai d on his farm. 
I n the land-purchase scheme the possible 
philanthropi c element is the purpose to 
give the benefit of the unearned increment, 
not to the speculator, but to the Negro 
purchaser. Those who put their money into 
either plan are sure of its return and the 
legal rate of interest on their investment. 
the rest being that they forego the increase 
of lan d value for the economic good of the 
race whose sweat has already enriched the 
soil of the Southland. 
These plans do not contemplate givin g 
the Negroes money. They do not anticipat e 
loaning money to the shiftless, the intemperate or the improvident. On the other 
hand, they demand a businesslike inquir y 
into the standing of every probable buye r 
of lan d or borrower of money. The good 
results contemplated are twofold. Apar t 
from the benefits to accrue to buyers and 
borrowers, the plans applie d wil l be rewards for persistent, honest effort and in ­
centives to self-help, and the approach to 
success on the part of the Negroes. 
N o better opportunity fo r the capitalist 
and the careful philanthropist to do good 
to the blacks and do no harm to themselves 
exists than is outlined i n these plans to 
help the submerged race to be self-respecting and successful farmers. They are 
attached to the soil. A s a result of freedom, 
after their long period of servitude, it 
would be economically and morall y just to 
help the race rise as citizens of a free 
government, as economically free men on 
the soil. 
I N MOSLE M SPAI N 
By JOSEP H F. GOUL D 
IT is not generally known that 
the Negro appeared i n 
history as a soldier of the 
Egyptia n Pharaohs centuries before we find him as 
a slave. Perhaps no other 
race in existence has had 
as long a record of militar y progress, and 
one of the most interesting epochs of the 
Negro's martia l career was spent i n Spai n 
as the ally of the tolerant Ara b and Berber 
conquerors. 
One of the great pro-Islamic poets was 
Antar, whose mother was a black slave, and 
his father a powerful chief. The poems of 
Anta r are still extant anil there is a long 
romance describing his deeds of prowess, 
which finally compelled his father to acknowledge him as his heir. Thenceforth it would 
seem that being of Negro blood did not 
prevent any Ara b from claimin g the position which was his due, and so one of the 
first events i n the career of the Negr o in 
Spai n was the attempt of lb n Horaith , the 
son of the chief of the Judhamil e tribe of 
Arabs, by a Negro woman, to gain the 
emirate i n Spain . 
Thoaba, the emir, died i n the year 746, and 
his son, Amr , claimed his father's place, lb n 
Horait h disputed the succession, lb n Horait h 
had such a dislike for the Syria n Arab s that 
he said : "I f one bowl contained the blood 
of all the Syrians I would drain it to the 
dregs." Fo r this reason Sumayl , the leader 
of the Syrians in Spain , used his influence 
to have Yusuf, of the tribe of Fihrites, appointed emir, and lb n Horait h was made 
prefect of Regio to console him. 
Sumayl, by treachery, had lb n Horait h 
deprived of his prefecture in January , 747, 
after he had enjoyed that honor only a little 
while. lb n Horait h allied himself with IN MOSLE M SPAI N 299 
Abu'l Khattir, another pretender to the 
emirate, who reluctantly gave up his claim 
because the tribe to which Ibn Horait h 
belonged was most numerous in Spain . This 
open quarrel revived a feud of very remote 
antiquity between the Northern and 
Southern Arabs, and the nobles enrolled 
themselves under the banners of the opposin g clans. 
The battle took place at Secunda, a 
suburb of Cordova , and the remains of an 
old Roma n walled town. There were only 
two or three hundred on each side, and they 
fought in the manner of the old chivalry. 
A t first they tourneyed until all the spears 
were shattered, and then drew their swords, 
and when these broke they fought with clubs 
and their bare fists. 
Towar d evening Sumayl, the Syrian , departed from this fair procedure and sent to 
Cordova for reinforcements of tradespeople. 
By force of •numbers the party of Ibn 
Horaith was conquered and i n the dusk he 
sought to escape by hiding under a mill . 
Thereupon his former ally, Abu' l Khattir, 
pointed him out to Sumay l and, with a taunt 
for Ibn Horaith's hatred of the Syrians, 
said: "Son of a Negress, is there one drop 
left i n your bowl ?" Sumay l beheaded Ibn 
Horaith with his own hand, and then, because the blood lust had seized him, he slew 
seventy of his followers. 
In October, 998, Muzaffar, the son of the 
Caliph Almanzor, fought a battle near Ceuta, 
in Nort h Africa , against Ziri , the Berber. 
The combat waged from dawn to sunset and 
Muzaffar was on the verge of defeat. A 
Negro whose brother had been put to death 
by Ziri's commaud avenged himself by 
wounding Zir i thrice and then rode off at 
full speed to the Spanish lines. A t first the 
Negro's story was not believed because the 
banner of the Berbers still floated aloft. 
Finally , Muzaffa r was convinced and ordered 
a charge, which put the Berbers to flight. 
Three years later Ziri died when his wounds 
were reopened. 
Earl y i n the eleventh century Kasi m Ibn 
Hammu d bought Negroes from Berbe r slave 
traders, freed them and entrusted important 
posts to their leaders. This action caused 
resentment among the people of Cordova , of 
which city he was caliph. On August 12, 
1021, lie was forced to flee wit h only five 
horsemen, and his nephew, Yahya , 
entered the city. Kasi m was joined by his 
faithful Negroes, and on Februar y 12, 1023, 
he took advantage of Yahya's absence 
i n Malag a to enter the city. On September 
6 the Cordovans again expelled his forces, 
but with his Negro troops he besieged them 
and cut off their supply of food. On 
October 31 the Cordovans, i n a concentrated 
force, sallied out and put the attenuated 
line of besiegers to flight, but the Negroes 
made a desperate resistance and only surrendered when Kasi m had lied. Kasi m was 
later captured at Xeres. 
Yahy a Ibn Hammu d had been impressed by the loyalty of the Negroes to 
his uncle, and so he employed them to garrison Carmona , a city he had captured from 
the cadi of Seville. In November, 1035, 
Ismail, the son of this cadi, lured Yahy a from 
his secure position withi n the city walls and 
slew him i n battle. Nevertheless, the Negroes 
who held the city gates and walls would not 
surrender to Ismail or Ibn Abdallah , the 
former ruler of Carmona , and they were 
nearly annihilated by their foes. A t Alge -
ciras Negro soldiers played the role of king ­
makers and proclaimed Mohammed, a cousin 
of Y7ahya, caliph, but this venture was 
unsuccessful. 
Zuhair, of Almeria , was unpopula r among 
his subjects because he was a so-called Slav 
prince—that is, a descendent of Northern 
mercenaries, such as the mamelukes of more 
recent times. Ib n Abbas, his vizier, gave 
him treacherous advice, which induced him 
to make an expedition into Granadan territory. On August 3, 1038, he found himself 
surrounded. His Slav cavalry fled when 
their leader, Hudhail , was dismounted, and 
his Andalusia n troops were dispirited and 
useless. His 500 Xegr o infantry thereupon 
seized the armory and went over to the 
enemy. It is possible that their desertion 
was prearranged also, for Badis, kin g of 
Granada , was devoid of religious and racial 
prejudice and had a Jew, Samuel Ibn Nag -
dela, for vizier and a Negro, Kodam , as 
provost-marshal. 
I n the year 1047 Idris II., of Malaga , was 
deposed when the Negro troops who garrisoned his citadel declared for his cousin, 
Mohammed. The inhabitants of Malag a were 
anxious to attempt to storm the heights, but 
Idris declared them impregnable and . said 
he would submit to the decree of Fat e without further bloodshed. 
Ten days later Malag a was annexed by 
Badis, of Granada , who continued the employment of a Negro garrison. This was a 300 TH E CRISIS 
wise measure, as the blacks were very loya l 
to him, whereas the Arabs, who were 
numerous i n Malaga , disliked the rule of a 
Berbe r and were intriguin g wit h Mutadid , of 
Seville. Mutadi d sent his son, A l Mutamid . 
to aid the Arab s of Malaga . A l Mutami d 
was dilatory i n pressing the siege and the 
Negroes i n the citadel managed to get wor d 
through the hostile lines to Badis, who sent 
strong reinforcements. 
Yusu f lb n Tashfln, the leader of the 
Almoravides, fought a battle wit h Alfons o 
VI. , of Castille, at Zallaka , on October 23, 
1086. Alfons o was hemmed i n on both sides, 
but resisted stubbornly. A t a crucial moment 
Yusu f ordered his Negro guards, whom he 
had held i n reserve, to charge. They di d terrible execution and one of them cut his wa y 
through to Alfons o and wounded him i n the 
thigh with a dagger. This fight won the 
"Afro-America n Folksongs, " a study in racial 
and national music. B y H . E . Krelibiel. 176 pages. 
S. Schirmer , New York . 
Krehbiel's "Afro-America n Folksongs " is 
the most important contribution to the literature of Negro art that has been made 
for several years. Mr . Krehbie l is the 
musical criti c on the New Yor k Tribune 
and has written the book to settle the question which some people have tried to argue : 
that the songs of the Negro slaves were not 
origina l folksongs native to the Negroes of 
this land. 
The author finds absolutely no reason to 
doubt this. H e ridicules those who deny 
and speaks of the "clamor from one class 
of critics which disclosed nothing so much 
as their want of intelligent discrimination 
unless it was their ungenerous and illibera l 
attitude toward a body of America n citizens to whom at least must be credited the 
creation of a species of song i n which an 
undeniable great composer had recognized 
artistic potentialities hitherto neglected, i f 
not suspected, i n the lan d of its origin . 
Whil e the critics quarreled, however, a 
group of America n musicians acted on 
Dr . Dvorak's suggestion, and music i n the 
serious, artistic forms, racy of the soil from 
victory and Alfons o could only save a small 
remnant of his forces. 
I n Moslem Spai n co-operation between 
Arab s and Berbers or Arab s of different 
tribes was impossible except i n the face o f 
a common danger, and fo r this reason Jews 
and Negroes were given opportunitie s to 
serve the State because they were neutrals 
as regards the feuds between Ara b and 
Berber, and because they had no connection 
with tribes they had more personal loyalty . 
It was an age of each fo r himself and there, 
are instances of Negroes lookin g out fo r 
their own advantages regardless of the side 
for which they fought. O n the whole, 
though, i n that age of treachery an d lo w 
standards, the Negro soldier was unusuall y 
grateful and faithful to those who used him 
well, and his physica l courage was never 
called i n question. 
which the slave songs had sprung , was pro ­
duced by George W . Chadwick, Henr y 
Schoenberg, Edwar d R. Kroege r and 
others." 
H e shows how certain impulses from 
these songs are to-day capturin g the world . 
"Th e song's created by the Negroes whil e 
they were slaves on the plantations of the 
South have cried out i n vai n fo r scientific 
study, though 'ragtime' tunes, whic h are 
their debased offspring, have seized upo n 
the fancy of the civilized world . This popu ­
larit y may be deplorable, but it serves at 
least to prove that a marvelous potency lies 
i n the characteristic rhythmica l element o f 
the slave songs. Woul d not a wide r an d 
truer knowledge of their other characteristics as well lead to the creation of a 
better art than that which tickles the ears 
and stimulates the feet of the pleasure 
seekers of London , Paris, Berli n and Vienn a 
even more than it does those of Ne w 
York? " 
Agai n and again he declares that "the 
songs of the black slaves of the South are 
origina l and native products. The y contain 
idioms whic h were transplanted hither from 
Africa , but as songs they are the produc t 
SON G AN D STOR Y SON G AN D STOR Y 301 
of America n institutions; of the social, 
politica l and geographical environment 
withi n whic h their creators were placed i n 
America ; o f the influences to which they 
were subjected to i n America ; of the joys, 
sorrows and experiences which fell to their 
lot in America. " 
Mentio n is made of the interesting music 
and musical instruments of Afric a and the 
beautiful black Creole music. It seems that 
both the "tango" and "turkey-trot " dances, 
together wit h the Cuban "Habanera " and 
other well-known dances, are due to the 
colored man. Indeed, the whole of this in ­
teresting book is an amplification and scientific proo f o f Dvorak's celebrated dictum 
concerning America n folksongs: 
"Th e most potent, as well as the most 
beautiful among them, according to my estimation, are certain of the so-called plantation melodies and slave songs, all of which 
are distinguished by unusual and subtle 
harmonies, the thin g which I have found i n 
no other songs but those of Scotland and 
Ireland. " 
m 
"Liberia. " B y Frederick Starr . 277 pages. 
Chicago, 1913. 
"Militar y Moral e of Nations and Races. " B y 
Charles Yonng . 270 pages. Frankli n Hudso n Publishing Co., Kansa s City , Mo . 
Two books associate themselves curiously 
on our table—one is by a white student of 
Liberia , the other by a colored worke r fo r 
Liberia's true freedom. Starr's "Liberia " 
is an excellent handbook which treats 
Liberia's problems sympathetically. Wha t 
Professor Starr recommends Majo r Charles 
Youn g is endeavoring to carry out with the 
same unwavering sense of duty that has 
always characterized his work. This innate 
sense of the best characteristics of the ideal 
soldier he has written down i n his treatise. 
It is academic and a bit "military, " but 
there is charm and straightforwardness i n 
its naivete. 
Turnin g from information to literature we 
have before us three little books: The first, 
" A Littl e Dreaming, " b y Fento n Johnson. 
Readers of TH E CRISI S have often read bits 
o f Johnson's poetry. The poems are very 
uneven i n value, but here and there are bits 
o f real singin g and the hint of an unusual 
message, as i n the "Ethiopian's Song. " 
DREA M O F A WHISPER . 
I shall dream! shall dream 
O f a whispe r soft 
Fro m the lip s divine, 
Fro m the lip s aloft, 
Fro m the lip s of Circe. 
An d my soul awakes, 
Though my eyes are closed; 
Pleasure fills my veins, 
A s when Venus rose 
Sea nymphs laughed so softly. 
Fai r enchantress, weave, 
Weave a dream for me ; 
Let my Hella s live 
Dow n beside the sea— 
Sea of starlit strangeness. 
m 
Teachers and parents who want stories for 
their children ought to buy A . 0 . Stafford's 
"Anima l Fables from the Dar k Continent. " 
Mr . Stafford is a teacher i n the Washington 
colored schools and has done excellent work 
i n Negro folklore. The little book is illustrated, and published by the America n Book 
Company. 
m 
" A Child's Story of Dunbar, " by Miss 
Juli a L . Henderson, has for a year or more 
been used i n some of the Texas public 
schools. It is an interesting little book and 
ought to have a wider circulation. TH E 
CRISI S sells it for 2 5 cents. 
''Th e Strange Case of Eri c Marotte. " B y J . I. 
Pearce. 366 pages. Published by the author, 
Chicago. 
A novel comes to us. I n spite of the 
pretentiousness and verbosity of the author's 
style, there is for the colored reader a 
strain of interest, until it dawns upon him 
that i n the end John, the supposedly colored hero, wil l turn out to be a dark white 
man. Al l of the sympathy which the 
author has seemed to lavish upon the Negro 
is really for the white man who is thought 
to be a Negro, and his real attitude toward 
the colored people is shown by such 
phrases as "taint of Negro blood, " "the 
curse of color, " and the words which he 
puts into the mouth of Joh n concerning his 
white sweetheart: "She would have married 
me even knowin g me to be a Negro, except 
that I forbade the sacrifice." A LITTL E lynchin g at Shreveport: 
"Fran k and Ernest Will ­
iams, Negroes, were shot to 
death by a mob a short 
distance from Blanehard. 
about 10 o'clock last Tuesday morning. They were taken from 
Deputy Sheriff F . W . Katliffe by a crowd 
of fifteen or twenty men, who are said to 
have been masked. * * * 
"It was Ernest Williams who testified 
before the coroner's jury , in the Ballar d 
case, that he had seen the murdered man at 
4 o'clock Thursday evening, and it was 
Fran k Williams who gave the alarm Saturday morning that Ballar d was missing. * * * 
"Calvi n Ballard , who kept a general 
store four miles from Blanchard, was found 
murdered i n his place of business last 
Saturday. H e was last seen alive the 
Thursday afternoon previous, and as the 
store failed to open, a Negro livin g i n the 
vicinity notified Mac k Wasson, Ballard's 
brother-in-law, who investigated and found 
the body, which lay between the counter 
and shelving. The victim had been shot 
in the left side of the face and had probably been dead a day when found. 
"I n 1009 Calvi n Ballar d was sent to the 
State penitentiary for ten years, having 
been convicted of manslaughter. H e killed 
his brother. D . E . Ballard , i n a quarrel 
about a Negro. H e served about two years 
of his sentence when he was pardoned for 
preventing a wholesale escape of Negro 
convicts. Ballard , who was a trusty, is 
said to have killed two of the convicts on 
that occasion. 
"Afte r Ballard's return home he engaged 
in the mercantile business with his brotherin-law. the firm being Ballar d & Wasson , 
ami doing business at Albany , near Blanehard. The store is three miles from the 
nearest railroa d and there are no telephones 
in that section, which is sparsely settled, 
principall y by small Negr o farmers. Bal ­
lard was 37 years old.'"—Louisiana Herald. 
D 
"I n referring to the case of the killin g of 
one. Calvi n Ballard , white, and the mobbing 
of the two Negroes, near Blanehard, La. , 
they were mobbed as usual without judge 
or juror. That the man was kille d by 
someone of his own color, and that the 
Negroes were not guilty, is the general 
opinion. It seems that they were Negroes 
who visited the place quite often and at 
limes worked about the place. It is reported that this older Negro was the first 
one to come up to the store for two or 
three days, and on approachin g he saw the 
store closed; going up to it and looking 
through the window he saw this man lyin g 
dead, and he hastened away and informed 
the neighborhood. H e and his brother were 
afterward ru n down and lynched, for it is 
dangerous to report a dead man, should you 
happen to come upon one, and dangerous 
not to report it. Is there any hope of 
refuge 1?"—A REAPER . 
" A Negro is a person of Africa n blood 
(much or little) about whom men of Eng ­
lish descent tell only half the truth, and 
because of whom they do not act with 
frankness and sanity, either toward the 
Negro or to one another—in a word , about 
whom they easily lose their common sense, 
their usual good judgment, and even their 
powers of accurate observation. The Negro 
in America , therefore, is a form of insanity 
that overtakes white men." — WALTE R H . 
PAGE . Ambassador to England . 
THE BURDEN TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 303 
By JACO B PEAS E 
(Instructo r at th e Mand o Mozart Conservator y 
an d membe r of the Ne w Amsterda m Musica l 
Associatio n an d of the Cle f Clu b Orchestra. ) 
AT 
5 West 125th Street (Y . M . G . A . Hall ) 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
TUESDA Y EVENING , APRI L 21, 1914 
A T EIGHT O'CLOC K 
Accompanie d by MELVILL E CHARLTO N 
Admission—3 5 cents and 50 cents 
Ticket s ma y be secure d b y applyin g to : 
Joh n W . Dias, 1603 Pacifi c Street, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Melvill e Charlton , 405 Cumberlan d St., B'ktyn , N . Y . 
Jaco b Pease , 2137 Madiso n Avenue , Ne w Yor k City . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
Homes in Long Island! 
Fe w people realize the wonderful possibilities of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growt h of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLING . GOO D HOME S I N CORONA , wit h all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to Ne w York . Corona is in the 
ver y center of Greater Ne w York , and in a few months wil l be reached 
b y the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, givin g to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
Th e only place withi n thirty minutes of Time s Square, Gran d 
Centra l Station or the Pennsylvani a Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home wit h all improvements at a moderate 
cost. W e woul d be glad to have yo u visit Coron a at our expense. 
Coron a is one of the highest elevations i n Ne w Yor k City , has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all Ne w Yor k for children. Fo r full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L . S. REE D & COMPAN Y 
142 Hunte r Avenu e Lon g Island Cit y 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 304 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PUBLISHERS ' CHA T 
No w for a circulatio n of 50,000 ! 
A t last w e have adequate office 
space an d equipment. Kindl y call . 
Ou r Atlanta numbe r come s i n May . 
Th e Jun e numbe r is Annual Conference number. Othe r numbers wil l 
follow. 
Her e are a few bouquets whic h w e 
modestly reprint : 
"TH E CRISIS , a magazine wit h the 
largest circulatio n eve r obtained b y 
a publicatio n edited by a colore d 
man."—O . G . Villard , i n the North 
American Review. 
"TH E CRISIS , a particularl y bright 
an d intelligent organ of the America n 
colore d people."—Wil l Alle n White's 
Emporia Gazette. 
"TH E CRISI S * * * one of the 
dynami c forces of this century."— 
S. Priestle y Smith , i n the Blenheim 
(England ) Magazine. 
" I am ver y glad yo u are editing 
TH E CRISIS , an d yo u are doin g it 
admirably."—Willia m Haye s Ward , 
of the Independent. 
"Past e pot an d shears."—Washington Bee. 
"The Freeman is the peer of NegTo journals, circulating in every State and Territory 
i n the Unite d States, an accomplishment which 
cannot be claimed by any other Negro publication. Send us your subscription at once." 
—The Indianapolis Freeman. 
Yo u are mistaken , sweet cousin . 
TH E CRISI S circulate s i n ever y single 
State of this Union , i n each of ou r 
dependent Territories, an d i n Europe , 
Asia , Afric a an d Australia . Ou r 
present edition, 36,000, is the largest 
editio n of a periodica l eve r issued by 
colore d me n i n the world . Excus e 
our candor. 
Beautifu l 
0 2 0 Inches Wide 
A-s. 4- / 19 Inches Long 
Staytyde Onl y 4.95 
The wonderful Stay-Tyde patent process, owned by us, 
prevents the delicate flues from breaking. Yet they cost 
you less than you pay elsewhere for ordinary willows. 
Stay-Tyde Willo w Plume s 
23in. wide 22 in. long 5.90 26in.wide 25 in. long 7.90 
25in. wide 24 in. long 6.90 29in. wide 27 in. long 9.90 
30 in. wide 27 in. long $11.90 
ich Cur l Plumes 
1., Special, $1.95 
2 4 8 
" Ex.wide, S.OO 
7.SO 
" '* IO.OO 
We have established a world ­
wide reputation on our No.401 magnificent lSl-inch French Curl Plume, 
made of rich, glossy, best male 
stock, with wide, broad fibres and 
heavy French head. <X C Q A 
BlacK. white and colors T' J,V U 
Send 25c to cover express charges and we will ship 
any of above C.O.D. for free examination. Or, send 
full purchase price and we will send all charges prepaid. Money promptly refunded if for any reason yon 
are not satisfied.' 
Send for free catalog of French or Willow Plumes, 
Ostrich Bands and Aigrettes, and get a complete $£5 
Course in Millinery, Dyeing, Cleaning, Curling, etc 
SOUT H AFRICAN IMPORTING CO . , 
1841 Wabas h Ave . Dept. 150 CHICAG O I 
Colored agents wanted everywhere to supply 
the big demand for our high grade Calling 
Cards. Latest styles and sizes for ladies or ge
cents or 50 for 25 cents. Outfit free Large 
commission. Exclusive territory. All orders 
filled promptly Write for samples and terms 
The House of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
D O YO U ADVERTISE ? 
If yo u want to brin g you r business to the 
attention of 150.000 discriminatin g readers 
advertise in TH E CRISIS. Advertisin g 
rate cards wil l be sent on application. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenue - - Ne w Yor k 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 305 
FREE ShotGun 
.FUL L CHOK E 
Hammerless,1* 
Double-Barrel Shot" 
Gun—very superior. Fitted with 
top snap-break, bar side locks, forged" 
frame, case hardened locks and frames. 
Nicely finished, highly polished stock and 
fore end. Polished blued steel barrels; 
choke bored, 12 Gauge and either 30 or 32 
inch barrels. Well balanced and accurate. 
A perfect beauty. The same model used by 
some of the best shots in the country. We give it 
I 
I 
I 
1 Absolutely FREE to Our Agents f 
All that we require is that you show our B i require is that you 
samples and take a few orders for our 
special made-to-measure clothes. We 
pay highest cash profits and give extra 
presents besides. Your choice of 628 
valuable premiums—such as Leather Suit 
Cases, Musica l Instruments, Pipes, 
Watches, Sporting Goods, Hats, * etc. 
Write for elegant free outfit a nd full particulars 
• SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept . 819. CHICAG O • 
1 
I 
1 
I 
Big Pay for Easy Work 
If You Live in a Small Town 
We want 6000 agonts — 6000 bright, youn g men 
willing to hustle nnd earn $5.00 to Ilfj.OO a day 
Rollin g our fine hand • made - to - measure clothes. 
Thl8 throws open one qoodjob in every community 
or town of not over 10,000 people. 
To the first man in you r tow n wh o 
writes us, will be given the firat opportunity 
to got ou r Complet e Sampl e Or 
fit Free . You need no experience, 1> 
star t rl«ht out making money—$2.00 to $9... 
profit on every suit you sell. Wholesal e 
Price s for Suit s $7.98 to $28.00—Pants 
$2.48 to $8.60. We prepay the postage or 
express on every shipment. 
Every carmen t 1B made-to-order 
nnd strictly hand tailored. Satisfaction Guarantee d o r You r 
Mone y Back . 
To prove to you the unequaled 
qualityof oar tailoring, we will let 
yo u order a Sample Suit or even a 1 
puirof pants at the wholesale price. 
Uemember. we want only one agent in each town. 
Someone else from your town ma y write us tomorrow—so don't delay—but mail your letter today. 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
Dept. 265 Van Buren and Market Sts.. CHICAGO 
WANTED—ON E MA N O R WOMA N I N EVER Y 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Best paying 
small business on earth. Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Writ e for particulars. Native Herbariu m Co., Ambler , Pa . 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d 
work . Address: 70 Fift h Avenue , 
Ne w York . 
$60 A WEEK and EXPENSES 
That's the money you can get this year. I mean It. I want County Sales Managers 
quick, men or women who believe In the square deal, who will go Into partnership with 
me. No capital or experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Full length 
bath In any room. Folds in small roll, handy as an umbrella. I tell you It's great! 
ORE AT I Rivals $100 bath room. Now llstenl I want YOU to handle your county. 
I'll furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger 
money In a wcrk with nie than you ever made In a month before—I KNOW IT 1 
TW O SALE S A DA Y $300 A MONT H 
That's what you get—every month. Needed in every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities (or all the people. Take the orders right and left. Quick 
sales Immense profits. Look at these men. Kunkle. Ohio, received f240 first week; 
Mathias Florida. $120 In two days; Corrtgan, New York, $114 in 60 hours; Newton, 
California, $G() In three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. The work is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It means a business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You caonot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, BO 
can you. Act, then, quick. SEND NO MONEY. Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustle I 
YOU ! 
YES.Y0U 
CAN GET IT 
H . S. ROBINSO N 
President 
190 Vance St., Toledo, O. Canadian Address: 
DEMONSTRATIN G 
TU B FRE E 
WalkerviUe , Ont., Canada. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 306 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
IN FREEDOM'S 
BIRTHPLACE 
A Study of the Boston Negroes 
B y John Daniels, sometime holde r 
of the South En d Hous e Fellowshi p 
in Harvar d University ; now secretary 
of the Socia l Service Corporation , 
Baltimore , Maryland . Wit h an introduction by Robert A. Woods, head of 
the South En d House . 
The' first comprehensive, impartia l 
analysis of the problems affecting a 
large colored population in a Norther n 
city. Th e result of nine years' sifting 
of facts from every quarter. 
Particularl y suggestive as showin g 
the present attitude of the city of the 
Abolitionists toward the Negro , not 
as a distant sentiment, but as a fellowcitizen and neighbor. 
496 pages; $1.50 net. Postage extra. 
HOUGHTO N MIFFLI N CO. 
4 Park Street Boston, Mass. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monograph s Sold Separately 
Address: 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxo n 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda . 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street - - - New York , N . Y . 
"HEAVE N AN D HELL " 
Swedenborg's great work ; 400 pages; 15 cents, 
postpaid. Pastor Landenberger , Windso r Place, 
St. Louis, Mo . 
Rea d Webb's Biblica l Work s of 
THE BLACK MAN'S PART IN THE BIBLE 
Jesus Wa s a Blac k Ma n 
,T. , (or Negro ) b y Blood . 
James Web b
 v 
Webb's boo k an d pictur e sho w it an d prov e it 
b y the Bible . A pictur e 12x18 of Jesu s wit h 
wooll y hair an d Hi s Hol y Angels at Hi s secon d 
coming . An d a boo k showin g that Jesu s wa s bor n 
out o f the blac k tribe , accordin g to Biblica l history . 
Thi s famou s pictur e i n colors an d the Biblica l 
boo k bot h fo r $1.50, postage prepaid . Th e follow ­
in g commen t is upo n the same , fro m the Seattle , 
Washingto n Daily Times: 
"Th e evidenc e submitte d by Elde r Web b tendin g 
to prov e tha t the Saviou r of mankin d wa s a blac k 
ma n seems to be sufficient to put thos e wh o 
oppos e the propositio n upo n their proof. No w tha t 
the chai n o f evidenc e presente d by Mr . Web b 
seems so complete , it is strang e that non e o f the 
delvers i n the Biblica l record s hav e advance d the 
propositio n before . No t onl y wa s Christ a Negro , 
bu t it seems tha t Solomon , wh o has bee n hel d up 
throug h al l the ages as the _ personificatio n of 
wisdom , ha d Ethiopia n bloo d i n his vein s also. " 
A NE W BOOK entitled 
Th e Blac k Ma n Wa s the Fathe r of 
Civilization . 
Thi s boo k defend s its titl e exclusivel y b y the 
Bibl e an d therefor e ha s nothin g to fear. Thi s 
boo k is illustrate d wit h man y pictures. Pric e 
$1.00 b y mail . Th e followin g commen t is fro m 
the Seattl e Daily Post-Intelligencer: 
"Elde r J . M . Webb , Evangelist o f the Churc h 
o f God , i n his boo k describe s the blac k ma n as the 
fathe r o f all civilization . H e take s th e Bibl e to 
sho w tha t the fathers o f the Churc h an d al l the 
grea t leaders, eve n the Greatest One , wa s black . 
Mr . Webb' s wor k is abl e an d thoughtful . Whethe r 
the Anglo-Saxo n believe s hi m o r not , Mr . Web b 
write s wha t he believe s to be tru e abou t his rac e 
an d their plac e i n Biblica l history. " 
Combinatio n of both books an d picture s for $2, postage prepaid . 
Sen d mone y order, express orde r o r registered letter to 
ELDE R J . M . WEB B 3519 State Street, Chicago , 111. 
WIL L SUBMI T TERM S TO AGENTS . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 307 
Masterpieces of 
Negro Eloquence 
Edited by ALIC E MOORE DUNBAR . 
Th e one volume that contains the best 
speeches of fifty-one of the. ablest Negroe s of 
the Unite d States, England , Afric a and France , 
from 181 8 to 1913 . Th e wonderful eloquence 
of the most powe rful Negr o men and wome n 
of the worl d is contained in this book. Nothin g 
mor e interesting and inspiring has ever been 
written . 
If yo u woul d kno w of the history of the 
race, appreciate the sacrifice for principle, 
understand the struggle for liberty, and properly value the oratorica l achievement of the 
Negro , yo u should place this book in your 
library. 
Th e "Masterpiece s of Negr o Eloquence " wil l take yo u back to 1818, when 
Princ e Saunders in his fascinating style eloquently pleaded for the abolition of 
slavery. It wil l give yo u the speech of Henr y Highlan d Garnett, the first Negr o 
ever asked to deliver a sermon in the Unite d States Hous e of Representatives; 
the speech of Frederic k Douglass, wh o in 185 2 with unexcelled eloquence 
demanded at Rocheste r to know, "Wha t to the Slave Is the Fourt h of July?" ; 
the speech that made Booke r Washingto n famous; an estimate of Toussaint 
L'Ouverture , by James McCun e Smith, that ranks wit h Wendel l Phillips's famous 
eulogy: Charle s M . Langston's defiance of the Fugitiv e Slave Law , delivered in 
1859 ; Judge Ruffin's famous eulogy of Crispus Attucks, a speech that should be 
read by every Negr o boy and girl . 
These arc but a few of the gems culled at random from this great book. 
Th e best of our present generation is well represented. 
This is a book that is a library, a reference book and an historical work, 
an indispensable addition to the library of every intelligent Negro . A book that 
shows in the best manner the best that the Negr o has done. 
It is carefully edited, well printed and thoroughly indexed, bound / 
in red and green silk cloth binding, 51 2 pages, gol d top, uncut pages. / 
W e want every reader of T H E CRISI S to have a copy of this / 
book. W e have set aside 50,00 0 copies whic h we are going to sell / 
to T H E CRISI S readers by allowing them to pay 5 0 cents down / 
and 5 0 cents monthl y for four months. i 
Do not delay; sit down immediately, clip this coupon / 
and send it to us with 5 0 cents, and a copy wil l be sent 
yo u by return mail. 
Crisis Coupon 
Th e Douglas s Publishin g Compan y 
HARRISBURG, PA. 
^UMMUM^MKUUUMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMUMUMi , 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
CU T OU T AN D 
MAI L NOW . 
The Douglass Pub. 
i Co., 509 No. 4th St., 
Harrisburg , Pa . 
Enclosed find 50c , for 
which send me a copy of 
/
 ''Th e Masterpieces of Negro 
. Eloquence." I promise to pay 
* 50c. each month until $2.50 is 
/ paid. Titl e of the book to 
remain with vou until the sum 
of $2.50 is paid. 
Name 
Address 308 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Kelsey' B Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Toni c and Fac e Lotio n have no equal. Price , 60c each. 
Guaranteed under Foo d and Dru g Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing , Marce l Wav ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage, Hair Making , Chiropody , 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupil s taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas . Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen' l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
A . Kelsey , Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TEACHERS— Th e new , efficienc y er a calls fo r th e 
moder n wa y o f selectin g teachers, throug h a liv e 
agenc y tha t furnishe s th e connectin g mediu m i n a 
business way , save s tim e o f schoo l officials, relieve s 
teachers o f "the embarrassmen t of jo b huntin g an d 
covers the whol e country . 
W e hav e ha d calls fo r teachers fro m Alabama , 
Arkansas , Delaware , Distric t o f Columbia , Florida , 
Georgia , Illinois, Indiana , Kentucky , Maryland , 
Mississippi , Missouri , Nort h Carolina , Oklahoma , 
Rhod e Island , Sout h Carolina , Tennessee , Texas, 
Virgini a an d Wes t Virginia . 
Ou r list of teachers covers eve n a wide r territory . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N . W . . Washington, D . C . 
Only 
$65.00 
Largest Xegro Carriage co 
Wo. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A V ilue Unequaled. Sold onfi.oo 
I'roi.t Margin Fro m 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogue. 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS, 
Greenfield, Ohio 
United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u ca n operat e i n you r own home durin g spare 
time . Th e parce l post ha s opene d up the doors of 
opportunit y to YOU . Others ar e makin g $20 to 
$500 a week . Wh y can' t you ? B y our metho d 
yo u ca n start wit h $5 an d up . W e offer yo u thirt y 
live , money-makin g mai l orde r plans. Yo u ca n 
make 95 cents profit on every dollar order. W e 
furnis h circulars, printe d matte r an d plac e your 
advertisin g a t lowest rates. Sen d 10 cents fo r 
complet e outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
617 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
Bu y Rea l Estate i n "Twi n Cities. " 
Yo u ca n doubl e you r mone y b y a n investmen t of 
cit y an d suburba n propert y i n an d aroun d 
Minneapolis . T hav e some goo d investments i n ne w 
town s i n Wester n Canada . Communicat e wit h 
me . 
B. MAXE Y McDE W 
Minneapolis, Min n 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) 
to settle on FRE E Government Lands i n 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom ---- - New Mexico 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
ma y b e mad e i n commission s b y partie s handlin g 
' 'Histor y o f Negr o Soldiers i n Spanish-America n 
War " combine d wit h "Histor y of th e Negr o Race. " 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address : E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassa u Stree t - - . - - - New Yor k 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8th and Plu m Sts. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
COLORED ME N 
WANTE D T O PREPAR E A S 
SLEEPING-CA R AN D TRAI N 
PORTERS . 
No experience necessary. Positions pa y $65 to $100 a month. 
Steady work. New Yor k roads. 
Passes and uniforms furnished when 
necessary. Writ e now. 
I. RY. C. I., Dept. 19, Indianapolis, Ind. 
A COLORE D DOLL Y FO R TH E CHIL D 
Bu y a beautifu l colore d doll , wit h lifelik e features, lon g hair, jointe d limb s an d sleepin g 
eyes. Th e righ t playthin g fo r you r child . A bi g attractio n a t churc h fairs an d bazaars. 
Endorse d b y leadin g clergyme n an d educators. Sen d fo r catalog . Agent s wanted . Novelt y 
souvenirs an d favors. 
E . M . S. NOVELT Y COMPANY , Dept . A , JAMAICA , N . Y . 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 309 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago 's Expert Photographe r 
I specialize in every phase of artistic picture 
making. Send me your photos for enlargements. 
Prices reasonable. Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phone 
6688 Douglass. 
WEB B STUDI O 
3519 State Street Chicago, 111. 
Grand Supreme 
Governor 
The Loyal Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
is incorporated unde r the 
laws o f the Distric t o f Co l 
umbia . Itsobjectistocom -
bine the Negroe s of the 
world for their mutua l advancement along industria l an d commerciallines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment by the Negr o o f 
his civil and political rights. 
Thi s movement is internationa l i n its scope; wehav e 
lodge s not onl y i n the Unite d States but i n 
Jamaica , B. W . I.; Colon, Bocas delToro , Panam a {Canal Zone ) and Costa Rica . It is a dark 
da y for the Negr o and he must come together. 
Rac e movements hav e failed because our peopl e were told that b y contributing thereto the 
rac e only would be benefited, but no tangibl e 
individaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the membe r pays 35c. pe r month in the Association an d receives $4.00 pe r week sick benefits and $100 at death. We not onl y look 
after the race but each individua l membe r as 
well. A bi g convention is soon to be held here. 
W e want a lodge i n every village, hamle t and 
town an d a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizer s wanted everywhere . Fo r 
full particulars, writ e 
KNIGHT S O F MALACHITE S 
111 1 Yo u St. N . W . Washington, D . C\ i 
AGENT S WANTED—Bi g seller. $3 to $5 per 
day. Costs you from 10 to 20 cents; sella for 
35 cents and up. Sample free for the asking. 
G- A . AXBUR Y & CO. , P. 0. Bo x 414, Bristol, Pa . 
Mention TH E CHISI S 
Beautiful Colored Doll Free 
This Negro doll has light 
brown color, long black 
hair, jointed limbs, sleeping eyes. Fo r selling ou r 
artistic Negro post cards 
and other beautiful cards. 
Larg e assortment; very 
cheap. Agents and dealers are making big 
money handling them. 
Terms free. Sample o f 
all post cards sent postpaid for 15 cents. 
J . GRIFFIT H 
AR T COMPAN Y 
36-38 Beekma n St. 
Ne w Yor k 
"Made $28 in 1 Day 
I Don't Know of Anything to Compete 
With the Minute Picture Business " 
So says J. A. McMillian, of 
Nettie, W.Va. , who has one of 
. ou r Champio n Cameras. If you 
want to mak e mor e money 
than you've ever made before 
—quicker and easier 
—this is the business 
for you . N o matter 
wher e yo u live or 
wha t you r occupation, you can coin money right from the start. 
Experience Not 
Necessary 
J.H . Arnold,Rock Lake, 
N.D. , writes;*'Rec6ivea 
outfit O.K . Took it to a 
little town, set it up for 2 
hours and took in S12.35." "Mad© $25 yesterday," 
writes Arthur Neely, Alvardo, Tes. "Firstday did 
S30 in business," says it. Lasha, Bell Island. Newfoundland. '"Made S50 Christmas"—0. V. Lovett. 
Fort Me.-He, Fte. "Had an excellent business of 
$29.90."—Vernard Baker, Eolbrook, Neb. 
Photo PostCards Allthe Rage ^^^'^ i 
sorts. Schools, Factories Depots, on Streets—anywhere, everywhere. Camera takes pictures size 
2*frx3^, l?a'x2^ and one-inch buttons. Photograph 
persona singly or in groups, houses, animals, autos, 
beautiful scenes, etc. Make them on the spot, in 
broad daylight. Jvb gallery, no rent, no profits to divide with others. The 
Champion Minute Picture Machine 
takes, develops and finishes perfect pictures in 30seconds: 200 nn hour. N o Dar k Room . Nearly 85cprofit 
on each $1.00 you take in. Get into this lucrative 
business at once. Travel if you like—see the world 
and enjoy life. Quit working for others; be your own 
boss. An opportunity like this does not occur every 
dny. Take advantage of it and write for Free Book, 
Testimonials, Liberal Offer, eto, 
AMERICAN MINUTE PHOTO COMPANY 
2214 Ogden Ave.. Dept A IIU CHICAGO, ILL . 
WANTED—Colore d carriage smiths, 
woodworkers, trimmers and painters. Sober, experience d me n only. 
Address: TH E CRISIS , 70 Fift h 
Avenue , Ne w Yor k City . 310 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Residence 2546 Michiga n Office Phone 
Bel l Phone E-2161 Hom e 58 Mai n 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
117 W . 6th Street Kansa s City , Mo . 
Telephones: {^^(M - W 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notar y Publi c 
1607 Williamso n Buildin g '- - - Cleveland, O. 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Booms 613-614, Metropolitan Buildin g 
113 Marke t St., Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis - Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Syke s Block 
Minneapolis Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street - - - Baltimore , Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS . E . GREENE , JR. 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Malone y Block - Youngstown, Ohio 
Willia m H . Austi n Edmun d O. Austi n 
La w Offices of 
AUSTI N & AUSTI N 
St. Pau l Building , 22p Broadway , New Yor k 
Suite 7—H , I, J , K 
Telephones: 7400. 5365. 5366 Cortlandt 
B. F. BOOT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
57 N . Second Street 
Memphis Tenn . 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningsid e 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 W . 135th Street - New Yor k Cit y 
Telephone Connection 
R. W . FEARIN G 
Electrician 
Contracting, Repairing , Motors, Electri c and 
Gas Fixture s 
Electrician recent Emancipatio n Expositio n i n 
*l New Yor k 
85 Mario n Street - - - - Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertaker s and Em b aimers 
Notar y Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Fre e 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Promp t Service 
266 West 53d Street - New Yor k Cit y 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dramati c and Dialec t Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect.' 
English Gramma r and Rhetoric . 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 904 5 
Studio: 231 W . 134th St. New Yor k Cit y 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Corner 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington ----- - N. C. 
WILLIA M L . BEL L 
Architect 
138] 1/2Auburn Avenue - - Atlanta, Ga. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements Jul y and August 
Bo x 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O. 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRESS 
ANDRE W J . BRANIC , Proprieto r 
Packin g and Shipping-—Goods Forwarde d to Al l 
Parts of the Worl d 
Order s by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. 
Trunk s stored, 25c. per month. 
459 Seventh Avenue New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISI S A Selected List of Books 
00 03 PRIC E INCLUDE S POSTAG E y j y j 
TH E QUES T OF TH E SILVE R FLEECE . W . E . B . D U Bois $1.5 0 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . Charle s W . Chesnutt 1.65 
HAZEL . Mar y Whit e Ovingto n 1.08 
AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . Anonymou s 1.40 
TH E TESTIN G FIRE . Alexande r Corke y 1.35 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.40 
MARRO W OF TRADITION . Charle s W . Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.65 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . Mau d Gune y Har e 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . Leli a Amo s Pendleto n 1.65 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . W . E . B . D U Bois 1.35 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . Kell y Mille r 2.1 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . B . G . Brawle y 1.35 
HAL F A MAN . Mar y Whit e Ovingto n 1.12 
MIN D OF PRIMITIV E MAN . Fran z Boa s 1.65 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . Willia m Sinclair 1.65 
JOH N BROWN . W . E . B . D U Bois 1.45 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . Joh n R . Lync h 1.65 
STOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . Booke r T . Washingto n 3.2 5 
FLOWE R O' TH E PEACH . Perciva l Gibbo n 1.45 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . Henr y E . Bake r 1 5 
A CHILD' S STOR Y OF DUNBAR . Juli a L . Henderso n 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
7 0 Fift h Avenu e ---- - Ne w Yor k Cit y C A P E MAY, N. J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E. W. DALE, Owner. 
The Art of Printing 
AS EXEMPLIFIED IN OUR WORK EM
POINTS OF MERIT: 
| (a) Neat 
1. Stationery •< {b) Attractive 
( (c) Quality 
f (a) Polite 
2. Form J. (b) Business 
( (c) Social 
{ (a) Artistic 
3. Workmanship -I (b) Correct ( (c) Prompt We Print THE CRISIS ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Eng
202 EAST 99th STREET Telephone: 