THE CRISIS 
ONE DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENT S A COP Y 
JUNE , 192 2 Another Lighthouse to Help 
Chart Negro Business into 
The Right Channel. 
The Southern Aid Society's 
New Modern 3 story and 
basement building located 
at 106 and 106A South Ave., 
Petersburg, Va . 
Petersburg's first colored 
bank and its leading professional and business interests now have modern 
quarter s withi n which to 
display thei r talents and 
wares. The Society's District Office is located on 3rd 
floor. 
In addition to providing a superior policy of protection to 
its policyholders—the Society renders a threefold service to 
the race: 
It gives employment to hundreds of young women and 
men—It provides ready cash to its policyholders in times of 
sickness, accident and death—It provides, in the largest cities 
in its field of operation, modern office facilities to the colored 
professional and business interests. It is indeed a Servant of 
the People. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA . 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
J. T, CARTER , Pres. and Gen'l Counsel B. L . JORDAN , Secty. 
W. A, JORDAN , Asst. Secty, TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO E TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W. E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINESS MANAGER . 
Vol. 24-No. 2 JUNE , 1922 Whole No. 140 
Page 
COVE R 
Drawing by Lucille Rogers. 
OPINION 
The Worl d and Us; White Charity; The Taboo of Methuselah; Can Yo u 
Help? Catholic Priests; A n Institute of Negro Literature and Art; 
Sidney; Attention! Aim ! Haiti; Self-Help; Patents 55 
TH E NEGR O IN DRAMA . Rollin Lynd Hartt 61 
A N ORGANIZE R O F OLD . Illustrated 64 
BANKIN G COAL . A Poem. Jean Toomer 65 
A S T O BOOK S . Illustrated. Jessie Fauset 68 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E 69 
TW O POEMS . Langston Hughes 72 
TH E HORIZON . Illustrated 73 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 80 
TH E LOS S O F ASHLE E COTTAGE . Illustrated. Effie Lee Newsome 84 
IF YO U SHOUL D GO . A Poem. Countee P. Cullen 85 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The data of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O E ADDRES S : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3. 1879. 52 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Mask The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E . Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training and Industrial School 
FO R COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution for the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courtes In carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys, 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic selenes and dornest!« art tor 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
W. R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognize d as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana , Arkansa s and Okla ­
homa State Board s of Education . _ Har ­
vard , Bosto n University , Universit y of 
Illinois and Universit y of Chicag o represented o n its faculty. On e hundre d 
twenty-seven i n College Department, session 1910-1020. Severa l new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN, President 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincol n Me n are Leaders i n the various 
professions i n Fort y States. 
Th e College is ranke d i n Class I. by the 
America n Medica l Association . 
Address: 
Joan B. Kendall, S.D., Lincoln University, 
Cheater County, Penna. 
Th e Cheyne y Trainin g 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa . 
A Pennsylvania State Normal School offering, in addition 
to the regular Normal Course of two years, professional 
three year courses in Home Economics and Shop Work. A 
diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate 
eligibl e to teach in the public schools of Pennsylvania. 
A three-year High School Course is offered to all who 
have completed the eighth grammer grade. 
Next term begins September 18, 1922. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
Lesli e Pinckne y Hill , Principal 
Cheyney, Pa . 
There Will Be No Summer School for 1922 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 53 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
ia laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta , Ga . 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Bett Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted fox Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offert full courtes la the following departments. College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial, 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term will open September 13, 1922. 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
Founded 1870 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd years' High School Courses, with certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Tear High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medical Course 
54th year of nine months opens September 20, 1922. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State hiring (or Its object 
collegiate. Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training tor Colored cl tissus In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Berries. Nuxalng and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal, Oammarclal. Mösle. Domestie Science. Missionary 
training class. 
Evening classes. correspondence course. Degree Board. 
President C . H . Parrich 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address. 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
i n Negro music. Special study i n Negr o life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and groundt. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood 'and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y MCKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course Is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
AU students In the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. MoCrsrey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOH N H . LEWIS , President 
BISHOP J . S. FLIPPER , Chairman Truste . Board 54 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
Founded by GENERA L O. O. HOWARD 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D. , D.D. , President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasure r 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
REGISTRATION 
Autumn Quarter Friday, Sept. 29, and Saturday, Sept. 30, 1922 
Winter Quarter Tuesday, January 2, 1923 
Spring Quarter Saturday, March 17, 1923 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON, Registrar 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. Colleg e Ave . & N . 19th St. 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Sprin g Ter m Openin g Apri l 4th, 1922 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON, D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Fa. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help Yon Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box SS, Wilberforce, O. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction i n nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founde d i n 1I67 for the Educatio n of 
Negr o Leaders 
Beautiful an d Healthfu l Location . 
Literary , Scientific, Educational, So -
cial Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurs e Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man -
hoo d and Womanhood . 
Fo r further informatio n address 
F . A. SUMNER , President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
SAMUEL A. OWEN , President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Bassist State Woman's Horn* 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Students 
from six durèrent states. Graduates exempted on trat trade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN , Fr—ithni 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the Ilsters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-OHARGE, 81SS Oermantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia. Vs. 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 24. No. 2 JUNE, 1922 Whole No. 140 
Opinion of W. E. B. Du Bois 
TH E WORL D AN D U S 
HOW Warren Harding, after his 
categorical promise to free 
Haiti, can sit in the White 
House silent and limp while 
Russell and Mcllhenny rape this little 
helpless land for the benefit of the 
National City Bank, passes our comprehension. Can he refuse to listen 
to the call uttered so clearly yesterday? 
Our little brown brothers of the 
Philippines still ask in vain for freedom. One would think that a country 
so bent on racial antipathies and segregations as we, would hasten to assure the Darker World that we mean 
what we say, by letting the Philippines and Haiti and Porto Rico and 
Hawaii go if they want to go, and be 
by themselves and live untouched by 
white prejudice. But no! We wander the world seeking colored companions and hugging them to us despite their struggles. An d for that 
reason we who are inside stay here. 
Not because we like it particularly, 
but because it's safer inside a beast 
and next his vitals than outside and 
under his hands and feet. 
Again the never ending miracle of 
the year bursts in pale yellows and 
crimsons and the faint feel of heat. 
But no—I talk of New York. Already 
in New Orleans summer is blushing 
crimson and gold. Already at the 
Cape of Good Hope the cold fall winds 
are blowing, and snow is flying in 
Australia. But everywhere it is 
miraculous, everywhere, men rise and 
fall and hope and cry with the weather. Why should we fear to talk of it? 
Still Ireland bleeds. We afar can 
scarcely discern her green and poignant beauty beneath the mists and 
fogs of politicians and press reporters. But one thing, which we do not 
need to see, is exemplified in this unhappy broil: the deep distrust of 
England by the masses of the hurt 
and disinherited, the world round ; 
the hatred of the Irish for a land that 
has fooled them so long that they fear 
her most bringing gifts ; the mounting 
hatred of the Indians at her persistent blundering; the smouldering distrust of Egypt at her double dealing— 
"Milton ! thou shouldst be living at 
this hour : 
"England hath need of thee!" 
Coal—it is not manufactured, it is 
a gift of God. It belongs to the people and it is monopolized by private 
corporations. It is not yet scarce 
but it is made artificially scarce so 
as to raise prices. The price paid 
by the public and the quantity used 
could afford a living wage to miners 
and steady employment to permanent 
and large groups of workers. As it 
is, more mines are opened than are 
needed and in these mines men are 
kept at work on part time, so that 
when the demand for coal is highest 
all may work, and when it is lowest, 
some may starve. And this is done 
to support with high profits the largest number of coal operators. 
Of all states in the United States, 
West Virgini a is the most glaring 
55 56 TH E CRISI S 
example of the ruthless exploitation 
of a group of people by great and 
soulless corporations. The great coal 
and iron and steel companies centering in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, 
with their stock owned by good and 
simple Quaker folk who preach sweetness and light, and their policies dictated by metal-hearted bandits, own 
West Virginia . They direct its politics, divide its income and drive its 
workers, and the only audible protest 
against a state of affairs which is a 
disgrace to civilization is voiced by 
a few miners banded together to escape compulsory starvation. An d we 
still send missionaries to China ! 
The vaster the body the mightier 
the travail of a soul in torment. China 
is still in chains, still in the throes of 
civil murder, still seeking to give birth 
to a great modern free state. Europe 
is lending no effective help but lies 
ready to pounce at any dawning of 
death. The soul of Japan is apparently incapable or perhaps unable to 
reach across the prejudice of centuries and heal the wound that divides 
the mightiest of human races. An d 
yet where there is Pain there is Life, 
and it is unsatisfied striving that 
keeps evil forever uneasy and insecure. 
Ulysses Simpson Grant, born 100 
years since, was no genius. He was 
a dogged plodder of medium intelligence and with no particular ideals. 
He won a war methodically, doggedly 
with horrible spilling of blood and 
mangling of flesh, without conception 
of sorrow and pain, and with eye single to victory. He neither liked nor 
despised Negroes and would probably 
have defended slavery as brutally as 
he destroyed it, if he had been in Lee's 
shoes ; just as Lee, in his, would have 
fought for freedom. A s a President, 
Grant was a failure—the victim of 
thieves, the delight of politicians, the 
despair of statesmen. An d yet, with 
all this, we might without Grant have 
had Negro slavery still with us in 
worse form than it still exists. 
There can be no question but that 
the Russians have made a good appearance at Genoa. Their demand 
for recognition as a de jure government was logically inevitable and unanswerable. Their initial offer to reduce the military forces so as to lessen France's excuse for a great army 
was not only delicious but fair ; their 
treaty with Germany was reasonable 
within itself and no one's else business; their offer to assume pre-war 
debt incurred by a Czar for the purpose of enslaving the mass of Russians was generous; and their desire 
for a loan parallels the desire of nearly every other nation. The world still 
has a right to doubt the ability of the 
Bolsheviki to conduct, in peace and 
prosperity, industry and government 
by democratic political methods, or 
even by oligarchy for the benefit of 
the masses ; but it has no earthly right 
to question the legality of a government to sequester private property 
and manage commercial enterprises. 
We ourselves are doing business as 
expressmen, farmers, manufacturers, 
bankers, miners and weather prophets. The Bolsheviki may be dreamers, 
but they are not fools. 
Last night I sat in Utopia and saw 
Egypt and India, Afric a and the South 
Seas parade in the sleek sweet splendor of Parisian finery made and 
planned in High Harlem. It was a 
lovely sight—such a poem as only 
colored New York can do, and do it 
carelessly, laughingly, perfectly, bathing in light and music. OPINIO N 57 
WHIT E CHARIT Y 
THROUGHOU T th e United 
States are numberless charities 
—schools, homes, hospitals and 
orphanages,—supported wholly 
or in part by white donors for the 
benefit of Negroes. As the Negroes 
have accumulated more means and 
become more self-assertive, the tendency has been for white givers to 
reduce their gifts or discontinue their 
interest entirely, putting many worthy and useful, indeed indispensable, 
institutions in grave distress. 
The motives for this withdrawal of 
help are various: many charitable 
folk have been left straitened by 
the war and the new rich have not 
learned charity. Other folks think 
that Negroes are now rich enough to 
help themselves; while not a few 
others resent the Negroes' new tone 
and demands so deeply that they say : 
Very well, help yourselves and make 
no more appeals to us! 
These last two classes are ill-advised. The Negro is still a poor, a 
very poor group and cannot support 
the social reform, and eleemosynary 
work which he needs for social uplift. 
Moreover his great bond to the rich 
and powerful has been their charity— 
if they break this bond they break the 
last tie that holds him in leash. This 
may be best in time, but for them is 
it wise now? Is it wise for white 
folk to forget that no amount of almsgiving on their part will half repay 
the 300 years of unpaid toil and the 
fifty years of serfdom by which the 
black man has piled up wealth and 
comfort for white America? 
It would be a wiser and more farsighted attitude today for white 
America to insist on paying back this 
debt which they owe to black America 
as a privilege—as a great peace-offering for wrong—rather than petulantly to vent their spleen on the sick, 
the degraded and the young for the 
growing self-assertion of the well, the 
risen and the old. 
On our part the way is clear: the 
sooner we rise above charity, the 
sooner we shall be free. 
TH E TABO O O F METHUSELA H 
TWO plays have been running in 
New York, widely different 
and yet connected. Shaw's Methuselah cycle is a bold critique of evolution and man: keen, fantastic, tremendous; wherein are treated the problems of short life, politicians without principles, the education of children, war and immortality. 
An d in the midst of the five parts, in 
part three, there is a picture of the 
year 2170 A.D. , with a republic in 
England ruled by Chinese and Negroes, with a colored woman as Min ­
ister of Health to whom the white 
President, Burge-Lubin, is making 
desperate love. 
An d now the Taboo: we have 
searched the reviews of New York 
critics in vain to find the slightest 
allusion to this incident. Min d you, 
the greatest dramatic effort of the 
year with no or almost no allusion to 
the fact that G. B. S. predicts the 
salvation of the world through the 
mulatto ! 
Why this Taboo? Because the 
white world fears discussion; it fears 
even imagination or fantastic artistry 
on this race problem. For this reason Mary Hoyt Wiborg's great play 
"Taboo" also spoke to deaf hearts in 
New York. To be sure it was, as 
critics complained, somewhat obscure 
in plot. But to us that sit within the 
veil it was clear. It was a tale of 
some far-off curse of mixed blood, 
descending on a little golden-haired 
Louisiana white child and making 
him abnormal and dumb. But around 
this unpleasant and untrue theme was 
woven a splendid fantasy of witchery 
and dark religious rites, of a great 
dream-Africa clothed in brilliant 
splendor and of the romance and 
tragedy of the old slave South. 58 TH E CRISIS 
Bu t it all fell on deaf ears. First 
because whit e and black actors played 
together i n it and played exceedingly 
well, and this is "Socia l Equality" . 
Bu t also because the audience had 
been taught to regard Negr o witch -
craft as funny minstre l stuff and not 
as crimso n tragedy. The y could not 
understand "Wha t it wa s all about". 
To them the new art was Taboo. 
CA N YO U HELP ? 
Au x Cayes, 
République d'Haïti. 
The Editor of TH E CRISI S : 
PLEAS E forgive the libert y 
whic h a comparative strange r 
takes i n approachin g you. I 
am a West Indian from Granada, 
B . W . I. I n the summe r of 1921 
I, havin g left my island home wit h 
the aim of seking employment i n 
Cub a to help m y poor mothe r an d 
three sisters, m y fathe r who was a 
well-to-do ma n died i n 1921, and wit h 
hi m his whol e belongings. I was 
forced to leave school, aged 18, to 
wor k and support m y mothe r and sisters aged from 4 to 12 respectively, 
but being unfortunate never got to 
Cuba . A whole two days' storm off 
the coast of Hait i forced us to ask 
fo r rescue and on the thir d day, whe n 
we expected all wa s over, we was gladdened by being rescued by a Haitia n 
boat and was landed here i n the month 
of Apri l last. W e was given no help 
b y the Englis h Consu l and wa s compelled to take up the onl y job that 
the island can give, laborin g at one 
gourde per day, value 20 cents Ameri -
can currency ; wit h this one must obtai n everything. I was always expecting something woul d tur n up, but 
things have gone to worse and nothin g to be got to do. M y boots are all 
gone and the hopes of leaving here has 
fled, a storm havin g passed over 
Granad a i n September last wit h the 
result of my mother's house blown 
down and now she is laid down wit h 
paralysis of one arm and there is none 
to help, I being the oldest, and she is 
every month expecting something, 
something that wouldn't reach her. 
I was takin g a course of lessons wit h 
the I. C . S. i n civi l engineering. I 
bad to drop it on account of not being 
able to wor k for enough to help her 
and to pursue my course of lessons. 
Whil e I beg the liberty to await you r 
solicited help, I am, sir, obediently, 
JOH N FRANCIQUE . 
P . S.— Ther e is a Roya l Ban k of 
Canad a here and even a 5-cent stamp 
can De exchanged. 
CATHOLI C PRIEST S 
Dea r Sir : 
THE Apri l CRISI S has an editoria l whic h ends by askin g 
whethe r the present Pope wil l 
see to it that Negr o priests are 
ordained. T o me this is a tremendous 
question for whic h I have agitated. 
B y wha t righ t can Negr o priests be 
excluded ? Coul d you not writ e a personal letter to Piu s XI ? H e speaks 
Englis h and Frenc h fluently. H e does 
not know of this abuse. Go d bless 
you. 
RAYMON D VERNICOURT , 
Catholic Priest. 
P . S.— Do not drop this great question, be fearless, man y priests wil l be 
wit h you. 
A N INSTITUT E O F NEGR O LITERATUR E 
AN D AR T 
WE need a periodica l gatherin g of Negr o artists and 
writers i n some central 
meeting-place. A summertime assembling i n or near Ne w Yor k 
might be best. 
Such an annua l gathering migh t : 
1. Establis h personal acquaintanceships 
2. Study literatur e and art 
3. Collect materials 
4. Study methods 
5 . Establis h canons of taste 
6. Criticiz e results 
7. Visi t librarie s and museums OPINION 59 
Al l this migh t be done wit h a minimu m of organization and wit h little 
money. Indeed an example of simplicity, poverty and joy i n creation 
and fellowship migh t be made. 
Those to whom this idea appeals 
are asked to writ e the editor. 
SIDNE Y 
SIDNE Y D E L A RUE , a whit e 
man, filed application fo r an 
accountant's position i n Wash ­
ington sayin g that he woul d 
"consider $3,500 or more " as a salary. 
The Commissione r was anxious to 
favor Mr . De L a Rue fo r various reasons; but insufficiency of experience 
and lack of qualifications compelled 
the Chie f Economist, Dr . W . H . S. 
Stevens, to offer Mr . De L a Ru e only 
a position as junio r accountant at 
$1,200-$1,800. This he refused. But — 
The Commissione r recommended 
Mr . De L a Ru e to the State Department. Mr . Hughes' colleagues sent 
hi m to Liberi a as Agen t of the Audi ­
tor of the State Department. W e always select our best to uplift Afric a ! 
ATTENTION ! AIM ! 
THI S comin g November, thirty -
three Senators are to be elected. So fa r as we kno w at 
present, only one of the Senators whose terms expire wil l not stand 
for re-election. Wha t we must do is 
to brin g more pressure, friendly, yet 
firm, on Republica n Senators, letting 
them know that they cannot expect 
Negr o votes unless they do everything 
i n their powe r to pass the Anti -
Lynchin g Bill . Nai l them to that one 
issue. 
Send a telegram or letter to your 
Republica n Senators callin g attention 
to the followin g facts: 
1. The Republica n Part y platform, 
adopted June 19, 1920, pledged itself to Congressional action 
against lynchin g i n these words: 
"We urge Congress to consider the 
most effective means to end lynching in this country which continues to be a terrible blot on American civilization." 
2 . President Hardin g i n his first message to Congress, on Apri l 12, 
1921, furthe r solemnly pledged the 
Administratio n to end lynchin g 
b y sayin g : 
"Congress ought to wipe the stain 
of barbaric lynching from the banners of a free and orderly representative democracy." 
3. Th e Hous e of Representatives on 
Januar y 26, 1922, passed the Dye r 
Anti-Lynchin g Bil l by a vote of 
230 to 119. 
4. The Attorney-Genera l of the 
Unite d States, Harr y M . Daugherty, has declared the Dye r Bil l constitutional. 
Emphasiz e these facts upon both 
Senators, tellin g them that every colored voter i n the State is lookin g to 
the Republicans i n the Senate to pass 
the Bill , thus carryin g out the platform pledge of the part y and acting 
i n accordance wit h the specific request of the President. Le t them 
know that colored voters can do 
nothin g less than hold the Republican 
Part y to blame if the bil l is not acted 
upon or is defeated. Mak e your letters specific. Le t the tone be courteous, but firm and unequivocal. 
Take Michigan , for example : Senator Charle s E . Townsend is up for 
re-election. H e has openly put himself on record as favorin g the Dye r 
Anti-Lynchin g bill . H e is opposed by 
Congressman Patric k J. Kelley , the 
only Michigan representative who 
voted against the Dyer Bill. Kelle y is 
"progressive, " "new thought " and all 
that, but, Michiga n Negroes, VOTE 
FOR TOWNSEND! 
Moreove r do not forget the Democratic Senators, Nort h and South ; 
remin d them gently but clearly that 
it woul d be ver y poor politics to let 
the worl d assume that the Democrati c 
Part y is the part y of lynchers. Sug -60 TH E CRISIS 
gest that the wa y to split the North ­
ern Negr o vote is to pass the Dye r 
Bil l wit h or without their Republica n 
colleagues' help. 
Whe n yo u have done wha t is outlined above, get other organizations 
and individuals, particularl y politica l 
organizations, to send simila r messages. Th e situation is serious! Ac t 
now ! W e have got to put this over 
and we can do it only throug h united 
effort and acton. 
HAIT I 
OVE R two years ago, James 
Weldo n Johnson and Herbert 
J. Seligman n from the executive offices of the Nationa l Association for the Advancemen t of Colored People went to Hait i to investigate America n control. The y returned and denounced the situation 
there, showin g that over three thousand natives had been kille d and that 
the Unite d States had forced its contro l on an independent people against 
their wil l without adequate cause. 
A t first there wa s vigorous denial, 
then finally most of the facts were 
admitted. Mr . Johnson then went to 
Warre n Harding , candidate for the 
Presidency, and secured his interest 
i n Haiti . H e stated categorically before election that he woul d not be a 
part y to "forcin g a constitution upon 
a helpless people against their will. " 
Whe n the Administratio n took office, the Secretary of the Nav y rushed 
to Hait i and after perfunctory investigation, practically announced that 
the Republicans proposed to take over 
the wor k of the Democrats and rul e 
the colored republi c for the benefit of 
the Nationa l Cit y Ban k and other 
large corporations. 
Indignation rose hig h and Hait i 
sent a delegation here whic h made 
categorical and explicit protests. A 
Senate committee was appointed wit h 
Medil l McCormic k at its head. This 
committee has done everythin g i n its 
powe r to distort the truth , whitewas h 
the situation and ease it out of publi c 
notice. If ever a Senator deserved 
defeat for betrayal of the Negro race, 
Medill McCormick is that man. 
Despite his efforts, however, the 
question has pushed itself forwar d 
again and now twenty-four lawyers 
includin g some of the greatest names 
of the ba r have appealed to Washing ­
ton against the infamy of our presence i n Hait i and demanded the im ­
mediate abrogation of the so-called 
treaty of 1919, legal elections and a 
new treaty on mutuall y satisfactory 
lines. 
SELF-HEL P 
THE Jews of Americ a were 
asked last September to raise 
$14,000,000 to save their people from starvation i n Russi a 
and the East. Seven months later 
they had raised $18,000,000 and eightninths of this wa s i n cash. 
An d this wa s not all the gift of 
the ric h either. Th e pennies of the 
poor swelled these million s and the 
single dollars of the workers. 
This is self-help. This is a lesson 
and a vivi d lesson to black folk. 
PATENT S 
THOS E who woul d reform economi c society should not forget patents. Unde r our present laws the discoverer ma y 
die of starvation whil e the ric h monopolist wh o has bought his patent for 
a song bleeds the nation wit h guaranteed special privilege fo r 14 years. 
One little law makin g patent rights 
personal and inalienable migh t easily 
do more than a whole revolution. 
Wh o woul d develop patents under 
such restrictions ? Those who are 
willin g to pay the patentee decently. 
Surel y there are a few such Captains 
of Industry. TH E NEGRO IN DRAMA 
ROLLI N LYND E HARTT 
B ECAUS E she has been an actress and 
is now writin g pageants and little plays, 
I asked Mrs. Hart t to share my study of the 
Negro i n Drama . So these impressions 
are not a reporter's merely, nor at all a professional critic's; I saw through the eyes of 
an artist, and if an artist may perhaps be 
a trifle too generous when appraising the 
genius of fellow-craftsmen—at the moment, 
that is—pray note that some little time has 
gone by since we saw Gilpi n i n "The Em ­
peror Jones", and went to an astonishing 
matinee at the Negro theatre in Harlem, 
and chatted wit h Negro players, Negro 
scenario writers, and Negro moving picture 
producers i n their Dressing-Room Club at 
the Harlem Community House established 
by Community Service. Yesterday—calmly 
I think—we reviewed our exploits. 
Ever y theatre-loving New Yorker—and 
every theatre-loving sojourner in New Yor k 
—knows the "Emperor Jones", black scapegrace lording it over a West Indian island 
"not yet self-determined by American marines". Durin g the opening scene, revolution breaks out. Fro m then on, we see 
the Emperor fleeing. Solitary. A t night. 
Through the forest. Fa r away, a tom-tom 
reveals where his enemies are preparing 
the silver bullet which, as he has boasted, 
alone can kil l him. He is visited by awful 
"hants". A bravo at first, he becomes 
more and more horror-stricken. Finally , 
he shoots himself. The play is practically 
all Gilpin . Gilpi n soliloquizing. On a stage 
nearly dark. 
Mr . Robert Bridges remarked to me the 
other day, "I'd hate to see a white man 
tr y it. Salvini might have succeeded. No 
livin g white man could." To the actress, 
Gilpi n is amazing: "Neve r before i n my 
whole experience have I seen an actor carry 
so difficult a rôle. He was forced to people 
the stage wit h imaginary characters. If 
he had not had an extraordinary imagination, you would never have felt the reality 
of the foes who filled him with terror. He 
lived his part, i n absolute sincerity; there 
was no trick of technique you ever caught 
him at. An d that prayer i n the forest— 
that agonized prayer! He put into it the 
complete realization of what he was saying 
as an artist, and as a human being." 
It takes an actress fully to measure the 
triumph. "Soliloquy is the most difficult 
thing a player can handle; every Hamle t 
finds this the great test. Ye t Gilpi n never 
made you nervous—you never felt that he 
was having a hard time to wade ashore 
with it. An d he 'got it over' i n the dark— 
a most difficult feat. I doubt if Salvin i 
could have played the 'Emperor'! I don't 
know any one but Gilpi n who could. Let 
alone other exactions, what a strain on the 
voice! The average actor i n the average 
cast feels that strain, though it is shared 
by anywhere from ten to twenty-five people, 
so that each gets time to rest his voice. 
Gilpin has almost none. Ye t throughout 
the play it responds to every nuance of his 
thought." 
A modest genius is Gilpin . Invited to the 
actors' .banquet, he came wit h the intention of not staying. Interviewed by newspaper men, he declared i n effect, "Man y a 
Negro could play the 'Emperor'" , and later 
on, in the Dressing-Room Club down under 
the establishment, a Negro said to us: "We 
have a lot of Gilpins. " Bu t it was i n none 
too expectant a mood that we visited the 
Lafayette Theatre in Seventh Avenue near 
131st Street, Harlem. The more fools we. 
Prepared for crude melodrama, we found— 
but first to describe the theatre. 
It is a spacious affair, handsome and 
scrupulously cared for. Posters outside announced the Lafayette Players (stock company, all black) i n "The Love of Choo 
Chin" . Wit h charming courtesy, a colored 
girl sells tickets. A mannerly girl usher, 
wearing Chinese dress in honor of Choo 
Chin, showed us to our box. The orchestra 
(colored) consisted entirely of young women. On the drop curtain, cheerful nymphs 
(colored) disported themselves in a familia r enough drop-curtain Eclogue. The 
audience (all black) was remarkable chiefl y for its air of very pleasing refinement. 
61 62 TU E CRISIS 
Wha t wonder? Amon g the 150,000 Negroes 
in Harlem, university graduates abound. 
"The Love of Choo Chin " is a play within 
a play. The Prologue introduces a ric h 
America n just back from China . To an 
old crony of his, he relates his adventures. 
Yes, there was a girl . The drama itself 
tells the story our hero tells his friend— 
how he fell i n love wit h Choo Chin ; how 
Choo Chi n rejected him i n order to marr y 
an odious Celestial, who, otherwise, would 
take her father's life ; and how the detestable alliance was happily forestalled—happily indeed, as it turned out that Choo Chin 
was really the daughter of Americans slain 
during the Boxer Uprising . The Epilogue 
resumes the confidences between our hero 
and his friend. Finall y enters the girl in 
American dress. So the hero presents his 
bride, and all ends sweetly. 
It is a pretty play. We were told afterward that only the huge popularity of "East 
is West " prevented its becoming a tip-top 
Broadway success. The Lafayette Players 
staged it splendidly, with elaborate scenery, 
correct costuming, careful stage direction, 
and an exercise of fine artistic conscience 
throughout. " I never saw a better performance by a stock company anywhere," remarked the lady at my side. "Wha t dignity and sincerity in the entire cast!" 
However, it was at one point quite uproariously amusing—to us. Whit e folks can 
black up, but black folks can't white up, 
and the rich American traveller was unequivocally a Negro. We could forget that. 
We could not forget, however, that his Eng ­
lish butler, who dropped his h's, was also a 
Negro. Oh, a lovely Negro! Black ! This, 
as Hashimur a Togo would say, was "very 
tough projectile for white folks to chew", 
though the audience took it beautifully, and 
there is now and then a much more hilarious absurdity on our own stage—to wit, an 
Englishman attempting Negro dialect. 
Except as regards color, that black man 
played the Englis h butler to perfection. 
Wit h your eyes shut, you would have been 
completely deceived, so imitative is the Ne ­
gro voice. To be sure, we noticed once or 
twice on the part of other performers a 
tendency to lapse into Afro-American . Once 
or twice only. Faultless diction was the 
rule. An d such deep, rich voices! How 
flexible! How carrying and enduring! Said 
Mrs. Hartt, "If a white player had any one 
of those voices, he'd be made!" 
She was especially delighted with Evely n 
Ellis, the leading lady, and praised "her 
wide and unusual range of talent, her ability 
to play an emotional rôle coupled wit h a 
charming sense of comedy; her absolute 
control of her body; her gesture; her voice, 
in its delicate modulations; her sympathetic 
understanding of the poetic lines of the 
play. Throughout the entire performance 
I failed to detect one instance of false reading. " An d before the second act was over, 
she said, "I'm going to write to her". 
"Wouldn't you like to meet her?" I asked. 
"I think it might be managed." 
Durin g an entre-acte, I stepped to the 
rear of the house, and said to one of the 
ushers, "The lady in the box wit h me was 
formerly Miss Helen Harrington, of the Coburn Players. Could you arrange for her 
to meet Miss Ellis? " 
The little usher went behind the scenes, 
and returned, presently, wit h word that 
Miss Ellis would come to our box after the 
performance. 
See how our mood had changed. In a 
Negro theatre, we had no longer a sensation of being among people of an alien 
race—perhaps because art knows no color 
line, perhaps also because the audience, 
black outwardly, seemed white inwardly, 
and, without overdoing the matter, responded appreciatively to nobility of phrase and 
sentiment, as well as to humor, in a most 
exquisite drama. 
When Miss Ellis came to us, she stood 
at the curtained doorway of our box, and 
consequently the white actress turned her 
back to me while talking with the colored 
actress. I overheard only this—Miss Ellis 
saying, "Oh , you don't know how much 
that means to me!" 
Out in Seventh Avenue, afterward, I 
asked, "Wha t did you say to that colored 
girl? " 
"I said, 'Miss Ellis, you are a very great 
artist.' " 
An d so she is. Some day a dramatist 
with enough genius wil l write a play about 
an octoroon, and a manager wit h enough 
genius wil l give Evely n Ellis the leading 
rôle. There'll be a fortune in it. 
On our way home, the white actress said, 
"I want to cry. " It was a mood I could TH E NEGR O IN DRAM A 63 
perfectly understand. Al l that talent, all 
that refinement, al l that charm, and— 
colored! I had been i n the same mood, once, 
after an hour with Miss Helen Keller; came 
away saying to myself, not, "Ho w magnificent that a creature born blind and deaf 
has achieved such a triumph! " but instead, 
"Ho w tragica l that a splendid, beautiful, 
gifted woman—so radiant and sweet—must 
endure such limitations! " Whic h was of 
course quite the wrong point of view, as 
regards Miss Keller. B y and by, it wil l be 
the wrong point of view as regards Miss 
Ellis. Shut out from our world, the Ne ­
groes are fast making a world of their own. 
It holds great promise. Wh o knows but 
that it may one day equal ours? When that 
day arrives, what honor wil l crown the Ne ­
groes who, despite hardships that would 
break the spirit of a less forgiving race, 
have promoted the growth of artistic sensibility among their people! 
In the upper Seventh Avenue district, 
Community Service started the Harlem 
Community House to foster Negro jollity 
and Negro genius. Gilpi n used to come 
there to hobnob wit h Negro actors. In the 
Dressing-Room Club, a page about Gilpi n 
from a Sunday paper adorned the bulletin 
board, when I was there. A framed photograph of members of the Drama League at 
their banquet showed Gilpi n among them. 
In a kind of an office, Maria n S. Nicholas 
was devoting her spare moments to collaborating with Leig h Whippl e upon scenarios. Upstairs, P. A . McDougall conducted 
a dramatic school. Afte r an evening in that 
center of creative, as well as interpretative, 
activity, Mrs. Hartt remarked, "Nothin g 
in all my life has been so interesting as this 
experience of discussing the drama with in ­
tellectual Negroes." An d with charmingly 
courteous Negroes, I may add. When we 
entered the Dressing-Room Club, a group of 
Negro actors were seated about a table 
playing cards. Instantly, every man rose. 
There is a lot to talk about in such a 
group. Gilpi n is now on the road. Here i n 
New Yor k it is reported that his manager 
has in hand a musical comedy, "Nobody 
Knows" , with a cast of thirty Negroes, 
among them Creamer and Layton, the song 
writers. Not long ago the Colored Players' 
Guil d of New Yor k presented "The Niche" , 
by Dor a Norman, and "The Pitfalls of Ap ­
pearance", by G. A . Woods. Both writers 
are members of the Guild. "Pu t and Take", 
a Negro revue, ran for several months i n 
New York . "Shuffle Along " still occupies 
the Musi c Hal l on 63rd Street. Negro students at Moorehouse College, Atlanta , recently presented "Hamlet" . An d at the 
time we visited the Community House, pupils 
of its dramatic school were rehearsing a 
pageant. We begged to look in on them. 
Havin g carried the leading rôle in Percy 
MacKaye's Gloucester pageant, "The Canterbury Pilgrims" , and having written pageants of her own, Mrs. Hart t is a trained 
critic in such matters. A s the teacher explained his pageant (he had created it, himself), I wondered what she would say. Wha t 
she did say was, "Excellent! The real 
thing—pure pageantry, conceived with a fine 
handling of symbolism, and a sincere and 
lovely reaching out for beauty." The author, by the way, is a devoted student of 
Keats. A s for his pupils—young girls from 
fourteen to eighteen years old—they showed 
"an unusual reverence for art. More, in ­
deed, than is common among white students. 
Nobody giggled. On the whole, it was as 
creditable a performance as you wil l find 
in any dramatic school, and in one respect 
it was exceptional. Al l had fine voices." 
Bu t I think that the white author of pageants was especially impressed by our Negro writer's method—his adoption of a 
poetic theme and his endeavor to elaborate 
it with scrupulous consistency. The Negro 
mind loves simplicity, directness, the dominance of one idea. Its aim is purposive— 
even didactic. 
In drama, whether for stage or screen, it 
is not content with mere dramatic genrepainting. It burns to say something. Downstairs, Miss Nicholas read us the scenario 
she and Leigh Whipple had written. The 
theme was reincarnation. From beginning 
to end, the story developed that theme. An ­
other photo-play, "The Slacker", written by 
a Negro, and produced by Negroes, with 
Negro actors, for Negro audiences, made 
loyalty its theme. Shown throughout black 
Americ a during the War, it sought to offset 
German propaganda among Negroes. "Wh y 
fight for a country that oppresses you?" 
cried German agents. Here was black 
America's answer. 
In the Dressing-Room Club we saw a 64 TH E CRISIS 
gaudy poster advertising that film, and Negro actors are prouder of it, even, than of 
the photographic group showing Gilpi n at 
the Drama League's banquet. "The Slacker " 
got results—tangible, measurable, and nobly 
patriotic. They glory in it. 
The walls of the Dressing-Room Club 
were covered with photographs. Chronologically arranged, they would have illustrated the Afro-American's progress from 
mere vaudeville clowning and stage minstrelsy upward through silent drama into 
the realm of complete and finished art. The 
Negro was never by nature a buffoon. He 
was never supremely a comedian. Whit e 
folks blacked up are always funnier. It is 
in serious drama that he has come into his 
own. An d it is i n serious drama, whether 
spoken or silent, that he finds himself a 
power. 
Professor Kerlin , author of that admirable book, "The Voice of the Negro" , declares that the real leader of the Negro 
race today is the Negro press. It has grown 
enormously. The literate Negro family today takes from one to five Negro newspapers. Bu t what of the illiterates? Throughout black America , Negro theatres and Negro movie houses are rapidly multiplying, 
and Negroes, unable to read, see Negro plays 
performed by Negroes i n establishments 
owned and managed by negroes. They see 
Negro films. An d a Negro film producer 
said to us i n the Dressing-Room Club, "I'm 
working just now on a photoplay called 
'Toussaint L'Ouverture'. It's a sermon. If 
a film isn't a sermon, I don't want anything 
to do with it." Withi n a very few years, 
the Negro theatre wil l become as influentia l as the Negro press—more influential, 
possibly. If, as Professor Kerli n declares, 
the Negro has "discovered his Fourt h Estate", he has also discovered his Fifth . It 
is a momentous discovery, coming as it does 
when for the first time in history the Negro 
seems determined to shape his own career. 
A N ORGANIZER OF OLD 
NO account of the Grand United Order of 
Oddfellows i n the United States could 
be complete without a mention of Peter Ogden. A s it happens no account of Peter 
Ogden would be possible without mention of 
the Grand United Order of Oddfellows for 
unfortunately very little is known of him 
save his connection with that order. Bu t 
that connection was of a nature so farreaching and so important that the telling 
of it makes an interesting story. 
A s far back as 1842 a group of colored 
men constituting the Philomathean Literar y 
and Musica l Society of New Yor k City organized a new association whose purpose 
was to gain from the Independent Order of 
Oddfellows a dispensation to form a lodge. 
Ulysses B. Vidal , James Fields and other 
illustrious members of this organization 
waited as a committee on the Grand Master of the Independent Order and preferred 
their request. 
They were flatly refused and refused 
without a doubt on account of color. 
Into the midst of these negotiations Peter 
Ogden—for all that one is able to learn of 
his early life—dropped like a bolt from the 
blue. He was already at this date a man 
of considerable training, apparently selftaught, and he had added to this the experience which comes from having frequently 
crossed the seas. Bu t more than that he 
was a man of decided convictions and "noted 
for his earnestness in any cause he undertook". In some way he became acquainted 
with the purpose of the members of the 
Philomathean Institute and from the outset strove to influence them against petitioning the Independent (American) Order 
of Oddfellows. It was much better, he assured them, to be connected wit h England 
and the Grand United Order and to enjoy 
thereby the benefits accruing from association wit h the fountain-head. He himself already belonged to the Englis h Order through 
affiliation wit h Lodge No. 448 i n Liverpool. BANKIN G COA L 65 
Upo n the refusal of the Independent Order 
the committee of 
the Philomathean Institute 
deputized Peter 
Ogden to negotiate with his Liv ­
erpool Lodge for 
a dispensation. 
The Lodge undertook to secure this and 
got in touch 
wit h the Committee of Management at the 
headquarters in 
Leeds wh o 
promptly granted the required 
dispensation . 
Thus was established Philomathean Lodge, No. 646, New 
York , Marc h 1, 1843. Furthermore the Committee of Management authorized Peter Ogden, destined to be Grand Master of the 
Philomathean Lodge, to act as their representative in Americ a and in this capacity to 
take charge of all matters there pertaining 
to the Grand United Order. 
Peter Ogden undoubtedly had a flair for 
the exercise of administrative power. In 
the ten years 
Which lay before him he established a subcommitte e of 
management, organized a Past 
Grand Masters' 
Chapter, resolved difficulties, soothed contentions that 
rose among the 
new lodges 
which began to 
spring up everywhere, and 
crushed the 
doubts and prejudices which the 
Independent Order of Oddfellows undertook 
to sow among 
the Grand United Order of England. 
He died i n 1852 convinced that he had 
initiated a great progressive movement. 
Not even his splendid vision, I dare say, 
had dreamed of the remarkable growth of 
the Grand United Order of Oddfellows i n 
Americ a which boasts 10,000 branches and 
nearly 500,000 members. 
The record of his services is a lesson in 
organization. 
PETE R OGDEN 
BANKING COAL 
JEA N TOOMER 
WHOEVE R it was who brought the 
first wood and coal 
To start the fire, did his part well; 
No t all wood takes to fire from a match, 
No r coal from wood before it's burned to 
charcoal. 
The wood and coal in question caught a 
flame 
An d flared up beautifully, touching the air 
Tha t takes a flame from anything. 
Somehow the fire was furnaced, 
An d then the time was ripe for some to 
say, 
''Right banking of the furnace saves the 
coal." 
I've seen them set to work, each in his way, 
Though all with shovels and with ashes, 
Never resting til l the fire seemed most 
dead; 
Whereupon they'd crawl in hooded nightcaps 
Contentedly to bed. Sometimes the fire left 
alone 
Would die, but like as not spiced tongues 
Remaining by the hardest on til l day would 
flicker up, 
Never strong, to anyone who cared to rake 
for them. 
But roaring fires never have been made 
that way. 
I'd like to tell those folks that one grand 
flare 
Transferred to memory tissues of the air 
Is worth a life, or, for dull minds that 
turn in gold, 
Al l money ever saved by banking coal, AS T O BOOKS 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
The Book of American Negro Poetry. 
Chosen and edited by James Weldon Johnson. Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York. 
Harlem Shadows. Claude McKay. Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York. 
Birthright. T. S. Stribling. The Century 
Co., New York. 
White and Black. H. A. Shands. Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York. 
Carter and Other People. Don Marquis. 
Appleton and Co., New York. 
Negro Folk Rhymes. Thomas W. Talley. 
Macmillan Co., New York. 
The Negro Problem. Compiled by Julia 
E. Johnsen. H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
One of the poets whom James Weldon 
Johnson quotes i n his "Book of American Negro Poetry", himself defines unconsciously the significance of this collection. 
This poet, Charles Bertram Johnson, after 
noting i n the development of Negro Poets 
"the greater growing reach of larger la ­
tent power", declares: 
We wait our Lyri c Seer, 
B y whom our wills are caught. 
Who makes our cause and wrong 
The motif of his song; 
Who sings our racia l good, 
Bestows us honor's place, 
The cosmic brotherhood 
Of genius—not of race. 
Not all of the 32 poets quoted here give 
evidence of this cosmic quality, but there 
is a fair showing, notably Mrs. Georgia 
Douglas Johnson whose power however is 
checked by the narrowness of her medium 
of expression, Claude McKa y and Anne 
Spencer. Of Claude McKa y I shall speak 
later, but I wonder wh y we have not heard 
more of Anne Spencer. He r art and its 
expression are true and fine; she blends 
a delicate mysticism wit h a diamond clearness of exposition, and her subject matter 
is original. 
This anthology itself has the value of an 
arrow pointing the direction of Negro 
genius, but the author's preface has a more 
immediate worth. It is not only a graceful 
bit of expository writin g befitting a collection of poetry, but it affords a splendid 
compendium of the Negro's artistic contributions to America . Mr . Johnson feels 
that the Negro is the author of the only 
distinctively American artistic products. 
He lists his gifts as follows: Folk-tales 
such as we find i n the Joel Chandler Harris collection; the Spirituals; the Cakewalk 
and Ragtime. Wha t is still more important 
is the possession on the part of the Negro 
of what Mr . Johnson calls a "transfusive 
quality", that is the ability to adopt the 
original spirit of his milieu into something 
"artistic and original, which yet possesses 
the note of universal appeal". 
The first thought that wil l flash into the 
mind of the reader of "Harlem Shadows" 
wil l be: "This is poetry!" No other later 
discovery, a slight unevenness of power, a 
strange rhythm, the fact of the author's 
ancestry, wil l be able to affect that first 
evaluation. Mr . McKa y possesses a deep 
emotionalism, a perception of what is 
fundamentally important to mankind everywhere—love of kind, love of home, and love 
of race. He is extraordinarily vivid i n depicting these last two. "Flameheart " and 
"M y Mother " fill even the casual reader 
with a sense of longing for home and the 
first, fine love for parents. The warmth 
and sweetness of those days described i n 
the former poem are espcially alluring ; 
the mind is caught by the concept of the 
poinsettia's redness as the eye is fixed by 
a flash of color. Bu t Mr . McKay's nobler 
effort has been spent i n the poems of which 
"America " (quoted in this issue's Looking 
Glass) is the finest example. He has dwelt 
in fiery, impassioned language on the sufferings of his race. Ye t there is no touch 
of propaganda. This is the truest mark of 
genius. 
Ma x Eastman prefaces these poems with 
a thoughtful and appreciative foreword. 
66 AS TO BOOKS 67 
The publishers of "Birthright " could 
hardly have realized how correctly they 
were writin g when they spoke of it as an 
"amazing book". Amazin g it is i n every 
sense of the word and in no way more than 
i n its contradictions. The story is that of 
a colored boy, Peter Siner, who after leaving "Hooker's Bend " for four years of Harvard comes back to his own special "Niggertown" and surrenders to its environment. 
That is his birthright. 
The style of the book is really unusual, 
the author clearly knows how to delineate 
his characters and how to write an absorbing story. But he dots not care how many 
fallacies he introduces. Here is a boy 
brave and far-visioned enough to pick himself up out of the ruck and mire and to get 
away to the very best of intellectual and 
aesthetic life only to yield on his return 
to the worst features of it. This hardly 
seems likely. Bu t while Mr . Striblin g fails 
in depicting his hero, it is probable that he 
has been successful i n limning his subordinate characters. One is struck forcibly by 
the meanness and shallowness of life i n 
Hooker's Bend and its menacing "Niggertown", its sordid whites and shiftless Ne ­
groes. One is hard put to it to decide 
which race appeals to him least. "Something rotten" indeed has crept into the 
national ideal which permits the existence 
of conditions like these. 
Mr . Shands' "Whit e and Black " leaves 
one not quite so angry as does "Birth ­
right", but infinitely more depressed. Written i n an unusually poor style, this story 
lacks the speciousness and sophistication of 
Mr . Stribling's art and for that very reason 
seems somehow more sincere. These white 
and black Texans live a life unspeakably 
revolting, mean, sordid and petty. The one 
redeeming character, "Mr . Will" , even at his 
best is patronizing in his dealings wit h Negroes; at his worst he is as autocratic 
as a man of fewer altruistic pretentions. 
Over and through every manifestation of 
life i n this town seeps the miasma of immorality, of illicit sexual relations. The 
whites do not respect the blacks because 
they are black and nobodies. The blacks 
do not respect the whites because they are 
white and are still nobodies. The colored 
girl Sally, the cleverest person i n the book, 
estimates correctly enough the resistance of 
the white boy who has just joined church 
and that of the Negro who is a minister 
of the gospel, and she acts accordingly. It 
is not surprising that the author introduces into these surroundings a lynching 
and a procession of the K u Klu x Klan . Such 
surroundings breed such phenomena. 
From a sociological standpoint these two 
books may be viewed as a step forward i n 
the relationship of the races. They may 
be cited too as good examples of the realistic school; especially is this true i n "Whit e 
and Black " and in the portions of "Birth ­
right " devoted to a description of "Niggertown". Finall y as a commentary on the 
uses of America n life they are drastic, 
most unpleasant, but valuable. 
Amon g a number of interesting, wellwritten but pessimistic stories Don Marquis 
introduces one called "Carter" , presenting 
an aspect of the Negro problem which I 
confess I never have seen manifested. "Carter " is a mulatto who can easily be taken 
for white. He comes Nort h to work and 
usually poses as a white man. His blood 
rather than his actual color is his bane 
however. Not content wit h being seveneighths Caucasian, of having the appearHugo Gellert 
CLAUD E McKA Y 68 TH E CRISIS 
ance of a Caucasian and therefore of enjoying the advantages of a Caucasian, his life 
becomes a dreary burden because he is not a 
Caucasian. So deep is his dislike for his black 
blood, that not only is he forced to admit 
his admixture to his white fiancée, but 
when she shows her indifference to this 'fact, 
"the seven-eighths of blood which was white 
spoke: 'B y God! I can't have anything to 
do wit h a woman who would marr y a nigger!' " 
I told this story to a colored school girl: 
He r reaction to it was hardly what the 
author, I imagine, would have expected. 
She said inimitably: "Gee but don't white 
people just hate themselves!" 
I n his carefully compiled volume of "Ne ­
gro Fol k Rhymes", Professor Talley gives 
us a new aspect of Negro life which is by 
a strange contradiction both disappointing 
and interesting. It is easy to mark i n the 
collection, the finger of the scientific investigator rather than that of the poet; for 
viewed from the standpoint of beauty these 
songs fail to satisfy, but from the standpoint of sociology they are both valuable 
and enlightening. They show the pathetic 
narrowness and drabness of the slave's outlook, his pitiful desire to get the better 
even i f only i n fancy of his environment 
and of his oppressors, and so he chuckles : 
Dem white folks set up in a Dinin ' Room 
An ' dey charve dat mutton an' lam'. 
De Nigger, he set 'hind de kitchen door, 
An ' he eat up de good sweet ham. 
Dem white folks, dey set up an' look so fine. 
An ' dey eats dat old cow meat; 
Bu t de Nigge r grin an' he don't say much, 
Still he know how to git what's sweet. 
In seeking compensation for his lot, he 
dwells on other unsuccessful creatures 
whose very failure to measure up to norms 
of beauty marks a kinship of suffering. 
"There are others" he declares: 
Nev' min ' if my nose are flat, 
An ' my face are black an' sooty; 
De Jaybir d hain't so bi g i n song, 
An ' de Bullfro g hain't no beauty. 
Certain salient characteristics of the Ne ­
gro are traceable in these songs, his sense 
of humor, his dryness, his tendency to make 
fun o f himself and above all his love for 
the sudden climax which Mr . James Weldon 
Johnson mentions in the preface to his 
anthology. This seems to me a perfect example: 
She wri t me a letter 
A s long as my eye. 
An ' she say i n dat letter: 
"M y Honey!—Good-bye!" 
Professor Talley seems to have done for 
the Negro Fol k Song what Mr . Johnson 
has done for poems by Negro authors, and 
like Mr . Johnson's preface not the least 
valuable part of Professor Talley's service 
lies i n the "Study of Negro Fol k Rhymes " 
which is appended to his book. Her e he 
distinguishes between Rhyme Dance Songs 
and Dance Rhymes; he points out that the 
composition of these songs really served to 
keep the slave mentally fit, and most important of all he shows that these effusions 
often formed a sort of cipher language 
perfectly intelligible to the slaves but meaningless to their masters. Without doubt we 
are indebted to Professor Talley for an extraordinarily valuable sociological contribution. 
In her explanatory note Miss Johnsen 
writes: "Selections have been chosen from 
both whit e and Negro writers, from opposers and sympathizers of the Negro alike, 
yet wit h the aim not so much to maintain 
exact balance as to give expression to 
views that reflect representative opinions 
and conditions of race friction, and .that 
serve best to indicate the way for constructive effort." 
This program, has been successfully carried out, wit h the result that the book shows 
no bias and so should form a valuable compendium for the student or debater. Al ­
though very nearly every espect of Negro 
life with relation to Americ a has been 
touched upon, latter-day conditions which 
make the present Negro problem are considerably more emphasized than such remote subjects as slavery or abolition. This 
seems a wise and sensible procedure. Wha t 
the true student of the problem wil l most 
treasure is the long and thorough bibliography wit h which Miss Johnsen prefaces 
her selections. This is a gold mine i n itself. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
TH E THIRTEENT H ANNUAL 
CONFERENCE 
THE Thirteenth Annua l Conference of 
the Association opens on Sunday, June 
18, at Newark, N . J. , wit h a great parade 
and mass meeting at which time addresses 
wil l be made by Moorfield Storey, our national president; Governor Edwar d I. Ed ­
wards of New Jersey; Mayo r Frederick C. 
Breidenbach, of Newark ; Dr. George E . 
Cannon, of Jersey City, and others. The 
conference wil l continue through Frida y 
evening, June 23, with two business sessions 
each day, morning and afternoon, and a 
large mass meeting each evening, at which 
some of the most eminent citizens of the 
country wil l speak. No business sessions 
wil l be held on Thursday as that day will 
be given over to an automobile drive and 
picnic which is being planned by the Newark Branch as one of the many entertainments for all delegates and members. Ever y 
session wil l be chock-full of interest. 
Our conference this year wil l take on 
somewhat the nature of a great celebration 
and at the same time a girding up of our 
loins for greater effort. Since we met at 
Detroit last June the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g 
Bil l has passed the lower house of Congress and is now pending i n the Senate. 
We wil l meet to rejoice over the victory and 
we also wil l show to the Senate the strength 
of the movement which demands early passage of this legislation. It wil l be of great 
interest and gratification to know that 
among the speakers at the conference wil l 
be Congressman Dye r and we want to show 
him how much we appreciate the valiant 
work that he has done. 
The time chosen for the event is especially suitable in that it is during the vacation 
period. The Nationa l Office takes this 
means of extending to every person, young 
and old, white and colored, who is interested i n the obtaining of justice for colored 
citizens, a very hearty and cordial invita ­
tion to meet with us at Newark and make 
it the greatest gathering of its kin d that has 
ever been held. We need your advice and 
counsel and we want you to come and take 
an active part i n the deliberations. 
Ever y branch that can possibly do so, is 
urged to send one or more delegates. If 
your branch has not elected its representatives do so at once. Al l persons who wish 
stopping places reserved for them are urged 
to write as soon as possible to Mr . R. W . 
Stewart, 279 Ban k Street, Newark, N . J. , 
and request such reservations. Unless you 
do this you may reach Newar k and find it 
impossible to secure accommodations as we 
are expecting a tremendous attendance at 
the conference. 
When you purchase your railroad ticket 
to Newark be sure to get from the ticket 
agent a certificate. Last year at Detroit 
our efforts to obtain reduced fares were 
unsuccessful because so many of the delegates and members, i n spite of repeated urgin g on our part, forgot to obtain certificates. 
B y so doing they not only deprived themselves of the saving of considerable money, 
but they as well deprived those who had not 
been careless or forgetful. 
Start preparing now! Arrang e your va ­
cation trip so that you can be at Newark, 
June 18th to 23rd! Yo u cannot afford to 
miss this, the greatest conference of the 
greatest organization ever created for the 
achieving of manhood rights for the colored citizens of the United States. 
A MEMORIAL 
T O TH E SENAT E O F TH E UNITE D 
STATE S 
The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon our country throughout the 
civilized world and threatens organized government i n the nation. 
Since 1889 there have been 3,443 known 
mob murders, 64 of the victims being women. 
In only a few instances has prosecution of 
the lynchers been even attempted. American mobs murdered 64 persons in 1921, of 
whom 4 were publicly burned at the stake. 
The House of Representatives on January 
26, 1922, i n response to insistent countrywide demand, passed the Dyer Anti-Lynch -
69 70 TH E CRISIS 
ing Bill , which invokes the power of the 
Federal Government to end the infamy of 
American mob murder. 
This bill is now in the hands of the 
United States Senate. The undersigned 
United States citizens earnestly urge its 
prompt enactment. 
GOVERNOR S OF STATE S 
Hon. Thomas E . Campbell, Arizona 
Hon. O. H . Shoup, Colorado 
Hon. William D. Denney, Delaware 
Hon. Len Small, Illinois 
Hon. Warren T . McCray, Indiana 
Hon. N. E. Kendall, Iowa 
Hon. Henry J. Allen, Kansas 
Hon. Edwin P. Morrow, Kentucky 
Hon. Channing H . Cox, Massachusetts 
Hon. Joseph M . Dixon, Montana 
Hon. Albert O. Brown, New Hampshire 
Hon. Harry L . Davis, Ohio 
Hon. Ben W. Olcott, Oregon 
Hon. William C. Soroul, Pennsylvania. 
Hon. W. H . McMaster, South Dakota 
Hon. Charles R. Mabey, Utah 
Hon. John J. Blaine. Wisconsin 
MAYOR S 
Hon. William S. Hackett, Albany, N. Y. 
Hon. William F. Broening, Baltimore, Md. 
Hon. James M . Curley, Boston, Mass. 
Hon. Frank X . Schwab, Buffalo, N. Y . 
Hon. Edward W. Quinn, Cambridge, Mass. 
Hon. John P. Grace, Charleston, S. C. 
Hon. Grant P. Hall, Charleston, W. Va._ 
Hon. George P. Carrell, Cincinnati, Ohio 
Hon. P. G. Lovenskield, Corpus Christi, Texas 
Hon. Thomas F. Donnelly, Covington, Ky . 
Hon. D. C. Bailey, Denver, Colo. 
Hon. James Couzens, Detroit, Mich . 
Hon. John McNabb, Grand Rapids, Mick. 
Hon. Newton C. Brainard, Hartford, Conn. 
Hon. Frank Hague, Jersey Cty, N . J . 
Hon. Harry B. Burton, Kansas City, Kans. 
Hon. Huston Quin, Louisville, Ky . 
Hon. George E . Cryer, Los Angeles, Cal. 
Hon. Daniel W. Hoan, Milwaukee, Wis. 
Hon. George E . Leach, Minneapolis, Minn. 
Hon. Jeremiah P. Mahoney, Newport, R. I. 
Hon. John F . Hylan, New York City 
Hon. James C. Dahlman, Omaha, Neb. 
Hon. W. A . Magee, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Hon. C. Clarence Neslen, Salt Lake City, Utah 
Hon. O. B. Black, San Antonio, Tex. 
Hon. Chas. T. Bauman, Springfield, 111. 
Hon. Edwin F. Leonard, Springfield, Mass. 
Hon. L. C. Hodgson, St. Paul, Minn. 
Hon. Henry W. Kiel, St. Louis, Mo. 
Hon. Herbert J . Corwine, Topeka, Kan. 
Hon. Frederick W. Donnelly, Trenton. N. J . 
Hon. Fred J. Douglas, Utica, N . Y. 
Hon. LeRoy Harvey, Wilmington, Del. 
Hon. George L. Oles, Youngstown, O. 
ARCHBISHOP S 
The Most Rev. Michael T. Curley, Baltimore, Md . 
The Most Rev. Patrick J. Hayes, New York City 
The Most Rev. Henry Moeller, Cincinnati, Ohio 
BISHOPS AN D CHURCHME N 
W. S. Abernethy, D.D., Washington. D. C. President American Baptist Foreign Mission Society. 
William F. Anderson, Bishop, M . E . Church, Cincinnati, Ohio 
Samuel Gavitt Babcock, Suffragan Bishop, P. E. 
Church, Massachusetts 
Hugh C. Boyle, Catholic Bishop: of Pttsburgh 
Theodore D. Bratton, Epscopa! Bshop of Mississippi 
Benjamin Brewster, Episcopal Bishop of Maine 
Chauncey B. Brewster, Episcopal Bishop of Connecticut 
Ferdinand Brossart, Catholic Biskop of Covington, 
Ky . 
William M . Brown. Bishop, P. E . Church, Galion, 
Ohio 
Frederick Burgess, Episcopal Bishop of Long Island, 
New York 
Hugh L. Burleson, Episcopal Bishop of South Dakota 
C. E . Burton, D.D., General Secretary Congregational 
Home Mission Society. 
J . F . Busck Catholic Bishop of St. Cloud, Minn. 
George L . Cady, D.D., Corresponding Secretary, 
American Missionary Association 
John P. Carrol, Catholic Bishop of Helena, Mont. 
R. A . Carter, Bishop, M . E . Church, Chicago, 111. 
Henry Sloane Coffin, D.D., Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York City 
Charles B. Colmore, Episcopal Biskop of Porto Rico. 
E . Cottrell, Bishop, C. M . E. Ckurch, Holly Springs, 
Miss. 
Thomas F. Davies, Episcopal Bishop of Western 
Massachusetts 
Thomas W. Drumm, Catholic Bishop of Des Moines, 
Quincy Ewing, Rector Christ Church, Napoleonville, 
La. 
William F. Faber, Episcopal Bishop of Montana 
J . S. Flipper, Bishop, A . M . E . Church, Atlanta, Ga. 
Robert Freeman, Pasadena Presbyterian Churck, Pasadena, Cal. 
Daniel M . Gorman, Catholia Bishop of Boise, Idaho 
F . R. Graves, Bishop, P. E . Church, China 
S. M . Griswold, Suffragan Bishop, P. E . Church, Chicago, 111. 
George Albert Guertin, Catholic Bishop of Manchester, N. H . 
Arthur C. A. Hall, Episcopal Bishop of Vermont 
Alfred Harding, Episcopal Bishop of Washington, 
D. C. 
J . C. Hartzell, Bishop, M . E. Church, Cincinnati, O. 
John R. Hawkins, D.D., Secretary of Finance, A . 
M . E . Church 
William H . Heard, Bishop, A . M . E . Churck, Philadelphia, Pa. 
E . A . Hiller, Secretary Christ Cathedral, Salina, Kan. 
Victor Hoag, Dean of Christ Cathedral, Salina, Kan. 
M . J . Hoban, Catholic Bishop of Scranton, Pa. 
John Haynes Holmes, Community Church, New York 
City 
Frederick B. Howden, Episcopal Bishop of New Mexico 
Murray Shipley Howland, Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian Churck, Buffalo, N . Y . 
John Hurst, Bishop, A . M . E . Church, Baltimore, 
Md. 
Charles E . Jefferson, D.D., Broadway Tabernacle, 
New York City 
E . H . Jenks, D.D. , First Presbyterian Church, Omaha, 
Neb. 
Joseph H . Johnson, Episcopal Bishop of Los Angeles 
J . H . Jones, Bishop, A . M . E . Church, Wilberforce, 
Ohio 
William Lawrence, Episcopal Bishop of Massachusetts 
Frederick De Land Leete, Bishop, M . E . Church, 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
William A. Leonard, Episcopal Bishop of Ohio 
Harry S. Longley, Episcopal Coadjutor Bishop of 
Iowa 
Samuel Lane Loomis, D.D., Secretary American Missionary Association 
William F. McDowell, Bishop, M . E . Church, Washington, D. C. 
F. A. McElwain, Episcopal Bishop of Minnesota 
Charles S. Macfarland, D.D. , General Secretary, Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America 
Cameran Mann, Episcopal Bishop of Southern Florida 
William T. Manning, Episcopal Bishop of New York 
Paul Matthews, Episcopal Bishop of New Tersey 
Charles Bayard Mitchell, Bishop, M . E. Church, St. 
Paul, Minn. 
Robert H . Mize, Episcopal Bishop of Salina, Kan. 
William Hall Moreland, Episcopal Bishop of Sacramento, Cal. 
E . C. Morris, D.D., President, National Baptist Convention 
J. D. Morrison, Episcopal Bishop of Duluth, Minn. 
Theodore N. Morrison, Episcopal Bishop of Iowa 
P. J. Muldoon, Catholic Bishop of Rockford, III. 
William F. Nickols, Episcopal Bishop of California 
D. J. O'Connell, Catholic Bishop of Richmond, Va . 
Edward J. O'Dea, Catholic Bishop of Seattle, Wash. 
Arthur Lee O'Dell, First Presbyterian Church, Phoenix, Ariz. 
Charles J. O'Reilly, Catholic Bishop of Lincoln, Neb. 
Edward M . Parker, Episcopal Bishop of New Hampshire 
C. H . Phillips, Bishop, C. M . E . Church, Nashville, 
Tenn. N. A. A. C. P. 
William A . Quayle, Bishop, M . E . Church, St. Louis, 
Mo. 
Wallace Radcliffe, D.D., New York Avenue Presbyterian Church, Washington, D. C. 
Paul P. Rhone, Catholic Bishop of Green Bay, Wis. 
William T. Russell, Catholic Bishop of Charleston, 
S. C. 
L. C. Sanford, Episcopal Bishop of San Joaquin, Cal. 
Charles H . Sears, Secretary, New York Baptist City 
Mission Society 
William O. Shepard, Bishop, M . E. Church, Portland, 
Ore. 
Eugene Spiess, Vicar General Corpus Christi Diocese, 
Corpus Christi, Texas 
Paul Moore Strayer, D.D. , Third Presbyterian Church 
Rechester, N, Y . 
Cortlandt Whitehead, Episcopal Bishop of Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 
R. S. Williams, Bishop, C. M . E . Church, Augusta, 
Ga. 
James R. Winchester, Episcopal Bishop of Arkansas 
James Wise, Episcopal Bishop of Kansas 
Stephen S. Wise, The Free Synagogue, New York 
City 
Charles E. Woodcock, Episcopal Bishop of Kentucky 
JURISTS AN D LAWYER S 
II. J. Bean, Associate Justice, Supreme Court of 
Oregon 
Clayton B. Blakey, City Attorney, Louisville, Ky . 
Edward Osgood Brown, Chicago, 111., former Judge, 
Cook County Circuit Court 
Edward J. Brundage, Attorney General of Illinois 
Orrin N. Carter, Justice, Supreme Court of Illinois 
James A . Cobb, former Assistant Attorney, District 
of Columbia 
William H . DeLacey, Washington, D. C. 
John H . Denison, Associate Justice, Supreme Court 
of Colorado 
Hugh M . Dorsey, Atlanta, Ga., former Governor of 
Georgia 
Edward F. Dunne, Chicago, former Governor of Illinois 
E . T . England, Attorney-General of West Virginia 
J . E . Frick, Justice, Supreme Court of Utah 
Edwin B. Gager, Judge, Superior Court of Connecticut 
W . Ashbie Hawkins, Baltimore, Md. 
*O. R. Holcomb, Associate Justice, Supreme Court 
of Washington 
George W. Kirchwey, New York, former Kent Professor of Law, Columbia University 
William P. Lawlor, Associate Justice, Supreme Court 
of California 
William H . Lewis, Boston, Mass., former Assistant 
United States Attorney General 
Robert W. McMurdy, Chicago, former Judge Illinois 
Court of Claims 
Julian W. Mack, Judge, United States Circuit Court, 
Chicago, 111. 
Carrington T. Marshall, Chief Justice, Ohio Supreme 
Court 
John G. Milburn, New York City, former President 
New York State Bar Association 
James F. Minturn, Associate Justice, Court of Errors 
and Appeals, New Jersey 
William J . Morgan, Attorney General of Wisconsin 
A . Mitchell Palmer, Washington, D. C , former Attorney General of the United States 
Philip G. Peabody, Boston, Mass. 
Albert E. Pillsbury, Boston, Mass., former AttorneyGeneral of Massachusetts 
S. C. Polley, Judge, Supreme' Court of South Dakota 
Byron W. Preston, Justice, Supreme Court of Iowa 
John G. Price, Attorney General of Ohio 
James E . Robinson, Justice, Supreme Court of North 
Dakota 
Flem D. Sampson, Judge, Court of Appeals of Kentucky 
Sydney Sanner, Judge, Supreme Court of Montana 
Alex. Simpson, Jr., Justice, Supreme Court of Pennsylvania 
Albert M . Spear, Justice, Supreme Judicial Court of 
Maine' 
Arthur B. Spingarn, New York. 
Moorfield Storey, Boston, Mass., former President 
American Bar Association 
Charles H . Strong, New York City 
Charles H . Studin, New York City 
Francis J . Swayze, Associate Judge, Court of Error» 
and Appeals, New Jersey 
James H . Teller, Associate Justice Supreme Court of 
Colorado 
Robert H . Terrell, Judge, Municipal Court, Washington, D. C. 
Walter B. Vincent, Judge, Supreme Court of Rhode 
Island 
Charles S. Whitman, New York, former Governor of 
New York 
George W. Wickersham, New York City, former 
United States Attorney General 
Butler R. Wilson, Boston, Mass. 
L. Hollingsworth, Wood, New York City 
EDITOR S 
Daily Newspapers 
Charles H . Dennis, Managing Editor, Chicago Daily 
News 
Victor F. Lawson, Editor and Publisher, Chicago Daily 
News 
Phil. J. Reid, Editor, Detroit Free Press. 
William Allen White, Editor Emporia (Kan.) Gazette 
Edwin F. Gay, Editor, New York Evening Post 
Royal J. Davis, Editorial Writer, New York Evening 
Post 
Louis Wiley, Managing Editor, New York Times 
Weekly Publications 
B. J . Davis, Editor, Atlanta Independent 
John H . Murphy, Editor, Baltimore Afro-American 
Joseph D. Bibb, Editor. Chicago Whip 
Joseph D. D. Rivers, Editor, The Colorado Statesman 
Fred R. Moore, Editor, The New York Age 
Lucien H . White, Managing Editor, The New York 
Age 
James H . Anderson, Editor, New York Amsterdam 
News 
Hamilton Holt, Editor, The Independent 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Editor, The Nation 
Lewis S. Gannett, Associate Editor, The Nation 
Ernest Henry Gruening, Managing Editor, The Nation 
Alvin Johnson, Editor, The New Republic 
Stoughton Cooleyt Editor 
Paul U . Kellogg. Editor, The Survey 
John J. Wallace, Editor, Pittsburgh Christian Advocate 
C. A . Rook, Editor, Pittsburgh Dispatch 
John Mitchell, Jr., Editor, Richmond Planet 
Lorenzo H . King, Editor Southwestern Christian Advocate 
Nick Chiles, Editor, Topeka Plaindealer 
Monthly Magazines 
Harold S. Buttenheim, Editor, The American City . 
Gleen Frank, Editor, The Century 
W. E. B. Du Bois, Editor, TH E CRISIS 
H . L. Mencken, Editor, The Smart Set 
COLLEG E PRESIDENT S AN D PROFESSOR S 
William T. Brewster, Professor, Columbia University 
L . B. R. Briggs, President, Radcliffe College 
M . L . Burton, President University of Michigan 
William J. Clark, President, Virginia Union University 
George William Cook, Dean of Commerce and Finance, 
Howard University 
J. Stanley Durkee, President, Howard University 
Ernst Freund, Professor, University of Chicago 
James E. Gregg, President, Hampton Institute 
J . Kelly Griffin, President, Knoxville College 
John Grier Hibben, President, Princeton University 
John Hope, President, Morehouse College 
David Starr Jordan, Chancelor Emeritus, Stanford 
University 
Henry C. King, President. Oberlin College 
Howard H . Long, Dean, Paine College 
Kelly Miller; Dean, Howard University 
Eliakin H . Moore, Professor, University of Chicago 
Stephen M . Newman ex-President, Howard University 
James P. O'Brien, Dean. Talladega College 
Ellen F. Pendleton, President, Wellesley College 
Josiah H . Penniman, Vice-Provost, Unversity of Pennsylvania 
Bliss Perry, Professor, Harvard University 
John A . Ryan, Professor, Catholic University of 
America 
Edwin R. A . Seligman, Professor, Columbia University 
Charles F. Thwing. President, Western Reserve University 
*Signs Memorial with exception of the clause: "and 
threatens organised government in the nation." 71 
THE CRISIS 
Edwar d T . Ware , President, Atlant a Universit y 
Andrew F . West, Dean, Graduate School, Princeto n 
Universit y 
Benjamin Ide Wheeler, President-Emeritus, University of Californi a 
Ra y Lyma n Wilbur , President, Stanford Universit y 
GENERA L 
Jane Addams, Hul l House , Chicago, 111. 
Charles E . Bentley, Chicago, 111. 
J. Albert Blake , General Gran d King , Roya l Arc h 
Mason s of Massachusetts 
Edwar d W . Bok, Merion , Pa. , former editor, The 
Ladies' Home Journa l 
Horac e J. Bridges, Chicago; author and lecturer 
Halli e Q. Brown , Wilberforce , Ohio , President, Na ­
tional Association of Colored Women, 
Willia m F . Cochran, Baltimore , Md . 
Edwar d T. Devine , New York , author and lecturer 
C. S. Dodge, New Yor k Cit y 
Samuel S. Fels, Philadelphi a 
Archibal d H. Grimké, Washington , D . C. 
Edwar d Car y Hayes, Urbana , 111., President, American Sociological Society 
Rev. W . H . Jernagin, D.D. , Washington, D. C , Presdent Nationa l Race Congress of Americ a 
James Weldo n Johnson, Ne w Yor k 
Robert Underwoo d Johnson, Ne w York , former Unite d 
States Ambassador to Ital y 
Florenc e Kelley , Ne w York , Secretary Nationa l Con ­
sumers' League 
Edwar d Lasker, New Yor k 
Agne s B. Leach , Ne w Yor k 
Mar y E . McDowell , Universit y of Chicago Settlement 
Joh n E . Milholland , Ne w Yor k 
Mar y Whit e Ovington , New Yor k 
Geo. N . Plimpton , member Ne w Yor k State Coloniza ­
tion Society 
Louis F . Post, Washington , D . C , former Assistant 
Secretary of Labo r 
Mrs. Corinn e Roosevelt Robinson , Ne w Yor k 
Victo r Rosewater, Omaha , Neb. ; former editor, Th e 
Omaha Bee 
L . S. Rowe , Washington , D . C , President, America n 
Academy of Politica l and Social Science 
Charles Edwar d Russell, New York , author and journalist 
Willia m Jay Schieffelin, Ne w Yor k 
Emmett J. Scott, former Special Assistant to the Secretary of Wa r 
J. E . Spingarn, New Yor k 
Willia m O. Stoddard, Madison , N . J. , author and 
journalist 
Mar y B. Talbert, Buffalo, N . Y. , Honorar y President, 
Nationa l Association of Colored Wome n 
Willia m Monro e Trotter, Boston , Mass., President, 
Nationa l Equa l Rights League 
Henr y Va n Dyke , Princeton , N . J. , author an d poet; 
forme r Ministe r to the Netherlands 
Lillia n D . Wald , Henr y Street Settlement, Ne w Yor k 
City 
Talcott Williams, Ne w York , journalist 
Alic e Ame s (Mrs. Thoma s G.), Winter, Indianapolis, 
Ind. ; President, General Federation of Women's 
Clubs 
TW O POEMS 
LANGSTO N HUGHE S 
TH E SOUTH 
THE lazy, laughing South 
Wit h blood on its mouth; 
The sunny-faced South, 
Beast-strong, 
Idiot-brained; 
The child-minded South 
Scratching in the dead fire's ashes 
Fo r a Negro's bones. 
Cotton and the moon, 
Warmth , earth, warmth, 
The sky, the sun, the stars, 
The magnolia-scented South; 
Beautiful, like a woman, 
Seductive as a dark-eyed whore, 
Passionate, cruel, 
Honey-lipped, syphilitic— 
That is the South. 
An d I, who am black, would love her 
Bu t she spits in my face; 
An d I, who am black, 
Would give her many rare gifts 
Bu t she turns her back upon me; 
So now I seek the North— 
The cold-faced North, 
Fo r she, they say, 
Is a kinder mistress, 
An d in her house my children 
Ma y escape the spell of the South. 
M Y PEOPLE 
DREAM-singers, 
Story-tellers, 
Dancers, 
Loud laughers i n the hands of Fate— 
M y People. 
Dish-washers, 
Elevator-boys, 
Ladies' maids, 
Crap-shooters, 
Cooks, 
Waiters, 
Jazzers, 
Nurses of babies, 
Loaders of ships, 
Porters, 
Hairdressers, 
Comedians i n vaudeville 
An d band-men in circuses— 
Dream-singers all, 
Story-tellers all. 
Dancers— 
God! Wha t dancers! 
Singers— 
God! Wha t singers ! 
Singers and dancers, 
Dancers and laughers. 
Laughers? 
Yes, laughers laughers laughers— 
Loud-mouthed laughers i n the hands 
Of Fate. The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELEIN E G. ALLISON . 
•Despite much discussion we know very 
little about Africa . The death then of J. 
Tengo Jabavu early in the year has not received much attention i n the United States. 
Mr . Jabavu was born in the Cape Province 
of South Afric a in 1859 and died last September. He belonged to the great Bantu 
nation and was educated at Lovedale. He 
was the second South Africa n native to 
pass the matriculation examination of Cape 
University and to become a teacher. Afterward he founded the Imvo newspaper which 
he edited during the rest of his life. When 
the union of South Afric a was founded he 
went to Englan d hoping to induce Parlia ­
ment to give the natives representation i n 
the Unio n Parliament, but in this he was 
disappointed. Whil e in England he joined 
the Friends and on his return to Afric a 
was appointed a member of the Provincia l 
Education Committee on native education 
together wit h three other natives who were 
the first i n South Afric a to be appointed on 
a government commission. Mr . Jabavu was 
one of the founders of the South Africa n 
Native College where his son is now a 
teacher. He died "where his heart was, at 
the native college". 
•We have had with us i n Americ a for 
over a year two splendid specimens of 
Africa n womanhood, Mrs. Casely Hayfor d 
of Sierra Leone and her niece Miss Kath ­
leen Easmon. Both of these ladies were 
horn i n West Afric a and educated in Eng ­
land and are raising funds for a school for 
young Africa n women. Their culture and 
unselfish devotion to their work have won 
them hosts of friends. Recently they have 
been interested in pageantry and have 
taken part i n pageants in Boston and New 
York. 
• St. James First Africa n Mal e Beneficial 
Society is celebrating its 75th anniversary 
in Baltimore. George B. Murph y is president. 
• A colored mail clerk, Ernest Thomas, 
was arrested i n Louisiana by local authorities for alleged stealing. Pursuant to immediate protests of the N . A . A . C. P. the 
two deputy sheriffs and the marshall who 
arrested him were i n turn arrested for obstructing United States mail. 
• L . W. Thomas of Mexia , Texas, has purMISS EASMO N MB . JABAV U MRS. HAYFOR D 
73 74 TH E CRISIS 
LINOTYP E ROO M OF TH E CHICAGO "DEFENDER " 
chased $60,000 worth of property i n South 
Muskogee where he proposes building a colored town. 
• Representatives of seven Greek letter 
fraternities and sororities met i n conference i n Washington Apri l 17 to 19. 
• Everybody has heard of the Chicago 
Defender, but few have seen its home or 
know its history. The next time you go to 
Chicago be sure to visit the Defender office. 
It is a striking building on Indiana Avenue, 
well lighted and spacious. It is filled with 
modern appliances—linotypes, a great press, 
a dozen light cozy offices, and thrifty looking business offices. 
But this is the shell. Withi n lies the life. 
A black boy from Savannah who had 
learned printing at Hampton started the 
Chicago Defender in 1905. He entered a 
field of journalism when a hundred or more 
weeklies catered to the Negroes of a nation 
but they were having a difficult fight for 
survival. Several of them had a national 
circulation, but in no case did it reach 50, 
000 and in all but one or two cases it was 
below 25,000. Then too Mr . Abbott was a 
sort of outsider, acquainted with few Negroes of influence, wit h limited training and 
a worker wit h his hands. 
Ye t he won. He won by sheer pluck and 
endurance, by learning as he grew, by knowing his job from A to Z. Today the Defender circulates in every state and territory and sells well over 100,000 copies 
monthly. More than that it is edited and 
ROBER T S. ABBOT T TH E HORIZON 75 
TH E "DEFENDER " PRES S 
manufactured right in Mr . Abbott's own 
plant. His editorial staff form a group of 
alert young men—college men from Harvard and elsewhere, business men and experts. In the great composing room white 
and black mechanics set the type and cast 
the plates ; in the press room they print the 
many paged paper with its colored head 
lines, and mail it to the ends of the earth. 
It is a curiously hopeful and inspiring 
sight. 
• George Hayes of the Howar d Hig h 
School, Wilmington, Del., won second place 
for the state i n the Nationa l Safety Essay 
Contest. 
• John F . Mathews received his M . A . degree from Columbia last October for work 
in education and languages. He was born 
in West Virgini a i n 1887, was graduated 
from Western Reserve in 1910 and has been 
teaching since at the Florid a A . & M . College, Tallahassee. 
• William J. H . Booker of Oxford, Nort h 
Carolina was a graduate of Tuskegee and 
the medical department at Shaw. He practiced for three years at Oxford, North 
Carolina , and served as first Lieutenant in 
the Worl d War. He died at the age of 39. 
• Dr. James G. Sterrs was born in Ala ­
bama in 1881. He attended the State Normal school and the Medical School at the 
University of Michigan. He finally completed the medical course at Shaw and began practice in Atlanta . He had perhaps 
the largest practice of any colored physician in the city, and died recently of apoplexy leaving a widow and three children 
and an estate valued at $100,000. 
• Dr. Fran k G. Smith was born at Selma, 
Alabama , and educated at Fis k University. 
He was one of the first colored teachers 
in the schools of Nashville, Tennessee, and 
for 25 years was principal of the Pearl 
Hig h School. Durin g this service he studied at summer school at Chicago University and graduated i n both medicine and 
pharmacy at Meharry. Finall y he graduated from the Northern Illinois College of 
Ophthalmology and passed the state board. 
He began practicing as a specialist on the 
ear and eye in Chicago, having resigned his 
principalship of the Pearl Hig h School. 
DR. SMIT H MR . MATHEW S DR. BOOKE R DR. STERR S TH E CRISIS 
Officers and Members 
of the 
Pioneer Radio Society, 1922. 
TH E PIONEE R RADI O SOCIET Y 
• The Pioneer Radio Society was organized in New Yor k Cit y last December for 
furthering the interest of colored electrical 
and radio amateurs. A t present there are 
15 members and the enrollment is growing. 
They have meeting and laboratory rooms 
on 138th Street. Miles Hard y is President. 
G There have been several intercollegiate 
debates among the colored colleges. Fis k 
won over Knoxvill e on the question of Compulsory Unemployment Insurance. Atlanta . 
Lincoln and Union debated together Apri l 
14. South Carolina State, Nort h Carolina 
A . & T. and Virgini a Norma l debated "Disarmament". Virgini a Norma l won. 
G Eigh t colored boys i n Des Moines, Iowa, 
are known as the "Dashing Eagles" , and 
they are very happy to have received the 
following letter from the Chief of Police: 
"It is a pleasure to me to advise you that 
I have received information to the effect 
that you were one of the boys who helped 
run down the two men who robbed the Reliable Ru g Co. pay-roll. 
"It is another evidence that the police 
department is always dependent upon outside help to assist them in being successful. 
"We are very appreciative of your work 
and it would be pleasing to me to have you 
advise the other boys who were with you 
as I do not know their names. 
"Sometime when your father is not busy 
we wil l be pleased to have you, your father 
and the other boys come down and we wil l 
show you through the building. " 
On the testimony of the boys the bandits 
were indicted before the Grand Jury , but 
they afterward escaped from jail . 
TH E "DASHIN G EAGLES " TH E HORIZON 11 
• In Topeka, Kansas, there has just been 
held the first music memory contest. The 
schools of the city for a period of eight 
weeks learned forty phonograph records. A 
preliminary contest was held in each building to select a team of five pupils who 
would contend in a final contest for prizes 
of $100, the first prize being $50, the second 
$25, etc. The music club of the city gave 
additional prizes of $10 to each building in 
the preliminary contest. The representatives of the colored Monroe school, Eliza ­
beth Wilson, Minni e Martin , Alth a Hick -
ing American College and University, held 
their annual "Go to Hig h School, Go to 
College" campaign during the week of Ma y 
8 to 14. 
• The Bing a State Bank of Chicago, Marc h 
10, had total resources of over a half million dollars. The capital and surplus 
amounted to $120,000 and the deposits to 
$380,000. 
CI A colored man, Edwar d L . Dawkins, has 
been appointed a customs agent and assigned to the Appraisers' Warehouse i n 
Philadelphia. Mr . Dawkins entered the 
MUSI C MEMOR Y TEA M OF TH E MONRO E SCHOO L 
man, and Anit a Williams won the first prize 
in the contest wit h 21 schools. Al l of them 
made 100%. They received both the $50 
and i n addition a gold medal. Both the 
second and third prizes went to colored 
schools. 
• James A . Gardiner of West Chester, 
Pennsylvania, received his B.A . at the Pennsylvania State College January 3, doing 
the work i n three and one-half years and 
specializing i n mathematics. 
• The 42 chapters of the Alph a Ph i Alph a 
Fraternity, which reaches now every leadcustoms service in Washington in 1893 as 
a laborer at a salary of $660 a year and 
has been promoted through the grades of 
assistant messenger, clerk and accountant. 
He is now engaged i n prevention and detection of frauds. 
• Negro school children have distinguished 
themselves. George Hurst of Detroit, 10 
years of age and i n the 6th grade, won second place as champion speller of the city. 
By failing to capitalize "Hawaii " he lost 
first place to a 12 year old, 8th grade, white 
girl . 78 TH E CRISIS 
MRS . WILLIAM S MRS . BRUCE DR. BROOK S MR . BROW N 
• A t Harrisbur g an automobile recently 
killed a woman of 72, Clar a Toop Williams. 
She was the mother of 7 children all of 
whom graduated from the Harrisburg , 
Pennsylvania, public schools, 3 of whom became teachers and one a medical doctor and 
one a business woman. Of the sons one is 
in the civil service, one manager of the 
Country Club and one in the 10th Cavalry. Mrs. Williams herself was formerly 
a member of the faculty of Aver y College 
teaching mathematics and music. She was 
volunteer organist at prayer meetings and 
a woman whose influence was felt everywhere for education and uplift. 
• Mrs. Mayme R. Bruce was born in 1863 
in Marylan d and educated i n the public 
schools of Baltimore and Washington. She 
became a public school teacher. She was 
one of the organizers and secretary of the 
well known Empt y Stocking Circle which 
purchased a farm in the country for houses 
and gave recreation to the poor children 
of Baltimore. She was also connected with 
other improvement associations and neighborhood clubs and for thirty years was principal of the Catonsville public school. She 
died in September, 1921. 
• One of the best known undertakers i n 
New Yor k was W . David Brown who was 
born i n Delaware i n 1862. Afte r common 
school training his mother apprenticed him 
i n undertaking but he did not like it and 
left it for hotel and concert business. 
Eventually he came to New Yor k i n 1883 
and at first earned a livin g by singing i n 
the leading choirs. Finall y he reentered 
the undertaking business and became the 
leading colored undertaker in New Yor k 
City. Fo r 33 years he was permanent secretary of one of the richest lodges of Odd 
Fellows i n the city and for 12 years was 
Grand Master of the state. He was also a 
32 degree Mason. He and his wife lived together 30 years and when she died in 1921 
he followed within seven months. 
• The colored ministry comes in for so 
much criticism on all sides that it is pleasant to be able here and there to bestow 
unstinted praise. Dr. Walte r H . Brooks 
is "70 years young". He was born i n Richmond, Virginia , in 1851 as a slave. When 
freed by the wa r he entered Lincoln Uni ­
versity where he finished the college and 
theological departments. He then served 
as post-office clerk and missionary until he 
entered the Baptist ministry i n 1876. Since 
1882 he has been pastor of the 19th Street 
Baptist Church and in the 40 years of that 
service has become one of the best known 
clergymen in the United States. He is a 
man of learning, of strong, fine personality and wide influence for good. He is 
the father of six children. 
• The Episcopal Church has appropriated 
$102,000 for five buildings and other equipment for the Okolona Industrial School in 
Mississippi. Mr . Wallace A . Battle is 
president. 
• The general conference of the C.M.E . 
Church was held i n St. Louis in May . The 
Rt. Rev. Robert S. Williams, senior bishop, 
presided. 
• Dr. D. Jonathan Phillips of Kingston, 
Jamaica, B. W . I., has been made a Justice 
of the Peace for the Parish of Kingston. THE HORIZON 79 
• Another minister whose life reads like a 
romance is the Rev. Charles A . Tindley of 
Philadelphia. He was born in Marylan d 
during the wa r and for years was a farmer, 
bricklayer and plasterer. He finally studied 
for the ministry in the Divinit y School of 
Philadelphia and afterward preached in 
Maryland , Delaware and New Jersey. He 
came to the East Calvary M . E . Church of 
Philadelphia where he pastors one of the 
largest, if not the largest church i n America, with between 5000 and 6000 members. 
His church which is an imposing structure 
on Broad Street has been turned into a 
great social settlement where relief of all 
sorts is ministered and where buildings 
and equipment to cost $300,000 wil l eventually be added. Handicrafts are being 
taught to men and women, positions secured and meals furnished. There are 
moving pictures and concerts, a gymnasium and club rooms and a large staff of 
paid and volunteer workers. 
• A t the corner of 35th Street and Grand 
Boulevard, Chicago, the visitor wil l notice 
that a large amount of the space of this 
new business block is occupied by the Lib ­
erty Lif e Insurance Company. This is an 
old line legal reserve life insurance company incorporated June 30, 1919, under the 
laws of Illinois and owned and officered entirely by Negroes. It has $100,000 deposited wit h the state and there are over 
a thousand stockholders. The statement of 
December 31, 1921, shows admitted assets 
of $113,284, and liabilities of $4,483. The 
officers are Fran k L . Gillespie, President; 
Oscar De Priest, Treasurer; W. E . Stewart, 
Secretary. The company has written over 
$759,000 worth of insurance. 
• A n effort is being made i n Boston to 
provide a scholarship in an America n college for a young woman of Japanese, East 
Indian or Negro blood each year. Three 
lectures have been delivered on the culture 
of these three peoples for the purpose of 
raising funds. 
• Few people realize the strain through 
which colored physicians are going. We 
continually have to record the death of 
many promising men from sheer over-work. 
James Monroe May , who died recently in 
Jackson, Mississippi, at the age of 54, was 
one of the best known public men in the 
South. He was a school teacher and then 
worked his way through college and graduated from Meharr y in 1892. He practiced 
in various places i n Mississippi and in 1910 
opened the Ma y Dru g Company in Natchez. 
Afte r six or seven years of strenuous practice his health gave way and he died after 
a lingering illness leaving a widow and five 
children. He always gave freely to charity 
and leaves a host of students who wil l reDR. MAY member him wit h gratitude. 
DR . TINDLE Y The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
AMERIC A 
ALTHOUG H she feeds me bread of bitterness, 
An d sinks into my throat her tiger's tooth, 
Stealing my breath of life, I wil l confess 
I love this cultured hell that tests my youth ! 
He r vigor flows like tides into my blood, 
Givin g me strength erect against her hate. 
He r bigness sweeps my being like a flood. 
Ye t as a rebel fronts a kin g in state, 
I stand within her walls with not a shred 
Of terror, malice, not a word of jeer. 
Darkl y 1 gaze into the days ahead, 
An d see her might and granite wonders 
there, 
Beneath the touch of Time's unerring hand, 
Like priceless treasures sinking in the sand. 
CLAUD E MCKAY . 
* * * 
Dr. Carl Kelsey, Professor of Sociology 
at the University of Pennsylvania and Research Fellow of the America n Academy 
of Politica l and Social Science for 1921, 
spent the past year i n Hait i and Santo Domingo. In his pamphlet "The American 
Intervention i n Hait i and the Dominican 
Republic" he concludes: 
Insofar as I can see there are but three 
general policies which might be adopted by 
the United States wit h reference to Hait i 
and the Dominican Republic: 
(1) Withdraw and refuse to accept any 
responsibility for what happens in either 
country; refuse to intervene again and refuse also to let any other country intervene. 
(2) Withdraw and refuse to intervene 
again, but let other countries do as they 
please in regard to the collection of debts or 
the establishment of naval bases. 
(3) Continue the intervention, promising 
to withdraw as soon as conditions make 
possible the restoration of autonomy. 
* * * 
Frederick Starr of Chicago University 
writes of Colonel Young : 
I have lost a valued friend. In my large 
list of acquaintances there are not twelve 
men for whom I had a deeper affection and 
a higher respect. He wil l be missed by 
many—as a friend, a husband, a father, a 
son, a soldier, an adviser, a man of vision 
and ideals. Liberi a has lost a wise counsellor; the United States has lost a brave 
soldier and a faithful officer; his race has 
lost a trusted leader. 
NOTES ON LYNCHING 
THE New Yor k American favors an 
anti-lynching bill : 
There is a resolution before the Massa 
chusetts Legislature to memorialize Congress in favor of the passage of the socalled Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill , which gives 
the Federal Government jurisdiction in certain parts of the country over situations i n 
which the danger of lynching is involved. 
The humanity and justice of granting 
protection to our Negro citizens and, in fact, 
assuring Constitutional protection of the due 
process of law to all our citizens is too plain 
to need discussion. 
The colored population of the world is 
beginning to come into its own. We heard 
the other day of the Negro regiment from 
Jamaica which refused at the order of the 
Britis h to sail for India, there to help the 
English hold down in their misery and oppression the people of India. 
We are making enemies for ourselves beyond our borders, and enemies which may 
become important enemies, by our practice 
of lynching. Perhaps more important than 
all, we are losing the respect of the thoughtful, just and discriminating people of the 
world by this practice of lawlessness and 
brutality. 
* * * 
The Duluth (Minn.) Rip-Saw reprints 
what the Canadian paper "Jack Canuck" 
thinks of our little America n ways: 
Canadians, colored and white, are now beginning to realize just what the much boasted liberty of the United States amounts to. 
The Matthew Bullock case has brought facts 
to light which many Canadians had never 
before realized. Before the Civi l wa r the 
Southern states made slaves of the colored 
people ; now they lynch them at will , and the 
United States government allows the Southerners to get away wit h it. 
It is not so very long since the self-same 
United States made a terrible outcry against 
the extradition of an Irish rebel who had 
defied the immigration laws and entered 
the U . S. as a stowaway. It was made the 
excuse for some bitter attacks against Eng ­
land by a certain element of the American 
press. We wonder what the said American 
press wil l have to say at Canada's reluctance to give up a colored citizen of the U . 
S. who has fled to this country to escape an 
untimely end at the hands of American 
rowdies who would lynch him. In the slavery 
days, members of the colored race would, 
on occasion, escape to Canada to flee from 
80 TH E LOOKING GLASS 81 
bondage at the hands of American "gentlemen". Members of this same race are now 
having to flee to Canada to avoid being 
murdered at the hands of the descendants 
of the same class of "gentlemen". 
Afte r enumerating the thousands of 
lynchings which have taken place in the 
Southern States since 1885, Jack Canuck 
concludes : 
An d amid all these lynchings in the Southern States not one lyncher was brought to 
justice! 
Wh y not give Turkey a mandate to civilize the Southern States of the U . S. A. ? 
There are millions of church members in the 
Southern States and they subscribe millions 
of dollars to convert the heathen of foreign 
lands. Woul d it not be a good idea if they 
devoted part of this vast sum to the teaching of Christianity and humanity among 
themselves? 
*** 
Walte r F . Whit e writes in the New Yor k 
Evening Post of one of the 36 lynchings 
and the 8 race riots which he has personally 
investigated : 
On the morning of my arriva l i n town 
I casually dropped into the store of one of 
these general merchants who, I had been in ­
formed, was one of the leaders of the mob. 
A t the time the store was free of customers. 
Afte r making some small purchase I engaged him i n conversation, gradually winning his confidence by telling him how much 
I admired the manly spirit of the men of 
that town for teaching those niggers a lesson. Mentioning the newspaper accounts of 
the lynching I had read and confessing, 
somewhat shamefacedly, that I had never 
been lucky enough to be in a lynching, I 
led the way up to the recent affair in his 
own town. He opened up almost immediately, offered me a box to sit on, and a bottle 
of soft drink, and then gave me a painstakingly minute account of the trouble from 
beginning to end. 
To my inquiries how the colored woman 
had met her death, he slapped his thigh and 
declared it "the best show I ever did see, 
Mister—you oughter seen that nigger wench 
fight and heard her howl when we strung 
her up". When I expressed a desire to meet 
personally and congratulate some of the 
other brave and fearless men who had conquered this fiercely fighting woman, he offered to have them come to the store that 
afternoon, or, if I didn't want that done, 
he would tell me who they were. 
WITHOUT HONOR 
THE peculiar significance of Claude Mc -
Kay's article on Marcus Garvey i n the 
Liberator is that it represents the estimate 
of one compatriot of another. Fo r both 
are Jamaicans. Mr. McKa y likens the Garvey movement to a simila r social phenomenon which he had already experienced: 
To those who know Jamaica, the homeland of Marcus Garvey, Garveyism inevitably suggests the name of Bedwardism, . . . 
a religious sect . . . founded by an illiterate 
black giant named Bedward about 25 years 
ago, who claimed medicinal and healing 
properties for a sandy little hole beside a 
quiet river that flowed calmly to the sea 
through the eastern part of Jamaic a . . . 
The most recent news of the prophet was 
his arrest by the government for causing 
hundreds of his followers to sell all their 
possessions and come together at his home 
in August Town to witness his annunciation; for on a certain day at noon, he had 
said, he would ascend into heaven upon a 
crescent moon. The devout sold and gave 
away all their property and flocked to 
August Town, and the hour of the certain 
day came and passed wit h Bedward waiting 
in his robes, and days followed and weeks 
after. Then his flock of sheep, now turned 
into a hungry, destitute, despairing mob, 
howled like hyenas and fought each other 
until the Government interfered. 
It may be that the notorious career of 
Bedward, the prophet, worked unconsciously 
upon Marcus Garvey's mind and made him 
work out his plans along simila r spectacula r lines. Bu t between the mentality of 
both men there is no comparison. Whil e 
Bedward was a huge inflated bag of bombast 
loaded with ignorance and superstition, Garvey's is beyond doubt a very energetic and 
quick-witted mind, barb-wired by the imperia l traditions of nineteenth-century Eng ­
land. His spirit is revolutionary, but his 
intellect does not understand the significance 
of modern revolutionary developments. May ­
be he chose not to understand, he may have 
realized that a resolute facing of facts made 
puerile his beautiful schemes for the redemption of the continent of Africa . 
* * * 
Considering Garvey's early background, 
Mr . McKa y finds his disregard of the economic problem inexplicable : 
The most puzzling thing about the "Bac k 
to Africa " propaganda is the leader's repudiation of all the fundamentals of the black 
worker's economic struggle. No intelligent 
Negro dare deny the almost miraculous effect and the world-wide breadth and sweep 
of Garvey's propaganda methods. But all 
those who think broadly on social conditions 
are amazed at Garvey's ignorance and his 
intolerance of modern social ideas. To him 
Queen Victori a and Lincoln are the greatest 
figures in history because they both freed 
the slaves, and the Negro race wil l never 
reach the heights of greatness until it has 
produced such types. He talks of Afric a 
as if it were a little island in the Caribbean 
Sea. Ignoring all geographical and politi-82 THE CRISIS 
cal divisions, he gives his followers the idea 
that that vast continent of diverse tribes 
consists of a large homogenous nation of 
natives struggling for freedom and waiting for the Western Negroes to come and 
help them drive out the European exploiters. 
He has never urged Negroes to organize 
in industrial unions. 
He only exhorted them to get money, buy 
shares in his Africa n steamship line, and 
join his Universa l Association. An d thousands of American and West Indian Negroes responded wit h eagerness. 
He denounced the Socialists and Bolshevists for plotting to demoralize the Negro 
workers and bring them under the control 
of white labor. An d in the same breath 
he attacked the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People, and its 
founder, Dr. DuBois, for including white 
leaders and members. In the face of his 
very capable mulatto and octoroon colleagues, he advocated an all-sable nation of 
Negroes to be governed strictly after the 
Englis h plan wit h Marcus Garvey as supreme head. 
He organized a Negro Legion and a Negro Red Cross in the heart of Harlem. The 
Black Star line consisted of two unseaworthy boats and the Negro Factories Corporation was mainly existent on paper. But it 
seems that Garvey's sole satisfaction i n his 
business venture was the presenting of 
grandiose visions to his crowd. 
* * * 
Perhaps after all Garvey was more interested i n histrionics than in social progress. Mr. McKa y seems to indicate this : 
Garvey's arrest by the Federal authorities after five years of stupendous vaudeville is a fitting climax. He should feel now 
an ultimate satisfaction i n the fact that 
he was a universal advertising manager. 
He was the biggest popularizer of the Negro problem, especially among Negroes, 
since "Uncl e Tom's Cabin" . He attained 
the sublime. Durin g the last days he waxed 
more falsely eloquent in his tall talks on the 
Negro Conquest of Africa , and when the 
clansmen yelled their approval and clamored 
for more, i n his gorgeous robes, he lifted 
his hands to the low ceiling in a weird pose, 
his huge ugly bulk cowing the crowd, and 
told how the mysteries of Africa n magic 
had been revealed to him, and how he would 
use them to put the white man to confusion 
and drive him out of Africa . 
THE AFFAIRS OF INDIA 
MR. SYU D HOSSAIN , Indian delegate 
to the Nea r East Peace Conference of 
1920, has set forth in the New Yor k Times 
India's uncompromising attitude toward 
Great Britain : 
One thing is perfectly certain: India, 
with a population comprising one-fifth of 
the human race, cannot eternally remain the 
"adjunct"—in Wells' phrase—of a little 
island 7,000 miles away from her shores. 
Neither any natural nor any economic ties 
bind her to the Britis h Empire , and she 
can only form part of that system if it 
can be proved that such an arrangement 
would be of definite advantage to her. The 
onus of proof lies on Britain . On the other 
hand, there is every reason i n the world 
why India should work out her own destiny, 
unfettered and uncoerced, and make her 
own contribution, as in the past, to the culture and civilization of the world. Not 
only India, but the world is the poorer for 
her present compulsory emasculation and 
disorganization. The Britis h have fixed a 
stranglehold on her creative genius and national growth. India must be free. . . . 
Mahatma Gandhi launched his "nonviolent, non-co-operation" movement to secure three definite things, viz.: (1) the 
righting of the Punjab wrongs; (2) the fulfillment of the Britis h pledges to Moslems, 
and (3) the attainment of Swaraj (selfrule) . 
It is upon this triple foundation that the 
national movement today rests; Gandhi's 
program having been accepted by the Indian Nationa l Congress and endorsed by the 
nation at large. Eac h one of the three 
items mentioned above is, from the viewpoint of India, fundamental, admitting of 
no compromise. Tha t is a fact which, it 
would seem, has at last begun to dawn 
even upon the Britis h Government, if one 
may judge from the circumstances attending the recent resignation of Edwi n Samuel 
Montagu, the Secretary of State for India. 
* * * 
England has tried vainly to divert the attention of the Hindus. Mr . Hossain declares : 
Reading between the lines of the dispatch 
of the Government of India, for publishing 
which Mr . Montagu was "sacked", it becomes abundantly clear that the Britis h 
Government's attempts to whittle down the 
Indian demands or, alternatively, to break 
down the Hindu-Moslem solidarity which 
sustains them, have failed. Overwhelming corroborative testimony on this point is 
also forthcoming from the successive and 
signal failures of the visits of the Duke of 
Connaught and the Prince of Wales. These 
royal visitors were sent to India, one after 
the other, i n a frantic but vain effort to 
create a diversion and thus secure a compromise. 
The Duke returned to Englan d with the 
doleful tale that "the shadow of Amritsa r 
has lengthened over the fair face of India" . 
The visit of the Prince, just concluded, has 
proved even a more dismal failure. There 
is not the slightest doubt that the Prince 
was sent to India to be an instrument of THE LOOKING GLASS 8 3 
reconciliation, a mouthpiece for "concessions". Wha t India was looing for, however, were deeds not words; for "specific 
performances" and not more promises. 
Deeds apparently were not forthcoming, 
The Prince was boycotted even more vigorously than the Duke. In the event his Roya l 
Highness has left India without even making one of those conventional, picturesque 
pronouncements belauding a fictitious "loyalty" that Britis h imperialism loves to put 
in the mouth of its royalty. 
* * * 
A n American, Ralph E . Henderson, contrasts i n the Boston Herald the bustle of 
an Indian town a week before the arriva l 
of the Prince of Wales wit h the apathy 
which the boycott produced: 
I was in Calcutta a week before the Prince 
of Wales was due to land. A t that time 
our taxi was caught in a traffic jam on 
one of the main thoroughfares and held 
for 15 minutes while the packed stream 
of carts, bullock-drawn, horse-drawn, buffalo-drawn or mandrawn, strained through 
the crowded street. 
When the prince landed at Calcutta, 
the streets were deserted as those of a 
New England town on an old Purita n Sabbath. Calcutta shops did no business. Ma ­
hatma Gandhi had so commanded. 
* * * 
India has suffered a great loss in the 
death of the Pundit a Ramabai. The Boston 
paper writes: 
Thousands of Bostonians who i n years 
past have heard the Pundit a Ramabai in 
city pulpits or on city platforms wil l be 
shocked to know that the remarkable career 
of this consecrated woman has just ended 
i n death. He r mission among us was first 
that of pleading the cause of the child 
widows of India ; later it broadened out into 
a movement for educational uplift, and with 
such success that, as chief figure of the 
famous Ramabai Association, she was enabled to organize and carry on the Sharada 
Sadana, or "Happ y Home," at which annually from 1500 to 1700 girls and young 
women receive their training. Night and 
day, abroad as well as at home, the Pundit a 
toiled i n the interest of her fellow-countrywomen. Not the least of her services in 
their behalf was a translation of the Christian scriptures into one of the native dialects; one of the most spectacular of them 
was her rescue of 300 girls from starvation 
during the great Indian famine. 
TRIBUTE 
THE unveiling of the Booker T. Washington monument at Tuskegee brought 
together a throng of educators and philanthropists from all over the country. The 
New Yor k Times quotes one of the speakers, 
Josephus Daniels, former Secretary of the 
Navy : 
"Because Booker T. Washington sought to 
advance his own race and to preserve friendship wit h the white neighbors, it is altogether fitting that men of both races, from 
the Nort h and from the South, should join in 
the unprecedented event. 
" I am not here to discuss so-called race 
problems. M y experience has told me that 
you cannot solve problems of people like you 
do an arithmetic lesson. One reason we 
have made less progress is because men insist upon a solution of racial differences by 
the rule of three and demand that the destinies of men be unfolded in their generation. I have no patent solvent for the socalled race problem. I do know that between 
white people and black people in the South 
there are stronger ties of friendship today 
than formerly and that out of this will grow 
a better understanding and better conditions." 
In Boston a number of white and colored 
people met at the Twentieth Century Club 
to pay honor to the late Mari a L . Baldwin. 
They moved to establish a room dedicated 
to her "for the collection and preservation of 
material relating to the history of the Negro, 
and those who have stood for justice for the 
Negro. " 
* * # 
According to the Boston Herald, Dr. 
Charles W . Eliot, president emeritus of 
Harvar d was present and said: 
" I have known many colored students at 
A T TUSKEGE E 84 TH E CRISIS 
Harvar d who have seemed to me to have 
been imbued with an almost apostolic spirit. 
But the life of Mari a Baldwi n was unique. 
I know of no other case where a woman 
from an obscure beginning rose to the head 
of the best grammar school in the city system, serving the children of all races. He r 
school was regarded by many of the leading 
white citizens whose children attended it as 
the best in the city. An d she kept the respect of the school committee through all 
the years of her service. Al l that has been 
said of her poise and charm is true. I recall but two women in all my acquaintance 
who surpassed her in this." 
* * * 
Mrs. Margare t Deland, whose wa r experiences have taught her to see the Negro 
from a different angle, declared: 
"The fortunes of both races are inextricably bound up, the hope of one race is the 
hope of the other. This proposed memorial 
room has many values. It wil l have the 
value of furnishing historical data concentrated under one roof. Bu t its greatest 
value wil l be as a source of stimulation to 
the colored citizens of Boston. 
" A museum is a source of progress, for 
we do not allow the collection of specimens 
of the past until we have achieved i n the 
present. A s a record of the long struggle 
of the Negro race to overcome the handicaps 
imposed upon it, this collection of historical 
data wil l be a constant inspiration to young 
Negro boys and girls. " 
AT A GLANCE 
SOMETHIN G has happened to the socalled "colored people" of the United 
States of which their white neighbors do 
not seem generally to be aware. 
In this instance we refer particularly to 
the Negro people. There are other "colored" 
people—the Japanese, Chinese, Hindus and 
others. Bu t it is the Negroes of whom we 
are speaking now—our own America n Ne ­
groes. 
An d what has happened to them is that 
there are those among them who have acquired a degree of culture equal to that of 
any race on earth. There is today among 
the Negroes of Americ a a large class that 
has placed itself beyond the sneers of Negrobaiters and Negro-haters. Fo r that class 
the "color line " has faded away forever. The 
people of that class can and do look serenely 
down on whoever sets himself up as a 
mental or moral superior. 
For, that's what happens to men and 
women who achieve a high state of mental 
and moral culture—they are beyond the 
power of ignorance to do them harm. Yo u 
can spit upon their bodies. Yo u can sneer 
at them and call them "niggers," but you 
can't spit upon their souls. They can laugh 
at you in sheerest pity—and they do. 
This class of cultured Negroes now numbering thousands of men and Women of the 
race i n Americ a is the product of their own 
universities and of white universities, notably Yal e and Harvard . An d especially Harvard, which to its everlasting glory be it 
said has never drawn the color line. 
The voice of this cultured Negro class 
speaks eloquently from a page of Burghardt 
DuBois's marvelous book, "The Souls of 
Black Folk. " where he says: 
" I sit with Shakespeare and he winces 
not. Across the color line I move arm In 
arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling 
men and welcoming women glide in gilded 
halls. From out the caves of evening that 
swing between the strong-limbed earth and 
the tracery of the stars I summon Aristotle 
and Aurelius and what soul I will , and they 
come all graciously with no scorn nor condescension." 
In that high world the Negro is safe. No 
sneer can hurt him there; no jibe can break 
his heart. 
—The Keokuk, la . City. 
* * * 
PESSIMIST S on the Afro-America n question may well consider the pure-blooded 
Negro girl, Sarah Rector, of Kansas City, 
aged 20, who proves to a white court that 
she is managing astutely her fortune of 
$750,000, and needs no guardian. Possibly 
the exception only proves the rule. 
—Brookly n Eagle. 
TH E LOSS OF ASHLE E COTTAG E 
EFFI E LE E NEWSOM E 
THE news of the burning of that stanch 
old colonial building that for years 
had been my home, came as a blow to me, 
so fa r away. From its windows, since 
earliest childhood, I had looked out upon 
the seasons and the birds; the orchard, 
fleeced with white plum blooms; the orchard 
roofed with the blossoms of the peach; the 
orchard, ceiled and hushed with snows. 
By my window on the south side of the 
cottage a poplar tree towered, and bore its 
summit to the third story. An d i n this 
poplar gathered the birds—birds to mate; 
birds to build ; birds to pour out such 
rhapsodies as filled the heart. Aye , even 
the oriole, he swung there! 
An d my window looked out upon all of 
this! I watched here the pageant of the ASHLE E COTTAG E 85 
seasons; gazed down upon turquoise-blue 
eggs; saw the eggs' fledglings that wavered 
away to come no more to the bowl-shaped 
nest. Ah , dreams! We learned Locksley 
Hal l in this very room, my sister Consuelo 
and I. Tennyson's haunting painting of a 
home that held memories infinite makes me 
long for just that skill to paint another 
seat of recollections in Ashlee Place, wherei n we passed our 
quiet lives with 
books and the study 
of prints from the 
brushes of masters. 
M y father, Bishop 
B. F . Lee, of Wil -
berforce, O., writes 
thus to us—to me 
and Rev. H . N . Newsome, his son-in-law. 
He paints from his 
heart what the loss 
of our home meant 
to him when the 
winds and the fire 
claimed it on the 
thirty-first day of 
December, 1921 : 
" I have learned 
more of the possible 
force of kindness in 
the great fire lesson, 
more of the hurried 
work and power of 
destructiveness 
against the slowness 
of constructiveness. 
Twenty-three years 
were required i n building up a great homestead; but sixty minutes to destroy it, reducing wood to ashes; iron to crimped, pitiless, apologetic and cringing nothing, i n the 
main. 
"Ever y line and point designating place, 
home, security, rest, comfort and the secrets of love and confidence are lost to sight. 
An d books, books!—a few in comparison, 
with many companions missing, or marred 
and scorched, and in many cases with absent leaves ; bedsteads and stoves that were 
crooking at and kicking, hugging and mocking one another, hopelessly falling into the 
ash grave, as lost as the loves and hopes, 
tossed by mad winds in charred leaves. 
"Silken and linen clothes, tablecloths, 
sheets and woolen blankets met in the upper 
flights of the maddened gusts, and carried 
hundreds of yards 
away at the altitude 
of half a hundred 
feet. An d art patrons 
of departed loved 
ones depicted b y 
love's inspired brush, 
or responding to the 
camera' s unerring 
judgment, alike went 
wit h 'trash' indiscriminately, and 
Ashlee Place mocks 
the hopes and visions 
of years. 
" A blessed fact i n 
the whole is found in 
the benevolent spirit 
shown by five hundre d Wilberforce 
people amid the 
ruins and mental 
daze. The close of 
the job of reduction 
came at the close of 
the day, the close of 
the year, 1921, and 
a cold day; and the 
inhabitants of Ash ­
lee House were left without the home 
whose faithful shell was now forsaking 
its lovers to the ashbed, red and glaring, 
too hot to be attractive, yet bidding them to 
look back to inquire for the real soul of 
Home, as turning from the debris of clothing, furniture and general confusion, they 
found warmth and welcome sleeping quarters i n neighboring houses wit h Christian 
friends and helpers." 
ASHLE E COTTAG E 
IF YO U SHOUL D G O 
COUNTE E P. CULLE N 
LOVE, leave me like the light, 
The gently passing day; 
We would not know, but for the night, 
When it has slipped away. 
So many hopes have fled, 
Have left me but the name 
Of what they were. When love is dead, 
Go thou, beloved, the same. 
Go quietly; a dream 
When done, should leave no trace 
That it has lived, except a gleam 
Across the dreamer's face. 86 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSITY 
Richmond Virginia 
is offering young men an excellent 
opportunity to secure a liberal education. We are offering work in the 
High School Department 
College of Liberal Arts 
Pre-Medical Scientific Department 
Pedagogical Department 
Theological Department, and in 
the Department of Public Health 
Nursing 
Strong faculty—healthy and attractive surroundings. Reasonable rates. 
JOSEP H K . BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMA L SCHOOL 
BRICKS , N . C. 
This School offers a first-class Hig h School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art , Agriculture , Wor k i n Wood , Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Voca l Music , 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 360; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 14. 
School farm, 1.129JS acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Ou r postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
Fo r further information writ e 
T. S. INBORDEN , Principal , BRICKS , N . C. 
Wilberforce University 
Summer School 
9th ANNUA L SESSION 
June 19th to July 29th, 1922 
Wonderful natura l beauty. Ideal place for health, recreation and study. Larg e faculty, inspirin g lectures, splendid 
educational equipment an d excellent cuisine. 
Courses: College, Normal, Hig h School. 
Special Features: Bibl e School and School of Philanthropy. 
Catalogues sent on application. 
Address al l mal l to the Director of the Summer School. 
Gilbert H . Jones, Director. 
HAMPTON INSTITUTE 
AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL 
HAMPTON , VIRGINIA 
Opportunity Knocks at the Door of 
the Ma n Wh o Knows and Can Do 
If you wish to prepare yourself to fill a responsible position of wide usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teacher of vocational agriculture 
Rural-school principal 
Hampton Now Offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEGE COURSE 
Leading to the Degree of B.S. in Agricultural Education Wit h Wor k i n WellEquipped Classrooms, Shops, and Laboratories; Wit h Summer Field Practice; With 
All-Round Training Under High-Grade Instructors. 
James E . Gregg, Principal 
Warren K . Blodgett, Director 
St. Philip's 
Normal and Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS ) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Musi c Courses, 
Teachers* Training , Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Writ e for Bulletin. 
Artemisi a Bowden, Principal 
TALLADEGA THEOLOGICAL 
SEMINARY 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Frederic k A . Sumner, President 
Is training men for the Gospel Ministr y at 
home and abroad. Students are also being 
trained for work i n the fields of 
SOCIA L SERVIC E 
RELIGIOU S EDUCATIO N 
TH E Y . M . C. A. , AN D 
TH E Y . W . C. A . 
The Seminary has an enviable record of 40 
years of service. Fo r full information address 
JAME S P, O'BRIEN , Dean 
399 W . BATTL E ST. , TALLADEGA , ALA . 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 87 
MEHARR Y MEDICA L COLLEG E 
wit h departments of 
Medicine , Dentistry an d Pharmac y an d a Nurs e Trainin g School 
AL L DEPARTMENT S RECENTL Y REORGANIZE D 
Two years (Class One) college work required for admission to the study of medicine. Graduation 
from a four years' Hig h School or Normal School required for admission to the departments of dentistry and pharmacy and nurse training. Fo r catalog and application blank address 
John J. Mullowney, M.D. , President of Meharr y Medica l College, Nashville , Tenn. 
KINDERGARTEN DEPARTMENT 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarte n Departmen t 
Atanta University Atlanta , G a 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS , VIRGINI A 
Beautiful location, 19 1 acres, fourteen buildings. DIREST 
railroad connections. 
The only school of its kin d i n historic Northern Virginia -
State standard Four-Tea r Hig h School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade Courses. 
Hig h moral standards. Prepare boys and girls to become 
useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For information address 
EDWAR D D . HOWE , PRINCIPA L 
NEW YORK WANTS TEACHERS! 
N o discrimination on account of color. 
Correspondence Courses for success i n New Yor k City 
examinations offered by experts. 
Salaries In New Yor k 1st to 6th year $2875. 7th and 8th 
year $3250. Si x week's Lecture Course during Jul y and 
August prepares for January examinations. 
Four evenings each week. Information Free 
Day's School of Pedogogy working i n conjunction with the 
famous McBvo y School. 
Address HOWAR D DAY , Prin . 
186 West 135th St , New York , N . Y . 
Armstrong Correspondence College 
ANNOUNCE S 
Courses for Teachers and Business Me n by Mai l 
Our system enables Yo u to take Business and Educa ­
tional work at Home at small cost. Wh y spend Three 
or Fou r Hundred Dollars when we can give you the 
same, work at littl e expense? 
The following are a few of the courses we offer in : 
EDUCATIO N BUSINES S 
Educationa l Psychology. Principle s of Business. 
Methods i n Gramma r and Hig h Salesmanship. 
School Subjects. Stocks and Bonds. 
Educationa l Tests and Measure- Insurance, 
ments. Accountancy. 
History of Education. Banking 
History of Negro Education. Advertising 
Psychology: General, Childhood, 
Vocational, etc. 
Industria l Education. 
Principle s of Negro Education. 
If you do not see what 
you want, write us. We 
give it. Writ e to-day. 
BYRO N K . ARMSTRON G 
West field , Indiana 
A RAC E COLLEG E FO R RAC E PEOPLE -
The Standard Teacher's Agency 
Established 189 7 
1011 New Yor k Ave. , N , W. , Washing-ton, D . 0 . 
Several Positions Availabl e No w 
Also 
Experienced Teachers Listed . 
Duncan's Business School •Summer course (3 months) June 5th to to 
August 31st. Shorthand, Typewriting and Bookkeeping. 5 
lessons per week. $45.00 cash or $50.00 Installments. WRITE 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE, 122 7 SOUTH 17TH ST. , PHILA -
delphia, Pa . 
AGENT S WANTE D 
FO R A NIG H GRADE LINE OF CALLIN G CUDS , BUSINES S CARDS , 
INVITATIONS, SOCIAL STATIONERY, ET C BI G DEMAN D EVERYWHERE, 
LIBERA L COMMISSIONS . PROMP T DELIVERIES. WRITE FOR SAMPLE S 
AN D TENU . 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNINfl. INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
A MONE Y GETTE R BECAUS E IT IS A CROW D GETTE R 
CHURCHES and CLUB S loosing for A PLAY THAT WILL AFFORD A N 
evening of Sido-Splittlno FUN , SHOULD HAV E 
The Slabtown Convention 
A A entertainment in one ACT; FULL et WIT 
AN D ite d HUMER . SCORES of CHURCHES HAV E CLEARED FRASJ 
Ont t» Two HUNDRE D DOLLARS I N OA S NIGHT . PRICE , MA . 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS . AUTHOR 
LINCOLN HEIGHTS. WASHINGTON . D . RI 
Placement Bureau For Colored Graduate Nurses 
317 West 138th Street, New York , N . Y . 
Telephone Audubon 5602 
Mrs. Adah Belle Thorns, R. N. 
Fo r many years Assistant Superintendent of Nurses 
of Lincoln Hospital, New York , N . Y . 
REGISTRA R 
SHORTHAND TAUGHT BY MAIL 
World's Standard System, Tria l lesson free. 
GEO. B . THORNTON , 
Southern Universit y Bato n Rouge, I * 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated i n publi c and secondary school 
libraries as an introduction to the study of Ainerican 
History from the American Negro viewpoint 284 pages, 
32 chapters, 17 full page illustrations. Index and 
bibliography other features. Pric e $2.00; postage prepaid 
$2.15; sent on receipt of net price. Order through any 
bookseller; C. O. D . or postage remittance. Fo r further 
information address the author. 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St., Washington, D . C. 
SPECIAL COMBINATION OFFERS 
THE CRISIS - $1.50 per year 
TH E SOU L O F JOH N BROW N 
By STEPHE N GRAHA M 
The Negro problem i n the Unite d 
States as seen by the noted Englis h writer $2.00 
Together wit h a year's subscription 
to TH E CRISIS $2.60 
DARKWATE R 
By W. E . B . DUBOI S 
The latest book by Dr. DuBois. Dealing 
with the hopes and aspirations of the 
darker races $2-25 
Together wit h a year's subscription 
to TH E CRISI S $2.85 
AMERICA N NEGR O POETR Y 
Edited by JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Containing selections fioni the writings of 
thirty-one American Negro poets. Together 
with an essay on the Negro's Creative 
Genius $1.7 5 
Together wit h a year's subscription 
to TH E CRISI S $2.35 
Address TH E CRISIS 
70 Fifth Ave. New York, N. Y . 88 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Cleota Collins, 
- Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORG E LACY , Manager, 
156 Hamilto n Avenue Columbus, Ohio 
TH E ANCRU M SCHOOL OF MUSIC 
Offers Courses in Piano, 
Pipe Organ, Violin , Voice, 
Theory, Solfeggio, Harmony, Composition, etc. 
New England Conservatory method. Excellent 
faculty. Fine dormitory 
rooms. 
Registration begins first 
Monday in September. 
Director : 
MRS. ESTELLE ANCRUM FORSTER, 
Graduate N.E.C. , 1919-20 
Send for year book. 
Address: 
74 West Rutland Square, Boston, Mass. 
CHESTER A. SMITH 
Baritone 
Scores a tremendous success 
with the Victorian Concert 
Orchestra. 
Clarence Cameron "White, 
Conductor 
"Boston Chronicle'* 
Fo r terms and dates, address 
CHESTER A. SMITH 
67 MOUNTFOR T STREE T 
BOSTON . MASS. 
Send at once for busts of 
Frederick Douglass, Booker T . 
Washington, Paul Laurence 
Ounbar, Bishop Richard Alle n 
and Rev. C. T. Walker, D.D . 
About I ft. In height, antique 
bronze color. Price, $2.50 each, 
or S busts for $11.25. Heroicsize bust of Douglass, 35 inches 
In height, for schools, libraries 
and auditoriums. Agents wanted. 
The Isaac Hathaway 
Art Company 
810 S. Hickory St., 
Fine Bluff, Ark. 
Students 
Students 
Are you spending the 
vacation at your home? 
If so, we desire your 
services in bringing TH E CRISIS 
to the attention of the citizens in 
your community. We are in need 
of your services both in the taking of subscriptions and in the 
sale of single copies of our magazine. We offer liberal terms to 
our agents and we solicit your 
help in this work. 
You know the work which TH E 
CRISIS is doing for our people. 
We need your help in this work. 
We are anxious to reach as many 
people as possible and in this 
you can help us greatly. 
Address: 
THE CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue 
New York, iV . Y. 
Teachers 
Teachers 
Teachers THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
The Only Record Made by Colored People 
SO LON G BER T 
NIGH T AN D YO U 
Sung by George P . Jones, Jr. 
A tribute to our own Bert 'Williams. 
Record No . 8056 
JELL Y ROL L BLUE S 
CONE Y ISLAN D BAB E 
Sung by Excelsor Norfolk Quartet 
Ful l of rea l harmony. 
Record No . 2051 
Operatic Selections 
HONE Y LOV E 
CARIBBEA N MOO N 
Sung by Mario n Harrison . 
Two melodies you can't forget. 
Record No. , 2055. 
I A M CLIMBIN G JACOB' S LADDE R 
JOSHU A FOUGH T TH E BATTL E OF JERICH O 
Sung by Harrod's Jubilee Singers. 
Record No. 2057. 
MAY RELEASES 
H E MA Y B E YOU R MAN , BU T H E COME S TO 
SE E M E SOMETIME S 
I'V E GOT TH E WONDE R WHER E H E WEN T 
AN D WHE N HE' S COMIN G BAC K BLUE S 
Lucill e Hegami n and He r Blu e Flame Syncopators 
Record No . 2049. 
MARI E (Venezuelan Waltz ) 
PAR A T I (Porto Rica n Danza) 
Belasco's South America n Players 
Record No . 2047 
DEA R OL D SOUTHLAN D (For Dancing) 
I'V E GOT M Y HABIT S O N 
Fre d Smit h and His Society Orchestra 
Record No. 2052 
ALM A MI A (Cuban Waltz ) 
SWEE T CHARLI E (Jamaican Paseo) 
Belasco's South America n Players 
Record No. 2048 
RIS E AN D SHIN E AN D GIV E GOD TH E 
GLOR Y 
WA Y OVE R JORDAN , WHA T DI D I SEE ? 
Harrod's Jubilee Singers 
Record No . 2046 
LUCILL E (Trinida d Waltz ) 
SUSPIR O D E AMO R (Columbian Waltz ) 
Belasco's South America n Players 
Record No, 2050 
(For Dancing) 
ST. LOUI S BLUE S 
YELLO W DOG BLUE S 
Handy's Memphis Blue s Ban d 
Record No, 2053 
CAR O NOM E (From Rigoletto) (Verdi) 
(Dear Name ) 
Antoinett e Games, Soprano, wit h Orchestra 
Record No . 7101 
AH , FORS ' E ' LU I (From Traviata ) (Verdi) 
(A h It Wa s He ) 
Antoinett e Games, Soprano, wit h Orchestra 
Record No. 7102 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
2289 Seventh Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Agents Wanted in Every Community 
JUNE RELEASES 90 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Capital Book of Etiquette 
Combined with Floyd's Flowers or Stories for Colored People 
A book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored society leaders 
on the street; at the theatre; at church; in the home; at receptions, balls, parties, 
weddings, dinners, etc., etc. The illustrations are so perfect and natural that 
the well-bred, correctly clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any and all occasions; correct dress 
for men and women; suggestions in colors and materials for the ladies; hints as 
to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, etc., for both sexes. 
What to serve guests for breakfast, 
lunch or dinner. 
How to converse intelligently; how to 
know when to talk and when to remain silent; how to make friends and 
gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member of society or the most 
humble. Illustratin g Table Manners 
Agents Wanted 
We are looking for 1,000 hustlers, men and 
women. Our offer wil l pay you positively $4 
to $9 per day. Such an opportunity comes but 
once i n a lifetime , AGENT' S SAMPLE S showing specimen pages and the pictures and covers of book wil l be mailed to you for 25 cents. 
A Book you will want—Must have in 
your home—a most excellent gift. 
100 pages of pleasing pictures taken from 
best photographs. A BI G BOOK , containing 
over 500 pages. The people are much pleased 
wit h this new publication and are sending 
thousands of orders to us. W e send by in ­
sured parce l post; return your money i f not 
perfectly satisfied. 
Pric e ONL Y $2.50, Writ e today. 
Dea r Friend : -
Ar e yo u energeti c and enterprising , ar e you 
intereste d i n th e development o f th e colore d people ? Ar e 
yo u intereste d i n seein g members o f the rac e buy and rea d 
good hooks , become self-educate d and enterprisin g 
citizens ? I s you r income perfectl y satisfactory , o r 
woul d yo u lik e t o make 50 ct s t o $1.00 pe r hou r fo r a 
littl e extr a tim e pu t i n fo r us i n you r community? 
Have yo u give n th e rac e problem s any thought ? 
Ar e yo u a thinker ? Pleas e pause a moment and conside r 
th e GOOD YOU MAY DO b y sellin g ou r publications , NATIONAL 
CAPITAL BOOK OP ETIQUETTE, PROGRESS OP COLORED PEOPLE, 
DUNBAR'S POEMS, KELLY MILLER'S WAR HISTORY, EMMET SCOTT'S 
WAR HISTORY, DUBOIS'S DARKWATER, FLOYD'S FLOWERS and 
othe r specia l books on the rac e and ou r ful l lin e o f 
BIBLE S and religiou s books. 
Schoo l teacher s and student s shoul d giv e thi s 
propositio n thei r carefu l attention . $4 t o $10 pe r day 
can be easil y made by workin g fo r us durin g vacation . 
Your s truly , 
Austi n Jenkin s Co , 
#523 Nint h St . N. W. , Washington , D. C. 
Send fo r catalo g o f 160 books. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 91 
ARE YOU PREPARED FOR THE FUTURE ? 
AR E YOU 
MAKING 
INVESTMENTS 
THAT WILL 
HELP YOU 
ON THE ROAD 
TO FINANCIAL 
INDEPENDENCE? 
OPPORTUNITY IS CALLING YOUR ATTENTION TO 
ORCHARDVILLE 
Where, if you act soon enough, you can secure 
ideal BUILDING LOTS for only 
$35. 
ON VER Y EAS Y TERMS . $3.00 DOW N 
AN D $1.50 A MONTH . NO INTEREST. 
CLEA R TITLE . EAC H LO T SOL D UNDE R 
MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE 
Real Estate is the foundation 
of all wealth. 
Yo u have heard that said many times and you 
know it to be true. Yo u know how people have 
made large sums of money out of Real Estate 
investments and you know that most of those 
people bought at TH E RIGH T TIME , That is 
an important factor. 
People from all parts of the country are buying Orchardvill e lots because they know that 
they have an excellent opportunity to earn BI G 
PROFIT S on their investment. The y know 
that when a place is developed in -the way 
Orchardvill e is being improved, the property 
there should INCREAS E I N VALV E CONSID ­
ERABLY . 
Tha t is why they are buying their lots now, 
while the price is low. 
You can do likewise, 
if you wish. 
Space here is too limited to cover all the details 
of this attractive offer, but we would like to 
have you know all about Orchardvill e and the 
opportunities it offers you. 
If you will write your name and address on the 
coupon below and send it to us promptly, we 
will gladly send yo u full particulars without obligation; on your part. Th e stamp on your envelope is all it will cost you. 
Perhaps this is the very opportunity you have 
been waiting for. Wh o knows? 
In view of the increasing demand for these lots, 
we suggest that you send the coupon without 
delay. 
ARENSON REALT Y 
DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL. 
WEIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realt y Dev'pt Corp. 
Chicago , IllGentlemen : 
I am interested in your Orchardvill e offer and 
would be glad to receive full particulars, without obligation on my part. 
Name 
Address 
Tow n and State 
CRI-fi-22-88 92 
flfHE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MADE TO YOUR 
ORDE R 
Pants 
NO EXTR A 
CHARGES 
$1.95 
Send no 
Money 
Postage 
Prepaid 
We make this special 
offer for 30 days, to 
prove the wonderful 
value, style and fit of 
Progress tailoring. We will tailor to 
your special order, a pair of these 
stylish $6.00 pants, send them to you 
postage prepaid and guarantee two 
years' solid wear or money back for 
only $1.95. 
Agents Wanted- Earn $30 to 
and neighbors for our high class tailoring. 
No experience necessary. 
Big Sample Outfit FRE E 
Drop us a line today and we will send you absolutely free our 
big assortment of woolen samples, style book and special wholesale prices on our made-to-measure suits—$12.45 up and made-tomeasure pants—$1.95 up. Full details of this offer sent FREE. 
The Progress Tailoring Co., Dept. F-117 Chicago, III THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 93 
BERESFORD GALE CORPORATION 
FINANCIERS, BROKERS AND GENERAL AGENTS 
Larg e an d growin g enterprise s desirin g connections, expansio n o r correspondents ar e cordiall y 
invite d t o transac t thei r business thr u ou r nationall y know n organization . 
Gale Building, 413 S. Broad Street, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY, N. J . 
Open March 15 
Rates reduced in keeping wit * the times. This 
magnificent Hotel, located in the heart of the 
Most Beautiful Seashore Resort in the world, 
is replete with every Moder n Improvement. 
Superlative in Construction, Appointments, 
Service and Refined Patronage. Orchestra 
daily. Garage, Tennis, etc., on Premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Booklet. 
E . W . DALE , Owner . 
COSMO S LABORATOR Y 
C D. CAMPBELL , A.B . Consulting Chemist and Analyst 
Address P. 0. Box 204, Dept. C , Newport, R. I. 
Specialist In Analysis ot Cosmetics, Drugs and Toilet Arti ­
cles. Investigate and Sell Trade Secrets, Manufacturing 
Processes and Formula s for all Hair Goods and Toilet Ar ­
ticles. 
Manufacturers of high grade Cold 'Creams, Perfumes, Hair 
Tonics, Pomades, Lotions i n hulk, by gross lots or by 
dozens for Agencies. AGENT S WANTED . 
Writ e enclosing 2o stamp for prices and terms. 
DONT GAMBLE! 
I f yo u ar e afrai d o f oi l an d othe r speculativ e 
investmen t proposition s an d prefe r 
SAFETY OF INVESTED CAPITOL 
plu s reasonabl e profits, w e hav e a n idea l invest ­
men t opportunit y i n a wel l establishe d an d sea ­
soned , nationall y know n fil m corporatio n tha t 
show s wonderfu l indication s o f substantia l 
profits. Ou r illustrate d bookle t No . 678 explain s 
i n detail . Sen d fo r a copy . Its FRE E ! 
Southern California Investment Co. 
1154 Centra] Ave., Los Angeles, Calif. 
$$ FREE—$ $ FREE—$ $ FRE E 
Wanted—2500 men and women who wil l use their spare 
time to make BI G MOKEY , or go into business for 
themselves; $3 to $5 per day and up to a hustler. W e 
wil l furnish you the goods to start with FREE . Al l 
we ask is that you pay the postage. Our line is a sure 
rrpeater and fast seller. HURRY . HURRY ! HURRY ! 
Do not delay, but- write to-day. 
DIXIE SALES AGENCY, 3161 S. State St., CHICAGO, ILLWANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Filth Avenue, New York 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Asbolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A . Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Larges! and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice hut a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. 94 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
PRICES SLASHED! 
Beautiful Waist 
FREE !
 $6.00 Value 
Now 
$2.98 
Postage 
Paid 
SEN D N O MONE Y 
Her e is one o f the biggest values 
ever offered to readers o f this paper. We'l l send this splendid 
serge skirt and with it this beautiful white voile waist FREE — 
without asking for one cent 
withtheorder. Skirtismadeo f 
good heavy weight serge, gathered at waist, wide loose celt; 
two pockets trimme d wit h tailored buttons. Colors: Nav y 
Blu e o r Black . Sizes,waist 
23 to 40; length. 36 to 40 inch. 
The waist we give free is madw 
o f white voile , handsomely 
trimmed wit h lace and embroidery; sizes 36 to 46. 
ROC K BOTTO M PRICE S 
Just send your name and address, givin g size and color of 
skirt wanted, also size of waist 
wanted. We'l l send both by 
parcel post prepaid. Yo u pay 
the mailman whe n delivered. 
Money back i f not pleased. Her e 
is positively a bi g $6.00 value for 
only $2.98. Send NO W as thenumbe r o f free waists is limited. Orde r b y Numbe f 191 C65 -
HOWAR D LU X CO. . DEPT . 191 CLEVELAN D 9» 
Both for 
ONL Y $2.98 
Statement of Ownership, Management, Circulation, 
etc., required by the Ac t of Congress of August 24, 
1912, of TH E CRISIS , published monthly at New York , 
N . Y . for Apri l 1, 1922. 
State of New York , ) 
County of New York , J ss " 
Before me, a Notary Publi c i n and for the State 
'and County aforesaid, personally appeared Augustus 
Granville Dill , who, having been duly sworn accordin g to law, deposes and says that be Is the Business 
Manager of TH E CRISI S and that the following is, 
to the best of his knowledge and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the 
aforesaid publication for the date ' shown In the 
above caption, required by the Ac t of August 24, 
1912, to wit: 
1. Tha t the names and address of the publisher, 
editor, managing editor and business managers are: 
Publisher—Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fift h Ave. , New York , 
N . Y . 
Editor—W. E . Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fift h Ave. , 
New York , N . Y . 
Managing Editor—W. E . Burghardt DuBois, 70 
Fift h Ave. , New York , N . Y . 
Business Manager—Augustus Granvill e Diu , 70 
Fift h Ave. , New York , N . Y . 
2. Tha t the owners are: The National'Associatio n 
for the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation 
wit h no stock. Membership 90,000. 
Moorfleld Êftorey, President. 
James Weldon Johnson, Secretary. 
Joe l E . Splngarn, Treasurer. 
Mar y Whit e Ovington, Chairma n Boar d of Directors. 
3. Tha t the known bondholders, mortgagees and 
other security holders owning or holding 1 per cent, 
or more of total amount of bonds, mortgagee, or 
other securities are: None. 
AUGUÊJTUS GRANYITX E DUX . 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 29th day 
of March , 1922. 
Fran k M , Turner, Notary Public , Queens Co., No . 
754, Certificate filed N . Y . Co., No . 164, New Yor k 
Register No. 2122. Term expires Marc h 30, 1922. 
AGENTS W ANTE D 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOO D PA Y 
Catalog Free 
THE EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG. CO. 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY , OKLAHOM A 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. 
Est. 1916. Capitalized 175,000 
$50,000 common, $85,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Fil m Corporation i n the Worl d Producing Negr o Photo-plays. 
1121 CENTRA L ATE. , LO S ANGELE S 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES , Pres. 
641 W. 9th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
YO U CA N BAN E B Y HAI L 
FIRS T STANDAR D BAN K 
Louisville , Ky . 
Capita l and Surpitts (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilso n Lovett , President 
MME . G . B. NEEDLE S 
FINE FURS 
FU R GARMENT S MAD E T O ORDE R 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morningsjdg 7S90 
Tel . 6417 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
54 School Street Boston, If au . A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WITH TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AND OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
TH E SOUL OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
UNSUN G HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY. (J . W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINCE HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOICE OF TH E NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E . B. Du Bois) , 90 
TH E EDUCATION OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J . Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBAR 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS. (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) . 2.50 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
TH E NEGRO IN LITERATURE AND ART . (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTY YEAR S AND OTHE R POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
TH E HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO CHURCH . (Carter J . Woodson).. 2.15 
TH E UPWARD PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.S5 
FIFT Y YEAR S IN TH E GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G . Steward)... 2.70 
HARLE M SHADOWS. (Claude McKay) 1.35 
TH E BOOK OF AMERICA N NEGRO POETRY. (James Weldon Johnson) .. 1.75 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y THE FOUNTAIN Of YOUTH 
PONC E D E LEO N braved the 
tempestuous sea in search of a 
mythical fountain located in the 
newly discovered America. Legendary tales had assured him that frequent baths in its exhilarating waters 
were quite enough to restore his fading youthfulness. 
Nestled beneath the azure sky and 
tropical sunshine of quaint old St. 
Augustine, this historic fountain 
stands to-day—a show place and an 
accepted tradition of old Spain but 
inaccessible for the enhancement and 
preservation of feminine loveliness 
and without the subtle charm of 
MADA M C . J . WALKER' S 
Superfine Toilet Preparations 
FOR THE HAIR AND SKIN 
Wonderful Hair Grower Tetter Salve i 
Temple Grower Clouine 
Vegetable Shampoo 
Cleansing Cream Vanishing Cream 
Cold Cream Complexion Soap 
Antiseptic Soap Talcum Powder 
Dental Cream Toilet Water 
Perfume Rouge 
Superfine Face Powder 
{white, roae-flewh, brown} 
Expensively 
Compounded but 
Conservatively Priced 
TH E 
Madam C. J. Walker 
Mfg. Co. 
640 North West Street 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
THE FOUNTAIN Or YOUTH AS IT STANDS TODAY 