The CRISIS 
Vol. 10—No.1 MAY , 1915 Whole No. 55 
ONE DOLLAR A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y 275652 
Attention, Masons! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonr y in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale , formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of New Haven and now a practicing lawyer tbere. Mr . 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENT S 
From James F. Rikards, 33° , Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A . & A . Scottish Rite : 
"'Princ e Hal l an d Hi s Followers, ' writte n by a scholarl y Afro-American , pre ­
sents to the Maso ni c worl d a treatis e o n the legitimac y o f Negr o Masonr y tha t 
shoul d he in the hand s o f ever y Maso n seekin g fo r Truth . Th e informatio n 
containe d in the chapte r doote d to Princ e Hal l is alon e wort h to the youn g 
Maso n the pric e o f the look . Brothe r Crawford' s easy an d pleasin g styl e 
creates in the reade r a desir e to complet e the volum e befor e puttin g the boo k 
ou t o f his hands. " 
From Henry A . Spencer, 33° , Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"Tli e hoo k fills a long-fel t wan t among" intelligen t Mason s o f ou r Race . 
T o kno w that we ar e right, an d to substantiat e that fact by intelligen t researc h 
an d logica l statements, is wort h mor e to us tha n wha t the othe r fello w ma y 
say. This is wha t Brothe r Crawford' s boo k does; an d it shoul d he in the hand s 
o f ever y Maso n o f e>ur Race. " 
From Jose H . Sherwood, 33° , Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners: 
" A ver y stron g brief, settin g fort h plainl y the legitimac y o f Princ e Hal l 
Masonry , and , as well , a ster n cal l to al l Negroe s to assume ful l prid e i n the 
happ y possessio n o f a Kit e whic h ca n sho w suc h clea r proofs o f its contentions. " 
From William H . Grimshaw, 33° , Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of " A History of Colored Freemasonry": 
" I have rea d wit h great pleasur e 'Princ e Hal l an d Hi s Followers. ' Th e hoo k 
is wel l written , containin g clea r an d convincin g diction . Th e impartia l accurac y 
wit h whic h the facts ar e marshalle d make s the boo k a ver y valuabl e asse t 
to Masons. " 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth. Avenue : . Ne w Yor k 
Mention The CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORED PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFTH AVENUE , NEW YOR K CITY 
Conducte d b y 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association (or the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for May, 1915 
PICTURE S 
COVER—Photograph from Life Page 
WILLIA M WILBERFORC E 13 
CARTOON . By John Henry Adams 26 
ARTICLE S 
MR . TAYLOR' S FUNERAL . A Story. (Concluded) 
By Charles W . Chesnutt 34 
POEMS . By Benjamin Brawley 37 
"OLIVE R CROMWELL. " By W . T . Freeman 42 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 13 
OPINIONS 16 
EDITORIA L 28 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COL ­
ORE D PEOPL E 38 
FIGHTIN G RAC E CALUMN Y 40 
TH E BURDE N 43 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered at Second-Class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 4 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
State Summer School 
Sixteenth Annua l Session 
wil l begin July 5, 1915 at 
the Agricultural and Technical College, (formerly 
A . & M . College) and continue five weeks. 
Writ e for catalog. 
Secure lodging in advance. 
Address 
J . H . BLUFORD , Director 
STATE SUMMER SCHOOL 
GREENSBORO , NORT H CAROLIN A 
JAS . B . DUDLEY . President 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinit y School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negr o 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St. 
Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN -CHARG E 
611 N . -43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa . 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educat e your children at home under our expert teachers 
Courses for Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Writ e to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible, 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study i n Negr o life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood an d 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
C. W . Morrow, Acting President. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 5 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—R ev . D r . C harle s H . P arkhurst , New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M . C. A. 
and Y . W. C A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT . 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N . C 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school wil l not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but wil l open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuitio n is free. 
Board , lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 6 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
OF ^ INTEREST TO VOCA L STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.* Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N, Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing* is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPED HIM GREATLY 
"Since I practised your exercises of Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Lay-ton. 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, III.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E . Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, 111. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Through us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B . F. BOWLES, MANAGER , 
2739 CONVERS E AVENU E EAS T ST . Louis, III. 
E . ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teacher of Theor y and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio: 30 W. 132d STREET, NEW YORK CITY 
CONCER T SOLOIS T 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES , Soprano 
For terms write 126 West 134 Street, New York City 
LAW 
HIGH-GRADE 
Instruction by 
Correspondence 
Prepares for the Bar 
Four Courses: College, Post-Graduate, 
Business Law and Bar Examination 
Review. Improved Methods; Standard 
Text-books, Leading Cases; Lectures; 
Moot Court; Brief-Writing; Practice; 
Degrees. Classes begin on first and 
third Mondays. Actual daily lessons. 
Not a "book-selling concern" but a 
recognized Law School 
Approve d by Bench and Ba r 
Write today for Catalog giving 
the Rules for Admission to the 
Bar and showing the Requirements in each State. 
Chicago Correspondence School of Law 
499 Reaper Block, Chicago 
PRINTFR Experienced in newspaper, 
book and job printing, wishes 
position as manager or instructor in printing. 
Married; strictly sober; A 1 references. 
Write G . C. DENNI S 
1 138 Carrollton Avenue Baltimore, McJ. 
A teacher of domestic science trained at Cheyney 
with a year and a half's experience in teaching wishes 
a position next year. She refers with permission to 
the principal of Cheyney and to the Editor of TH E 
CRISIS . She can also assist in music. 
Address A . B. D. , 
Care of Th e CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue Ne w Yor k Cit y 
(Trade Mark) 
HAV E YO U RAC E PRIDE ? 
Then you will want one or all of our New Photographs of Famous Negroes, just out. Beautiful 
large 12 x 14 pictures of Frederick Douglas, Booker 
T. Washington, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Toussaint 
L'Ouverture, Sojurner Truth, Henry O. Tanner, 
Crispus Attucks, Alexandre Dumas, S. Coleridge 
Taylor, Richard T. Greener, and W. E. B. Du Bois. 
The finest pictures of their kind, heavily mounted, 
suitable for framing, or hanging unframed. 50c 
each, 6 for $2.25. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
DOUGLA S SPECIALTIES CO . 
354 8 Vernon Ave . (Dept. K) Chicago. illMention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 10 -No . 1 MAY, 1915 Whole No. 55 
Along the Color Lin
MUSI C AN D AR T 
MME. ANIT A PATT I BROW N 
•*• gave a concert in the City Hal l 
auditorium of Dallas, Texas, and also at 
the City Hal l at Waco . The local white 
paper alludes to her as a singer "wit h a 
voice that was sweet and musical and a 
modesty, refinement and culture that reflected great credit upon her race." 
A well attended concert for the benefit 
of the Howar d Orphanage was held in 
Ne w Yor k Cit y at the Lafayette Theatre. 
Dr. Katherine B . Davis and the Hon . 
Charles W . Anderson spoke, and the 
Tempo Club and others furnished the 
music. 
C The third annual concert of the Musi c 
School Settlement for Colored People in 
Ne w Yor k City was held at Carnegie 
Hall . This concert has become one of 
the musical events of the season. This 
year Rolan d W . Hayes sang, Ethe l 
Richardson played and a chorus of 150 
voices gave the first part of ColeridgeTaylor's "Hiawatha. " 
C Mr . Percy Grainger, pianist of Austra ­
lia, who has scored a triumph in Americ a 
this season and proven his right to be 
reckoned wit h the world's great artists, 
gives a most interesting interview in the 
Ne w Yor k Evening Post concerning 
Negro music and the influence of the 
Negro idiom on Englis h musicians. 
C " A Tal e of Ol d Japan, " ColeridgeTaylor's beautiful cantata after the poem 
by Alfre d Noyes, was given a fine performance under the conductorship of 
Dr. Jules Jordan at the first concert of 
the Narragansett Chora l Society at 
Peace Dale, R. I. 
C The People's Choral Society of Philadelphia rendered Handel's oratorio of 
the "Messiah " at the ninth annual concert, Marc h 4th. The chorus of 100 
voices was assisted by Miss Abbi e Mit ­
chell, soprano, Miss Jean Kelly , contralto, Roland W . Hayes, tenor and 
Richard C. Clarke, bass. 
C l n a series of recitals at the State 
Norma l School, Prairi e View , Texas, 
Mme . Anit a Patti Brown , soprano, Joseph Douglass, violinist and Car l Diton, 
pianist, have been presented to the pupils. 
C " Aun t Sally, " a song by Horac e Clark 
written after the Negro idiom, shows the 
typical pentatonic inflections and is on 
the whole admirable. 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
THE United States Census Bureau 
A
 reports that the death rate of 
Negroes of the United States decreased 
from 29.4 per thousand in 1900 to 25.5 
in 1910. Returns, however, include only 
about one-fifth of the total Negro population. There has been a decrease in the 
death rate from tuberculosis and pneumonia. 
C A t the sixth annual interscholastic 
track meet at Chicago the Rock Island 
Hig h School won. Eac h of its twenty 
points was scored by Solomon Butler, 
a colored student. H e took first place in 
the 60 yard dash, the 12 pound shot-put 
and the broad jump. In the 60 yard 
high hurdles he not only won first place 
but tied the world's record. 
([ There is « report that over 50,000 
colored workingmen are in the ammuni-8 TH E CRISI S 
tion plants of Great Britai n and that 
without them the plants would be unable to cope with their work. 
C Richar d Lonsdale Brow n has given an 
exhibition of paintings in Washington at 
the residence of Mrs. Carrie W . Clifford. 
C The colored railway mail clerks of 
Chicago have formed an organization to 
affiliate with the Nationa l Postal Alliance. 
C Par k facilities for colored people are 
to be furnished in E l Paso, Texas, and 
Lexington, Ky . 
C It is reported that Mrs. Hattie L . Matlock, of Cleveland, Ohio, has won fi
cash prizes offered by daily papers of 
that city for essays on economics and 
household hints. She also won third 
prize last fall at the Cleveland Flowe r 
and Garden Show. 
C Robert Gould Shaw House, the Boston Settlement, reports tota
last year of $4,975. 
C The Mu-so-lit Club of Washington, 
D . C , entertained the Hon . Henr y B. F . 
Macfarland, former Chairman of the 
Boar d of Commissioners at a recent 
meeting to discuss the fiscal affairs of 
the District. 
C The Phalanx Club of Chicago has a 
membership of 261 persons. It is 
organized for social uplift. 
C Dr. Charles W . Kerr, a colored man, 
has put the dental department of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Boston out of business. The College 
was offering degrees which it had no 
right to confer. Dr. Ker r sued them and 
was awarded damages. 
C John Oneley, a 17 year old colored 
float driver of Brenham, Texas, saved 
the life of a white driver by stopping a 
runaway team. 
M 
MEETING S 
A MAS S meeting was held in Brooklyn to protest against the outrageous aspersions upon the colored race 
made by Prof. Willia m S. Meyers, of 
Princeton, N . J. Meyers now says that 
he was partially misquoted. 
C Health Wee k was observed largely by 
colored people throughout the country. 
In Baltimore three days' sessions of 
crowded meetings were held. A t Richmond, Va. , and at Hampton there were 
large meetings. 
C A t a recent dinner of the Socialist 
Press Club of Ne w Yor k City , race prejudic
fore 500 diners. Amon g the speakers 
were Prof. Jacques Loeb, of the Rocke
Prof. Fran z Boaz , of Columbi a Unive
Museum of Natura l Histor y and Henrietta Sz
C The colored masons of Florid a held 
their forty-fifth annual communication 
at Jacksonville. The y had a large attendanc
C The second annual educational con
Churc h i n Tacoma , Washington. 
C The Southern Sociological Congress 
wil l hold its fourth annual session in 
Houston, Texas, Ma y 8th to 11th. Th e 
general subject wil l be the conservation 
of health and one of the departments 
wil l be "Healt h and Race Relations. " 
There wil l be about 60 speakers including several colored men. Fo r informa ­
tion address, The Southern Sociological 
Congress, 323-6th Avenue , N. , Nash ­
ville, Tenn. 
C The John Adams Chapter of the 
Daughters of the America n Revolution 
held a meeting at the Hote l Bruns
University was presented by a daughter 
of the founder. Musica l selections were 
given by Mr . Willia m H . Richardson, 
baritone and Mrs. Mau d Cuney Hare , 
pianist. 
m 
EDUCATIO N 
IT is reported that the South Carolin a 
A
 Legislature has passed a compulsory 
education law to go into effect Jul y 1st. 
It has, however, a number of loopholes 
which wil l make it only partially applicable to colored children. 
C Charles H . Houston, a colored senior 
of Amherst College, has been elected to 
the Ph i Beta Kappa . 
C Gammo n Theologica l Seminary has a 
new dining hall. 
C State teachers' associations have met 
i n Louisville , Ky. , Nashville , Tenn., and 
Montgomery, Ala . 
C Dr. C. A . Smith, Professor of Englis h 
in the University of Virginia , recently ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
TROOP E, 9th CAVALRY, U. S. A., GUARDING THE BORDER AT DOUGLAS, ARIZONA 
addressed one of the literary societies of 
Hampto n Institute. 
C The students of Hartshorn Memoria l 
College have been celebrating the birthday of Miss Carri e B . Dye r who has 
been a teacher there for more than 30 
years. 
C In Littl e Rock, Ark. , a portrait of 
Mrs. Charlotte E . Stephens has been unveiled in the Stephens School which is 
named after her. She has served more 
than 40 years in the city public schools. 
C In a recent contest for ten pathescope 
moving picture machines offered by The 
Washington Post, the Willia m Lloy d 
Garrison School (colored) stood seventh 
wit h a total vote of 396,590. 
C The first school bank in the United 
States to be operated by students in 
colored schools was opened at the Armstrong Manua l Training School afte
Easter recess. A president, cashier and 
board of directors were elected. 
C Colored teachers wil l replace white 
teachers in the Richmond, Va. , colored 
high school. 
C Mr . Richar d R. Wrigh t reports that 
the ignorance in the Mississippi Delta is 
appalling among Negroes, reaching in 
some counties 75 per cent, of illiteracy. 
Teachers are poorly prepared and receive not more than $18 or $25 a month. 
C A colored supervisor of elementary 
colored schools is proposed by a bill 
offered in the Tennessee Legislature. 
C The Virgini a Colored Teachers' Association reports that $42,000 has be
raised by colored people for their schools 
outside of regular taxes. 
PERSONA L 
MRS. LEA H JONE S who died recently in Littl e Rock, Ark. , has left 
$1,600 for colored missions. She was a 
colored member of the Lutheran church. 
C Mr . Caesar Simmons has been appointed postmaster for Boley, Oklahoma . 
C It is reported that Sanders Cooper, a 
colored man of Philadelphia, has been 
appointed official trumpeter at the San 
Francisco Exposition. 
C Miss Lydi a Barksdale, a colored 
graduate nurse of the Provident Hos
war. She has charge of a number of 
white nurses. 
C W . B . Paterson, for 40 years head of 
the State Norma l School for Teachers, 
at Montgomery, Ala. , died recently i n his 
67th year. H e was a Scotchman by 
birth. 
C Dr. Booker T. Washington made a 
tour through the state of Louisiana during the month of Apri l speaking at various places. 
C The General Assembly of Illinois adjourned ou
the late Majo r John C. Buckner, a former colored member. 
C Mrs. Carrie Langston, widow of the 
late John Merce r Langston, died recently 
in Washington at the age of 83. 
C Dr. C. T. Nichol, a colored dentist of 
Chicago, has recently been appointed 
dental inspector in the colored schools. 
C S. H . Hart, Jr., was admitted to the 
Ba r of Jacksonville, Fla. , standing at the 
head of 26 applicants. 
C Mrs. Elizabeth Kelley of Pittsburgh, 
Pa., celebrated her 86th birthday recently. She is the mother of nine children 
C Frederick D . McCracken , secretary to 
Congressman Stephens, loses his position 
on account of the defeat of the Congressman 
the only colored man holding such a 
position. 
C The Rev. Preston Taylo r has subsc
A. , Nashville, Tenn. 10 TH E CRISI S 
CYoland e D u Bois finished her second 
term at Bedales School, Hants, England, 
and spent her Easter holidays wit h her 
mother in London . Mrs. Young , wife 
o f Majo r Charles Young , U . S. A. , 
joined Mrs. D u Bois about the same time 
with her children whom she had just 
removed from the Belgian wa r zone. 
Dr. W . E . B . D u Bois is resting in 
Jamaica during the month of April . 
([President B . F . Alle n of Lincol n Institute has been re-elected by the Regents 
for two years. 
([Throug h the efforts of lawyer W . A . 
Carter and others, the mayor of Cincin ­
nati has declared that the examination 
of candidates for positions in the fire department of the city cannot be confined 
to colored men. 
CMrs . Eloise Bib b Thompson of Lo s 
Angeles, Cal., is making her mark as a 
staff writer on the Lo s Angeles Tribune. 
Fo r several successive weeks she has had 
three column articles on Negro leaders 
and happenings in the colored world. 
CW . Randolph Granger, a Ne w Yor k 
colored boy, saved the day for Dartmouth in the relay race for teams of four 
men, each to run 1,000 yards, taking the 
first place from John W . Overton of 
Yal e in a finish that brought all the partisan and non-partisan spectators to their 
feet cheering. The Ne w Yorker, who 
represents the Irish-American Athleti c 
Club during the summer, literally ran 
himself into the ground to breast the tape 
ahead of Overton, but he got there with 
five yards to spare. Then, to show that 
he was far from the collapsing condition 
in which he finished the 1,000-yard contest, he came back in the medley relay, 
and, running the final leg of 1,000 yards, 
gave Te d Meredith, the Pennsylvania 
champion, another great battle. 
CMr . W . M . Trotter, editor of the Boston Guardian, has been lecturing in Ne w 
York , Louisvill e and elsewhere to large 
audiences. 
S i 
ECONOMIC S 
T N the decade from 1900 to 1910 the 
*• number of homes owned by Negroes 
in the Southern states increased by 102,-
912 or 31.4 per cent.; this increase covering increase in farm homes of 30,449, 
or 16.7 per cent., and i n other homes o f 
72,463, or 49.8 per cent. Furthe r figures 
are: total number of farm homes owned 
in the South 212,507; total number o f 
other homes owned 217,942, grand total 
430,449. This makes throughout the 
South an owned home to every twenty 
Negro inhabitants. In Texa s there is an 
owned home to every twelve Negr o in ­
habitants/ i n Kentuck y one for every 
thirteen; i n Oklahoma one for every 
fourteen and in Florid a one for every 
fifteen. 
CTh e Unite d Brothers of Friendship, a 
fraternal insurance organization o f 
Texas, reports a total income of $39,-
300 for the last three months. 
CTh e Od d Fellows of Arkansa s have 
collected $93,700 in their insurance .department since October 1913. 
CSalen a B . Rebe r has inherited from 
her godfather who recently died i n 
Denver a fortune whic h amounts to 
nearly $100,000. 
CTh e Clove r Lea f Casualty Company, 
a white insurance company of Jacksonville, 111., has for the past two years been 
running its St. Louis office under the 
management of colored agents. Mr . J. 
J. Alle n was the first district manager 
and has now been made state manager. 
E . Hawkin s succeeds him. 
CWillia m H . Henderson, a colored 
preacher of Lo s Angeles, is said to be 
worth $100,000 made chiefly through 
the handling of real estate. H e is at 
present promoting a religious movement 
which includes a stock company and a 
bank. 
CLibert y Theatre, owned and controlled 
exclusively by colored men, has been 
opened on Beale Avenue , Memphis. It 
is devoted to moving pictures. 
CSixty-on e Negro railway mail clerks 
run out of St. Louis. Their salaries 
amount to over $90,000 a year. NewOrleans has about the same number 
while Atlant a has 90 clerks receiving 
over $130,000 a year. 
CTh e Gran d Lodge of the Knights of 
Pythias of South Carolina has paid 
$80,000 to deceased members i n the last 
ten years. 
CJ - W . McCal l has opened a dry goods 
store in Savannah, Ga . This is the 
second colored store of the kin d i n the 
city. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
TH E COLORE D ALABAM A PENN Y SAVING S BAN K 
C The Hatchett Electric Float Company 
has been organized in Cleveland, Ohio, 
to manufacture several devices patented 
by Andre w Hatchett, a colored electric 
contractor. 
FOREIG N 
THE land question in Rhodesia has 
• been submitted to the English 
Priv y Council for adjudication. 
C The Consultative Committee of the 
South Africa n Native Congress has been 
called into consultation on labor matters 
for the government. Some of the natives 
are to be used as drivers and laborers in 
the campaign against 
German South Africa. 
C Sir Henry Lione l 
Galway, Governor of 
South Australia , in a 
recent public speech, 
depreciate d the 
"Whit e Australia " 
policy, and urged the 
development of the 
Northern Territory 
by colored labor. H e 
has become the object of sharp adverse 
comment. The Prime 
Ministe r declares 
that his words are a 
"grave official indiscretion which ca
be allowed to pass 
for a single day without protest." 
TH E CHURC H 
MR. HENR Y 
SACH S writes 
us: "Before I left 
Colorado Springs for 
the winter, I drew 
your attention to the 
Home in the Springs, 
which was originally 
created b y the late 
Bisho p Grant for 
superannuated colored ministers. 
pointed out how neglected that institution was. Afte r coming 
to San Antonio I decided to visit the 
grave of the late Bishop Grant, who, as 
we all know, was not alone charitable 
throughout his life, but who left quite a 
fortune to charity and philanthropy. I 
was amazed to find that his executors 
had not yet after three years had elapsed 
erected any kind of a monument to mark 
his grave. 
" I am enclosing herewith as evidence 
picture of a monument which stands at 
the head of his wife's grave and on my 
right in this picture is the Bishop's grave, 
marked only by a piece of board. It 
seems to me a very unfitting way to 12 TH E CRISI S 
THE NEGLECTED GRAVE OF THE LATE 
BISHOP GRANT 
mark the grave of a man who had accomplished so much for his people." 
C The Unio n Wesley A . M . E . Zion 
Church, Twenty-third Street, Washington, recently dedicated a mammoth new 
Carnegie organ. A prominent organist 
played and Bishop Walters made an address. This church boasts that it is the 
first church in this section to receive 
such a gift from Mr . Carnegie. 
C The colored citizens of Detroit sent a 
wreath to the bier of Father Charles 
O. Reilly, a much esteemed Catholic 
priest. 
TH E GHETT O 
THE colored people of Jacksonville, 
Fla. , are opposing the school bond 
issue. Out of a bond issue of $1,000,000 
for schools, the city is proposing to appropriate only $115,000 to colored people. The colored people say that this is 
"unjust, outrageous and inequitable."' 
They add : 
"A s example of the partiality shown 
us in the past, the white schools now 
have property worth One Millio n ($1,000,000), while the colored only have 
property worth Thirt y Thousand ($30,
colored children are said to be equal to 
the number of whites. An d now from 
this Millio n Dolla r Bon d Issue we are 
only to get One Hundre d Fifteen Thou
equipments. If yo u are fair minded, 
contrast the present comfortable buildings for whites, with the broken down 
shacks used by colored children and then 
you wil l agree wit h us i n this contention. " • 
C Durin g a meeting of educators i n Cin ­
cinnati certain of the meetings were held 
at the Hote l Sinton which is owned by 
the wife of ex-President Taft. Colored 
delegates were not allowed to use passenger elevators. 
C The Lo s Angeles Times conducted a 
women's subscription contest wit h automobiles for prizes. It announced that 
"no colored ladies are eligible." 
([ Whe n Peter Bell, a Negro lawyer, appeared at the Camden County Superior 
Court, South Carolina , he had to be protected by the sheriff as the white natives 
had never seen a colored lawyer. 
C Whit e citizens of St. Louis are trying 
to have the entrance to the colored high 
school changed to a less conspicuous 
street. 
C Oklahoma is talking of changing her 
"Jim-Crow " car law i n accordance wit h 
the supposed views of the Supreme 
Court. 
C It is reported from Tuskegee that the 
accommodations for colored people at 
the San Francisco Expositio n wil l be 
poor. 
M 
CRIM E 
THE lynchings since our last record 
have been as follows: 
Alexande r Hill , Brooksville , Miss. 
—murder. 
Pin k Goodson, Hickory , N . C,—living 
The wife and child of Joe Perry , 
Henderson, N . C , were killed and Perr y 
and his brother probably fatally wounded—r
Si x residents of West Philadelphi a 
have been haled to court for riot last 
November for trying to get rid of the 
Negro householder. ME N of the MONTH 
A N ABOLITIONIS T 
ON the 12th of May , 1789, Willia m 
Wilberforc e returned to his seat 
.WILLIA M WILBERFORC E 
in the English House of Commons after 
a serious illness. H e found that his life 
work of stopping the Africa n slave trade 14 TH E CRISI S 
had been carried on by the great William Pitt. Wilberforc e threw himself 
into the work with renewed energy. 
Yea r after year he introduced his motion to abolish the slave trade. Yea r 
after year he was defeated. It was not 
until 1807 that the motion finally passed 
and the abolition of slavery in Englis h 
colonies did not come until a month 
after the death of Wilberforce, which 
took place in 1833 in the 74th year of 
his age. 
Ou r illustration represents him in the 
prime of young manhood, just as his 
life work was beginning. 
A COUNSELLO R 
EDWARD GREEN E was born in 
Naugatuck, Conn., in 1882. His 
parents early moved to Ohio where he 
was educated in the public schools and at 
the Case School of Applie d Science. 
Afterwar d he entered the La w School of 
Western Reserve University and was admitted to the Ba r in 1907. Durin g his 
EDWARD GREENE 
LIZABETH NEILL 
high school and college course he was 
noted as a football player. 
In 1909 he was appointed enrolling 
clerk of the Ohi o Senate and i n 1915 
was made Special Counsel i n the office 
of the Attorney General of Ohio . 
A PERFEC T BAB Y 
OF 379 babies entered i n the Washingt
contest nine were awarded prizes or 
certificates. O f these Elizabeth Neill , 
daughter of Mr . and Mrs. James L . 
Neill , 906 T Street, N . W. , made an 
average of 99 % and was awarded a first 
prize certificate. O f the babies i n her 
division (one year old or under) only 
one made a higher average and one 
other equalled the average of Elizabeth. 
The daily press of the city in reporting the outcome of the contest took 
pains to say that Elizabeth Neil l was the 
"best colored baby." The fact is there 
was only one contest, one standard by 
which all the babies were judged, and ME N O F TH E MONT H IS 
one set o f judges. The average of 99 % 
and the certificate which went with it 
were won not in a contest with colored 
babies only, but with 379 babies, most 
of whom were white, some colored and 
at least one Chinese. 
m 
A PHILANTHROPIS T 
MRS. ELLE N BRANSFORD , an 
ex-slave, died recently at Littl e 
Rock, Arkansas, aged 74 years; she left 
her entire savings of $6,000 to the Lutheran Church for religious and educational work among 
Colored Lutheran Church in the United 
States, organized Jul y 3, 1878 at Littl e 
Rock. The church has been without a 
pastor of its own for 21 years. Pastor 
A . H . Poppe of the white English-German Lutheran Church officiated at her 
funeral and the choir of his church 
rendered suitable songs. The February 
issue of the Lutheran Pioneer and of the 
Missionstaube contained extended obituaries of this consistent christian. 
Bransford never had a picture of herself taken. 
M 
A MISSIONAR Y 
WHE N Rev. Dr. Willia m H . Sheppard, Fellow of the Roya l Geographical Society, returned to Americ a 
a few years ago, after spending twenty 
years as a missionary for the Southern 
Presbyterian Church in the Belgian 
Congo, many of his friends felt sure 
that Africa n labors and hardships had 
incapacitated him from further service. 
The story of Dr. Sheppard's brave 
and successful attacks on the chartered 
Belgian rubber companies that had committed unspeakable atrocities among the 
helpless Africans is a matter of historical record. Tha t Dr. Sheppard has 
"come back" physically is a genuine 
gain for the South. Today Dr. Sheppard 
some notably constructive social uplift 
work for his people. H e is working in 
sympathetic co-operation with Rev. John 
Little and other southern white men and 
women. 
Willia m H . Sheppard was born in 
Waynesboro, Virginia , in 1865. H e 
found his way to Hampton in the early 
eighties and there received the inspiration 
his fellowmen. Then followed hard 
years in carrying the gospel and ideas 
of education to the natives of Central 
Africa . Whether facing hostile cann
inated by the wil l of Kin g Leopold, Dr. 
Sheppard has displayed courage, pati
WILLIAM H. SHEPPARD OPINION 
TH E RIGH T T O WOR K 
RACIA L IT is curious to see how the 
ECONOMIC S problem of disfranchisement is more and more becoming the problem of work in the 
South. There was a time when these 
were supposed to represent opposite 
poles of thought and aim. Le t us follow, however, some recent southern arguments. 
The Columbia State is not satisfied 
over the present disfranchisement laws 
of South Carolina. It says: 
"The main qualifications for suffrage 
in the State constitution of 1895 are that 
the applicants for registration shall be 
able to read and write any section of the 
constitution or show that he has paid 
taxes on property assessed for taxation 
at $300 or more. 
"Accordin g to the census of 1910, 
there were 20,372 Negro farm owners 
in the State and, presumably, practically 
all of these pay taxes on property assessed at as much as $300. Man y Negroes in 
and lots in towns and cities and a few 
pay taxes on personal property assessed 
at $300. 
"About 38 per cent, of the Negroes 
in the State are illiterates. The remaining 62 per cent, are literate, more or less. 
"It is conservative to say that at least 
40,000 or 50,000 of 172,000 Negro males 
of voting age in the State can not be prevented legally from obtaining registration certificates." 
Eve n if these intelligent colored property holders register, they cann
vote, for, as the State continues: 
"Wit h one accord our political leaders 
insist that no white man shall be prevented from voting in the primary and, 
so long as the primary is the election 
that elects, there is nothing to induce the 
illiterate or propertyless white man to 
fit himself to be a legal elector. These 
same leaders, most of them, refuse to 
press for a compulsory school attendance 
law and so they consent to the growin g 
up of thousands of white men in illiteracy. 
"O f course, the politicians wit h the 
foreknowledge that the solid white man's 
primary is a perpetual institution in 
South Carolina may answer that increase 
of poverty and illiteracy of white men 
would not hurt or affect their political 
position. Some of them, for all we know, 
have had a supernatural revelation that 
not ten or twenty years in the future or 
at any time wil l the white party split, 
and that never wil l the literate and taxpaying Negroes seek to register. A t this 
moment, however, the national Repub
with an incentive to register by making 
representation i n national Republican 
conventions dependent on the number of 
votes polled in Congressional elections." 
The Newar k (N . J.) Evening News 
adds: 
"It would be a remarkable illustration 
of 'hoist with its own petar' if the very 
measures taken to insure white supremacy i n 
operate to overthrow it. " 
Signs multiply that tell us that the 
South is rapidly making up its min d that 
economic suppression must be added to 
political disfranchisement if the Negro 
is to be kept in his place. 
Riley Hal e says in the Maco n (Ga.) 
Telegraph: 
"If the Negro man were desirable in 
every other respect, he would not be undesi
spot i n the southern attitude toward the 
Negro, which gives it so little convincing weight with the outside world. It is 
the failure of southern statesmen and 
publicists to grasp the fact that the political 
least important feature; that it is the in -OPINION S 17 
industrial and economic blight of his physical presence, and worst of all the psychic 
environment for the white race which 
should cause them disquietude, that 
makes thoughtful students of the problem everywhere turn from them with 
impatient—sometimes contemptuous, incredulity." 
The Ne w Yor k Evening Post says: 
"The difficulties that confront the lawabiding Negro in the South steadily in ­
crease. A bill to prevent the employment of Negroes by any railroad in 
Nort h Carolina, veiled under a literacy 
test, is before the Legislature of that 
State. Althoug h only a few hundred 
Negroes are so employed, and the railroads promised i n 1910 not to 
the percentage of their colored employees, the unions now want all of th
jobs for white men. In Christian and 
Crittenden Counties, Kentucky, a fresh 
set * of 'hooligans'—so the Louisvill e 
Courier-Journal calls them—are driving 
out the Negroes. These miscreants, that 
newspaper asserts,, are the direct successors of the night-riders, whose lawless
by the State a few years ago. It points 
out that the colored people, who are in 
a small minority, are respectable and 
law-abiding and innocent of any offence." 
The Hartfor d (Conn.) Courant which 
may blame itself for a good deal of 
wrong-heeded advice to Negroes concerning the unimportance of the ballot 
and the all-sufficiency of property is beginning to see things a bit straighter. 
"There are Negro laborers on the 
farms of Missouri, and also white laborers. Some of the land-owner
there have little houses or cottages to 
rent, and presumably a very decent patch 
of ground goes with each of these cottages. Bot h blacks and whites hire 
these houses, the only question probably 
being as to the ability of the tenant to 
come up regularly with his rent. It appears now that the white agricultural 
hands think their wages too low and 
their house-rents too high, and they 
have made it out to their own satisfaction that the Negroes are responsible for 
both of these conditions. Being a rude 
and simple people, a good deal quicker 
on the trigger than they arc in their 
sense of fair play, these white laborers 
have organized themselves as night-riders an
task of driving the Negroes out. Notices 
have been put up at various points advising the Negroes to leave, and then 
these night-riders go about after dark 
shooting up a Negro house here and a 
Negro house there and thus emphasizing 
the printed words. The purpose of these 
highly civilized proceedings is to raise 
wages and reduce rents for the white 
men, and in this economic sense, and in 
no other, there is a race war now going 
on in Misssouri. Wit h fewer hands to 
work on the big farms a rise in wages 
can be demanded, and with fewer per
down. It is as simple as falling off a 
log, and all because one man is white 
and another man is black. 
"W e say that the Negroes must imp
but we are careful not to add that they 
must also see to it that they do 
not use their improved qualities in 
those fields, which the white man wishes 
to occupy as his own. The white man 
first is the rule, and then if there is anything left over the black man—and this 
with occasional and incidental personal 
exceptions here and there, is the rule 
for the Negro race. 
"These night-riders in the southeast 
corner of Missouri are merely carrying 
the general rule pretty far, and no doubt 
they are acting i n accordance with the 
ethics of civilization that prevail in their 
neighborhood. But blue is blue even if 
it is a dark shade of blue, and substantially and i
rule is the general rule of this country. 
The Negroes have fully demonstrated in 
these later years that they have the capacity to make of themselves good mech
men. In those parts of the South where 
they are numerous enough to maintain 
in fair degree the normal right of every 
America n citizen to do, in an honorable 
way, whatever he is capable of doing, 
they have brought these qualities to the 
proof. Th e only question that is still 
unsettled, in regard to their future, is 18 TH E CRISI S 
as to whether or not our white people 
wil l give them a fair field in which to 
use their new accomplishments. This 
has not been and is not the white man's 
habit." 
A POE M O N TH E NEGR O 
VACHE L Colored readers may be reLINDSAY' S pelled at first at Lindsay's 
CONG O great poem but it is, in its 
spirit, a splendid tribute with 
all its imperfections of spiritual insight. 
In a private letter Lindsay says: 
" 'Congo, Congo, Congo, Congo, Congo, 
Congo' I said to myself. The word began to haunt. It echoed with the war 
drums and cannibal yells of Africa . It 
seemed the perfection of tone color. 
" I had a new poem! I thought it over, 
walking home. It was all sketched, including the principal refrains, before 1 
in the afternoon and time for Sunday 
dinner. It took me two months at least to 
write it, and another month to learn to 
recite it. 
"Bu t that Sunday morning it was outlined in substance as you read it today. 
In addition, before night I had a list of 
colors for my palette—gobs of yellow, 
red and black paint. Her e is my color 
list: 
" I had browsed through Stanley's 
'Darkest Africa ' when a boy. There 
was stamped on the back, if you remember, a great black solid silhouette of 
Africa , with one gleaming river crawling 
through the Congo that Stanley had explored. I wanted to give that silhouette. 
An d I wanted to give the word Congo 
such a setting that it would convey the 
same weird thrill I had felt over Stanley's discovery of the Pigmies and 
Mountains of the Moon . Bot h the race 
and the mountains had been thought 
legendary before his time. 
" I had seen the dances of the Dahomey 
Amazons at the Chicago fair when I was 
a boy. I wanted to reiterate the word 
Congo, and get some Dahomey into it. 
Amon g my notes were songs used by 
Williams and Walke r before Walke r 
died. Do you remember 'In my castle 
on the Rive r Nil e I'm going to live in 
elegant style, baboon butler to guard the 
door, diamond carpet on the floor?' 
Then there was a song 'M y Zul u Babe,' 
where Williams as the buck and Walke r 
as the lady used to appear i n black tights 
and brief ostrich-feathered skirts and go 
prancing i n and out of the stage jungle 
in a mock wooing. The y magically conv
whole white audience turned into jungle 
savages and yelled wit h a sort of gorill a 
delight. 
"It was the Afric a of the romantic 
Negro's imagination, a scrap of black 
grand opera, if not the actual Africa . 
Di d I put all these things into my poem? 
No . But some of these things helped, 
with their implications, whispers, echoes. 
I hoped to imply Joseph Conrad's fatal
Darkness.' I reached for the spiritual 
Africa n fever he shows us there, that is 
sure death to the soul. In my devices 
and settings for such phrases as 'Mumbo Ju
him consciously in mind. 
"Wa y back in 1908 I had attempted 
several magazine articles, just after the 
Springfield anti-Negro riots. Those riots 
shook my young soul then as much as 
the war in Europe has done. It was my 
first revelation of the savagery of the 
white man. O n the wor d of one white 
liar, who afterward confessed, a whole 
Negro street was burned and many black 
people killed, and there were two brutal 
lynchings of innocent Negroes i n three 
days, the second while the town was full 
of state militia . M y magazine articles 
about this were very properly rejected. 
Bu t I wanted to do better in rhyme. I 
wanted to bear such testimony as I could 
as to what was learned i n that dreadful 
time and vindicated those studies. 
"Wha t might be called the intellectual 
outline of the poem: The Basic Savagery 
of the Negro, His Hig h Spirits, and 
Minstrelsy and the Hop e of His Religion, 
in preparing those articles. Just after 
the riots I had talked wit h our two 
colored lawyers interminably, and I had 
asked a list of questions of a select group 
of ten colored preachers, and compiled 
results. An d I had interviewed endless 
'prominent citizens' among the whites. 
Their answers to the same questions 
were in startling contrast to the first 
compilation. 
"The next winter one of my lectures OPINION S 19 
for the Springfield Y . M . C . A . was "the 
Negro : his contribution to our citizenship; sorrow-songs, minstrelsy, vau
"One of the studies I made at that time 
has recently appeared in the Negro magazine TH E CRISIS , in the issue for 
vember, 1914 . It is called 'The Goldenfaced People.' The n I had in my list 
some of the things 'Uncl e Tom's Cabin' 
meant, and the emancipation proclamation. I had in mind the affair of Coatsville, Pa., and the other burnings alive of 
Negroes, some of them guilty Negroes, 
many of them innocent. I put in my list 
the songs of Stephen Collins Foster. I 
put in the list my memories of 'The 
Souls of Black Folk, ' that beautiful 
tragic book by the black leader W . E . B . 
D u Bois. I might add, for the other side 
of the picture, that I had seen on 
Eleventh Avenue , Ne w York , north from 
Fifty-ninth Street, many saloons where 
the Negroes seemed eight feet high and 
the degraded white men who waited 
upon them about four feet high, and 
they all drank liquor not served from the 
bar, but from barrels piled high against 
the wall in gloomy grandeur. Going 
through a score of these barrel-houses in 
one evening, on behalf of a certain religious institution, I accumulated a 
impression that remains with me yet, and 
shall remain for many a day to come." 
m 
TO M DIXON' S "CLANSMAN " 
A CONTEMPTI - O f the "Reverend" To m 
BL E SLANDE R Dixon's latest attack on 
colored people, Jane 
Addams says: 
"The producer seems to have followed 
the principle of gathering the most vicious and grotesque individuals he could 
find among colored people, and showing 
them as representatives of the truth 
about the entire race," she said in describing her impressions of the play. "It 
is both unjust and untrue. The same 
method could be followed to smirch the 
reputation of any race. Fo r instance, it 
would be easy enough to go about the 
slums of a city and bring together some 
of the criminals and degenerates, and 
take pictures of them purporting to show 
the character of the white race. It 
woul d no more be the truth about the 
white race than this is about the black." 
Rabbi Stephen S. Wis e said in a recent 
sermon: 
"Most serious of all is the circumstance that this play constitutes a deliberate attempt to deepen and justify 
within the hearts of men the more or 
less instinctive prejudices which it is the 
business of an enlightened democracy 
ceaselessly to challenge and to combat. 
If but the author and the producers had 
the courage to declare that of which I 
accuse them, of designing to foster hate 
and to intensify prejudice, to make it impossible for two races to live side by side 
in this republic upon the basis of peace 
and good-will, one could almost respect 
their frankness and courage and not be 
moved to despise them for their cowardice as 
"The general effect of the play is to 
present the Negro of a generation ago as 
a foul and murderous beast. Therefore, 
I call this play a crime against two 
races. The men who are responsible for 
it are coining prejudice and bitterness 
and every unholy instinct of men into 
money. 
"If thirty or forty years ago Europe 
had set her face like flint against the 
initial causes which inevitably brought 
about the campaigns that ultimately 
ended in war, the war that now is upon 
us need never have been fought. The 
time to protest is not when race assassination has 
do that is now, when an attempt is deliberately made to foment it. It may become too late; and if too late and we 
have been silent, the blood wil l be upon 
our own heads, for we shall have suffered the soul of our city and our nation 
to be poisoned day by day by the fatal 
and ineradicable poisoning of race prejudice and race assassination." 
The Brookly n Standard Union says: 
"If a whole race, other than the Negro 
race, were slandered as the Negroes are 
slandered in the current moving picture 
play, it would not run two nights in Ne w 
Yor k or in any other city. If a college 
professor should attack the morality of 
the women of any race, other than the 
Negro race, as a college professor sland
Brookly n not long ago, he would not 
long be either a lecturer or a college pro-20 TH E CRISI S 
fessor. Baiting the Negro and attributing to a whole class of people, all the 
evils that minds of a certain type can 
think of, has been prevalent in many 
parts of the country for some time. It 
wil l be disgusting and discreditable if 
such should become the sentiment of this 
community. It is gratifying to the selfrespect of Ne w Yor k that the nearest approaches to this sort of thing that have 
been experienced here did not originate 
here." 
Wh y are Negroes despised? Read 
this from the St. Louis Republic, Marc h 
28th: 
NEGR O A T CIT Y CLU B 
TALKS , DOE S NO T EA T 
MAJ . R. R. MOTO N HA D BEE N PETITIONE D 
B Y OW N RAC E NO T TO DIN E 
WIT H WHITE S 
St. Louis business men forgot their 
work for two hours at the City Club 
yesterday noon when Maj . R. R. Moton , 
Negro commandant of Hampton Institute, near Ol d Point Comfort, add
them, following a score of songs by the 
Hampton Quartet. 
Maj . Moto n arrived late, having been 
detained by a delegation of Negroes who 
insisted that he should not eat at the City 
Club. H e did not eat at the club, but he 
made his address, which was received 
with considerable applause. 
Maj . Moto n is a real Negro and is 
proud of it. H e believes the Negro 
should be trained to work with his hands 
and told of the work Hampton Institute 
is doing along that line. 
'Is this story of pitiable cowardice and 
utter lack of self-respect true? W e 
trust not but we fear.' 
ga 
TH E LAN D 
FORCIN G Alic e Werner, in the Daily 
POVERT Y News (London, Eng.), thus 
O N BLAC K summarizes the provisions of 
FOL K the South Africa n land act 
against which the natives are 
protesting: 
"Certain areas are to be set aside as 
native reserves, within which no nonnative can rent o r buy any land whatever, 'except with the approval of the 
Governor-General.' 
"Outside those areas no native may 
acquire any land, either by hire or purchase, 
the Governor's approval. 
" A Commission is appointed under the 
Ac t to inquire and report as to land 
which may be reserved as part either of 
the native or non-native areas. A 
•Schedule of Native Areas' is printed as 
an appendix to the Act ; presumably the 
inquiries of the Commission are wit h a 
view to supplementing these. 
"It is nowhere expressly stated i n the 
Ac t that natives are not to live outside 
the scheduled areas unless workin g for 
an employer, but this is virtually implied 
in the prohibition to rent or purchase 
land, which therefore deprives them of 
all freedom of contract as regards wages. 
It appears also that 'the native is not i n 
practice permitted to leave the farm on 
which he labours, i n order to seek work 
at higher wages elsewhere, unless he can 
obtain a written permit from his master.' 
"Whateve r the result of the Commissi
areas scheduled as native reserves are at 
present far too small. Th e total area of 
land in the South Africa n Unio n is given 
as 142,000,000 morgen. Ou t of this, the 
four million natives have 11,000,000 
morgen assigned them; the remaining 
131,000,000 are in the occupation of 1,-
250,000 whites. 
"No t only was the Ac t carried through 
the Hous e somewhat hastily; it has been 
put into execution wit h equal o r greater 
haste, and evictions have been taking 
place on a large scale. It is probable 
that there wil l shortly be serious distress 
in Natal, where nearly half a millio n 
natives are living on private farms. 
Man y of these are under notice to quit 
at the end of the harvest—viz., in Jul y 
or August, and the Nata l locations are 
now filled to overflowing. Mr . H . M . 
Meyler. one of the members for Natal, 
said in the Hous e on Ma y 13: 'Ther e 
was nowhere to go, and the alternative 
was that the rents went up 25 per cent, 
and the Natives Lan d Ac t was used to 
rackrent these people. . . . These people, whose natural place was on the land, 
were going to be, or thought they were 
going to be, forced into industrial places.' OPINION S 21 
"Perhaps they have some excuse for 
thinking that the real intention behind 
the Ac t is to divorce them from the land 
and drive them into wage-slavery." 
This is certainly not overstating the 
case. Tur n now to the thoughts of a 
white southern farmer, J. O. Prude, expressed in the Montgomery (Ala.) Advertiser. 
"Afte r the civil war an idea was 
lodged in the minds of the most unprejudiced, profound thinkers along this 
line, that the Negro land owners in the 
rural districts would become the best 
and most useful Negro citizens. This 
has proven to be a mistake. The more 
property they have accumulated and the 
better educational advantages they have 
enjoyed have rendered them either intentionally or unconsciously the most 
dangerous element to the social well being of the community. Wh y ? 
"There are Negroes in Negro rural 
communities, and also Negro families 
sandwiched in with small land owners 
and white tenants who are superior in 
intellect and property to these white 
farmers for the reason that no small 
white farmer who is intelligent and possesses a reasonable amount of property 
wil l consent to have a Negro as an undesirable neighbor. Thus the ignorant 
and low tenant class of white farmers 
are left as immediate neighbors and as 
time goes on they become perfectly callous and indifferent as to conditions. 
The social barriers are broken down— 
children play together, and the grownups exchange visits; both men an
women sit around each others firesides 
without race distinction. 
"This leads to borrowing and paying 
back farm implements, meat, lard, flour 
and a hundred other things that bring 
them close together. I know of one instance where a white widow borrowed 
from her next door Negro neighbor, 
who was a Negro preacher, money to 
make her crop, and executed a crop lien 
mortgage for the payment of same. 
Small white farmers are selling their 
lands at half value every day to get 
away from Negro settlements, and Negroes are the purchasers. Statistics wil l 
sustain these facts, that where nine per 
cent, of white farmers in the State of 
Alabama have bought and paid for 
farms twenty-one per cent, of the Negroes 
tional farms. 
"Th e ratio for the State of Georgia is 
seven to thirty-eight per cent, in favor 
of Negro purchasers of land. 
"Fro m these facts I would conclude: 
In the South the Negro land owner is 
a menace to the moral and social status 
of the South. " 
Reedy's Mirror, a white paper of St. 
Louis, says: 
"Out upon the proposal now industriou
Negroes in this city. Segregation is a 
punishment. The community can only 
punish for crime. It is no crime to be 
born black. An d there is no way by 
which we can deprive a Negro of his 
property, wherever located, without due 
process of law. The cry that Negroes 
ruin neighborhoods is a false one. 
Neighborhoods are ruined, generally 
speaking, before Negroes enter them. 
They are ruined by real estate speculation luring residents to newer regions 
and by the refusal of landlords to keep 
property in such repair as wil l hold 
white tenants. W e can't begin segregating • N
course that will end i n our segregating 
'poor whites.' W e can't segregate Neg
where they wil l be subjected to the exaction 
is the desire of some mighty sorry specimens o
can look down upon." 
The Baltimore Evening News winces 
at Dr. H . S. McCard's arraignment of 
segregation. It says: 
"Economics sent the Negro to the 
cheapest possible dwellings. Segregation merely keeps him there." 
It concludes: 
"If the city chooses to worship to the 
extent it does at the shrine of real estate 
values, then part of the ceremony must 
be study, instruction, watchfulness, helpful supervision, and very careful care of 
the colored sick." 
In Nort h Carolina the campaign of 
Poe, the latest Negro-baiter, is bearing 
its natural fruit. In two counties peaceful Negro farmers have been murdered 
for the new crime of land-owning. The 22 TH E CRISI S 
Charlotte Observer (white) calls the 
agitation a "developing menace" and 
says: 
"It is no excuse that harm was not in ­
tended to the colored man or his wife, 
but that it was merely an attempt to 
scare him from the neighborhood. H e 
owned the home i n which he was slain 
and he had the right to live there in 
peace and safety, so long as he conducted himself as a law-abiding citizen. The 
mob had as much right to scare him as 
it had to kil l him. 
"Th e Observer is in agreement with 
Mr . Garren in his theory as to the inciting cause. When , a few nights ago, 
the home of a Negro in Vanc e County 
was set on fire and the man and members of his family killed, this paper drew 
the inference that behind that crime was 
a feeling born of the segregation idea. 
The Catawba County case, following so 
closely, tended to strengthen that impression. By force of habit, some 
papers may refer to these occurrences 
as 'unfortunate.' Tha t does not fit the 
case. They were wantonly wicked, and 
each one brought public shame upon the 
community in which it was perpetrated. 
If it is true that these occurrences are 
the outgrowth of the segregation propaganda, that fact should be only the 
more reason why the hand of the law 
should be felt in its utmost severity at 
this time, that the spirit in which it is 
bred may be stamped out in its incipiency. In these occurrences may be seen 
a developing menace to the social and 
moral conditions in Nort h Carolina, and 
one that should cause those charged with 
the administration of the laws grave 
concern. The Observer has always held 
that segregation of the races is a thing 
of ultimate achievement, not by statute 
process, but through the operation of 
moral and natural laws." 
S3 
TAXE S 
WH O PAY S The Norfol k Journal and 
THE M Guide, a colored paper, has 
this excellent economic argument : 
"The colored man who rents a flat in 
Norfol k for $7.00 per month or $84.00 
per year, pays his landlord $77.28 and 
the city gets $6.72. 
"Th e colored flat-dweller, who pays 
a yearly rental of $108.00 at $9.00 per 
month gives his landlord $97.36 and the 
city receives $8.64. 
"Th e colored man who rents a house 
for $12.00 per month or $144.00 per 
year pays his landlord $133.48 and the 
city $11.52. 
"Th e colored man who lives in a 
house i n Norfol k for which he pays a 
rental of $15.00 per month or $180.00 
per year pays his landlord $165.60 and 
pays the city $14.40. 
"Norfolk's population is now estimated 
colored. This would give us approxim
8000 houses or flats. A s colored prop
say that 6000 of these families are renters. 
per month or a total of $960,800.00. 
Fro m this yearly rental from 6000 colored families the city should receive 
$76,800.00 in taxes. 
"No w then, what does the colored 
rentpayer receive from the city of Norfolk? 
"H e gets streets to walk upon but they 
are not paved in the sections in which 
he is segregated. H e gets sewers and 
water. H e gets limited protection for 
his life and property, policemen and firem
assault, • robbery or disaster, but in case 
of either, the policeman is on another 
beat and the fireman cannot reach his 
home on account of unpaved streets i n 
the section in which he is segregated. 
"H e gets limited schools for his children and there are three thousand unable to gain admission to these, on account of over-crowded conditions. 
"Ther e is no building o f equipment 
provided for the education o f his children above the seventh grade. 
"His health is not safeguarded but 
there is an alms house provided for the 
care of the poor and the healing of the 
sick. 
"H e is not provided with any parks or 
zoological gardens or recreation centers 
of any kind. H e is disfranchised and is 
not permitted to participate in the elections that are arranged 'at which you 
may elect your mayor and aldermen.' OPINION S 23 
"It is possible that the humble rentpayer and producer of wealth wil l receive his just proportion of municipal 
benefits i n Norfol k when the public 
conscience is awakened to the exact relation of the rentpayer to the community. " 
TH E NEGR O VOTE R 
NAIV E The Richmond Virginian 
TESTIMON Y (white) says: 
"Befor e passing the bill 
repealing the law which makes unpaid 
capitation taxes a lien on real estate, 
the Senate wil l do well to make up its 
mind as to what course it wil l pursue 
wit h regard to the bill already passed by 
the House, which provides machinery 
for the collection of the two million in 
back taxes, and declare not only that unpaid taxes shall constitute a lien on real 
estate, but on personal property as well. 
The Virginian has already expressed its 
belief that these taxes should be collected if there is any possible way of doing 
so without subjecting the State to the 
danger of additions to the Negro voting 
list. Those who favor the collection bill 
point out that as these taxes cannot be 
collected until they are three years old 
and that no man is eligible to vote whose 
taxes have not been paid for three years 
preceding the election in which he desires to vote, the bill wil l not open any 
loopholes. This argument is met by the 
contention that a man who pays any 
very large amount of back taxes wil l pay 
the full amount, including the three 
years which wil l be necessary for voting. This i n turn is met with the statement that the additional three years wil l 
constitute, for most Negroes, too heavy 
an expense, and that even were it paid 
registration of the Negro voters would 
be necessary, which would be adequately 
handled by the registrars." 
Note the "adequately handled by the 
registrars"! 
S i 
A LOVE R O F CHILDRE N 
A PLEASIN G The Playground reports 
INCIDEN T that a white man, Edwar d 
H . Abbott, living in Chattanooga, wrote recently to the daily 
papers: 
"A n Open Letter to Girls and Boys 
Wh o Go to School: 
"Dea r Children—Out at my house on 
Lindsay street, by the river, I have dug 
up about five hundred roots of my iris 
plants that I want you to come and get 
and plant in your yards. I want to make 
it easy for a lot of people to have some 
furnishing flags." 
Whil e the invitation of Edwar d A . 
Abbott to go to his home and get a supply of flower roots and bulbs was extended to all the school children in the 
city, and while the response was gratifying to him, so far as numbers were concerned, the children from the colored 
schools did not avail themselves of the 
opportunity offered. No w Mr . Abbott 
extends an invitation to all colored 
school children—and to them only—to 
appear at his home at 8 o'clock tomorrow morning and get supplies of the 
roots and bulbs. 
"The great fun I've had in giving 
away 350 bags of iris and lily plants to 
the school children has been marred by 
the disappointment of a host of colored 
young folks who came to my house too 
late and too numerous to share i n last 
Saturday's distribution. I was prepared 
for 200 of the young garden enthusiasts, 
but was not fixed for the 300 or 400 who 
answered my call to get 'next to the 
ground.' 
"To repair, as far as possible, the disappointment of these children and to rewa
another raid on my iris and lily beds and 
have made ready another hundred bags 
of plants for those who found the way 
to my place, but went away emptyhanded. So, only those who were here 
last Saturday and got no plants, are expected to come next Saturday to help 
me repair the damage a big lot of disappointed children may have suffered at 
my hand because I under-estimated the 
number of people who want to plant and 
raise something good to look at. Come 
after 8 and before 9. 
"EDWAR D A . ABBOTT. " 
About 42,000 iris and 1,000 lily bulbs 
were distributed, and Mr . Abbott says 
what was remarkable to him was that of 
all the children who came none failed to 
be courteous to one another and to him. 24 TH E CRISI S 
OU R DEAT H RAT E 
BETTE R A year ago we called attention 
HEALT H to the untruth spread by 
Charles Stetzle concerning the 
increase of the Negro death rate. The 
figures for 1910 are a further refutation. 
The Ne w Yor k Evening Post says: 
"The figures given i n our Washington 
correspondence of Tuesday on the decrease of the death-rate and the increase 
of the home-ownership-rate of the Negro 
population, especially i n the Southern 
States, are decidedly encouraging. Un ­
til the full statement of the Census Bureau is at hand, it is not safe to judge 
of the exact significance of the reduction in the death-rate, for it must always 
be remembered that this is connected 
with age-distribution; it may be that part 
of the reduction is due to a lower birthrate with its accompaniment of a smaller 
total of infant deaths. N o such doubt 
applies to the extent of the gain in home owning. That the number of home
owned by Negroes in the Southern 
States increased by 102,912 in the ten 
years from 1900 to 1910 is on its face a 
remarkable fact; that this was an in ­
crease of more than 31 per cent, makes 
it more remarkable. But when it is 
added that this gain of 31 per cent, i n 
the number of homes was made while 
the total colored population of the 
Southern States increased less than 10 
per cent., we see how marked must be 
the advance in well-being and i n standards of living, that has taken place. 
Wit h all the drawbacks that Negro progress has labored under, the upward 
movement of the race, decade after 
decade, has been such as to justify the 
most persistent and hopeful effort to 
promote its material, moral, and intellectual advancement." 
m 
CULTUR E 
RACIA L W e append three clippings without 
TRAIT S comment. 
"Though they have seen six of 
their fellow troopers shot by Mexicans, 
in one or two instances it seemed deliberately, not once, so far as I am 
aware, have the United States troopers 
yielded to the natural temptation to violate orders and shoot back across the 
line. 
"Th e behavior of the troopers stands 
out finest in the treatment of the Mexican wom
protectors. Whe n the dirty, miserable 
refugees themselves, were too indifferent 
to clean up the quarters i n the opera 
house, the soldiers did the cleaning and 
did the best they could to keep conditions 
sanitary. Troo p B , Nint h Cavalry, commanded by Capt. W . B . Cowin , is i n 
charge at the opera house. Yesterday 
was a busy day for them, as they had to 
look after arranging quarters for the 
Mexica n wounded. 
"The record of the Nint h and the 
Tenth Cavalry troopers at Nac o is undoubtedly a credit to their regiments." 
Fro m a white Douglass (Ariz.) , daily. 
(Th e Nint h and Tenth Cavalries are 
colored.) 
"W e should all work for peace and 
reconciliation. Le t us all cry out until 
the call of the Whit e Race is heard above 
the din of battle, till the leaders lend 
their ears and the soldiers drop their 
arms and become citizens and friends 
once more. 
"Rall y around the standard of the 
Whit e Race. Tha t is the call which wil l 
appeal to all the fighting Nations of 
Europe with one exception; that is the 
appeal which should be made, and be 
made before it is too late." 
Fro m the Crucible, Richmond , Va. , 
"A n organ for the promotion of a better 
understanding of Germany by the people 
of the Unite d States." 
"Wha t shall we think even of our own 
culture which permits a Nativ e Lan d 
Ac t to be passed without any qualms of 
conscience? Culture ! Ther e is no cultured 
tured Englishmen, cultured Frenchmen, 
cultured Japanese, cultured men and 
women in every race i n the world, but 
no cultured nation." A . P . O. 
( A colored South Africa n paper.) 
MISCELLANEOU S 
"Wh o invented ice cream? 
"Accordin g to an old clipping from 
the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, ice 
cream, the world-famous America n dessert, was invented by a Negro named 
Jackson. OPINION S 25 
"Th e latter kept a small confectionery 
store in the early eighties, down in the 
sleepy old home of the most famous ice 
cream in the country, namely Philadelphia. 
"Jackson used to make a specialty of 
making cold custards for the ladies and 
gentlemen who used to frequent his 
store in the summer months. H e found 
that it was easy to thoroughly chill the 
custard by placing it on ice for a few 
hours. Experimenting further he found 
that by covering a vessel full of custard 
completely in broken ice for some hours, 
the custard became a semi-frozen mass 
which was most cooling and delicious. 
So successful was he with his frozen 
custards that he used to sell it for $1.00 
per quart. His product brought him a 
fortune and although he had many imitators none of them were as successful 
as Jackson, as his custards were superior i n flavor to any others." 
M 
" I notice in your editorial of Thursday last, on 'Partisanship and Equa l 
Suffrage,' you attempted to point out the 
condition which will defeat the proposed 
amendment to the State Constitution so 
as to extend suffrage to women. In so 
doing you dared to make the statement 
that in the granting of the suffrage to 
women, the State wil l gain 10,000 added 
votes from colored women, and 'all the 
Negro women, with rare exceptions, 
would solidly support the Republican 
party and its candidates.' I feel called 
upon to defend the women of my race 
against such a statement. It is nothing 
short of an insult to their intelligence. 
The majority of the women who wil l use 
the ballot, if it is given to them, are not 
of the class who will vote blindly at the 
behest of some party leader. The editor 
may be informed, if he does not possess 
such knowledge, that the Negro man or 
woman is no longer a tool to any political 
party. Th e times have passed when the 
Negro finds himself bound and gagged 
to any political party or machine. The 
knowledge the Negro is in possession 
of makes him free to cast his vote where 
he feels and thinks it will be of greatest 
value to the nation and government of 
which he is a part. 
***** * 
"N o man can predict what the Negro 
woman will do with her vote. The intelligence with which they are surrounded and the interest they take in the 
affairs with which they are identified 
gives cause to expect from them nothing 
less than that which reason and common 
sense and good judgment will direct. 
Wh y should the author of the statement 
presume that the ignorance of the women 
of any other race will direct them to vote 
for one or the other party and the great 
body of Negro women will be pressed 
and jammed into any one Republican 
booth. It is high time that both Republicans and 
realize that the Negro is not asleep." 
Wilmington (Del.) Every Evening. 
m 
Fou r portrait heads of ancient Egy
be sent to the Boston Museum of Fine 
Arts, according to word just received 
from Dr. George A . Reisner, in charge 
of explorations for the museum in 
Egypt. They are part of a group of 
eight unearthed in a pit previously examined by a European archaeologist, and 
supposed to have been exhausted. Fou r 
will be placed in the museum at Cairo. 
"The importance of these portraits," 
writes' Dr. Reisner, "from the artistic, 
the historical, and the merely human 
point of view, makes the group a find 
almost equal to the group of statues 
found in the Mycerinus temples. The 
men and women whose faces they show 
us had spoken with Cheops and Chephren, 
pyramids in building. " 
Dr. Reisner thinks that some of these 
portraits support the theory, hitherto 
advanced, that the Egyptian rulers of 
the fourth dynasty, 2900-2750 B . C , had 
Negro blood. One of the heads of a 
princess he describes as "of a distinctly 
negroid type."—N. Y . Evening Post. "TH E CRISI S IS COME! " EDITORIAL 
The 
Crisis 
The 
Crisis 
PEAC E 
THE various efforts toward 
peace show wit h singula r unanimity either the 
utter inability or the determined refusal of the 
peace advocates to consider race prejudice as the prime cause 
of the present worl d war. The Hollan d 
Peace Movement, founded October 8th, 
notes ten points of proposed agreement 
for the overthrow of war. These points 
include closer co-operation among "European" powers, arbitration among "ci
animosity between "nations." Bu t not 
a word about race hatred and the rulership of the colonies for the profit of 
Europe . So too, the America n Trut h 
Society i n Munic h protests against the 
introduction of Japan to this Europea n 
war which, as it says, "involves a menace to the supremacy of the white rac
M 
TH E REPUBLICAN S 
VERY quietly and on tiptoe the Republican Party 
has completed its disfranchisement of Negro 
delegates in the South. 
O n February 1st Mr . 
James B . Reynolds, secretary of the Republican National Committee, announced 
that the disfranchisement proposed by 
the Republican Nationa l Committee had 
been approved by the requisite number 
of states. Unde r this new provision, 
each state is entitled to four delegates at 
large and one delegate from each congressional district; also an additional 
delegate for each congressional district 
in which the Republican vote was not 
less than 7,500. In this way the Republican Party h
majority of its Negro representatives 
from the South in the Nationa l Conventi
time to hear the comment of colored 
Republicans on this procedure. 
M 
TH E FOURTEENT H AMENDMEN T 
A CORRESPONDEN T 
asks us "i n view of the 
explicit and imperative 
terms of the Fourteenth 
Amendment is it not the 
binding duty of Congress 
swer, it is. Bu t who is going to make 
Congress do its duty? W e are trying to 
do this and have tried and wil l continue 
to try, but we have not yet succeeded. 
THA T CAPITA L "N " 
THE Youth's Companion 
writes to J. N . Cotton of 
Alabama that it wil l 
"consider the question of 
spelling the wor d Negro 
wit h a capital letter." 
It says i n excuse for its usage i n the 
past, "we have always regarded the wor d 
negro not as the name of a race, but as 
meaning simply black men, and on that 
theory would no more capitalize it than 
we would capitalize white men or red 
men when referring to Anglo-Saxon s or EDITORIA L 29 
Indians." Wil l the smiling gods of logic 
take this extraordinary argument to 
heart? 
black wn i t e red 
negro Anglo-Saxon Indian 
Wh y "negro" we "ask to know? " 
m 
EMPORI A 
WILLIAM ALLE N 
WHITE , editor of the 
celebrate d Empori a 
Daily Gazette, usually 
passes for a man of 
some insight and discrimination ; i n fact some people have 
even gone so far as to call him a radical 
in matters of the distribution of wealth 
and the purification of politics. He was 
i n the past, and possibly in the present, 
a Progressive with a very large "P. " It 
seems that in Empori a and in the state 
of Joh n Brow n there is a Y . M . C. A . 
which cost we understand something like 
$75,000. It is, however, for white people only, being established and dedicated 
to the "meek and lowly Jesus." A 
colored man writes "respectfully" to the 
Gazette and asks "but what of the poor 
Negro? " Mr . Whit e devotes three quarters of a column of very fine talk on the 
evil of slavery. H e talks of "civilization 
and Christianity; " he says some learned 
things on environment and heredity, and 
he concludes that the demand for a 
"colored" Y . M . C. A . is just. 
Wh y colored, dear Mr . White ? 
m 
BRYAN T AN D JONE S 
OF the truth behind the 
charges made by the 
Secretary of the Africa n 
M . E . Sunday School 
Unio n against one of the 
bishops of his church, 
the public is not i n a position to make 
final judgment; but this thing is certain, 
that when a high officer of the church is 
openly and repeatedly charged with 
"stealing, lying, mal- administration, neglected duty and conduct unbecoming a 
bishop of the church" and when these 
charges have been reiterated in public 
print for a year it is necessary for the 
good name of the Negro race to have 
quick and thorough investigation followed by refutation or punishment. A s 
TH E CRISI S has said before the A . M . E . 
Church is without doubt the greatest 
organization owned and conducted by 
men of the Negro race. It has performed 
a stupendous task in the past but it is 
fronted by even a greater one. W e have 
hope and faith that the church has power 
to purge itself of evil. 
FAI R PLA Y 
PRESUMABLY man y 
white southerners would 
declare that the Fair 
Play Associatio n of 
Washington, which has 
lately asked that Negroes 
not representative of the best white 
opinion of the South. We are strongly 
inclined to agree with them, and yet 
every once in a while something happens 
in the South so palpably unfair that we 
wonder if it is spasmodic or symtomatic. 
Eugene Brieux, the well-known French 
dramatist is visiting in this country. 
Whil e calling on white friends in Atlanta 
taken to the worst slum in the city on 
Decatur Street. Hearst's American 
says: 
"Monsieur and his party clustered 
about the nearest pool table, and a curious crowd of Negroes—cocaine sniffers 
they were, if ever heavy eyes and swollen 
noses and sodden faces revealed the habit 
—pushed close about Monsieur and 30 TH E CRISI S 
Madame. But all they heard was much 
talk in French. Monsieur, it seemed, 
was not at all favorably impressed with 
the Atlant a Negro of Decatur Street. 
" 'Ah, ' he said, with his appraising 
eyes narrowed. An d again, 'Ah. ' 
"An d out on the street again, he told 
what he thought about it. 
" I have seen the Negro on the headwaters of the Nile, ' he announced, 'and 
in Nubia , and a place or two else. An d 
they seemed more civilized and wholesome there than they do here.' " 
Whe n the white people of Atlant a 
showed this distinguished writer such 
scenes and let him think that they were 
typical of America n Negroes they lied 
and lied brazenly. However, we are glad 
to say that Monsieur Brieu x was not deceived as effectively as the Atlanta 
whites may think. In a personal letter to 
the editor he says: 
"J'aurais ete coupable si en cherchant 
seulement a. satisfaire la curiosite sympathique que je porte a tous les faibles 
je m'etais contente des renseignements 
recueillis sur la race negre aupres de la 
race blanche." 
LIF E 
IN a recent issue of TH E 
CRISI S we quoted from 
Life a charming paragraph about "our friends 
down South" assuming 
the Negroes inferiority 
and then going about to keep them inferior. The Atlanta Georgian is disturbed over this pronunciamento and 
talks largely. First it says that there is 
no social equality between the races and 
never wil l be, ignoring the fact that in 
1910 there were 200,000 mulattoes in 
Georgia. It then goes on to declare that 
"the school fund is distributed according 
to population" regardless of color. This 
is so untrue that we would refer the 
Georgian to the recent report of the Russell 
schools of Atlant a which may be tabulated 
WHITE S NEGROE S 
Children of school age 22,031 10,018 
Enrolle d 17,047 5,924* 
Gramma r Schools .. . 38 11 
Hig h Schools 4 0 
Night Schools 5 0 
Teachers 426 82 
•Erroneously given in the February CRISIS as 2,924. 
If the Negroes had their proportional 
share of attention they would have 8,000 
children in school, 19 gramma r schools, 2 
high schools, 2 night schools and 213 
teachers. O f the $350,000 spent for 
teachers' salaries, the Negroes forming 
a third of the population, get less than 
$50,000. It would seem that Life's point 
was well taken. 
WASHINGTO N VIGILANC E 
SEVERAL times we have 
seen i n the colored press 
a demand for a vigilance 
committee i n Washington to watch 
i n Congress. Variou s 
plans for financing such a committee 
have been voiced. It seems that the 
colored public does not know that for 
two years the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People has 
maintained two expert salaried represent
Senate and one i n the House . 
No t a single piece of legislation has 
been proposed of which we have not 
been notified by wire or mail. It is in 
this way that we have been enabled to 
act so quickly and through this knowledge 
Beside this, the Washington Branc h of EDITORIA L 31 
this Association has acted as a vigilance 
committee and done its work voluntarily. 
So effectively has this work been done 
that it scarcely seems necessary to duplicate it or supplant it. Whe n the m
tablished the next thing for the public to 
do is to support it, and not to start 
building new machinery. 
M 
CREDI T 
AGAIN and again when 
men unite to some great 
end and accomplish all 
or a part of that toward 
which they aim, there 
arises an astonishing and 
often disreputable scramble for the 
honor and credit of the accomplishment. 
In a sense this is natural. Independent 
enthusiasts striving for a great end often 
forget or are ignorant of others striving 
for the same end and are indignant or 
incredulous when they do not receive 
what they think is due credit. Something of this unfortunate feeling is creeping into recent movements in which this 
Association has been interested. A n extraordinary campaign has been carried 
on to prevent Congress from passing discriminatory legislation. That the Sixty -
Thir d Congress has actually adjourned 
without the enactment of such laws, and 
wit h some things like the Howar d University appropriation to its credit, is 
extraordinary tribute to the organized 
fighting strength of America n Negroes. 
To whom should the credit for this accomplishment be given? Manifestly to 
no one person or to no one organization. 
The Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People would be 
the last to claim sole and entire credit for 
the accomplishment. Individuals unconnected with it and organizations not affiliated have from time to time joined 
enthusiastically in these campaigns. Tw o 
things the Association has an undoubted 
right to claim; first:—that through its 
widespread organization and continual 
vigilance it has been able to keep the 
colored people warned, and secondly, 
that through its continual insistence upon 
the value of agitation it has brought almost a revolution in the attitude of the 
colored people during the last five years. 
But after all what difference does it 
make as to who did the deed so long as 
the deed is done ? so long as the Negroes 
fight aggression, advance their interests 
and rescue the spirit of democracy in the 
United States ? Awa y with littleness and 
jealousy, and on with the fight! 
TH E JUBILE E O F EMANCIPATIO N 
THE Jubilee of Emancipation has been cel
already by expositions 
in Ne w York , Ne w Jersey 
Further celebrations are 
planned in Illinois and Virginia . It is 
unfortunate that the celebration should 
be thus in piece-meal and that so little 
really fine or distinctive has come from 
the celebration or seems likely to come. 
Undoubtedly, money was wasted in 
Pennsylvania without adequate return. 
In Ne w Jersey the celebration was unfortunate in being cramped for funds 
but did well within its limits. Ne w 
Yor k contributed one new fine thing, 
the Pageant of Negro History. The Virg
because of the hands into which it has 
fallen, although we hope to be disappointed in this pessimism. Fro m Illinois 
we had expected great things but we 
must unfortunately confess the fact that 
the promise at present is small. Nearly 
$20,000 has been spent in publicity and 
"preliminary" outlay. Such an expendi-32 TH E CRISI S 
ture should call for at least $100,000 of 
funds. There is neither prospect nor 
likelihood of any such sum being appropriated. Moreover, it is now Ma y and 
the physical gathering of the exposition 
matter has scarcely begun. W e know 
from bitter experience that it is easier 
to criticize movements of this sort than 
to make them, but it is certainly the 
business of President Fallows and his 
co-workers to dispel in the minds of 
most people the feeling that waste and 
incompetency is about to spoil that 
which we had hoped to be the crowning 
of the commemoration season. 
LECTURE S 
HI S Association seeks to 
furnish wherever possible lecturers on Negro 
problems and allied subjects. It is the basic 
idea that such a lecture 
bureau should be self-supporting. The 
lecture is or should be careful work 
done by an expert and entitled to compensation by the beneficiaries just as in 
the case of the lawyer, the doctor or the 
merchant. There has, however, been 
repeatedly shown in the conduct of our 
lecture work a feeling on the part of 
colored people that lectures should not 
be paid for or that they should be given 
as a sort of charity. This is a curious 
inversion of ideas. There may, of 
course, be charity connected with the 
lecture work. W e have, for instance, 
in our Association a few men like Mr . 
Villar d and Dr. Spingarn who can now 
and then give their services as lecturers, 
and they do so willingly and to the great 
advantage of our work. But it is giving, it is charity from them to the 
colored people. It costs them money 
and effort and time. 
O n the other hand there are persons 
connected with the Association, and Mr . 
D u Bois is one of them, who cannot afford for perfectly obvious financial reasons to make such a gift. Mr . D u Bois, 
therefore, always charges for his lectures. If he is speaking to branches of 
this Association the charge covers his 
expenses; if he is speaking to other organi
also includes a small fee for the lecture. 
This fee varies usually from ten to fifty 
dollars. Wit h such fees Mr . D u Bois 
has i n the last ten years been enabled to 
meet the colored people i n every state in 
the Unite d States, to give them some in ­
formation and set before them certain 
arguments. Fro m his returns he has 
paid his expenses of travel, his life in ­
surance and been enabled to buy certain 
books with which to pursue his studies. 
Mr . D u Bois regards this as reasonable 
and just and he proposes to continue 
this plan. His lectures are prepared 
with much expenditure of time and 
thought. If they are valuable they are 
worth paying something for; if they are 
not they need not be listened to. It is 
certainly too much to ask that a man 
with a family to support should contribute twenty-five dollars or more for the 
privilege of talking to people who are 
not willing to pay twenty-five cents each. 
If, of course, private resources enabled the lecturer to give his services 
the case would be different. Eve n to 
such giving there is an obvious limit. 
The proverb "Pa y as yo u go," applies 
to intellectual food as much as to potatoes 
are going to depend upon philanthropists 
to furnish them the kin d of information 
which they get from the public forum 
then they must be prepared to hear not 
men like Villar d and Spingarn, but 
rather the large number o f speakers who 
are continually saying to colored people 
the kind of thing that the colored people 
do not want to hear and ought not to EDITORIA L 33 
hear. Le t us then seek to support this 
lecture bureau and other lecturers on the 
basis of paying honestly for an honest 
return. 
m 
TH E CLANSMA N 
SEVERAL years ago a 
"professional southerner" named Dixo n wrote 
a sensational and melodramatic novel which 
has been widely read. 
Eigh t years ago Dixo n brought out his 
novel as a sordid and lurid melodrama. 
In several cities the performance of this 
play was prohibited because of its indecency or incitement to riot. Recently 
this vicious play has been put into moving pictures. Wit h great adroitness the 
real play is preceded by a number of 
marvelously good war pictures; then in 
the second part comes the real "Clansman" wit h the Negro represented either 
as an ignorant fool, a vicious rapist, a 
venal and unscrupulous politician or a 
faithful but doddering idiot. B y curious 
procedure this film received the preliminary approval of the Nationa l Board o
Censors. It was put on i n Lo s Angeles 
and immediately the fine organization of 
the N . A . A . C. P . was manifest. The 
facts were telegraphed to us from our 
Lo s Angeles Branch. W e started at the 
Boar d of Censors. The proprietors of 
the film fought madly but the Censors 
met, viewed the film and immediately 
withdrew their sanction. Man y of them 
were astonished that any committee of 
their board had ever passed it. The 
owners of the film promised to modify 
it but the modifications were unimportant. Ye t this remarkable Boar d of 
Censors met a third time and passed the 
film over the protests of a minority of 
nine persons. Amon g these nine, however, was the chairman and founder of 
the board, Frederick C. Howe , Commissioner 
missioner of Immigration at the Port of 
New Yor k and several others equally influential. In other words, the board of 
censorship is now practically split in 
two. The Association was not discouraged but immediately took steps on 
the one hand to bring the matter into 
court and on the other hand to interview the mayor. The interview with the 
mayor was after some difficulty arranged. The delegation of five hundred 
of the most prominent white and colored 
people in the city filled the Council 
Chamber at City Hal l and for an hour 
in terse, tense speeches urged the 
mayor to act. The mayor promised to 
have the two rape scenes cut out immediately and to go further than this if 
the play still seemed objectionable from 
the point of view of public peace and 
decency. 
This action while commendable is not 
sufficient. The whole second half of the 
play ought to be suppressed and the Association 
end. It is gratifying to know that in 
this work we have the cordial co-operation of all elements of colored people. 
The Ne w Yor k Age and the CRISI S 
worked hand in hand with Harlem, 
Brooklyn and Jersey City. W e know no 
factions in the righting of this great 
wrong. 
It is sufficient to add that the main incident in the "Clansman" turns on a 
thinly veiled charge that Thaddeus 
Stephens, the great abolition statesman, 
was induced to give the Negroes the 
right to vote and secretly rejoice in Linc
wonder that a man who can thus brutally 
falsify history has never been able to do 
a single piece of literary work that has 
brought the slightest attention, except 
when he seeks to capitalize burning race 
antagonisms. MR. Taylor's 
Funeral 
By 
Charles W. Chesnutt 
SYNOPSI S O F FIRS T PAR T 
Mr . Davi d Taylor , a well-to-d o boa t steward, disappeare d o n one o f his tri
drowne d bod y wa s identifie d by his youn g 
widow . Sh e ask e d the personabl e youn g Bap ­
tist minister, the Rev . Alonz o Brown , to con ­
duc t the funera l servic e sinc e Mr . Taylor's 
ow n Methodist minister, Elde r Johnson , wa s 
out o f town . Unfortunatel y the latte r re ­
turn s an d bot h ministers appea r at the funera l 
read y to conduc t the service . 
Elde r Johnson looked surprised, Mr . 
Brown looked determined, and they 
glared at each other belligerently. 
"Ma y I ask what you mean, sir? " said 
Elde r Johnson, recovering somewhat 
from his surprise. 
" I mean, sir, that I'm going to conduct 
the funeral exercises," replied the other. 
The undertaker began to feel uneasy. 
It was his first funeral in that neighborhood, and he had expected to make a 
reputation by his success in directing it. 
"There's evidently some misunderstanding here," he said, in a propitiatory 
tone. 
"There's no misunderstanding on my 
part," said Elde r Johnson. " I was telegraphed to by Deacon Larkins, at the 
widow's request, and have left important business and come five hundred miles 
at considerable expense to preach this 
funeral, and I intend to preach it, or 
know the reason why. " 
"There can be no possible misunderstanding on my part," replied Mr . 
Brown . "People may send telegrams 
without authority, or under a mistaken 
impression; but I was asked by the 
widow, personally, to conduct the funeral services, and I propose to do so." 
"The deceased was a member of my 
church before the widow was born," retorted Elde r Johnson, making in his 
warmth a mistake of several years. " I 
was requested by the widow's agent to 
conduct this service, and have come here 
prepared to do it. Ever y consideration 
of duty and decency requires me to in ­
sist. Eve n the wishes of the widow 
should hardly be permitted to stand in 
the way of what, in this case, is the most 
obvious propriety." 
"The widow, " said Mr . Brown , "is the 
principal one concerned. He r wishes 
should be sacred on such an occasion, to 
say nothing of her rights. I'll not retire 
until I am personally requested by her to 
do so. I received my commission from 
her, and I'll resign it to her only. " 
"Wai t a moment, gentlemen," said the 
undertaker, hopefully, "until I go and 
speak to the widow. " 
The colloquy on the porch had not 
gone unnoticed. Throug h the halfclosed Venetian blinds a number of the 
guests had seen the group apparently engaged in animated discussion, though 
their voices had been pitched i n low 
tones; and there was considerable curiosity as to what was going on. 
In a few moments the undertaker returned. "Gentlemen, " he said in desperation, "something must be done. I can't 
get anything out of the widow. She is 
almost hysterical with grief, and utterly 
unfit to decide on anything. Yo u must 
come to some agreement. Wh y can't 
you divide the services between you? " 
The rival clergymen set their faces 
even more rigidly. 
" I can submit to no division, " said MR . TAYLOR' S FUNERA L 35 
Elde r Johnson, "that does not permit me 
to preach the sermon. N o man could 
know Brothe r Taylo r as well as I did, 
and no man could possibly be so well 
prepared to pronounce a fitting eulogy 
on his life. It would be an insult to my 
church for any one but Brothe r Taylor's 
pastor to preach his funeral; in fact, it 
seems to me not only in bad taste, but 
bordering on indecency for the pastor of 
another church, of another denomination, to take advantage of a widow's 
grief and irresponsibility, and try to 
force himself where the most elementary 
principles of professional courtesy would 
require him to stay away. However, I'm 
willing to overlook that, under the circumstances, if Brother Brow n wil l be 
content to read the Scriptures and lead 
in one of the prayers." 
" I repel Brother Johnson's insinuations wit h scorn; their animus is very 
plain, " said the Baptist minister, with 
some heat. " I wil l accept of no compromise that does not allow me to deliver the discourse. I was personally requested to do so; I have prepared a sermon wit h special reference to the needs 
of this particular case. If I don't use it 
my labor is wasted. M y brother seems 
to think there's nobody to be considered 
in this matter but the deceased, whereas 
I am of quite the contrary opinion." 
It was very apparent that no such 
compromise as the one proposed was 
possible. Meanwhil e the curiosity on the 
inside was rising to fever heat; a number of eyes were glancing through th
blinds, and several late comers had collected about the steps leading up to the 
porch and were listening intently. 
Pending this last statement by the 
reverend gentlemen of their respective 
positions, the undertaker had had time to 
think. H e was a man of resources, and 
the emergency brought out his latent 
powers. A flash of professional inspiration came to his aid. 
"Gentlemen," he said soothingly, " I 
think I can see a way out of this difficulty, which wil l give each of you an opportunity to officiate, and prevent the 
funeral from being spoiled. Her e are 
two large rooms, opening by wide doors 
from opposite sides of a central hall. 
There are people enough to fill the two 
rooms easily. The remains can be placed 
in the hall between the two rooms, where 
they can be seen from both. Each of 
you conduct a service in a separate room, 
and all the guests can be comfortably 
seated, in a position to hear or participate in one service or the other." 
The proposition was a novel one, but 
it possessed the merit of practicability, 
and after some brief demur, both minis
moved to the hall, and disposed in a position where it would be visible from 
both rooms. The undertaker made a 
brief statement of the situation, and announced that two services would be held. 
The company divided according to their 
individual preferences, some taking seats 
in the other room, others remaining 
where they were. The Baptist choir of 
course went with their own minister, the 
Methodist choir remained with theirs. 
Whe n the widow came out, clad in deepest weeds and sobbing softly, she took 
her seat, whether by inadvertence or 
choice did not appear, in the room where 
Mr . Brow n had elected to conduct his 
part of the ceremony. 
Eac h service opened with singing. 
The Methodist choir sang "Roc k of 
Ages. " The Baptist choir softly chan
compelled to sing louder in order to be 
heard at all. Eac h of the ministers then 
read a passage of Scripture; there was 
no conflict i n this, as they were far 
enough apart to avoid confusion. 
Eac h then offered prayer. The Metho
blessing of a beautiful life that had been 
spared so long among them as an example of right living. Mr . Brown , on the 
other side of the hall, with equal fervor 
asked for comfort to the sorrowing 
widow in her bereavement. An d each 
in his own words prayed that the event 
they had come together to mourn over 
might be a warning to those present of 
the transitoriness of all earthly good, 
and that by calling attention to the common mortality it' might humble their 
souls and drive out jealousy and envy 
and malice and all uncharitableness. 
A t the close of the prayers there was 
another musical number—or rather two 36 TH E CRISI S 
of them. The Baptist choir rendered an 
anthem breathing resignation and comfort. The Methodist choir sang a hymn 
of triumph over death and the grave. 
Some one discreetly closed one of the 
doors during the singing, so that no discord marred the harmony of this part 
of the service. 
Whe n the two addresses were well 
under way, a man came up the street and 
entered the premises by the front gate. 
There had been several late arrivals, but 
until this one appeared they had all 
found seats in the house. A s the newcomer approached he saw the crepe 
the door, noted the half-drawn blinds, 
and glanced across the lot at the row of 
carriages drawn up on the side street. 
Wit h an expression of mingled wonder 
and alarm, he drew nearer the door and 
heard the sound of preaching. H e 
stepped softly upon the porch but paused 
before he reached the door, and, after 
hesitating a moment, came down again, 
and going around to the side of the house 
stood on tiptoe and peered curiously 
through the half-closed blinds at the 
scene within. First he noticed the coffin, 
piled high with flowers. Then the sermon fixed his attention, and clutching 
the window-sill with his elbows he stood 
listening for several minutes. 
"Indeed, my dear brethren and sisters," Elde r Johnson was saying, "we 
may well mourn the death of our dear 
brother, and look upon it as an irreparable loss. Wher e wil l we find a man 
who was so generous in his contributions 
to the church, so devoted to his family, 
or who set a better example of the Christian life? In him we have lost a leader 
in every good work, a faithful friend, a 
dear brother, a strong pillar in the 
church, a champion of his race, a man 
whom we all loved and admired. Cut 
off in the prime of life, in the full tide 
of his usefulness, we mourn his departure, and we rejoice that he has lived— 
we celebrate his virtues and we revere 
his memory." 
The man outside dropped from his 
somewhat constrained position, and the 
puzzled expression on his face became 
even more pronounced. Bu t he had 
heard the voice, though indistinctly, of 
the minister across the hall, and he went 
softly around the rear of the house and 
picking up a small box which lay i n the 
yard, placed it under a window of the 
other room. Lookin g through the slats, 
he saw a woman dressed i n deepest 
mourning. He r face was concealed by 
the heavy crepe veil that fell before it, 
but her form was shaken by convulsive 
sobs. Grouped around the room was an 
audience equally as large as the one 
across the hall, and the young Baptist 
minister was saying, wit h great unction: 
"There are no words, my hearers, by 
which we can adequately express the 
sympathy we feel for this bereaved 
widow in this, her hour of deepest ear
loved sister, whose mainstay has been 
cut off, and who has been left to tread 
the thorny path of life in loneliness and 
desolation. I know that if the departed 
can look down from that upper sphere 
which he now adorns, upon this scene 
of his late earthly career, no more painful thou
ity of his happiness than the reflection 
that he had left behind him i n inconsolable grief the companion of his earthly 
joys and sorrows. W e feel for our sis
all comfort; we assure her of such 
friendly offices as are within our weak 
power. An d we hope that in time the 
edge of her grief wil l lose its sharpness, 
and that she may feel resigned to the decree of Heaven, and find such consolation as a life of usefulness may yet have 
to offer her." 
The two sermons came to an end almost simultaneously, and again the two 
audiences were led i n prayer. Whil e 
the eyes of the two ministers were raised 
on high in supplication, and those of 
their hearers were piously turned to 
earth, the man on the outside, unable to 
restrain his curiosity longer, stepped 
down from his box, came around to the 
front door, opened it, walked softly forward, and stopped by the casket, where 
he stood looking down at the face it contained. 
A t that moment the two prayers came 
to an end, the eyes of the ministers 
sought a lower level, while those of the 
guests were raised, and they saw the 
stranger standing by the coffin. 
Some nervous women screamed, sev-POEM S 37 
eral strong men turned pale, and there 
was a general movement that would 
probably have resulted in flight if there 
had been any way out except by passing 
through the hall. 
The man by the casket looked up with 
even greater wonderment than he had 
before displayed. 
"Whos e funeral is this, anyhow? " he 
asked, addressing himself to nobody in 
particular. 
"Why, " responded several voices in 
chorus, "it's your funeral! " 
A light dawned on the newcomer, and 
he looked much relieved. 
"There's some mistake here," he said, 
"or else if I'm dead I don't know it. I 
was certainly alive when I came in on 
the train from Buffalo about thirty minutes ago." 
The drowning in Buffalo harbor of a 
man resembling Taylo r had been, of 
course, a mere coincidence. It might be 
said, i n passing, that Mr . Taylor never 
explained his prolonged absence very 
satisfactorily. H e did tell a story, or 
rather a vague outline of a story, lacking 
in many of the corroborative details 
which establish truthfulness, about an 
accident and a hospital. A s he is still a 
pillar in the Jerusalem Methodist church, 
and trying hard to live up to the standard 
be unbecoming to do more than suggest, 
in the same indefinite way, that when 
elderly men, who have been a little wild 
in their youth, are led by sudden temptation, when away from the restraining influ
into the convivial habits of earlier days, 
there are, in all well-governed cities, instit
where they may go into retreat for a 
fixed period of time, of such length— 
say five or ten or twenty or thirty days 
—as the circumstances of each particular case may seem to require. 
TH E END . 
SHAKESPEAR E 
B Y BENJAMI N BRAWLE Y 
I thought how oft the great gray god of 
years, 
Swinging adown the dark abysm of time, 
Some lamp portentous i n the dimness 
rears, 
Some taper high, ineffable, sublime; 
No w darts a gleam faint thrilling 
through the deep, 
An d now a glimmer from archangels' 
wings; 
An d then once more the mighty aeons 
sleep, 
Lost i n the slumber that the darkness 
brings; 
An d then I dreamed of one Promethean 
light, 
That, throbbing, as a mystic searchlight 
blazed 
Throug h all the caverns. Nature leaped 
in might 
T o greet the signal from the rampart 
raised; 
He r innocent heart at last a flame in ­
quired ; 
An d one by one all other lights expired.. 
M Y HER O 
(To Robert Gould Shaw) 
B Y BENJAMI N BRAWLE Y 
Flushed with the hope of high desire. 
H e buckled on his sword, 
To dare the rampart ranged with fire, 
O r where the thunder roared; 
Into the smoke and flame he went, 
Fo r God's great cause to die— 
A youth of heaven's element, 
The flower of chivalry'. 
This was the gallant faith, I trow. 
O f which the sages tell; 
O n such devotion long ago 
The benediction fell; 
An d never nobler martyr burned, 
O r braver hero died, 
Tha n he who worldly honor spurned 
T o praise the Crucified. 
An d Lancelot and Sir Bedivere 
Ma y pass beyond the pale, 
An d wander over moor and mere 
To find the Hol y Grail ; 
But ever yet the prize forsooth 
M y hero holds i n fee, 
An d he is Blameless Knigh t in truth, 
An d Galahad to me. BRANCHE S 
Baltimore: 
The Frederick Douglass anniversary 
meeting, held by the Branch, February 
11 , at the Sharp Street Methodist 
Church, had as its chief speaker Mr . 
Charles Edwar d Russell. A t the concert given on Marc h 1 1 by the Williams 
Colored Singers at Albaugh's Theatre, 
for the benefit of the N . A . A . C. P., 
the Branch cleared nearly one hundred 
dollars. 
Boston: 
A monster meeting of protest against 
legislation in Congress, discriminating 
against colored citizens, was held by the 
Boston Branch in Tremont Temple, 
Sunday afternoon, Marc h 7. The audience numbered over three thousand. The 
speakers were the Hon . Marti n B. Mad ­
den, member of Congress from Illinois; 
Mrs. Mar y E . Wilso n and Dr. J. E . 
Spingarn. Mr . Storey presided. Wit h 
the exception of the District of Columbia Branch, Boston leads in the efficiency 
of its organization for campaigning 
against hostile legislation. The printed 
appeal which the Branch sent out to all 
its members urging immediate action 
was a model in its practical suggestions 
and the information it contained. Wit h 
it was enclosed a slip giving the names, 
residences and terms of office of the 
Massachusetts members of Congress. 
Detroit: 
This branch is still working hard to 
defeat the anti-intermarriage clause in 
the proposed marriage law mentioned in 
TH E CRISI S for March . The bill is now 
in the joint judiciary committee of the 
Senate and House. A committee calling 
itself The Committee on Equitable Legislation and including Father Bagnal
Secretary of the Detroit Branch and 
Mr . Francis H . Warren , its attorney, 
have compiled and published an admirable brief against the proposed law. 
This brief was sent to all members of 
the Legislature. 
District of Columbia: 
Th e Juvenile Committee of the Distric
Carrie W . Clifford is the Chairman, 
gave a dramatic recital in the Wesley 
A . M . Zion Church, with Mr . Charles 
Borroughs as reader. A substantial 
sum was turned over to the Treasurer 
of the District of Columbi a Branc h as a 
result. The next public meeting of this 
Committee wil l be held on Apri l 18 and 
wil l be distinctively a children's meeting, almost the entire program being 
given by children. 
Harrisburg: 
The Harrisbur g Branc h is endeavoring 
in the Legislature. Co-operating with 
it are the Philadelphia and Pittsburgh 
branches. Harrisbur g is also continuing 
its prosecution of the Dauphin County 
moving picture case which tests the 
civil rights bill of 1887 and which the 
branch has already wo n i n the lower 
courts. 
Howard University Chapter: Miss 
Ethe l Cuff of the Senior Class of the 
Teachers' College of Howar d University 
won the framed picture of Willia m 
Lloy d Garrison, offered by the college 
chapter of the N . A . A . C. P., for the 
best essay on the subject, "Wha t should 
Be the Purpose of the College Chapters 
of the N . A . A . C. P. " Miss Zephyr 
Moor e o f the Junior Class of the Teachers' Colleg
Indianapolis: 
A t the mass meeting held in the Jones 
Tabernacle on February 26, at which 
Mr . Brokenburr, President of the 
Branch, presided. Father Bagnall, of 
Detroit, made a characteristically eloq
entitled "The Wa y Ou t for the Negro. " 
National Assn. For the Advancement of Colored People N . A . A . C . P. 39 
Louisville: 
A case to test the new segregation 
ordinance was brought by this branch 
through their attorneys, Blakey, Quin n 
& Lewis, the leading lawyers of the 
city. This week the ordinance was declared valid. Record is now being prepared and the case wil l probably be 
argued in the Court of Appeals in May . 
Portland: 
This branch has made the first step 
in removing the so-called "black laws " 
from the statute books. A bill • has 
passed the Legislature which wil l place 
on the ballot at the next election a constitutional amendment to repeal that 
section of the state constitution which 
excludes Negroes and mulattoes from 
the state and which denies to all Negroes, mulattoes and Chinese the rig
suffrage. Bot h of these sections of the 
constitution are practically void. The 
bill to eliminate them from the constitution was introduced by Senator 
George McBrid e who has been assisted 
in this work by Senator Farrell, Dr. 
Andrew D . Smith and D . C. Lewis, 
members of the House. 
The branch has held a number of notable meetings, including a Lincoln's 
birthday celebration. The work done by 
its Publicity Committee is especially 
good. The President is Dr. T. A . Merriman, the Secretary, Mrs. Beatrice 
Morro w Cannaday, and the Chairman 
of the Executive Committee, Mr . E . D . 
Cannaday. 
Pittsburgh: 
O n the 17th of Marc h the Branch 
held its first quarterly meeting in the 
Central Baptist Church, adding over 
eighty new members and raising one 
hundred dollars i n cash. It sent a contribution of twenty-five dollars to assist 
the Harrisbur g Branc h in continuing its 
prosecution of the moving picture case 
mentioned above. 
St. Louis: 
This branch, through a committee of 
thirty members, fifteen white and fifteen 
colored, is waging an extensive campaign against an attempt to pass a s
pared by Mr . Roger N . Baldwin , of the 
Executive Committee, is being published 
for distribution to citizens. Ever y newspaper in th
nance. 
A committee known as the United 
Welfar e Association which has the cooperation of the real estate interests of 
the city favors the proposed ordinance. 
Several previous attempts to pass a segreg
committee is now circulating initiative 
petitions calling for a special election on 
the question. To hold this election requires fifteen thousand signatures, that 
is ten per cent of the registered voters. 
Tacoma: 
A t the Lincol n celebration, held in 
Od d Fellows' Temple on February 12, 
the program included some of the most 
eminent white and colored people in 
Tacoma. 
Wilmington: 
A t a mass meeting which taxed the 
standing capacity of Od d Fellow' Hall , 
held on Marc h 7, under the auspices of 
the Wilmington Branch, the chief 
speakers were ex-Senator Washburn, 
of Elkton , Md . and Dr. William A . Sinclair, 
ANNUA L CONFERENC E 
A s voted some months ago by the 
Board of directors, because of the retrench
National Conference wil l not be held 
this year. The Association wil l hold a 
meeting in connection with the National 
Conference of Charities and Correction 
in Baltimore on the afternoon of Ma y 
13, beginning at three o'clock. This 
meeting wil l be rather informal in character, hav
among the members of the Conference. 
Addresses wil l be made by Miss Mar y 
Whit e Ovington, who wil l speak on 
"Cit y Philanthropy Amon g Colored 
People; " Prof. Willia m Pickens, whose 
subject will be "The Ultimate Effects of 
Discrimination; " and Prof. Goerge Will
many years a member of the National 
Conference of Charities and Correction, 
who wil l talk on "The Community and 
The Colored Child. " 
I FIGHTING RAC E CALUMN Y 
A N INSTANC E O F TH E WA Y TH E 
N . A . A . C . P. WORK S 
TH E CHRONOLOGICA L RECOR D O F TH E FIGH T 
AGAINS T TH E "CLANSMAN " I N 
MOVIN G PICTURES . 
February 12-26: 
W e are advised by our Lo s Angeles 
Branch that "The Birt h of a Nation, " 
a picture play founded on Dixon's 
"Clansman, " is running in that city and 
that the branch has been unable to suppress the play because it has the approval 
of the National Board of Censorship, 
located in New York . 
Advance announcement of this performance in Ne w Yor k appears in the 
local press. 
W e go to the office of the Board of 
Censorship and request: 
The names of the committee who approved the picture so that we may ascertain its character from someone who has 
seen it; the names and addresses of the 
National Board of Censorship; a list of 
the cities where the film has been released; the possibility of arranging for 
an advance performance when the film 
could be reviewed by the entire Board 
of Censorship and a committee from our 
Association. 
The office of the Boar d of Censorship 
reply that there is nothing objectionable 
in the picture and refuse to give us the 
names of any of the committee who 
have approved it. They also refuse the 
addresses of members of their board 
and advise us not to communicate with 
them. They say that since the picture 
has been passed by the Board, no advance performance can be arra
Ne w Yor k and nothing can be done 
about it. 
W e appeal to the Chairman of the 
National Boar d of Censorship, Mr . 
Frederic C. Howe , for an advance performance and it is arranged. 
February 27: 
W e write a letter to the members of 
the Nationa l Boar d of Censorship stating our position in regard to the picture. 
The National Boar d of Censorship 
and a committee from our Association 
are invited to attend the advance perfor
promised twelve tickets; later the numb
Boar d of Censorship and colored people 
are excluded. 
Marc h 1: 
The Nationa l Boar d of Censorship 
meet after the performance and (according to their Chairman, Dr. Howe), 
disapprove certain incidents in the first 
section of the film and practically the 
entire second part. N o communication 
in regard to this action is sent from the 
office of the Boar d of Censorship to the 
N . A . A . C. P. 
Marc h 3 : 
The owner and producer of the film 
are summoned by the N . A . A . C. P. 
to the Police Court on the grounds that 
they are maintaining a public nuisance 
and endangering the public peace. They 
are represented by Marti n W . Littleton. 
Chief Magistrate McAdo o rules that it 
is not within his jurisdiction to stop the 
performance unless it actually leads to a 
breach of the peace. 
Marc h 8: 
W e write for a statement of the disapproval of the play by the Boar d of 
Censorship. W e do not get it. W e request all our members i n Ne w Yor k and 
vicinity to write letters of protest to the 
press. 
Marc h 9 : 
W e again write to the Boar d of Censorship for a statement of their disapproval of the film and also request a 
copy of the statement of release which 
is being sent to other cities, and a list of 
the states where bills for public censors 
are pending. 
W e are advised by a member of the 
Boar d of Censorship that the action of 
the Boar d on Marc h 1 i n disapproving 
the film was not official. N o communicat
office of the Board. 
Marc h 10: 
Prominent members of our Association, Mr . 
Addams, Dr. Jacques Loeb, Miss Lillia n FIGHTIN G RAC E CALUMN Y 41 
D . Wald , as well as several prominent 
white Southerners, see the play. Al l 
agree i n condemning it. 
Marc h 10: 
Th e Nationa l Association brings criminal proceedings against Aitke n and 
Griffith, owner and producer of the film, 
and retains James W . Osborne as attorney. 
Marc h 11 : 
W e send a letter to the moving picture 
trade calling their attention to the action 
of Aitke n and Griffith in producing this 
play after it has been disapproved by the 
Nationa l Boar d of Censorship. 
Marc h 12: 
W e appeal to the Commissioner of 
Licenses to stop the performance under 
that section of the penal code which applies to public nuisances. 
W e are advised that the Boar d of 
Censorship is seeing the play in its revised form. W e attend the same performance and find that only slight 
changes have been made. 
Marc h 13: 
Miss Jane Addams who has witnessed 
the play at our request, gives an exclusive interview condemning it to the 
Evening Post, which is sent out by the 
Nationa l Association to the press of the 
country. None of the Ne w Yor k papers 
carried this except the Post which, we 
understand, is the only paper in Ne w 
Yor k that has refused the advertising 
for "Th e Birt h of a Nation. " 
Marc h 15: 
W e are officially advised by the office 
of the Nationa l Boar d of Censorship 
that the film has been approved by the 
Board. Some of the members present 
tell us that the producer was even 
cheered when he came into the room. 
Marc h 16: 
W e are asked by the Board of Censorship to retract our letter sent to the 
moving picture trade. W e do not. 
W e request of the Boar d of Censorship the addresses of their committees 
and again ask for a list of the cities 
where the film has been released and a 
list of states where bills for public censors are pending. W e do not get this 
information. 
Marc h 19: 
W e write the Mayo r requesting him 
to use his authority to suppress the play 
as an offense against public decency and 
as endangering public morals; also on 
the ground that the effect of the picture 
is likely to lead to a breach of the peace. 
Marc h 23 : 
A review of the play in the New Republic 
title "Brotherly Love, " is mailed by the 
N . A . A . C . P . for editorial comment to 
five hundred newspapers. 
Marc h 24: 
The New Yor k press breaks its silence 
by publishing the "story" of the split on 
the Boar d of Censorship over the vote 
on this film. 
Marc h 26: 
W e are advised by the Mayo r that he 
wil l receive a delegation from our Association. W e 
and organizations interested, in Ne w 
Yor k and vicinity, to unite with us in 
appearing at this hearing. 
Marc h 27: 
W e attempt to arrange a procession 
to the Mayor's office. License is refused 
on the ground that it might lead to a 
breach of the peace. 
Marc h 29: 
The National American Woma n Suff
with the Nationa l Board of Censorship 
in working against the bill for a public 
censor pending in Pennsylvania, because 
of the action of the Board on this play. 
Marc h 30: 
Hearing before the Mayo r with following speakers: Dr. Frederic C . Howe , 
Chairman of the National Board of 
Censorship; Dr. Willia m H . Brooks, 
Pastor of St. Mark's M . E . Church ; Dr. 
W . E . B . D u Bois, Edito r of the 
CRISIS ; Dr. Stephen S. Wise , Rabbi of 
the Free Synagogue; Mr . Fre d R. 
Moore , Edito r of the New York Age; 
Mr . George E . Wibecan, President of 
the Brookly n Citizens' Club ; and Mr . 
Oswald Garrison Villard , President of 
the New Yor k Evening Post Company, 
and Vic e President of the N . A . A . C. P. 
The following organizations were represented : The colored and white ministry of Greater Ne w York , the Citizens' 
Club of Brooklyn, the Committee of One 
Hundre d of Hudson County, N . J., the 
National League of Urba n Conditions 
Amon g Negroes, the United Civi c 
League, the Columbus Hil l Civi c 42 TH E CRISI S 
League, and the Northeastern Federation of Women's Clubs. 
The Mayo r told the delegation which 
overflowed the Council Chamber that he 
had seen the film and that he agreed 
with all that had been said about it. H e 
felt that it might perhaps incite to 
breaches of the peace and had already 
so advised the management of the 
theatre and the owners of the film; the 
latter had consented to cut out the two 
scenes which had been particularly objected to and the play would be produced in that form for the first time 
that night. This, the Mayo r was careful 
to say, had been done without any attempt on his part to exercise any power 
he might be given by statute. The 
breadth and force of such powers were 
in doubt, he said, but if it was found 
necessary to take the matter up again 
he would take such steps as were authorized by law. 
Marc h 31 : 
W e adjourn our legal case with the 
idea of discontinuing it if the changes 
promised by the Mayo r are made i n the 
film. 
Apri l 1: 
W e see the play in its second revised 
form and find again that only unimportant changes have been made and that 
the two particularly objectionable scenes 
still remain the motif of the second part. 
W e again appeal to the Mayo r calling 
his attention to the fact that these scenes 
which he promised the delegation should 
be eliminated have not been cut out. 
Apri l 2 : 
Miss Rosalie Jonas, a native of Ne w 
Orleans, with other prominent Suffragists i n Ne w York , file a protest wit h the 
Mayo r against the play. 
W e are advised by the Mayo r that he 
has been assured by the producers of 
the film that they wil l meet his wishes in 
the matter of elision. 
(To be continued, and we trust concluded, in our next.) 
"OLIVER CROMWELL" 
By W . T . FREEMA N 
December the 13th, 1776, Washington's army was in peril. 
General Lee had marched with his 
command as far as Morristown , N . J., 
taking up his quarters at Basking Ridge. 
O n the evening of December the 13th a 
squad of Britis h cavalry captured Le e 
and hurried him off to Ne w York . General Sullivan took command of 
Lee's division and hastened to join 
Washington. 
The entire American force now 
amounted to a little more than six thousand men. In the midst of disaster 
Washington saw in the disposition of the 
British forces an opportunity to strike 
a blow for his disheartened countrymen. 
The leaders of the enemy were off of 
their guard. They believed that the wa r 
was ended. Cornwallis obtained leave 
of absence, left the State of Ne w Jersey 
in command of General Grant and made 
preparations to return to England. The 
English army was spread out from 
Trenton to Burlington. 
It was at this critical time that Washingto n 
conceived the bold idea o f crossing the Delaware Rive r and striking the 
detachment of the enemy's forces at 
Trenton before a concentration of the 
forces could be affected. 
The America n army was accordingly 
arranged in three divisions; the first, 
under General Cadwallader, was to cross 
the river at Bristo l and attack the Britis
his brigade was to pass over a little below Trenton for the purpose of intercepting the retreat while Washington 
with General Sulliva n and General 
Greene and twenty-four thousand men 
were to cross nine miles above Trenton, 
march down the river bank and assault 
the town. Everythin g was to be carried 
out with the greatest of secrecy. 
Christmas night was selected as the 
time to strike the blow; it was a well 
known fact that a majority of the English 
The night was cold, the river was 
filled with floating ice. Generals Ewin g TH E BURDE N 43 
and Cadwallader were baffled in their 
efforts to cross the river on account of 
the severity of the cold and the floating 
ice, but Washington and his aids succeeded. 
In the boat with Washington amongst 
the muffled rowers was our hero "Oliver 
Cromwell," a colored man. 
They landed on the Jersey coast about 
3 A . M. , marched down to Princeton 
getting there about 8 A . M. , where they 
attacked the British to their surprise and 
conquered them. 
Oliver Cromwell was born at the 
Black Horse (now Columbus) in the 
family of John Hutchin. He enlisted 
with a company commanded by Captain 
Lowery attached to the second regiment 
under the command of Colonel Isaac 
Shrever. 
He fought at the battle in Princeton 
with bravery on that memorable morn
of Springfield he distinguished himself 
and also at Yorktown. 
At the end of the war he received an 
honorable discharge from the army, his 
papers being signed by General Washington, Commander-in-Chief of the 
American Army. 
The 
Burden C " So she coaxed him on and on with his 
history, as Desdemona persuaded Othello 
to talk. Only Eldon was not a blackamoor, and it was of his defeats and not 
his victories that he told. Which made 
him perhaps all the more attractive, seeing that he was well born and well 
made."—Rupert Hughes in Munsey's, 
Dec, 1914. 
C A colored woman had purchased some 
goods from a white man on the installment plan. Having gotten somewhat behind in the payments, the white collector 
ordered her to have his money for him 
on a given day. This the woman failed 
to do and the collector thereupon began 
to beat her. She ran out of her house 
into the store of a colored man begging 
the storekeeper for protection. This was 
given her, and the white man was pushed 
out of doors. A telephone call was sent 
by the colored man for the patrol wagon. 
Whe n the policeman arrived he at once 
put the colored woman under arrest, and 
while he was leading her to the patrol 
wagon the collector began to assault her 
again by kicking her, whereupon the 
colored man once more intervened. The 
colored woman was put into the patrol 
wagon and carried to the jail. The assaulting 
collector rode with the driver 
for a short distance, then got down and 
went about his business.— From a southern paper. 
C A colored man, educated, runs an auto. 
He does quite a good business taking 
people riding. Recently a lady called 
him over the 'phone asking his terms by 
the hour, etc. He gave her particulars, 
which she said were satisfactory. Then 
asked him if he thought it was too cold 
to go out that day. He replied "It is quite 
cold, but if you wish to go, I will take 
you." After more pleasant conversation 
and a request for him to come at a certain time and place, she said "Oh ! are— 
are you colored?" He replied "Yes." 
She said "I think it is a little too cold 
today, I think I won't go." I, being a 
Yankee and coming recently from the 
Wooden Nutmeg State, am quite dense 
in regard to the color line. When he 
told me I replied "Why it seems to be 
quite the style to have colored chauffe
have them." He replied "You do not understand; if I did not own the car it 
would be all right; but it is very presuming for a colored man to own an 
auto." The light dawned on me, and I 44 TH E CRISI S 
replied " I am so thankful I am not that 
kind of a fool."—M . L . S. S., Washington, D . C. 
" •, Oklahoma . 
C The subscription which I paid for to 
be sent to the Carnegie Librar y of this 
place may be changed to . 
"This request is made for the reason 
that TH E CRISI S is not permitted to remain in the library. This information 
was given me by the janitor who happens 
to be a colored man. It is ordered out as 
soon as it appears." 
([ "Th e board of trustees of the Hyd e 
Par k Presbyterian Church at Fifty-thir d 
Street and Blackstone Avenue wil l hold 
a meeting to-morrow night in the board 
room in the church to consider what 
shall be their attitude toward the theatre 
which has been built next door, and 
which, its owners say, wil l be converted 
into a Negro church if a theatrical license is denied them.—Chicago Examiner. 
"TOANO , Va . 
C " I am bothered and handicapped in my 
business. I have struggled in affliction 
and discouragement to the limit of 
human endurance; and alone. I have 
been afflicted with rheumatism for ten 
years. 
" I have a nice little farm which has 
been advertised for sale by one of the 
worst men here. In my crisis I was 
forced to borrow some money from him. 
In a short time he attempted to sell my 
home, raising my account to nearly double what I had gotten from him. I 
charged him with usuary and took out 
an injunction and stopped the sale. 
"O n the 8th the judge in the lower 
court decided against me. I at once filed 
an application for an appeal. O n the 23d 
inst. I went to Hampton, Va. , wit h the 
hope of seeing Majo r Moto n or Capt. 
Alle n Washington to get some advice. I 
did succeed in seeing Capt. Washington. 
H e advised me to write you and it might 
be that you would make some recommendation that would help me. I have 
a large family; a wife and seven little 
children, the oldest twelve years. 
"An d above all things earthly, I want 
my farm on which I may learn my little 
children how to work and get an honest 
living, without walkin g the roads in idleness. 
"This man claims that I owe him $625 
wit h interest from 1913 to date. I don't 
owe it, I have never gotten it. I have 
valuable property here near Toano, Va. , 
on the peninsula, about 40 miles from 
Hampto n and 37 miles from Richmond , 
Va. , near the railroad station, which is 
worth double the money; this man wants 
it and says he intends to have it. 
"H e has taken my uncle's whic h joins 
mine and is now building houses on it. 
H e says he is going to build on mine in 
the same way. 
" I am now praying for help from 
those of our people who can help, and 
who know where help can be found. 
I am very humbly yours, 
(Signed) J . A . JONES . 
([ The legislature of Oklahoma has had 
a stormy debate on the race problem 
arising from a proposal to appropriate 
$15,000 for the support of the colored 
State University and an extra $20,000 
for water works and sewerage systems. 
Representative Childers of Garfield 
county, declared that he was opposed to 
any appropriations for "niggers." 
"Let's take care of our white institutions first," shouted Childers, "before 
voting money for the niggers.- I don't 
believe Go d created the black man, anyway, and if H e did H e only intended for 
him to be a servant for the white man. " 
Representative Morgan , a Democratic 
minister of the gospel, made a bitter 
speech against the Negro : 
"They dont need educating," declared 
Morgan , "for I have observed that the 
Negro woman takes in washing to support her worthless educated husband. 
W e should take care of the Negro only 
as far as we are able. This is a white 
man's country." 
Other representatives supported the 
appropriation which was finally passed 
but wit h the water works and sewerage 
system item cut out. A s a matter of fact 
the $15,000 thus given is really less than 
the state receives from the Unite d States, 
for the agricultural training of Negroes. 
One legislator defended Langston. H e 
said that it "educates the Negro for agricTH E BURDE N 45 
curse and the country nigger is a necessity. I want to see them taught to be 
useful on the farms and as servants." 
Representative Pinkham was among 
the few who took a strong stand. 
"W e Democrats," said Pinkham, "cannot take a position that involves hatred 
or viciousness against the Negro race. 
They were brought here against their 
will , and it is up to you people to take 
care of them." 
TH E MURDE R O F PAU L SMIT H 
([Earl y one cold morning in last December, some time before daybreak, the 
dead body of a young Negro man was 
found on Nint h street, near State. The 
discovery was made by two policemen. 
Several hours before this gruesome 
find was made, these same policemen 
had gone to a house of il l repute in that 
neighborhood, probably i n search of 
Pau l Smith, a Negro youth who had escaped from the chain gang. A t any rate, 
Smith was there when the officers arrived, and he made a dash to escape, 
clad only i n his night clothes. The officers fired several shots and went their 
way. 
The young Negro found dead on 
Nint h street, two or three hours later, 
was Pau l Smith. H e wore only his night 
clothes and had been shot to death. 
A n indictment was returned against 
the two policemen who had attempted to 
arrest Smith, charging them with murder. The case was continued and did 
not come to trial until two or three days 
ago, when it was called in the Circuit 
Court at Blountville. The officers are 
said to have testified that they did not 
shoot at Smit h or i n his direction. The 
evidence was such that the jur y rendered 
a verdict of not guilty. 
The policemen who attempted to arrest Smit h would have had no right to 
kil l him, since there was no charge 
against him of a more serious nature 
than a misdemeanor. Therefore, it is 
wit h a feeling of relief that the local 
public learns that these officers did not 
commit this crime. Bu t here arises a 
question which, doubtless, has suggested 
itself to the reader: Wh o did commit the 
crime, and what is the theory of the police department as to the m
what steps have been taken to clear up 
the mystery ? 
Pau l Smith was "only a Negro, " to be 
sure; he seems to have been an occasional pett
worth much to the community. But he 
was human, and he had a right to live 
so long as he did nothing to forfeit his 
life. H e was not a dangerous character; 
he had committed no serious offense; he 
was killed without provocation, for he 
was found dead in his night clothes, with 
no weapon of any kind on his person. 
It is to be regretted that, so far as the 
public knows, no effort has been made to 
apprehend his murderer. An d it is to be 
hoped that this is the last case of the 
kin d that wil l occur in this city.— Editorial in 
daily) Bristol, Tenn. 
FRO M SA N ANTONIO , TEXA S 
([Th e following incident that occurred 
recently is illuminating on the canniness 
of even the white boy when dealing with 
Negroes and white people : 
A small white boy knocked at the door 
of the house where I was visiting. The 
lady of the house was a mulatto of very 
fair complexion. It developed that the 
lad was peddling picture post cards during his hours of freedom from school. 
H e opened up with quite a line of talk, 
showing the lady post cards of the Alamo 
ticed, however, that there was a pack in 
one hand that he did not show and on 
asking him to let her see the pack in 
question, evidently mistaking his questioner for a white woman, he said airily, "Oh , you don't want to see them. 
They're for Niggers. " He r interest being aroused by this unexpected reply, 
she insisted on inspecting the Ji m Crow 
pack. They proved to be copies of a 
certain cheap, but familiar type of pictures 
a group of Negro notables. The whole 
incident was so unexpected, so illuminating, and 
on about his way of dealing with Negroes, totally 
identity of his questioner, for certainly 
there was no natural racial repulsion to 
warn the boy), and so truthful a picture 
of the usual white man's attitude from 
within, that I think it worth the time to 
write to you. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Strength of Standard Life 
No t long ago the writer of these articles received a letter from a friend in Ohio. 
"Please send me some evidence other than your own printed matter that Standard 
Lif e is all that it claims." 
In reply we sent him an editorial taken from the Atlant a Constitution referring 
to us which said, among other things: "The final test of the Company's worth is 
that it qualified for a license under the new insurance laws, among the most 
drastic in America. " W e sent him a certificate signed by the Treasurer of the 
State of Georgia, that he holds bonds owned by us, of a. par value of One Hundre d 
Thousand Dollars, for the protection of our policyholders. W e referred him to 
the New Yor k Independent (August 25, 1914), whose insurance page is one of the 
highest authorities in the land. W e sent him the statement of the Certified Publi c 
Accountant who has examined us twice: "Al l records of the Company were found 
in excellent condition and its affairs are carefully managed." 
Th e Strength of Standard Life 
Lies Both in Methods and in Men 
Though hundreds and hundreds of assessment societies and insurance associations 
have disappeared from existence, there has never been a failure of a life insurance 
company conducted rigidly on old-line legal reserve principles. Standard Lif e was 
organized and is operated on the old-line legal reserve plan. Standard Lif e is 
following the plans and the methods that made the Equitable, the Ne w Yor k Life , 
the Metropolitan, and the Northwestern Mutua l great. 
In 1913, it set aside a reserve liability of over $7,000; in 1914 this reserve was 
increased over $15,000, making a total reserve liability set aside of over Twentytwo Thousand Dollars. It lias in addition Pai d In Capital of $100,000.00 which 
is invested in first class bonds and deposited with the State. 
Back of Its Methods are Men 
Its officers and directors are men of unquestioned integrity and ability. They 
are men who know what they are doing, and who are doing what they know. 
Ou r reports to the Insurance Departments of Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, 
Kentucky, Missouri, Arkansas, and Texas where we operate show, among others, 
the following figures: 
Gross Assets $136,127.31 
Legal Reserve 22,545.61 
Cash Income for 1914 69,025.07 
Death Claims Paid 2,625.00 
Insurance in Force, December 31, 1914 - $1,205,000.00 
Our policyholders live in 23 States and the Canal Zone. W e can protect 
you no matter where you live in amounts from $250.00 to $5,000.00. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Over One Million and a Quarter Insurance in Force 
Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
HEMA N E. PERRY, President 
HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Please 
send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amoun t $. . . 
Sex 
Ag e 
Weight 
Occupation. . 
Name 
Address 
(C . Ma y 1915) 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 47 
Foot Wear Fit To Wear 
FRO M FACTOR Y T O YO U B Y PARCE L POST WITH NO ADDITIONA L COST 
In all 
STYLES 
Leathers 
A 
SHO E 
of 
Quality 
For the discriminating buyer of shoes who experiences difficulty in being suited, we guarantee to fit and satisfy you. Our 
illustrated catalog and self measuring blank mailed on request. A 
large and carefully selected line. Patronize a Race Industry. 
Guaranteed Line $3.50, $4.00, $4.50, $5.00 
Other Shoes $2.00, $2.50, $3.00 
THE FRED DOUGLASS SHOE CO., INC. DEPT. 
LYNN , MASS . 
$3000 FOR YOU 
T
HAT' S the money you should get this year. I mean it. I want 
County Sales Managers quick, men or women who believe in 
the square deal, who will go info partnership with me. No 
experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works 
required. Full length bath in any room. Folds in small roll, handy 
as an umbrella. I tell you it's great I GREA T I Rivals $100 bath 
room. Now listen! I want YO U to handle your county. I'll furnish demonstrating tub on liberal plan. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger money in a week with me than you ever 
made in a month before. I KNO W IT I 
. Two Sales a Day— 
$300.00 a Month 
That's what yon should get—every month. Weeded in every home, badly wanted, 
eagerly bought. Modern bathing facilities lor all the people. Take the orders right 
and left. Quick Kales, immense 
profits. Look at these men— 
Smith, Ohio, got 18 orders first 
week; Meyers, Wis., $250 profit first 
month; Newton, California, $60 in 
three days. You should do as well. 2 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH . 
The work is very easy, pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating. It means a 
^ business of your own. 
Little capital needed. I grant 
credit—Help you Out—Back you up 
—Don't doubt —Don't hesitate — Don't 
back—You cannot lose. My other men ar e 
g houses, hack accounts, so can you. Act than 
quick, SEN D NO MONEY. Just name on penny post card 
fo r free tub offer. Hustle! 
H . S. Robinson, Pres., 42 2 Fac,op,o s
 Bldg., TOLEDO , OHI O 
Canadian Branch — Walkerville, Ont 
Exclusive 
Territory. 
100% 
Profit. 
Demonstrating^^ 
Tub \^ 
Furnished. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 48 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Teachers The new efficiency era calls 
f o r the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the' whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a 
and West Virginia . 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 
Profit Margi n 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
an d other styles. 
Sen d for catalog? 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS . 
Greenfield, Ohi o 
Largest Negro Carriage concern In the Unite d States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. Yo u can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
Make Extra Money Each Week 
Light, pleasant and very profitable work. Take 
orders for our high grade calling cards at 50 for 25 
cents with name and address. Bi g demand everywhere. Large commissions. Exclusive territory. 
Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUSE O F CHOWNING. Indianapolis, Ind. 
Wealth is Powe r 
The Unio n Development Company's 
stock is a wealth producer. $40,000.00 
of stock for sale at $10.00 per share. 
Stock is now paying 7%. Ever y dollar 
invested i n first class improved business 
property, located in the heart of the city ; 
no risk, no failure. Company duly 
chartered under the laws of Georgia ; is 
composed of some of the most successful 
and influential business men and women 
of the city and has great earning possibilities. Send at once for free circular 
giving full information. 
Union Development Co . 
45 8 West Broa d Stree t Savannah , Ga . 
BEAUT Y 
CULTUR E 
A n art every woman should cultivate to retain the transparent, 
velvety complexion of youth. 
There's no secret or mystery 
about it, just use 
REJUVENATIN G CREAM ' 
for cleansing and massage 
DELUX E POWDE R 
for a beautiful complexion. Rejuvenating Cream, 20 cent jars. DeLuxe Powder, white, pink, or high 
brown, 50 cent boxes. 
Asa profession Beauty Culture offers a dlgnlfled and lucrative employment for young women. Most completely appointed Beauty Culture Parlors and School In the east. All 
branches taught. Special terms for a limited 
time. 
MADA M BARREA U 
Bristo l Building 
NE W BEDFORD , MASS . 
PIANOS-PLAYER PIANOS 
Factory To Home 
B Y M Y PLA N 
of selling direct from factory to home. I can save you 
from $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Model Pianos. 
Two to Four Years to Pay 
The easiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
Al l middlemen, jobbers, dealers and agents 
profits cut out. No charge for salesroom expense for my 
office is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
why I can sell the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons Write today. 
30 Days Free Trial 
We allow all freight charges, let you use the. 
beautiful Evans Artist Model Piano for thirty day*/X! 
free, [f you are not entirely satisfied, we will tafe A 
it back without any cost to you—you are the sole XX*?' 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you mav%V\J*. ' 
do So on our low factory wholesale price on/^y^r 
most convenient terms. 
Free Music Lessons 
T O EVERY CUSTOMER 
we win give a two year course of piano 
instruction Free. Ask about our liuuf 
ante plan and our method of saving 
you money. Write today. 
F. O. E»—s Piano Co. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :; ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A . M. 
A n aggressiv e exposur e b y a n Anglo-Saxo n cham ­
pio n o f equa l rights. Startlin g facts an d crushin g 
arguments. Fascinatin g reading . A necessit y fo r 
clea r understandin g an d up-to-date propaganda . Be ­
long s i n the librar y o f ever y frien d o f socia l justice . 
Pric e 25 cents. Sen d orde r to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Te n poems by 
EFFIE T . B attle , A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle ha* an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
Yo u owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor , Southwestern Christian Ad ­
vocate. 
"Verse s are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
Address : O kolon a I ndustria l S chool , 
Okolona, Miss. 
SILVER CHORD POEMS 
By one of the leading poets of the race, 
ADOLPHU S JOHNSON . 
Printed on fine Aberdeen book paper, highly glazed, and handsomely bound in Olive 
green cloth. A book for every home. In dialect and English. Start the buy a book movement. Agents wanted. 
Price 75C . foBtP*"1* 
TH E GRA Y PUBLISHING CO. 
420 South 11th St., Philadelphia 
IN NEW YORK AT 
The Crisis, 70 5th Ave. Young's Book Exchange, 135 W. 135th St. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"Histor y of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "Histor y of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
Th e Story of Wendell Phillips 
by 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
"The story of the great abolitionist by a modern 
abolitionist " 
Mr . Russel l says: 
Th e rea l emancipators o f the slave s wer e Garrison , 
Phillips , Joh n Brow n an d the fe w that, standin g wit h 
them upo n the exalte d groun d o f right , despise d expediency a
Thi s excellen t boo k shoul d be a n inspiratio n to 
ever y love r o f freedom . 
PRICE. 50 CENTS 
Th e CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New Yor k 
Better 
known at 
SEA ISLE CITY 
N. J. 
Opens July 1 
Closes Sept. 15 
The Ocean House 
The Gordon Sea View, 
Personall y manage d b y Mrs . Luc y Lee . Thi s is 
the onl y propert y w e ow n o n the Atlanti c Beac h 
front . Ever y roo m open s o n the ocean . Bathing , 
boating , fishing , music , dancing . A beautifu l vie w o f 
the ocea n whil e dinin g fro m ou r ne w conservator y 
dinin g room . 
Specia l rate s to schoo l teachers fo r July . 
Writ e fo r rates. Address : 
MRS . LUC Y LEE , 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, N . Y . Helpfu After July 1st, The Ocean House, Sea Isle, N. J. 
l Ideas for Young People in 
Regard to Life and Sex 
By CHARLOTT E ABBEY , M.D . 
204 South 7th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
Price, 10 Cents, includes postage 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
(Georg e Younj*) 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colored Authors and Books on Race Problems 
a Specialty. 
13 5 W . 135t h Stree t Ne w Yor k Cit y 
If Yo u Plan to Visit 
New York This Summer 
Fo r study, sightseeing or pleasure, and desire 
quiet, respectable accommodations with the 
best private families, write the Housing 
Burea u of the Nationa l Leagu e on Urban 
Conditions Amon g Negroes, at 2303 Seventh 
Avenue , Ne w York . 
Our Service Is Absolutely FREE 
Mention TH E CRISI S 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGAL' DIRECTORY 
T.l .„i, „ .. . /Centra l 104- W Telephones: | Mai n fil 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
A ttorney-at- L a w N otar y P ubli c 
1607 Williamso n Buildin g Cleveland , Ohi o 
Office L . D . Telephon e 3297 Marke t 
Residenc e L . D . Telephon e 5277- M Marke t 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
C ounsellor-at- L a w 
Room s 613-614, Metropolita n Buildin g 
113 Marke t St. , Cor . Washington , Newark , N . J . 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
A ttorne y an d C ounsellor-at- L a w 
1020 Metropolita n Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapoli s Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
A ttorney-at- L a w 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Bloc k 
Nea r Thir d an d Hennepi n 
Minneapoli s Min n 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
A ttorney-at- L a w 
908 Walnu t Stree t 
Philadelphi a Pa . 
Tel . 5437 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
A ttorne y an d C ounsellor - at- L a w 
34 Schoo l Stree t Boston , Mass . 
Telephon e Connectio n 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s Georg e W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
A ttorneys-at- L a w 
21 East Saratog a Stree t Baltimore , Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephon e 5277 Morningsid e 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
S urgeo n D entis t 
188 W . 135th Stree t Ne w Yor k Cit y 
WILLIAM L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
SOO Od d Fellow Bldg . ATLANTA , GA . 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mai l Open for 
engagements Jul y and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALIA C» . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th And Plum Streets. Cincinnati, Okie 
LADIES ! 
$2.4 0 — Pe r Day-$2.4 0 
Selling our high-grade Food Flavoring. 
Saucepan Free with each order. 
W. HENR Y ELMORE , JR . 
5IO Carolina Street Chattanooga, Tenn. 
Big Pay for Easy WorkMake $5 00 to $15.00 a day in you r spare 
time — on tailoring orders. Write for 
line Fre e Sample Outfit, with special 
offer and wholesale prices on clothes for 
yourself. Address 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
Dept. 30 9 Van Buren and Marke t Sit. , CHICAGO 
I
NEED BRANCH MANAGERS 
1^1 for m y world-wid e mail-orde r business. Operat e from you r home . 
Spar e time . Yo u shoul d mak e $5 0 weekly . Experienc e 
unnecessary . C. A. BUTLER , 41 2 Factories, TOLEDO , OHIO 
Rogers Silver State Seal 
Souvenir Spoon 
Ge t this genuine , guarantee d 188 1 
ROGERS A 1 Stat e Sea l Souveni r 
Spoo n o f you r ow n state. The y certainl y ar e beauties. Yo u neve r sa w 
anythin g lovelier. Th e patter n is sim ­
pl y exquisite . The y embod y th e ne w 
ide a o f smooth , large , bow l an d th e 
elaboratel y decorate d handle . Th e kin d 
wome n love . A heav y dee p cu t stat e 
sea l design ; noble , moder n an d elegant. 
Th e qualit y o f the spoo n is the ver y 
best, solid , substantia l an d rich . The y 
ar e spoon s yo u wil l be prou d to own . 
Th e illustratio n give s yo u onl y a fain t 
ide a o f the exquisit e loveliness o f th e 
whol e effect. Thes e spoon s ar e mad e 
an d guarantee d b y the tim e honore d 
firm o f Win . A . Rogers, whic h stand s 
fo r finest designing , highest grad e o f 
workmanshi p an d longest wear. Ever y 
spoo n is wrappe d i n the origina l guarante e certificate . Thes e spoon s retai l 
fro m 50c to 75c each . Specia l intro ­
ductor y pric e 15 cents each , 3c additiona l fo r postag e o n on e spoo n an d 1c 
fo r eac h additiona l spoon . W e nee d 
ambitious, energeti c an d reliabl e me n 
an d wome n to represen t us. Exclusiv e 
territory . Thi s is a hig h grad e clea n 
proposition . You r opportunity ; gras p 
it ; address 
Rogers Souvenir Spoon Co. 
2252 South Sacramento Avenu e 
Chicago. III. 
Mention T h e Crisis A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . (Charles W . Chesnutt) $1.5 0 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-C OLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARRO W O F TRADITION . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.00 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kell y Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B. G . Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.50 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booke r T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S OF NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICA N ABROAD . 2 Volumes. (William H . Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kell y Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . (Henr y E . Baker) 15 
A CHILD' S STOR Y O F DUNBAR . (Julia L . Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
B y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , autho r of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silve r Fleece, " "Selec t Bibliograph y of 
the Negr o American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. H e is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa , America , and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound—Ready May 1 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's new book is the latest additio n to a remarkabl e 
series of low-price d new book s wit h whic h everybod y shoul d become acquainted . 
Thes e books may be obtained from Th e CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSITY LIBRAR Y 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
Th e editors are Professors GILBER T MURRAY , H . A . L . FISHER , W . T . BREWSTE R 
and J . ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Clot h bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r „ • 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sol d separatel y - -
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N By J . A . Thomso n LATI N AMERIC A B y W . R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIA N LITERATUR E 
B y H,la,r e Be,lo c
 By G . K . Chesterton 
ROM E By W . Ward e Fowle r GERMAN Y O F TODA Y 
PROBLEM S O F PHILOSOPH Y B y Charle s Towe r 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDE S AN D HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H . A . L . Fisher By Gilber t Murra y 
TH E CIVI L WA R By F. L . Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A . C . Pigou 
94 volumes now ready. Send for a list 
HENR Y HOL T AN D COMPAN Y
 3 4
 ™ m 
Mention TH E CRISIS 