EXPOSITION NUMBER 
NOVEMBE R 
-1913 - Ten Cents A Copy 
of 
The Crisis PROGRA M O F TH E 
National Emancipation Exposition 
OCTOBE R 22 to 31, 1913 
12th Regiment Armory New York City 
SPECIAL D AY S A FTERNOON S E VENING S 
Oct. 22 Wednesday Albany 
Saratoga 
Troy 
Fraternal 
Orders 
Opening 
Exercises 
Oct. 23 Thursday New Rochelle Masons and 
Odd Fellows 
Pageant 
Oct. 24 Friday Governor's Day 
Syracuse 
Stenographers 
and Artisans 
Music School 
Settlement 
Concert 
Oct. 25 Saturday Mount Vernon 
White Plains 
All Southern 
Day 
Pageant 
Athletic 
Meet 
Oct. 26 Sunday Douglass Day 
Rochester 
Inter-church 
Chorus 
RELIGIOU S 
Will Marion 
Cook and 
Double 
Quartette 
CONGRES S 
Oct. 27 Monday Lincoln, 111., 
Day, Yonkers 
Professional Banquet 
Men 
SOCIOLOGICAL CONGRESS 
Oct. 28 Tuesday Baltimore Children's 
Buffalo Day 
WOMAN'S I 
Pageant 
DA Y 
Oct. 29 Wednesday Boston, Binghamton, Elmira, 
Ithaca, Auburn 
Business 
Men 
Clef Club 
Concert 
Oct. 30 Thursday 
Washington, 
D. C , Kingston, Newburgh, 
Ossining, 
Poughkeepsie 
West Indians Pageant 
Oct. 31 Friday Greater New 
York 
Native 
New Yorkers 
Exposition 
Band Concert 
and Costume 
Ball 
Mention T H E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manager 
Contents for November, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE : An Octoroon. (Photographed from life.) 
ARTICLES 
Page 
OFFICER S O F TH E LA W 327 
TH E NATIONA L EMANCIPATIO N EXPOSITIO N 339 
TH E MUSLI N PRIEST AN D TH E HEATHEN . 
Adapted by A. O. Stafford 345 
TH E FREEDO M O F TH E FREE . A Poem. 
By Benjamin Griffith Brawley 347 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LINE.. . 319 
ME N O F TH E MONT H :. . 325 
OPINION 328 
EDITORIA L 337 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 342 
LETTE R BO X 348 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 316 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. 
ATLANTA , GA. 
WAR E 
Knoxvill e College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1913. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and of 
the United States. Open all the 
year round. For males only. 
Fall term began September 1, 
1913. Strong faculty. Excellent 
equipment. Successful graduates. Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. For catalog or 
further information address 
JAME S B . DUDLE Y 
President 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
" In the Heart of the Healthy Hills " 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
NORMAL , ALABAM A 
Makes a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out their own salvation. It gives breadwinners a chance to go to 
school and so puts a first-class English education and 
a trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose. 
Board, lodging and washing cost $9 per month. 
An entrance fee of $10 covers medicine, hospital 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the first Monday in October and 
closes the last Thursday in May. 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President 
Virginia Theological Seminary and 
College, Lynchburg, Va. 
COLLEG E OF LIBERA L ART S — Standard 
Bachelor of Arts Course (B.A.). Scientific Course 
leading to the degree Bachelor of Science (B.S.). 
THEOLOGICA L SEMINARY — Wit h full theological course leading to degree of Bachelor of 
Divinity (B.D.), including Greek, Hebrew, Sociology 
and Social Psychology. 
ACADEMI C COURSE—Whic h prepares for college, teaching and professional schools. 
NORMA L DEPARTMENT — Offerin g special training to teachers. Doing extensive work in Pedagogy 
and Education. Co-educational. 
Three hundred and five students last year, representing fifteen States, South and West Coast Africa, 
South America and British West Indies. 
Strong, efficient, experienced faculty. 
ROBER T C. WOODS , President. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
BISHOP COLLEGE , MARSHALL , TEX . 
Maintains college, academic, theological, musical, normal, 
grammar and Industrial departments. Offers the most advanced courses and Is the best-equipped school for Negroes In 
the Southwest. For Information address 
. C. „ H. MAX.S0N, .President 
Mention the Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 317 
NUMEROU S OPPORTUNI ­
TIE S FO R AL L T O 
LEARN A 
USEFU L TRADE 
In Enterprise Institute, Incorporated and Located at Chicago, 111. 
More than forty trades taught. 
Prices very low and terms easy. 
Call at or address 
Enterprise Institute 
Rev. G. H . McDaniel, D. D., Pres. 
3711 State St. - - -Chicago, 111. 
CARNEGIE COLLEGE-HOME STUDY 
"60 PAG E BULLETI N FREE*' 
COURSE S B Y MAIL 
Grammar School Agricultural 
High School 
Norma 
Profesaiona 
Penmanship 
Type-writing 
Short-hand 
Book-keeping 
La w 
Poultry 
Domestic Science 
Civil Service 
Engineering 
Drawing 
English 
Language 
Real Estate 
Pres. GALRRRATH 
Reduced rates of tuition to first 
applicants. Kor "Free ISuIletln" 
and "Special Scholarship," apply 
CARNEGI E COLLEG E 
No. 1BD St.. ROGERS. Ohio. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSITIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
Kelly Miller's Monographic Magazine 
A comprehensive, precise, clear-cut essay in each number. 
Published by Kelly Miller, say, once a month. Ten cents a 
single copy; $1 a year (twelve numbers). 
NOW READY 
No. 1. Education for Manhood. Kelly Miller. 
No. 2. The Political Plight of the Negro. Kelly Miller. 
No. 3. The Social and Industrial Capacity of Negroes. 
(Part I.) 
No. 4. The Social and Industrial Capacity of Negroes. 
(Part II.) 
Agents wanted everywhere. Address: 
KELL Y MILLER' S MAGAZIN E 
Howard University ... . Washington, D. C . 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 318 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
in Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position When 
Practising, Position When Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Bules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P.. 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. T.: "A very practical little 
book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' by Pedro T. 
Tlnaley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News." Chloago, 111.: "Accordingly his 
'Practical Method of Singing' Is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
cannot fail to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PEIC E $1.00 
.Address the publisher: PEDE O T. TINSLE Y 
6448 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO, ILL . 
ARCHITECTS 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
WILLIA M L. BEL L 
Architect 
138% Auburn Avenue - - - Atlanta, Ga. 
WANTE D 
Agents for T H E CRISIS. Dignified work 
Address 
26 Vesey Street, New York 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: 
E . A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street .. . New York 
LEARN TO READ MUSIC AT SIGHT 
P0K $1.00 
ft* 
One copy of any of the following included: 
Educated Frog, Octoroon, New Century 
March, New Century Waltz, Anthem Collection, Song Service; or whole list for $2. 
Music published or arranged for publication. 
"Smith's Orchestra" 
HIGH-CLASS MUSIC REPRESENTIN G OU R OW N COMPOSER S 
Smith's Sight Reader, 50c copy. 
"Emancipation Hymn, " single copy 5c; 
per doz., 55c; per 100, $4.35, prepaid. Band 
and Orchestra arrangement, 50c a copy. 
Positions at actual pitch for Cornets, 
Altos, Trombones, Valve and Slide, scales and 
valuable hints. Never been offered before by 
anyone; to anyone. 
"We've Walked Side by Side" (Song 
Bring Back My Childhood Days) 25c 
Song Service for Sunday Schools 10c 
Anthem Book 25c 
Marches for Piano 25c 
"Delaware Triumph," "Delaware College," "Lovers' Retreat," "Tuskegee 
March " (To Dr . B. T. Washington), String 
Quartettes, Violin and Piano selections, 
Violin "positions" and scales; instruction 
diagrams for 'Cello and Bass, Viola and 
Piano. Send cash with order. 
Published by WM . D. SMIT H 
1547 North Camac St. Philadelphia, Pa . 
WHA T TH E WORLD IS SAYING ABOU T 
"A 
Little 
Dreaming' 
By 
FENTO N 
JOHNSON 
"Who is acclaimed by prominent critics, leading 
authors and the international press as the foremost 
romantic poet and one of the greatest writers of 
African strain. 
"Praiseworthy in the ways of imagination, mysticism and romance."—Chicago "Daily News." 
Josephine Turck Baker, editor of "Correct English," says: "When the young poet brough't his 
verses to me I felt that a new singer had come 
among us, singing of love, of passion, of joy and 
sorrow, sounding the depths and climbing the 
heights. In the brighter passages there exists the 
deft touch of the born artist, while in the deeper 
moments he makes sentient the emotions of the 
soul—a soul that has lived and suffered." 
Published by Peterson Company, Chicago. Vellum 
de luxe edition, 75 cents, net, illustrated. 
Now running in its second edition. 
Agents wanted in colleges, towns and cities. 
Address: 
CENTRA L DISTRIBUTION STATION 
3522 State Street Suite 5 Chicago, 111. 
Mention T H E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol .6-No. 7 NOVEMBER , 1913 Whole No. 37 
ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
LOUI S GRIFFITHS , who served on the 
•*-*' staff of the commander at the national 
camp of the Grand Arm y of the Republic 
held i n Chattanooga, Tenn., in September, 
was the first colored man to serve in this 
capacity. 
<J Dr. A . B . Schultz-Knighten, a colored 
woman, was one of the jurors on the third 
jury of women appointed by Judge Owen i n 
Chicago for the trial of insane women. 
*I A black Zulu speaking three European 
languages has been ordained a priest i n 
Rome. 
<J Amos Williams, a colored farmer living 
near Poughkeepsie, N . Y. , recently saved the 
lives of a white man and his wife who were 
i n danger of being killed i n a runaway 
accident. 
<J Rev. A . J. Carey represented the Negro 
race at the Perry centennial celebration at 
Put-in-Bay, Lake Erie , 0 . He was one of 
four speakers. 
<I Father John McGuire , the pastor of the 
colored Catholic church i n St. Louis, is 
establishing a Negro settlement and training 
school for colored working girls in that city. 
<I Negroes i n Cleveland, 0., have purchased 
thirty-four acres of land i n Hamilton 
County on which they . propose to erect a 
school for boys. 
<J The colored people of New Orleans are 
to have a new branch library. 
«I A colored woman, Mrs. Joseph Shreeves, 
represented Illinois at the annual convention 
of the Spanish-American war veterans in 
Buffalo, N . Y . 
*J William Reilly, a Southern landowner, has 
furnished homes and small farms for thirty 
Negroes formerly in his employ. 
*5 The colored churches of Philadelphia have 
presented a memorial to the late J. D. 
Kelly , a prominent member of the relief 
committee of reconstruction times. 
<B Reports submitted at the meeting of the 
Alabama Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs showed that the clubs of this State had 
distributed $12,000 during the year for 
reform and educational work. 
*fl A . C. Taylor, a colored aviator, will make 
his first flight in an aeroplane, which he is 
constructing, at the State fair i n Richmond. 
A memorial has been erected to Dr. 
Edward Wilmot Blyden in Sierra Leone, 
where he spent his last years. A subscription fund for final payments on the memoria l has been started in England. 
*J The building which is to house the 
National Industrial Orphan School at 
Centralia, Cal., for Negroes has been 
started. 
*I Al l the members of the white longshoremen's union in Mobile, Ala. , are on strike to 
enforce the demands of 2,000 Negro 
longshoremen. 
*I The Southern Labor Congress which met 
at Nashville recently, representing nearly all 
the trades unions of the South, decided, after 
a long debate, to admit colored men to the 
organization. 320 TH E CRISIS 
^ Two young colored fellows, Sloan and 
Thompson, saved 317 lives in the Dayton 
flood. They have been recommended for 
Carnegie medals. 
*2 Henry West, a one-armed colored flagman 
in Asbury Park, lost his life i n saving two 
9-year-old boys who were driving a pony 
across the tracks before an approaching 
train. 
EDUCATION . 
THE board of education has ordered 
•*• seven new schools erected for Negroes 
i n Mecklenburg County, N . C. The board 
will furnish the material and the people of 
the districts will erect the buildings. 
*I Man y have sent subscriptions for the 
support of the Berean Manua l Training 
School i n Philadelphia. This school, formerly supported by the State, was cut off 
entirely by Governor Tener when he acted 
on the appropriation bills passed by the 
last legislature. 
<I St. Martin's College, i n Philadelphia, 
which had enrolled thirty or forty colored 
youths from the poorer sections of the town, 
has been compelled to close down because of 
the lack of funds. 
*I Fis k University received $1,000 from the 
estate of the late William Cutting. 
*II A site has been purchased near Eagle 
Ford , Tex., for the projected rescue normal 
and industrial institute for Negroes. 
*I The Manua l and Industrial School for 
Colored Youths, at Bordentown, N . J. , has 
been reorganized on a vocational basis and 
the school term has been lengthened sixty 
days. 
^ Miss Dora Holmes, who has been appointed to teach in the public "schools of 
Haverhill, Mass., will be the first colored 
teacher appointed in these schools. 
<I I n addition to the $15,000 which the 
National Baptist Association has been contributing yearly to home missions, the association now plans a theological school i n 
Tennessee for the training of Negroes. 
•I White teachers have been appointed i n 
the McCarthy school for Negroes i n New 
Orleans. 
*I Afte r a long controversy the decision that 
Chinese are not colored permits the children 
of this race to attend the white public 
schools in Covington, Ky . 
ECONOMICS . 
THE Ohio business directory of colored 
men and women for 1913 has been 
published and shows, of the entire population of 4,767,121, a colored population of 
223,994. There are 1,215 business enterprises i n the fifty-one towns represented i n 
the directory. 
«I Sarah Rector, a 10-year-old colored girl 
of Muskogee, Okla., has a yearly income of 
$11,000 from oil wells which she has 
inherited. 
<I Negroes i n Charleston, S. C , have 
opened a ten-cent store which gives employment to twenty-five colored people. 
<1 Dr. J. T. Williams, a colored citizen of 
Charlotte, N . C., has opened a hotel i n that 
city for the accommodation of members of 
his race. The hotel contains twenty bedrooms and all modern appointments. 
*I Money is being raised by the colored 
people of Chicago for a wholesale house and 
a department store which wil l give employment to 300 Negroes. 
*I Dr. Clinton Barnett, a colored physician 
of Huntington, W . Va. , owns and manages 
a modern private hospital valued at $25,000. 
<fl Negroes of Washington, D . C , have 
opened the Industrial Savings Bank. 
*I Negroes have opened a bank i n Ocala, Fla . 
MEETINGS . 
THE national Baptist convention and 
jubilee anniversary of the Negroes' 
freedom was held i n Nashville, Tenn., September 17. The exposition connected with 
the convention was held two miles from the 
city i n a forty-acre park worth $300,000 and 
owned by an ex-slave. 
*J The Freedmen's Relief Committee of 
Philadelphia held their fiftieth anniversary 
celebration in Philadelphia September 8-17. 
<I The Sigma P i Phi, a national Greekletter fraternity of colored college graduates, had their grand boule at Washington, 
D. C , September 10-12. 
*J Semi-centennial celebrations of the emancipation of the Negro are being held i n 
Chicago, Richmond, Ind., New Orleans and 
other places. A t all of these celebrations 
the main purpose is to show the progress 
of the Negro i n his fifty years of freedom. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 321 
The sixth annual session of the National 
Association of Colored Nurses was held in 
Philadelphia September 3-5. Two hundred 
and fifty were present. 
^ The National Independent Political 
League met i n Boston during September to 
devise a campaign i n defense of colored 
citizens. 
*I The National Emancipation Commemorative Society, of Washington, D. C , celebrated 
the emancipation anniversary on September 
22. 
*J Although Connecticut has no State appropriation, the colored citizens held a threedays celebration at White City, Savin Rock, 
which began September 25. 
*I Negro mail clerks met i n St. Louis 
October 2-4 and organized a national 
association. 
*I The tenth annual session of the National 
Association of Teachers i n Colored Schools 
met i n Little Rock, Ark. , August 3. 
*][ The Beecher centennial was held in 
Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, October 21. 
Prof. Kell y Mille r and Mrs. A . W . Hunton 
were the chief speakers. 
*J Richmond, Va. , is holding a semi-centennial celebration. 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
A BENEFI T performance was held under 
the auspices of the Richmond Music 
Association and the Richmond Commercial 
Club, both white organisations, for Wesley 
Howard, a young colored violinist, who 
graduated from high school i n Richmond 
this spring. Over $500 was netted. 
<I A large colored company under the direction of G. G. Williams will give Edwi n H . 
Haekley's musical romance, "The Ambassador," i n Philadelphia on November 6. 
<I Miss Effie Grant, a young colored 
vocalist of exceptional talent and the first 
colored graduate from the Yale Musical 
Conservatory, with Miss Helen Minnis, a 
brilliant young pianist, gave a recital at the 
Whit e Congregational Church, of Racine, 
Wis. 
<I Mrs. Hackley conducted a class i n oratorio 
for a month in the Hampton Institute summer school. She will i n the future devote 
her time to giving the masses of Negroes 
vocal training. 
*J Arrangements have been completed for the 
Clef Club to make a tour of several large 
cities after their initial concert at the emancipation exposition. 
PERSONAL . 
PHILADELPHI A was represented at the 
* International Congress on School 
Hygiene, held in Buffalo, by Dr. John P. 
Turner, the only colored inspector of that 
city. Dr. Turner's exhibit, which won the 
first prize, was selected from a long list. 
*I David Francis, a colored scholar, who was 
a sort of recluse, died at Flemington, N . J. , 
recently, leaving an estate which is valued 
at $250,000. 
*J In the September CRISI S we stated incorrectly that Mr. Bourne is chief proofreader 
for the Riverside Press. He has charge of 
the mechanical department of the Atlantic 
Monthly. 
^ J. A . Crawford, of Boston, has been 
appointed bail commissioner. 
*J Alfred Cowan, the well-known Brooklyn 
lawyer, died in Norfolk on September 9. His 
widow is also a lawyer. 
*3 Fred. N . Campbell, a colored boy of 
London, Canada, has invented an airship 
destroyer. He claims that two of them will 
protect a city as large as Toronto. 
*I A colored man, Mr. J. B . Clarke, has been 
appointed to teach Spanish i n the evening 
high schools of New York . He received the 
highest rating i n the competitive examinations for men. 
*J Lavelette Witten, a young colored girl of 
Springfield, Mass., won a prize for essay 
writing, competing with forty others. 
<I A t the fourth annual Amenia (N . Y. ) 
field day on August 16 Miss Mar y Carl, a 
colored girl, took the part of Mother Nature 
i n a play festival representing "The Fou r 
Seasons," in which all the other dancers, 
about seventy in number, were white. Miss 
Carl's part was the most important. 
FOREIGN . 
THE local labor federation of Perth, 
Australia, has protested to the postmaster-general that the employment of a 
colored doctor on the mail steamer "Orontes" 
is a contravention of the white labor condition in the mail contract. 322 TH E CRISIS 
*I I n China, during the past year, sentences 
varying from ten to twenty years have been 
passed on many colored coolies for "rioting" 
and "attempting murders" of European 
estate owners. I n most cases the trouble 
resulted from the failure of the managers to 
pay the coolies promptly and the habit of 
abusing them when they wanted to stop 
work. Retaliation of the laborers resulted 
in the imprisonment. To remedy this a bill 
has been introduced which will enforce 
punctual payment of the coolies. 
The late Sir Alfre d Jones, president of 
the Elde r Dempster Steamship Co., has 
bequeathed $20,000 for the promotion of 
technical education i n British West Africa , 
and considerable sums for the study and 
treatment of tropical diseases, with hospitals 
and laboratories at Sierra Leone and at 
Liverpool. 
*I A t Barbados, the West India island which 
has the best educational system, a bill to 
raise the age limit for attendance in the 
grade schools to 16 years from 14 was 
defeated, largely through the efforts of 
colored men prominent in the legislature 
and government service. A s the result of a 
petition signed by 6,000 persons under the 
leadership of another group of colored men, 
the white majority of the legislature and 
board of education compromised by voting 
to permit the attendance at school of 
children who could show some good reason 
for failing to complete their course between 
the ages of 7 and 14, the present maximum. 
<J Thirty-four native and colored women who 
rebelled against the Pass laws of Bloemfontein, South Africa , have been sentenced 
to two months' hard labor, but still remain 
firm i n their determination not to be treated 
as chattels. 
*I A great outcry comes from the natives of 
South Afric a against the land act which 
has just been passed. This act forbids 
natives to acquire land or an interest in 
land outside of the areas set aside as the 
native reserves. The purpose of the law is 
to segregate natives from Europeans. 
POLITICAL. 
' THE Jefferson Political League, of 
Denver, Col., has sent a strong protest to Congress against the "Ji m Crow" 
marriage law which places Africans and 
those of African descent in the same class 
with criminals, mental defectives, those with 
tubercular diseases, etc. 
<I The citizens of New Yor k Cit y are 
making plans for the organization • of a 
civic league which wil l conduct a campaign 
to secure Negro representation i n the administration of the city's affairs. 
*I Ralp h E . Langston has been appointed 
special agent under agent John W . Sinsel, of 
the New Yor k division of the Internal 
Revenue Department. 
*I Representative Henr y George was referred 
to the Southern Senators by the President 
when he wished to recommend several 
Negroes i n his district for Federal 
appointments. 
TH E GHETTO. 
THE principa l of the New Jersey Avenue 
school, i n Atlanti c City, refused to 
enroll colored children at the beginning of 
this school year. 
^ Henr y Kearney, who was sentenced to 
serve ten years i n Jackson, Miss., for manslaughter, has been pardoned because one 
member of the jury confessed that some of 
the jurors convicted him simply "to keep the 
Negro down." 
*I A white carriage driver i n Cincinnati 
refused to drive a carriage occupied by 
colored people. H e claimed that it was 
against the rules of the drivers' union to 
drive any open carriage containing Negroes. 
«I Springfield, 111., is paying $45,000 to the 
relatives of those slain i n the riot of 1908. 
<I "Ji m Crow" cars still go into Ohio 
contrary to the laws. 
<I J. H . Duckery wished to take a summer 
course at the Y . M . C. A . in Philadelphia, 
but was refused on account of color. The 
young man's father threatened to publish 
the actions of the Y . M . C. A . and demand 
that the name Christian be taken from the 
organization. Duckery was then admitted. 
*I Al l of the colored girls working i n Butle r 
Brothers' wholesale house i n Dallas, Tex., 
except one, left because they were not 
allowed to use the passenger elevator. 
*I Sixty colored school children marched to 
the Roslyn, L . I., public school demanding 
entrance and the abolishment of the separate 
school provided for them. They were 
threatened with arrest i f they did not leave. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 323 
<I Andrew Sims, a Negro, of Newark, N . J. , 
has brought suit against Isaac Boyland, 
alleging that he was refused admittance to a 
motion-picture theatre owned by Boyland. 
Negro soldiers in the Philippines are said 
to be compelled to labor with pick and shovel 
i n mud and water, even on Sundays, while the 
white soldiers are exempt from this labor. 
^ "When a colored real-estate dealer of 
Los Angeles called at the property assessor's 
office recently he found no names of Negro 
owners or occupants i n the books, but i n 
each case simply "occupied by niggers." 
*I Georgia Curry, a colored woman, who was 
asked some time ago to vacate her seat i n 
Fox's Theatre in Brooklyn, N . Y. , won a 
suit against the company for $150. 
<J A colored mail clerk between Norfolk and 
Raleigh, N . C , had as a subordinate a white 
man who had passed a less creditable examination than the Negro. The matter was 
complained of and now the positions of the 
white and colored man have been reversed. 
*I Eight of twelve colored convicts confined 
i n a dark cell were suffocated at Harlem 
State farm, Tex. There were four one-inch 
ventilation holes i n the cell over which the 
survivors held their faces. The ages of the 
victims ranged from 17 to 19 years. Two 
guards and one sergeant, who were at first 
placed under appearance bonds on charge of 
murder, have been permanently released from 
the charge. 
*I Commander George R. Downs refused to 
allow discrimination against the Negro at the 
army and navy union at Philadelphia. 
*J Students who formerly attended Southern 
University in New Orleans have no place to 
go now, as the Negro schools do not provide 
for any course above the sixth grade. The 
school board had planned to establish a 
Negro industrial and high school in the 
Southern University building, but because of 
a strong protest from the property owners 
against having a Negro school in that 
vicinity the board has abandoned this idea. 
<$ A house recently bought and occupied by 
Owens Fuller, a Baltimore Negro, was bombarded by a crowd of white men and boys 
who shattered window panes and battered 
the woodwork. The police, although the 
stationhouse was only two blocks away, did 
not come upon the scene of the mob until 
twelve hours after it happened. Three other 
houses owned by colored people in Baltimore 
were attacked at about the same time. 
€ The Camberwell poor-law guardians of 
London, England, refused to appoint a 
colored physician whose qualifications were 
above those of the other candidates, on the 
ground (hat the fastidious poor would refuse 
to be attended by a Negro. 
<I Postmaster B . H . Jones, of the Atlanta, 
Ga., postoffice, began his administration by 
placing the white employees on the eastern 
and most desirable side of the office and the 
colored employees on the western side. 
*I A white hotel keeper was compelled by 
the white citizens to leave Wynne, Ark. , 
because he had his white waitresses serve 
supper to a large number of Negroes en 
route to the national Baptist convention. 
*II Maxine Elliot, in a cablegram to the 
New Yor k Age, denied the report that she 
had refused to be borne from the stage by 
two colored men in the play in which she 
is appearing in London. 
<I A meeting was held by white people 
living in Sunbrook Park, Baltimore, to protest against the moving of Morgan College 
for Negroes to that vicinity. A s a result 
Judge Duncan, of the Baltimore circuit 
court, has granted an injunction restraining 
Morgan College from taking any action that 
would result in the settlement in this vicinity 
of any Negroes or persons of Negro descent, 
"except in the capacity of servants." 
«I William H . Webster, white, and Nellie 
Rolls, colored, were arrested in Baltimore 
on their return from Washington, D. C , 
where they had been married, charged with 
violating the miscegenation laws of 
Virginia . 
<I George Howe, a colored resident of 95 
Harfor d Avenue, Baltimore, i n the attempt 
to protect his home, fired into the mob attacking the house and injured four men. 
He was arrested while the mob threatened to 
lynch him and was struck by several members of the mob. When tried he was given 
a sentence of two months each for the first 
three offenses, but through the efforts of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People these decisions were 
appealed and he is now under $500 bail 
awaiting a jury trial for the fourth case. 
None of his white assailants i n the mob 
were arrested. 324 TH E CRISIS 
Q Dr. H . E . Lee, of Houston, Tex., was 
informed by the New Yor k Post Graduate 
Hospita l that he would be admitted to their 
clinics. When he disclosed the fact that he 
was colored the offer was withdrawn. 
CRIME. 
HENR Y CROSBY , a Negro, was lynched 
at Louisville, Miss., because he 
frightened a white woman by his "strange 
actions." The "strange actions" consisted in 
asking the woman i f her husband was at 
home. 
q One Negro was killed and another 
injured by a posse i n Cairo, Ill., after being 
tracked by bloodhounds. The killin g was the 
result of a dispute between the Negroes and 
a merchant in the town. 
*I Mr . Ralston, a well-known citizen of 
Wichita, Kan. , firing into a cornfield to 
frighten some white boys who were i n his 
watermelon patch, shot one of the boys who 
had hidden in the cornfield. B y eluding the 
mob, which immediately formed, he reached 
the Ardmore prison safely, but later, while 
being taken to Paul's Valley for trial, he was 
taken from the officers and lynched. 
*I William Davis was lynched on the charge 
of killing two white men and wounding a 
third. 
1 Joseph Richardson, a Negro charged with 
attacking a white boy or girl (which, does 
not seem to be clear), was taken from a jail 
in Litchfield, Ky. , by a posse and lynched. 
q Walter Brownloe, accused of attacking a 
white woman, was taken from the prison i n 
Hinchcliffe, Miss., and lynched. 
*I In an altercation between a white man, 
McGougar, and Thomas Anderson, a Negro, 
both were killed and the body of the Negro 
was smeared with oil and burned. The white 
man was buried with elaborate ceremony. 
*I William Fair, who barely escaped lynching on the charge of a crime against a white 
woman, has been found not guilty. 
q A Negro who enlisted in the Mississippi 
National Guard without mentioning his race 
barely escaped lynching when it was discovered that he was colored. 
q Louis White, a colored overseer of a farm 
i n Germantown, Tenn., and another Negro 
were fired upon by two white boys as they 
were driving along near the farm. White 
was killed and his companion fatally 
wounded. The murderers have not been 
found. 
q Moses Holman, on his way to Cincinnati, 
was passing through a white coach to get 
to the coach for colored people when some 
dispute arose between the Negro and several 
white men. Holma n was killed by a shot 
from one man and a stab from another. 
q I n a recent race riot i n Harrison , Miss., 
ten were killed and thirty wounded. Two 
Negroes who were accused of beginning the 
riot by shooting through the town were 
lynched and the 2,000 colored inhabitants o f 
Harrison were marched past their coffins 
and compelled to view the mutilated remains. Now the mother of these two Negroes, 
accused of being the chief plotter, is i n jail 
and an organized mob lies i n wait for her. 
The majority of those killed were Negroes. 
*I George Deese, a Montgomery constable, 
was freed from the charge of killin g 
Benjamin Josephs, a Negro. The defense 
was that the Negro was reaching for his 
revolver when Deese fired. 
q Preston Jones, a Negro accused of killin g 
Samuel Hickey, a white patrolman, has been 
sentenced to hang in Nashville, Tenn. 
q Charles Guth, who killed his colored 
chauffeur in a dispute which arose because 
Guth didn't want his milk delivered at the 
same time as his chauffeur's, has been freed 
from the charge. 
q Albert Sorgee, the superintendent of the 
Aike n County chain gang, has been arrested 
on the charge of murdering a Negro by 
whipping. 
q Julius Dorsey, a 10-year-old colored boy 
who was sent to the Mississippi penitentiary, 
has been pardoned by Governor Brewer, who 
considers him too young to be serving the 
State. 
q G. S. Nanch, a white man of Brockinghamr 
N . C , who murdered his wife and had been 
pronounced insane, was threatened with 
lynching. The sheriff got advance information, however, and skilfully "evaded the 
angry mob." 
q A mob of striking miners assaulted three 
colored non-union men when they left the 
train at Trinidad, Col. The hack driver, who 
was at the station with a justice of the 
peace in the hack, was compelled to drive 
away, so the fate of the three Negroes is 
not known. John Stone was the only one 
of the three whose name was known. A FLORIST . 
PEYTON M . DeWITT , of Bridgewater, 
* Pa., is rated by Bradstreet at $40,000. 
Mr . DeWitt is one of the most successful 
horticulturalists i n the country and has 
worked up i n his trade from gardener's 
assistant to the proprietor of a large business 
which has put several new varieties of 
flowers on the market. H e was born i n 
Georgia just before the outbreak of the Civi l 
War, and came with his mother and her 
three other children to Bristol, Pa . A t the 
age of 8 he was a mule driver on the 
canal and then became a gardener. 
I n the summer of 1880 came the first 
undertaking—a partnership with his brother 
in a small house, 12x50, at Bristol. Afte r 
PEYTO N M . DeWITT. 
DR. GEORG E W. BUCKNER. 
seven years of successful effort he became the 
sole proprietor of a large establishment at 
Torresdale. Fo r the past fifteen years the 
plant, has been beautifully located at Bridgewater upon a tract of thirty acres. The 
plant comprises, roughly, eight greenhouses, 
each having a depth of 150 feet and a 
breadth of twenty feet, covered by 20,000 
feet of glass; a central hot-water plant under 
pressure, fed by two boilers of twenty-five 
and forty horse power, respectively; a water 
tank of 15,000 gallons capacity and other 
necessary equipment. 
A regular force of six men is employed, 
including a very capable foreman, who has 
been i n Mr . DeWitt's service for eighteen 
years. 
MEN OF THE MONTH 326 TH E CRISIS 
ME . DeWITT' S CONSERVATORIES . 
During the busy season, from October to 
June, from 500 to 1,000 carnations and 
chrysanthemums are shipped daily to two 
leading wholesale 
houses in Philadelphia. Whil e other 
varieties of flowers 
are cultivated, carnations and chrysanthemums are Mr. 
DeWitt's specialty. 
A few years ago he 
succeeded in marketing a new variety—a 
dark pink carna -
tion—known as the 
Pennsylvania, but 
called by many the 
DeWitt. A t present 
he has other good 
varieties on trial, a 
white one being 
especially promising. 
M 
TH E MINISTE R T O 
LIBERIA . 
PRESIDEN T 
WILSO N ha s 
nominated and the 
Senate has confirmed W. W. SANDERS . 
George W . Buckner, of Evansville, Ind., as 
United States Minister to Liberia . Dr. 
Buckner was born in Greens County, Ky. , 
and was educated i n 
the public schools of 
Indianapolis an d 
Terre Haute. H e 
took his medica l 
course at the Eclectic 
Medical College of 
Indianapolis, where 
he was graduated i n 
1890. H e is a practising physician i n 
Evansville and has a 
wif e an d fou r 
children. 
A STAT E 
LIBRARIAN . 
MR. WILLIA M 
WALTE R 
SANDER S has just 
been appointed State 
librarian of Wes t 
Virginia . Mr . 
Sanders was born 
Henr y County, Va. , 
October 16, 1873. 
He was educated in ME N O F TH E MONT H 327 
MR . BLODGETT AN D HIS HOME . 
the district schools and the Presbyterian 
School of Martinsville and at Lincoln 
University, where he graduated from the 
college department i n 1897 and the theological department i n 1900. Fo r ten years 
he was the pastor of the Hope Presbyterian 
Church, Chambersburg, Pa . Thence he went 
to West Virgini a as teacher in the public 
schools. gg 
A CONTRACTOR . 
MR. L . M . BLODGETT , one of the lead-
•*• ing contractors of Los Angeles, Cal., 
was born in Summerville, S. C , thirty-five 
years ago. His family belonged in Augusta 
and returned there when he was 10 years of 
age. He attended the local schools and 
learned his trade of mason and finally decided 
to settle in California. He says: 
"On coming to California I found that I 
was still a colored man and for which fact the 
people here thought that I should be debarred 
from making a living at my trade as a 
journeyman. But there was plenty of work 
and I knew how to do it right. So I began 
taking small contracts and increasing the 
size as my capital and working force 
increased. This color business, which seemed 
to be a bar, turned to be advertisement for us. 
" I have employed more than 1,512 men 
during the last year. The total amount 
actually contracted for during the year was 
$107,730.26. I employed both skilled and 
unskilled labor of all races and denominations. I own my own teams, concrete mixer, 
hoists and such machinery as is required in 
the erection of a building." 
OFFICERS O F TH E LA W 
IN one year fifty murders done, 
Wit h flashing knife and banging gun— 
Yo u should worry! 
Some twenty girls found in fresh blood; 
Near them are tracks, inch deep in mud— 
Yo u should worry! 
The clumsy slayer's still at large; 
No clue, as yet, much less a charge— 
Yo u should worry! 
One death is London's sole disgrace, 
While fifty shame Atlanta's face— 
Yo u should worry ! 
Fo r spooning at the capitol 
Now shakes your brave, chivalric— 
Wha t a crime! 
Courageously you seize the pair 
Who make love i n the open air— 
What a crime! 
Now secretly 'twould be all right; 
But out there i n the starlit night— 
Wha t a crime! 
A kiss! Oh, help ! Some hugging, too— 
Of course, these things YO U never do! 
What a crime! 
Wh o thinks you'd face a killer's gun, 
That's seen you from a mad dog run? 
But drag a maid's name to disgrace 
Fo r an innocent kiss in a public place— 
Ah ! Wha t a valiant thing to do, 
Since horsewhips have their dangers, too. 
—Atlant a Constitution. SOM E 
SOUTHER N 
LOGIC. 
Many people find it difficult to ' 
follow the logic of white 
Southerner s i n regard to 
Negroes. Certainly the three 
extracts from Southern papers which follow will not lessen their difficulties. The 
South Carolina lynchings have stirred the 
Columbia State to strong editorial; and one 
white correspondent says: 
" I have lately reached a point to which 
years of consideration of this matter of public murder of Negroes have been bringing 
me; I assume as a matter of fact that the 
lynched Negro is not only a murdered man, 
but an innocent murdered man, and I am 
pretty sure I am not alone i n this state of 
mind. Wh y should I be? A t the present 
time a Negro can be murdered by any body 
of white men i n South Carolina with impunity, if only a woman, an anonymous 
woman, bring an indefinite accusation 
against him. You r readers must have noticed 
that neither the husband's nor the father's 
name was given in the papers i n connection 
with this supposed assault in Anderson. 
Certainly there are most obvious reasons for 
not publishing names, but very little thought 
is needed to see the horrible danger to the 
community if vague accusations by anonymous women are sufficient to justify a man 
hunt, as the sport of Negro murder is well 
called. Soon an unpopular white man may 
be considered a fit quarry for that sort of 
chase—a man, let us say, whose views on the 
subject of 'Negro domination' do not agree 
exactly with those of his neighbors. 
"Agai n I want to make myself clear. 
Though villainous men can easily, and no 
doubt have more than once before this in ­
vented such anonymous charges and so used 
some woman as a pretext for a lynching, I 
have no doubt almost all such cases come 
about quite innocently. A sudden attack of 
panic arising from general nervousness and 
overstimulation of the imagination by accounts of other 'attacks,' 'man hunts,' lynch -
ings and similar occurrences, and a woman 
can i n a moment cause a murder, when the 
other conditions are ripe. Moreover, every 
doctor knows, and every other man should 
know, that women are peculiarly subject to 
conditions of delusion on just this point. 
The constant talk of danger from Negroes 
makes lonely communities often into hotbeds 
for this delusion. Then some poor woman 
loses her self-command i n a moment of 
fright, and the mischief is done. 
"Three years ago about this time there was 
talk of lynching a Negro who had just been 
condemned and was that moment to be 
brought out from the Richland county courthouse here i n Columbia. I mixed with the 
crowd and talked to several of those 'protectors of Southern womanhood.' Those I 
saw were all drinking. Muc h whiskey was in 
circulation through the crowd. 
"L . P . CHAMBERLAYNE. 
"Columbia, September 22." 
A s illustrating the kin d of hysteria to 
which Mr . Chamberlayne refers, we cannot 
resist publishing the complaint of editor 
Birdsall as given i n the Yazoo Cit y (Miss.) 
Sentinel. A s a frank exposition of the views 
of a certain type of Southern mind we commend this gem to our readers: 
"There occurred last week an incident in 
which the editor of this paper was concerned, upon which we want to make some 
comment, not to air a personal grievance, 
but to consider an action which sets a precedent that wil l act as a solvent i n destroying 
that wall of protection against Negro domination which was built by those who strove 
forty years ago to assert and maintain white 
supremacy. 
" A yellow nigger by the name of Wil l 
Stewart came to the residence of the editor 
Opinion OPINION 329 
in the morning to sell some chickens. It 
was so early that none of the family was 
completely dressed, and the cook took the 
chickens upstairs for inspection. The cook, 
a reliable servant that had been with the 
family for four years, afterward stated that 
when she took the chickens upstairs she saw 
the usual morning milk sitting on the walk 
near Stewart; and that she had a short time 
previously seen the milkboy leave it there. 
Less than three minutes after she saw the 
milk sitting near Stewart, when she returned to pay him for the chickens, the milk 
was gone. 
"The evidence that he had stolen it was 
conclusive. The editor had him arrested, not 
because of the value of the milk, which was 
a trifle, but as a lesson against petty pilfering. The mulatto tried to employ Mr. 
Jas. G. Holmes, of the firm of Holmes & 
Holmes, to defend him, but Mr. Holmes declined to take the case. The mulatto then 
went to Mr. W . A . Henry, Jr., who accepted 
the case for a fee of $10, we understand. 
The fee was secured by Mr. J. W . Gregory, 
according to his subsequent admission to the 
editor. 
"Durin g the progress of the trial the 
Negro uttered an infamous and most outrageous slander as to the editor's wife, imputing to her language that no lady would 
use, and which no man, with a spark of 
manhood, would have heard without resentment. The insult was promptly and vigorously resented by violence on the part of 
the editor with the only weapons at hand— 
those provided by nature. The nigger lost 
no time in getting away, but was subsequently brought back by two officers. 
''The mulatto's attorney apologized for the 
coon's language, which he said he knew was 
untrue, but proceeded to make a very eloquent plea for his acquittal, in face of the 
flagrant insult to a lady who had been his 
loyal and steadfast friend from boyhood. 
"The Negro was acquitted and discharged, 
i n face of the very strongest circumstantial 
evidence, by the following jury : Wil l 
Rosenthall, W . R. Jones, Simon Stubblefield, 
Lee Cummins, W . H . Hame l and B. E . 
Bridges. In justice to Mr . Bridges, it should 
be stated that he said to the editor after the 
trial that he was thoroughly convinced of 
the nigger's guilt, and that he only consented to the verdict, after considerable protest, because he was sick, and did not want 
to be detained all night on a hung jury. 
"Feeling incensed and outraged to the 
highest degree by the foul and infamous 
slander, we sought the Negro that night and 
the next morning with the fixed purpose of 
inflicting a just punishment denied by the 
court (1). The Negro appealed to Mr. 
Gregory for protection and advice. Instead 
of following a custom universal throughout 
the South, he told him "he didn't know what 
was to be done except to put the white man 
under a peace bond! Just think of it, ye 
men of Yazoo, whose proud boast has been 
that the brave men of this county were the 
first i n the State to overthrow nigger rule 
and re-establish a white man's government 
here—think of a white man advising a nigger 
to put a white man under a peace bond for 
wanting to punish a nigger for resenting an 
insult to a white woman. 
"This nigger has a reputation of being an 
insolent, drunken, quarrelsome coon, who has 
been mixed up in a number of cutting 
scrapes with other Negroes, and we are told 
has been laid off by his employer, Mr. 
Gregory, more than once for drunkenness. 
"Mr . Gregory went to the mayor, where 
the nigger also appeared. A n affidavit was 
made against the editor by direction of 
Mayor Campbell, and was served by his 
officers. We declined to make the bond until 
we had time to consult an attorney, who was 
absent from the city at the time. We made 
vigorous protest to Mayor Campbell, citing 
him to the fact that a search of the records 
of every court in every city i n every State 
in the South would not reveal a similar case 
—law or no law—where a white man was 
required to give a bond to keep the peace 
against a nigger who had offered an insult 
to a white woman. But Mayor Campbell, 
with a tardily awakened sense of his duty, 
said he had a duty to perform, and under 
his oath he must perform it! Wit h a great 
show of authority he set the machinery of 
his office in motion and almost the entire 
police force was out after a white man to 
put him under a peace bond that the nigger 
might be protected. The editor went to 
consult a friend for a half hour as to the 
matter, and then at his usual hour leisurely 
wended his way home, over the route always 
traveled. 
"Finall y we appeared before Police Justice 
R. R. Norquist, who had a bond prepared 
in the sum of $5,000! A bank robber, a 
safe blower, or desperate highwayman, 
would have been treated with more con-330 TH E CRISIS 
sideration. But the nigger must be protected—regardless of the insult to the white 
woman. Upo n request of our attorney, 
however, the bond was finally reduced by the 
justice to $1,000. 
"Now, here is a white man who is forbidden by white officials to administer 
punishment to a wretched, drunken, insolent yellow coon for an insult offered to his 
wife i n a court presided over by a white 
man. We have a white man, J. W . Gregory, 
who aids and abets this insolent nigger i n 
his insolence, defending him from the consequences of it. Mr . Gregory, we are told, 
will be a candidate for sheriff. Wil l the 
white voters of Yazoo County put a mam 
like that i n the highest executive office in 
the county—a man who would protect a 
yellow nigger who publicly slanders and in ­
sults a white woman who has always lived 
her life on the highest level; a woman of 
intellect, character and firmness, which others 
would do well to emulate? 
"An d then the mayor, forsooth, saying 
that he must do his duty! A man whose 
administration has been notoriously feeble 
and inefficient, who. when numberless appeals have been made to him to enforce the 
sanitary and other laws, has evaded action. 
An d yet, 'for solemn duty's sake,' he must 
protect a yellow nigger in his assault on the 
respectability of a pure white woman. We 
do not say 'lady,' for it seems the coons are 
the only 'ladies' nowadays. 
"Not long ago an Assyrian, a friendless 
member of an alien race, made complaint of 
assault by a white man, and asked for a 
peace bond as protection. The case was 
literally laughed out of court as a joke. 
"Some time last year a man claiming to 
represent the Salvation Arm y made improper advances to a highly respected young 
lady of this city. No punishment, but to 
prevent the rightful vengeance of the outraged father the offender was advised by the 
officials to leave town. 
"Not long ago Ad a Martin, who has 
operated a blind tiger i n this city i n notorious violation of the law for the last 
twenty years, was convicted, and afterward 
released on a bond of $100, subsequently 
jumping her bond, and yet the police judge, 
in his wisdom and mature judgment, proposed putting the editor of this paper, who 
had committed no crime, and who is certainly 
of respectable standing i n this community, 
under a bond of $5,000! 
"Now let us see what wil l be the effect of 
this course: The law wil l not punish verbal 
assaults on white women by Negroes, and yet 
it prohibits personal punishment. A nigger 
wil l do anything i f he thinks he has a white 
man behind him. I n this case the nigger 
knew that Stewart was protected by Mr . 
Gregory, who, by the way, is an alderman, 
and by the whole city administration. This 
will be construed by them as license to offer 
other insults, and no woman i n the future 
wil l be safe against them. The niggers, 
under the circumstances, wil l be justified i n 
believing that they can do anything with 
impunity. W e must make them feel that 
they must respect white men and white 
women, whether they wil l or not. I n default 
of the law, individual wil l must and shall 
control. 
"Fo r many years the white people of the 
South have asserted and maintained moral, 
social and political supremacy. Mora l and 
intellectual superiority has been all that 
has sustained such supremacy. Such cases 
as the one under discussion wil l soon destroy 
the Negro's belief i n the superiority—hence 
the supremacy—of the white man. 
"The lesson taught by the official act of the 
mayor, the alderman and the police justice 
will not be lost on the ignorant black race. 
Its fruit wil l ripen i n the blood of white 
men, i n nameless crimes on innocent white 
women, and in other outrages on the white 
race—and the responsibility wil l rest—not 
upon the ignorant race—but upon the heads 
of the shortsighted white officials who, under 
the flimsy cry of a 'duty to perform,' uphold a nigger against a white man for 
taking a course that every self-respecting 
white man should feel was the only course 
left for any white man to take under the 
circumstances." 
W e confess to a sneaking sympathy with 
the persecuted editor, and we fear that there 
will be a political upheaval i n Yazoo Cit y 
at the next election. 
The Macon Telegraph comes forward with 
a suggestion that the abatement of lynching 
has at least the charm of novelty. We- give 
it in the correspondent's words: 
"The grand juries, petit juries and witnesses are alike unwilling to sacrifice a large 
number of the members of their best families to avenge the unlawful killin g of one 
sorry Negro. I f the laws were so framed 
that the penalty for participating i n a 
lynching should be a misdemeanor, I don't OPINION 331 
believe that any thinking person will doubt 
for a moment that the evidence to convict 
would be forthcoming in nearly every case 
of lynching, and that grand juries would 
willingly and gladly probe this class of cases 
with a view to breaking up the- offense, and 
that petit juries would willingly do their 
part toward breaking up the offense by convicting where the evidence authorized it. 
Furthermore, it is almost certain that where 
the people believe that they will be brought 
to the bars of justice and punished for committing this violation of the law, they will 
go much slower i n organizing a mob for 
lynching a Negro, whereas, under the 
present conditions they feel practically assured from the beginning that there is 
absolutely no danger of any punishment 
whatever i n the courts. 
''Under our present law every lynching 
constitutes what is called a 'riot,' which is a 
misdemeanor. I f our laws should be so 
made that a lynching constituted a riot only, 
and not the graver offense of murder, it is 
almost certain that lynchings would be 
greatly reduced, i f not entirely broken up. 
Though such an act by our lawmaking body 
might subject them to temporary criticism on 
the part of Northern writers and speakers, 
yet it is not probable that such criticism 
would be much more severe than it is now. 
However, any plan which wil l tend to break 
up the lynchings i n Georgia would be welcome i n the long run by all good people who 
are interested i n maintaining the supremacy 
of the law and the fair name of Georgia as 
well as of the South. W . H . GrjRR. 
"Dawson, August 16." 
The Charlotte (N. C.) Observer speaks 
out with regard to the lynching there i n no 
uncertain way: 
"Yesterday morning found Charlotte 
humiliated as never before by an occurrence 
unparalleled i n its history, but at least it 
has the consolation that as a community it 
did not perpetrate and utterly abhors the 
crime. The small mob which sneaked, just 
before daylight, to the door of an institution devoted to the work of ministering 
religion among colored people was representative of no element except the riffraff 
that habitually hangs around cafes and the 
red-light district at late hours of the night. 
This statement must be qualified i n one way. 
That mob represented a sentiment well 
known by it to exist also among some members of the police, the man wounded by the 
victim of the mob being a member of the 
police force. We do not at present undertake to say whether at least morally positive assurances of police non-interference had 
been received. It is certain that the police 
headquarters (as also the sheriff and the 
night newspaper reporters) were circumstantially informed from several quarters of 
a lynching afoot; and that the newspaper 
men, believing, later guided themselves by 
'the story to the spot almost on the moment, 
while the officers could not be gotten in ­
terested enough. * * * 
"I n the light of these facts we can but 
say that the county was very poorly served 
by those upon whom the immediate responsibility for averring threatened lawlessness 
and murder fell. It need not fear that the 
machinery of the courts for punishing 
murder will fail without good efforts made. 
There could not be a fitter judge than Judge 
T. J. Shaw, solemnly and whole-heartedly to 
direct investigation into this abominable outrage—committed while his court was in 
session here. Solicitor Wilson has turned 
over all his regular docket to former 
Solicitor Heriot Clarkson that he might 
direct his entire energies to punishing the 
thirty-five murderers, who, as Judge Shaw 
reminded the grand jury, are at large today. No court business that could possibly 
interfere with this solemn duty will be done. 
The shamed and outraged sentiment of the 
public is behind the representatives of the 
civilization which the mob violated, most 
earnestly hoping that initial difficulties and 
perjured alibis will not prevent their success. 
Mayo r Bland, acting with promptness and 
vigor, has offered $1,000 reward for the 
arrest and conviction of each and every 
murderer; and the State and county authorities will offer more. The only lynching 
Mecklenburg County has ever known in all 
its long and honorable history! The first 
lynching to disgrace the State of North 
Carolina in years. Justice cries to Heaven 
for the vindication of the honor of city, 
county and State." 
™.t^„. t There can be no doubt but 
r V*UVA\ALI . . 
SEGREGATION. THAT THE AGITATION started by 
the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People against 
the unjust and undemocratic segregation of 
Federal employees in Washington has started 
an agitation of deep significance. 
FEDERA L 
SEGREGATION. 332 TH E CRISIS 
Fro m Tacoma, Wash., comes this editorial 
i n the News: 
"The protest to President Woodrow 
Wilson against the segregation of Negro 
clerks i n the Federal offices in Washington, 
with iron bars, screens and closed doors, is 
justified by the laws of the land and the 
dictates of freedom and fairness. It is but 
a part of the 'Jim Crow' movement which, 
while the South may understand, the North 
cannot, nor can the North sympathize wit h 
it. The Southern democracy is i n the saddle 
and the colored man as an officeholder is not 
a desirable political aspect with the dominant party. The South's attitude toward 
the colored man is not that of hostility, 
but of a kind of paternal guardianship mixed 
sharply with the belief that the white is of 
much superior clay. There won't be much 
difference i n the last big wash. 
"Bu t the feeling exists and eradication is 
a question of years and education—education 
of both whites and blacks. 
"The other day the dominant party rejected the nomination of a colored man for 
an important post and soon afterward endorsed an Indian for the same post with 
a rather unexpected unanimity and 
enthusiasm. 
"We shall have the Negro with us for 
many a year, and some of those who are 
studying the race problem have expressed 
the belief that the attitude of the white, and 
not a racial blemish, is a chief hindrance to 
the Negro's progress. But he is progressing. 
No race yet has shown such an adaptability 
for, such a facility to, civilization. He is 
getting rich, learned and cultivated. He is 
running all kinds of profitable business enterprises and he is building schools, churches 
and libraries with a persistence that predicts 
great things for him i n the years to come. 
"Instead of grilled windows and barred 
doors to keep him 'in his place,' the 
politicians will find that it will be of less 
political loss to discharge him. The kind of 
segregation alleged will not be objected to by 
the Negro alone. There are thousands of 
white men and women who wil l add their 
voices." 
The Public, of Chicago, sees the deeper 
significance of the segregation movement 
in an article on segregation and democracy: 
" A violation of civil-service reform 
principles, less excusable than any committed by spoilsmen, is the recent order of 
the Federal Bureau of Printing and Engraving segregating colored employees. The 
order reserves certain duties for colored 
workmen only and other duties for whites 
exclusively. A protest has been sent to 
President Wilso n by the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People; but it should not be left to that 
organization to protest alone. The issue in ­
volved is not merely one of respecting the 
feelings of colored persons. The bugaboo 
of 'social equality' does not enter into the 
matter at all. The first thing to bear i n mind 
is that the Bureau of Printin g and Engrav ­
ing does not exist for the purpose of formulating rules of social etiquette. It exists to 
perform certain work for the government. 
I n the performance of that work it is the 
duty of those i n charge to put the most 
competent employees i n the places where 
they can perform the best service. This 
cannot be done i f placing of employees is 
made to depend on other qualifications than 
personal fitness. Discrimination against an 
employee for no better reason than his 
choice of ancestors is as bad as favoritism. 
I n principle and i n effect this segregation 
order is the same as nepotism. It is a far 
greater injustice to the government than it 
is to its Negro employees. I f civil-service 
reform organizations and civil-service reformers shut their eyes to this violation of 
civil-service reform principles, then they 
cannot consistently object to a return of the 
old spoils system. Fea r of offending antiNegro prejudice is no excuse for such 
neglect. 
"O f course there are better reasons for 
objecting to this segregation order than violation of civil-service reform principles. The 
order is undemocratic. Individuals have a 
perfect right, for any reason or for no 
reason, to refuse to associate with other 
individuals. But they have no right to force 
third parties to conform to their likes or dislikes. This order places the government of 
the United States i n the position of endorsing a prejudice which some individuals feel 
toward a certain class of citizens. The 
government has no right to recognize social 
distinctions among citizens. Least of all 
has the government of the United States a 
right to recognize an aristocracy of birth. 
The order should be rescinded and the official 
or officials responsible therefor given a muchneeded lesson i n sound democracy and true 
Americanism. 
"Bu t there is a lesson i n this incident that OPINION 333 
should not be lost either on the Negroes or on 
the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, an organization composed 
largely of whites. The injustice done by this 
segregation order is slight compared with 
other wrong's upon which most Negroes and 
their friends look indifferently or even approvingly. The infliction of an indignity or 
insult on a person should not be as galling 
as the fact that conditions compel submission to the affront lest an opportunity be 
lost to earn a living. Were one-half the 
indignation vented in fruitless protests 
against the affront directed toward the conditions which compel submission it could be 
put to a far more effective use. Legalized 
privilege creates these conditions and forces 
white as well as Negro laborers to submit to 
many things against which their manhood 
rebels. It is against privilege that their 
protests should be leveled. Yet many a 
colored man whom a thoughtless use of the 
epithet 'nigger' will inflame to madness will 
east his vote to uphold privilege. So wil l 
many a white worker groaning under the 
burdens that privilege inflicts. It is useless 
to endeavor to escape injustice while upholding the cause of it. " 
The New Yor k Evening Post comments 
on a "true note of the new South," which 
"comes to us in an editorial in the Lexington 
(Ky.) Herald i n regard to the segregation of 
the colored employees of the government at 
Washington. 'Knowing, ' it says, 'that many 
will disagree with our views, and condemn 
bitterly our expression thereof,' it none the 
less protests against this policy of the 
national government, 'the effect of which, 
transmitted to lower channels, may be most 
disastrous. No greater calamity could befall 
this nation,' it insists, 'than to have included 
in its inhabitants millions of people of any 
race in whose face the door of hope is shut, 
who are not permitted to aspire to free and 
independent citizenship, and to strive for 
equal political, financial and industrial reward that brawn or intellect brings to those 
of any race.' These are brave words indeed, 
in shining contrast with the utterances of 
so many Southern senators who claim to 
represent their section, and who certainly do 
represent the reactionaries and the ignorant. 
The Lexington Herald, edited by Desha 
Breckinridge, bears witness to that rising 
tide of protest and dissatisfaction with existing race relations which found a notable expression, in a purely scientific way, at the 
recent meeting of the Southern Sociological 
Congress. The lime must come when it is a 
commonplace to say, as does the Herald, 
that 'no greater misfortune has come to the 
South in our judgment than the enactment 
of those laws the purpose of which is to prevent all Negroes from voting.' What a pity 
it is that the Wilson administration must 
bear the odium of this segregation policy." 
The Congregationalist and Christian 
World repeats the facts in an editorial entitled "Turning the Negro Back" : 
"Durin g the last few months orders have 
been issued in the Treasury and Post Office 
Departments which require white and colored 
employees to use separate toilet rooms, to 
be separated in lunchrooms, and most of the 
colored clerks in the Post Office Department 
have been gathered from the various bureaus 
and assembled in the Dead Letter Office, in a 
room where they are separated from white 
clerks by a row of lockers placed across the 
middle of the room. One important colored 
clerk, whose location cannot be changed conveniently, has been screened off, so as to conceal him from the public view and from his 
fellow workers. Two or three others have 
been assigned to messenger service, although 
having appointments as clerks. Watchmen 
are stationed at the doors of the toilet rooms 
to see that colored clerks use the special ones 
assigned to them on the eighth floor of the 
Post Office Department building. In addition 
to the humiliation involved i n segregation, 
thousands of dollars are being lost in time 
spent i n going to the eighth floor from other 
floors of a great building occupying a city 
square, although toilet rooms heretofore 
used are near to all. In the Treasury 
Department the toilet rooms assigned to 
colored clerks are in a corner of the basement, and i n this great building similar loss 
of time occurs. 
"Soon after the issuance of these orders in 
the Treasury Department segregation signs 
were posted. Following a protest the signs 
were taken down, but verbal warnings affirm 
that the order is in force. Segregation i n 
work has been begun in the Bureau of Printing and Engraving. Colored clerks who have 
been reluctant to submit have been admonished sharply, and a state of alarm has 
spread among the colored employees of all 
executive departments. The fear that they 
may lose their positions has led some of those 
segregated to seek favor from the administration by declaring that they are pleased with 334 TH E CRISIS 
the new plan. They dare not protest, but 
privately they declare their indignation and 
disapproval. Southern opposition has deprived colored men of some of the few high 
appointive positions that have been occupied 
for many years by members of their race. 
The post of Register of the Treasury and that 
of minister to the 'black republic' of Hayt i 
are the most noteworthy instances. 
"Meantime Senators Vardaman, Tillman, 
Hoke Smith and other Southern members of 
Congress declare their purpose to force race 
segregation throughout all branches of the 
Federal government. Senator Vardaman 
proposes to introduce a series of bills i n 
December, the ultimate-effect of which would 
be to expel Negroes from all government 
positions. He says the holding of office is 
the symbol of sovereignty, and Negroes 
must not exercise sovereignty; and then he 
quotes Alexander Stephens' declaration that 
slavery was the natural and normal position 
of the Negro. Two bills have been introduced i n Congress to require separate street 
cars for white and colored people i n the 
District of Columbia. Injustice once started 
is bound to spread apace. 
"Si x months ago a new administration 
came into power at Washington. It came 
with promise of a 'New Freedom' to all our 
people, avowing the spirit of Christian 
democracy. It came under obligation to 
many colored voters, who threw aside past 
political allegiance, worked for and voted 
for the election of a ticket the head of which 
gave this assurance to the colored people: 
'Should I become President of the United 
States they may count on me for absolute 
fair dealing and for everything by which I 
could assist in advancing the interests of 
their race in the United States.' " 
It concludes with these ringing words: 
" A wave of racial prejudice is sweeping 
over the world—in Canada, i n India, i n 
Africa , in other lands. It leads to hate and 
wrong and strife. Shall we make matters 
worse or shall we now take warning ere too 
late, and choose the better way, the way of 
true democracy, the Christian way? This 
government is the Negroes' as well as ours, 
colored Americans are our fellow citizens. 
The black man is the brother of the white 
man in the sight of God. What, therefore, 
is the Christian white man's dutv in a time 
like this? 
"Protest against the wrong; demand 
justice; keep on demanding it until we win. " 
A correspondent writes to the Chicago 
Evening Post and says among other things: 
"Admittin g that the prejudices of the white 
race against the black race is unkind, perhaps unjust i n many of its results, it exists, 
and cannot be removed by forcing them into 
relations of intimacy which are offensive, 
intensely offensive i n many instances, to the 
white race. 
"There may be white native-born Americans, even persons of colonial descent, who 
believe that the Negro should be treated precisely as a white person of equal mental 
and moral attributes, and received on an 
equal footing in business and social life. I 
have never known such a person, and i f I 
should meet one who professed that degree 
of liberality I should consider that he was 
self-deceived or something worse. Wha t call 
has the Federal government to enforce upon 
its employees an association which cannot 
but result in the intensification of their existing race prejudices? Especially when the 
only other result attained is to gratify the 
natural propensity of the Negro to force 
himself where he is not wanted?" 
To this the Post replies: 
"Fo r white people to 'get along with' 
colored people on a democratic basis as 
fellow citizens, or even as fellow employees, 
let us say, instead of as 'superiors' and 
'inferiors,' requires breadth and intelligence, 
sympathy and insight. Enough white people 
have done it to prove that it can be done, 
even though our correspondent seems never 
to have met anyone equal to the task. Our 
own observations lead us to think that the 
difficulties are i n certain minds absurdly 
exaggerated. 
"Bu t it would be hard to exaggerate the 
difficulties which wil l ultimately confront 
us when we have followed the policy of 
segregation to its logical conclusion and have 
undertaken to force 10,000,000 of colored— 
and near-colored—people into a rigi d 
economic and social caste. There are some 
who can contemplate comfortably the spectacle of the suffering which that wil l inflict 
upon the colored race, but it would prove 
utterly intolerable to millions of white people 
as it must prove to the colored people themselves. We are a century too late for such 
medieval solution. We aren't, as the saying is, 'cut out for it.' An d while the 
democratic solution is slow and difficult and 
possibly even painful at times, it is as solid 
as the hills i n its foundations." OPINION 335 
BALTIMORE . Although the full text of the 
decision of the Court of 
Appeals has not been handed down at this 
writing-, the Baltimore city council is already 
at work on a new segregation ordinance, and 
the courts have granted an injunction against 
the Morgan College, a colored institution, 
which is trying to get out of the crowded 
city quarters. Charles J. Bonaparte says i n 
the Baltimore Evening Sun in regard to the 
difficulties of framing a legal ordinance: 
''These difficulties arise very largely from 
the fact that the Fourteenth Amendment prevents these enactments from saying plainly 
what their authors mean, and obliges the latter to profess a purpose which they do not 
really entertain. Wha t they wish is to 
keep Negroes out of desirable neighborhoods; 
i f they could provide by law that, within the 
city limits, no Negro should live on a highway more than twenty feet wide or own or 
rent a house of more than twelve feet front, 
this would perfectly satisfy them, and 
they would pay no more heed to the question 
whether white people also lived on these 
alleys, as the Negroes' neighbors, than has 
ever been paid by our municipal government since we had such a government i n 
Baltimore. Unfortunately for their charitable and enlightened ends, they can't now 
banish by law the 'niggers' to the slums, as 
they might have done fifty years ago; and 
this lamentable condition of affairs compels 
them to affect a ridiculously insincere solicitude lest the same proximity to black people 
which the white people of Baltimore have 
endured without apparent injury for more 
than a century should suddenly become disastrous to the morals and manners of the 
very same white people. Now it is well 
settled that the Fourteenth Amendment does 
not forbid the consideration of race differences i n legislation relating to such 
subjects as intermarriage, coeducation or 
even conveyance by common carriers, provided such legislation is not discriminatory 
against any one of the races affected by it; 
and the authors of our 'segregation' ordinances have tried to bring them within the 
class of laws thus upheld by imposing the 
same, or strictly analogous, prohibitions as to 
residence upon white men which they do 
upon Negroes. Under the first of Mr . 
Dashiell's ordinances, i f the writer's memory 
serves him aright, a white woman was 
actually prosecuted for coming back to live 
i n her own house after a colored tenant had 
given it up I 
"The writer understands the Court of 
Appeals to have intimated that the city has 
power, under its charter, to prohibit persons 
of different races from living within the 
same designated areas, if (and this is a 
rather large 'if') it can manage to do this 
without infringing the vested rights of 
property owners within the several areas thus 
designated, these vested rights of property 
being protected by other language in the 
Fourteenth Amendment and by our State 
constitution as well. Doubtless it will not 
prove impossible for competent counsel to 
prepare an enactment .which may run the 
gantlet of this test; but to do this will not 
be child's play and is rendered the more 
difficult by the well-established rule of law 
which obliges the courts to pass on the 
reasonableness of a municipality's exercise 
of its charter powers. The writer has no 
apologies to make to anybody for describing 
the whole business as petty, impolitic, 
medieval in conception, injurious to the 
best interests of the city, worthy, perhaps, 
of Russia, certainly of Governor Blease and 
Senator Vardaman and the communities 
which admire and trust those great men, but 
unworthy of Maryland and especially of 
Baltimore; if anybody from the South, 
North, East or West doesn't like this description, he is at perfect liberty to dislike it. " 
A white real-estate owner adds this letter 
in the Baltimore Evening Sun: 
"SI R : I herewith beg to deny that Negroes 
are moving into 'the most desirable sections 
or our fair city.' The assertion is pure rot! 
Facts are the things that teach! The record 
office records the fact that the writer is the 
owner of property on Drui d Hil l Avenue, 
McCulloh Street, Madison Avenue, Linden 
Avenue, Bolton Street, Par k Avenue, Mary ­
land Avenue and intermediate points. I 
have lived in the said section for at least 
fifty years; this is another fact. It is also a 
fact that if I had not been acquainted with 
what appreciated and depreciated property 
i n that time I would have been in Bayview 
at the present time. 
"Di d any one of your segregationists ever 
hear what the Pennsylvania Railroad did to 
Maryland Avenue? He doesn't have to take 
my word for it. Al l he has to do is to look and 
see. The soot and the smoke and the cinders 
are still there. The rip and the roar and 
the ja r of traffic are yet heard in the land. 336 TH E CRISIS 
Formerly it was the custom to drive cattle, 
steers, sheep and hogs to the depots i n the 
vicinity. This odor, mixed with 'a savory 
odor of Standard Oil, ' about emptied the 
street. 
"An d yet another fact appears, viz.: Every 
good Baltimorean formerly stored his filth 
i n a well i n his back yard. This custom likewise generated an odor which was a jewel i n 
its way. I affirm that such circumstances 
have and will depreciate the value of any 
property in any section. I affirm the Negro 
had no more to do with it than I had. I 
deny that the Negro has depreciated property 
on Maryland Avenue, for the simple reason 
that the property was depreciated before the 
Negro got there. In fact, the property is 
now more valuable than when the whites left. 
" A short time ago a ground rent was 
offered for sale on the said avenue. The 
investor refused to buy on account of the 
colored man's presence. Afte r further in ­
spection it was discovered the Negro paid 
more rent for the leasehold, and paid it more 
promptly, than the former white tenant. The 
investor on this showing purchased the 
ground rent, the same being recorded in the 
name of my unworthy self. 
" I defy anyone to dispute these facts. I 
have taken Maryland Avenue as i n some 
degree an example of what happened to the 
other streets. In this matter your correspondent has certain views on segregation which 
may or may not be expressed later. We may 
not love the colored brother, but it is not 
necessary to lie about him. 
"WILLIA M P. CHUNK , M . D . 
•"Baltimore, August 23." 
Another one says: 
"It has been my experience not to have 
"found the small colored population of former 
white neighborhoods a direct cause for 
property depreciation as much as that of 
other nationalities in certain sections of the 
•city. Take, for example, West Fayette, 
Lexington and Lombard Streets, near Fre ­
mont Street. There are no colored inhabitants there, and yet what part of the city 
has suffered more from propert y 
depreciation ? 
"There are many reasons attributed to 
changes in neighborhoods, and simply because the respectable colored people wish to 
improve their home conditions by coming 
from alleys out into the open it does not 
follow they desire to drive white residents 
from their homes. On Drui d Hil l Avenue, 
which is entirely occupied by colored people 
now, as far north as Nort h Avenue, property 
values are far more substantial than they 
were some years ago when the houses were 
owned by white people, who cared for and 
sought more modern houses elsewhere, and 
were only too glad to dispose of their properties to colored people." 
A n echo to this from Yonkers, N . Y. , has 
brought the following letter to the 
Statesman : 
"A n article i n two of our local papers of 
yesterday would convey to the mind of the 
reading public an existing condition which 
is new and surprising to me. 
" I have been i n Yonkers since the 60's, 
and have always had reason to believe that 
the people here looked upon the worthy 
Negro with commendation when he had taken 
any step that pointed to a betterment of 
his condition, and I sincerely hope the realestate dealer wil l not be responsible for the 
suggested barbarism as the coat of tar and 
feathers proposed to be meted out to future 
purchasers of homes i n certain of our 
Yonkers sections. 
"FRANCI S J . MOULTRIE. " 
SOLUTIO N "Wanted—Solution to the Race 
WANTED . Problem. This problem has 
bothered us long enough. Must 
have solution at once. Lynchings, 
assimilation, democracy and other proposals have been tried without success. 
Solution must make it clear how the 
South can continue to enslave the Negro 
without violating the Constitution of the 
United States, and how the Nort h can continue to profess a love for the Negro without 
allowing him to enter into active competition. 
The solution must show, i n short, how the 
shrewd American Northerner and Southerner 
can continue to get all the advantages from 
the importation of an unassimilable race 
without getting any of the disadvantages. 
This is not so difficult as it sounds. It is 
certainly no more difficult than the tariff or 
the currency. Suitable reward to right party. 
Address Servitude, Washington, B . T."— 
Life. •SOUTHERNERS. " 
WE AR E delighte d to lear n 
tha t Walte r H . Page , 
forme r edito r of the 
World's Work an d now 
Ambassado r to Grea t 
Britain , is not a 
4
'Southerner. " This poin t is definitely 
settled b y the editors o f a Souther n 
magazine publishe d i n Ne w Yor k for 
the conversion of the heathen. 
W e ha d lon g suspected this. W e 
have used the term "Southerner " i n a 
restricte d sense. It di d not refer, fo r 
instance , to a person bor n i n the South , 
otherwis e (Heave n forfend!) there 
woul d b e som e 8,000,000 black 
4
' Southerners''—a n unthinkabl e thi n g. 
"Southerner " means something special, 
limited , definite. It coul d not refe r to 
Walte r Page . Mr . Page , fo r instance, 
has worke d fo r the socia l uplift of the 
Negro , he has met Negroe s o n terms of 
equality , treatin g them, indeed, as gentlemen. H e believes i n the righ t of 
blac k me n to vote an d aspire. 
No w al l this we learn, on the 
authorit y o f Neale's Monthly, preclude s 
Mr . Pag e from bein g a "Southerner. " 
A "Southerner, " it seems, must be a 
ma n wh o has assimilate d no new ideas 
as to democrac y an d socia l classes since 
1863 ; he must be "haughty, " intoleran t 
an d snobbish. Hi s ancestors must have 
been "aristocrats " an d he must have 
ha d a blac k mamm y whom he loved, 
an d as an evidence of this love he now 
an d the n lynche s he r grandchildren . 
Bu t the "Southerner " has one characteristi c above this: he hates Niggers; 
he pursue s them vindictively ; he 
chases a dro p of Negr o blood lik e a 
sleuth. H e makes it his chie f business 
i n lif e to hound , oppress an d insul t 
black folk, an d to tell them personall y 
as often as he ca n how utterl y he 
despises them—except their women, 
privately . These he likes. Th e "South ­
erner " is intensely religious an d set on 
foreig n missions. H e especially wishes 
to convert the heathen i n Chin a an d 
the Cong o Valley . H e is also a familia r 
frien d of Go d an d knows more about 
the religio n of Jesus Christ tha n an y 
other Christian . 
This is the pictur e of the "South ­
erner " draw n b y Neale's Monthly an d 
elaborated b y TH E CRISIS . 
Is it a true pictur e of the sixteen or 
more million s of white s i n the South ? 
Certainl y not. It is a laughabl e carica ­
ture. But—an d this is the serious part 
—i t is a true pictur e of certai n dominan t elements i n the whit e South , an d 
the rest of the whit e Sout h is willin g 
to let tha t type of "Southerner " represent it. Thu s the y repudiat e Walte r 
Pag e an d accept Jame s K . Vardaman . 
TH E SIMPL E WAY . 
SOM E ways of lif e are so 
simple . Ther e was, for 
instance, a few years 
ago, a solutio n of the 
Negr o proble m s o 
ridiculousl y simpl e that 
those who di d not' receive it as gospel 
were hooted i f not stoned. Th e gist 
was this: 
Th e Negr o must wor k out his own 
salvation. 
EDITORIA L 338 TH E CRISIS 
The Negro must make himself useful 
to his neighbors. 
The Negro must not complain. 
Duties must be taught Negroes— 
never mind their rights. 
Negroes must let politics alone. 
Money talks—let the Negro get a 
$5,000 brick house and his individual 
problem is solved. 
Etc., etc. 
All this the Negro has done. He has 
striven to solve his problems unaided. 
He is so useful to his neighbors that 
the problem of to-morrow will be the 
Southern millionaire waxed fat on the 
starvation wages of black peons. 
The mass of Negroes has been so 
ground down and oppressed that they 
do not know what complaint is. If 
they did, segregation, the "Jim Crow" 
car and disfranchisement would disappear to-morrow. We have shivered 
in the storm like dumb driven cattle 
and forgotten our rights before we 
learned them. We have "let politics 
alone" so effectually that we practically 
have no voice in our own government, 
and we have accumulated brick houses 
so fast that from Boston to Galveston 
white nerves are being strained to 
drive us out of them. 
We are therefore listening to those 
eminent and distinguished solvers of 
the Negro problem, white and black, 
who, with hat in hand, have in the last 
twenty years been lulling this nation 
to sleep and also feathering their own 
nests; we are listening for further 
advice and direction along the simple 
way. 
HOWELL S AN D BLAC K FOLK . 
IN the composite picture 
which William Dea n 
Howells, as his life work, 
has painted of America 
he has not hesitated to be 
truthful and to include the most significant thing in the land—the black man. 
With lie and twistings most Americans 
seek to ignore the mighty and portentous 
shadow of ten growing millions, or, if it 
insists on darkening the landscape, to 
label it as joke or crime. But Howells, in 
his "Imperative Duty," faced our 
national foolishness and shuffling and 
evasion. Here was a white girl engaged 
to a white man who discovers herself to 
be "black." The problem looms before 
her as tremendous, awful. The world 
wavers. She peers beyond the Veil and 
shudders and then—tells her story 
frankly, marries her man, and goes her 
way as thousands of others have done 
and are doing. 
It was Howells, too, that discovered 
Dunbar. We have had a score of artists 
and poets in black America, but few 
critics dared call them so'. Most of them, 
therefore, starved; or, like Timrod, 
"passed" as white. Howells dared take 
Dunbar by the hand and say to the 
world, not simply here is a black artist, 
but here is an artist who happens to be 
black. Not only that, but as an artist 
Dunbar had studied black folk and 
realized the soul of this most artistic of 
all races. "I said," wrote Howells, 
"that a race which had come to this 
effect in any member of it had attained 
civilization in him, and I permitted myself the imaginative prophecy that the 
hostilities and the prejudices which had 
so long constrained his race were 
destined to vanish in the arts; that these 
were to be the final proof that God had 
made one blood of all nations of men." 
Finally when, on the centenary of 
Lincoln's birth, a band of earnest men 
said, we must finish the work of Negro 
emancipation and break the spiritual 
bonds that still enslave this people, 
William Dean Howells was among the 
first to sign the call. From this call came 
the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and 
T H E CRISIS magazine. The National Emancipation Exposition 
g § I N NE W YOR K CITY , OCTOBE R 22-31. 1913 
THE pageant of Negro history 
as written by W. E. B. Du 
Bois and produced by 
Charles Burroughs, Master; 
Daisy Tapley, Dora Cole 
Norman, Marie Stuart 
Jackson, Augustus G. Dill 
and 350 others, during the exhibition, and 
entitled "The People of Peoples and Their 
Gifts to Men." 
PRELUDE. 
The lights of the Court of Freedom blaze. 
A trumpet blast is heard and four heralds, 
black and of gigantic stature, appear with 
silver trumpets and standing at the four 
corners of the temple of beauty cry : 
"Hea r ye, hear ye ! Me n of all the Americas, and listen to the tale of the eldest and 
strongest of the races of mankind, whose 
faces be black. Hea r ye, hear ye, of the 
gifts of black men to this world, the Iron 
Gift and Gift of Faith , the Pai n of Humilit y 
and the Sorrow Song of Pain , the Gift of 
Freedom and of Laughter, and the undying 
Gift of Hope. Men of the world, keep 
silence and hear ye this!" 
Fou r banner bearers come forward and 
stand along the four walls of the temple. On 
their banners is written: 
"The First Gift of the Negro to the world, 
being the Gift of Iron. This picture shall 
tell how, in the deep and beast-bred forests of 
Africa , mankind first learned the welding of 
iron, and thus defense against the living and 
the dead." 
Wha t the banners tell the heralds solemnly 
proclaim. 
Whereat comes the 
First Episode. The Gift of Iron: 
The lights grow dim. The roar of beasts 
is heard and the crash of the storm. Lightnings flash. The dark figure of an African 
savage hurries across the foreground, 
frightened and cowering and dancing. 
Another follows defying the lightning and is 
struck down; others come until the space is 
filled with 100 huddling, crowding savages. 
Some brave the storm, some pray their Gods 
with incantation and imploring dance. 
Mothers shield their children, and husbands 
their wives. A t last, dimly enhaloed in 
mysterious light, the Veiled Woman appears, 
commanding in stature and splendid in garment, her dark face faintly visible, and in her 
right hand Fire , and Iron in her left. A s 
she passes slowly round the Court the 
rythmic roll of tomtoms begins. Then music 
is heard; anvils ring at the four corners. 
The arts flourish, huts arise, beasts are 
brought i n and there is joy, feasting and 
dancing. 
A trumpet blast calls silence and the 
heralds proclaim 
The Second Episode, saying: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye! Al l them that come to 
know the Truth, and listen to the tale of 
the wisest and gentlest of the races of men 
whose faces be black. Hear ye, hear ye, of 
the Second Gift of black men to this world, 
the Gift of Civilization in the dark and 
splendid valley of the Nile. Men of the 
world, keep silence and hear ye this." The 
banners of the banner bearers change and 
read: 
"The Second Gift of the Negro to the 
world, being the Gift of the Nile. This 
picture tells how the meeting of Negro and 
Semite i n ancient days made the civilization of Egypt the first i n the world. " 
There comes a strain of mighty music, dim 
i n the distance and drawing nearer. The 100 
savages thronged round the whole Court 
rise and stand listening. Slowly there come 
fifty veiled figures and with them come the 
Sphinx, Pyramid, the Obelisk and the empty 
Throne of the Pharaoh drawn by oxen. As 
the cavalcade passes, the savages, wondering, 
threatening, inquiring, file by it. Suddenly 
a black chieftain appears in the entrance, 
with the Uraeus in one hand and the winged 
Beetle i n the other. The Egyptians unveil 
and display Negroes and mulattoes clothed 
i n the splendor of the Egyptian Court. The 
savages salaam; all greet him as Ra , the 
Negro. He mounts the throne and the cavalcade, led by posturing dancers and Ra , and 
followed by Egyptians and savages, pass in 
procession around to the right to the thunder 
of music and tomtoms. A s they pass, R a is 
crowned as Priest and King . Whil e the 
Queen of Sheba and Candace of Ethiopi a 
join the procession at intervals. 340 TH E CRISIS 
Slowly all pass out save fifty savages, who 
linger examining their gifts. The lights 
grow dim as Egyptian culture dies and the 
fifty savages compose themselves to sleep. A s 
they sleep the light returns and the heralds 
proclaim 
The Third Episode, saying: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye! Al l them that come 
to see the light and listen to the tale of the 
bravest and truest of the races of men, whose 
faces be black. Hea r ye, hear ye, of the 
Third Gift of black men to this world—a 
Gift of Fait h in Righteousness hoped for 
but unknown; men of the world, keep silence 
and hear ye this!" The banners change and 
read: 
"The Third Gift of the Negro to the 
world, being a Gift of Faith. This episode 
tells how the Negro race spread the faith 
of Mohammed over half the world and built 
a new culture thereon." 
There is a sound of battle. The savages 
leap to their feet. Mohammed and fifty followers whirl in and rushing to the right beat 
the savages back. Fift y Songhay enter and 
attack the Mohammedans. Fift y other 
Mohammedans enter and attack the Songhay. 
Turning, the Songhay bear the last group of 
Mohammedans back to the left where they 
clash with the savages. Mohammedan 
priests strive and exhort among the warriors. A t each of the four corners of the 
temple a priest falls on his face and cries: 
"God is God ! God is God ! There is no God 
but God, and Mohammed is his prophet!" 
Fou r more join, others join until gradually 
all is changed from battle to the one universal cry: "God is God! God is God ! There 
is no God but God, and Mohammed is his 
prophet!" In each corner, however, some 
Mohammedans hold slaves in shackles, 
secretly. 
Mansa Musa appears at the entrance with 
entourage on horseback, followed by black 
Mohammedan priests and scholars. The procession passes around to the right with music 
and* dancing, and passes out with Mohammedans and Songhay, leaving some Mohammedans and their slaves on the stage. 
The herald proclaims 
The Fourth Episode, saying: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye! Al l them that know 
the sorrow of the world. Hear ye, hear ye, 
and listen to (lie tale of the humblest and 
the mightiest of the races of men whose faces 
be black. Hear ye, hear ye, and learn how 
this race did suffer of Pain , of Death and 
Slavery and yet of this Humiliatio n did not 
die. Me n of the world, keep silence and 
hear ye this!" The banners change again 
and say: 
"The Fourth Gift of the Negro to the 
world, being a Gift of Humiliation. This 
gift shows how men can bear even the Hel l 
of Christian slavery and live. " 
The Mohammedans force their slaves forward as European traders enter. Other 
Negroes, with captives, enter. The Mohammedans take gold i n barter. The Negroes 
refuse gold, but are seduced by beads and 
drink. Chains rattle. Christian missionaries 
enter, but the slave trade increases. The 
wail of the missionary grows fainter and 
fainter until all is a scene of carnage and 
captivity with whip and chain and only a 
frantic priest, staggering beneath a cross and 
crowned with bloody thorns, -wanders to and 
fro in dumb despair. 
There is silence. Then a confused moaning. Out of the moaning comes the slave 
song, "Nobody Knows the Trouble I've 
Seen," and with it and through the chained 
and bowed forms of the slaves as they pass 
out is done the Dance of Death and Pain . 
The stage is cleared of all its folk. There 
is a pause, i n which comes the Dance of the 
Ocean, showing the transplantation of the 
Negro race over seas. 
Then the heralds proclaim 
The Fifth Episode, saying: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye! Al l them that strive 
and struggle. Hea r ye, hear ye, and listen 
to the tale of the stoutest and the sturdiest 
of the races of men whose faces be black. 
Hea r ye, hear ye, and learn how this race 
did rise out of slavery and the valley of the 
shadow of death. Me n of the world, keep 
silence and hear ye this! " The banners 
change again and read: 
"The Fift h Gift of the Negro to the world, 
being a Gift of Struggle Toward Freedom. 
This picture tells of Alonzo, the Negro pilot 
of Columbus, of Stephen Dorantes who discovered New Mexico, of the brave Maroons 
and valiant Haytians, of Crispus Attucks, 
George Lisle and Na t Turner. " 
Twenty-five Indians enter, circling the 
Court right and left, stealthily and watchfully. A s they sense the coming of the 
whites, they gather one side of the temple, 
watching. NATIONA L EMANCIPATIO N EXPOSITIO N 341 
Alonzo, the Negro, enters and after him 
Columbus and Spaniards, in mail, and one 
monk. They halt the other side of the temple 
and look about searchingly, pointing at the 
Indians. Slaves follow. One of the slaves, 
Stephen Dorantes, and the monk seek the 
Indians. The monk is killed and Stephen 
returns, circling the Court, tells his tale and 
dies. The Spaniards march on the Indians. 
Their slaves—the Maroons—revolt and march 
to the left and meet the Indians on the opposite side. The French, some of the mulattoes 
and Negroes, enter with more slaves. They 
march after the Spanish. Their slaves, 
helped by mulattoes and Toussaint, revolt 
and start back. The French follow the 
Spaniards, but the returning Haytians meet 
oncoming British. The Haytians fight their 
way through and take their place next to the 
Maroons. Still more slaves and white Americans follow the British. The British and 
Americans dispute. Attucks leads the 
Americans and the British are put to flight. 
Spanish, French and British, separated by 
dancing Indians, file around the Court and 
out, while Maroons, Haytians and slaves file 
around in the opposite direction and meet 
the Americans. A s they pass the French, 
by guile induce Toussaint to go with them. 
There is a period of hesitation. Some slaves 
are freed, some Haytians resist aggression. 
George Lisle, a freed Negro, preaches the 
true religion as the masters listen. Peace 
ensues and the slaves sing at their tasks. 
Suddenly Kin g Cotton arrives, followed by 
Greed, Vice , Luxur y and Cruelty. The slaveholders are seduced. The old whips and 
chains appear. Nat Turner rebels and is 
killed. The slaves drop into despair and work 
silently and sullenly. The faint roll of tomtoms is heard. 
The heralds proclaim 
The Sixth Episode, saying: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye! Citizens of New York , 
and learn of the deeds of eldest and 
strongest of the races of men whose faces 
be black. Hea r ye, hear ye, of the Sixth 
and Greatest Gift of black men to the world, 
the Gift of Freedom for the workers. Men 
of New York , keep silence and hear ye this." 
The banners change and say: 
"The sixth and last episode, showing how 
the freedom of black slaves meant freedom 
for the world. In this episode shall be seen 
the work of Garrison and John Brown ; of 
Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass, 
the marching of black soldiers to war and 
the hope that lies in little children." 
The slaves work more and more dejectedly 
and drivers force them. Slave music comes. 
The tomtoms grow louder. The Veiled 
Woman appears with fire and iron. The 
slaves arise and begin to escape, passing 
through each other to and fro, confusedly. 
Benezet, Walke r and Garrison enter, scattering their writings, and pass slowly to the 
right, threatened by slave drivers. John 
Brown enters, gesticulating. A knot of 
Negroes follow him. The planters seize him 
and erect a gallows, but the slaves seize his 
body and begin singing "John Brown's 
Body. " 
Frederick Douglass enters and passes to 
the right. Sojourner Truth enters and passes 
to the left. Sojourner Truth cries: 
"Frederick, is God dead?" Voices take up 
the cry, repeating: "Frederick, is God 
dead?" Douglass answers: "No, and therefore slavery must end in blood." The heralds 
repeat: "Slavery must end in blood." 
The roll of drums is heard and the 
soldiers enter. First, a company in blue with 
Colonel Shaw on horseback. 
A single voice sings " 0 Freedom." A 
soprano chorus takes it up. 
The Boy Scouts march in. 
Ful l brasses take up " 0 Freedom." 
Little children enter, and among them 
symbolic figures of the Laborer, the Artisan, 
the Servant of Men, the Merchant, the Inventor, the Musician, the Actor, the Teacher, 
Law, Medicine and Ministry, the All-Mother, 
formerly the Veiled Woman, now unveiled in 
her chariot with her dancing brood, and the 
bust of Lincoln at her side. 
Wit h burst of music and blast of trumpets, 
the pageant ends and the heralds sing: 
"Hea r ye, hear ye, men of all the Americas, 
ye who have listened to the tale of the eldest 
and strongest of the races of mankind, whose 
faces be black. Hear ye, hear ye, and forget 
not the gift of black men to this world— 
the Iron Gift and Gift of Faith, the Pai n of 
Humilit y and Sorrow Song of Pain, the Gift 
of Freedom and Laughter and the undying 
Gift of Hope. Men of America, break 
silence, for the play is done." 
Then shall the banners announce: 
"The play is done!" BRANCHES . 
BALTIMORE. 
ON October 20 Baltimore held a mass 
^**' meeting protesting against segregation. Mr . Villar d and Miss Ovington 
made addresses. Mr. McGuinn , one of 
the attorneys for the branch, presided. 
Baltimore has its own aggravating problems. A new segregation ordinance has just 
been passed by the city council, modeled so as 
to cover the defects in the old ordinance which 
was recently declared invalid by the Supreme 
Court of the State. About the time this last 
ordinance was passed white people moved 
out of some miserable houses in a segregated area and colored people began to move 
in. The houses were at once bombarded by 
white toughs and several people were injured. 
One white man, getting into a controversy 
with his colored chauffeur in regard to the 
matter, shot and instantly killed him. 
The murderer has been exonerated. The 
branch is working on the case and the 
association is co-operating. It is the intention of the association to further co-operate 
with the branch in fighting the new segregation ordinance as soon as a test case can be 
brought. 
TACOMA. 
"This little branch has been doing a landoffice business. Wh y did you not tell us you 
needed us sooner?" We quote from our 
Tacoma correspondent because we always 
feel so cheered up by a letter from this far 
Western outpost that we want their infectious spirit to get abroad. A s soon as Tacoma 
received the circular letters from national 
headquarters, the branch immediately corresponded with Seattle, Spokane, Portland, 
Denver and Ogden. and succeeded in arranging meetings of protest i n both Ogden and 
Seattle. To the latter meeting Tacoma sent 
four delegates. 
Tacoma held its mass meeting of protest 
i n the First Baptist Church. Mayo r Seymour 
presided. There were both white and colored 
speakers and several impromptu speeches by 
members of the G. A . R. Resolutions were 
drawn up, signed by 500 men and women of 
both races, and sent to the President. The 
local press was most enthusiastic i n its 
notices of the meeting, only one paper—the 
Post-Intelligencer, of Seattle—refusing to 
report it. 
TOPEKA. 
THE Topeka branch held a meeting to 
protest against segregation on September 
26. There was a large attendance. Mr. 
Arthu r Capper, president of the branch, 
presided. There were several prominent 
speakers of both races, including Mr . James 
H . Guy and Mr . Patrick Coney, attorneys; 
the Hon . Thomas McNea], Prof. N . Sawyer 
and the Rev. F . L . Loveland, pastor of the 
First M . E . Church. Resolutions of protest 
were drawn up, signed by 400 people, forwarded to the President, and copies were 
also sent to Kansas representatives in 
Congress. The branch is carrying on an 
extensive campaign to increase its membership and expects to hold another mass 
meeting this month. 
Other branches which are arranging protest meetings are Detroit, Californi a and 
Boston. 
WASHINGTON. 
The association has been most fortunate 
i n securing as president of the Washington 
branch Mr . Archibald H . Grimke, who is too 
well known to our readers to need more than 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE TH E N. A. A. C. P. 343 
mention. Al l the other officers of the former 
organization have been reappointed. They 
will serve until January, when the branch will 
hold its own election i n accordance with the 
resolution published under Association Notes 
i n the last number of TH E CRISIS . The 
branch begins its new year with enthusiasm. 
Man y new members and renewals have been 
received. On October 2 7 a mass meeting 
was held to protest against segregation. 
Mr . Villar d and Dr. John Haynes Holmes, 
of New York , were the speakers. 
SEGREGATIO N I N GOVERNMEN T 
DEPARTMENTS . 
A LARG E number of letters were 
received from our members i n all 
parts of the country i n response to the circular sent out by the association protesting 
against the segregation of colored employees 
i n the government departments. Several 
members have undertaken to write articles 
for publication and the office has received a 
number of inquiries from members of Congress asking for the facts. Several Senators 
have interested themselves. Senator Clapp 
has assured the association that he intends to 
urge the consideration of his resolution which 
was mentioned i n the last number of TH E 
CRISIS . 
The association sent an investigator to 
Washington. Space forbids our giving full 
details. It was ascertained that segregation 
of colored employees exists and is increasing 
i n the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, i n 
the Post Office Department and i n the office 
of the Auditor for the Post Office, which is 
a part of the Treasury Department. A s yet, 
segregation has not been introduced i n the 
Treasury building, where there are 270 
colored employees scattered throughout the 
corridors and offices with white clerks, 
although it seems to be generally understood 
that ultimately colored clerks are to be 
segregated i n the registry division of this 
building. A Southerner in charge of one of 
the offices i n the Treasury building, mistaking the investigator for a sympathizer, confidingly remarked that they wanted to 
inaugurate segregation everywhere in the 
Treasury Department, but were handicapped 
because "they did not know how to go about 
it, it being most difficult to determine upon 
the best method." Before he could give more 
valuable information he was warned by the 
guide. 
No official orders have been issued and no 
signs posted except in regard to lavatories. 
This order is still i n force in at least three 
departments. The signs in (he Treasury 
Department have been taken down. They 
are still posted in the Bureau of Engraving 
and Printing. There seems to be a willingness on the part of officials to discuss this 
order, possibly because they realize it would 
be a waste of ammunition for the colored 
people or their friends to make an issue of 
it just now. The attention of the investigator was repeatedly called to the fact that 
the colored people had resented this order 
bitterly, while not a single protest had been 
received against segregation i n work. The 
reasons are almost too obvious for comment: 
(1) The colored people resent a personal 
affront. (2) They cannot protest against 
segregation in work when no orders have 
been issued in regard to it. Should they 
complain they would at once be asked to 
cite a discriminating order, and failing that 
would probably be told, as they have been, 
that the changes made had been necessitated 
by the exigencies of the work, color having 
had nothing to do with it. They 
would be unable to prove their case and 
might jeopardize their positions by 
"insubordination." 
The subtle way i n which segregation is 
slowly being effected without official orders 
is worthy of attention. Such delicate coordination on the part of officials is 
impressive. Generally the excuse is a 
readjustment i n work to increase efficiency. 
In the rearrangement of desks, which always 
seems to be necessary, clerks are moved from 
one room to another, and when the process 
is completed the colored clerks always find 
themselves, in some mysterious way, together. 
To illustrate: Recently the colored clerks 
i n the dead letter division of the Post Office 
Department were segregated back of a row 
of lockers in one corner of the room. The 
guide said that it became necessary to move 
these lockers in order to improve ventilation. He was unable, however, to explain 
how all the clerks segregated back of them 
happened to be colored. 
Even more dangerous to the colored people 
than this segregation is the skilful way in 
which its justification is being spread. 
Friends of the colored people hear with comparative indifference the statement that "We 
are determined to reduce these people to 
menial and subordinate positions," for such 344 TH E CRISIS 
frankness cannot fail to arouse resentment i n 
favor of the oppressed, but the sinister 
equivalent of this blunt declaratio n 
frequently heard i n Washington—"We cannot have colored men working i n the same 
room with white women or colored men i n 
charge of the departments employing white 
women"—is menacing and much more 
difficult to combat. Not only does this 
arouse latent prejudice, but it tends to create 
it where it does not now exist. 
One white woman who has had a long 
experience i n office work inquired why the 
government did not segregate its women 
employees instead of its colored clerks. 
Though an ardent advocate of woman's 
rights, she fails to see why. the entry of a 
few women into the government service 
should cause its entire reorganization because, 
as she tritely remarked, any clerk, white or 
colored, who makes himself offensive to his 
fellow clerks will soon find himself discharged. 
Moreover, with the resignation of Mr . 
Napier, Registrar of the Treasury, there will 
be no colored men i n positions of authority, 
the heads of all the departments being white, 
except Mr. Napier's successor, who is an 
Indian. 
Although segregation i n government departments has just begun, its effects are 
already startlingly in evidence. Those 
segregated are regarded as a people set 
apart. Instead of allaying race prejudice, 
as some of its advocates would have us 
believe, the government, by recognition, has 
emphasized it. I n Washington, as usual, 
history repeats itself in giving to those 
segregated what no one else wants. Fo r 
example, i n the Bureau of Engraving and 
Printing the lunchroom assigned to colored 
women is unsanitary. I n the office of the 
Auditor for the Post Office a group of 
colored women who work on what is known 
as the "key punch" were taken from light 
and airy rooms and segregated i n an unpleasant alcove. In the Dead Letter Office, 
where the colored clerks have been segregated by a row of lockers, the part of the 
room chosen is the least desirable. 
If the policy continues competition in 
work, of course, will be eliminated. Colored 
clerks will be restricted to employment i n 
the few offices designated for them. A 
prominent social worker i n Washington, 
referring to the matter, said that the white 
people did not really object to working with 
the colored people, but were using this old 
argument of race prejudice as an excuse to 
get their positions. I f the colored people 
protest against segregation, she said, it wil l 
be probably only a question of time before 
the Civi l Service Ac t is annulled and 
another passed making it possible to deprive them of all government positions. 
That the basis of the whole segregation 
idea is caste and not race is indicated by 
the fact that the attention of the investigator was repeatedly called to the absence 
of segregation i n the cleaning forces. In 
two of the government buildings the attendant i n charge said it would be impossible 
to segregate without interfering with the 
efficiency of the work and, moreover, he had 
had no complaints from the white "scrub 
ladies." 
Another difficulty i n carrying out segregation by color consistently unexpectedly 
arose, to the great embarrassment of the 
clerk who was acting as guide i n the 
Treasury Department. Entering one of the 
rooms where colored clerks were employed, 
he remarked: "There are two i n here, that 
man in the far corner of the room and"— 
turning to a white man at the door—"you are 
the other colored clerk i n here, aren't you1?" 
The reply cannot be published, but it is significant that the man making it was considerably darker than some of the colored 
clerks who will have to be segregated i f the 
present policy is perfected. 
It is impossible to prophesy the outcome. 
The association is working hard and intends 
to keep up its fight. Ever y member is urged 
to interest his friends and to write to his 
representatives i n Congress i f he has not 
already done so. 
The rumor was abroad i n Washington 
that it was not likely that any further effort 
would be made to segregate the colored 
people until after the election for mayor 
i n New York , as Mr . Mitchell, the Fusion 
candidate for mayor, is also the candidate 
favored by the present administration. 
Colored men vote i n New Yor k City ! 
LEGAL. 
ALL members of the association should 
be interested i n the case of Fran k 
Guinn and J. J. Bea l vs. the United States, 
which is set for hearing before the Supreme 
Court on October 14. 
This "grandfather" case is one between 
the United States on the one hand and TH E MUSLI M PRIEST AN D TH E HEATHE N 345 
certain registrars of voters on the other, 
arising from an attempt on the part of the 
government to punish the defendants for 
complying with the provisions of the 
Oklahoma amendment. The government is 
therefore a party to the case and is represented by its Solicitor-General. The latter, 
in reply to an inquiry from the association, 
advised us that we might be permitted to 
file a brief. This has been prepared by 
Mr . Storey, our president, and has been 
filed. It will be presented by Jackson 
Ralston, Esq., an eminent attorney of 
Washington, D . C. 
William Harrison, Esq., a colored attorney of Oklahoma City, who was active in 
the case mentioned above, also appears in the 
case of McCabe, et al, vs. Atchison, Topeka 
and Santa F6 Railroad. This is a "Ji m 
Crow" case and is to come before the 
Supreme Court this term. Mr. Harrison 
asked the co-operation of the association and 
invited Mr. Storey to appear with him as 
counsel to argue the case. Mr. Storey has 
consented and the association sent $180 to 
the clerk of the Supreme Court to cover the 
expenses of printing a record of the case. 
The other "Ji m Crow" case, that of the 
Alabama & Vicksburg Railway Company 
vs. Pearl Morris, which is in the hands of 
the association, will not be reached for some 
time. 
The MUSLI M PRIEST AN D TH E HEATHE N 
(A n Africa n Parable) Adapted by A . O . Stafford 
[NOTE—This parable has been adapted for 
the readers of TH E CRISIS from the Rev. 
S. W . Koelle's "African Native Literature." The locale is in the British Protectorate of Nigeria, West Central Africa, a 
vast territory with a population of several 
million Negroes, where for centuries the 
Mohammedan faith has been the prevailing 
religious belief. The Muslim priest of the 
parable, his heathen friend and the chief 
magistrate of the African town of Kuka were 
Negroes. The late Dr. Edward W. Blyden, the 
eminent Negro scholar, states that the Azan 
or "call to prayer," which to this day summons throughout the Eastern world millions 
of Mohammedans to their devotions, was first 
uttered by a Negro—Bilal by name—whom 
Mohammed, in obedience to a dream, appointed the first muezzin or crier.—A. O. S.] 
1
 THER E was once a great 
priest who possessed all 
books the wisdom of which 
he had mastered. His only 
friend, whom he loved passionately, was a heathen to 
whose house he went daily 
for converse. These visits pleased the 
heathen exceedingly because he knew that 
he never fasted, never prayed, never killed 
the Easter lamb, but did many things forbidden in the Koran . Yet he and the priest 
lived in friendship. 
One day while at the heathen's house the 
priest said: "M y friend, i n a week I shall 
make my pilgrimage to Mecca." 
"Father priest, if thou goest to Mecca 
takest me with thee?" asked the heathen 
immediately. 
"Thou art a heathen," replied the priest. 
"Thou never fastest, never prayest and wilt 
thou goest to Mecca with me? I cannot take 
thee." 
"Let me follow thee to Mecca," begged 
the heathen; "when you have come to Mecca 
and God gives thee a good place, I by thy 
blessing may also obtain one." 
"This cannot be," answered the priest as 
he arose to go. 
A t the end of a week the priest was ready 
for the journey, taking with him dried cow's 
meat and flour, a ease with books, a calabash for drinking water and another one 
to be used for washing his face and hands 
before prayer. When the heathen saw his 
friend depart for Mecca he also prepared 
for the journey, taking dried hog's meat— 
forbidden by the Koran—a calabash for 
water and a staff. B y walking rapidly he 
overtook, in a few days, the priest on his 
journey through the desert. When the 
priest saw his heathen friend he asked: "Ho w 
couldst thou follow me after I had said that 
I could not take thee to Mecca?" 
The heathen's spirit was crushed, but he 
answered, looking upon his friend with sorrowful eyes: "Go thou to Mecca alone, but I 
shall follow thee from afar." 346 TH E CRISIS 
In time the priest came to Mecca, followed i n a short while by the heathen. 
The morning after their arrival was 
Friday . Al l of the great men had prepared 
to go to the mosque, when the voice of the 
crier was heard chanting the morning call to 
prayer: 
"Go d is most great! I testify there is no 
God but God ! I testify that Mohammed is 
the Apostle of God ! Come to prayer! 
Come to salvation! God is most great! 
There is no God but God ! Praye r is better than sleep. Prayer is better than sleep." 
A s the call was chanted all listened with 
reverence, the passers in the street stood 
still, those at work ceased from their labors 
and those who had not arisen sat up i n their 
beds. 
When the call was finished all the great 
men of Mecca entered the mosque, while the 
priest and the heathen stood at the entrance. 
Seeing the priest, the crier asked of him: 
"Whence comest thou?" 
The priest replied: "From Kuka , i n the 
Bornu country of Africa. " 
Whereupon said the crier: "Thou hast a 
friend who after many weary weeks i n the 
desert followed thee hither, but whose 
coming thou dost not like. . Er e thou 
calledst him a friend, thou knewest that he 
never fasted, never prayed, never killed the 
Easter lamb and that his parents, grandparents and great-grandparents were 
heathens. 
"When thy friend hoped, on his following 
thee hither, to obtain Heaven by thy blessing 
thou didst not like his coming. If one seeks 
and does good our Lor d will interpret it 
to him for good. Not he is a heathen who 
eats hog's meat or monkey meat, but he who 
quarrels with his neighbor and then keeps 
him in his heart maliciously and who always 
remembers it when he sees him with whom 
he had a quarrel. Therefore I will not let 
thee enter the mosque, but the man whom 
thou callest a heathen may enter." 
The heathen was then called and told to 
enter, while the priest was left standing on 
the outside. Al l of the great men of Mecca, 
the heathen among them, then prayed in the 
mosque. 
When the prayer hour was over the 
heathen was called, given a beautiful house 
in which to live, while to the priest was 
assigned a small one. 
A t the end of a month, filled with prayer 
and reverence, when the heathen expressed 
a desire to return to the Born u country, the 
chief magistrate of Mecca gave him a silver 
basin, a scarlet cap, a silver staff, a cloak, 
a beautiful upper garment, food to eat on 
the journey and a golden plate for his 
food. To the priest was given a little food, 
a water pan, a copper basin and an iron 
staff. 
The priest and the heathen left Mecca together and for over two months they continued their return journey before reaching 
Kuka . 
One morning, a few. weeks later, the priest 
was taken with fever, and the heathen also, 
between morning and noon. Earl y the following morning after the priest had said his 
prayer he died and before noon the heathen 
also passed away. 
Then some people of the town came and 
washed their bodies, wrapped them i n rough 
mats and carried them to the graveyard. 
Then they took spades, measured the ground 
and began to dig the graves. 
The grave for the heathen was not hard 
to dig, the ground having no stones, but 
was of sand; hence it was soon finished. 
When the grave for the priest was begun a 
strange thing happened. Afte r the people 
had dug one foot they met with rocks. They 
left and began to dig i n another place; again 
they met with stones; then leaving that place 
they began once more and still again they 
met with stones. Growing weary of their 
task, the body of the heathen was placed i n 
the sandy grave and completely covered with 
sand, but the body of the priest was placed 
about a foot deep i n the grave of stone, 
which left part of it exposed above the 
surface. 
Then the chief magistrate of the town said 
to all the people who had come to the 
burial: 
"The priest did not want to take the 
heathen with him to Mecca, but the heathen 
went, followed the great men of Mecca to 
the mosque, entered there and prayed aud 
our Lor d accompanied him. The priest who 
relied on being a priest did not obtain admission to the mosque. 
"I n the beginning our Lor d created all ; 
the black, the white, the red, the brown and 
the yellow, the small and the tall. Our Lord 
did not create anyone saying: 'This is a 
heathen and this is a believer,' but he created 
all alike; with our Lor d there is neither 
slave nor free man, priest nor heathen, but TH E FREEDO M O F TH E FRE E 347 
everyone is free and everyone has a heart. 
I f a man, whether priest or heathen, has a 
good heart he will obtain Heaven. A s for 
reading, thou mayest have read all the books 
of the world, but i f thine heart is bad thou 
shalt not obtain Heaven. 
''Therefore our Lor d who knew the hearts 
of these dead men made the priest out for 
the fire and the heathen for Heaven." 
The people then departed, thinking of this 
friendship, of the pilgrimage to Mecca, of 
the words of the crier, of the prayer in the 
mosque, of the long return journey through 
the desert, of the sudden deaths of the priest 
and the heathen, of the strange happening in 
the cemetery and finally of the words of the 
chief magistrate. 
Thus ended the story of the priest and his 
heathen friend of the town of Kuk a i n the 
Bornu country of Africa . 
TH E FREEDO M O F TH E FRE E 
(Emancipation Exposition Poem) B y Benjamin Griffith Brawley 
WHE N the people of Jehovah to the 
promised land would go, 
They were shown a valiant leader for the 
conflict with the foe; 
But they wandered many weary years and 
faced the raging sea, 
Er e their children won the harvest of the 
Freedom of the Free. 
When the black men of the wilderness were 
wanted of the Lord , 
From America to Europe flashed the word 
with one accord; 
An d the Christian nations hankered for the 
glitter of the gain, 
Whil e the screaming of the eagle dulled the 
clanking of the chain. 
But the captive on the slaver's deck beneath 
the lightning's flash— 
Unto him were only scourging and the stinging of the lash; 
But such things as these must be, they say, 
and such the pruning be, 
Er e our children win the harvest of the 
Freedom of the Free. 
Fa r across the deep Atlantic speeds the vessel on its way, 
An d the nights are wild with weeping, and 
the days with tempests gray, 
Til l at length within the glory of the dawn 
the shore appears, 
An d the slave takes up the burden and the 
battle of the years. 
In the fury of the auction runs the clamor 
on and on : 
"Going ! Going ! Wh o bids higher? Going ! 
Going ! Going ! Gone! " 
An d the mocking bird is singing, and the 
lilies dance in glee, 
An d the slave alone is sighing for the 
Freedom of the Free. 
Now the wide plantation shimmers i n the 
freshness of the morn, 
An d the dusky workers scatter through the 
cotton and the corn, 
Wit h the problems of the ages in the yearning of their eyes, 
Whil e the slave whip sings forever underneath the azure skies. 
In the silence of the night and from the 
weird assembled throng 
Comes the beauty and the wailing of the 
dirge and Sorrow Song: 
"I've been listenin' all the night long for to 
hear some sinner pray; 
I've been waitin' all the night long for the 
breakin' of the clay." 
Til l at length from Maine to Mexico peals 
forth the trumpet blast, 
An d a wild expectant nation at the fury 
stands aghast; 
While the young men in their glory feel the 
fever of the fight, 
An d the blood drops of the firstborn stain 
the doorposts i n the night. 
In the crimson of the carnage, in the deluge 
of the flame, 
Come the black men to the trenches for the 
honor and the fame; 
An d they sell their hearts' blood dearly for 
humanity's decree, 
That their sons should have the promise of 
the Freedom of the Free. 348 TH E CRISIS 
Now a nation's second birthday blossoms 
from the gloom of night, 
An d a people stands bewildered at the dawning of the light; 
But the untried hands are willing, and the 
hearts are ever true 
To the call of home and country and the 
faith the fathers knew. , 
But the tempter whispers ever with monotonous refrain, 
That the struggle and the striving and the 
faith are all in vain; 
But from woodland wold and mountain peak 
eternal years reply : 
"Better live to fight like brave men than 
like coward slaves to die." 
Let us heed no tale of Ana k or Philistine in 
the land; 
Let us hear the word from Sina i and 
Jehovah's high command; 
Worship not the Golden Calf nor unto Baa l 
bend the knee, 
That our sons may rise triumphant i n the 
Freedom of the Free. 
LETTE R BO X 
ADVANCEMEN T AN D LYNCHING . 
I DESIR E herewith to express my approval of TH E CRISI S for its frankness 
and truthfulness concerning the outrages, 
indignities and injuries inflicted on the Negro 
by the white races and especially by the 
American white man. TH E CRISI S is full of 
information concerning the advancement of 
the Negro along all walks of life ; it puts the 
Negro in touch with the general advancement and uplift of his race and affords him 
a source of information to be acquired nowhere else. 
Respectfully yours, 
LUTHE R L . NEWMAN , 
Harrisburg, Pa . 
Being a monthly reader of TH E CRISIS , I 
would say that if this magazine would drop 
so much talk about the lynching of Negroes it 
would be a great credit to TH E CRISIS . I 
don't see where TH E CRISI S is stopping the 
lynching at all. Take up something else 
concerning the Negro race and let the lynching question go for a while. 
From yours truly, 
J. H . T. . 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
FRO M A NORTHER N WHIT E WOMAN . 
Mrs. Edward L . Buckley's subscription to 
TH E CRISI S expires December, 1913 . Wil l 
you kindly discontinue sending it after this 
date? To my understanding its influence is 
inflammatory and in that way far from 
beneficial to the race. 
FRO M A SOUTHER N WHIT E MAN . 
I inclose check for $ 1 to cover my subscription to TH E CRISIS . I appreciate the 
opportunity it affords for clear and coherent 
presentation of the educated colored man's 
point of view as -to the problems of race 
adjustment. 
FRO M A COLORE D TEACHER . 
Just yesterday I was discussing your work 
and position in relation to your race with a 
Southern white woman, and during our conversation she claimed to have noticed that 
you seldom, i f ever, bring out examples of 
the finer traits of her race i n their treatment 
of us. I cited to her instances where you had 
not been guilty of such, but she declared that 
several times when one of her race had been 
instrumental in dispersing a mob no* mention 
has been made of it in your magazine. 
H . S. DUNBAR , 
Paine College, Augusta, Ga . 
I find TH E CRISI S mighty interesting reading, though sometimes depressing, as the 
truth must always be i n certain aspects. 
CHARLE S W . CHESNUTT , 
Cleveland, 0 . 
I am always intensely moved by reading 
TH E CRISIS . Some of the sad things keep 
me awake at night, but on the whole there 
is much to encourage. I know no difference 
i n races or lands. I f God's principles are 
worth anything they obliterate trifles and 
stand only for character. 
FLOR A E . AVERY , 
Galesburg, 111. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 349 
SOUVENI R PROGRAM S 
O F TH E 
Emancipation Proclamation Exposition 
12th Regiment Armory, New York City, October 22 to 31, 1913 
Biographical sketches of prominent Negro men and women. 
Issue limited to 50,000 copies. 
THI S PROGRA M WIL L B E VALUABL E 
1. To the individual holder: It will be a constant reminder of 
the achievements of the race. 
2. To the advertiser: It will reach a select group of discriminating readers. 
Orders Ma y Be Sent Now Pric e ol Program 2 5 Cents 
' ADDRESS : 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Chairman 
2217 Seventh Avenue New York City 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
A year's subscription will be 
given free to anyone sending in 
at one time five paid-up yearly 
subscriptions to T H E CRISIS. 
This offer holds good until midnight, December 31, 1913. 
TH E CRISI S 
One Dollar a Year 
26 Vesey Street, New York City 
FREE SUIT 
Fre e Overcoa t 
) Fre e Outfi t an d 
$6 0 22a WEEK 
No matter what line of business you 
are in—what kind of a job you hold— 
what other line you are handling—or 
how much money you are making you 
simply can't afford to pass up this 
amazingly sensational and wonderfully 
liberal offer. No other tailoring concern 
in the world is in a position or can afford to duplicate this offer. We put 
you in business on our capital—make 
you a swell suit and overcoat FREE — 
make it so easy for you to succeed that 
:you simply can't help earning $60 a week and more
Outfits Cost Us $76,00 0 
Listen! This is the most gorgeously stupendous Agent's 
Outfit ever conceived and executed by the skill of man! 
Cost us $76,000—yet it costs you only 1 cent for a postal to 
get one. Our famous Boo k o f Gold , Masterpiece Edition 
shows 96 fashions, 220 samples—all different—all distinctive. Complete outfit—biggest and most magnificent ever 
produced—everything you need FRE E and beside you get 
Your Swell Suit and Overcoat Free 
Made to your own measure from style and fabric selected by you. Makes you the swellest dressed man in town. 
Everybody wants up-to-date clothes like yours, and orders 
pour in to you. W e prepay all express charges. You 
take no risk. $5,000 guarantee bond behind every garment 
—money back if not perfectly satisfactory. No money -
no experienc e necessary . Snappy selling helps and 
Valuable presents for your customers—everything FRE E 
and sent a t once . Write today—a postal will do. 
Great Central Tailoring Co. Dept. 756 Chicago, UL 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 350 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OU R CHRISTMA S CAR D 
The CRISIS 
which will come to you 
monthly during the new 
year as a gift from 
This card, beautifully printed in three colors on cards with gilded and beveled edge, together TH E CRISIS 
with envelopes, sent free In any quantity, for the asking. What better Christmas present than 26 Vesey St., New York 
SANTIAGO GEMS C.O.D/ M V 
The,look„d,ear.. bat a n exper t cao tell thed - m from GENUINE DIAMONDS 
The y are not Imitations of diamonds but a genuine stone, cu t an d faceted by 
skille d diamon d cutters exactly lik e a diamond , stand filing, fire an d acid tests 
like adiamond . Contains no glass, paeteor foilbackmg . It sparkle s juetlik e a 
diamon d an d on accounto f thei r great hardness wil l retain thei r brillianc y 
forever . T o advertise these Santiago Gem8 we wil l fo r a shor t time Bend your 
choice of the above Solid Gol d ring s CO.D . | 5 00 for the Ladie s wit h % curato r 
$10.00 for the Gents wit h 1 '-.? carat Santiago Gems by mai l or express. Giv e it 
any test you desi re and if you fi mi it i a not all we clai m retur n it at our expense . 
Sen d your exact size an d orde r at once as this Specia l Offer is for a Bhorttim e 
only . Diamon d Jewelr y Co.,Dep . 2 6 ,18 9 W. Iladlson SU,Chicago , III. 
WANT A JOB? 
Sleeping-car Porter s 
wanted for summer and 
permanent service. No 
experience necessary. 
Writ e to-day for full 
information. 
AMERICA N SERVIC E SCHOO L 
Instruction Department 
80 Fifth Avenue - - - New York City 
SITUATIO N WANTE D 
Competent young man desires position 
as stenographer and typewriter; rapid and 
accurate; touch operator with speed of 
fifty words per minute; could furnish own 
machine. Address "R, " care Advertising 
Department, 
TH E 
26 Vesey Street 
CRISI S 
New York 
Mention T H E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 351 
GIV E U S A N HOU R 
FOR THIS SWELL SUIT 
Made to Your Measure 
T T should not take over an 
A
 and the suit Is yours. You no 
saw a suit half as swell—or as 
well made—or as perfect fitting—or as up-to-date. You 
choose yuur own cloth and 
the style you want It made. 
Yourfrlendswill flock to you 
all wanting to know uhuut It I 
and you simply take their 
orders. You can be the beat 
dresser for miles around 
without spending a cent. 
Write Us a Postal Card 
and we will send you absolutely free our Elegant Outtlt 
which Includes everything. 
We Prepa y Al l Express Charges. 
This ia the chanc e of your lifetime , so writ e us today. Don't 
wait. A pusU l wil l do. 
AMERICAN WOOLEN MILLS CO., 
Dep( U5I CHICACO j 
hour 
WANTED—ON E MA N O E WOMA N IN EVER Y 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Best paying 
small business on earth! Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Write for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
STAR T A BUSINESS OF YOUR OWN 
We want live, hustling men and women in every 
village, town and city to start a big successful 
business of their own. Experience not needed; we 
teach you the business. If you have the real 
will power you can have an independent business 
that will pay you from $75 to $100 per month. 
Write to-day before some one in your territory 
gets ahead of you. Just inclose a 2-cent stamp for 
particulars. 
A. BLOUN T & COMPAN Y 
Washington N. C. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to 
$500 a week. Why can't you? By our method 
you can start With. $5 and up. We offer you thirty 
live, money-making mail order plans. You can 
make 96 cents profit on every dollar order. We 
furnish circulars, printed matter and place your 
advertising at lowest rates. Send 10 cents for 
complete outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
2 0 Inches Wide 
10 Inches Lon g 
Only 4;45 
The wonderful Ptay-Tyde patent process, owned by Q B 
proveni the dulicate fluua from breaking. Ye t they coat 
you leaa than you pay elsewhere for ordinary willows. 
Stay-Tyde Willow Plumes 
23in. wid e 22 in . lon g 5.SO 26in. wid e 25 in . lon g 7.9 0 
25in. wid e 24 in . lon g 6.9 0 29in. wid e 27 in . lon g 9.9 0 
30 in . wid e 27 in . lon g $11.9Q 
We hav e establishe d a world ­
wide reputation on our No.401 mag -
nilicoot 19-inch French Cur l Flumo . 
made of rich. glossy, male 
stock, with wide, broad fibres and 
Frenc h Cur l Plumett 
17 in.. Special, $1.9 5 
18 " " 2.4 8 
19 ** Ex.wide, S.O O 
20 " " 7.5 0 
22 " " lO-O O BlncK, white and c 
Send 25c to cover express charges and we will ship 
any of above C.O.D. for free examination. Or , send 
full purchase price and we will send all charges pre­ paid. Money promptly refunded if for any reason yon 
are not satisfied. 
Send for free catalog of French or Willow Plumes, 
Ostrich Bands and Aigrettes, and get a complete $25 Course in Millinery, Dyeing, Cleaning, Curling, et c 
SOUT H AFRICA N IMPORTIN G CO . 
1841 Wabash Ave . Dept. 4603 CHICAG O 
COLORED MEN 
WANTE D T O PREPAR E A S 
SLEEPING-CA R AN D TRAI N 
PORTERS . 
No experience necessary. Positions pay $65 to $100 a month. 
Steady work. New York roads. 
Passes and uniforms furnished when 
necessary. Write now. 
, Dept . 19, Indianapolis, Ind . 
SE E OUR SPECIA L OFFE R 
PAG E 349 
Highly 
Artistic 
Postcards 
of Negro Subjects 
in Colors 
W. E. B. Du Bois, the late Paul Laurence Dunbar, 
Booker T. Washington, on postcards in halftone 
Advance sale of Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year's and 
other pretty cards. We announce the sale of calendars of Negro 
subjects done up in colors and halftone, handsomely designed. 
Nothing comic, but work of real art. Catalogue contains confidential prices to agent. Retailer free. 
They are big sellers for bazaars and fairs. Samples of all 
postcards and one calendar sent for 35 cents postpaid. 
J . GRIFFIT H AR T COMPAN Y 
36-38 BEEKMA N STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 352 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Vnhi e Unequaled . Sold on $j.oo 
Profit Margi n From 
Factory to User 
"Write for price s 
an d othe r styles. 
Sen d for catalogue . 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS , 
Greenfield , Ohi o 
Largest Negr o Carriag e concer n i n the Unite d States. 
TH E EQUITABL E ASSURANC E 
SOCIET Y O F OKLAHOM A 
Incorporated and licensed by the Insurance 
Department of the State of Oklahoma to write life, 
health and accident insurance on the level premium 
basis. No assessments. Address Home Office 
Peoples Bank & Trust Company Bldg. 
Muskogee ------ - Oklahoma 
Telephone Connection 
t
0 "DEACON " JOHNSON 
(That Cheerful Entertainer) 
Leader, Mandolin and Second Tenor with 
TH E ' 'DEACON' ' JOHNSO N QUARTE T 
Montreal New York Philadelphia 
Permanent Address: 
Times Sq. Sta., Box 317, New York City 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
TermB Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio: 231 W. 134th St. New York City 
CONCER T SOLOIS T 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONE S 
Soprano 
For terms write 32 West 131st Street, 
New York City 
J. E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August. 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
Thi s Sui t I s Your s 
fo r On e Hour' s Wor k 
Wea r it, an d whe n your friends adm i 
simpl y take thei r order s fo r one like 
their choice from our largo selection. 
way you can get all the clothes yov 
absolutely free. It's easy, for our suits 
have class sticking out al l over the m 
an d sell like wildfire, an d no wonder , 
for they are the niftiest, swellest, most 
up-to-date clothes you ever saw. Ever y 
(me made to measure an d guaranteed 
to fit. 24 hours' examination allowed. 
An d the lowest prices kuown . 
We Pay Expressage on Everything 
Yo u don't have to invest a cent. We 
go the limit wit h our men . W e furnis h 
everything yon need free i n our 
Big, Complete Outfit 
W© take the risk. To u wil l make 
good. Hundred s are now wearin g the 
swellest suits i n town without costing 
them a cent. Yo u can doit . 
Act Quick. Get Busy. Send Us a Postal 
Simpl y writ e your name on a postal 
and send it today. Th e outfit an d our 
grand offer wil l come to you by retur n 
mail . 
PARAGON TAILORING CO., 
Dept.] |5] CHICAGO 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Sti 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
TYPEWRITERS 
Agents' Prices 
One machine at wholesale 
price to introduce our goods. 
Eargains in every make. 
Typewriters for $5.00 up. 
STANDAR D TYPEWRITE R 
EXCHANG E 
31-B Park Row New York 
BOKAR A DIAMONDS . Agents, everyone, to wear 
and sell our famous Bokara diamonds. Write for 
sample offer and catalog free. 
NORTHWESTER N JEWELR Y COMPAN Y 
Dept. 24 
2141 Summerdale Avenue Chicago. 111. 
DESIRABL E APARTMEN T 
Conveniences; 
Moderate rent. 
Four rooms: second floor 
heated. One or two adults 
Wit h owner, 816 Lafayette Avenue 
Brooklyn, N. Y. 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price 50c each 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hai r Making, Chiropody 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
Mention T H E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 353 
$6 0 A WEE K an d EXPENSE S 
That's the money you can get this your. I moan It. I wunt' County Sales Managers 
quick, men or women who behove In the square doal, who will go Into partnership with 
me. No capital or exporlenco needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Ful l length 
bath In any room. Folds In small roll, bandy as an umbrolla. I tell you It's great 1 
GREAT ! Rivals $100 bath room. Now UstenI I want YO U to handle your county. 
1*11 furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can net blgner 
money In a week with me than you ever made In a month before—I KNO W IT I 
TW O SALES A DAY—$30 0 A MONTH 
That's what you get—ovory month. Needed In every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities_ for all the people. Take the _orders right and left. Quick 
YOU ! 
YESY0 U 
CAN GET IT 
sales, Immense profits, 
Mathlaa. Florida. $120 
LOOK at these men. Kunkle, Ohio, received $2-10 first week; 
In two days; Corrlgan, New York, $114 In 60 hours; Newton, 
California. $(i0 in three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALE S A DA Y MEAN S $300 A MONTH . The work Is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It means a business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You cannot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, so 
can you. Act, then, quick. SENT) NO MONEY . Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustle I 
H . S . ROBINSO N 
President 
190 Vanc e St., Toledo , O . 
DEMONSTRATING 
TUB FRE E 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Long Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLIN G GOO D HOME S IN CORONA , with all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to New York. Corona is in the 
very center of Greater New York, and in a few months will be reached 
by the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand 
Central Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home with all improvements at a moderate 
cost. We would be glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New York City, has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all New York for children. For full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L . S. REE D & COMPAN Y 
142 Hunter Avenue Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 
Mention T>HB CRISIS, 354 TH E CRISIS 
"The Negro's Progress in 
Fifty Years " 
Articles by well-known authors, including 
Booker T. Washington, LL . D. 
Principa l Tuskege e Norma l an d Industria l Institute . 
W. E. Burghardt Du Bois, Ph. D. 
Edito r T H E C RISIS , Ne w York . 
Edward T. Ware, A. B. 
Presiden t Atlant a University . 
Kelly Miller, LL . D. 
Dea n Howar d University . 
Prices: paper, $1; cloth, $1.50 
A MERICAN 7 A CADEM Y OF POLITICAL 
AND SOCIAL SCIENCE 
West Philadelphia Station 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Mqnographs Sold Separately 
Address: 
DEPARTMEN T O F SOCIOLOG Y 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating -reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York, N. Y. 
A Book of Exceptional Interest 
to Readers of T H E CRISIS 
LIBERI A 
Descriptive — History — Problems 
By FREDERIC K STAR R 
of the 
University of Chicago 
No other book like it. Buy it. Read it. 
Talk about it. Sent postpaid for $1.1 0 
postal money order. Address 
FREDERIC K STAR R 
554 1 Drexel Avenue - - - Chicago, IllSuitable Books for Holiday Gifts 
Address T H E CRISIS 
2 6 Vesey Street - - - New York 
ANNOUNCEMEN T 
MASTERPIECE S O F 
NEGR O ELOQUENC E 
Edited by A LIC E M . D UNBA R 
Fift y speeches of remarkabl e oratory . 
A magnificent tribute to the intellectual 
development of the colored race. 
Strongl y endorsed by Xegr o scholars. 
A splendid piece of book workmanship . 
Fin e gift for the holidays. 
Price $2.5 0 Postage 2 6 cents 
TH E BOOKER Y PUBLISH -
IN G COMPAN Y 
1 2 East 38th Street, New York 
A new book of special interest 
LINCOL N an d SLAVER Y 
By ALBER T E . PILLSBUR Y 
Mr . Pillsbury , wh o wa s formerl y Attorney-Genera l of Massachusetts, give s 
i n this volum e an admirabl e revie w of Abraha m Lincoln's rea l attitud e towar d 
Slaver y an d Emancipation , wit h historica l evidence , principall y fro m Lincol n 
himself, of his steady an d consisten t efforts to restric t the forme r an d accom ­
plis h the latter. It is a valuabl e contributio n to Lincol n literature , as helpin g 
to a true understandin g of this greatest of al l American s in the supreme act 
of his life . A t all bookstores. 12mo, 75 cents net. B y mail , 82 cents. 
HOUGHTON-MIFFLI N COMPAN Y 
4 Park Street Boston, Mass. 
Mention T H E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 355 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
Residence 2546 Michigan Office Phone 
Bell Phone £-2161 Home 58 Main 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Oonnielor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
117 W. 6th Street Kansas City, Mo. 
FRANKLI N W. WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Seal Estate Conveyancer 
206 Parrlah Street Durham, N. 0. 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L . D. Telephone, 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Bykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Fort Hil l Gable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attomeys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M. 
Residence, New 733-A. 
THOS . E. GREENE , JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
William H . Austin Edmund O. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTIN & AUSTIN 
St. Paul Building, 220 Broadway, New York 
Suite 7—H , I, J , K 
Telephones: 7400, 6365, 5366 Oortlandt 
B. F. BOOT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
57 N. SECON D STREE T - MEMPHIS , TENN . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
LEGA L DIRECTORY—Continued 
Telephones: { 
HARR Y E. DAVIS 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Bldg. Cleveland, O. 
Telephone 5662 Cedar 
R. O. LE E 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Practice in All Courts 
26 and 26 Union Block, 4th & Cedar, St. Paul. Minn. 
Toio„v,„„an . /Office: Main 9168 
Telephones: | Residence : Vermont 1156 
E . BURTO N CEEUT I 
Lawyer 
600-501-502 Thorpe Building 
Corner Broadway and Franklin Streets 
Residence: 1540 W. 36th Place Los Angeles, Cal. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4886 Morningside 
DR. D. W. ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W. Cor. 133d St. and Lenox Ave., New York 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m„ 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays by Appointment 
'Phones: Residence, 515; Office, 642: Hospital, 403. 
DR. J . R. SHEPPAR D 
Physician and Surgeon 
Chief surgeon and superintendent of Sheppard Sanitarium and 
Nurse Training School. 
Marshall Texas 
Telephone 4048 Prospect 
JOH N B. MOSELE Y 
REA L ESTATE and INSURANCE 
640 Fulton Street Brooklyn, N. Y. 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, 111. 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 3936 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York, N. Y . 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 356 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 2 6 Vesey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25, 191 1 
OFFICER S 
National President—Mr. Moorneld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr . John E . Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller, Baltimore. Md. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W. E . B. Du Bois, New York. 
National Organizer—Dr. M . C. B. Mason, Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss May Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which TH E CRISIS puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY , join this 
Association and help us to put our words into 
DEEDS . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per 
year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying 
$25 per year. 
Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
$2 to $10 per year. 
Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 357 
Earle's Princess Hair Oil 
This is the preparation you are looking 
for. It keeps your hair and scalp in good 
condition. It has no equal for dry and 
feverish scalps. Sent anywhere on receipt 
of 50 cents. 
JAMES T. EARL E 
P. O. Box 390 - - Newport, R. I. 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to 
settle on FRE E Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom ---- - New Mexico 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
I specialize In every phase of artistic picture making 
Send me your photos for enlargement. Prices reasonable 
Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phon e 6688 Douglass. 
WEB B STUDI O 
3519 State Street Chicago, III. 
The new odorless disinfectant at 
less than one-quarter cent per gallon. 
Safe, efficient, economical. 
The only disinfectant that absolutely destroys any odor without leaving another. "U-Zit" is just starting. 
Start with it. Antiseptic and harmless. 
One teaspoonful makes three gallons. 
Hot or cold water. 
"U-Zit" for scrubbing. "U-Zit" for 
dishwashing. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning woodwork, 
windows, refrigerators. 
"U-Zit" for thoroughly disinfecting 
toilets, etc. 
"U-Zit" for cleaning the barn, 
dairies, etc. 
"U-Zit" to kill all germs and better 
preserve health. 
"U-Zit" is guaranteed to be as represented or money refunded. Sample 
test free. Can we be of service to 
you? Personal references given. 
"U-Zit" is put up in cans and retailed 
for the small sum of $1 per pound. 
Special five-pound can, $4, F. O. B. 
Chicago. Terms, thirty days. Address 
U-ZIT SPECIALTIES CO. 
3726 S. Dearborn St., Chicago, 111. 
The Loyal Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
is incorporated under the 
laws of the District of Columbia. Its object is to combine the Negroes of the 
world for their mutual advancement along industrial and commerciallines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment by the Negro of 
rn^ H c.. n . nm & his civiland political rights. 
Grand Supreme Thi s movem en t is internaGovernor tionalinits scope; we have 
lodges not only in the United States but in 
Jamaica, B. W. I.; Colon,BocasdelToro, Panama (Canal Zone) and Costa Rica. It is a dark 
day for the Negro and he must come together. 
Race movements have failed because our people were told that by contributing thereto the 
race only would be benefited, but no tangible 
individaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the member pays 35c. per month in the Association and receives $4.00 per week sick benefits and $100 at death. We not only look 
after the race but each individual member as 
well. Abigconvention issoon to be held here. 
We want a lodge in every village, hamlet and 
town and a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizers wanted everywhere. For 
fttll particulars, write 
KNIGHTS O F MALACHITE S 
Will i You St. N . W . Washington, D. C . j 
Consult Our List of Suitable Books for 
Holiday Gifts 
TH E CRISI S 
26 Vesey Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
U-ZI T 358 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Religious 
Training School 
" I cordiall y commen d the school's interest an d needs to al l wh o 
believ e i n the Negr o race an d i n ou r obligatio n to hel p promot e its 
intellectual, mora l an d religiou s uplift. " 
—REV . DR. CHARLE S H . PARKHURST , Ne w Yor k City . 
It Is MORE Than a Mere School 
It Is a COMMUNITY of Service and Uplift 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the 
country in improved Negro community life wherever our 
trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign 
mission fields, Y . M . G. A . and Y . W. G. A . secretaries and 
district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies 
under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and 
actual every-day practice through the school's social service 
department. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry, industrial 
training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious 
students. Communities requiring social workers should 
write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School, - Durham, N . C . 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund of 
$15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 359 
A Life of 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNE Y 
By 
MAU D CUNE Y HAR E 
(His daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was 
one of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like 
to inspire your children with the life of this "Tribune of the 
Black People"? 
8vo; 250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
Published to-day. 
TH E CRISIS PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
26 Vesey Street ..... . New York 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional 
endowment needed, $50,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
36th and Dearborn Sts., Chicago, III. 360 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Gir l 
By MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Author of "Half a Man" 
HAZE L 
Price $1.00 net. Postage prepaid, $1.08. For sale 
through our agents and at TH E CRISIS office. 
CRISI S PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 361 
An Illustrated Weekly Magazine for Busy Thinking People 
THE INDEPENDENT now appears in a new form 
with many improvements. A larger page, more and 
better illustrations, a wider popular appeal. Preeminently a forward-looking magazine, its articles and 
pictures dealing with men and affairs of to-day and tomorrow. A timely, human, comprehensive, non-partisan 
weekly journal. 
The Independent was founded in 1848 as a progressive 
religious journal, particularly for Congregationalists who 
protested against conservatism in theology and pro-slavery 
politics. With the New York Tribune, it was the most 
influential foe of slavery in the land until slavery had come 
to an end through war. 
It has ever been the foe of race prejudice in all its 
forms and has stood stanchly for the right of the Negro 
and all other oppressed peoples. Few periodicals have 
espoused more unpopular causes and still fewer have seen 
so many of them triumph. 
The new Independent will be different from any other 
periodical in the world. Price $3 a year. 
We have a liberal proposition for agents. Write 
Desk F 
119 WES T FORTIET H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
TH E INDEPENDEN T 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 362 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
International Records for 
Speed, Accuracy, Stability 
Tell the tale of TYPEWRITE R 
SUPREMACY . They prove 
==== = that the ========= 
Underwood 
HOLD S EVER Y INTERNATIONA L AWAR D EVE R MAD E FO R 
Rapid, Perfect Wor k 
"The Machine You Will 
Eventuall y Bu y 
UNDERWOO D TYPEWRITE R CO . (Inc.), Underwood Building, NE W YOR K 
Branches in Al l Principal Cities 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Get a Standard Life Policy 
and Then Hold On to If 
THERE ARE 
THIRTEEN Reasons Why 
Let us send them to you and let us tell you 
what we can do for you at your age. Give 
name, age and occupation. 
Capital Stock (Paid in) . . . $100,000.00 
Surplus 21,211.00 
Purely old line legal reserve. Not fraternal. Not assessment. 
OFFICER S 
HEMA X E . PERRY, President 
A . L . Lewis, Vice-President R. L . Isaacs, Vice-President. 
L . J . Garth, Vice-President Thomas H . Hayes, Vice-President 
Harry H . Pace, Secretary A . F. Herndon, Treasurer 
Thomas H . Slater, M . D., Medical Director 
M . W. Bullock, Counsel H . C . Dugas, Assistant Secretary 
George Dyre Eldridge, Consulting Actuary 
Standard Life Insurance Company 
HOM E OFFIC E ATLANTA , GA . 
Branch offices in Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee and Kentucky Suitable Gift Book s 
| | PRIC E INCLUDE S POSTAG E |JJ K 
TH E QUES T OF TH E SILVER FLEECE . W . E . B . D U Boi s $1.50 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS. Charle s W . Chesnut t 1.65 
HAZEL . Mar y Whit e Ovingto n 1.08 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED MAN . Anonymou s 1.40 
TH E TESTING FIRE. Alexande r Corke y 1.35 
LYRICS OF LOWL Y LIFE . Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.40 
MARROW OF TRADITION. Charle s W . Chesnut t 1.65 
TH E SPORT OF TH E GODS. Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.65 
NORRIS WRIGHT GUNEY . Mau d Cune y Har e 1.60 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. Leli a Amo s Pendleto n 1.65 
SOILS OF BLAC K FOLK . W . E . B . D U Bois 1.35 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . Kell y Mille r 2.15 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. B . G . Brawle y 1.35 
HAL F A MAN . Mar y Whit e Ovingto n 1.12 
MIN D OF PRIMITIVE MAN . Fran z Boa s 1.65 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. Willia m Sinclai r 1.65 
JOH N BROWN . W . E . B . D U Bois 1.45 
RAC E PREJUDICE. Jea n Fino t 3.25 
STORY OF TH E NEGRO. Booke r T . Washingto n 3.25 
FLOWER O' TH E PEACH . Perciva l Gibbo n 1.45 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Twenty-si x Vese y Stree t ... . Ne w Yor k Cit y 