Frank Walts 
Crisis 
May 191NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR THE 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 
President 
MOORFIELD STOREY 
Chairman Board of Directors 
MAJOR J. E. SPIXGARN 
Acting Chairman of the Board 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON 
Treasurer 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
Secretary 
JOHN R. SHILLADY 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR . W. E. B. DUBOI S 
Field Secretary 
JAMES WELDON JOHNSON 
Assistant Secretary 
WALTER F. WHITE 
The N. A. A. C. P. has no endowments. It is supported entirely 
by voluntary contributions and membership fees. It appeals to all 
fair-minded citizens, white and colored, to join in the effort to secure 
simple justice under the law for colored citizens. 
Heretofore the Association has not had money enough adequately to carry on the fight. Join now and help 
The Moorfield Storey Drive for 
50,000 MEMBERS 
Negroes in many states are disfranchised, discriminated against, 
"Jim-Crowed," lynched, denied equal protection of the laws, equal 
educational advantages for their children, and equal economi c opportunity. National honor demands justice for all citizens. 
If every reader of The Crisis will become a member, the Asso ­
ciation's work can be made more effective. D O I T NOW . 
Date , 1918 . 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year 
in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 
with the stipulation that one dollar of any amount remitted herewith in 
excess of one dollar is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Street 
City and State TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GR\NVILLE DILL, BUSINESS 
MANAGER 
Contents for May, 1918 
PICTURE S 
Page 
COVER. Portrait of Matty Thomas in "Chu Chin Chow." By Frank M. 
Walts. (See page 29.) 
MEN OF THE MONTH 14 
THE LYNCHING A T MONROE, LA 20 
MIDNIGHT AUDIENCE. Booker Washington Theatre, St. Louis, Mo 26-27 
"THE BUFFALOES." The 367th Infantry, N. A 28 
ARTICLE S 
A LEGEND OF THE BLUE JAY. By Ruth Anna Fisher 12 
AGAIN IT IS THE VIBRANT MAY. A Poem. By Georgia Douglas Johnson. 12 
THE AFRO-PORTUGUESE. By P. E. Pereira 13 
THE BURNING OF JIM McILHERRON. An N. A. A. C. P. Investigation. 
By Walter F. White 16 
DEPARTMENT S 
EDITORIAL 7 
MEN OF THE MONTH 15 
THE LOOKING GLASS 21 
THE HORIZON 30 
TH E JUN E CRISI S 
The June Crisis will be Soldiers' Number. The cover in colors will be from the poster painted 
for the Circle for Negro War Relief by Robert Edmund Jones. There will be special letters from 
the cantonments and portraits of Negro officers. Articles will deal with the black man's part in 
this war. 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and DRAWINGS relating to colored people arc desired. They will be received at 
the sender's risk, but if postage is enclosed effort will be made to return them safely, if unavailable. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM, N. C. 
Open to Students of Either Sex. 
It is more than a mere school. It is a community at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections 
of the country in improved Negro community life wherever 
our trained workers locate. 
The following departments are already in successful operation: Teacher Training, Industrial, Literary, Academic and 
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Household 
Economics and Departments of Music. 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed by any School for 
the Education of Negro Youth in the South. 
The next term opened Monday, October I , 1917. For catalog 
and detailed information, address 
President, JAMES E. SHEPARD, 
DURHAM - - - NORTH CAROLINA 
Th e A. & T. Summe r 
Schoo l 
The Agricultural and Technical College 
The Nineteenth Annual Session begins 
June 24, 1918, and continues six weeks. 
Pleasant surroundings, strong faculty, attractive courses. 
Teachers are advised to send Registration Fee at once and secure lodging 
in advance. 
A Teachers' Institute, under the management of Experts, will be conducted 
co-incidentally with the last two weeks 
of the session. 
Registration Fee: to new students $2.00 
" " : to former students 51.00 
For information as to Summer School, 
Institute or for catalog, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLEY , 
Greensboro, N . C. 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
For reasonably mature students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$125. Fall term begins "Wednesday, September 18, 1918. 
The Summer School for Teachers, from 
July 1st to July 31st, inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
For further information write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, 
Principal. 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 5 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal 
School and Collage, with manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortyeight years of succeesful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA, , GA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and 
Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September 19, 1917. 
For Information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
for Catalog Address 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P. O. DRAWER 524 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUTH ATLANTA GEORGIA 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, hoard, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light 
COURSES OF STUDY 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened October 8, 1917. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA GA 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A„ 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists. trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Chris 
tian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W . A . FOUNTAIN , Presiden t 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention THE CRISIS 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY , N . C . 
A Religions Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. An d Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water , Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session Opened Wednesday, October 3, 1917. 
For Further Information Address 
D . C . SUGGS , President or 
J. E. Aggrey, Registrar. 
WILBERFORC E 
UNIVERSIT Y 
SUMME R 
SCHOO L 
5t h Annua l Sessio n 
Jun e 2 4 — Augus t 3 
191 8 
College. Normal and Vocational 
Courses offered. Splendid opportunity 
for review of teacher's professional 
work and advance or review work 
along literary lines. 
Large and specially prepared faculty, 
ample accommodation, excellent equipment. 
Special course of lectures. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, President. 
Wilberforce University. 
GILBERT H. JONES, Dean, 
College of Arts and 
Director of Summer School. 
For full particulars write the Director. 
T0UGAL00 COLLEGE 
MISSISSIPP I 
" The best school for Negroes in the 
State."—Bishop Theodore D. Bratton. 
COLLEG E 
Regular Four Year A. B. Course 
Two Year Teacher Training Course 
ACADEM Y 
Choice of Seven Courses — College 
Preparatory, Agricultural, Mechanical, 
Home Economics, Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical. 
Out in the country. Expenses low. 
Four Prize Scholarships of $25.00 Each Offered 
Boys for Best Entrance Examinations to 
Eighth and Ninth Grade. 
For particulars 
Writ e Presiden t W . T . HOLME S 
Tougaloo, Hinds County, Mississippi 
Th e Slater Industrial an d 
Stat e Norma l Schoo l 
Fo r Colored Yout h of Bot h Sexe s 
WINSTON-SALEM, N. C. 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
In Academic Subjects, 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teacher's Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV. Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
For further Information communicate with 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal 
SLATER STATE NORMAL SCHOOL, 
Winston-Salem, N. C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O . L . COLEMAN , President 
THE LINCOLN HOSPITAL 
AND 
HOME SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the City of New York offers to young 
women a three years' course of instruction in 
Nursing. Capacity of hospital 420 beds. Post 
Graduate course of six months to graduates 
of accredited training schools. For information apply to SUPERINTENDENT of 
NURSES, Lincoln Hospital and Home, New 
York City. 
Mention The Crisis. THE CRISIS 
Vol . 16-No . 1 MAY , 191 8 Whol e No . 9 1 
Editorial 
SAV E 
I BELIEV E that this is Our 
Wa r and not President Wilson's Wa r and that no matter 
ho w man y blunders the administration makes, o r ho w man y obstacles it puts in our wa y w e must 
wor k the harde r to win the war. 
I wan t to urge the importanc e o f 
advertising in every wa y you can the 
campaign fo r Wa r Savings—savings 
o f money, o f food, o f labor. In doing 
so you kill three birds with one stone : 
1 . Promot e the success o f the 
war. 
2 . Increase the individual wealth 
o f you r constituency. 
3 . Put them on a commo n footing 
with other patriotic American 
citizens and promot e those 
commo n bonds that gradually 
break down prejudice. 
I f the colored citizens o f the country seize this opportunity to emphasize their America n citizenship b y 
effective wa r activities, they will 
scor e tremendously. Whe n men fight 
together and wor k together and save 
together, this foolishness o f race 
prejudic e disappears. 
Georg e G . Bradford . 
TH E NEGR O AN D TH E WA R DEPART -
MENT . 
I T seems to be necessary to insist upon justice toward the 
Negr o from the Wa r Department. W e are well awar e 
that much o f this injustice is incidental and not intentional. A s Ne ­
groes, w e propos e to fight for the 
right, no matter wha t our treatment 
ma y be ; but w e submit to the public 
that intentional injustice toward colored soldiers is the poorest investment that this nation can make just 
now. 
First, let us recall the position o f 
Colonel Young : he is still imprisoned 
in Ohio on full pay with nothing to 
do. The Examining Board recommended that Colonel Youn g be "retained in active service." The Secretary of Wa r approved this recommendation and directed that "Colonel 
Youn g be placed on active duty." 
The Adjutant General, knowing the 
difference between "active service" 
and "active duty" immediately retired Colonel Youn g from active 
service and placed him on active duty 
with nothing to do. 
Twelve million Negroes demand 
that Colonel Young be restored to 
"active service!" 
Again, the Ninety-second Division 
o f Negr o troops wa s established by 
the Secretary o f Wa r and approved 
by President Wilson ove r the protest 
o f the General Staff: but no effort 
wa s made to secure for this division 
certain necessary persons o f technical training. The colored officers at 
Fort Des Moines wer e given no artillery training. Farmers from the 
South, largely illiterate and without 
mechanical skill or education, wer e 
assigned to the artillery in the first 
draft. This, however, could easily 
have been remedied by transferring 
from other regiments in this division 
and from other divisions, educated 
and technically trained colored men. 
The permission to make such trans-8 TH E CRISIS 
fers has been denied by the War Department. Unless this decision is reversed, the Ninety-second Division is 
bound to be a failure as a unit organization. Is it possible that persons 
in the Wa r Department wish this division to be a failure? 
Thirdly, we call the attention o f the 
public to Bulletin No. 3 5 sent out 
from Camp Funston, Kans., which 
says: 
"The Division Commande r has repeatedly urged that all colored members o f his command, and especially 
the officers and non-commissioned officers, should refrain from goin g 
where their presence will be resented. 
In spite of this injunction one of the 
sergeants of the Medical Department 
has recently precipitated the precise 
trouble that should be avoided and 
then called on the Division Commander to take sides in a row that 
should never have occurred and would 
not have occurred had the sergeant 
placed the general good above his 
personal pleasure and convenience. 
This sergeant entered a theatre, as he 
undoubtedly had a legal right to do, 
and precipitated trouble by making 
it possible to allege race discrimination in the seat he was given. He is 
strictly within his legal rights in this 
matter and the theatre manager is 
legally wrong. Nevertheless, the sergeant is guilty o f the greater wron g 
in doing anything no matter ho w legally correct that will provoke race 
animosity. " 
Can it be that General Ballou is not 
going to protect his colored officers in 
their simplest legal rights? W e are 
aware ho w careful colored men have 
to be everywher e in the United States 
in "stirring up " race antagonism, but 
the greatest danger is not that they 
will carelessly bring on race antagonism, but rather that they will invite 
it b y submitting to intolerable insult. 
Finally, we call attention to one 
other action o f the Wa r Department, 
prefacing it by the information that 
there are twenty-three colored doc ­
tors in Detroit, that they are graduates o f some o f the foremost medica l 
schools o f the country and that they 
have long practised amon g both colored and white people. Notwithstanding this, the followin g letter has 
been sent to local Exemptio n Boar d 
No . 4 : 
"Gentlemen: 
"It has been called to the attention 
of this department that man y o f you r 
whit e registrants have been examined 
by colored doctors. 
"This matter has been taken up 
with the Adjutant General and he desires that this practise be discontinued. 
"By the direction o f the Adjutan t 
General, 
"Signed b y Robert K. Davis. " 
Z . W . MITCHELL . 
FROM time to time it become s 
the painful duty o f Th e 
Crisi s to expos e fraud and 
humbug. Z. W . Mitchell has 
been operating in the Middle West 
and in Canada fo r man y years. Usually his methods just escape transgression o f the letter o f the law, but 
he found it best to remov e from Canada, leaving a membe r o f his family 
in the penitentiary and recently he 
himself has been in jail in Iowa . A 
prominent white merchant o f Iowa 
writes us: 
"I am glad to learn o f the where ­
abouts o f the Negro, Z. W . Mitchell, 
fo r I know a lot about his dishonest 
doings and pretentions. Some four 
or five years ago he came to Oskaloosa 
and worked along the same lines 
which you r letter indicates he is doing 
at Springfield now, namely, 'Loya l 
Legion Co-operative System,' fo r the 
solution o f the Negr o problem. He is 
an intelligent Negr o and a slick fellow and knows ho w to line up a lot o f 
prominent men fo r his work . Mr. 
, Negr o lawyer of , read EDITORIAL 9 
his character better than some o f the 
rest o f us. He received about one 
hundred dollars from me, through 
misrepresentation and false pretenses, but go t away from Oskaloosa 
before I fully comprehended the real 
facts leading up to my cashing his 
draft. I could not locate him fo r 
about three years, then I put 
to wor k trying to collect m y money 
and I think he traced him through 
Th e Crisis . Mr. collected 
part o f the money, but later, failing 
to make satisfactory settlement, I 
placed my correspondence and various data in the hands o f the County 
Attorney, wh o called me before the 
Grand Jury some two years ago, and 
it did not take them long to indict 
Mr. Mitchell. He wa s arrested in 
Quincy, Ill., brought to Oskaloosa, put 
in jail to await trial; but through the 
influence o f some attorneys and his 
goo d promises, he wa s released from 
jail, on wha t grounds I do not know. 
I declined to see him or have any conference, but the indictment is still 
ove r him and all the evidence in the 
wa y o f telegrams, letters, papers, etc., 
are now in the hands o f the County 
Attorney. 
"M y opinion is that he is a slick 
and smart rascal and his nefarious 
wor k ought to be stopped. " 
A n authorized agent o f Tuskegee 
writes: 
"Just befor e Dr. Washington summoned me to meet him in Chicago, 
late in 1912 , or early the following 
year, I ran across this same man, 
Mitchell, wh o at that time wa s operating in eastern Iowa with a base at 
Muscatine, Iowa . Some o f our 
donors at Clinton and Davenport (in 
Iowa ) bitterly complained to Dr. 
Washington about Z. W. Mitchell 
then. I got in after him and especially with the aid of Mr. , a 
Negr o lawyer, chased Mitchell into 
Missouri. Later I learned he wa s living in St. Louis. 
" I may say here that this man 
Mitchell has caused Tuskegee to lose 
many o f its donors. I actually saw 
with my own eyes a letter he claims 
Dr. Washington gave him out in Ohio 
many years ago—in the late nineties 
—during President McKinley's first 
term as our President. He is a very 
intelligent-looking individual and is 
an exceedingly smooth talker. He is 
a great liar, a scoundrel, a thief, wh o 
plays on charity and actually belongs 
in the penitentiary! I suggest that 
the school take a very firm stand 
against this slick, glib, smooth imposter." 
Mitchell is no w circularizing the 
West for a "Co-operative Congress " 
to be held this summe r in Springfield, 
Ill., wher e he is at present operating. 
UNCONSCIOU S INSULT . 
A COLORE D woma n writes us: 
"On Tuesday, February 12 , I 
was invited, along with a large number o f our women, to a meeting called 
by Clarence R. Wilson, Food Admin ­
istrator fo r the District o f Columbia, 
to listen to addresses on food conservation by several speakers, and I feel 
that we colored wome n wer e invited 
to this meeting for the specific purpose of being insulted. 
"The first speaker, Mrs. Archibald 
Hopkins, in her address referred to 
her 'old black mammy ' and said that 
she had said to her, 'Miss Hopkins, 
I'se got to have sugar.' The second 
speaker, Mrs. Matthew Scott, President of the Daughters o f the American Revolution, began her speech b y 
saying, A n old darkey down South 
wa s asked to change a ten dollar bill, 
etc ' The third speaker, a trained 
one from Chicago, made no reference 
to us as a race, but I have felt ever 
since I left that meeting that Mrs. 
Hopkins and Mrs. Scott should be 
showered with the protests o f the 
nearly one hundred colored wome n 
present, to so ridicule our race in a 
meeting called for the unity o f all 
American women in the matter of 
food conservation. " 10 THE CRISIS 
The real tragedy of this protest lies 
in the undoubted fact that neither 
Mrs. Hopkins nor Mrs. Scott had the 
slightest idea that they wer e insulting anybody. It is even doubtful if 
they knew that Negroe s could be insulted. 
Imagine such a situation in a civilized land! 
THE BAPTIST REUNION. 
WE congratulate the black 
Baptists of Americ a for 
their skill and sacrifice in 
putting an end to that 
which threatened to be a lamentable division. The white Baptists of 
the South, too, deserve great credit 
for their kindly co-operation and 
advice. The gist o f the plan of 
reunion is, First, that the charter 
of the Morris convention be annulled. 
Second, that the pending law suit 
against the Boy d Publishing Board 
be dismissed, but that it be distinctly recognized that the publishing 
house and all other institutions and 
boards belong to the National Baptist 
Convention and are under its control. 
Arrangements are made fo r the two 
conventions to meet next year at the 
same place, adopt separately the 
peace treaty and then unite under officers to be appointed by the commission which drafted the agreement 
outlined above, and which consists of 
representatives o f the two conventions and of the Southern whit e Baptists. 
We venture to suggest that after 
this happy step it would be a graceful thing fo r both Doctor Morris and 
Doctor Boy d to withdraw to a welldeserved rest and leave the after conduct o f Baptist affairs to younge r and 
newer men. 
TH E UNIT PLAN. 
THER E has been started in 
Cincinnati a plan of social 
uplift, known as the "Unit 
Plan," which deserves the 
thoughtful attention of colored people. Briefly, the idea is to take the 
small block or street in a city wher e 
there is a fairly homogeneous pop ­
ulation and try to minister to its 
needs in every modern scientific way . 
A social visitor, at first appointed, 
but eventually chosen b y the people, 
secures the information and consults 
the social experts. First, efforts are 
directed to the babies in the block. 
The y receive periodical medical attention, prope r food, etc. Prospec ­
tive mothers are given advice. Births 
are registered, unemployment recorded and every effort, made to ob ­
tain careful knowledge and skilled 
remedy. Multiple visits b y outside 
agencies are cut down to the minimum and the people themselves are 
encouraged to organize and take 
charge o f their own social welfar e 
and have representation on the general board, which administers the social welfare wor k o f the war d or city. 
This social unit plan should be 
carefully studied b y colored people , 
and as quickly as possible be introduced amon g them. Its well expressed purpose is: 
"T o hasten the comin g o f a democracy both genuine and efficient b y 
building up on a basis o f geographical units an organization through 
which the people can get a clear idea 
of their commo n needs and can utilize the technical knowledge of skilled 
groups in formulating and carrying 
out programs to meet those needs. " 
A PROTEST. 
The Editor o f The Outlook: 
I HAV E never expected from 
The Outlook any real friendship fo r the Negro . On the 
contrary, I have been prepared for wha t seems to me deliberate 
misrepresentation o f the motive s o f 
those wh o are fighting fo r the Ne ­
gro's manhood rights and a nauseous 
emphasis upon the absolute probity 
of the "better " South. 
I did not, however, think that The EDITORIAL 11 
Outlook would sink to publishing so 
scurrilous an article as that on the 
Negr o soldier. It is a libel that begins with a lie and is built on the 
sneer that Negroe s are dogs and not 
men. 
I think it is not only outrageous, 
but shamefully unpatriotic for a 
great journa l like yours to deride and 
seek to degrade one hundred thousand men wh o are offering their lives 
fo r their country. I hope to God 
there is nothing lowe r in you r toadying to the South to which yo u are 
planning to sink. 
W . E. B . D UBOIS . 
COOPERATION. 
T o the Editor o f T H E C RISIS : 
I HEARTIL Y welcome the discussion in you r columns of 
the principles o f cooperation 
in production and distribution. Muc h o f the injustice which the 
N . A . A . C. P. is fighting would 
disappear if the colored people wer e 
less economically dependent and 
through cooperation in industry a 
long stride in removin g this disability migh t be taken besides training 
them fo r united action to improve 
their condition in other directions. 
Cannot a leader be found wh o will 
do fo r the Negr o farme r wha t Sir 
Horac e Plunkett has done for the 
Irish agriculturist, or a group among 
them arise with faith to attempt 
wha t the Rochdal e pioneers attempted? I hop e the discussion may 
g o further, fo r I cannot imagine a 
greater service which the N. A . A . 
C. P. can render than the promotion 
o f this form o f self-help. 
A. K . M AYNARD . 
NOTES . 
THE whit e Methodists have almost agreed to disfranchise 
their Negr o members until 
they gro w to 600,000, when 
they will automatically become an independent church in everything but 
name . 
President Wilson says that "the old 
party slogans have lost their significance and will mean nothing to the 
voter o f the future, for the wa r is certain to change the mind o f Europe as 
well as the mind o f America. " Let 
Negroe s note this when they read the 
suffrage plank o f the new National 
Party platform, as drafted by the editor of T H E CRISIS : 
"W e demand enforcement o f the 
laws which give the right to vote to 
American citizens o f Negr o descent, 
and in orde r that they and others 
may cast an intelligent ballot w e ask 
fo r national aid to common school 
education, to be distributed among the 
several states in accordance with their 
illiteracy." 
Negr o Health Wee k and the Child 
Saving Movement bring to us the 
need of careful, persistent effort to 
stamp out disease. It is unfortunate 
that many calamity howlers follow 
the example o f Dr. Shirley Wynn e o f 
the Ne w Yor k Department of Health 
and seek to prove , in the face of all reliable statistics, that the Negro is "deteriorating." This is flatly false. He 
is rapidly improving in health, but his 
efforts must be redoubled before he 
reaches the full modern standard. 
Eat strengthening food, sleep with 
the windows open, and get out o f the 
alleys and swamps—that is the program. 
The concrete proposal o f Dr. James 
H. Dillard for national aid to Negro 
education is the one piece of constructive statesmanship for the uplift o f 
the Negr o which has come out o f the 
South fo r fifty years. It would be a 
shame fo r Congress not to follow the 
advice o f superintendents in the National Education Association and 
either adopt this proposal or the one 
by the Child Labo r Association. A LEGEND OF THE BLUE JAY 
By RUTH ANN A FISHER 
IT was a hot, sultry day in May and the 
children in the little school in Virginia 
were wearily waiting for the gong to free 
them from lessons for the day. Furtive 
glances were directed towards the clock. 
The call of the birds and fields was becoming more and more insistent. Would the 
hour never strike! 
"The Planting of the Apple-tree" had no 
interest for them. Little attention was 
given the boy as he read in a sing-song, 
spiritless manner: 
"What plant we in this apple-tree? 
Buds, which the breath of summer days 
Shall lengthen into leafy sprays; 
Boughs where the thrush, with crimson 
breast, 
Shall haunt and sing and hide her nest." 
The teacher, who had long since stopped 
trying to make the lesson interesting, 
found herself saying mechanically, "What 
other birds have their nests in the appletree?" 
The boy shifted lazily from one foot to 
the other as he began, "The sparrow, the 
robin, and wrens, and—and snow-birds, and 
blue-jays,—" 
"No, they don't, blue-jays don't have 
nests," came the excited outburst from some 
of the children, much to the surprise of the 
teacher. 
When order was restored some of these 
brown-skinned children, who came from the 
heart of the Virginia mountains, told this 
legend of the blue-jay. 
Long, long years ago, the devil came to 
buy the blue-jay's soul, for which he first 
offered a beautiful golden ear of corn. This 
the blue-jay liked and wanted badly, but 
said, "No, I cannot take it in exchange for 
my soul." Then the devil came again, this 
time with a bright red ear of corn which 
was even more lovely than the golden one. 
This, too, the blue-jay refused. At last 
the devil came to offer him a wonderful 
blue ear. This one the blue-jay liked best 
of all, but still was unwilling to part with 
his soul. Then the devil hung it up in the 
nest, and the blue-jay found that it exactly 
matched his own brilliant feathers, and 
knew at once that he must have it. The 
bargain was quickly made. And now in 
payment for that one blue ear of corn each 
Friday the blue-jay must carry one grain 
of sand to the devil, and sometimes he gets 
back on Sunday, but oftener not until Monday. 
Very seriously the children added, "And 
all the bad people are going to burn until 
the blue-jays have carried all the grains of 
sand in the ocean to hell." 
The teacher must have smiled a little at 
the legend, for the children cried out again, 
"It is so. 'Deed it is, for doesn't the black 
spot on the blue-jay come because he gets 
his wings scorched, and he doesn't have a 
nest like other birds." 
Then, to dispel any further doubts the 
teacher might have, they asked triumphantly, "You never saw a blue-jay on Friday, 
did you?" 
There was no need to answer, for just 
then the gong sounded and the children 
trooped happily out to play. 
AGAIN IT IS THE VIBRANT MAY 
By GEORGIA DOUGLAS JOHNSON 
AGAIN it is the vibrant May, 
The bursting buds, the leafing trees, 
The toying fragrance of the breeze 
Call to my heart in subtlest way, 
Come! come, it is a holiday! 
The streamlet with unending song, 
Steals soft beneath a veiling mist, 
As to some sweet alluring tryst— 
While I, with inner surges strong, 
Find incomplete the day, and long. 
Again it is the vibrant May, 
The Springtime fervor mocks my pain, 
For I am thrall to wintry rain— 
Fain would I turn my eyes away, 
Fo r love alone brings holiday, 
12 THE AFRO-PORTUGUESE 
By P. E. PEREIRA 
I AM a colored man from the Cape Verde 
Islands (Afro-Portuguese, you would 
say) and certainly am concerned, interested 
and united in spirit with the cause for 
which the N . A. A. C. P. defends and stands. 
In the Cape Verde Islands (I suppose 
you have met some of the fellows from 
there) we are made up of three races, the 
African, the Brazilian and the Caucasian 
(Portugese). Either of these three bloods 
may run in our veins to a greater or lesser 
extent in a variety 01 cases, because the 
first distribution of the first colons was not 
evenly made; but a study of the pedigree 
will find the three stuff there surely. The 
first black contingent, some of them, were 
under bond of slavery, but they, notwithstanding, got mixed up with the other two 
races, or rather the Brazilians and the 
whites got mixed up. with the Negroes. 
The mixture with the Indian mulatto (Brazilian) and the whites increased much after 
the emancipation. One thing peculiar was 
that some islands were first colonized with 
a greater number of whites, some with a 
greater number of blacks, and yet some with 
a greater number of mulattoes. So true 
is this that if you meet the average man 
from the Island of Brava and the average 
man from the Island of Sam Thiago, you 
would soon notice these extremes. The mixing up of the trio race is uneven up to this 
day One thing we never heard of until 
we landed in America is the color line. If 
ever there was a racial prejudice in our 
islands, it was between the free people 
(black, white or Brazilian) and the slaves 
or their offspring. In some instances the 
free people (some black among these) objected to intermarriage with the slaves and 
their progeny, but this at no time ever developed to such a thing as racial or color 
line, because, as you see, it was not a matter of color or race, but simply a civic 
status, if I may call it this way. In every 
country and in ours there has always been 
a distinction between the rich and the poor, 
the educated and the uneducated; and as a 
rule these classes do not associate together. 
If you happen to be colored in my country 
and you have education and wealth, you 
will associate with the higher class of the 
same standing, say the whites, and no one 
would dream of your complexion and much 
less mention it. It would cause an earthquake ! 
From the foregoing explanation you can 
imagine how shocked, how scandalized a 
man from my country would feel when he 
first sets his feet on your land and learns 
of the color lines, of Jim Crow Law, of 
lynching and racial hatred. You can just 
imagine. One thing is sure, when we are 
come, we cast our lot with American colored people, and make up our minds, there 
and then, to shoulder the cross of our adventures. 
It may be true that the majority of us 
are not able to take part intellectually in 
the race fight, because, having grown under an autocratic and poor government 
(old Portuguese Kingdom) we were not 
blessed with the advantages of an education. And those of us who had any education received it in the Portuguese language 
and even if by personal application we 
have learned and understand a little English, it may not be enough to enable us to 
express our views intelligibly and forcibly 
to be of any help to you. It may be true 
also that being brought up under a Latin 
government, speaking the language of a 
Latin nation and imbued with the traditions 
of a Latin race—we Cape Verdians must 
be of a different bent of mind and different 
not only in our domestic habits but, perhaps, in many other respects from the average American Negro, whose feeling has 
been hurt by a dint of injustice; whose attitude is one of constant defense, because of 
persistent, unjust prosecution. These differences, however, do not prevent us from 
learning quickly what is the real situation, 
the situation that is facing us on account 
of our dark skin in America. In you we 
recognize our dark brothers. Your fight 
is legitimately our fight. We must stand 
by you shoulder to shoulder; and, if yon 
have the patience to guide us, you knowing 
the way better, we will march every inch 
of the ground with you, and mark well, 
YOU WILL FIND US THERE. 
13 DR. J. H. LOWERY JAMES E. GREGG 
THE LATE DR. S. M. STEWARD 
MAJOR G. W. PRIOLEAU C. H. TOBIAS 
14 Men of the Month 
A PIONEER PHYSICIAN. 
DR. S. MARIA STEWARD, wife of 
Chaplain T. G. Steward of Wilberforce University, was born in Brooklyn, 
N. Y., in 1845 the daughter of Sylvanus and 
Anna Smith. She took up the study of 
medicine when it was a rare career for a 
woman. She studied at the New York 
Homeopathic College for Women and was 
valedictorian of her class. Afterward she 
took a post-graduate course in the Long 
Island College Hospital. For many years 
she practised in New York State and was 
a member of the King's County Homeopathic 
Society and the New York State Medical 
Society. With her other duties she served 
as organist for the Bridge Street A. M. E. 
Church for twenty-eight years. 
Mrs. Steward was married twice, her first 
husband being the Rev. W. G. McKinney, 
and her second Chaplain Steward. During 
her last years Dr. Steward was resident 
physician at Wilberforce University. She 
traveled much at home and abroad, was 
the mother of two children and a woman of 
rare charm and great ability. 
A FIGHTING PHYSICIAN. 
DR. J. H. LOWERY was born in 1861 in 
Louisiana and has spent his life 
there. He was educated at Straight University and the Flint Medical College. He 
has built up a large practice at Donaldsonville and made considerable investments in 
real estate. Recently he headed the movement for securing better accommodations on 
the railroads for colored people. Through 
the efforts of his committee the State Railroad Commission has ordered equal accommodations for the races on the railroads of 
the state. 
Dr. Lowery is prominent among Odd Fellows and other fraternal orders in Louisiana. 
AN ARMY CHAPLAIN. 
GEORGE W. PRIOLEAU was born in 
Charleston, S. C, and educated in the 
public schools, Avery Institute and Claflin 
University. He taught in the public schools 
and then entered the ministry. Afterward 
he was sent to Wilberforce University, 
graduating from the Theological Department in 1884. For several years he taught 
in the Theological Department at Wilberforce University and pastored churches in 
Xenia. In 1895 he was appointed chaplain 
of the Ninth Cavalry, U. S. Army, with the 
rank of Captain. He served in this regiment until 1915, when he was transferred 
to the Tenth Cavalry. In 1916 he was assigned to the Twenty-fifth Infantry and 
given the grade of Major. 
Chaplain Prioleau is married and has two 
children. 
THE PRINCIPAL OF HAMPTON. 
THE new principal of Hampton, James 
E. Gregg, succeeds Dr. Frissell and 
General Armstrong. Mr. Gregg was born 
in Hartford, Conn., in 1875 and was educated at Cutler Academy and Harvard College, where he was graduated in 1897 after 
making a notable record for scholarship. 
He taught for three years and then studied 
for the ministry, first at Harvard and finally 
at the Yale Divinity School, where he was 
graduated in 1903. He has held three 
charges, one in Lowell and two in Pittsfield, Mass. 
Mr. Gregg has a wife and four children. 
AN ENLISTED MAN. 
CHANNING H. TOBIAS was born in 
Augusta, Ga., in 1882. He was educated in the public schools, at Paine College 
and at Drew Theological Seminary. Returning to Paine, he taught Biblical literature for six years. During the past seven 
years he has been secretary of the International Committee of Young Men's 
Christian Associations for work among colored students. He was a delegate to the 
World's Student Christian Federation Conference at Lake Mohonk in 1913 and helped 
to organize the Negro Students Convention 
at Atlanta in 1914. He is executive secretary of the annual conference of students 
held at King's Mountain, North Carolina. 
Mr. Tobias directed the recent campaign 
for the Students' Friendship War Fund and 
collected $12,000 from fifty colored institutions. 
15 THE BURNING OP JIM MC ILHERRON 
AN N. A. A. C. P. INVESTIGATION 
By Walter F. White, Assistant Secretary 
THE facts given below were secured by 
Mr, White within the week following 
the burning of McIlherron in interviews 
with a number of the citizens of Estill 
Springs, largely white, including the proprietors of several stores, farmers and others. The account is not a compilation of 
opinions, but is based upon statements of 
inhabitants of the town, some of whom were 
eyewitnesses to the burning. All of the accounts of the burning were given by white 
people. 
THE TOWN 
Estill Springs, the scene of the third within nine months of Tennessee's burnings at 
the stake, is situated about seventy-four 
miles from Chattanooga, being midway between that city and Nashville. The town 
itself has only two hundred inhabitants; 
with the territory within the radius of a 
half-mile, about three hundred. Franklin 
County, in which Estill Springs is located, 
had a white population of 17,365 and 3,126 
colored inhabitants in 1910, according to the 
census. Estill Springs is not incorporated 
and, therefore, has no mayor or village 
officials. It is a small settlement located 
midway between the larger and more progressive villages of Decherd and Tullahoma, each having about 2,000 inhabitants. 
Winchester, fifteen miles from Estill 
Springs, is the county seat. 
Estill Springs is made up of a small group 
of houses and stores gathered about the 
railway station. The main street is only 
three blocks long. Its few business establishments are located on one side of this 
street. There is one bank, the Bank of 
Estill Springs, purely local in nature; a 
barber shop, a drug store and five general 
merchandise stores of the type indigenous 
to small rural communities in the South. 
The settlement's sole butcher left on the day 
that the investigator reached there, to work 
in a nitrate factory in a nearby town as 
the butcher trade of the community was 
not sufficient to support hist shop. Simply 
stated, Estill Springs is one of thousands 
of small settlements of its type, poorly located from a geographic and economic 
standpoint and with little prospect of future 
growth. Its static condition, naturally, 
tends to make the minds of its inhabitants 
narrow and provincial. The people of the 
surrounding country are farmers and because of the failure of the cotton crop last 
fall, occasioned by an early frost, corn was 
the only crop on which they made money. 
Such of the people as were interviewed 
were leisurely of manner and slow of speech 
and comprehension. 
Paradoxical as it may seem, in the light 
of the event which has put Estill Springs 
on the map in a kind of infamy of fame, 
the settlement seems to have a strong religious undercurrent. Small as the community is, it has four white churches, two 
Baptist, one Methodist and one Campbellite. In addition, there are two colored 
churches, one a Baptist and the other a 
Methodist, of which latter the Rev. G. W. 
Lych was pastor. There is a local Red 
Cross unit among the white women which 
16 N. A. A. C. P. 17 
was planning to inaugurate meetings to 
knit for the soldiers. In the windows of a 
number of homes, the emblem of the National Food Conservation Commission was 
displayed. The son of the proprietor of 
the only hotel is local agent for the sale of 
Thrift Stamps. The town purchased its allotment of both the first and second Liberty Loans. 
THE CAUSE OF THE TROUBLE 
About one mile from the railway station 
of Estill Springs, there lived a Negro by 
the name of Jim McIlherron. He resided 
with his mother, several brothers and father, who bears the reputation of being 
wealthy "for a Negro," as he owns his own 
land and is prosperous in a small way. The 
McIlherrons do not appear to have been 
popular with the white community. They 
were known as a family which resented 
"slights" and "insults" and which did not 
willingly allow its members to be imposed 
upon by unfriendly whites. However, there 
appears to have been no serious trouble between them and their white neighbors up 
to the time of the street fight which resulted in the shooting for which Jim McIlherron was later burned at the stake. One 
white woman expressed in a local phrase the 
opinion of the family when she said that 
the McIlherron family were "big-buggy niggers," meaning that they were prosperous 
enough to have a few articles other than 
bare necessities, among these being a larger 
buggy than was common in the section. 
Most of the whites in the locality, it must 
be explained, were of the poorer country 
folk. 
Jim McIlherron bore the reputation in 
Estill Springs of being a "bad sort." It 
was gathered from remarks made that this 
implied that he shared the family characteristic already alluded to of resenting 
"slights" and "insults." In other words, 
he was not what is termed "a good nigger," which in certain portions of the South 
means a colored man or woman who is 
humble and submissive in the presence of 
white "superiors." 
McIlherron was known to be a fighter 
and the possessor of an automatic revolver. 
(Laws against "gun-toting" are observed in 
the breach, apparently, in this region.) He 
was, therefore, classed as a dangerous man 
to bother with. A little over a year before 
the lynching, he became involved in a fight 
with his own brother in which the latter was 
cut with a knife wielded by the former. For 
this he was arrested by Sheriff John Rose, 
the sheriff of Franklin County. At the time 
of this affair, McIlherron threatened to 
"get" the sheriff if he was ever arrested 
again by that officer. It is an admitted fact 
in the community that the sheriff was afraid 
of McIlherron. Soon after the trouble with 
his brother, McIlherron went to Indianapolis where he worked in an industrial plant, 
proceeding later to Detroit. In Detroit he 
had an attack of rheumatism and was forced 
to return to his home shortly before the 
shooting. His having lived in the North 
tended to increase his disfavor with the 
white people of the community, as he was 
credited with having absorbed during his 
residence there certain ideas of "independence" which were not acceptable to the 
white citizens of this small rural community. 
Sharing popular disfavor with McIlherron was the pastor of the Methodist church 
in Estill Springs, the Rev. G. W. Lych. He 
had repeatedly advised the colored people 
to assert their right to be free from the 
petty tyranny alleged to have been imposed 
upon them by the white people, assuring 
them that they were made of the same clay 
and were as good as anybody else. 
THE SHOOTING 
On the afternoon of Friday, February 8, 
Jim McIlherron went into a store in the 
town and purchased fifteen cents' worth of 
candy. In Estill Springs it had been a habit 
of an element of young white men to "rock" 
Negroes in the community—i. e., throwing 
rocks or other missiles at them to make 
them run. This had occasioned frequent 
tilts between the races none of which, however, had previously been serious. McIlherron had been the victim of one of these 
"rockings" and had declared that if ever 
they got after him again, somebody was 
going to get hurt. When the trouble started 
on February 8, it was about five o'clock in 
the afternoon, in the gloom of early nightfall. It is probable that the Negro believed 
that they were after him again. He walked 
down the street eating this candy, going 
past Tate & Dickens' store in front of 
which he encountered three young white 
men, Pierce Rogers, Frank Tigert and Jesse 
Tigert by name. As McIlherron passed 
them a remark was made by one of the 18 THE CRISIS 
young men about his eating the candy. The 
others laughed and several more remarks 
were made. At this the Negro turned and 
asked if they were talking about him. 
Words followed, becoming more and more 
heated, until threats began to be passed 
between them. One of the young men 
started into the store whereupon McIlherron, apparently believing, as one of our 
white informants said, that they were preparing to start a fight, pulled out his gun 
and started shooting. Six shots were fired, 
two taking effect in each man. Rogers died 
in his tracks, Jesse Tigert died about twenty 
minutes later and Frank Tigert was carried 
to the office of Dr. O. L. Walker, Estill 
Springs' only physician, where he received 
medical aid. The latter will recover, as his 
wounds are not serious. 
THE MAN HUNT 
Immediately after the shooting, McIlherron, in the attendant excitement, ran down 
the road leading toward his home. There 
was no immediate pursuit by the whites. 
Although everybody knew that he had gone 
to his home, the white people waited and 
sent all the way to Winchester, the county 
seat, some fifteen miles distant, at a cost of 
sixty dollars, to secure blood-hounds. When 
these arrived, they succeeded in tracking 
him only as far as his home, where the 
scent was lost. 
Intense excitement prevailed in the town 
as news of the shooting spread. In this 
chaotic state of affairs, no one seemed to 
know what to do and threats of lynching 
began to be made. A few of the cooler 
heads pleaded that the crowd allow the 
sheriff to handle the entire affair. Knowing 
of the sheriff's fear of the Negro, the crowd 
greeted this suggestion with a derisive 
shout, and cries of "Lynch the nigger" answered this plea. Plans were laid to form 
posses to catch McIlherron. Word was sent 
to Sheriff Rose at Winchester, upon receiving which he immediately left for Estill 
Springs. 
Shouts of "Electrocution is too good for 
the damned nigger," "Let's burn the black 
" and others of the sort rose thick and 
fast. Led by its more radical members, the 
mob soon worked itself into a frenzy; a 
posse was formed and set out on the manhunt. 
Meanwhile, McIlherron had gone to his 
home, gathered his few clothes and proceeded to the home of Lych, who aided him 
in his flight. On two mules they set out 
in the direction of McMinnville, in an attempt to reach the Tennessee Central Railroad where McIlherron could get a train that 
would take him to safety. The preacher 
went a part of the way with McIlherron 
and then returned to his home in Prairie 
Springs, a small settlement about twelve 
miles from Estill Springs. The news soon 
spread that Rev. Lych had aided McIlherron in his flight and a part of the mob went 
to Prairie Springs to "get" him for this. 
Two members came upon him near his home. 
One of them pointed his gun at the preacher 
and pulled the trigger. The gun did not go 
off, and before he could fire again, Lych 
snatched the gun from his assailant's hands, 
broke it and started towards the man with 
the stock in his hands, when the other man 
fired a charge into the preacher's breast, 
killing him instantly. 
The hunt for McIlherron continued 
throughout Friday night, Saturday, Sunday 
and Monday, large posses of men scouring 
the surrounding county for him. Monday 
night he was located in a barn near Lower 
Collins River, just beyond McMinnville. 
The barn was surrounded and the posse 
began firing on it. The Negro answered 
the fire, this state of affairs continuing 
throughout Monday night. During this time 
McIlherron succeeded in holding off the 
crowd, whose numbers were rapidly augmented, when the news spread that the 
Negro had been located. In the hundred 
or more men in the posses were Deputy 
Sheriff S. J. Byars and Policeman J. M. 
Bain. In the fusilade. of bullets poured 
into the barn, McIlherron was wounded, one 
eye being shot out. He also received two 
body wounds, one in the arm and one in the 
leg. Finally, McIlherron's ammunition gave 
out and, weak from the loss of blood, he 
was forced to surrender when the barn was 
rushed. When captured, the triumphant 
members of the mob carried him into McMinnville. The feeling against him was so 
great that an attempt was made to lynch 
him in the town of McMinnville, but the 
citizens of that town refused to allow a 
lynching in their midst and were able to 
prevent it from happening. McIlherron 
was, therefore, placed on Train No. 5, en 
route to Estill Springs, where he arrived 
at 6:30 P. M. on Tuesday. N. A. A. C. P. 19 
THE CROWD 
In the meantime, news of the capture 
spread like wild fire and men, women and 
children started pouring into the town to 
await the arrival of the victim. They came 
from a radius of fifty miles, coming from 
Coalmont, Winchester, Decherd, Tullahoma, 
McMinnville and from the country districts. 
In buggies and automobiles, on foot, on 
mules, they crowded into the little settlement, until it was estimated that from 1,500 
to 2,000 people were in the town. A high 
state of excitement prevailed as the time for 
the arrival of the train drew near. Threats 
of the torture to be inflicted were made on 
many sides. Boxes, excelsior and other 
inflammable material were gathered in readiness for the event, and iron bars and pokers 
were obtained. Most of the crowd were 
grim and silent, but there were some who 
laughed and joked in anticipation of the 
coming event. 
Finally, the train drew near. McIlherron 
was so weak upon arrival, from the loss of 
blood due to three wounds received in the 
battle with the posse, that he was unable to 
stand and had to be carried to the spot 
selected for his execution. The leaders of 
the mob decided that he should be lynched 
on the exact spot where the shooting occurred. He was, therefore, carried to this 
place where preparations for the funeral 
pyre were made. The cries of the crowd 
grew more and more vengeful as the moments passed. 
Just as the arrangements had been completed, a few of the braver spirits among 
the women of the town demanded that the 
Negro be not burned in the town itself, but 
be taken out a little way in the country. 
There were loud objections to this proposal 
from the now uncontrollable mob. The 
women insisted, in spite of these objections, 
and finally it was decided to carry McIlherron across the railroad into a small clump 
of woods in front of the Campbellite church. 
This was done and the mob transferred its 
activities to the new execution ground. 
The self-appointed leaders of the mob by 
this time had great difficulty in restraining 
the wild fury of the crowd. They were constantly forced to appeal to them not to 
strike McIlherron or to spit on him, but to 
allow the affair to be a "perfectly orderly 
lynching." The sister of one of the men 
slain was in the mob and had become frantic 
in her pleas to the men to let her kill the 
Negro. She demanded that he be killed immediately, not to allow him to live another 
moment. It was evident that such a humane 
thing as instant death would not have appeased the blood-thirst of the mob, in its 
revengeful mood. 
THE TORTURE 
On reaching the spot chosen for the burning, McIlherron was chained to a hickory 
tree. The wood and other inflammable material already collected was saturated with 
coal oil and piled around his feet. The fire 
was not lighted at once, as the crowd was 
determined "to have some fun with the 
damned nigger" before he died. A fire was 
built a few feet away and then the fiendish 
torture began. Bars of iron, about the size 
of an ordinary poker, were placed in the 
fire and heated to a red-hot pitch. A member of the mob took one of these and made 
as if to burn the Negro in the side. McIlherron seized the bar and as it was jerked 
from his grasp all of the inside of his hand 
came with it, some of the skin roasting 
on the hot iron. The awful stench of burning human flesh rose into the air, mingled 
with the lustful cries of the mob and the 
curses of the suffering Negro. Cries of 
"Burn the damned hound," "Poke his eyes 
out," and others of the kind came in thick 
confusion from the mob. Men, women and 
children, who were too far in the rear, 
surged forward in an attempt to catch sight 
of and gloat over the suffering of the Negro. 
Now that the first iron had been applied, 
the leaders began eagerly to torture McIlherron. Men struggled with one another, 
each vying with his fellow, in attempting 
to force from the lips of the Negro some 
sign of weakening. A wide iron bar, redhot, was placed on the right side of his neck. 
When McIlherron drew his head away, another bar was placed on the left side. This 
appeared to amuse the crowd immensely 
and approving shouts arose, as the word 
was passed back to those in the rear of 
what was going on. Another rod was 
heated and, as McIlherron squirmed in 
agony, thrust through the flesh of his thigh, 
and a few minutes later another through 
the calf of his leg. Meanwhile, a larger 
bar had been heating, and while those of 
the mob close enough to see shouted in fiend-20 THE CRISIS 
ish glee, this was taken and McIlherron 
was unsexed. 
The unspeakable torture had now been going On for about twenty minutes and the 
Negro was mercifully getting weaker and 
weaker. The mob seemed to be getting 
worked up to a higher and higher state of 
excitement. The leaders racked their brains 
for newer and more devilish ways of inflicting torture on the helpless victim. 
The newspapers stated that McIlherron 
lost his nerve and cringed before the torture, but the testimony of persons who saw 
the burning is to the effect that this is 
untrue. It seems inconceivable that any 
person could endure the awful torture inflicted, however great his powers of resistance to pain, and not lose his nerve. The 
statements of onlookers are to the effect 
that throughout the whole burning Jim McIlherron never cringed and never once begged for mercy. He was evidently able to 
deny the mob the satisfaction of seeing his 
nerve broken, although he lived for half an 
hour after the burning started. Throughout 
the whole affair he cursed those who tortured him and almost to the last breath 
derided the attempts of the mob to break 
his spirit. The only signs of the awful 
agony that he must have suffered were the 
involuntary groans that escaped his lips, 
in spite of his efforts to check them, and the 
wild look in his eyes as the torture became 
more and more severe. At one time, he 
begged his torturers to shoot him, but this 
request was received with a cry of derision 
at his vain hope to be put out of his misery. 
His plea was answered with the remark, 
"We ain't half through with you yet, nigger." 
By this time, however, some of the members of the mob had, apparently, become 
sickened at the sight and urged that the job 
be finished. Others in the rear of the crowd, 
who had not been able to see all that took 
place, objected and pushed forward to take 
the places of some of those in front. Having succeeded in this, they began to "do 
their bit" in the execution. Finally, one 
man poured coal oil on the Negro's trousers 
and shoes and lighted the fire around McIlherron's feet. The flames rose rapidly,, 
soon enveloping him, and in a few minutes 
Mcllherron was dead. 
GEORGE McNEEL, LYNCHED IN MONROE, LA., MARCH 16, 1918, 
THE GRAND JURY FOUND "NO INFORMATION SUFFICIENT TO INDICT" THE LYNCHERS 
BUT THIS POSTCARD WAS SOLD ON THE STREETS "TO WHITE PEOPLE" AT 25 CENTS EACH The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE. 
EDGAR M. CULLEN, former Chief 
Justice of the State of New York: "It 
will not be tolerated that when New York 
is forced to obey an Eighteenth Amendment, 
Mississippi may ignore or evade the Fifteenth Amendment." 
Benjamin Brawley, author of "A Short 
History of the American Negro" and of 
other works, has brought out "The Negro 
in Literature and Art in the United States" 
(Duffield & Company, 8 vo., 176 pp., $1.35, 
postage extra). This is an amplification of 
the last chapter in his short history. It 
supplies a want and is done in the author's 
painstaking and readable style. His first 
chapter on Negro genius emphasizes the 
distinct art element in the Negro's gift to 
BENJAMIN BRAWLEY 
the modern world. The five following chapters are devoted to individual colored writers, while Chapter Seven is a review of 
Negro literature. The last five chapters 
are devoted to orators, the stage, painters 
and sculptors and music. An appendix 
contains an essay on the Negro in American fiction and an excellent bibliography. 
We welcome this book not only for its picture of the soul development of a race but, 
also, for its own contribution to the new 
Negro literature. 
The North American Student has an article by Channing H. Tobias: "Shall 
America Be Made Safe for Black Men?" 
We acknowledge the receipt of a book of 
poems in Spanish by Luis Felipe Dessus: 
"Flores y Balas." 
THE WAR. 
THE London Spectator quotes from Sir 
Harry Johnston's "The Black Man's 
Part in the War": 
The United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Ireland rules more or less directly some 
44,700,000 Africans, about 1,700,000 Aframericans in the West Indies, Honduras 
and Guiana, and about 338,000 Oceanic Negroes, Melanesians and Polynesians in the 
Pacific archipelagoes. And in addition the 
Daughter Nation of the South African 
Union governs another 4,000,000 of Bantu 
Negroes, Hottentots and half breeds; lastly, 
the Commonwealth of Australia and the 
Dominion of New Zealand are responsible 
for the safe keeping and welfare of about 
400,000 Papuans, 150,000 Australoids and 
100,000 Polynesians, Melanesians and Micronesians. 
Our Asiatic subjects are more than six 
times as numerous, but our fifty-one million 
Negroes are not greatly inferior in numbers to the sixty-one million white people 
within the Empire, and their help, freely 
and loyally tendered, has been most valuable. The author proves his case by taking 
each Negro country in turn, describing its 
races, and showing what they have done 
in the war. British West Africa naturally 
comes first. Nigeria alone contains over 
sixteen million Negroes, some of whom are 
among the best native troops that we have. 
The French Senegalese battalions have done 
magnificent service on the Western Front, 
and their southern neighbors under our rule 
have an equally fine record in the African 
campaigns. The Hausa of Nigeria and the 
Mandingoes of Gambia and Sierra Leone 
make first-rate soldiers, and have faced 
German troops and their machine-gun fire 
without flinching. 
Ebrima Jalu, a Mandigo sergeant-major 
in the West African Frontier Force, received the D. C. M. in 1916, for his gal-' 
lantry in a severe action in the Cameroons. 
When his white officer had been killed, he 
took command of. his sector and directed 
the guns for several hours until another 
officer could reach him. Sergeant-Major 
Ebrima Jalu is not the only hero of his 
race. It is good to know that all these West 
African troops, perhaps thirty thousand in 
number, are volunteers, and that they enlist 
with the warm approval of their people. 
21 22 THE CRISIS 
An Associated Press dispatch from Ismailia, Egypt, speaks of the defense of the 
Suez Canal: 
In the territory between the outpost and 
the canal there are many well laid camps 
for thousands of troops. Everywhere there 
is intense but methodical activity. 
Neatly built wooden and steel buildings 
are located where only the Bedouin's tent 
has stood before. Whistling locomotives and 
tooting automobiles go rushing past long 
strings of heavily laden and slow-moving 
camels and donkeys. Khaki-clad Australians and English soldiers, Negro troops from 
the West Indies, robed and turbaned Egyptians, and Indians in their native garb, work 
together, forming an unusual picture with 
its desert setting. 
The wonderful showing made by the 
"Buffaloes," the colored 367th Regiment of 
the National Army, as they recently 
marched up Fifth Avenue, brought interesting comment. The New York Tribune says: 
The parade of the Negro troops last Saturday recalled history. It recalled Shaw 
at the head of the freedmen who were to 
seal their courage and soldierly devotion 
in the assault on Fort Wagner. It recalled 
the great experiment of the Sixties in making disciplined fighters out of men who had 
known nothing but the abjectness of slavery 
and who were still confusedly classified, 
not as men, but as contraband. 
The Negro soldier proved his mettle in 
the Civil War. "The colored troops' fought 
nobly" was more than a perfunctory phrase. 
It told an unvarnished truth. And the 
Spanish War brought added confirmation of 
the theory that the American Negro yields 
rank to none in capacity to master the trade 
and acquire the virtues of the soldier. 
He will show his worth again in this war 
—as great a war for human freedom as the 
one in which he fought in the armies of 
the North against disunion and for his 
own enfranchisement. 
The Evening Sun adds: 
The progress of the Negro regiment—the 
367th—through New York was marked with 
music. If the men fight as they sing, they 
will win their share in the final honors. 
Nobody who knows the history of their race 
doubts that they will fight. And aside 
from the personal contribution of the individual soldiers, the folk-element that has 
entered into American life by way of Africa 
is not the least of the forces that help us 
all in a time like this. 
The spirit of the old slave songs may well 
be carried over, in a vicarious sense, to the 
cries of Belgium and Poland for deliverance. Long years have passed since the 
Negroes from their cabins and meeting 
houses lifted in music that voicing, as it 
were, of Heaven's command: Let my people go! 
The freed children of the slaves are 
marching on to Germany, singing in a tone 
of doom the songs that prophesy freedom 
to those whom the Kaiser has enslaved. 
To many this is a dark hour. Therefore, 
it is the hour when faith in ultimate right 
is most needed. Such faith is found in 
these old camp meeting songs. The race 
that gave them to America is by no means 
out of the wilderness. But they march. 
That the song of the Negro is re-echoing 
in Europe is shown from a letter to Colonel 
Hayward from the head of a Red Cross 
base hospital "somewhere in France": 
I want to express to you, and through 
you to the men of your band, the Fifteenth 
Regiment, New York, the great pleasure 
they gave on Saturday last to the patients 
in the base hospital to which I have been 
assigned for duty. Every window in the 
hospital was open; I may say every man 
straining his hearing not to lose a note. 
I have talked with a number of patients— 
there are about 750 of them, unfortunately 
—the nurses, doctors and corps men, about 
1,000 in all; and I have yet to find a single 
one who does not seem to have been stimulated in spirit by just hearing those colored 
boys of yours play. That they came from 
little old U. S. A. was so much to the good. 
I don't want to seem to lay it on too 
thick. I'm not when I say that I think every 
one who heard, who hears those boys play, 
is a better soldier and better able to help 
win the war. 
That the colored soldiers in the cantonments are measuring up to every expectation is proven in many ways. A writer in 
the New York Evening Mail says that they 
are acknowledged to be "the best drilled 
soldiers in camp." 
The Greenville, S. C. News says editorially: 
The throngs who packed the streets of 
Columbia to see the soldiers parade on 
Washington's birthday applauded the colored men in olive drab as much as anybody 
else—and that would not have been done 
if any ill-will were felt toward them, or if 
their conduct had not been excellent. A 
member of The News staff was present 
recently at a competitive shooting contest 
between picked teams from all the regiments 
and there noted the unexceptionable bearing of the colored men, several of whom 
were doing capital shooting. Incidentally 
it was learned that they are the best singers 
in camp, as is to be expected, for the race 
has been a singing one for ages. The quietness and good order of these soldiers is 
very noticeable. It is easy to believe that 
they are making good soldiers and that 
they will make good fighters when they get 
to the firing line. 
The Des Moines, Iowa, Capital says: 
There are several thousand colored soldiers at Camp Dodge prepared to be trained THE LOOKING GLASS 23 
for military service. They are from the 
plantations and fields of Alabama. They 
are not the aristocrats of their race. They 
represent the rank and file of the workingclass Negro of the South. Some of these 
husky young fellows are said to be ignorant. No doubt this would apply to a majority of them. They came here with rather 
scanty clothing and they were sent to a 
camp scarcely completed. They took the 
places assigned to them without making 
any complaint. They adjusted themselves 
to the circumstances. They have received 
their uniforms. Their habitations are completed and they are comfortable. They remain in camp. They are not seen in the 
city in large groups. They are quiet in 
their demeanor and make a specialty of 
attending to their own business. This community is pleased with these samples of 
the common Negro of the South. 
William Pickens in the Baltimore Daily 
Herald discloses, however, some very unfortunate conditions at Camp Lee, near Petersburg, Va.: 
Not being able to keep out Negro soldiers 
Petersburg next demanded that there should 
be no colored officers of any rank. Of 
course, the United States of America refused to sign any treaty with Petersburg. 
But today there is at any rate, no Negro 
commissioned officer at Camp Lee. 
And this brings us to the second and, perhaps, the greatest misfortune to the colored men. Not because the colored officer 
has pigment in his skin, but because Southern conditions enable him to enter more 
fully into the lives of his men is he the 
better officer for colored soldiers—especially 
from the rank of captain downward. This 
is especially true in a community like Petersburg ... . 
Now, thirdly, even at Camp Meade, Md., 
there are a few colored boys in the officers' 
school. But at Camp Lee the Negro boys 
are only servants and waiters in the school. 
With characteristic Southern sarcasm somebody picked the two best drilled companies 
of colored boys and sent them over as "bellhops" at the officers' school. This takes 
these two companies about five miles from 
the rest of the colored soldiers, and isolates 
them ... . 
It is said that there are less than fifty 
thousand soldiers at Camp Lee and that 
7,000 of these are colored. But in addition 
to other institutions maintained for white 
men by the Knights of Columbus and others 
they have eleven out of twelve buildings of 
the Y. M. C. A. The full significance of 
this will not be gotten unless you hold 
in mind the fact that a Negro soldier at 
Camp Lee can get absolutely no sort of 
service from the Y. M. C. A. buildings for 
the whites—not even a postage stamp or a 
drink of water. 
Those two companies of colored boys who 
are serving as waiters at the school for 
officers, though they are five miles from the 
building for colored men, cannot get from 
the Y. M. C. A. nearest them a piece of 
paper on which to write their mothers. 
Francis C. Sumner, Fellow in Psychology 
at Clark University, writes in the Worcester, Mass., Evening Gazette: 
The soul of black folk is already rent in 
twain, I tell you. Within the soul of each 
member of my race the conscious self is 
saying, Serve your country; while the unconscious from out of the depths is thundering, you have a poor cause to serve. 
On the one side, the martial music and the 
tramp of soldiers exhort to arms and patriotism; on the other side, in moments 
of sweet, silent thought—the words "God, 
punish America" ring of salvation. What 
is to be done to reconcile these opposing 
forces within my soul? I realize that I 
am but half a man. I long for the oneness of soul of Jean Paul Richter when he 
confesses, "I am with my country right or 
wrong; if right, to keep it right; if wrong, 
to set it right." 
Robert N. Owens writes in the St. Louis, 
Mo., Post-Dispatch: 
Our President, as the spokesman of the 
American people, who has so nobly expressed 
our sentiments as to the rights of the oppressed in other countries, realizing the 
staggering burden of the colored people of 
this nation, could greatly alleviate that 
burden by a word in our behalf at this 
time, for notwithstanding our unquestioned 
loyalty, the question that is first and uppermost in the minds of the vast majority of 
the black people of this country is, Are 
we included in this world that is to be 
made safe for democracy? If we are, there 
is no sacrifice too great; if not, then we 
are no longer freemen, but slaves. America 
can ill afford the cooperation of slaves. 
That the better South is being impressed 
by this thought is shown in the address of 
L. K. Favot of Baton Rouge, La., before 
white students at Shreveport: 
Those Negroes who are now defending our 
country will chafe under the restrictions 
we impose upon them when they come back. 
Are we going to consent to" let these things 
rock along by remaining indifferent to them, 
or are we going to become informed and 
look the situation fairly and squarely in 
the face? I know a little of what they do 
in their lodges and churches. It surprised 
me to find what some of them are reading. 
I go into their schoolhouses and find a magazine called TH E CRISIS, published by a 
noted Negro leader, an extremely intelligent, brilliant man ... . 
We tell them we are the best friends they 
have; this magazine is teaching them to 
doubt this very seriously, and if we want 
to convince them that we are their best 
friends, we have to do something and not 
only tell them so on gala occasions. It is 24 THE CRISIS 
up to the people of the South to study the 
ways and means of getting to the Negro 
the reasons why we are their best friends, 
and proving this thing to them. 
In the face of this, George Creel of Washington is sending out stuff like this as 
"public information;" which the New York 
Independent feels constrained to print: 
They have thousands of propagandists 
among the Negroes, exciting them with 
stories of impossible atrocities committed 
against the colored people in the South. 
They are equally busy with attempts to incite the whites to Negro lynchings, even 
while they are assuring the Negro that under the Kaiser the colored race will have 
social equality with the whites. 
"IMPOSSIBLE ATROCITIES." 
RECENT atrocities in the South are, we 
regret to say, "impossible" only to 
Mr. Creel's imagination. 
The Rt. Rev. Thomas F. Gailor, Episcopal 
Bishop of Tennessee, a Southern white man 
who has not been accused of pro-Germanism, writes in the Nashville Banner: 
I realize that it is futile to attempt by 
any written word to stem the tide of what 
seems to be the popular will; but a man 
can, at least, declare his abhorrence of such 
atrocities. 
This kind of lynching seems to be becoming epidemic in our state. About two years 
ago a Negro from Fayette County was 
lynched most barbarously near Memphis, 
and parts of his body, according to the 
newspapers, carried away as souvenirs. 
Many citizens of Memphis protested, but 
they were ignored. Last winter a Negro 
man near Memphis was burned at the stake, 
gasoline was poured over his body, and his 
head was cut off and taken through the 
city streets as a trophy. Last fall a Negro 
was burned to death in Dyersburg, and 
thousands of white people stood by and 
gloated over his agonies. And now, at Estill 
Springs, we have another burning, where 
the white men in charge first tortured the 
miserable creature with a red-hot iron, "to 
break his will," while the victim, already 
shot nearly to death, with one eye hanging out, screamed for mercy, and a thousand 
white men, with hundreds of women and 
children, looked on and were not ashamed. 
G. C. Brewer, an "Evangelist" of Winchester, Tenn., writes in the same paper: 
I cannot overcome the feeling that our 
preachments against these things after they 
happen is more or less of a camouflage; a 
sort of defense against the criticisms of 
other states. Why don't we stop these outrages? Will there be any genuine effort 
made to apprehend and punish the members 
of the Estill Springs mob? We know there 
will not be any such effort. There never is. 
Was there any effort made to prevent mob 
violence in this case? Let us consider the 
facts: 
The Negro committed the crime Friday 
afternoon. He was not taken by officers 
till Tuesday forenoon. We all knew a mob 
was hunting him and that he would be 
lynched when taken. County officers were 
heard to say Friday night that he would 
be lynched. Newspaper reporters from 
Nashville came out to report the burning 
and followed the officers and dogs all night. 
Yet nobody came from Nashville or from 
anywhere else to prevent mob violence. 
The Negro was found in Warren County 
Monday, and men from Estill Springs had 
ample time to go to the scene. Tuesday 
morning newspapers carried the report that 
he was found and held at bay. He was 
captured, after having been wounded about 
11 o'clock Tuesday, and the report reached 
Nashville in time to be published in the 
noon edition of The Banner. I was in Nashville and read the report while at luncheon. 
The Negro was taken to McMinnville and 
released by the officers of the law and committed to the men from Estill Springs, who 
I am told, were not officers. These men 
with their prisoner waited for a train at 
McMinnville and then came on to Tullahoma where they again waited for a train 
which leaves Nashville at 3:30 p. m. The 
train came, but did not bring anybody with 
authority to prevent mob violence. The 
men with the prisoner boarded the train for 
Estill Springs. The county jail is at Winchester where he should have been incarcerated and where his trial should have been 
held and that train came on to Winchester. 
Nobody in Winchester, however, was expecting the Negro brought there. The crowd 
had gathered at Estill Springs, for everybody knew what was to take place. On the 
streets of Winchester Evangelist Culpepper 
made a speech and begged people not to go 
to Estill Springs to witness the horrible 
sight. According to schedule the captors 
of the Negro got off the train with him at 
Estill Springs and there he was tortured 
and burned alive. 
Now, in view of all these facts, and I 
think they can be verified, it seems useless, 
nay, it seems weak and spineless if not 
hypocritical for us to send up a lugubrious 
wail about a certain class of ignorant and 
misguided people bringing a stain on our 
state and our South. We are guilty of 
criminal negligence, if not of acquiescence 
in the brutal deed, and we would as well 
confess it with bowed heads and take what 
the Northern papers give us. I doubt if 
they will give us more than we deserve 
Yet let it be understood that I am a Southerner, a native of Tennessee, and my people on both sides were Confederate soldiers. 
I'll tell you there is no use in disguising 
facts. We all know that the common people of our state understand that nothing 
will be done when they lynch a "Nigger " 
In fact, there is a sentiment among them— THE LOOKING GLASS 25 
I am one of them; I was reared among them 
and I have had opportunity to see five 
lynchings in my life—that a community that 
would permit a "Nigger" to commit a brutal 
crime and escape lynching would be untrue 
to our traditions, devoid of chivalry and 
lacking in real manhood. No doubt of it. 
Of course, they always expect a few "high 
brows" and "sissies" to whine when they 
see the blood or hear the frying flesh, but 
the real men, the real sons of the South, 
the descendants of the Ku Klux are not going to let a "Nigger" get by with such 
crimes. 
Perhaps the most illuminating document 
born of this whole horrible affair is a letter 
published in the Nashville Banner. It is 
without signature, but was mailed from the 
southeastern part of the state. The editor 
says: 
While the letter displays ignorance, provincialism and prejudice, it does not come 
from the wholly illiterate class. The penmanship is good and it gives generally indication of rudimentary education. The 
writer evidently reads a daily newspaper. 
This is the letter verbatim: 
Dear Sir: I read your article in Chattanooga Times in regard to the negro Linching at Estill Springs. And I want to say 
in reply that am very thankful that Estill 
Springs has got the nerve to hold up for 
her rights. 
What right has a negro to just walk 
up and shoot our white men and women and 
run over them in the most cruel manner, 
after the white man went to Africa and 
sent him to America and gave him all the 
Learning he has today? 
He was no more than an ape when he 
came from Africa. 
You went on far enough to put our Holy 
Bible down with such a low down thing 
as a negro Linching. 
Now if you want to use the bible in this 
matter why Not take it to a Bible standpoint? 
You said the negro was made in Gods 
own image, and the most prominent men of 
the day (Evangelists) claim that the white 
man is made in Gods own Image. Now the 
only way you can get any history as to the 
negro being any human, is that Cain when 
he killed his Bro. (Abel) he was sent to 
the Land of Knod, and there was a mark 
placed upon him so all Nations would know 
him, and he (the negro) is the only Black 
man we have, and it is surely the mark 
that was put on Cain. 
But now lets go a little further on. Was 
there any women in the Land of Knod? 
How could he have any wife when there 
wasn't any women there? He surely had 
to get him an Ape for a wife didn't he? 
Did you ever see the Skeleton of a negro 
and the Skeleton of an ape place together? 
I have, and you cant tell one from the 
other if you did not know. The Bones of 
each is red and the Negro has no bone 
in his nose at all. Ive got one in mine 
and Surely if the Negro is an Image of 
God the white man is not, for surely he 
hasnt got two Images. So Thanks to Estill 
Springs for taking interest enough in their 
own Race to go and get the Negro. 
Let the conscience of America remember 
that it is this kind of person to whom the 
bishops of the church, the leaders of society 
and the editors of The Outlook have committed the settlement of the Negro problem! 
As the New York Nation says: 
Had any such item as this come out of 
Belgium or Armenia, we should know what 
to think of the unspeakable Germans and 
Turks responsible. A wave of horror would 
sweep over the country and there would be 
an extra rush to the enlistment offices. But 
when Americans thus debase themselves, 
nobody volunteers to end the evil, nobody 
speaks about it—at least, nobody who is 
white—and we complacently turn to the congenial task of setting up democracy in Germany. "The application of red-hot irons" 
is now a regular feature of these tortures 
—this is the second of the kind within a 
couple of weeks. In the other case, the 
man's eyeballs were slowly burned out— 
without even an apology to the Sioux. 
There is a Canadian soldier going around 
the country deeply stirring our rural communities with the tale of the crucifixion of 
three Canadians by German fiends. What 
reception would one of our black soldiers 
get if he were to lecture on the fiendishness 
of burnings in the South? 
NEGRO ART. 
EXTRAORDINARY note is being taken 
today of the artistic side of Negro 
life, particularly in music and dancing. 
Karleton Hackett says in the Chicago Evening Post: 
The only distinctive thing in our music, 
which is the spontaneous product of our 
soil and without trace of European influence, is this curious syncopated rhythm 
known as ragtime—and how the elect do 
rage about it still as a noxious weed in their 
carefully tended garden of art! Yet being 
a plant indigenous to the soil, and consequently of hardy growth, it thrives despite 
them, and to my way of thinking will 
plague them more and more as time goes 
on, until, mayhap, it will come to be recognized as no weed but of worth as an outflowering from our land. 
If high-sounding words could have killed, 
it long since would have withered, but it 
waxes daily and is forcing its way into our 
symphony halls. If only some of our painstakingly imitative art had the vigor of this 
condemned outlaw! "DOING 
A MIDNIGHT AUDIENCE AT THE BOOKER WASHINGTON THEATRE, ST. LOUIS, MO . THE El 
TOBACCO FUND OF THE COLORED 
26 a BIT. " 
PROCEED S WER E DONATE D B Y TH E COLORE D PROPRIETO R O F TH E THEATR E TO THE 
FTEE S A T CAM P FUNSTON , KAN . 
27 "THE BUFFALOES" Underwood & Underwood. 
THE 367th (Colored) INFANTRY OF THE NATIONAL ARMY WITH COLORED LINE OFFICERS 
MARCHING UP FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 
28 THE LOOKING GLASS 29 
A writer in the Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Republican says of Burleigh's arrangement of 
Negro Folk songs: 
There are nights when overhead rises a 
star-set dome, a gem encrusted surface, and 
there are other nights when the stars lie 
deeper, when the blue-black distances between are deep as night itself. The simple 
versions of these spirituals are charged 
with religious ecstasy, but it is shallow, as 
ephemeral as an April shower, while the 
arrangements under discussion attain a solidity that causes us to suspect that in them 
the Negro voices a religious security as old 
as creation. Older than hope, deeper than 
grief, more tender than tears, more substantial than eternity—the utterance of a 
race unshaken in faith though subjected to 
earth's vilest torments. The depth which 
has been added to these songs is a universal 
quality which may remove them from the 
Negro as his peculiar property, and give 
them to the world at large. 
Mr. Burleigh has preserved them in harmonies that belong to modern methods of 
tonal progression, but these progressions 
have not pressed out of the melodies their 
racial flavor. The wild grape has been 
transformed into a delicious wine. 
Finally, Max Endicoff tells of a mid-night 
pilgrimage to a New Jersey city in the New 
York Call: 
A single spluttering gas flame spit a 
spiral wave of sooty smoke toward the 
low ceiling and shot a yellow circular wave 
into the darkness, thrusting deep shadows 
into the corners. 
Up against the bar and alongside the 
walls a dozen Negroes, or more, lounged 
with that easy animal grace, so naturally 
inherent to them. They all maintained a 
strange quietude, with only an occasional 
sibilant whisper tearing through the silence 
like a streak of lightning across black skies. 
All eyes were centered attentively on a young 
buck and a wench, in close embrace, going 
through a rhythmic dance interpretation 
of the hiccoughing music that stuttered 
from a chronically asthmatic player-piano. 
But what was this music on the cylindrical roll, with its queer hieroglyphic excisions? Was it a popular dance tune, a 
rag-time melody, a jazz strain or a tuneful hymn? Oh, no. It was nothing less 
than the prelude and liebestod from Wagner's "Tristan and Isolde." 
And it was to this intense, surging and 
tumultuous cry of love passion that the 
two young Negroes pirouetted with an inconceivably imaginative conception of appropriate movement of the limbs. Considering the rhythmless character of the music 
(from a terpschorean point of view) the 
performance was amazing for its audaciousness and precocity. And equally 
astounding was the cool, nonchalant attitude of the onlookers, who critically studied 
each movement of the dancers and quietly 
commented upon them among themselves. 
The Negro is finding an opening door in 
the field of dramatic art. This is as it 
should be—for true art knows no color line. 
Three groups of Negro players who have 
appeared on the New York stage during 
the past two years have given evidence of 
that fact. 
• The Lafayette Players, composed entirely 
of Negro actors, have played in a house 
located in the distinct Negro district of 
New York City and patronized largely by 
Negro theatre-goers. 
The Negro Players, composed entirely of 
Negro actors, have played Ridgely Torrence's works in two houses located in the 
distinct theatre district of New York City 
and patronized largely by white theatregoers. 
A third group of Negro actors presents a 
different phase of this interesting field of 
art. This season has brought to New York 
the beautiful and colorful "Chu Chin Chow," 
a musical tale of the East, in which thirty 
and more Negro actors work along, side by 
side and in pleasing harmony, with their 
upwards of two hundred co-workers of various races—a veritable assemblage of peoples of both hemispheres. These Negro 
actors take well their parts—from the small 
brown-faced smiling lad of eight, who disports himself in his Eastern habiliments 
while carrying the weighty bags of treasure, 
to the overgrown and loud-mouthed "Son of 
the Bean Seller in the Streets of Ancient 
Bagdad." But way and above and beyond 
her kinsmen and distinctly one of the outstanding characters of the entire cast stood 
Matty Thomas, who, until her recent and 
unexpected and lamentable death, took the 
part of "Bostan, the half-witted servant 
whose dialect no one understands but her 
mistress." 
The New York Times said: 
The serving woman in Ali Baba's house 
speaks only in some uncouth and unintelligible jargon, but with an expression so characteristic, so eloquent, that one seems to 
understand and rejoices that such evil is 
not conveyed in words. 
The New York Evening World commented 
thus: 
The work of the young Negro girl, Matty 
Thomas, who plays the role of Bostan, the 
half-witted servant of Mahbah, shows skilful training. This girl was among a score 
or more who answered an advertisement 
for "supers" for "Chu Chin Chow." Mr. 
Swete picked her from the mob, and she 
made good. She speaks nothing but a 
jumble of Arabian words taught her by Mr. 
Swete. But even funnier than her performance is the fact that she was a Tenth 
Avenue laundress before she worked her 
way to the stage, a Madam Sans Gene, as 
it were, with a touch of color. 
It is Matty Thomas whom TH E CRISIS 
presents as a cover page to its readers. The Horizon 
MUSIC AND ART. 
THE combined choral and orchestral societies of the six Higher Institutions 
for Negro Education in Atlanta, Ga., which 
included a chorus of five hundred voices, 
gave an intercollegiate benefit concert on 
March 22. Kemper Harreld was the director. 
Henry F. Gilbert's "The Dance in Place 
Congo," ballet pantomine after a story of 
old New Orleans by George W. Cable, was 
one of two novelties presented in March at 
the Metropolitan Opera House. The New 
York Times heralds Mr. Gilbert's work, not 
only as "all American," sincerely and genuinely based on the folk songs of the 
American Negro, familiar Southern tunes 
in an 'artistic score, but as "the most artistic piece of Negro ragtime rhapsody 
Broadway has shown." 
No other American composer has written so prolifically or sincerely or with deeper 
sympathy after the Negro idiom than Henry 
F. Gilbert, who declares the true American 
yet in the making and who will be a fusion 
of all races in a perfect one. 
The Anglo-African was represented on 
the program of the Bristol Musical Club, 
Bristol, England, by Coleridge Taylor's 
"Fantasiestuck." 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Drake's Drum," a 
part song, was sung in Plymouth, England, 
at a concert given by a choir of twenty 
male voices, musicians in the R. N. Air Service, under the direction of Cecil Moon. 
The Soldiers' Unit of Boston, Mass., connected with the Circle for Negro War Relief, gave three Sunday afternoon musicales 
in March. The churches offering their auditoriums were Ebenezer Baptist Church of 
Boston, the First Universalist Church of 
Everett, and the First Parish Unitarian 
Church of Cambridge. Volunteer talent included Mme. Estelle Clough, Adah Gaskin 
Mason and Gertrude O'Neal, soprano; William H. Richardson, baritone; Maud Cuney 
Hare, pianist; Louisa V. Jones and Clarence 
Cameron White, violinists. 
Marion E. Anderson, contralto of Philadelphia, Pa., was heard in a recital at the 
Twelfth Baptist Church, Boston, Mass., on 
March 14. 
"The Seven Last Words," by DuBois, 
was given by the Howard University Choir 
at Rankin Memorial Chapel, Washington, 
D. C, on March 24. The soloists were Margaret Rhodes, soprano; Roland W. Hayes, 
tenor, and Frank Harrison, baritone. 
Madame Marie Selika, first coloraturasoprano of note of Negro blood, received a 
hearty welcome at The Guardian Benefit 
Concert, Monroe Trotter, Editor, on March 
21, at Shawmut Congregational Church. 
Musical Courier says of the singing of 
William H. Richardson at the Theodore 
Schroeder Salon-Musicale, held on March 3 
—"The colored baritone, William H. Richardson, was heard in a modern French song, 
'Le Portrait,' Schumann's 'Two Grenadiers' 
and 'Go Down, Moses,' a Negro spiritual by H. T. Burleigh. His rich and resonant baritone is a genuine pleasure to 
hear. Careful training, deep thought and a 
broad interpretative sense were marked 
features of his singing." 
Emily Harford, Sylvia Fairweather and 
Kathleen Narelle appeared recently at a 
music-lecture recital at the Music School 
Settlement for Colored People, New York 
City. During March, James Weldon Johnson gave an address on "The Negro in 
Music and Art." Remarks were made by 
the noted American violinist, David I. Mannes, and Rev. F. A. Cullen. Musical illustrations were given by Mrs. Blanche Deas 
Harris, soprano; Ethel Richardson, pianist, 
and William Butler, Jr., violinist. 
One thousand soldiers of the 367th colored infantry gave a concert at Manhattan 
Opera House after the triumphal march of 
the regiment up Fifth Avenue. 
Musical instruments of all kinds, including violins, 'cellos, guitars, banjos, mandolins and brass or mouth instruments, are 
needed by the colored musicians of the Ninety-second Division. They may be sent to 
Captain Sam Bucklew, Camp Funston, Kan. 
At the April concert of the Schola Cantorium, Carnegie Hall, New York City, Negro folk-songs, newly collected by Natalie 
Curtis Burlin, were presented. 
30 THE HORIZON 31 
Colored regimental bands at Camp Meade 
have developed unusual efficiency and received wide commendation by their playing. 
A patriotic festival, "Who Follow the 
Flag," was given in Princeton, N. J., by 
pupils of the Colored Public School. 
Mae C. Porter gave a recital to six 
hundred people in the City Hall Auditorium, 
Dallas, Texas. She presented a gold medal 
to Daisy Young for the best song on the 
program. 
Joseph Douglass, the violinist, appeared 
at Talladega College recently in selections 
from Coleridge-Taylor and Kreisler. He 
was accompanied by Carl R. Diton. 
Genevieve Quivers played Mendelssohn's 
Concerto in G Minor at a recent recital of 
the Goudey Music School, Stockton, Cal. 
Frederick D. Allen will exhibit oil paintings at the annual exhibition of the Toledo 
Federation of Art Societies at the Toledo 
Museum of Art, April 7 to May 7. 
W. H. Graham, a colored man, was 
awarded third place for his composition, 
"March Militare," in the National Army 
Musical Contest held at Camp Funston, 
Kans., among one thousand contestants. 
Lieut. John Philip Sousa was the judge. 
The "Birth of a Race" photoplay corporation, which has been promoting a film 
based on the life of the late Booker T. 
Washington, has gotten in trouble with the 
State of Illinois, by not complying with its 
law as to the sale of stock. They have issued a circular which makes a number of 
prominent people appear as officers and directors and have promised large returns. 
Julius Rosenwald has threatened suit unless his name is withdrawn from their circulars. 
The rendition of Faust at the Lafayette 
Theatre, New York, and at the Howard 
Theatre, Washington, D. C, by colored players was an unusually commendable presentation. The Mephisto of William B. Townsend 
and the Marguerite of Abbie Mitchell merited especial mention. 
C On April 3, Roland W. Hayes, tenor; 
William H. Richardson, baritone; and Maud 
Cuney Hare, pianist, gave a recital of jubilee, folk-lore and classical selections at New 
Nixon Theatre, for the benefit of the Arctic 
Avenue Branch of the Y. M. C. A., Atlantic 
City, N. J. 
The Sedalia Singers, quartet of women's 
voices from Palmer Memorial Institute of 
North Carolina, appeared in a concert at 
Jordan Hall, Boston, Mass., assisted by 
Roland W. Hayes, tenor. William S. Lawrence was the accompanist. 
Melville Charlton was musical director of 
the opera "Martha," rendered at the Waldorf-Astoria, March 14, in New York City. 
MEETINGS. 
THE Colored Druggists' Association of 
the District of Columbia, has held its 
annual session. Dr. W. C. Simmons is head 
of the organization. 
A Southern publicity committee, with 
members in every Southern State, has been 
organized by liberal white Southerners, 
headed by James H. Dillard and Mrs. John 
D. Hammond. The aim is to give publicity to facts concerning co-operation and 
good will between the races. 
Five thousand colored people from all 
parts of Georgia attended a food conservation convention in Atlanta. Schools were 
closed and the Governor made a speech. 
A conference on Negro education, attended by the presidents of leading colored 
colleges of South Carolina, was held at 
Orangeburg. 
Seven hundred delegates attended the 
Laymen's Missionary Movement of Colored 
Churches in South Carolina. 
The New Orleans Public High School for 
Colored People has held its first public exercises. 
The State Medical and Pharmaceutical 
Association of Colored Doctors met in New 
Orleans, May 1 and 2. 
A summer school will be held at the Negro A. & T. College at Greensboro, N. C, 
June 24 to August 3. 
The Louisiana Negro Civic League held 
a conference in New Orleans last month, 
for better school facilities, higher wages, 
children's playgrounds and the suppression 
of mob violence. 
THE WAR. 
THE Recreation Club for enlisted men in 
South Carolina has become affiliated 
with the Fosdick Commission and is known 
as the Charleston Colored War Camp Community Service. Dr. Hulda Proileau is 
general chairman of the activities. 
The Mary Church Terrell Red Cross Aux-32 THE CRISIS 
iliary has been formed by colored women 
in Sioux City, Iowa. The members have 
pledged to complete fifty pairs of pajamas 
each week. 
Seventy-five Negroes in Pittsburgh, Pa., 
have formed a Home Defense League. 
Frank Sutton is chairman of the movement. 
The drafted Negroes at Camp Gordon, 
Atlanta, Ga., form the 514th Engineer Service Battalion under Major Sydney Smith of 
New York. 
Over four hundred relatives and friends 
attended an "at home," given the colored 
officers at Camp Dix. 
The War Recreation Board has opened 
a club for Negro soldiers at Camp Zachary 
Taylor, Louisville, Ky. Prof. A. E. Meyzeek, Principal of the Booker T. Washington School, is chairman of the Club Committee. 
Seventy-five thousand Negroes have already been certified for service in the National Army, or eight per cent of the total 
enlistment. Of every one hundred colored 
men called thirty-six were certified for service, as against twenty-five out of every one 
hundred white men. 
The Chicago Daily News has presented 
the 370th colored regiment, under Colonel F. 
A. Dennison, a stand of colors. 
INDUSTRY. 
THE Payton Apartments Corporation has 
been formed of Negroes to buy the six 
elevator apartment houses for Negroes in 
Harlem, New York, the property of the late 
Philip A. Payton, valued at $1,500,000, from 
the Philton Holding Company. In the company are E. C. Brown and Andrew F. 
Stevens, bankers of Philadelphia; W. H. C. 
Brown, Emmett J. Scott, and Heman E. 
Perry, President of the Standard Life Insurance Company of Atlanta, Ga. 
The United Brotherhood of Elevator and 
Switchboard Operators in New York City 
has become affiliated with the American 
Federation of Labor. 
The Negro Commercial Association, Inc., 
of Denver, Colo., has opened a grocery store 
and issued The Colorado Progress, edited by 
the Rev. Messrs. D. E. Over and H. B. 
Brown. It aims to advance mercantile interests among the colored people. 
In Charleston, S. C, colored women are 
being employed to load and unload freight 
cars and as carpenters. At the Immigration Building five hundred colored women 
are engaged in the manufacture of clothing 
for the navy. At Savannah, Ga., forty colored women have been employed for sewing 
and as cleaners and helpers. At Brunswick, Ga., hundreds of colored women are 
employed in the shrimp and oyster canning factories. 
The Farmers' Co-operative Mercantile 
Company of Mound Bayou, Miss., reports 
for 1917 resources of $41,994. It has a 
capital of $8,000, undivided profits of $12,-
373, and its sales during the year amounted 
to $62,361. The stockholders bought their 
shares at five dollars and have received 
three dollars in dividends on every share, 
besides being credited with $12.70 in undivided profit. 
A labor union of colored employees of 
the stockyards has been started in Chicago. 
Among the 1,275 men employed at Hog 
Island, near Philadelphia, during the first 
week in March were 450 colored men. 
The immigration officials of Canada have 
decided to import colored West Indians, 
rather than Chinese, to supply the labor 
shortage. 
Negroes from the Bahama Islands are 
to be imported into this country as farm 
laborers. 
The thirtieth annual report of the Berean Building and Loan Association of Philadelphia, Pa., shows that during the year 
1917 its income was $105,196 with a balance 
of $3,002. Its assets, consisting of mortgages, stock loans, cash and real estate, 
were $267,888. The expenses of running 
the association for the year amounted to 
$879. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS. 
THE Associated Charities of Pittsburgh 
for the first time in its history is employing a colored social worker, Edith L. 
Spurlock. 
Negroes of Atchison, Kans., under the 
leadership of W. E. Gray, John Kelly, Lloyd 
Kerford, Clyde Briggs, and others, recently 
secured over $1,500 for a community house 
for Negro troops at Camp Funston. 
Two Negroes have been added to the 
St. Louis, Mo., police force: Charles Johnson and John Kunz. THE HORIZON 33 
Colored janitors of the Court House and 
Hall of Records, Los Angeles, Cal., have 
been restored to the charge of a colored 
chief, L. G. Robinson. 
A model apartment house has been opened for Negroes in Springfield, Mass., 
through the activities of St. John's Church, 
of which the Rev. Dr. W. N. De Berry is 
pastor. 
Of the $4,000,000 budget of the Y. W. 
C. A. for war work $200,000 will be used for 
work among Negro women and girls, which 
would seem to be one-half their rightful 
quota. 
A Catholic Negro Hospital has been established in Memphis, Tenn. In nine months 
284 patients have been received. It has 
lately added a training school for nurses 
and a free dispensary. 
A recreation center for colored girls has 
been opened by the Recreation Association 
at the Dart School in Charleston, S. C. 
The Baltimore Branch of the colored Y. 
M. C. A. has a membership of over eleven 
hundred. 
C Public School No. 89, in the Harlem section of Manhattan, on February 1 had sold 
$4,080 worth of Thrift Stamps. There are 
over 1,800 Negro pupils in the school. 
A twenty days' drive for an increased 
membership for the colored Y. M. C. A. in 
New York City resulted in an addition of 
535 members. 
The chairman and clerk of the local Exemption Board of Talliferro County, Ga., 
have been removed by President Wilson for 
discrimination against Negroes. 
A second separate street car bill has been 
killed in the Louisville, Ky., Board of Aldermen. 
The United Brothers of Friendship, a 
colored fraternity, has erected a fifty thousand dollar building in Houston, Texas. 
The Mercy Hospital and Nurses Training School has been opened in Detroit, Mich. 
Hampton claims the championship in the 
basketball season, having defeated the Dunbar High School, Shaw, Carlisle, Lincoln 
and Howard. 
A delegation of Negroes, led by Bishop 
W. D. Chappelle, of the A. M. E. Church, 
has been received by President Wilson. A 
petition asking that lynching be made a 
Federal offense, was presented. 
The National League on Urban Conditions Among Negroes has received a fund 
of $3,200 for social welfare work in East 
St. Louis. 
White citizens of Tennessee have formed 
a Law and Order League to stop lynching 
by a campaign of education, including literature, lectures, etc. 
The State of Ohio maintains no library 
at its Columbus Penitentiary. All the books 
are donated by the public and various publishing houses. Gifts of books in which colored prisoners would be interested may be 
sent to Chaplain T. O. Reed, Ohio Penitentiary, Columbus, Ohio. 
The House of Representatives of Kentucky has submitted a constitutional amendment making sheriffs and jailers responsible 
for prisoners taken from their custody. 
The extraordinary decisions of the New 
York Court of Appeals interpreting the 
Civil Rights Law have been noted. Two 
decisions have exempted bootblack stands 
and saloons, while the third decision opens 
parks and dance halls. A comprehensive 
amendment of the law has been passed by 
the Legislature and will probably be signed 
by Governor Whitman. 
The Executive State Council of Defense 
of West Virginia has appointed thirty colored men and women as an Auxiliary Advisory Council of Defense. J. C. Gilmer, 
former State Librarian, is the secretary and 
directing head with offices in the State 
House at Charleston. 
The Woman's Reformatory of Kansas 
City, Mo., is putting colored matrons in 
charge of the colored girls. They must 
have good common school education and 
will receive from $600 to $780 a year and 
maintenance. Applicants should apply to 
the Superintendent, 2015 Vine Street, Kansas City, Mo. 
A world's record for bread-baking has 
been established by Baking Company No. 
328 of the Quartermaster's Department of 
the National Army. The bakers are composed of men from the Tenth and Twentyfourth Infantries. They are established at 
Camp Cody, Deming, N. M. 
EDUCATION. 
THE Legislature of New Jersey has appropriated for the fiscal year from 
July 1, 1918, to June 30, 1919, $93,900, including earnings, for the Bordentown School. 34 THE CRISIS 
This amount includes maintenance and permanent improvements. 
Twenty-five students graduated from the 
four-year-course at Kortrecht High School, 
Memphis, Tenn. 
A benefit for Manassas Industrial School 
has been held in New York at iEolian Hall. 
Mile. Guiomar Novaes, Brazilian pianist, 
gave a recital. 
A colored public school to cost $170,000 
with the site is to be erected in Baltimore. 
The report of the John F. Slater Fund 
for the year ending September 30, 1917, 
shows appropriations of $30,150 for county 
training schools, $12,000 to Hampton and 
Tuskegee, $9,150 to private secondary 
schools, and $17,500 to colleges. The income from the year 1916, including a balance from previous years, was $127,523. 
The annual public trial given by the Law 
Department of Howard University, devoted 
its proceeds to the Manassas Industrial 
School. 
Mather Industrial School, Beaufort, S. C. 
celebrated its fiftieth anniversary, March 23. 
Fifty thousand dollars has been appropriated for a new colored public school in 
Augusta, Ga. 
The Colored Central High School of 
Shreveport, La., has raised $1,016 for an 
auditorium. Newton Smith, a colored farmer of Caddo Parish, contributed $500. 
The fourth annual oratorical contest of 
the A. & I. State Normal School, Nashville, 
Tenn., has been held. 
Two thousand dollars each was willed to 
Tuskegee Institute and the Calhoun School 
by the late Mrs. E. C. Farnham of New 
York City. 
Nearly three hundred colored communities in Alabama have complied with conditions laid down by Julius Rosenwald and 
raised enough funds to receive his aid in 
building school houses. 
The District of Columbia has purchased 
fourteen hundred copies of Miss L. E. Wilkes' "Story of Frederick Douglass," to be 
used as a literature primer for pupils of 
the seventh grade. 
A campaign for raising $65,000 for four 
Negro schools is being made in Texas. 
THE CHURCH. 
A RELIGIOUS census of men of the 
366th Infantry, Camp Dodge, Iowa, 
taken January 30, 1918, showed 1841 Baptists, 816 Methodists, 279 other church members, and 519 without church affiliation. 
Second Baptist Church in Detroit, Mich., 
has been destroyed by fire. The property, 
valued at $75,000, was insured for $20,000. 
Mother Zion A. M. E. Church in New 
York City has celebrated its 122d annual 
reunion. 
During the year 1917 the Catholic church 
raised $135,013 for its Negro and Indian 
missions. To this the United States Government added for Indians $142,629. The 
mission work among Negroes covers 112 
churches with 123 priests and 150 schools; 
7,454 persons were baptized during the 
year and 17,183 children taught. The Catholic church claims 105,053 communicants in 
the thirty cities where its mission work is 
being carried on. 
PERSONAL. 
JOHN R. McNEIL, a colored man, has 
been appointed Inspector of Hydrants 
in New York City at a salary of $1,500. 
James A. Hunster, who has been an employee of the Cincinnati Gas & Electric Company for forty-seven years, has been pensioned. 
G. A. Sheehy, colored, of Philadelphia, 
Pa., has been appointed inspector of Leather 
for the Government. 
The town of Andy, Texas, has been 
granted a new post-office and by special 
legislation the name has been changed to 
Cuney, in honor of the late Norris Wright 
Cuney, a widely known colored Republican 
politician. 
Ersol William Martin, a colored member of the Naval Reserve Corps of South 
Philadelphia, was killed on the Von Steuben, 
formerly the raider, Kronprinz Wilhelm. 
He was eighteen-years old and a volunteer. 
Dr. Daniel S. Balekehu, of the Yoo tribe 
in Central Africa, who came to America in 
1905 and is a graduate of Meharry Medical College, has been appointed Chief of 
Resident Physicians at Mudgett's Hospital, North Philadelphia. 
Mannie Taylor, of Florence, S. C, "somewhere in France," has been promoted to a 
corporalship. 
Charles H. Williams, of Hampton Institute, has been selected to make a study 
of recreational activities for colored soldiers in the sixteen cantonments. He will 
work under the Phelps-Stokes Foundation THE HORIZON 35 
and the Federal Council of Churches of 
Christ in America. 
Ann Meneese, of Nashville, Tenn., is dead 
at the age of 119. Half of her life was 
spent in slavery. Two sons, thirteen grandchildren, fifteen great-grandchildren, and 
three great-great-grandchildren survive her. 
Rosa Nixon, head of the Art Department at the Normal School in Montgomery, 
Ala., has accepted a place in the Colored 
High School in Baltimore, Md. 
Francis Kane, a member of the Twentyfourth Infantry in France, has been given 
the red, white and blue salvage medal for 
catching a spy. He has three colonial medals for bravery and distinguished conduct. 
Several times he has been wounded in battle. 
James Thompson, colored, of Louisville, 
Ky., has been given a verdict of $6,000 
against the New York Central Railroad 
Company for permanent injuries. 
Roscoe McKenney, a freshman at Bates 
College on a scholarship from Dunbar High 
School, Washington, D. C, has been chosen 
one of twelve from a class of 120 to compete in a public speaking contest. 
William A. Huskerson, a graduate of 
the Engineering School of Howard University, has been appointed Municipal Engineer 
and Inspector of Public Works of the District of Colon, R. de Panama. He has accepted a contract from the government to 
construct a twenty-mile road from New 
Providence to Colon. 
Attorney Robert L. Vann, of Pittsburgh, 
Pa., has been appointed Assistant City Solicitor. 
Oswald Garrison Villard addressed a 
mass meeting of colored people of New 
Orleans. 
DeWitt Purdue, a well-to-do colored West 
Indian, has left his library to the Colored 
High School at Huntington, W. Va. 
Charles Eaton Burch, of Bermuda, who 
was educated at Wilberforce, has received 
his Master of Arts degree in the Department of English and Comparative Literature, Columbia University. His thesis was 
"A Survey of the Life and Poetry of Paul 
Laurence Dunbar." 
Dr. W. E. B. DuBois has been lecturing 
to audiences aggregating over four thousand 
persons in Harrisburgh, Pa.; Dayton and 
Youngstown, Ohio; Detroit, Mich., and Syracuse, N. Y. 
Matty Thomas, the star of "Chu Chin 
Chow," died recently in New York City. 
Her funeral was attended by members of 
her company. 
A colored soldier, A. G. Coles, of Halifax County, Va., died recently at Camp 
Lee and left his little son his insurance of 
$10,000. The soldier's parents are prosperous farmers owning two hundred acres. 
Chaplain Clifford L. Miller has been assigned to the Tenth Negro Service Battalion 
at Camp Lee, Va. 
Sergeant R. W. Overton has been sent 
to the Officers' Training Camp for Aviators 
at Camp Funston, Kans. 
The Rev. Mr. G. W. Arnold, District 
Superintendent of the Atlanta District in 
the M. E. Church, is dead. 
Celia Parker Wooley, head of Frederick 
Douglass Center and a prominent social 
worker in Chicago, is dead. 
Captain J. E. Dunjill has replaced Captain W. R. Spencer as head of former Company L, Sixth Massachusetts Infantry. 
F. Q. Morton, Assistant District Attorney of New York County, is in charge of 
the drawing of indictments for the Grand 
Jury and has made an exceptional record. 
He was recently given a dinner in New 
York City, where white and colored people 
representing the Bench and Bar, united to 
do him honor. Judge J. F. Mulqueen, of 
the General Sessions; the Hon. William S. 
Bennett, ex-member of Congress, and William H. Lewis, ex-Assistant Attorney-General of the United States, were among the 
prominent persons participating. 
Sergeant J. R. A. Crossland, Jr., was 
buried with military honors at St. Joseph, 
Mo. 
John H. Brown, a colored private of the 
regular army, has been made Second Lieutenant at the training camp, Camp Sherman, 
Ohio. 
Governor Manning, of South Carolina, 
addressed a Negro race conference in Columbia. 
Hugh Bess has been appointed baggage 
master of the Union Station at Charleston, 
W. Va. Forty daily passenger trains use 
the station. 
Miss Florida Thomas graduated with 
honors from the Lucy Flower Technical High 3 6 THE CRISIS 
School, Chicago, Ill. She was a member of the Wiseacre Club, a school 
society which required its members to have 
an average of 95 per cent in all subjects. 
Miss Thomas will continue her studies 
at the Chicago Normal Teachers' College. 
James M. Morris, an attorney at law 
at Staunton, Va., has been especially commended by the chairman of the draft council 
for his work in preparing the colored 
registrants. 
George Mattlock, a private of the 25th 
Infantry and champion gunner, Hawaiian 
Island, has defeated contestants from three 
regiments. 
R. J. Smith, of Hartshorn, Okla., a prominent member of the United Mine Workers 
and various colored organizations, is dead. 
The City Council, of Urbana, Ohio, has 
a Negro member, J. A. Brown. 
Dr. Charles A. Martin has been elected 
vice-president of the Board of Health of 
Muncie, Ind. 
C John Borden, a colored farmer in Goldsboro, N. C, is the father of thirty-five 
children, fourteen of whom are serving i; 
the Army. 
Dr. Mary L. Brown has been commissioned by the Red Cross Society to go to 
France. Dr. Brown received her medical 
education at Howard, and took a post 
graduate course at Edinborough, Scotland. 
Margarita E. Lewis graduated from 
the Wendell Phillips High School, Chicago, Ill., with honors. During her four 
year course she maintained an average of 
90 per cent. Miss Lewis has entered the 
Chicago Teachers' College, having made 
an average of 92 per cent, on her entrance 
examination. 
FOREIGN. 
THE Municipality of Port-of-Spain has 
an elective council, four-fifths of the 
members of which are colored men, four of 
them being physicians, two barristers-atlaw, one a solicitor, and one a prominent 
merchant. 
The London Observer has published a 
list of twelve Negro officers in the West 
African Forces who have been decorated for 
bravery. 
The National Party of South Africa, 
composed of Boers, has protested against 
Lloyd George's speech with reference to selfdetermination by the Aborigines of South 
Africa. 
His Royal Highness Daudi Chua, King 
of Uganda, has been decorated by King 
George with the Order of St. Michael and 
St. George. 
The Governing Council of the South African Native College has held its annual meeting. The Rev. Mr. James Henderson, M.A., 
was re-elected chairman. The college was 
open nine months and had thirty-one students. 
CRIME. 
GOVERNOR CATTS, of Florida, and 
members of the Board of State Institutions, have leased 789 convicts, most of 
whom are Negroes, to the highest bidder. 
The state will receive $360 per year for the 
hire of each prisoner. 
Emma Vigil, a thirteen year old white 
girl of Spokane, Wash., played truant 
from school and attended the movies. She 
then bit and bruised her arms and told a 
terrible tale of being kidnapped by a Negro. 
The police were notified and started to hunt 
for the black man, when the girl broke 
down and acknowledged that she had lied. 
The 450 colored vaudeville performers in 
the country are not admitted to the National Vaudeville Association, but are to be 
"permitted" to have an affiliated organization and elect their own officers. 
Two Catholic hospitals of Detroit, St. 
Mary's and Providence, refuse to receive 
Negro patients, although the former receives city funds. Even sick folks from 
the colored Catholic church are not admitted. 
The Supreme Court of Tennessee has 
upheld damages awarded certain white 
women, because between Memphis and Little Rock, Ark., three colored women ate in 
the same dining car on the Rock Island road. 
At Vicksburg, Miss., a Negro boy who 
stole a bicycle was given five years at hard 
labor, while a white man who stole $1,900 
was given two years. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Monroe, La., March 16—George McNeel, 
hanged for alleged attack upon a white 
woman. 
Crawfordville, Ga., March 22—Spencer 
Evans, hanged; he was convicted of criminal assault upon a colored woman at the 
February term of court and sentenced to 
be hanged, but a mob took him from jail 
and lynched him. 
Lewiston, N. C, March 26—Peter Bazemore, for alleged attack upon a white 
woman. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 3 7 
Standard Life Insurance Company 
20 0 Aubur n Avenu e 
Atlanta , Ga . 
Old Line (Not Fraternal—Nor Assessment) 
Legal Reserve 
Fifth Annual Statement 
To the Policyholders and Public 
Insurance in Force $5,174,491.00 
Gain for 1917 $1,844,491.00 
Total Income 203,266.10 
(Premium and Interest) 
Gain for 1917 82,198.10 
Admitted Assets 334,222.33 
Gain for 1917 89,052.20 
Policy Reserve and Other Liabilities 186,028.08 
Gain for 1917 64,742.08 
Surplus to Policyholders 148,194.25 
Gain for 1917 24,310.25 
Comparative Statement 
Number InsurPolicies ance in Premium Death Legal Admitted Surplus to 
Year. In Force. Force. Income. Losses. Reserve. Assets. Policyholders. 
igi 3 48 1 $381,50 0 $10,293.6 8 None $7,639.0 0 $116,701.9 0 $104,198.0 0 
191 4 1,62 2 1,205,00 0 37,329.9 2 $2,625.0 0 22,545.6 1 131,248.4 8 106,730.0 0 
191 5 2,58 0 1,944,91 0 71,664.6 5 11,222.0 0 51,779.4 6 159,152.7 1 104,585.0 0 
191 6 4,06 9 3,330,00 0 114,794.0 8 19,012.9 1 ng,353- 67 245,170.1 3 123,884.0 0 
191 7 6,17 2 5,174,49 1 193,066.3 5 32,760.4 0 181,078.4 3 334,222.3 3 148,194.2 5 
The Company that gives to the race PROTECTION—INVESTMENT—EMPLOYMENT. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Hom e Offic e ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 38 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, he. 
Sells Insurance That Protects 
Insurance that covers the whole field of life's emergencies in one policy: 
Sickness, Accident and Death, and perpetual in payments for disabilities. 
Of all investments that of insurance is the safest, because it pays at the 
crucial moment—it is not subject to the money market or the rise and fall 
of stocks and bonds; but pays promptly upon the death of each policyholder. 
Then why not select the best that is to be had—a policy that pays every 
week with Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc.? Also owning and operating 
the Va. Beneficial & Insurance Co., Inc., at Norfolk, Va. 
Read a few testimonials from the thousands that are on file at home 
office in Richmond, Va. 
DREW $217.50 SICK BENEFITS and $500.00 DEATH CLAIM 
Richmond, Va., July 2, 1917. 
To Whom It May Concern: 
This is to certify that my wife, Mrs. Lelia V. James, 1104 Chaffin Street, 
was a member of Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., for six and one-half 
years. During this time, she was sick on several occasions and whenever 
she reported her illness to the Society, she received her sick dues promptly. 
Her last illness extended from the latter part of November, 1916, to June, 
1917. The Society sent her money to her bedside each week, from December 6, 1916, to June 6, 1917, and at her death paid over to me the Death 
Claim of $500.00. 
I take pleasure in recommending the Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., 
to anyone who wants a sure policy of protection all through life. 
Respectfully yours, 
GEORGE JAMES, Husband. 
CLARENCE JAMES, Witness. 
$500.00 DR. THOS. A. STEVENS' DEATH CLAIM 
1007 Sixth St., Lynchburg, Va. 
Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., February 10, 1917. 
Richmond, Va. 
Gentlemen: 
Kindly accept my sincere thanks for your check of $500.00 in full payment of death claim of my husband, Dr. Thomas A. Stevens, who died February 6, 1917. The above named check was delivered to me Thursday, February 8, 1917, by your superintendent, Mr. R D. Burton. 
I shall always speak in the highest terms of your company, and pray 
God's blessings upon the work. 
Respectfully, 
MRS. THOMAS A. STEVENS. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOME OFFICE: 527 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va. 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINST SICKNESS, ACCIDENT AND DEATH. 
A. D. PRICE, President. THOS. M. CRUMP, Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN, Asst. Secretary. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM, N. CAROLINA 
m 
The Oldest, Largest and Strongest 
Old Line Legal Reserve Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Abstract from Financial Statement for 1917 Shows: 
Total Income—1917 $ 624,794.31 
Total Disbursements—1917 523,915.7o 
INCOME OVE R DISBURSEMENTS $ 100,878.61 
Admitted Assets 358.363.97 
Liabilities (Including $258,918—Legal Reserve).. 270,801.51 
Unassigned Funds (Surplus) 87,562.46 
INSURANC E IN FORCE $11,157,472.00 
$130,000.00 DEPOSITED WIT H INSURANCE DEPARTMENTS 
For the Protection of the Policyholders 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$1,736,504.50 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILITY CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore , M. D., Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M. Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick, Ass't Sec'y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 40 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHY NEW YORK REAL ESTATE 
GROWS IN VALUE 
When it is realized that the permanent increase in population of New York in one year was 400,000 equaling the 
population of Cleveland, Ohio, some idea of the tremendous growth of the city is appreciated.— National 
Magazine. 
PUT YOUR DOLLARS IN IMPROVED NEW 
YORK CITY REAL ESTATE 
Yo u have heard of the Payton Apartments, Nos. 117-127-13 5 West 
141st Street, and Nos. 130-140-148 West 142nd Street, Ne w York City , 
the finest owned and controlled by colored people in the world, set aside 
for the tenantry of colored families. 
A proper idea of the magnitude of this proposition can be had only 
by taking into consideration that these houses cover a tract of over 
two and one-half acres, or thirty-three full city lots. Thes e six large, 
modern, de luxe elevator apartment houses contain 306 apartments, 1466 
rooms, and will house more than 1500 people. The y were constructed 
at a cost of one and a half million dollars. 
Th e Payton Apartments Corporation, incorporated under the laws 
of the State of Ne w York, with a capitalization of $250,000.00, wa s 
organized to take title to these valuable properties. 
Th e Directorate of the Corporation is made up of the following 
well known men: 
E. C. Brown, President, is a Banke r and Real Estat e Operator of 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Andrew F. Stevens, Vic e President, is a Banke r and President of 
the Home Extension Insurance Association of Philadelphia. 
Emmett J. Scott, Secretary and Treasurer, is Secretary of Tuskegee , 
Alabama. He is also one of the Assistant Departmental Heads at 
Washington. 
W . H. C. Brown, Director, is an Investment Banker, Washingto n 
D. C. 
Heman E. Perry, Director, is President of the Standard Lif e Insurance Co., Atlanta, Ga. 
W e have published a little booklet, illustrated, telling all about this 
remarkable proposition. It tells how for as small a sum as five dollars 
a month for a few months you can become a part owner in the largest 
real estate proposition in the world undertaken by Negroes. 
Send for Booklet today. It is free for the asking. 
E. C. BROWN COMPANY 
Investment Securities 
427 S. BROAD STREET PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Mention TH E CRISIS, THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 4 1 
De white man he got ha'f the crop 
Boll-weevil took, de res'! 
Ain't got no home, 
Ain't got no home. 
TO find better homes and better 
jobs Negroes are migrating to 
northern industrial towns. But too 
often their search is rewarded with 
living and working conditions that 
are little improved. George Edmund 
Haynes, educational secretary of 
the National League on Urban Conditions among Negroes, writes two 
articles on 
Why Negroes 
Move North 
In 
THE SURVEY 
NATIONAL JOURNAL OF SOCIAL WORK 
112 E. 19th Street, New York City 
Price $3 a year With The Crisis $3.50 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 42 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Here Is What We Offer 
An opportunity to become part owner in the new Dunbar 
Theatre, on the corner of Broad and Lombard Sts., 
Philadelphia, now being constructed at a cost 
of nearly Four Hundred Thousand Dollars. 
The Dunbar Theatre, in addition to being one of the handsomest and most 
modern theatres in Philadelphia, will be the best located of any colored theatre 
in the United States. It is situated on the theatrical street of Philadelphia — 
Broad Street — four squares from City Hall; quite near the Wanamaker store; 
within the shopping and financial centres; three squares from the famous Forrest 
Theatre; two squares from the South Broad Street Theatre, Academy of Music, 
and the new million dollar Shubert Theatre. The Dunbar Theatre will be located 
at the beginning of an almost solid community for a long distance, beginning 
with Lombard Street and extending South and West, and having a population of 
nearly 150,000 . 
No better location could be secured in any city in the United States. 
From a pure sense of real estate value, no better site could be selected. Real 
Estate in central Philadelphia, only four squares away, brings $10,000.0 0 a front 
foot; at Broad and Locust Streets, two squares away, $9 ,000.0 0 a front foot; at 
Broad and Pine, one square away, $4 ,000.0 0 a front foot. Broad and Lombard 
Streets of "today" will be Broad and Locust Streets of "tomorrow" ; so certain 
is the real estate in this district to advance in value. 
Colored theatres, or rather theatres employing colored talent and appealing 
directly to colored patronage, when located in cities where there are large colored 
populations, have long since passed the experimental stage; and in every instance 
they prove big money makers. 
Do you want to share in the enormous profits that will be derived from this 
money-making undertaking? 
DO YOU WANT TO BECOME A PART OWNER OF THE HANDSOMEST—THE MOST MODERN —BEST LOCATED AND LARGEST 
THEATRE OWNED BY COLORED PEOPLE IN THE WORLD? ' 
Do you want to become part owner in a theatre located on the finest street 
in Philadelphia — a theatre where colored people can go and witness high class 
performances without suffering the humiliation of being segregated to the gallery? 
FINALLY, DO YOU WANT TO MAKE MONEY? DO YOU WAN T 
YOUR DOLLARS TO WORK AS HARD FOR YOU AS YOU WORKE D 
FOR THEM? 
If you do, send us your name and address, and we will show you how a few 
dollars monthly can be invested safely and profitably. 
This information will cost you nothing — but may mean hundreds of dollars 
to you. 
Write to-day. 
E. C. BROWN COMPANY 
Investment Securities 
427 S. BROAD ST. PHILADELPHIA 
Mention TH E CRISIS.. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 43 
ROLAN D W. HAYES , Teno r 
RECITALS CONCERTS ORATORIO OPERA 
HIS VOICE IS RICH, PURE, FREE AND GRACEFULLY LYRIC; LENDS 
ITSELF EASILY TO DRAMATIC PASSAGES. NOT ONLY HAS HE A 
VOICE THAT MANY MIGHT ENVY. HE ALSO HAS THE GIFT OF INTERPRETATION. HE CATCHES ALMOST INSTINCTLY THE MOOD OF THE 
POET AND COMPOSER.— PHILIP HALE, IN BOSTON HERALD. 
HE COMBINES A PLEASING AND WELL TRAINED VOICE, PARTICULARLY WELL USED, WITH NOTABLE ABILITY TO EXPRESS THE MEANING OF HIS SONGS, EXCELLENT ENUNCIATION AND LOVE FOR HIS 
ART.— BOSTON TRAVELER. 
ADDRESS: 130 BOYLSTON ST.. BOSTON. MASS. 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
TELEPHONE 6393 MORNINGSIDE 
12 6 W . 134TH STREET NEW YORK CITY 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBERT 
Soprano 
"SHE HAT ONE OF THE BEST VOICES THAT 
GOD HAS GIVEN HER RICE." —LOS ANGELES TIMES 
ENGAGEMENTS ACCEPTED FOR CONCERTS. RECITALS, ORATORIO 
9 3 LOCUST STREET, DETROIT, MICH. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critic s ar e on e i n thei r 
hig h estimat e o f th e splendi d 
attainment s o f Clarenc e 
Camero n Whit e an d hi s Con - ' | 
cer t appearanc e i n you r cit y 
mean s the musical event o f 
th e season. " Fo r term s an d date s addres s 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
HARRY A . WILLIAMS. 
PUPIL OF DELLE SEDIE AND SBRIGLIA— Paris 
DERIZA AND TOSTI— LONDON. 
VOICE CULTURE 
Coachin g an d Repertoir e 
Frenc h an d Italia n Song s a Specialty . 
174 West 141st St., New York City. 
Telephone Audubon 8009. 
Theodore Drury Costume Song Recital 
DRUR Y AS HIAWATHA 
Shawmut Booking Agency 
Transcontinental Tour. Local 
Managers on line 
with Albany , 
Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, 
St. Louis, Denver and San 
Francisco. 
Address: 
687 SHAWMUT AVENUE 
BOSTON, MASS. 
Records of Negro 
Artists 
Do you own a phonograph of 
any make and have you tried to 
purchase records which would 
bring to your home the singing 
and playing of the best Negro 
artists ? Of course you were offered records of popular airs and 
popular music and possibly a few 
records of quartet songs by 
Negro singers. But that wasn't 
what you wanted. You wanted 
to bring to your home and to 
your family and to your friends 
the voice of the individual Xegro 
singer or the playing of the individual Negro performer who 
would take high rank among the 
invisible makers of music and 
singers of song whom the phonograph has brought to cheer your 
spare moments after the grind of 
the day's work is done. 
At last this is possible. Roland 
W. Hayes, the acknowledged 
leading singer of the Negro race, 
has brought out his first record 
and he has plans for many others 
in the very near future. Nothing 
else could so well introduce the 
series as the favorite and plaintive Negro melody 
"Swing Low, Sweet 
Chariot" 
This record sells for $1.5 0 and 
can be used on any machine using disc records. 
Address : 
ROLAND W. HAYES 
130 Boylston Street 
Boston, Mass. 
MENTION THE CRISIS. 4 4 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
NEGRO Problems 
1 9 Monograph s Sol d Separatel y 
ADDRESS 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y ATLANTA , GA . 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressiv e exposur e b y a n Anglo-Saxo n cbam -
pio n of equal rights . Startlin g fact s an d crushin g 
arguments . -Fascinatin g reading . A necessit y fo r 
clea r understandin g an d up-to-dat e propaganda . Be ­
long s i n th e librar y of ever y frien d o f socia l justice . 
Pric e 2 5 cents . Sen d orde r t o 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 153th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
$25.0 0 PER WEE K 
na y b e mad e i n commission s b y partie s handlin g 
"Histor y o f Negr o Soldier s i n Spanish-America n 
War " combine d wit h "Histor y o f th e Negr o Race. " 
40 0 pages , 5 0 illustrations . Pric e $1.2 5 ne t 
Address ! E . A . JOHNSO N 
15 4 Nassa u Stree t NE W YOR K 
RUTH, THE GLEANER | 
A n Oper a in Five Acts 
by 
J. A. BUTTERFIELD 
Presented by 
THE AIDA CHORAL SOCIETY 
"With a chorus of forty voices in elegant 
costumes and scenic effects. 
Under the direction of: 
Sidney Woodward, tenor of international 
fame, at Star Casino, 107th St. & Park Avenue, New York City, on Thursday evening:, 
June 6, 1918. 
Miss Cleota J. Collins, a pupil of Lila 
Robertson of the Metropolitan Opera Company, will appear in the leading- role. 
Admission $ .50 
Boxes seating twelve 5.00 
" " nine 4.00 
" " eight 3.00 
Boxes on sale at the Music School Settlement from 2 to 10 P. M., also at 163 W. 
143d St., Apt. 4 and from the members of 
the Choral. 
TH E MUSI C MASTE R 
Ne w musi c monthl y fo r colore d fol k edite d b y Wellingto n A. 
Adams . "Goo d idea. " sa y Car l Dito n an d Clarenc e Camero n 
White . Intende d as a mouthpiec e fo r colore d musician s an d 
designe d t o foste r organizatio n amon g the m an d to encourag e 
youn g composer s an d musicians . 
A PRIZE—$5.0 0 GOL D AWAR D 
fo r th e bes t musi c compositio n b y a colore d musicia n is offere d 
i n ou r Ma y issue . Sen d fo r cop y an d be ou r agen t amon g 
teachers , pupils , etc. Addres s 
Th e Editor , 1911 9th St. , N . W. , Washington , D . C . 
$ 1.00 a year . 10 cent s a cony . 12c. by mail . 
Have You Read 
"Morning Meditations 
and Other Selections" 
By 
Bishop R. A. Carter, A.M., D.D.? 
If you have not, send for a copy today. It is 
a book for thoughtful pastors. It is a storehouse of good things for aspiring young men 
and women. The book contains the choicest 
of the Bishops' sermons and addresses delivered to colleges, secret societies, General Conferences, etc. The sermons to the Odd Fellows and Knights of Pythias on their thanksgiving occasions have been pronounced by 
competent critics masterly expositions of the 
principles of these orders. You will enjoy 
reading "Dreams and Dreamers," "The Universal Law for Stars and Souls," "The Three 
Downward Steps in The Ministry." More 
than 20 0 pages beautifully bound in cloth. Now 
in its second edition. Price $1.2 5 a copy. 
Agents wanted. Liberal terms to the right 
persons. Order from 
Bisho p R . A. Carter 
39 8 Aubur n Avenue , ATLANTA , GA . 
Agent s Wante d to sell great epic poem to 
Hon . Frederic k Douglas s 
Historical and Epigramatic. Absorbing in interest; 
Inspiring in effect; Epic in subject and replet> with 
incident. 
One Hundred and Eight Verses-- Illustrated. 
De Luxe Edition $1.00. Wnt e for terms. 
Enclose a 3c stamp. 
By Dr. M. A . Majors, 4714 State St., Chicago, Ill. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 86 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Bound in Full 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W . CROMWEL L 
143 9 Swan n St . Washington , D . C . 
I will be through your territory soon 
Kindl y sav e you r 
order s fo r m e 
W. H. HARLESTON 
Mad e t o measur e 
CLOTHE S 
NE W YOR K 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia fo r ever y 
Fraternal Society. Cash o r Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country . Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N . E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati, Ohi o 
LOOK! B ust s of Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, 
Paul Laurance Dunbar and Bishop Richard Allen 
reduce d fro m $1.5 0 t o $1.0 0 eac h fo r 3 1 days , 
beginnin g Ma y I a t " o'cloc k A . M. , closin g 
Ma y 3 1 a t 1 0 o'cloc k P . M . A fortunat e pur ­
chas e o f ra w materia l permit s u s t o mak e 
thi s offe r fo r 3 1 days . SF.N D A T ONCE . 
The Isaac Hathaway Art Co. 
718 S. Hickory Street 
Pine Bluff, Ark. 
Hale Infirmary and Nurse 
Training School 
328 Lake Street, Montgomery, Alabama. 
Hale Infirmary School of Nursing offers to intelligent young women between the age of eighteen 
and thirty-five a three years' course in the profession of nursing. Students of this school are eligible 
to Alabama examinations for the degree of R. N. 
For further information apply to the superintendent. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help You Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, O. 
GOING TO 
THE PRESS THE BIG FOUR BON TON BOOKS For Cooks 
and Waiters 
The Southern Chef—$2.00. All Southern, Creole, Indian and Oriental dishes. 
The Broadway Chef—Salad Book—$2.00. All the new Salads, Dressings and Condiments. 
The Bon Ton Waiter—$1.00—On sale now. Concensus of service by the best American and 
European head waiters. 
The Bon Ton Tailor—$5,00—Second Edition. For Tailors, Dressmakers, Cleaners and Dyers. 
DALLA S GURLEY , 
(Twenty-five years catered 
to "New York's 400") 436 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
EXCELLEN T OPPORTUNIT Y for Me n an d Wome n 
Schoo l o f Mechanica l Dentistr y 
Complete in Eight Months. 
A . O . BRANSO N & CO. , 
Night or Day Write for Booklet, etc. 
52 W . 135th St. , New Yor k City 
Mention THE CRISIS. 46 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Mention THE CRISIS. 
Mme C. J. Walker's PREPARATI
for the HAI R 
Worth more than it costs 
The culmination of the genius ~ 
of Mm e C, J. Walke r is her wonderful 
Hair Grower and in itself is a wonderful 
creation for dandruff and falling hair. In fact, 
it invigorates dry and lifeless hair, stimulates 
circulation, thereby causing a new growth. 
Mme C. J. Walker's 
Preparations 
are all now packed in SQUARE YELLOW BOXES 
with Mme. C. J. Walker's Seal and Signature 
on each outside package, which is YOUR GUARANTEE 
Vegetable Shampoo. a splendid food and thorough cleanser for the scalp and hair. Has a healing effect on a sore sca
Tetter Salve. One 
of th e best 
known cures for 
dandruff, tetter 
and eczem a 
makes a friend 
once used if 
afflicted with 
this skin disease. 
Scientific , | 
Thorough, and 
Practical. 
ALL Mme. C. J. WALKER'; 
Inventions are re 
liable because they re 
store and beautify the 
hair without injury to the 
scalp and are used and 
endorsed by thousands of 
Hair Dressers, Scalp Specialists, throughout the 
country, known as the 
Walker Hair Dressers 
having a diploma from 
the Lelia College of Hair 
Culture which signifies 
| Mme . C. J. Walker': 
system. 
THERE is nothing 
imaginary about the 
World-Wide Fame of 
Mme . C. J. Walker's 
Ultra-Quality Preparations. None genuine 
without Mme . C. J. Walker's seal and signature. 
W e have gone to a great 
deal of expense to put these 
preparations up in new yellow 
cardboard boxes, sealed with 
the Walke r trade-mark as a 
guarantee that you are getting 
the genuine Mme . C. J. Walke r 
Preparations which are "worth 
more than they cost. 
Lelia College and Walker Hair Parlor 
110 W. l36thSt., New York 
For Mail Orders and Information Address 
Mme. C. J. Walker M'f'g Co, 
. Main Office, 640 N. West Street, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Temple Crower. Recommended 
highly from those who have used it 
for growing hair on the temples or 
bald spots. Endorsed by thousands 
of hair dressers throughout USA 
Glosslne. Only to be used in dressing 
the Hair and it will make short harsh 
hair behave and stay In place if 
used as directed at the same time imparts 
a beautiful gloss to the hair THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 47 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 So. 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
Shorthand, typewriting, bookkeeping, business law, 
multigraphing, mimeographing, etc. 
Every man can rise from where he is to higher heights. Grit your teeth and rise in spite of all 
storms of discouragement. Let us aid you to rise to a $1,000 height and then you can go alone. 
$1,000 and $1,200 appointments in the Government Service through Civil Service Competitive 
Examinations for Typewriter Operators and Stenographers. The following students have been appointed since last September: Richard II. Hill, Jr., at Norfolk, Va.; Miss Helen L. Milton and 
Jimmerson R. Williams, at Philadelphia; Mr. H. H. Hocutt, Washington, D. C , now in Philadelphia; 
Miss Henrietta D. Seth has been certified at $l,000; Mr. Herbert C. Nelson is now receiving a 
salary of $1,650 at Philadelphia; Miss Ruth Bacon is on eligible list. We shall be pleased to advise 
graduates of other schools, who need no further training, free of charge. 
Summer School opens June 1st and closes August 31st. A three-months' course for public 
school teachers. 
Free Employment Service.— Persons desiring work as Clerks, Stenographers, or Domestics (no 
matter what school they are from, or where located) may rile their applications with us and we 
shall be pleased to put them in touch through correspondence with employers, anywhere, desiring 
their service. Employers arc urged to apply to us when in need of clerical or domestic aid. We 
are placing hundreds of people in positions, annually. Enclose stamp for reply. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, President 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr . BELL , 4709 Stat e St. , Chicago , Ill. 
Mme. BRIDGES' SCHOOL 
A PRIVATE BOARDING 
Write for Catalog. 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and" 
Millinery. Special Courses in Designing, 
Copying, Draping, Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
SCHOOL FOR SPECIAL TRAINING. Individual Instruction. 
4221 OAKENWALD AVENUE, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
WE ARE NOW GIVING THE COURSE BY CORRESPONDENCE 
Special price for sixty days only $15.00, payable $10.00 with 
application and $5.00 when diploma is granted. Send $1.00 
for thirty days' trial treatment. 
We teach only one person in a 
town, she teaches the rest. Our 
graduated agents are making 
money. 
DERMO COLLEGE CO. 
19 East 43d St. Chicago, Ill. DERMO COLLEGE CO. 
MAKES YOU AN EXPERT IN HAIR AND BEAUTY CULTURE. 
CHICAGO 
AGENTS $60 WEEKLY 
Robinson Folding Bath Tub. Big seller. Costs 
little, no plumbing, little water. Weight 
15 pounds, folds into small roll. Full length baths 
far better than tin tubs. Guaranteed 10 years.. $10 
a day easily made, write for free tub offer. 
ROBINSON CABINET MFG CO. 4828 Factories Bldg.. Toledo, Ohio 
K 1 0 See the Selected List on 
BOOKS* Inside Back Cover 
AGENTS WANTED 
Men, women and High School boys to sell the most beautiful 
patriotic picture ever mad e for colored people. "Colored Ma n is 
no Slacker," 16 x 20, five beautiful colors. Yo u can coin 
money with this. Every home will want it. Agents selling 50 
to 20 0 each per day. Over 200 % profit. Als o to sell Memorial 
Edition of the "Lif e and Work s of Booke r T. Washington. " 
Complete picture and outfit mailed for 25c. in stamps. 
HUSE SALES COMPANY. ATLANTA, GA. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 48 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"INDEPENDENT" STYLOGRAPHIC PEN holds sufficient ink to write 10,000 wor
Pric e $1.0 0 
DOES NOT LEAK OR BLOT 
Cut 
shows 
2/3 size $1 
It cannot be excelled for the business 
man, teacher, student or in the home for 
writing. It IS especially serviceable for the 
EACH pen is accompained with full directions, filler 
and cleaner and fully guaranteed to give absolute satisfaction. Address. A. Holland. Box 3806. Phila, Pa 
SITUATIONS WANTE D 
Domestic Science, Mathematics, Biology, 
History and Music—graduates—best testimonials. 
Standard Teachers' Agenc y 
(Established 1807) 
1011 New York Avenue, "Washington, D. C. 
MOTHER' S HELPER 
Young woman with a baby desires to 
make her home with a cultured Christian 
woman; small remuneration or privilege to 
do outside work. Cheerful disposition and 
friendly interest essential. Suburbs or 
country north of Washington, D. C., preferred. Address M, F. G., in care of the 
CRISIS, 70—5th Avenue, New York City. 
Beauty for Women 
CLEAR, SMOOTH SKIN 
-PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
A Kashmir Girl 
Famous Deluxe Beauty Book, illustrated 
and complete. Sent to you postpaid free 
of charge. Tells all about the Kashmir 
Wa y and describes the wonderful methods 
which hundreds of women are using to get 
pretty skin and hair. You can do the same. 
5 or io minutes a day caring for your skin and hair the Kashmir 
Wa y will bring wonderful results. You Won't Know Yourself in a 
few days. 
WRIT E TODA Y DON' T SEN D AN Y MONE Y 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO., Dept. K 
Room 419, 312 So. Clark Street Chicago, Ill. 
Buy Your Holiday Goods Now 
HAND MADE NATURAL HUMAN HAIR WIGS 
Transformations, Switches, Puffs, Plaits, 
Bangs, Coronet Braids, that can be combed the 
same as your own hair. Human hair for sale 
by ounce or pound. Hair NETS. 
W e Carr y th e Larges t Stoc k i n Electri c Comb s 
Mail Orders sent t o an y par t o f th e U. S. o r B. W. I. Send 2c fo r catalog . 
MIME. BAUM' S HAI R EMPORIUM , Inc . 
Pennsylvania Terminal. P. O. Box 145. New York City 
Mention THE CRISIS 
$1 
SOLDIER in CAM P TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
AGENT S WANTED ! $ 3 to $1 2 Pe r Day 
PROF . KELLY MILLER' S ne w Progress of Colored People 
Teachers, students, male or female, ministers, widows, married women, anyone with spare time, can 
make $1 per hour. Everybody buys—it's easy to sell. Send 25c for salesmans sample and liberal 
terms; act today. 
AUSTIN JENKINS COMPANY, 523 Ninth Street; WASHINGTON, D. C. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
All Races 
Prepare in the beat school of its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship. Civil Service Training, and SPANISH. 
COMMERCIAL CLASS 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., New York City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W. Mottley, President 
TEACHFR S A live agency furnishes the 
r connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
1
 ieorgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Carolina. Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island. 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1108 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
100 CALLING CARDS 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The House of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Open June 20th. Closed September 10th. 
THE OCEAN HOUSE 
Sea Isle City, N. J. 
This hotel is right on the ocean front. It 
has wide porches, large conservatory dining 
room where one has a beautiful view of the 
ocean while dining. Every room opens on 
the ocean. Special rates for July. Mrs. 
Lucy Lee, proprietor, 5 Plain St.. Elmhurst, 
L, I. Address after June 1st, Ocean House, 
Sea Isle City, N. J. Bell telephone connection, 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 South Park Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 
HOTEL DALE 
CAP E MAY , N . J. 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located i 
the Heart of the Most Beautiful 
Seashore Resort in the World, 
is replete with every modern improvement 
superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises 
Special attention given to ladies and children 
Send for booklet. 
E. W . DALE , Owner 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve racking routine lives and 
romp and play once mor e as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
D o you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
D o you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
D o you want a place to go where you can build u p 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency ? 
D o you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—peopl e who do things? 
D o you believe in progress and do you want to 
have a part in one of the moat progressive move- / 
ments of the time ? Surely ! * 
Then you will be Interested In. and want t o 
own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * 
cure a beautiful lot for only $24.50 each; / 
$6.00 cash; $1.0 0 per week. Whe n your * 
payments are completed the lot will be / 
transferred to you by an absolute ' 
warranty deed with abstract showing / 
clear title. I 
Good liv e energeti c 
agent s wante d 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartfor d Bldg., 
So . Dearbor n St . 
Chicago , ILL. 4 
Idlewilde Resort Comp
1110 Hartford Bldg., C
Gentlemen: Without co
Mention THE CRISIS. 50 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Mad e t o $1.95 Order 
flf Special Offer 
a^^ B to prove our fine quality: 
These fine Pants for Dress or 
Business, choice of many handSome styles, guaranteed for 13 
^^^ ^ months solid wear and satisfaction or MONEY BACK, absolute $5.00 value—while they 
last, one pair to a customer, , 
Express prepaid for only $1.95 pants 
N o Extra Charge s 
No charge for Big Extreme Pep Tops or 
Cuff Bottoms, nothing extra for fancy Belt 
Loops or Pocket Flaps, no charge for Open 
Welt Seams or Large Sizes—all novelty features free. 
this GOLD FINISHED 
PIN FREE to you 
.Classy, lapel pin wit h 
your first order, only a 
few hundred on hand, get yours quick 
Cash Profits area of relatives and 
neighbors. Young George Gekovich made 
$66.16 IN ONE day. Write for free samples TODAY. 
Chicago Tailors Association 
Dept . K -1 2 • 515 Sout h Frankli n Street . Chicag o 
$1.00 Pants 
Not $1.00, not even 60c, not one cent cost jo you 
under our easy conditions. No extra / 
charge for fancy, swell styles , no extra \ 
charge for extra big, extreme peg-tops, 
pearl buttons, tunnel or fancy belt 
loops, no extra charge for anything, 
ALL FREE. Before you take another 
order, before you buy a suit or pants \ _ 
get our samples and new offer. AGENTS 
OF OTHER TAILORING HOUSES PLEASE WRITE, we 
have a new deal that will open your eyes. 
WE ask every man to answer this, 
every boy in long pants, every man, 
everywhere. No matter where you live 
or what you do, write us a letter or postal 
and say "Send Me Your New Free 
Offer" the big, new different tailoring 
deal. Costs nothing and no extra charges. I 
Write today, this minute. Addressee 
KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G CO . 
DEPT. 676 CHICAGO, ILL 
W e GIV E i t t o YO U 
Take this fine Made-toMeasure Suit and don't 
pay us one cent for ItWe want you to get one of our high 
class suits, absolutely Free, so you 
can show it to your friends. It will 
be a big advertisement for us. 
If you have a little spare time, 
you can easily make from 
QUALITY 
AND FIT 
GUARANTEED 
$35 to $ 5 0 
EXTR A 
EVERY WEEK 
and beside s that be the bestdressed man in your town. It's an 
opportunity you cannot afford to 
overlook. Don't delay a minute. ^ 
Writ e fo r thi s Bi g Offe r a t Onc e 
Drop us a line or send us your name 
on a postal card and we will send 
you absolutely Free , our wonderful 
styl e book, containing dozens of samples and fashion plates to choose from 
Writ e Now , Everything sent Fre e 
and postag e prepaid . 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G C O 
Dept . 981 , CHICAG O 
Ear n Bi g Mone y 
At home in a pleasant, spare time business 
of your own. We show you how to manufacture perfumery. Send stamp for free 
sachet powder formula. 
M. J. BAILEY, 31 1 WALNUT ST., READING, FA. 
T -T_F,„„_ . /CENTRAL 104-W TELEPHONE*: ( MAI N 61 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
A ttorney-at- L a w N otar y PUBLIC 
160 7 WILLIAMSON BUILDING CLEVELAND, OHIO 
GENERAL PRACTICE NOTARY PUBLIC 
WILLIA M R . MORRI S 
A ttorne y an d C ounsellor-at- L a w 
818 METROPOLITAN LIFE BUILDING 
MINNEAPOLIS MINN. 
BROW N S . SMIT H 
A ttorney-at- L a w 
OFFICES: SUITE 80 2 SYKES BLOCK 
NEAR THIRD AND HENNEPIN 
MINNEAPOLIS MINN. 
TEL 5437 For t Hill CABLE ADDRESS, EPBEN 
EDGA R P . BENJAMI N 
A ttorne y and C ounsellor-at- L a w 
J4 Schoo l Stree t Boston , MASS 
TELEPHONE CONNECTION 
W . ASHBIE HAWKINS GEORGE W . P. MCMECHEN 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
A ttorneys-at- L a w 
21 EAST SARATOGA STREET BALTIMORE. MD. 
Patents secured on easy terms 
Write for particulars. 
JOS . H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law , 
494 Louisiana Ave., N.W., Washington, D. C. 
Telephon e Greele y 421 4 Establishe d 191 1 
BRANIC' S 
New Yor k an d Brooklyn Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WEST 35th STREET 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C New York City 
Domesti c Scienc e Teache r 
wishes position as 
MATRON, STEWARDESS OR TEACHER 
Fo r informatio n addres s 
H. L. in care of the CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
SUNSHIN E COTTAG E 
A Res t Hom e fo r Wome n 
Convalescents and Invalids Cared For 
(Mrs , Corinna M. Phillips, R. N. 
171 King Street Springfield, Mass. 
WEST PHILADELPHIA BEAUTIFUL PORCH 
FRONT HOMES FOR SALE 
Respectable families who are particular and desire to live in a nice locality; every modern convenience. Very low terms arranged. Inspection 
invited. 
J. ADAMS, JR., 
5815 Market St., Philadelphia. 
Mention THE C risis . A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
H AZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.00 
TH E AMERICAN CAVALRYMAN. (Henry F . Downing).. 1.50 
NORRIS AVRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (B. 
F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton). 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN'S BURDEN. (T. Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein) .50 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. (Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) ... . 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon 
Johnson) 1.25 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford) 1.00 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W . Ellis). 2.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 60 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter 
G. Woodson) 2.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. Berwick-Sayers) 2.25 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.00 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman Beecher Stowe) 2.00 
Address, THE CRISIS : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York Advertising 
iiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiit 
There are twelve million Negroes in the United States. 
They spend a thousand million dollars every year. 
THE CRISIS reaches more Negroes with intelligence 
and money than any other periodical in the world 
and is therefore a valuable medium for advertising. 
The patronage of recognized advertising agencies and 
of national advertisers will receive careful attention. 
Rates will be sent on application. 
Circulation,- 80,000 
TH E DISGRAC E O F DEMOCRAC Y 
An Open Letter to President Wilson 
By KELLY MILLER 
"The ablest document the war has yet produced in the 
United States."—H. L. Menchen, Editor Smart Set. 
" With this document the Negro problem is no longer a 
vague futurity. The Negro question has arrived."— 
New York Globe. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE. 
Price , 10 cent s a cop y Term s t o agents , 5 cent s a cop y 
OVER 65,000 COPIES ALREADY DISTRIBUTED 
Address:—KELLY MILLER, Howard University, WASHINGTON . D. C. 