The CRISIS 
Vol. 23-No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1921 Whole No. 135 
ON E FIFTEEN CENTS' DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R  
 
Turning Hard Times 
into Prosperous Times The year 1921 will ever be remembered as the period of "America's Hardest Times " 
efforts of those determined spirits who are forcing the wheels of progress to continue to 
who are trying to keep the Door of Opportunity open. The cut below shows the new 
$200,000.00 four-story and basement modern fireproof building erected by the Society at 7th 
and Tea Streets. N W., Washington, D, C . to help turn Hard Times into Prosperous Times. 
not only does the Superior Policy of Protection, issued by the Society, keep the wolf 
the door of all Southern Aid Policyholders but its policy of constructing modern office 
lings, in the various cities where it operates, makes it possible for our professional and 
less interests to have suitable quarters—like the best had by other races—in which to 
lay their talents and wares and to do better business. Therefore by its Insurance Policy 
as well, by its Business Policy the Society is daily helping to turn Hard Times into 
Prosperous Times. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
Insures Against Sickness, Accidents and Deaths 
J. T. CARTER, PRES. B. L. JORDAN, SECTY. W. A. JORDAN, ASST. SECTY.  
 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 23-No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1921 Whole No. 133 
PICTURES page 
COVER . Figure of Africa typifying "Science" in the Palais Mondial, Brussels, 
where the Second Pan-African Congress was held. The inscription 
reads "I am the one that was, that is, and that shall be. No mortal may 
unveil m y face." 
GENERA L SORELA S 9 
CRESCEN T STARS ' AMUSEMEN T BASEBALL PARK , NE W ORLEANS . . . 19 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 27-2 8 
AMERICA N NEGR O MINISTERS A T TH E ECUMENICA L COUNCIL, 
LONDO N 3 3 
ARTICLES 
IMPRESSION S O F TH E SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS . Jessie 
Fauset 12 
MANIFEST O T O TH E LEAGU E OF NATION S 1 8 
A NE W ORLEAN S BASEBAL L PAR K 2 0 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 5 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE 21 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 2 6 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 2 9 
TH E HORIZO N 3 4 
THE DECEMBER CRISIS 
The December CRISIS will Be a Christmas Number and will show by extracts from leading 
journals what Europe thought of the Pan-African Congress. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 2 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young
Men and Women for Service 
Thoug h It is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling man y responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and wome n for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Gramma r School Th e Teache r Training Department 
Th e Academ y Th e Divinity School 
Th e School of Arts and Sciences Th e Commercial Department 
Th e Department of Musi c Th e Department of Hom e Economic s 
Th e Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
Fo r further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School LINCOLN UNIVERSITY FO R COLORE D YOUT H 
Pioneer in Collegiate and BORPENTOWN, N. J. A high Institution tor the training of colored Theological Education youth. Excellent equipment thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings,. Academic training for all students. Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. professions in Forty States. Including auto repairing. Courses In domestic science and domestic art for The College is ranked in Class I. by the girls. A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. American Medical Association. New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly equipped. Address: Terms reasonable. Fall term opens September 15. 1921. John B. rendall, D.D., Lincoln University, 
For Information address Chester County, Penna. 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
Cheyney Training School For Wile y Universit y Teachers 
Marshall, Texas Cheyney , Pa . 
Made in 1810 an accredited State Normal School 
Recognized as a college of first class bv offering, in addition to the regular Normal course of
Texas. Louisiana. Arkansas and Oklahoma Stat two years e Board , professiona s of Education l three yea .Harvard
r courses in Home Economics, and Shop Work. A diploma from any of Illinois and University of Chicagorepresented or. its faculty. One hundred these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach in the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year High School Course is offered to all who have co
twentv-seven in College Deoartment.session 1910-1920. Several new build
steam heated and electric lighted, 
Send application now for fall term opening September 
20th. 1921. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLIE Pinckney HILL, Principal 
M. W . DOGAN . President Cheyney, Pa. 
i THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR ixjt 
jfenticm The Ceisis.  
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 3 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
Atlanta University (Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, ATLANTA , G A 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, College, Academy, Divinity School Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students A n institution famous within recent years 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates for its emphasis on all sides of manlydevelopment
have a fine record for successful work. devoted solely to the education of Negro For further information address young men. 
President Edward T. Ware Atlanta, Ga. Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address KNOXVILLE COLLEGE JOH N HOPE , President. 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location, 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere, 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. FISK UNIVERSITY Institution offers full courses in thefollowing departments, College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Nurse Training and Industrial. Founded 1866 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, natural drainage, splendid dormitories.Expenses very reasonable. Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
Fal in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. l Term Begins September 14, 1921. 
For catalog and other information address Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds 
Well-equipped Science building. PRESIDENT J. KELL Y GIFFEN Knoxville, Tenn. Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1921 FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Over 10O acres of beautiful campus Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use in 
September, Strong faculty—Religiousatmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and CHARLOTTE, N. C. 
2nd years' High School Courses, with certificate. Biddle University, operated under the auspices of Junior College—3rd and 4th Tear High School with the Northern Presbyterian Church, has fourDepartments—
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School Diploma. course Is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
College—Four years above High School, or two years of the High School. 
above Junior College Course, with decree of A_B. 
Domestic Science;—Commerce—Normal— The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
Pre-medical Course of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
 of months scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 53rd year nine opens September 21, 1921. The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is $150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry 15 units of High School work. HARRY ANDREW S KING . President The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. axe required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrerey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
TheFlorida agriculturaland mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. Morris Brown University Atlanta , Ga . 
Co-Educational Nathan B. Young, President The largest institution of learning in the South 
Tallahasee , Florida owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists,
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial. emphasis and positiveChr
athletics under faculty supervision. Expensesreas
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. 
The only Institution in the State having for Its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizens in Kentucky. „ . 
Special training In Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and Departments Hospital Work : iheology, College, High School,No
Normal. Commercial, Music, Domestic Science. Missionary Printing and Tailoring. training class For further information address 
JOH N H . LEWIS , President 
President C. H. Parrish BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Beard 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degress offered 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 4 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 Talladega College BEREA N Talladega , Alabam a 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of Manua
Negr o Leader s l Training and 
Industrial School Beautiful and Healthful Location. (Non-Sectarian) Literary, Scientific, Educational,Soc
S. College Ave . & N. 19th St. Business Administration, Journalism, Philadelphia, Pa. Nurs e Training Courses. 
Winte r Ter m Opening January 3, 1922 High Standards of ChristianManho
DAY AND NIGHT SESSIONS 
write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, D.D. Fo r further information address 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. F. A. SUMNER , President 
"JUST THE PLAC E FOR YOU R GIRL" 
Dayton a Norma l and Industrial Institut e for Negro Girls, Daytona , Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable . 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , Principal. 
Roger Williams University,Nashville,tenn. COLEMAN COLLEGE FOUNDED 1866 LOCATION IDEAL 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY is the GIBSLAND , LA . 
largest institution in the Southland built, 
owned and operated by Negroes. It offers Supported by Baptist State Woman', Home 
courses in the Liberal Arts College, Normal, Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
Academic and Musical departments. Athletics A. B. E. Society of New York. Students 
is one of its strong features. from six different states. Graduate,exem
and Oklahoma. Perhaps no scene in and around Nashville 
is more beautiful than that of Roger Williams 
University. It stands upon the lofty banks O . L. COLEMAN , Proidtnt 
of the Cumberland River in sight of the government's lock and dam. The roaring waters 
as they fall over the dam in their onward march 
to the sea lend enchantment to the scene. ST. MARY'S SCHOOL FALL TERM BEGINS SEPT. 19, J92J 
For Catalog and Information Write An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
SAMUE L A . OWEN , President direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: THE 
SIsTER-IN-CHArGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Fa. 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL The Colored Teachers' Bureau Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. BRICKS , N. C . 
This School offers a first-class High School rEGISTer NOW REASONABLE terms 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, Box 22, wilberforee, 0 . Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 350; 
hoarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 84. 
School farm, 1,1291/2 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. in the city of New York For further information write 
T. 8. INBORDEN, Principal, BRICKS, N. C. offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. (Richmond , Va.) For information apply to: 
In addition to regular high school, college, pre-medical and theologica Superintenden l courses, now offer t os a f n especially arranged co
 Nurse s or Social Work and Public Health of this city. 
This course will lead to a degree. For particulars 
address The President Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York , N.Y . 
Mention TH I Csisia.  
 
THE CRISIS 
Vol. 23. No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1921 Whole No. 133 
Opinion of w.e.b. du bois 
T O TH E WORL D 
(Manifesto of the Second PanAfrican Congress.) 
For the
peoples to
groups. 
 purpose
 intellige
 of
nce
 raising
,self-kn
 such 
owledge 
|THE absolute equality of races, 
—physical, political andsocial—is the founding stone of 
world peace and humanadvancement. No one denies greatdiffe
The insidious and dishonorable but the voice of science, religion and 
propaganda, which, for selfish ends, practical politics is one in denying so distorts and denies facts as to represe
the God-appointed existence of super-races, or of races naturally and 
impossible and undesirable, should inevitably and eternally inferior. be met with widespreaddisseminatio
citize
That in the vast range of time, 
one group should in its industrial 
technique, or social organization, or 
spiritual vision, lag a few hundred 
years behind another, or forge fitfully 
ahead, or come to differ decidedly in 
thought, deed and ideal, is proof of 
the essential richness and variety of 
human nature, rather than proof of 
the co-existence of demi-gods and 
apes in human form. The doctrine 
of racial equality does not interfere 
with individual liberty, rather, it
and texture of the hair, is surely the 
most adventitious and idiotic. 
It is the duty of the world to
backward and suppressed groups of 
mankind. The rise of all men is a 
menace to no one and is the highest 
human ideal; it is not an altruistic 
benevolence, but the one road to 
world salvation. 
of making the Negro slave a free
proofs of the impossibility of selfgovernment among black men; the 
experience of Spanish America does 
not prove that mulatto democracy 
will not eventually succeed there; the 
aspirations of Egypt and India are 
not successfully to be met by sneers 
at the capacity of darker races. 
We who resent the attempt to treat 
civilized men as uncivilized, and who fulfils it. And of all the bring in our hearts grievance upon variou 
in the past been prejudged and classified, that of the color of the skin grievance against those who lynch 
the untried, disfranchise theintellig
complain; but not simply or primarily 
the millions of our fellows, blood of 
our blood, and flesh of our flesh, who 
have not even what we have—the 
power to complain against monstrous assist in every way the advance wrong, the power to see and to 
know the source of our oppression. 
How far the future advance of 
mankind will depend upon the social d 
 
 F
6 TH E
contact and physical intermixture of 
the various strains of human blood 
is unknown, but the demand for the 
 CRISIS 
Buddha and Mahmoud, and in the 
mightiest Age of Human Reason, 
there can be found in the civilized 
world enough of altruism, learning 
modern days, from the white race and benevolence to develop nativeinst
alone, and has been imposed upon enslaved by ignorant and selfish 
brown and black folks mainly by agents of commercial institutions, 
brute force and fraud. On top of whose one aim is profit and power 
this, the resulting people of mixed for the few. 
race have had to endure innuendo, 
persecution, and insult, and thepenetrated countries have been force 
interpenetration of countries andintermingling of blood has come, in 
And this brings us to the crux of 
the matter: It is the shame of the 
If it be proven that absolute world world that today the relation between 
segregation by group, color or historicth affinit e maiyn i group s best fo s or th f mankin e futured an , d 
let the white race leave the dark their mutual estimate and respect is 
world and the darker races will gladlydetermine leave thd chiefl e whitey b. Bu y tht the degre e proposition e in 
men, of men whose likenesses far outweighwhic thei h onr differences e can subjec ; wht thomutua
e other to 
thought and dream, but who cansuccessfully its service, enslavin have eac g labor h othe , makin r onlg y on 
terms of equality, justice and mutual 
respect. They are the real and only 
peacemakers who work sincerely and 
peacefully to this end. 
ignorance compulsory, uprooting 
ruthlessly religion and customs, and 
destroying government, so that the 
favored Few may luxuriate in the toil 
of the tortured Many. Science,Rel
made the slaves of world commerce 
and industry, and bodies, minds, 
souls of Fiji and Congo, are judged 
almost solely by the quotations on 
the Bourse. 
The beginning of wisdom ininterracial contact is the establishmen 
political institutions amongsuppressed The day of peoples such worl . The
d habi organiza
t of democ
earth. Despite the attempt to prove made for it in other ages, the 20th 
that its practice is the secret and divine centur gif y must ot com f thee few to judg , no habi e met in a s mor s e 
natural or more widely spread among men and not as material and labor. 
primitive people, or more easily capable of development among masses. The great industrial problem Local self-government with a minimum of help and oversight can be 
established tomorrow in Asia, in 
Africa, in America and in the Isles 
of the Sea. It will in many instances 
need general control and guidance, 
but it will fail only when thatguidance seeks ignorantly and con
sim
people's liberty and good. relat
which has hitherto been regarded as 
the domestic problem of culture 
lands, must be viewed far more 
broadly, if it is ever to reach just 
settlement. Labor and capital in England, 
solve their problem as long as a
poverty and injustice marks the
estimate, which half the peoples of 
earth put on the other half, depends 
mainly on their ability to squeeze 
profit out of them. 
Surely in the 20th century of the 
Prince of Peace, in the millenium of  
 
OPINION 7 
If we are coming to recognize that ignorance among the natives, 
the great modern problem is to correct has enslaved them and is stillensl
maladjustment in the distribution of declined even to try to train black 
wealth, it must be remembered that and brown men in realself-government, to 
the basic maladjustment is in the folks as civilized, or to grant to colored co
outrageously unjust distribution of government which it freely gives to 
world income between the dominant white men. 
and suppressed peoples; in the rape 
of land and raw material, and monopoly of technique and culture. And 
in this crime white labor is particeps 
criminis with white capital.Unconsciously and consciously, carelessly Belgium is a nation which has but and deliberately, the vast power of recently assumed responsibility for the white labor vote in moderndemocracies has been cajoled and flatt
her colonies, and has taken some enslave and debauch black, brown steps to lift them from the worst and yellow labor, until with fatalretribution, they are themselves toda abuses of the autocratic regime; but 
bound and gagged and renderedimpotent by the resulting monop
she has not confirmed to the people the world's raw material in the the possession of their land and labo
hands of a dominant, cruel andirresponsible few. allow the natives any voice in their 
own government, or to provide for 
their political future. Her colonial 
policy is still mainly dominated by 
the banks and great corporations. 
But we are glad to learn that the 
present government is considering 
a liberal program of reform for the 
And, too, just as curiously, the future. 
educated and cultured of the world, 
the well-born and well-bred, and even Portugal and Spain have never 
the deeply pious and philanthropic, drawn a legal caste line against persons o 
receive their training and comfort Negro descent. Portugal has a huma
and luxury, the ministrations of delicate But beaut , unfortunately y and sensibility , the industria , on condition l 
and the methods of distribution or concessions of Portuguese Africa are 
interfere with the legal props which almost wholly in the hands offorei
rest on a pitiful human foundation will not control, and who are exploiting 
of writhing white and yellow and African slave trade. 
brown and black bodies. 
We claim no perfectness of our 
own nor do we seek to escape the 
blame which of right falls on the The United States of Americaf
black folks suddenly emancipated backward for failure to advance, but them and began their education; but noblesse oblige, and we arraigncivilization and more especially thec
it acted without system orforetho
their own better conscience. educating them withoutthoroughne
them the while to lynching,lawlessn
England, with her Pax Britannica, 
her courts of justice, established 
commerce and a certain apparentrecognition of native law and custom
has nevertheless systematically fostered  i
TH E CRISIS s 
to give her a single bit of help, 
their own aid or sympathy. government, theyenfranchized the Negro and then whend
thousands of educated and civilized What do those wish who see these 
black folk to be lawlesslydisfranchised evils of th aned colo subjecte r lined an tod a racia castle
discri
system
1812, 1861, 1897, and 1917, they divine right of suppressed andback
asked and allowed thousands of be free? 
black men to offer up their lives as 
a sacrifice to the country whichdespised and despises them. 
The Negro race through itsthin
I—The recognition of civilized 
men as civilized despite their race or 
Franc color e alone of the great colonial 
powers has sought to place her cultured black citizen sel s f on a plane of II—Local government for 
absolute legal and social equality backward groups, deliberately rising 
with her white and given themrepresentation as experienc ine he anr
d highes knowledg tlegislate grow 
state education. This splendidbeginning must be completed by to complete self government under 
indigenes the ownership of the soil, the limitations of a self governed 
by protecting native labor against world 
the aggression of established capital, III—Education in self knowledge, 
and by asking no man, black or white, in scientific truth and in industrial 
to be a soldier unless the country technique, undivorced from the art 
gives him a voice in his own government. of beauty 
IV—Freedom in their own religi
right to be different and non-conformi
V—Co-operation with the rest 
of the world in government,ind
Freedom and Peace 
The independence of Abyssinia, 
Liberia Haiti and San Domingo, is VI—The ancient commonowne
fruits and defence against theunre
absolutely necessary to anysustained belief of the black folk 
sincerity and honesty of the white. 
These nations have earned the right VII—The establishment under the to be free, they deserve the recognitionLeagu of thee o world f Nation ; notwithstandin s of aninternatio
g a11
their faults and mistakes, and the problems fact that they are behind the most 
advanced civilization of the day,nevertheless they compare favorably 
with the past, and even more recent, VIII—The establishment of aninte
history of most European nations, with the protection of native labor. and it shames civilization that the 
treaty of London practically invited 
Italy to aggression in Abyssinia, and The world must face two eventualiti
that free America has unjustly and the great world states, with political, cruelly seized Haiti, murdered and civil and social power and privileges for a time enslaved her workmen, absolutely equal for its black and 
overthrown her free institutions by white citizens, or the rise of a great 
force, and has so far failed in returnblack African state founded in Peace 
and Good Will, based on populareduGENERAL LUIS SORELAS 
9  
1(1 TH E CRISI S 
freedom of trade; autonomous and 
sovereign in its internal policy, but 
from its beginning a part of a great 
society of peoples in which it takes 
its place with others as co-rulers of 
the world. 
In some such words and thoughts 
as these we seek to express our will 
of any State than has devolved 
upon yours in re the Negroes of 
Phillips County condemned to death 
in the electric chair and so sentenced 
by the courts of your State. It is a 
deed to be contemplated with extreme 
horror. In the execution of these 
men, a race is suffering crucifixion." 
and ideal, and the end of our untiring effort. To our aid we call all men In his letter, Prof. Kerlin explains of the Earth who love Justice and the iniquities of the peonage system Mercy. Out of the depths we have and the travesty of trial given the cried unto the deaf and dumb masters of the world. Out of the depths 
we cry to our own sleeping souls. 
The answer is written in the stars. 
ROBER T T . KERLI N 
READERS of TH E CRISIS will 
remember the appearance a 
year ago of a compilation of 
Negro opinion gathered in a 
volume entitled "The Voice of the 
Negro." Here for the first time we 
had a book bringing to the white as 
Elaine Negroes. The letter received 
much publicity and was so resented 
by the Board of the Virginia Military 
Institute that Prof. Kerlin'sresign
the Board, which stated that "he had 
rendered his further connection with 
the Virginia Military Institute undesirab
We can not express too deeply our 
appreciation of Prof. Kerlin's course 
in sending his letter to the Governor well as the colored reader theNegro's criticism, through hi of Arkansas, and in standingunsw
press, of America's treatment of him dealings with his Board. Virginia and his race. The book contained Military Institute, designed topro
an interesting preface by its compiler, Prof. Robert T. Kerlin,profes
has dismissed from its force a man Institute, Lexington, Va. Prof.Kerlin followed this by a displaying the finest courage the In
"Contemporary Negro Poetry." He 
might have continued his literaryefforts undisturbed ; but th 
wrongs of the Negro pressed upon 
him, and when he read of thecondemnation to Only through Elaine riots, he used his splendid 
individual or a command of English to publish an South steadily open letter to Thomas C. McRae, showing itself Governor of Arkansas, entreating more sterile. cannot suppress a the Governor to give earnestconsideration to the sentence of the courts man like Mr. Kerlin, but judging pronounced upon these Negroes. from its past acts, with the Ku Klux "Not in the history of our Republic." 
spirit, it will drive him beyond its Prof. Kerlin said, "has a more tremendou borders. Perhaps more than any s responsibility before God 
other section of the world, the South and the civilized world devolved 
refuses to listen to the voice that cries upon the shoulders of the chief executive 
in the wilderness. 
K U KLU X KLA N 
t
HE white knights are on the 
run. Their flowing robes no 
longer present the dignified 
. appearance made familiar to 
millions of Americans by "The Birth 
 death of the six Neg
 self criticism can an 
 nation progress. The 
 suppresses self criticism 
 more and more and 
 It 
 
 
OPINIO N 1 1 
of A Nation." Instead they stream in The overhead expense is being cared 
ridiculous tatters. Since the Newfo Yor r by the cit k World y an ha d state s describe , but eac d h 
is ended. We have learned a great 
deal about their Grand Wizard and 
their Kleagles and we know now that 
the Klan is a money-making affair 
selling stock based on race prejudice. 
Congratulations to the New York 
World for its wonderful exposure. 
The part that the Association took 
in the exposure, the assistance that 
it was able to give, is told in this 
number under National Association 
notes. 
"AMERICA' S MAKING " 
THE part which each group has 
had in the development of 
this land will be clearly shown
pageant and exhibit which will show 
 themisc
racial or national group is expected 
to defray the expenses of its own exhibit 
Negroes have been invited to
all the conferences at which
plans of the enterprise have
worked out. The committee on
 a
exhi
James Weldon Johnson and as its 
secretary, Eugene Kinckle Jones. 
This committee plans to have a 
continuous exhibit showing the contribution of 
and labor. On Thursday night,Novem
several hundred voices and an orchestra 
this time a primer of Negroaccomplishment
gain direct information concerning 
the Negro's worth to America. 
 in "America's Making," a 
participate
 the 
 been 
Negro
three centuries of racial andimmigrant contributions to our national 
life. From October 29 to November 
12, through pageants, festivities and 
exhibits, the gift of each race to The educational value of this exhibit 
America will be set forth. Thisdemonstration cannot be estimated is under th . Foe genera r a modes lsuperv
t 
budget of $3000, it is believed that 
the committee on the Negro exhibit 
can provide a program which will 
favorably compare with any other. 
L'UNION CONGOLAISE, BELGIUM  
 
 
 
IMPRESSIONS OF THE SECOND PAN-AFRICAN 
CONGRESS 
JESSIE
i 
The dream of a Pan-African Congress 
had already come true in 1919. Ye t it 
was with hearts half-wondering, half
1921. So tenuous, so delicate had been its 
beginnings. Had the black world, although 
once stirred by the terrific rumblings of 
the Great War, relapsed into its lethargy? 
Then out of Africa just before it was time 
to cross the Atlantic came a letter, one of 
many, but this the most appealing word 
from the Egyptian Sudan: "Sir: We
sum ($17.32), to help toward the expenses 
of the Pan-African Congress. Oh Sir, we 
are looking to you for we need help sorely!" 
So with this in mind we crossed the seas 
not knowing just what would be the plan of 
action for the Congress, for would not its 
members come from the four corners of the 
earth and must there not of necessity be 
a diversity of opinion, of thought, of
was that Ethiopia's sons through delegates 
were stretching out their hands from all 
over the black and yearning world. 
II 
'"P'HEN one day, the 27th of August, we 
met in London in Central Hall, under 
the shadow of Westminster Abbey. Many 
significant happenings had those cloisters 
looked down on, but surely on none more 
significant than on this group of men and 
re
sm
Gre
women of African descent, so different in fascinating than learning at first hand that 
rearing and tradition and yet so similar the stranger across the seas, however differ
in purpose. The rod of the common oppressorno ha differenc d made the e omf heart fel the ? Wir owe wer n community e all one 
family in London. Wha t small divergences 
 FAUSET 
were there and the men and women of 
African blood who were at that time
That was a wonderful meeting. I think 
that at first we did not realize how wonderful. 
and Rev. Jernagin of Washington presided; 
the second day Dr. DuBois and Mr. Archer, ex
necessity those first meetings had to be 
hearts. Native African and native American st
this is my lot; tell me what is yours! " 
fearful that we ventured to realize it afresh 
cannot come but we are sending you this
Mr. H. A. Hunt of Fort Valley, Ga., Mr. 
R. P. Sims of Bluefield, W . Va., Dr.Wilb
Bainbridge, Ga., Rev. W . H. Jernagin of 
Washington, D. C , Dr. H. R. Butler of 
Mr. White, Mrs. Kelley and Miss Fauset— 
all these told of America. And in return 
Dr. Olaribigbee and Mr. Thomas of West 
project? Africa Bu , Mr. August t the
o mai of Lagos n , Mrs. Davis thing, the great thi
of South Africa, Mr. Marryshow of
Varma and Mr. Satkalavara of India told 
the tale of Afric a and of other countries 
of which the Americans knew little or nothing. 
We listened well. Wha t can be more 
of opinion, slight suspicions, doubtful 
Men from strange and diverse lands glances there may have been at first were 
came together. We were all of us foreigners. Sout all quickl h Afric y dissipated a was represented . W e felt ou , thr comme 
Gold Coast, Sierra Leone and Lagos, Grenada, the United States of America,Mart
of East Africa came, yet men who had 
lived there presented and discussed their 
problems. British Guiana and Jamaica Out of the flood of talk emerged real 
fact and purpose for the Americandel
12  
 
SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRES S 13 
large cities, alive and bustling, with its of land but had imminentsomething else, the problem of politica share of noise. All about us were beautiful, and the heavy and insulting problem of 
large buildings and commodious stores, exce
segregation. The East African, on the centuries old, recalled the splendor and dig
other hand, and also the South African had 
the shadow of monarchical government. no vestige of a vote (save in Natal), had 
True London is the heart of a monarchy, been utterly despoiled of the best portions too, but the stranger does not feel it unless of his land, nor could he buy it back. In he is passing Buckingham Palace or watchin
addition to this the East African had to 
consider the influx of the East Indian who 
might prove a friend, or might prove as 
harsh a taskmaster as the European despoiler. 
At first it was not so noticeable. 
We had been invited by Paul Otlet and Through the inter-play of speech and description and idea, two propositions flashed 
Senator LaFontaine and had been helped out—one, the proposition of Mr. Augusto, greatly by M. Paul Panda, a native of the a splendid, fearless speaker from Lagos, Belgian Congo who had been educated in that the Pan-African Congress shouldaccomplish something very concrete. Belgium. The Congress itself was held in urged that we start with the material in the marvellous Palais Mondial, the World hand and advance to better things. First Palace situated in the Cinquantenaire Park. of all let us begin by financing the Liberian We could not have asked for a better setting. loan. Liberia is a Negro Independencyalready founded. "Let us," pl
first place, there were many more white conscious black world toward its development." than colored people—there are not many of 
us in Brussells—and it was not long bef
deeper, more immediately significant than 
that of the white people we had foundelsew
material interests centre in Africa in the 
The other proposition was that of Mr. Belgian Congo. An y interference with the 
Marryshow, of Grenada, and of Professor natives might result in an interference with 
Hutto of Georgia. "W e must remember," the sources from which so many Belgian 
both of them pointed out, "that not words capitalists drew their prosperity. 
but actions are needed. We must be prepared to put our hands in our pockets 
must make sacrifices to help each other. 
"Tell us what to do, " said Mr. Hutto, "and 
the Knights of Pythias of Georgia stand Afte r all, who were these dark strangers ready, 80,000 strong, to do their part." speaking another tongue and introducing 
Heaven only knew what ideas to be carr
Those were fine, constructive words. of the strides which colored America had 
Then at the last meeting we listened to made in education I suggested to M. Panda 
the resolutions which Dr. DuBois had that perhaps some American colored teachers migh 
drawn up. Bold and glorious resolutions and help with the instruction of the natives. 
they were, couched in winged,unambiguous words. Without a single dissenti
vote the members of the Congress accepted 
them. W e clasped hands with our newly 
found brethren and departed, feeling that 
it was gocd to be alive and most wonderful t "Oh, no o b, no e colored , no! " h. No e exclaimed t one o,f an usd bu addt e
new and perfect African brotherhood. never permit that, the colored Americans 
are too malins (clever). " 
D
After we had visited the Congo Museum 
we were better able to understand the unIll spoken determination of the Belgians to let 
nothing interfere with their dominion in OW N to Dover we flew, up the English 
Channel to Ostend, and thence to the Congo. Such treasures! Suchillim
plainly be for them. For the first time in Brussels. my life I was able to envisage what Brussels was different. How shall I explain it? The city was like mo 
 
 
 
14 TH E CRISI S 
Africa means to Europe, depleted as she has There was no doubt but that our assembly become through the ages by war and famine and plague. In the museum were th from the International University gave us seeds of hundreds of edible plants; there a welcome from students of all nations; we was wood—great trunks of dense,finegrained mahogany as thick as a man's were invited to a reception at the Hotel de is wide and as long as half a New York Ville (City Hall) in the ancient public block. Elephants' tusks gleamed, white square, and on the last day General Sorelas and shapely, seven feet long from tip to and his beautiful wife and daughters received u base without allowing for the curve, and as 
broad through as a man's arm. All the 
wealth of the world—skins and furs, gold And yet the shadow of Colonial dominion 
and copper—would seem to center in the governed. Always the careful Belgian eye 
Congo. watched and peered, the Belgian ear listene
murmur of complaint of Black Africa, without 
intelligible the greatest set of wrongs 
against human beings that the modern 
Nor was this all. Around us in the spacious worl rooms were the expression of an d has known. We realized of course 
earlier but well developed art,wood-carvings showing beyond the shadow of a doubt how delicate the Belgian situation was and 
the inherent artistry of the African. Dearest of all, yet somehow least surprising to how sensitive a conscience the nation had 
us, was the number of musical instruments. because of the atrocities of the Leopold 
There is not a single musical instrument regime. We knew the tremendous power 
in the world, I would venture to say, of of capital organized to exploit the Congo; 
which the Congo cannot furnish a prototype. but despite this we proposed before the 
Congress was over to voice the wrongs of 
Negroes temperately but clearly. We assu
our hosts in a very literal sense. Indeed 
as we afterward found, we were reckoning Native wealth, native art lay about us without our own presiding officer, for without in profusion even in the museum. Small 
had undoubtedly felt called on to assure wonder that the Belgian men and women the Belgian Government that no "radical " watched us with careful eyes. step would be taken by the Congress. He The program in Brussels was naturally 
different from that in London. We undertook sponsore t d therefor o learn
e
 somethin a mild resolutiog of thne
sugg
 culture Mondial stating that Negroes were "susceptible" which colored people had achieved in the the international movement in Belgium. different parts of the world, but we hoped 
When the London resolutions (which are also to hear of actual native conditions as published this month as our leadingedit
we had heard of them in thefirstconference. M. Panda spoke of the generaldevel
alarmed, and our Belgian visitors were excited
of the Congolese woman. Miss Fauset told and for a while it looked as though the of the colored graduates in the United 
main session of the Pan-African Congress States and showed the pictures of the first was destined to end in a rather disgraceful women who had obtained the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Bishop Phillip row. It was here, however, that the American delega
Nashville and Bishop Hurst of Baltimore DuBois, showed themselves the real master
greeted the assembly. Mrs. Curtis told of Liberia, the presiding office 
M. Barthelemy from the Pas de Calais, in 
the French Chamber of Deputies, ably assisted. 
Belgian officialdom was wellrepresented. General Sorelas of Spain spoke of 
problem of the mixed race. Another General, a Belgian, splendid in ribbons and 
orders, was on the platform, and two members of the Belgian Colonial Office were 
present, "unofficially."  
 
 
 
SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRES S 15 
and dignified protest, they allowed M. 
Diagne to "jam through" his resolutions 
and adjourn the session; but they kept their 
own resolutions in place before the Congress to come up for final consideration 
Paris, and they maintained the closing of 
the session in Brussels in order and unity. 
I suppose the white world of Europe has 
never seen a finer example of unity and 
trust on the part of Negroes toward a 
Negro leader. 
But we left Belgium in thoughtful and 
puzzled mood. How great was this smothering power which made it impossible for 
men even in a scientific Congress to be 
frank and to express their inmost desires? 
Not one word, for instance, had been said 
during the whole Congress by Belgian 
white or black, or French presiding officer which would lead one to suspect that 
Leopold and his tribe had ever been other 
than the Congo's tutelary angels.Apparently not even an improvement could 
hinted at. And the few Africans who were 
present said nothing. But at that last 
meeting just before we left, a Congolese 
came forward and fastened the button of 
the Congo Union in Dr. DuBois' coat. 
Wha t lay behind that impassive face? 
IV 
At last Paris! 
Between Brussels and the queen 
city of the world we saw blasted town, ravaged village and plain, ruined in a war 
whose basic motif had been the rape of 
Africa. Wha t should we learn of the black 
man in France? 
Already we had realized that the black 
colonial's problem while the sameintrinsically, wore on the face of it a different M. PAUL PANDA was it that we had learned more quickly 
and better than they the value of organization, Madagascar of frankness, of freedom of speech? , from Annam. I looked at 
W e wondered then and we wonder still that sea of dark faces and my heart was 
though Heaven knows in all humility. moved within me. However their white 
overlords or their minions might plot and 
plan and thwart, nothing could dislodge 
from the minds of all of them the knowledge 
But Paris at last, with its glow and its to black, hands of hope and the promise of 
lights and its indefinable attraction! unity though seas and armies divided. 
W e met in the Salle des Ingenieurs(Engineers' Hall) in little Rue Blanche 
of the Opera. Logan was there, Beton On the platform was, I suppose, theinte
and Dr. Jackson, men who had worked To American eyes and, according to the p
faithfully and well for us even before first, for he had first envisaged this movement 
we had come to Paris. And around us were 
more strange faces—new types to us—from 
Senegal, from the French Congo, from  
16 TH E CRISI S 
the Haitian minister to France and 
Haitian delegate to the assembly of the 
League of Nations. Beside him sat the 
grave and dignified delegate from the Liga 
Africana of Lisbon, Portugal, and on the 
other side the presiding officer, M. Diagne 
not given the right to speak said to me 
after hearing Dr. DuBois' exposition of 
the meaning and purpose of thePan-Afr
chance to speak to Dr. DuBois ? There is 
much I would tell him." 
France is a colonial power but France is 
sat the American Rayford Logan,assistant secretary of the Pan-African
and his colleague, M. Candace, French deputy from Guadeloupe. A little to one side 
a republic. And so when our resolutions 
at Paris and our interpreter. His translations, mad weree off-hand without a moment's presented once more to this the final 
preparation, were a remarkable exhibition. 
In the audience besides those faithful 
American delegates* who had followed us 
from London on, were other friends, Henry 
O. Tanner, Captain and Mrs. Napoleon 
Marshall, who had joined us in Paris, 
Bishop and Mrs. Hurst, who had come back 
from Brussels to Paris with us, Captain 
and Mrs. Arthur Spingarn, white delegates 
C
session of the Pan-African Congress, that 
audience felt that here at last was the fearless 
their hearts, here was comprehension, here 
was the translation of hitherto unsyllabled, 
unuttered prayers. The few paragraphs 
about capitalism M. Diagne postponed "for 
the consideration of the next Pan-African 
Congress." But the rest that yearning, 
groping audience accepted with their souls. 
The last session of the last day was over. 
It was midnight and spent and happy we 
from America, who had attended thecosferences found our way home regularl througyh an thde hastreet d laughe s d a
worked with us in between whiles. of Paris which never sleeps. 
V 
The situation in Paris was less tense, 
one felt the difference between monarchy "YE T after all the real task was at Genand republic. But again the American was eva. The city struck us dumb at first 
temporarily puzzled. Even allowing for natural difference wit s of training and tradition, h its beauty of sky and water—the blue 
it seemed absurd to have the floor given repeatedly to speakers who dwelt on the and white of the September heavens above, 
glories of France and the honor of being 
a black Frenchman, when what we and most 
of those humble delegates wanted to learn 
was about us. 
The contrast between the speakers of the 
Eastern and Western hemispheres with 
but two exceptions was most striking. 
Messieurs Diagne and Candace gave us fine 
oratory, magnificent
Edward Frazier, of Walter White, of Dr. 
Jackson, of a young and and fiery Jamaican 
and of M. Bellegarde, gave facts and food 
for thought. The exceptions were the 
speeches of M. Challaye, a white member 
of the Society for the Defense of African 
Natives, and those of the grave and courtly 
Portuguese, Messieurs Magalhaens and 
Santos-Pinto. 
But this audience was different from that 
in Brussells. To begin with, its members 
were mainly black and being black, had 
suffered. More than one man to whom the 
unusually autocratic presiding officer had 
Lake Geneva and the Rhone River gliding 
green and transparent under stone bridges, 
black and white swans, red-beaked,floa
above and beyond all in the far distance 
Mont Blanc rising hoary, serene and majestic
But scant time we had for looking at 
that! The Assembly of the League of Nation
resolutions were in process of beingprese
 gestures—butplatitudes. But the speeches of Dr. DuBois, o 
here and men of international name and 
fame were presiding. How were we to gain 
audience? 
Fortunately for us Dr. DuBois' name and 
reputation proved the open sesame. He 
had not been in the city two hours before 
invitations and requests for interviews 
poured in. One of our staunchest helpers 
was an English woman, Lady Cecelia, wife 
of that Mr. Roberts who had worked with 
Montague in India. She presided at meals 
at a long table in the dining room of the 
Hotel des Familles and here Dr. DuBois 
was made a welcome guest throughout his 
* A list of the delegates will b e publishe d later . whole stay. Here came to meet and  
 
SECON D PAN-AFRICA N CONGRES S 17 
confe r with him on our cause Mr. Roberts
Professor Murray writes us, with "quiterem
himself, Mr. Lief-Jones, M.P., Professor year it may be quite suitable to put it Gilbert Murray (representing South Africa at the Assembly of the League of 
Slavery and Aborigines' Protection Society. 
M. Bellegarde, Haitian Minister to France 
and delegate to the Assembly, was also at 
that hotel and gave us generously of his aid 
and assistance. 
On Monday night, September 13, Dr.
and conveyed to them some idea of
the black world was thinking, feeling
doing with regard to the Negro problem. necessity for using at least two languages, 
I am sure that many of that group of people, wit thinker h the limites an d detaile d student d knowledg s thouge whic h theh y
were, had never dreamed before that there the black foreigner is permitted to get of 
might even be a black point of view.
they took their instruction bravely
afterwards thanked Dr. DuBois with
 But Africa and with the pressure brought to 
and bear on many Africans to prevent them 
shining eyes and warm hand clasps. from frank speech—action must be slow 
and very careful. It will take years for an 
institution of this sort to function. But it 
is on its own feet now and the burden no 
Besides meeting and conferring with longer is on black America. It must stand 
these distinguished personages Dr. DuBois or fall by its own merits. 
had luncheon conferences with Rene Claparede of the executive committee of theSo
Indigenes and with William Rappard, head 
W e have gained proof that organization of the Mandates Commission of the League on our part arrests the attention of the of Nations, a dinner conference with G. 
world. W e had no need to seek publicity. Spiller, former secretary of the Races Congress, and an interview with Albert Thomas, If we had wanted to we could not have esca
head of the International Bureau of Labor. The white world is feverishly anxious to 
know of our thoughts, our hopes, our 
dreams. Organization is our strongest 
weapon. A t the end of a week of steady driving, 
by dint of interviewing, of copying, of 
translating, of recopying, we were ready to It was especially arresting to notice that 
present and did present to Sir EricDrummond, the Pan-African Congres secretars an y ofd Na
a copy in French and English of the resolutionsa entitle whit in d T o essentia The Worl l methods d (se. e
5) and of the manifesto (see page 18). 
Mr. Thomas and M. Rappard who both 
heartily endorsed the appointment of a 
"man of Negro descent" to the Mandates 
Commission, Professor Gilbert Murray, 
and M. Bellegarde also received copies. 
An d between whiles we listened to the 
world striving to right its wrongs at the 
Assembly of the League
Of course we were at a
Nations, had no delegate.
Murray suggested to M.
Haitian delegate, that he
resolution (see manifesto)
 of Nations. 
down as a resolution." 
V I 
RESULTS are hard to define. But I must 
strive to point out a few. First then, 
out of these two preliminary conferences of 
1919 and 1921, a definite organization has 
been evolved, to be known as thePan-Af
what in these pages. Naturally working with 
and people from all over the world, with the 
DuBois addressed the English Club of Geneva 
activities. There had to be
many explanations, an infinity
patience and then talk again.
ththee Leagu Assembly e of
Neithe page r attempted
 much talk, 
of time and 
Neither the 
wrongs of Africa nor of the world, can be 
righted in a day nor in a decade. W e can 
only make beginnings. 
The most important result was our realization 
ahead of all of us. W e have got to learn 
disadvantagebecause everything—facts about Africa America , th,
e no difference t bein betw
g in 
But Professor one foreign language at least (French or 
Bellegarde, the Spanish), new points of view, generosity 
state the second of ideal and of act. All the possibilities of 
during the debate all blac on k men are neede Mandates d o wel . Thi d togethe s he did r , as  
 
 
 
18 TH E CRISI S 
shall be so powerful that the enemy will 
when black and white meet to do battle. say, "But behold! these men are our brothers." 
the black men of the world against the day 
God grant that when that day comes we 
MANIFESTO TO THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS 
TH E second Pan-African Congress which labor would be through investigation of nativ
met in London, Brussels and Paris, 
August 28, 29 and 31 and September 2, 3, Secondly: The second Pan-AfricanCon
5 and 6, represented 26 different groups of the modern world moves towardself-governm
people of Negro descent: namely, British and nations and that consequently the Nigeria, Gold Coast and Sierra Leone; the mandated areas, being peopled as they are 
Egyptian Sudan, British East Africa,former German East Africa ; Fre
so largely by black folk, have a right to 
the French Congo and Madagascar;Belgian Congo; Portuguese St. Thom
ask that a man of Negro descent,properlyfi
and Mozambique; Liberia; Abyssinia; 
Haiti; British Jamaica and Grenada; 
French Martinique and Guadeloupe;British Guiana; the United States 
Negroes resident in England, France, Belgium and Portugal, and fraternal visitors 
from India,
Annam. 
 Morocco, the Philippines and 
Thirdly and finally: The second PanAfrican Congress desires most earnestly 
and emphatically to ask the good offices and 
careful attention of the League of Nations 
to the condition of civilized persons of Negro 
world today a widespread and growing 
The Congress adopted two sets of resolutionsfeelin differin g tha g somewha t it is permissibl t in detaie t l bu o trea t t civilized
The result of this attitude and many consequent laws, 
is presented in its original English text; that a bitter feeling of resentment,pers
essentially identical. The first set of resolutions (adopted unanimously at London) 
the second set (discussed at Brussels and the world among those very persons whose 
adopted unanimously at Paris) is presented rise is the hope of the Negro race. 
in its original French text. 
The Congress directed its executive officers to approach the League of Nations 
with three earnest requests, believing that 
the greatest international body in the world 
must sooner or later turn its attention to W e are fully aware that the League of 
the great racial problem as it today affects Nations has little if any direct powe r to 
persons of Negro descent. adjust these matters, but it has the vast 
moral power of world public opinion and 
of a body conceived to promote peace and First: The second Pan-AfricanCongress asks that in the International 
justice among men. For this reason we of Labor a section be set aside to deal particularly and in detail with the conditions ask and urge that the League of Nations and needs of native Negro labor especially 
take a firm stand on the absolute equality in Africa and in the Islands of the Sea. of races and that it suggest to the Colonial P
It is the earnest belief of the Congress Nations the forming of an International that the labor problems of the world cannot be understood or properly settled so Institute for the study of the Negro Prob­ long as colored and especially Negro labor lems, and for the Evolution and Protection is enslaved and neglected, and that a first of the Negro Race. step toward the world emancipation of 
W . E. BURGHARDT DuBois, 
Geneva, September 15, 1921. Secretary. WATCHING A BASEBALL GAME AT THE CRESCENT STARS AMUSEMENT BASEBALL PARK, NE W ORLEANS  
A NEW ORLEANS BASEBALL PARK 
a search for suitable grounds which colored peo
Cohen, a Negro, who assisted not only with 
his broad experience, but also with his 
influence with the city authorities. 
A Board of Directors was formed, consisting o 
bought at least $1,000 worth of stock. Mr. 
Wallace C. Marine was elected president; 
Mr. F. V. Fauria, treasurer, and Mr. C. C. 
Uejoie, secretary. Other members of the 
Board of Directors are: Messrs. Walter L. 
Cohen, Dr. P. H. V. Dejoie, AlbertWork
J. Bigard, Joseph W. Elliott, Edward E. 
Woodruff, George Andre, ArnoldDufourch
Dr. F. T. Jones. 
After a capital stock of $25,000 had been 
subscribed by the members of the Board of 
Directors, the common stock was opened to 
the public, and $45,000 was subscribed, the 
shares being $50 each. 
The ground has been named The Crescent 
Stars' Amusement Baseball Park. The site 
is situated in the Seventh Ward, which is 
WALLAC E C. MARIN E 
NEGR0E S i n N e w Orleans have developed better known as the downtown or Creole 
a liking for picnics, fairs and District—-"Faubourg Treme." It is four 
baseball games. For these amusements squares from St. Bernard Boulevard, which 
they were compelled to use the Fair Grounds, which is owned and controlled by is one of the prettiest thoroughfares in New white people. The owners charged the colored people enormous prices for rental, and Orleans. would not permit them to rent the ground 
on holidays, and seldom on Sundays. 
The Park was planned and built by Negr
Club, of which Mr. Marine is the Manager, This state of affairs became aggravated is a great attraction. The park has a seating when a committee of colored men planned any time for a nominal sum. an affair for July 4. They succeeded in 
renting the grounds, paying the required 
deposit, and began their advertising. When, 
however, the owners realized that they had New Orleans, therefore, can well boast 
inadvertently rented the grounds to colored of he peopl r amusemen e fot
r plac Julye 4 whic , thehy i revoke s ownedd th, e 
privilege, and only through the services of controlled and operated solely by Negroes. 
a lawyer were the Negroes given satisfaction. This enterprise is but one of the many 
indications of the new spirit which is gradually inv
Mr. Wallace C. Marine, thereupon, began 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
Nationalassociationfor the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
THE 24TH INFANTRY PRISONERS We are a delegation representing the 50,000 signers of this petition which we On Wednesday, September 28, a delegation have of 30 leading colored men and the honor to lay before you, and we women, headed by James Weldon Johnson, come not only as a representative of those 
Secretary of the N. A. A. C. P., had an who signed the petition, but we are spokesmen or more of Negro citizens of the United audience with President Harding and presented a petition, signed by 50,000 persons, States. asking for the pardon of the 61 soldiers of 
the 24th Infantry who are confined in The petition, you will note, asks for as result of rioting in Houston, Leavenworth their a
Texas, in August, 1917. pardon on three grounds: first, the previous re
the provocation of local animosity which 
manifested itself in insults, threats and 
acts of violence against colored soldiers; 
third, the heavy punishment meted out to In the delegation with Mr. Johnson, or members of the 24th Infantry of whom 19 
lending their names to it, were the Hon. were hanged, 13 of them summarily and 
Mr. Archibald Grimke, president of the without right of appeal to the Secretary 
Washington Branch; Major R. R. Moton, of War or to the President, theirCornmander-in-C
shocked the entire country and appeared principal of Tuskegee Institute; R. S. to the colored people to savor of vengeance Abbott, editor of the Chicago Defender; rather than justice. Sixty-one members of 
Emmett J. Scott, special assistant to the the 24th Infantry are still in prison serving
Secretary of War during the World War; 
Prof. George W. Cook and Kelly Miller, of 
Howard University; Robert R. Church,colored Republican leader in Te
Charles E. Bentley, of Chicago; Miss Nannie H. Burroughs; Mrs. Mary B. Talbert, 
honorary president of the NationalAssociation Contrary to all precedent of Colored, Women' the provos s Clubs t ; M
Mary Church Terrell; Mrs. Alice Dunbar guard of this colored regiment had been disarmed in a state and in a city where insult Nelson, Harry H. Pace, John Hope, the daily experience. Following a long series Hon. Mr. J. C. Asbury, memberPennsylvania Legislature; Harry E. Davis, membe of humiliating and harassing incidents, one of the Ohio Legislature; Drs. William H. soldier was brutally beaten and a wellbel
Washington and W. W. Wolfe, of Newark, woman by local policemen. The report 
spread among the regiment that theirnoncommi
N. J.; the Rev. Mr. R. H. Singleton, of Atlanta, Ga.; James A. Cobb, counsel for the had been killed. Whatever acts may have N. A. A. C. P., and John R. Hawkins,financial secretary of the A. M. E. C
been committed by these men were not the result of any premeditated design. The men were goaded to sudden and frenzied 
action. This is borne out by the long recor
part of this regiment throughout its whole history up to that time. 
Mr. Johnson in presenting the petition 
said: 
As Secretary of the NationalAssociation Moreover, althoug for th whit e Advancemen e citizent os of Colore f d 
composed of persons and representatives Houston were involved in these riots and 
of bodies deeply concerned for America's the regiment to which these men belonged 
good name, I have the honor to present a was officered entirely by white men, none 
petition signed by 50,000 Americancitizens, but Negroes, so far as w whit e hav e ane bee d black n abl, prayin e g 
exercise executive clemency, and pardon to learn, have ever been prosecuted or 
the 61 members of the 24th U. S. Infantry punished. In consequence, the wholesale 
now in the Federal Prison at Leavenworth, punishment meted out to these colored soldiers 
Kansas, convicted on charges of rioting at visitation upon their color rather than upon 
Houston, Texas, in August, 1917. their crime. The attention of coloredpeo
21  
 r
 
22 THE CRISIS 
focussed upon the action which it may Association's attention was called to the 
please you to take. fact that the Klan was using an address In consideration, therefore, of the almost in New York in an attempt to recruit members. Th
five years already served in prison by the to the city officials but to the New York 61 men and of the foregoing facts, and because of the long record for bravery,d
crisis of the nation, we bespeak your attention the representativ which wee beg here World, and was to th Klan' e petitio s n traced to the Army and Navy Club in New 
York. 
Meanwhile, through press stories sent 
broadcast throughout the country, by mass 
The President promised to review the meetings and magazine articles, the Associatio
testimony in the cases of the soldiers and to of the Klan. So well and so thoroughly 
take the request made in this important pe­ was this work done that the Searchlight, 
tition under advisement. Mr. Johnson also published in Atlanta as the organ of the 
made reference to the gratification of the Klan, called the National Association for 
colored people that the government through the Advancement of Colored People its most 
two channels was investigating the nefarious dangerou Ks u Klux Klan. foe; and denunciation of the 
Klan began to be heard not only from the 
pulpit but in the editorial columns of the 
FIGHTING TREASON most reputable white southern newspapers. 
Among the agencies which denounced the THE treason which consists ofcommercialized race hatred and masquerades Klan in the South were the inter-racialcom
as Americanism has found a dangerousantagonist in the National Associatio of the Confederacy in Virginia. Advancement of Colored People. For more 
than a year the Association has fought the 
Ku Klux Klan with the weapons of publicity and fact-telling, until such a po
New York World became convinced of the In September, 1921, the New York World, 
necessity of taking up the fight. The expose after an i exhaustivn the investigation e World has tor , bega n thne las a t 
secrecy off the Klan's mummery and it is series of twenty articles upon the Ku Klux 
shown to be the lowest and vilest sort of Klan. Not only was it shown that the 
money-making scheme conducted by those Klan was attempting to suppress the N
who are ready to play upon prejudices of anti-Catholic propaganda of a mostvir
any and every sort for their own advantage.prejudic This expos e e travelled the length and against Japanese and Jews. The 
breadth of the United States, being reprinted was newspapersAmerican . shown to be bound by un
To the World, the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People had 
the privilege of contributing information 
which was publicly acknowledged in the 
World's articles. The National Association 
two months before the articles began to 
the disposal of a representative of the 
Even before the election of 1920, in which World. Lists of the atrocities attributed 
r.he Ku Klux Klan attempted to intimidate to the Ku Klux Klan were published in the 
colored voters, the National Association World, and public acknowledgment by the 
for the Advancement of Colored People Klan of its responsibility in a number of 
was endeavoring to obtain facts about these cases. 
bed-sheet heroes. An officer of theAssociation discovered, when he was invi
join the Klan under the mistakenimpression that he was a white man, th
Klan intended to organize in New York 
City. The attention of the New YorkPolice Department, the May
menace and both the Mayor and the District Attorney assured the people of New 
York that the Klan would not be permitted 
within the city's limits. Subsequently, the 
Kla i n n dozens of powerful
The personal lives of the leaders of the 
Klan, who pretended to be leading in a ca
the World published the fact that two of 
the leaders of the Klan had been arrested 
in a disorderly house in Atlanta and fined,  
 
 
 
e 
 
 
 
N. A. A. C. P. 23 
one of those arrested being the chief woman a report on the Klan, and William J. Burns, 
in the Klan. head of the Federal secret service, turned 
over such a report to President Harding. To such an extent was the NationalAssociation for the Advancement of Colo
People useful in exposing the Klan, that THE ARKANSAS CASES 
the Klan actually attempted to employ a The fight still goes on in the Arkansas 
traitorous colored man to create dissensionexecute in thd e Association's ranks. A former in September are still alive. 
Klansman, C. Anderson Wright, writing in 
the New York American, of September 16, 
spoke of this dastardly attempt as follows: 
Another subject of serious discussion was the realization that the power of the Negro 
An appeal to the Governor for reprieve 
was unsuccessful. Then our attorneys applied for 
stay to the execution. On learning that the 
writ of certiorari could not be obtained 
in time to stop the execution, as the judges 
society, known as the Society for the Advancement of the Federa of Colore l Curdt woul peopled no, wat bs becomin e in Washington g a great menace in the expansion of the Ku application was made for a writ of habeas Klux Klan, as it was continually giving to the press publicity on the Klan'sunderhanded corpus. This wa methods s grante. Thi d ans
d
 societ madey
retur
 was getting 
active in State Legislative work, having 
already succeeded in having introduced by a Negro legislator from Chicago, a bill denouncing the Klan in the IllinoisLegisla
from joining or associating in any manner with the Ku Klux Klan. On Tuesday, September 27, a telegram 
was received, stating that the writ was sustained 
Evidence is now in hand which should 
have large weight towards securing the 
This activity on the part of the Negro, freedom of the prisoners who are yet to 
in the judgment of Clarke, warranted come to trial and which will favorably affect th 
prompt action, and it was decided to set up The other cases will be tried in Marianna, a rival organization to the Society for the Ark., in the near future. This will be the Advancement of Colored People without delay. Clarke began with a Negro in his own employ, a man of unusual intelligence, who was in charge of the servants on his farm on the outskirts of Atlanta. This servant 
enlisted the services of other Negroes as spies, and they attended the meetings of 
the society and reported everything that was said and done. Also, these spies sought 
to create dissatisfaction and discord among 
the members of the society. 
It is, therefore, established, practically 
conclusively, that the Klan has actually 
first opportunity to use the new evidence. 
The Association is leaving no stone unturned 
these men. 
We urgently appeal for contributions to 
the Arkansas Defense Fund to meet this 
critical moment in the defense of these innocent 
CERTIFICATE MEMBERSHIP DRIVE 
been driven to employ spies to try to create dissensio At n in the National Association the Atlanta Conference it was voted 
for the Advancement of Colored People. The 
Association is gratified at the Klan's lack 
of success and feels this attention on the 
part of the Klan to be a tribute to its
treason to the principles upon which the 
American State rests. 
Following the exposure of the Ku Klux 
Klan's hypocrisy and treason, the National 
Association appealed to President Harding 
in a telegram urging his endorsement of a 
complete Federal investigation of the 
Klan's activities and Congressional action 
should that prove necessary. At about 
that time, Attorney General Daugherty 
ordered the Department of Justice to make 
that an attorney be employed by the 
Association who should give his whole time 
to its work. It was thought that such an effectiveness arrangement in fighting the Ku Klux Klan's , supplementing the voluntary 
service of the Legal Committee of theAssoc
At the Detroit Conference it was voted 
that as soon as the Association found itself 
be done towards organization in all sections 
of the country. 
The Association so far has found itself 
unable to carry out these recommendations 
and also unable to do many other things  d
24 THE CRISIS 
that it would like to enter upon because of 
1919 Drive22,875 1920 lack of funds. One dollar from its members will not furnish
do the work which needs to be done. It 
has not been our good fortune to secure 
many bequests from our
soon be established. Over 90 percent of 
our support comes from colored people, and 
it is well that this should be so; but most 
of these are One Dollar members. It is 
because One Dollar a year will not furnish 
sufficient means, that the branches are now 
being urged to conduct some time in October 
1921 Drive:— 
New members gained. .
New branches organized well-to-docitizens, but we hope that the hab
Branches ove r 1,000 
members now
Branches ove r 1,000 
members before the Drive
Branches over 500 mem­ bers now
Branches over 500 mem­ bers before the Drive
 (no drive held) sufficient revenue to 
 44,200 
 37 
 13 
3 
 18 
7 RECEIPTS 
persons whose means are such that they Receipts from the Drive $28,243.53 or November a one-week CertificateMembership Drive. In every branch there 
DISBURSEMENTS should donate each year to the Association Printing $1,668.84 $25, $50, $100, or more. Almost every Buttons 822.92 
member in all our branches can. without Salaries 996.46 
undue sacrifice, become either a Gold or a Postage 600.00 
Blue Certificate member. The Gold Certificate at $10 a year means the spending of $6,284.11 less than 20c per week for the work of securing justice for our group. The Blue Sales of buttons and lit­ Certificate at $5 a year means spending erature 1,360.12 
less than 10c per week for this end.
of our members is so poor that he
This is very little to pay for liberty. 
One Dollar members may become
or Blue Certificate members by paying $9 
or $4, respectively. It is hoped that every 
branch will enter this one-week intensive 
campaign. The pioneer in this idea is our 
branch at Florence, S. C, in which a large 
proportion of the members are certificate 
members. 
 None 
cannot Net disbursements $ 4,923.99 afford, if he would, 20c or 10c a week. 
 Gold 
H 
Net receipts from the 
Drive $23,319.54 
THE CASE OF HARLEM HOSPITAL 
ARLEM HOSPITAL is one of the 
units under the control of Bellevue 
and Allied Hospitals' Association—themu
City. 
Harlem has 150,000 colored people, and 
the hospital from its location is fitted to 
serve their needs. 
But there have been so many rumors 
and statements of alleged graft,mistrea
Harlem Hospital that the colored residents 
prefer to go to any other hospital in the 
city. It is significant that the 109th Street 
The one-week intensive drive is to beconducted Hospital states that twent primaril y pey withi r centn, th of e bra
every branch take as its motto: One Hundred Percent Certificate Membership! 
WE
their total admissions are colored, and that 
eighty per cent, of these are from Harlem. 
The Presbyterian and St. Luke's Hospitals 
DRIVE OF THE N. A. A. C. P. also have an unusually large percentage of 
 have had many queries concerning colored admissions. These are all out of 
the final drive report. We are herewithth printin e coloregd it district . At h. I e samn spit e time oe wf thei e wisr h 
to congratulate the branches on the splendidpatient wor s ofk th thee Harle y did unde m Hospita r the ver l ary advers e colored. e 
circumstances produced by the economic depression. 
de
It will be of interest to review at the 
same time the previous drives of the Association. 
Moorfield Storey Drive (1918), new 
membership gained 26,916 
In January, Mr. Cosmo O'Neil, the Superint
been notably fair in his attitude towards 
colored people and who had placed colored 
physicians on the hospital staff, was 
 
 
N. A. A. C. P. 26 
Alderman George W. Harris, deeming it colored committee, the consultants of the 
necessary to have a friend of the colored American Hospital Association are alleged 
people at Bellevue, and feeling that the to have offered, after the second hearing, 
demotion was not the result of anyincompetency, to secure a $2,000,00 took u0 Negr p thoe hospita mattelr i wit f thhe Mayo
Hylan, seeking the reinstatement of Mr. matter would be dropped. 
O'Neil. At this time, it was thought well 
The committee is reported to have replied to bring up the matter of the treatment 
the rights of colored patients, nurses, doctors of colored patients at Harlem Hospital and and not in securing a segregatedinstitu
to seek a remedy. Harlem Medical Association, the organization 
and pharmacists, who fully endorsed their 
Mr. Harris, Dr. Allen B. Graves,Attorney fight and employed a specia Mortonl investigato , and Mr. Walte r r 
assistant secretary of the N. A. A. C. P., and two attorneys to help in the matter. 
formed a committee representing the coloredMr citizen . Williams N wh. Colso o sough n wat ts employe o reinstat d aes th investige 
superintendent, but without success. After 
meeting with the Board, who pushed aside 
their requests, the committee then brought 
before the Mayor a mass of data they had 
collected concerning alleged
patients. 
The Mayor appointed Commissioner of 
Accounts Hirschfield to hear the complaints, 
and the defense. Five hearings in all were 
held. A mass of evidence was produced in 
the form of sworn affidavits and personal 
witnesses, charging the hospital authorities 
Ferdinand Morton as counsellors. All of 
these did excellent work. 
 graft,mistreatment and shameless neglect of colored 
It was made clear that the crux of the 
whole question is the admission of colored 
nurses and internes. The strong objection 
—it is alleged—is based on the necessary 
social intermingling this would entail. 
The entire matter is not yet settled, but 
there have been certain importantimme
with grave offenses against colored patients. 
1. Bellevue and Allied Hospital Boards, 
together with the local board of Harlem Hosp
The committee averred that these conditions onl colore y coul d physician d be remedie s ared determine by the presence d to 
and Surgical Board of Harlem Hospital, fight for their full rights. 
and made as its minimum demand that 
there be appointed two such members, and 
that visiting physicians with the full rights 2. Two physicals who were in theMed
of the hospital and visiting surgeons with transferred to the Surgical Out-patient 
full rights to the hospital be appointed. Department—a promotion. These are 
Dr. Louis T. Wright and Dr. Douglass 
Johnson. Two other physicians have 
Commissioner Hirshfield had the hospital record been appointe s of Januar d in th y ane Medica d Februar lOut-payexam
that forty-six per cent, of all admissions 
were colored, he stated that it was but fair 
that colored people have representation on 
the Board. 
Much publicity was given the hearings 
through the reports in the New York News, 
the Harlem Home News, and the New York 
Tribune. 
As a result of the pressure occasioned 
by the publicity given to the work of the 
and Dr. Ralph Young. 
3. Two others have been permitted to work 
in the hospital, Dr. Ernest Alexander 
in the Skin Department and Dr. Vernon 
Ayer in the X-Ray Department. 
4 Colored Red Cross nurses have been permitte
5. The hospital also has promised to admit 
colored nurses.  o
 
Men of the Month. O volunteer social service worker in New N October 1, 1888, during theadministration of Lord Sackville West, Charles 
Fleurence Meline Browne enter.d the
He has served as a messenger and clerical 
assistant through the administrations of 
Lord Paunceforte, Sir Michael Herbert, Sir 
Mortimer Durand, Viscount Bryce, Sir 
Cecil A. Spring-Rice, Lord Reading, Sir
Auckland Geddes, a period of 33 years. 
The Order of the British Empire was
the most popular medals given by the 
Crown. Mr. Browne is the first Negro, and 
one of the few persons in the United States, 
to be awarded this medal. 
Mr. Browne was born in Washington, D. 
C, December 24, 1871. He studied in the 
public schools of the District of Columbia 
and was graduated from the law school of 
Howard University in 1898. 
THE late Dr. Samuel John Ross was 
president of the College of West Africa, 
Liberia. He was born in British Guiana, 
South America, September 19, 1880. In 1902 
he came to the United States and entered 
Lincoln University, where he was given 
Jer 
born in Washington, D. C, 44 years ago, service of the Chancery of the British Emb
being the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Eugene 
Brooks. She served as a clerk to thesuper
and was for several years a supervisor of 
first year work in the public schools of 
Edward Washington Grey and the present incumbent, Sir . She married Attorney Eugene 
M. Gregory, a graduate of HarvardUniv
Jersey and New York. 
created by King George in 1917 and is one Among Mrs. Gregory's activities in NewJersey Were the offices of vice-president of 
the Newark Branch of the NationalAssoc
the New Jersey Federation of ColoredWom 
and the Colored Mission of the Diocesan 
Auxiliary of the Cathedral of St. John the 
Divine, and a director of the Music School 
Settlement. 
A scholarship in memory of Mrs. Gregory 
Training and Industrial School for Colored 
Youth at Bordentown, N. J., by the Federati
the degrees of Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Divinity in 1907. He was president 
and valedictorian of his class and the winner AURELI o O EDUARD f three gol O BERMUDE d medals foZ wa r oratory s . 
1908 he matriculated at the College of Physiciansbor an n in thd Surgeons e Province, i onf Chicago Colon, Augus , and wa t s 
graduated in 1912 with honors. 
In 1913 Dr. Ross married Miss Pearl F. 
Thomasson, of Chicago, and during the year 
they sailed for Porto Rico, where Dr. Ross 
did interne work at Yauco. He practiced 
medicine in the United States from 1915-'18; 
then he was appointed Medical Missionary 
to Liberia by the Board of Foreign Missions 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Under 
his administration the College of West Africa grew from an enrollment of 250 to and only Negro Captain on the Isthmus. -356. In collaboration with Mrs. Ross, a 
Y. W. C. A., a Y. M. C. A„ and an athletic 
association were established, being the first 
of their kind in Liberia. 
1, 1893. He joined the police force when 
fourteen years of age, being the youngest 
member of that body, and became attached 
to the Bureau of Investigation. He is 
known as the only finger-print expert in 
Central America. 
In 1912 Mr. Bermudez was appointed 
Chief of the Investigation Bureau of the 
City of Colon, with the rank ofSub-Lieutena
promoted to the rank of Lieutenant, last 
October. In January of this year he was 
appointed Captain of the InvestigationDepa
"Fifty years ago, David JonathanPhi
""THE late Mrs. Musette Brooks Gregory College and the Pharmacy School of the of Newark. N. J., was a prominent 
26 A.URELIO E. BERMUDE Z 
DR. DAVI D J. PHILLIP S 
TH E LAT E DR . SAMUE L J. ROSS 
CHARLE S F. M. BROWN E 
TH E LAT E MRS . MUSETT E B. GREGOR Y  
 
28 THE CRISIS 
Dr Dr. Harvey A. Murray Dr. T. E. Stevens Dr. Douglas B. Johnson , Darrington Weave r 
I N St. Louis, Mo., Dr. Darrington Weaver 
Public Hospital, in Kingston, and wasappointedresident dispenser at the Falm
received the appointment of CityPost-M
Public Hospital. After three years he resigned per year fro . Dr. Weave m Governmen r was bor t servic n in Hearne e and establishe
, 
Spring. He came to the United States and Texas, December 31, 1889. He was graduated fro 
enrolled, in 1894, at the Medical Chirugical 
College of Philadelphia, from which he was 
graduated in 1898, as the winner of the 
Spencer Morris Special Prize of $100 for the A MEMBER of the Board of Health at 
best examination in medical jurisprudence Wilmington, Del., is Dr. HarveyAl
and toxicology. He passed thePennsylvania staff of the Babies Medica' Hospita l State Boar l and
d Da Examination y Nursery. ,m
time. Then he studied in Canada, where November 8, 1891. He is a graduate of the he was graduated from the Medical School Medical School of Howard University, 1913. of the University of Bishop's College, taking with first honors the degrees of M.D., 
CM. Later, in London, he passed the examination of the Royal College of Surgeons 
and Physicians, and was awarded the degrees of M.R.C.S. (England), and L.R.C.P. 
(London). He has served as assistant physician at the Royal South London Opthalmic 
Hospital and as an assistant at the Royal DR. T. E. STEVENS was born in Tuskegee, A
Victoria Nose and Throat Hospital. In graduated from Meharry Medical College. 
1917 he was elected a member of the City In Tennessee, he has served as a member of 
Council of Kingston. the Board of Health, at Jellico, and of the 
Board of Aldermen, at Cleveland. 
In 1914 Dr. Douglas B. Johnson was graduated from 
College of Medicine. He passed the Virginia 
was born February 19, 1888, in Petersburg, 
Va., where he was one of the founders of 
the William A. Crowder MemorialHosp
in America and abroad. Dr. Johnson is a 
Whil member of the Visiting Staff of the Harlem Hospe in Philadelphia, Dr. Phillips was New York City. resident physician at the FrederickDouglassMemorial Hospital and chairma 
the Board of Trustees of Zion Baptist 
Church. He was a founder of the Banneker 
Building and Loan Society, and is still its 
president.  
 
 
 
 
 
The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
My Race 
MY life were lost, if I should keep A hope-forlorn and gloomy face, And brood upon my ills, and weep 
And mourn the travail of my race. 
Who are my brothers? Only those Who were my own complexion swart? 
Ah no, but all through whom there flows 
The blood-stream of a manly art. 
Wherever the light of dreams is shed, And faith and love to toil are bound, There will I stay to break my bread, For there my kinsmen will be found. 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, in his 
"Wings of Oppression." * * * 
Lyman Abbott writes in The Independent 
of Booker T. Washington: 
Only once did I ever know him to "let 
himself go." This was at the graduating 
exercises at Hampton Institute. He and I 
The speaker's task was a difficult one. He had to stand at one side between the two audiences and play the part of Mr. "Facing- Both-Ways." Mr. Washington turned first 
toward one, then toward the other, of the two audiences as he spoke. He appealed to the members of his race to secure the eloquent portrait of what the race had done since emancipation to justify self-respect 
he swung himself around as on a pivot and, speaking with unaccustomed vehemence to the white portion of his audience, cried 
out: "I tell you, we are as proud of our race as you are of yours." It was like a flash from a before silent and supposedly 
unloaded gun. How the Negroes on the platform cheered him! 
* * * 
America's Making News tells of the piece 
mummy with hands upraised, symbolizing 
the self-emancipation of that race from 
ignorance into educated, self-reliantcitiz
is being modelled at the artist's Boston studio and will be life size. 
Mrs. Fuller is a pupil of Rodin and was educated at the Philadelphia Academy of Fine Arts. 
FAR FLUNG PROPAGANDA 
EVEN Denmark has been penetrated by 
anti-American Negro propaganda. The 
"Birth of a Nation" has lifted up its ugly 
lying head in Copenhagen. Fortunately for 
us Edward Franklin Frazier, who is now 
studying at the University of Copenhagen, 
was there to protest and to publish the 
main facts of Reconstruction in theCopenh
Mr. Frazier protests against thehistor
A young American student of Negro descent,
spoke on that occasion on the same platform. fellowshi Tep senio of thr clas e America s certainly—i n Scandinavia f my n memory serves me right, all the Institute Foundation (Niels-Poulsen Foundation), students—were gathered on this platform, has sent us the following: wnile the visitors, mostly white, were seated upon the floor of the great building. I write the following criticism of the film, "The Birth of a Nation," merely in the defense of truth. The film might be allowed 
to pass as any other piece offictionlacking-realism but 
substantiation and its veiled attack upon a righteous cause and the race that benefitted 
by the triumph of that cause. respect of their white neighbors, not by 
After the recent World War the South, fearing that the Negroes because of their part in the struggle would thereafteres
Klan. Even in the Southern States the idea of a secret organization dispensing 
justice was opposed by some citizens. In the city of New York the police were ordered 
Klan as other criminals. In spite of this opposition an attempt was made to popularize
educative force in America—the moving 
picture. Where the picture was shown, riots generally resulted not only because of the resentment on the part of Negroes but also because of the infuriated ignorant 
whites. The picture is barred from some cities while in other cities it is only permitted real artistic setting, this picture has come 
of art to be exhibited by Meta Warrick Fuller to Europ at th e toe
 poiso cominn thg exposition e minds o, "America' funsuspec
s 
Making." 
Mrs. Fuller is now at work on a commission given by the Negro Group. She. is designing a statue which will be in the centre of the Negro exhibit, showing a fem
figure emerging from the wrappings of a 
29 n 
s 
 t
 
 
30 THE CRISIS 
The most serious indictment against the certain positions in order to free themselve 
picture is that it falsifies history and glorifies from foreig thne tutelage most notoriou . s band of crimin
in American history. Congressionalinvestigations Such was the basi provec ide d thaa ot thf ea K first u Klu Pan x Kla - n a dangerous band of criminals bent on murdering African no Congres t onl s hel y innocen d in Parit Negroe s in 191s9 bu ant als a 
conscientious whites, who sought to erect presided over by M. Diagne, the French 
political institutions on the ruins of the Deputy from Senegal andhighCommissioner 
slave oligarchy. Nowhere can one find there were present at these meetingsdel
either in written records or tradition the over the glob e great majority of the 
crimes charged in the picture againstNegroes delegates came, however durin , frog thm Americ e Reconstruc
a 
never dominated the legislature of any where there are at present 12 millions of 
state during the Reconstruction Period. Negroes emancipated 60years ago who, 
Only once and then for only two years in aided by the United States, have continued 
the Lower House in South Carolina did the to work out their intellectual, economic and 
Negroes outnumber the whites; the ratio political emancipation. There are several 
being 3:2 and not as the picture charges financial institutions in America, founded 
more than 5:1. Laws permittingintermarriage and run by Negroes could no , andt th have fortun e beene passe of the d b
Negroes even then, for the whites always blacks in the United States is estimated at 
had an overwhelming majority in the Upper Chamber 5 billions. A. Th simila e pictur r developmen e does not ha t shos take w n 
the fact that Negroes established the first place in the intellectual and educational 
free public school system in the South. Nor fields. Negroes have created over there, aw
do we find in it the fact thatsuffrage—restricted—was noant grante d evend a th universit e Negroeys attende untild th onlye b Sout v h 
subterfuges as: A Negro found without members of their own race so that today 
suitable employment shall be hired preferably to the America his former n Negroe master s hav for e reall hisyaccom
board
and lodging; and a Negro impudent to a white by word or gesture is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be returned to his 
master on the same terms. 
These colored men, to use a currentexp
the world, and who found themselves during of a sacred cause, finally felt the desire to found a native organization—that is to say, they asked themselves what, after all, was their original country, and if they should not lay claim to it and show that by their efforts to emancipate themselves, they had 
conquered the right to aspire to the obtainm
had not been, as it were, allowed to Griffith's other play was barred, I understand, because it gave offense to Germany. But, alas! the Negro is the defenseless victim of lies and can only appeal to the conscience of mankind. I address these remarks to the good people of Copenhage
because the world has suffered so much by This original country, according to them, ignoring the mandate of the Man who said is Africa. Hence this Pan-AfricanCo
nearly 2,000 years ago: "Ye shall know the in Paris revealed the means of civilization truth and the truth shall make you free." and of emancipation possessed by these colo
The movement is very interesting to FROM BRUSSELS study. Those who are engrossed with the THE Belgian L'Exportateur Beige writes question of the future and the evolution 
of the sessions of the Pan-AfricanCongress o held in Brussels. Rayf
f a race that was formerly rather badly 
treated and—as History tells us—for a translates: long time held in the bonds of slavery are beginning to have that idea. 
After contributing with their well-known The promoters of the first Congress are 
courage and self-sacrifice to the operations planning to hold a second session in Brussels. 
of war that finally assured once more the maintenance of threatened civilization, the Negroes, fighting in the ranks of the various CONCERNING allied armies, began to reflect in the MOB VIOLENCE different parts of Europe where they were The Indianapolis News of Indiana tells in contact with a way of living and of organizing life totally unfamiliar to them, and said to one another, that it would perhapsus: be well to study, in their turn, the means of creating a mode of living similar One cannot read the papers even in the to that in Europe and at the same time most casual way without being impressed of qualifying themselves to fulfill, like the and shocked by the growing popularity of whites, certain functions and to occupy lynch law in this country. Whether the and feathered, burned at the stake or hanged, the act is, in essence, lynching­THE LOOKING GLASS 31 
though perhaps not technically so. For it 
is the execution of a sentence passed b: , 
those who have no right to pass it, and the 
"law" enforced is nothing more than the 
will or whim of those who set themselves 
up as the guardians of what is supposedby the guardians—to be the public welfare. 
* * * 
To which the Rochester, N. Y., Herald 
adds: 
Racial rancor and anciently implanted 
antipathies are not peculiar to any section 
or limited by climatic or political boundaries, if recent happenings are to be taken 
as evidence. Even the rockribbed conservatism of New England seems not to be proof 
against the lynching fever when the neces 
sary incentive is applied. 
* * * 
The Buffalo, N. Y., Evening Times gives 
us the following thoughts on mob violence, 
and points out the way to stop it. 
The "authorities" in the various communities seem to be paralyzrd with fright 
or incapacity, and indeed in some instances 
show a disposition entirely in sympathy 
with the mobs. 
The thing is getting to be a fashion. Custom soon becomes law. It is a serious situation; but it raises a question still more 
serious,—are we degenerating as a people, 
or are we merely showing ourselves in our 
true colors? The war has torn the masks 
from many nations. Is its influence divesting us of a masquerade? 
Whether these queries are answered in 
the affirmative or the negative, one thing 
is certain—this wave of lawlessness could, 
and can, be stopped forthwith by those who 
have been sworn to uphold the law. If the 
President of the United States were to issue a proclamation denouncing "lynch law" 
and directing the Attorney General's Department to pursue and punish with merciless severity within the Federal jurisdiction every person convicted of participation 
in such outrages, and if the President would 
further appeal to the Governors of the various States to follow his example with similar proclamations and direction? to the 
District Attorneys of all counties in the 
different Commonwealths, the cowardly and 
dastardly "lynching parties" would instantly seek cover after the fashion of such 
gregarious assassins. 
* * * 
Through the Herald, of Erie, Pa., we 
learn: 
Massachusetts and Tennessee, a northern 
and a southern st'-ite, have just been furnishing commendable illustrations of how 
to prevent lynching. They have both demonstrated that mob violence cannot prevail 
where the constituted authorities are possessed of the moral courage and the will to 
suppress it. 
Barnstable and Knoxville were fortunate 
in the possession of resolute officials at a 
time when courage and resolution were 
most needed. In the Massachusetts case 
the mob displayed the usual mob characteristics and cowered when it saw itself opposed by armed authority. At Knoxville 
a little blood-letting was found necessary, 
but the mob did not stand for much of it 
and has probably learned its lesson. 
Promptness and energy in the suppression of lawlessness is always effective. Indecision and a disposition to compromise 
with the mob spirit always encourages violence. 
Knoxville and Barnstable have furnished 
two excellent examples of law enforcement 
which will have the unqualified approval 
of all who believe in American ideals. 
* * * 
Further, we read in the Cincinnati, Ohio, 
Commercial Tribune, these encouraging 
words: 
In the matter of lynch law and mob execution in protection of women from the 
menace of brutish baseness there has just 
been given an expression by southern women that is at once illuminating and inspiring. The emanation is in form of a state 
ment issued from a special section of the 
Georgia State Committee on Inter-Racial 
Co-operation. The membership of this section, it is stated, is composed entirely of 
southern women. The statement reads: 
We believe that no falser appeal can be 
made to southern manhood than that mob 
violence is necessary for the protection of 
womanhood, or that the brutal practice of 
lynching and burning human beings is an 
expression of chivalry. We believe that 
these methods are no protection to anything 
or anybody, but that they jeopardize every 
right and every security that we possess. 
That is a preachment in behalf of orderly 
observance of law founded on a principle 
«-i<f>t adhered to «s here set forth, cannot 
but bring about rigorous, righteous enforcement of law. It is an appeal from lawless 
r.ess to law, from the specious argument of 
curing violence by violence of the sound 
argument of insuring immunity under law 
by referring all crimes and misdemeanors 
to adjudication through law. 
This may be womanly intuition of which 
we are wont to prate. It is essentially womanly intelligence sensing right which 
alone is cure for wrong. 
* * * 
The Brooklyn, N. Y., Eagle, observes: 
It is a pleasure to note that women as 
women, even Georgia women, are tired 
of what has camouflaged the lynching terror for half a century. 
Former Governor Hugh Dorsey, whose 
manly attack on Judge Lynch was univer 
sally applauded by right-thinking persons, 
seemed to have been beaten down by the 
reactionaries when Hardwick became Governor and the executive policy was changed. 
But this new development gives fresh illustration to the proposition that right conduct 32 THE CRISIS 
and true speaking are never without permanent effect, no matter how unpopular 
for the moment. The State of Georgia will 
be brought close to Dorsey's position if 
these energetic women keep up their work. 
And to the material industrial interests of 
Georgia no greater service can be done 
than the establishment of fair play to the 
Negroes, on whose skilled and unskilled 
labor the State must long depend. 
THE VOTE 
I N the Call of New York, we read: 
We have had occasion the past year or 
two to call attention to the changing political conditions of the South as a result 
of the increasing importance of capitalist 
production in that section. We have pointed out that the Republican party has been 
gradually dumping its Negro traditions to 
win the support of the southern oligarchy 
Today the views of the party as formulated 
by Lincoln, Sumner and Seward have been 
practically repudiated. If these men were 
to return today they would find a rapidly 
increasing coalition of the Republican party 
with the southern ruling class and that the 
terms of the coalition are the sacrifice of 
the Negro. Over his prostrate body the 
ruling classes of two sections make peace. 
A dispatch to the Evening Post from 
Richmond, Va., shows that the bargain is 
being consummated. It is agreed by the 
Republicans of that state that they are to 
be a "white man's party." More significant 
still is the statement: "It is understood 
that this innovation meets with entire approval at Washington." This means that the 
bargain with southern Democrats has the 
approval of the national Republican leaders. Negro Republicans were barred from 
the Republican Club of Richmond by the 
police when they sought to participate in 
the election of delegates to the state convention. 
"In exchange for the loss of its Negro 
auxiliaries," we read, "the Renublicans in 
Virginia have gained the suptiort of manv 
men of influence and wealth." Amon g 
these are railroad presidents, hankers, capitalists and business men of R:
chmond, Norfolk, Lynchburg and other cities. In short, 
the Republican aggregation is admitted to 
be a consolidation of catrtalist wealth and 
power. It is to maintain an unwritten 
agreement with the Democratic carry for 
the complete exclusion of the Ne°r o from 
elections. The agreement frees the ruling 
class of Virginia from dependence upon 
one political machine. 
On° congressional district has been carried by the Republicans for a number of 
years and the Republican vote has boen 
srowine in other districts. The Republican national committee has already taken 
steps to eliminate the Ne?ro from its councils and Republican conventions with the 
exnectat;on that a "lily white" Republican 
parfv will increase in power in the South 
All this follows the marked economic 
changes of the last half century which are 
slowly transforming the South into an image of the capitalist North. It. indicates 
the sweep of capitalist production to the 
Gulf. The old political traditions of Lincoln and other early leaders of the Republican party are being abandoned and the 
bargain consists of the complete social, eco 
nomic and political degradation of the Negro workers of the South. It also carries 
with it a similar degradation for many 
hundreds of thousands of white workers 
who are excluded from the franchise by 
various exception laws. 
The last semblance of difference between 
both political parties in national politics 
is being wiped out. Capitalism is national 
and its parties at last become national in 
scope. The Negro Republican leaders who 
have led masses of Negroes to their betrayal are themselves being kicked in the 
face for their treachery. A final chapter 
in the orientation of the two-party machine 
of capitalism is being written for the instruction of the working class of all colors 
and degrees of economic servitude. 
THE SOUTH AND "MR." 
T N an article in The Christian States­
* wan, the Hon. Bolton Smith of Memphis, 
Tenn., has this to say: 
The white people in every locality of the 
South should get in close touch with the 
conservative local Negro leaders. They 
should grant all possible requests coming 
from them for the improvement of the 
schools and living condit:ons of their people and for their protection in person and 
property. Such leaders should be encouraged to speak with frankness to local 
white leaders of the conditions of which 
their people complain and fault should not 
readily be found with them for what they 
may say to their own people. If we think 
them mistaken we should reason with them, 
not threaten them. If they are not allowed 
a certain freedom in their intercourse with 
their people, we cannot expect them to 
have influence with them. W e must begin 
to show, in our address to the Negro leaders for whom we feel respect, some of that 
respect we should show to the most ordinary members of our own race. A Negro 
leader of standing and character is entitled to be addressed as Mr., and his wife 
as Mrs., for in our own tongue we have no 
other title of respect. W e do it now :n correspondence and I believe we must do it in 
speech. This will be difficult to many of 
us, but I can see no other course if we 
hope to maintain relations of genuine sym­ ;
pathy with these leaders. This s the only 
civilized country in the world in which all 
Negroes—high and low—are addressed 
alike. In other lands it has been the effort to so treat the Negro leader that 
he would side with the white man's government. The difficulty of our problem has 
been increased by our failure to do this AMERICAN NEGRO MINISTERS AT THE ECUMENICAL COUNCIL OF METHODISM. IN LONDON, 
With portraits of Bishops Coppin, Smith and Jones; Secretaries Hawkins and Wright; Dr. W. S. Scarborough; Mrs. J. F. Hurst; and others. The Horizon 
COMPILE D B V MADELIN E G . ALLISO N 
MUSIC AND ART 
STUDENT S of Myrtilla Miner Normal 
School, Washington, D. C , have presented a pageant, "The Beckoning Spirit," 
which depicts the history of their school. 
The work was under the direction of J. 
Francis Gregory of the English Department. 
(i Granville L. Stewart, tenor, Louie V. 
Jones, violinist, and William S. Lawrenc e 
pianist-accompanist, have been making ; 
tour of towns in Nova Scoti i. Numbers 
that have particularly pleased their audiences are "Reflection," taken from Dunba 
by William S. Lawrence; "Rising Sun," by 
R. Nathaniel Dett; and Negro "Spirituals,' 
by H. T. Burleigh. 
G Elmer C. Bartlett has given an orgar 
recital at First A. M. E. Church, Los Ange 
les, Cal. His program included works i 
Bach, Coleridge-Taylor, Guilmant, Dubois 
and Horatio Parker. 
(I Mayor Hylan's Committee on City Music, in New York City, included the Negro in its presentations. The 15th Regiment Band and Revella E. Hughes, soprano, 
rendered numbers, among which were 
Tchaikowsky's "1812," Arditi's "A h Wondrous Morn" and "II Bacio," and Coleridge 
Taylor's "Explanation." 
C Mamie Smith, the colored "jazz " singer 
for phonograph records, has filled a 3-day 
engagement at the Regent Theatre, Baltimore, Md., where she was paid $1,000 per 
day. 
EDUCATION 
THE Atlanta School of Social Sen-ice is 
conducting its 2nd session at Morehouse 
College. Courses lead to secretaryships of 
associated charities, anti-tuberculosis associations and Urban Leagues; probation and 
attendance officers; recreation directors and 
welfare workers in churches, Y. M. C. A.'s, 
Y. W. C. A.'s and industries. 
G Mildred D. Brown, a colored girl in Jersey City, N. J., has entered Lincoln High 
School at the age of eleven. 
C Colored high school students in Brooklyn, N. Y., have organized the Alplm Chi 
Sigma Fraternity in the interest of higher 
scholarship. William A. Hunton, Jr., is the 
secretary. 
C Governor Hyde has released $100,000 for 
the erection of a dormitory at Lincoln 
University, Jefferson City, Mo. 
G The State Board of Education has voted 
to discontinue secondary work at West Virginia Collegiate Institute. Units of work 
now include colleges of education, engineering, agriculture, industrial education, arts, 
science, home economics and business administration. Messrs. F. C. Sumner, Ph.D., 
psychology; A. P. Hamblin, B.S., biology; 
.and E. L. Kelly, B.S., home economics, have 
been added to the faculty. The president 
is John W. Davis. 
G A t the University of Chicago, H. Councill Trenholm has been awarded the degree of Bachelor of Philosophy with honors. He is a member of the Alphi Phi 
Alpha Fraternity. Mr. Trenho'm will teach 
at the State Normal School in Montgomery, 
Ala., this year. 
C Meta L. Christy, a colored girl of Kokomo, Ind., has received the degree of Doctor of Osteopathy from the Philadelphia 
College and Hospital for Osteopathy. 
C Walter L. Smith has been appointed to 
succeed Garnet G. Wilkinson as principal 
of Dunbar High School in Washington, 
D. C. Mr. Smith is a graduate of Howard 
University. He has been a teacher in 
Washington since 1902. 
C Prof. Roscoe C. Bruce, formerly Assistant Superintendent of Colored Schools, in 
Washington, D. C , has accepted the position of Rural Supervisor of Schools in 
Huntington, W. Va . His salary is $3,000 
a year. 
Cl Fort Dearborn Hospital and Training 
School for Nurses has been opened in Chicago, 111. Negroes may enter fo r nurse 
training and interneship. 
34 THE 35 HORIZON 
C Since the beginning of the present school 
session, 15 rural school houses have been 
opened for Negroes in Tennessee. Julius 
Rosenwald contributed $50,000 toward financing this work. 
C The Colored High School at Lynchburg, 
Va., opened this term with a Negro faculty. 
Many former students, who had dropped 
out while white teachers were in charge, 
have re-enrolled. 
(I John W. Lee has been awarded a scholarship at the University of Pennsylvania. 
C By making Grade A average, Charles 
H. Houston, a Negro law student at Harvard University, has automatically become 
one of the editors of the Harvard Law Review. His average, 75 percent, is the highest ever made by a colored law student. 
C Estella Lovett has been appointed Assistant Principal at the Booker T. Washington School in Kansas City, Mo. Miss 
Lovett was formerly Girls' Work Secretary 
at the Paseo Branch of the Y. W. C. A. 
C. In Washington, D. C , the Dunbar High 
School opened this year with an enrollment 
of 1,267 as against 1,120 last year; the 
Armstrong Manual Training School report* 
an enrollment of 731, an increase of 242; 
at the Shaw Junior High School there are 
319 students as compared with 215 on opening day last year. 
(I Charles Chandler, a Negro student in the 
Yal e University Law School, has been appointed a contributing editor of the Yale 
Law Journal. 
MEETINGS 
OVE R 8,000 people were in attendance 
at the National Baptist Convention, 
Inc., which was held in Chicago. Dr. E. C. 
Morris, of Little Rock, Ark., was re-elected 
president. The Rev. Mr. L. G. Jordan resigned the secretaryship, after 26 years' 
service. He was made secretary emeritus 
with a salary of $1,200 per year and a purse 
of $2,500. Dr. J, E. East, a returned missionary from Africa , was elected to succeed Mr. Jordan. The financ'al report 
shows $323,860 raised during the year. Dr. 
Morris denounced the plan of northern 
white Baptists to set up regional organizations among Negroes. 
C The Lott-Carey Foreign Mission Convention and the Women's Auxiliary have been 
held in Newark, N. J. The sum of $38,000 
was raised for work in Africa, South America and Haiti. Dr. C. S. Brown and Mrs. 
J. H. Randolph, of Richmond, Va., are pres 
idents of the convention and the auxiliary. 
C More than 300 delegates attended the 
8th triennial convention of St. Joseph's 
Aid Society, which convened in Jersey City, 
N. J. The organization has 100,000 members and property valued at $100,000; its 
cash balance is $50,000. Dr. Thomas H. B. 
Walker, of Jacksonville, Fla., is president. 
C Four thousand people attended the Baptist Convention, unincorporated, which was 
held in New Orleans, with Dr. E. P. Jones 
presiding. Dr. R. H. Boyd, corresponding 
secretary of the National Baptist Publishing Board, reported that more than $225,­
000 had been collected by the Board. With 
the addition of the National Baptist Theological Seminary and Training School at 
Nashville, worth $250,000, the publishing 
plant is valued at $750,000. 
INDUSTRY 
THE Square Deal Realty & Loan Company, a Negro enterprise in Kansas 
City, Mo., is conducting departments in real 
estate, insurance, mortgage loans and home 
building. Its capital of $250,000 is fully 
paid and non-assessable. It is paying quarterly dividends of 8 percent. Samuel R. 
Hopkins is president. 
C At Buffalo, N. Y „ the Haitian-African 
Coffee Company, a Negro concern, owns a 
4-story building where colored people are 
employed in roasting and blending coffee. 
C Mr. R. S. Cobb, secretary of the Missouri 
Negro Industrial Commission, has published 
a bulletin on housing and health conditions 
in Missouri. 
C A Negro clerk in the Jersey City, N. J., 
Post Office, Robert Evans, has been promoted to the position of statistician. 
C Among employees in the Department of 
Finance of Jersey City, N. J., are the following Ne<rroes: James Tate and Clarence 
Jones, rent inspectors; Gilbert Brown, jitney inspector, and Louis Faulkner, deputy 
sheriff. 
C In Akron, Ohio, Norman Kerr is a stenographer in the Engineer's Office, being the 
first Negro clerk in this office. 
(I Zova E. O. Tinsley, a blind Negro in 
Muskogee, Okla., owns 45 miles of telephone service. He has 49 subscribers who 
pay from $2.50 to $3.50 per month. Mr. 
Tinsley does his own line work, repairs instruments and makes installations. 
C Fourteen years ago, Charles Copper, a 36 THE
Negro, entered the Civil Service of Chicago, 
111., as a junior clerk. He now holds a 
position in the Division of Pipe Yards and 
Stores, with 17 clerks, 13 of whom are 
white, under his charge. 
C Up to April 30, 1921, the colored Berry 
& Ross Manufacturing Company, in New 
York City, made a net sale of $37,312; it 
paid to its colored workers, $14,560. 
0 The report of the Laborers' Penny Savings and Loan Company, in Waycross, Ga., 
shows that during the fiscal year ending 
August 31, 1921, the paid-in capital had 
increased from $28,811 to $47,463; deposits, 
from $68,318 to $97,060; total resources, 
from $107,705 to $149,677. The bank owns 
$16,025 worth of real estate, $7,301 in stock 
and Liberty Bonds, and has no bills payable. A dividend of 8 percent was declared. 
The officers are: Carlton W. Gains, president; Dr. H. C. Scarlett, vice-president; J. 
C. McGraw, treasurer; and O. R. Harper, 
cashier. 
C William A. Cornelius, a Negro in New 
York City, has been appointed to a clerkship in the Office of the Collector of Internal Revenue. His salary is $1,600 per 
year. 
C In the City Tax Office in Philadelphia, 
Pa., there are 2 colored deputy delinquent 
tax collectors, 2 deputy collectors, 7 senior 
grade clerks and 2 janitors. 
CRIME 
THE following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Aiken, S. C , September 8, Mansfield 
Butler, shot; attacking woman. 
Aiken, S. C , September 8, Charlie 
Thompson, shot; attacking woman. 
Columbia, La., September 13, Gilman 
Holmes, burned; attacking ticket agent. 
Pittsboro, N. C , September 18, Ernest 
Daniels, hanged; attacking woman. 
McComb, Miss., September 19, Edward 
McDowell. 
POLITICS 
NEGROES have for the first time been 
appointed to the Hudson County, N. J., 
Board of Election. The appointees are Mrs. 
Florence Jerome, Mrs. Rosa Frazier, Miss 
M. Goldsborough, Mrs. Ella Barksdale 
Brown, Dr. G. Warren Hooper, C. Bion 
Jones and Alderwin Thomas. 
C In the primary election in Baltimore, 
two Negro Republicans won nomination as 
 CRISIS 
delegates to the Maryland Legislature. The 
nominees are Attorney Arthur E. Briscoe, 
who has served a clerkship in the Legislature, and David Robinson, a business man. 
Each candidate was fourth on his district 
list, with 1,148 and 1,700 votes, respectively. 
C Amos W . Scott, a Negro in Philadelphia, 
won Republican nomination for City Magistrate. 
(I In the primary election in New York 
City, two Negro members of the Board of 
Aldermen—Dr. Charles H. Roberts and 
George W. Harris, were re-nominated. 
d Negroes in Louisville, Ky., have organized the Lincoln Independent Party. A full 
city and county ticket, with the exception 
of the judiciary, will be put into the field. 
FRATERNITIES 
IN Jacksonville, Fla., the Progressive 
Order of Men and Women has held its 
first Grand Congress. The Order, which 
was organized 10 years ago, has a membership of 1,500. Dr. H. W . James, Dr. John 
E. Ford and Professor N. W . Collier are 
officials, and the Hon. Mr. George E. Taylor is general organizer. Amon g measures 
adopted by the Congress is the erection of 
a $100,000 temple. 
C Masons in Indianapolis, Ind., have laid 
the cornerstone of a $100,000 temple. 
C The mortgage on the Masonic Temple in 
Jacksonville, Fla., has been burned. The 
temple is valued at $500,000. Mr. O. D. 
Powell is Grand Master. 
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE 
THIRTEE N meetings to promote health 
educational plans were held last month 
for ministers, physicians and leaders of 
public thought in Chicago by the Chicago 
Urban League. Dr. Ralph B. Stewart, of 
the United States Public Health Service, 
and Franklin O. Nichols, of the American 
Social Hygiene Association, were the speakers. 
C T. Arnold Hill, Executive Secretary of 
the Chicago Urban League, is serving as a 
member of the Executive Committee of the 
Unemployment Conference formed to handle unemployment in that city. 
C Through the Armstrong Association of 
Philadelphia, affiliated with the National 
Urban League, an athletic director for girls 
at the Durham Public School has been appointed. Besides her athletic work with THE HORIZON 37 
girls during the period allotted for recreation, she is developing self-governing clubs. 
C The Home and School Vistors, formerly 
employed by the Armstrong Association as 
a demonstration of the possibilities of 
school visiting, have been taken over by the 
public school system—thus justifying the 
experiment of the Armstrong Association. 
d In the neighborhood of one public school 
in Philadelphia, which has about 1,400 colored pupils, the work of a Home and School 
Vistor has resulted in the establishment of 
one of the best equipped day nurseries in 
Philadelphia, the Harrison Day Nursery. 
It has accommodations for 70 children. 
C The Mayor's Unemployment Committee 
of New Yor k City has as one of its members, James H. Hubert, Executive Secretary of the New Yor k Urban League. 
C The "Fellows " appointed by the Nationr 
al Urban League for the school year 1921­
22 are: T. Lloyd Hickman, graduate of 
Denison University, assigned to the New 
York School of Social Work ; Miss Katherine B. Watts, graduate of Fisk University, 
assigned to the New Yor k School of Social 
Work ; and Miss Myrtle D. Hull, graduate 
of Spelman Seminary, assigned to the 
School of Economics of the University of 
Pittsburgh. 
C The Annual Conference of the National 
Urban League was held in Chicago, October 
19 to 22. Amon g subjects discussed were 
unemployment, the Negro migrant, plans 
for recording and interpreting statistics as 
a basis for practical social effort, industrial 
relations and co-operation between the 
races. 
(I The Department of Research and Investigations of the National Urban League, 
of which Charles S. Johnson is the director, 
has completed a social survey of the Negroes in Flushing, L. I., and is now at 
work on a similar study in Hartford, Conn. 
It is working under the immediate auspices 
of the Mayor's Americanization Committee. 
C As a result of the child hygiene work 
which is being done in Newark, N. J., by 
three colored nurses appointed through the 
efforts of the New Jersey Urban League, 
Dr. Julius Levy, Director of the Bureau of 
Child Hygiene, reports that infant mortality among colored babies for the first six 
months of 1921 was 106 per 1,000 births, 
while for 1920 it was 173 per 1,000 births, 
and for 1919 it was 171 per 1,000 births. 
This is a reduction in one year of 67 points. 
d Dr. George E. Haynes was appointed a 
member of President Harding's Unemployment Conference, following protests of the 
National Urban League and its branches 
against the omission of Negro representation. Dr. Haynes was assigned special 
work with the Committee on Community 
Civic and Emergency Measures in dealing 
with unemployment. Col. Arthur Woods, 
of New York, is chairman of this committee. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
THE Reconnaissance Francaise, a bronze 
medal, has been awarded to Dr. Harriet A. Rice by the French Government for 
services in the French military hospitals 
during the world war. Dr. Rice is a Negro 
graduate of Wellesley College and of the 
Women's Medical College of New York. 
(I Victor R. Daly has been appointed to 
the staff of the Journal of Negro History, 
in Washington, D. C , as business manager. 
Mr. Daly is a graduate of Cornell. He 
served as a Lieutenant in the 367 "Buffalo" 
Regiment. 
C Mrs. E. D. Cannaday, a colored woman 
of Portland, Ore., has been admitted to the 
Bar. She recently pleaded a case in Judge 
Morrow's court and won her action. 
(I New York City has its first Negro detective sergeant, in the person of Wesley Redding. Mr. Redding has been connected with 
the Police Department 18 months. 
C A tablet in memory of Hayward Sheppard is to be erected in Harper's Ferry, 
W. Va., by the Daughters of the Confederacy. Mr. Sheppard, a Negro porter, was 
the first person killed in the raid of John 
Brown. 
(T The price of business property which 
Dr. Charles E. Herriot purchased in St. 
Louis, Mo., is $30,000 instead of $80,000. 
d Mr. C. G. Williams, of Booneville, has 
been appointed Inspector of Negro Schools 
in Missouri. 
C The 25th anniversary of the Northeastern Federation of Colored Women's Clubs 
has been celebrated in Baltimore, Md. 
Miss Elizabeth Carter, of New Bedford, 
Mass., is president. 
d In the national tennis championship meet, 
Tally Holmes, of Washington, D. C , won 
in men's singles, defeating Dr. O. B. Williams, of Chicago. The scores were 6—4, 38 THE CRISIS 
9—7, 6—3. In the women's singles, Miss 
Lucy Slowe, of Washington, D. C , defeated Educat e You r Gir l a t 
Miss Isadore Channels, of Chicago. Tally 
Holmes and Sylvester Smith were victors 
in the finals of the men's doubles. The 
mixed doubles championship went to Miss 
Esther Hawkins and Harold Freeman. Ted 
Thompson won the national junior title. 
d Miss Bessie Coleman, a colored woman 
of Chicago, 111., has become a certified aviatrix, after a course in aviation at the Condrau School in France. 
C Charles S. Gilpin, the Negro star in Eugene O'Neill's "The Emperor Jones," has 
been received in private audience by President Harding. 
C At its recent session in Milwaukee, Wis., 
the Army and Navy Union elected John E. 
Smith, a Negro of Washington, D. C , as 
national historian. The vote was 149-17. 
C John H. Pride, a Negro in Elizabeth, 
N. J., is the winner of the 50 target merchandise event of the Duane Gun Club. 
Mr. Pride broke 49 clay birds out of a possible 50; he had two competitors trying for 
second honors, with 47. In a 100 target 
match, Mr. Pride broke 97 birds. 
C Samuel A. Barnett has been awarded a 
verdict of $100 against the Philadelphia 
Confectionery Company of Hackensack, N. 
J., for discrimination. 
C Earl Johnson, a Negro athlete, of Braddock, Pa., won the Masonic marathon race 
in Detroit. He finished 22% miles in 2 
hours, 17 minutes and one-fifth of a second. 
C Frank R. Willis, a Negro poultryman, 
won the Grand Championship at the Kentucky State Fair, defeating 3,850 fowls of 
all breeds for the honor. 
(I The "Committee of One Hundred" to entertain visitors to the conference on the 
Limitation of Armament, to be held in 
Washington, D. C , has the following Negro members: Messrs. Emmett J. Scott, 
D. W. Wiseman, W. L. Houston, George 
Cook, Henry Lincoln Johnson, W. A. Warfield and James A. Cobb. 
C The African Progress Union of London. 
England, gave a public reception to Dr. W. 
E. B. DuBois, September 29, at the Portman 
Rooms, Baker Street. Dr. John Aleindor 
presided. 
C A pageant on the history of the Negro 
race called "The Open Door " will be given 
in New York City, November 22, at Carnegie Hall. It is for the benefit of Atlanta 
University. 
The National Training 
School for 
Women and Girls 
Lincoln Height!, Washington, D. C. 
Among the best schools for women and 
girls in the United States. 
The School that develops CHARACTER and PERSONALITY. We fill 
our students with a burning desire to 
go out into the world and make not 
only a LIVING but a LIFE. 
COURSE S 
6th, 7th and 8th Grades, Normal Preparatory 
and Normal, Music, Business. Domestic 
Solenoe and Arts 
Social Servloe 
Beauty Culture Physical Culture 
Ideal Location High Grade Teachers 
Thorough Training 
SEND FOR CATALOG 
Nanni e H . Burroughs, President 
Prairie View State Normal 
and Industrial College 
Offers short courses in Auto Mechanics, Battery Repair, Acetylene Welding, Ignition and Vulcanizing. 
For full information address: 
Division of Mechanic Arts 
Prairie View, Tex. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 191 acre*, fourteen building! Di­ rect railroad connections. 
The only school of its kind In historic Northern Virginia State standard Four-Tear High School Course Advanced Grade School. BualneM and Trade Course*. 
High moral standard*. Prepare* boy* and girl* to 
become useful men and women; term* reasonable. 
For Information addrsas 
EDWARD D. HOWE, Principal 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studie s o f th e Negr o Problem s 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY " ATLANTA, 
Mention The Crisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
MISS 
MADELINE 
ALLISON 
Shopper 
CHRISTMA S is onl y tw o 
months! Remember those last 
days of shopping last Christmas? 
An d the clerks who didn't care—? 
Well, let me do your Christmas 
shopping for you this year in 
New York . Hurr y up and write 
me. 
Address : Room 622 
70 FIFTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK, N. Y. (Refers by permission to the Editor of the "Crisis.") 
25,000 Agents Wanted 25,000 Men and women, be your own boss and earn $5.00 
per day and more, handling- our line of goods. 
Over 100% profit, sells in every home, fast seller, 
sure repeater. Agent's outfit free to start with. 
DIXIE SALES AGENCY 3161 So. State St. CHICAGO 
STUDENT S We would like to secure the services of 
students during the school term to act as agents 
—taking subscriptions and selling single copies 
of 
The CRISIS Liberal commission is offered 
Address: A. G. DILL 70 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK. N. Y. 
XMAS CALENDARS WITH BEAUTIFUL NEGRO SUBJECTS 
SAMPLES FREE TO
Your own Picture or Picture
Neatly Adjusted to fit
MR. BUSINESS MAN:—One of
to each of your customers, with
PbOM tastefully printed on them, will be enthusiastically 
appreciated. Resides, it will keep you and your business 
continually before them, day and night, throughout the 
entire year which, of course, is the most valuable kind Of 
advertisement—you know that.—A sufficient line to select 
from. WRITE TO-DAY. 
WITH NEGRO AR T BLOTTER S SUBJECTS 
Tffl JUS T OU T 
Beautiful Jlrrjro CalrnOarg 
MERCANTILE CALENDAR COMPAN Y 
Calendar Fans and Blotters 
Colored Ad.eriismg Novelties 
Knarnel Surfaced Any Cut Can Be Used 
Assortment of Pictures 
A wtmdirful advertising medium—Knables you to "Put Your 
Message Across" many times a day. No particular season 
for blotters. They can he distributed any time. 
MERCANTILE CALENDAR CO. S2 5 T ST. , N . W . WASHINGTON , D . C . 
NO AGENT S 
 BUSINESS MEN 
 of your Business can be 
 Our Art Borders. 
 these Calendars presented 
 your Name. Business and 
Holiday Suggestions 
TH E CRISIS Calendar for 1922 will be a "Negro Home s Calendar"—containing 
pictures of attractive homes in the possession of Negroes in this country. Price 
50 Cents per copy. Ready Dec. 10, 1921, 
Yo u can make no better gifts to your friends than good books. Consult the 
inside back cover page of this issue of TH E CRISIS for suggestions and prices 
and send your orders early. 
Is it a Holiday Gift to a friend? Then make it a year's subscription to TH E 
CRISIS. Subscription is $1.50 per year. AS A SPECIA L OFFE R we will send 
a year's subscription free to anyone sending us A T ON E TIM E five paid up 
yearly subscriptions to TH E CRISIS. This offer holds good until 31 December, 
1921. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 40 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
DARKWATER OR 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
A human document of extraordinary intensity 
and insight, and dealing with the place of the 
darker races in the modern world. The book 
contains as a frontispiece a good picture of 
Dr. Du Bois. The book is selling like wild 
fire. Price only $2.00 postpaid. Satisfaction 
guaranteed or money refunded. AGENTS 
WANTED. Send 60 cents for outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 
Book and Bible Publishers, 
Washington, D. C 
A SOCIAL HISTORY 
OF THE 
AMERICAN NEGRO By 
Benjamin Brawley 
Author of " A Short History of the 
American Negro," etc. 
Here is the first formal attempt to 
review the life of the Negro people in 
connection with the life of the nation, 
It is a social and political estimate of 
the contribution which the Negro race 
can make to America. 
Professor Brawley writes earnestly 
and honestly of his people, and his book 
is valuable both from a historical standpoint and for a more complete understanding of the mind and mission of the 
Negro race. 
$4.00 
Special Section on Liberia 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E The only establishment dedicated to collecting 
and distributing the history and literature of 
the African and his descendants. Books out 
of print a specialty. 
135 WEST 135th STREET 
NEW YORK , N. Y . 
HERBERT C. MILLAR. M.A., B.S.. 
of Asbury Park, N. J., says: 
-THE SCIENTIFIC SIDE OF THE NEGRO 
PROBLEM, by HAROLD E. SIMMELKIAER, means a new Race leadership. It 
should be in every home." 
COPIES 2 5 CENTS 
GEO. R. JORDAN. Pub.. 219 E. 88th St., 
New York. N. Y. 
A MUM L T bETTER D«.»u» e 11 l» A CROWD SETTER 
Churches and Clubs looking for • play that will afford ar> 
.tenths of Side Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention As entertainment III one act; full of wit 
tnd good humor. Scores of churches ha,e cleared from 
Ons to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE 60. 
MISS NANNIE H BURROUGHS, Author r
i p.f.i . H.loht* Washington O.
STUDENTS! PUBLIC SPEAKERS! Literary Criticism and Revision for Writers and Speakers 
We also assist in the writing of material for Special Articles. 
Manuscripts. Theses. Sermons. Essays, Orations and One Act 
Plays. These are expertly prepared (typewritten) papers. 
Proficient, scholarly service. 
Address: John A. Martin, Secretary, 
?220 Sixth St.. N. W. Washington. P. C. 
AGENTS WANTED 
For a high grade line of Calling Cards, Business Cards, 
Invitations. Social Stationery, etc Big demand everywhere. 
Liberal commissions. Prompt deliveries. Write for samples 
and terms. 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNING. INDIANAPOLIS. IND 
IMPROVE YOURSELF 
HELP OTHERS I 
Easy. pleasant, dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 50c in 
stamps for membership, sup 
plies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Tou Si N. W.. Wash., D. C 
Borrow Books by Mail 
An y published—from the 
Universal Library 
224 Tremon t St., Boston, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED 
GRADUATE NURSES 
and 
BUREAU OF INFORMATION 
For Colored Graduate Nurses 
Central Headquarters 
317 West 138th St., 
New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Audubon 5602 
MME. G. B. NEEDLES 
FINE FURS 
FUR GARMENTS MADE TO ORDER 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyelng 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y . 
Telephone Morningside 7590 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E 41 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FARMS IN 
MICHIGAN 
Make Ideal Homes 
Where You Will Enjoy 
Splendid Schools 
No Segregation No Lynching 
Good Roads 
Civil and Political Rights 
Peace and Plenty 
MICHIGAN WANTS YOU 
W e have Ten Thousand Acres of excellent, new, hardwood, farming lands 
for sale at from TE N to FIFTEEN 
DOLLAR S PER ACR E in parcels of 
forty acres or more. Eighty acres 
make an ideal Farm Home. 
These lands will be allotted to applicants in the order they are received. 
All land guaranteed as represented. 
Peaches, pears, plums, apples, berries and small fruits, melons and all 
kinds of garden produce are raised 
abundantly. 
Fowl, pigs, sheep and livestock thrive. 
For further information apply to: 
MICHIGAN LAND & HOMESTEAD CO. 325 Broadway Market Building 
DETROIT - - MICHIGAN 
Fill out and mail this blank today. 
Michigan Land & Homestead Co., 
326 Broadway Market Bids., 
Detroit, Mich. 
Gentlemen: Please send to my address 
full particulars about your Michigan Farming Lands proposition. It Is understood tha t 
I Incur no liability in making this application. 
Name 
P. 0. Address 
State 
H O M E S 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L. S. REED 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA, N. Y . CIT Y 
Telephone 348 
HOTEL MARY ELIZABETH 
(A New Hotel) 
W. B. SAWYER. Proprietor 
Nearest colored Hotel to Business center of Miami 
PRICES REASONABLE 
SPECIA L RATE S TO HOTE L ME N 
Wil l be opened Nov. 1st, 1921 
Cor. 7t h St. , N.W. 2nd Ave. MIAMI, FLA. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L. JONES , Pre.. 
641 W . 9th St. Cincinnati. Ohio 
Service Engineering and Construction Company 
HERMA N E. PERRY, W . P. TERRELL , 
President Vice President and Chief Engineer 
Architects Engineers Constructors 
Residences, churches, office and school 
buildings, industrial plants 
180 Auburn Avenue ATLANTA, GA. 
Mention T H E C RISI S 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ENROLL NOW! 
DERRICK BUSINESS SCHOOL ONLY SCHOOL OF ITS KIND 
SHORTHAND , TYPEWRITING , BOOKKEEPING , OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
SAVE TIME AND MONEY DORMITORIES. $2.50 PER WEEK BOYD'S 30-DAY SYSTEM 
M. J. DERRICK, Principal and Manager ___ _ 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping Business Law 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th STREET PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
(Started 20 years ago) 
The Oldest and Best Equipped Business School in South 
Philadelphia. 
Real Estate, Business Organizations and Financing—Graduates Making the Highest Averages Are Placed in Businesses 
Organized By the School. 
It is th3 Popular School of Business Efficiency. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President. 
LEARN TO TYPEWRITE 
W e teach you by mail how to 
use a typewriter without looking 
at the keys. 
Only i o Easy Lessons. 
Diplomas Awarded. 
IMPERIA L CORRE ­
SPONDENC E SCHOOL , 
Bo x 3173 Washington, D . C . 
D O YO U LIK E 
Do you like to draw? 
Unlimited Opportunities 
lor men and UJomen 
Become a Commercial Artisl 
An Uncrowded Profession 
Mike Illustrations tot Advermiou 
BIG FIELD GOOD PAi 
Tuition Reasomblr 
For information, u-rile at once to 
TH E KEYSTON E SCHOOL OF COMMERCIA L AR T 
f o»nt-sfo-.i>[vct OOMM «*j' N SfVMtllj S.r«t Phtlidelphti. 
Water's Mechanical Evening School 
Courses of instruction 
Automobile Construction Automobile Driving Mechanical Drawing Mechanical Mathematics 
JOH N F. WATERS , Principal 
739 Bainbridge St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. Est. 1916. Capitalized $75,000 
$50,000 common, $25,000 &% preferred. 
Oldest Film Corporation in the World Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
1121 CENTRAL AVE., LOS ANGELES 
Cleota Collins, Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artittic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORGE LACY, Manager, 
156 Hamilton Avenue Columbus, Ohio 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Organist-Director of Music of St Marks M. E 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching, 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
Itadlo: tSO W. 138th It., New York, X. Y. 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
Refined young woman alone in the world would like 
to make her home with a refined elderly couple where 
interest would be exchanged. References as to character. Address P. O. Box 147, Johnstown, Pa. 
Tel. 6417 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
A TTOSNI Y AN D C OUNIXLLOI-AT -L A W 
•4 School Street Boston, Mass. 
SWEATE R FRE E 
Fine Serge Pants iflKSJp 
BARGAIN JEl L V7
A°L°UE NOW $09 § i If 
>«-> h
KWFATF.K 
i Postage fmKm Paid m OHHH 
SEND NO MONEY Here is one of the biggest values offered to readers of this paper. Will send this splendid pair of serge panta and with it this fine Bweater FREE--without asking for one cent with the order. PANT S are made of extra quality blue 1
 serge, well tailored In every way. Extra heavy pocketing, all seams serged, no raw edges, bar tacking, strong belt straps. Waist 30 to 44, inside seam length 30 to 36 inches. Be sure to give inseam length. SWEATE R we give free Is 
made in the popular Shaker Knit, of commercial wool yarn, V-neck style. COLOR—Khaki. SIZES—36 to 46. 
GE T A SWEATE R FRE E 
Just send your name and address, giving sizes wanted. We'll send both pants and sweater by parcel I post prepaid. You pay mailman when delivered. Your money back if not pleased. Here Is 
positively a big $7.00 value for only $3.98. Send — 1
 NOW as the number of SSf.S, No 191 C55. free sweaters U limited. 
HOWAR D LU X CO. . DEPT . 191 CLEVELAND . 0. 
| 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 4;! 
CONSTELLATION FILM CORPORATION 
28 West 44th Street, New York, N. Y. 
OFFERS $200,000 CLASS A STOCK 
Registrar Transfer Agent 
HARRIMAN NATIONAL BANK CENTRAL NATIONAL CORPORATION 
New W k New York 
Authorized Class A Stock par value $10 per share; To be Outstanding $200,000 Participating and Preferred as to dividends up $100,000 
to 10'< , full-paid and non-assessable. 
OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS 
President Vice-President Vice-President 
MADISON COREY CHARLES W. ANDERSON ROBERT J. RAYSON 
Formerly General Manager, Former Collector Internal Edw. G. \Y. Ferguson & Co Henry W. Savage Enterprises. Revenue, New York City. Inc., New York City. Director 
REV. DR. W. W. BROWN 
Secretary & Treasurer Pastor, Metropolitan Baptist Director 
EDW. G, W. FERGUSON Church, New York JAMES F. ADAIR 
Pres., Edw. G. W. Ferguson Director District Grand Secretary 
& Co., Inc., Pres. Central EDW. STAATS LUTHER Grand United Order of Odd 
National Corporation. Fellows in America Political Editor 
The Morning Telegraph 
An enterprise, devoted to the utilization of the racial talent, unprejudiced, free from propaganda, giving the fullest possible outlet to the literature of the Negro race, to its elevation and the 
picturization of its brightest side. 
The following is quoted in full from a letter by Mr. Charles W. Anderson, ex-collector of Internal Revenut-, New York City, who is a Vice President The following is quoted in full from and Director of Constellation Film The following is quoted in full from a letter by Reverend Dr. W. W. Brown, Corporation: a letter by .lames F, Adair. District Pastor of Metropolitan Baptist Church, Edw. G. W, Ferguson & Company, Inc. GRAND Secretary, Grand UNITED Order New York, a Director of the Company. New York. X. Y. of Odd Fellows in America: Edw. G. W. Ferguson & Company. Inc. Dear Sirs: Edw. G. W. Ferguson & Company, Inc. 
New York, N. Y. In response to your request, I am New York. N, Y. glad to give you my op.nion of ConGentlemen: stellation Film Corporation. 
In join ng the Constellation Film There is a decided field and need Gentlemen: 
Corporation organization I did so with for a concern that can and will sup­ As a Director of Constellation Film 
a full realization of Its importance to ply the Negro with motion pictures in Corporation, I have no hesitancy in 
our people. The race should ha v it* which his own people play the parts— asserting that the enterprise is worthy pictures that are clean, inspiring, un­ of the fullest support of the Colored own picture producing unit, it should 
hare inspiring, clean, up-to-date pro­ prejudiced and t hat depict life as it Race, since its work will be elevating, is and the Negro In his true char­ educational, and will materially ad­ ductions in which our own performers acter, a patriotic man and a worthy­ vance our people and their interest. display their talents and it should have citizen. an outlet for Its own constantly increasing literature. The Class A security, having a I believe the (lass A Stock of the preferential claim on earnings up to Company to BP an exceedingly good The News Service will likewise be of 10<7 should be a highly profitable r END high YIELDING investment and that the greatest importance. Investment. the Company will be honestly and effi­ I therefore have no hesitancy in The enterprise is worthy of the full­ ciently managed. recommend1
!!'* the enterprise to the est support and will have my entire sympathy and co-operation. fullest extent. Very truly yours, Very trulv yours. As an Officer and Director of the James F. Adair. Rev. Dr. W, W. Brown. Corporation. I will see to it that the enterprise is efficiently and honestly managed, and that its ideals are maintained. Vcrv truly yours, 
Charles W. Anderson. 
TH E CLAS S A STOC K of Constellation Fil m Corporation 
is entitled to earn 10"f
 in dividends in each year. 
Hi , C a s i s A Stock, par value $10.00 per share, is offered at par, $10,00 per share. 
The allotment offered for sale is limited to $100,000. 
USE THI S COUPO N 
Edw Eupene Davidson & Co. . G. W. Ferguson & Co. Inc. Offered and Recommended by 2354 Seventh Ave.. 28 West 44th St., New York, N. Y. New York, N. Y. 
I enclose Dollars in payment for. 
shares of Class A Stock of Constellation Film Corporation. 
Name . 
Address 
City . . . 
Mention T H E C RISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Recent Recordings of 
Black Swan Records 
ALL MADE BY COLORED PEOPLE 
HIGH CLASS 2012 J WIT H THE COMING OF TOMORROW Revella A. Hughes 
85c (A H WONDROUS MORN Soprano 
2009 j MORNING Harry A. Delmore 
86c (MACHUSHLA Tenor 
2015 S SORTER MISS YOU Marianna Johnson 
85c I THE ROSAKY Contralto 
2013 ( SINCE YOU WENT AWA Y J- Arthur Gaines 
85c (WH O KNOWS Tenor 
DANCE NUMBERS 2026 ) GYPSY BLUES (From Shuffle Along) Henderson's Novelty 
85c ( SWEET LADY Orchestra 
2014 j PRETTY WAYS Black Swan Dance 
85c (THERE AIN'T NO NOTHING Orchestra 
2004 ( MY MAMMY Black Swan Dance 
86c ( BRIGHT EYES Orchestra 
MALE QUARTETTE 2016 ) AIN'T IT A SHAME The Four Harmony Kings 
86c ( GOODNIGHT ANGELI"E of "Shuffle Along" 
BLUES 2010 ( DOWN HOME BLUES Ethel Waters 
85c (O H DADDY and the Jazz Masters 
2021 i THERE'LL BE SOME CHANGES MADE Ethel Waters 
85c (ONE MAN NAN and the Jazz Masters 
2018 ( WHEN IT'S TOO LATE Katie Crippen 
85c (M Y CUP BLUES Singer of Blind Man Blues 
2008 ( HOW LONG SWEET DADDY BLUES Alberta Hunter 
85c (BRING BACK THE JOYS Chicago, 111. 
2017 ( A LITTLE KIND TREATMENT Georgia Gorham, 
85c ( BROADWAY BLUES Montgomery, Ala. 
No Matter what kind of records you have been buying, 
you will find BLACK SWA N RECORDS, made by a Colored Company, sung by Colored People, the equal of any 
record made, barring none. Buy one and you will buy 
them regularly. 
MAD E BY 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
257 W. 138th Street New York, N. Y. AGENTS WANTE D IN EVER Y COMMUNIT Y TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
NATIONAL CAPITAL CODE OF ETIQUETTE 
Combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PART i 
A Book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, in­ structive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored Society leaders on the street; at tke Theatre; at Church; in the Home; at Recep­ tions, Balls, Parties, Weddings, Dinners, etc., etc. The illustrations are so perfect and natural that the well bred, correctly clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any and all occasions; correct dress for men and women; suggestions in colors and materials for the ladies; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, etc., for both sexes. 
What to serve your guests at breakfast, lunch or dinner. How to converse intelligently; how to know when to talk and when to remain silent; how to make friends and gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member of so­ ciety or the most humble. 
STORIES 
PART 2 
A wonderful collection of Short Stories for Young and Old. Stories that will hold your attention from start to fin­ ish. By the most famous colored writer of Short Stories in America. 
Stories of Adventure Stories of Pluck Stories of Bravery 6tories of Success Stories of School Days Stories of Great Hen 
Stories for Father, Mother or the Children. Funny Stones; Stories that will bring the tears to your eyes; Stories once started must be finished before laving aside the book. Hand­ somely illustrated—pictures that seem to live throughout the story. 
A Boo k yo u will want—Mus t hav e in 
you r home— A mos t excellen t gift 
Over fifty pages of pleasing pictures taken from best photographs. A BIG BOOK, con­ taining over 400 pages. The people are much pleased with this new publication and are sending thousands of orders to us. Order to­ day. We send by insured parcel post; re­ turn your money if not perfectly satisfied. Price ONLY $2.50. Write today. 
Illustrating Table Manners 
Agent s Wante d We are looking for iooo hustlers, men 
and women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 to $9 per day. One agent made 
$21 the first day. Such an opportunity comes but once in a lifetime. 
AGENTS' SAMPLE showing specimen 
pages and the pictures and covers of book 
will be mailed to you for 25 cents. It 
represents exactly the complete book. 
Send 25 cents for agents' outfit to-day. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . ^i&^lT Z 
Send for free catalog of 160 books 
Mention The Crisis. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MADE . T O YOU RORDER 
pants $1.95 
N O EXTR A Postage Prepaid CHARGE S 
• W E MAK E this special 
ben d n O offer fo r 30 days, to 
0
AlOllC V rov e p the wonderfu l 
value, style an d FIt of 
Progress tailoring. W E will tailor to 
you r special order, a pair o f these 
stylish $6.00 pants, send the m to yo u 
postage prepaid an d guarante e TW O 
years' solid WEA R or mone y back fo r 
only $1 .95 . 
Agents Wanted-^3.™ 
EVER Y WEEK , TAKING ORDERS FROM YOUR FRIENDS 
AND NEIGHBORS FOR OUR HIGH CLASS TAILORING. 
N O EXPERIENCE NECESSARY. 
Big Sample Outfit FREE 
DROP US A LINE TODAY AND WE WILL SEND YOU ABSOLUTEL Y FRE E OUR 
BIG ASSORTMENT OF WOOLEN SAMPLES, STYLE BOOK AND SPECIAL WHOLESALE PRICES ON OUR MADE-TO-MEASURE SUITS—$12.45 UP AND MADE-TOMEASURE PANTS—$1.95 UP. FULL DETAILS OF THIS OFFER SENT free . 
TH E PROGRESS TAILORING CO. , dept. L-1 7 CHICAGO , 111. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 47 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
GOING FAST! 
ACT QUICKLY IF YOU WANT 
ORCHARDVILLE LOTS 
at $29-59 eac h 
$3.00 DOWN AND $1.50 A MONTH This offe r is meeting with GREA T The location of Orchardville is ideal 
SUCCESS . Peopl e fro m AL L and everybody who has been there so 
OVE far has expressed himself or herself as R TH E COUNTR Y are tak­ being HIGHL Y PLEASE D with every­ ing advantag e o f it, and the deman d thing. That is why the demand for the for the lots is INCREASIN G B Y lots is increasing so fast. LEAP S AN D BOUNDS . This offer should receive your careful Th e lots are size 30 x 144 feet each and consideration because it may be just have plenty of room for a house, gar­ what you have been looking for. Yo u 
den, chicken yard, etc., besides a few can get all the details by simply writing 
fruit trees which can be planted later your name and address plainly on the 
on. Each lot is sold under a MONE Y coupon below and sending it to us 
BAC K GUARANTE E and the title to RIGH T AWAY . W e will then send 
the property is ABSOLUTEL Y you booklets telling you all about it. 
MAI L TH E COUPO N TODAY . CLEAR. 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL. WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSON REALTY DEV'PT CORP. Date. .19*.. CHICAGO, ILL. 
Gentlemen:.— _. . . _ , . . . 
I would like to receive all the detail! regardlnt your new lot offer, without any obligation on my part. 
Name 
.Town and State. Address 
CRI-N-O-11-21 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 48 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
OUR LATEST CATALOG WILL BE 
MAILED TO YOU UPON REQUEST We are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAI R GOODS who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME . BAUM , by the most skillful artists in the 
0 trade. s 
o Try Mme. Baum"s Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made M 
< of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using n 
H 
t- them. < 
1 
it 
o Mme. Baum'i Bob 
v. gives the appear, 
w ante of wearing the 
hair bobbed, but t- makes cutting un­ K necessary. Mad e 
i of strictly Supreme 
Quality huma n 
hair, with natural 
waves, sawed on 
Velve t Ribbon, 
fitted with three 
tuak Comb s to 
hold aecuro. lb 
all shades. Prlee. 
15.50. 
Agent s Wante d 
I n Ever y 
Tow n an d 
Locality . 
GOO D PA Y 
Catalog Free 
THE EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG. CO. 
316 N . Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY , OKLAHOM A 
BLUET S COR N AN D 
WAR T REMED Y 
puts new life in your feet. 
Write for free sample 
bottle. Also wholesale 
price. Regular price, single bottles. $.25. Write 
to-day. 
Blue's Corn Remedy Co. 
1323 N. Mervine St.. Philadelphia, Pa. 
ii 
O 
We carry the largest selection of Hair­ • 
dressers' Tools and Accessories. > 
o 
e MME o . BAUM' S r 
> 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE 
80
Our Factory is Located at 
 FOURTH AVE. NEW YORK, N. Y. 
Whan writing, mention this paper. 
COSMOS LABORATORY 
Manufacturing Chemist Consultation and Research, Specialist in Perfumery and Toilet preparations. Let me solve your prob­ lems, perfect your formulas, or furnish you with any formula. Analysis made. Fees are reasonable for practical and reliable advice. 
Address C. D. Campbell, Analytical Chemist, P. 0. Box 204, Dept. B., Newport, Rhode Island 
WANTED AT ONCE Few live agents! Hustlers! To sell excellent new line; Cold Creams, Perfumes, Toilet Waters, Hair Growers, Oils and Pomades. Fine chance for Col­ lege Students, spare time work, 100' t
 profits. Address Chemical Cosmetic Co., Dept. C, Box 204, Newport, R. I. Send 2c stamp for agent's confi­ dential price-list. 
We'll Give You a Doll 
A 13-inch Kewpie Doll—unhreakahle. fine finish, 
pretty expression, silk costume, natural hair and 
veil. Stands alone. Children everywhere "tickled 
to death" with it. Sell one dozen QUINO face powder. The doll is yours FREE. No money required. Write QUINO, Dipt. D, Nashville, Tenn. 
INDOO R TOILET 
Shipped on approval. Write for remark­ able rock-bottom factory offer on the famous and genuine COMFORT Indoor Toilet, Save one-third now Highest (Trade; gray enam­ eled: absolutely odorless. Chemicals consume contents and germs. Easily cleaned. 
AGENTS: &ritS *5 I*™8^•?£IaBi '
8
 territory. IWH I v. Wonderful opportunity to coin money. 
ROBINSON HOUSEHOLD MFQ. CO. 732 Factorial Bldq. Tolado, Ohio 
Mention T H E C RISIS. 111 """" " " " " H " " 'IMlUllMIIIUIlMDUUIIUUUlUlllUIIUUIIUUUIMIUlliUlllllllUll 
A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONAR Y 
FORCES . (Hunton and Johnson) $2.5 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgi a Douglas 
Johnson) 1.2 5 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.5 0 
TH E SOU L OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.0 0 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amo s Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson ) 1.1 0 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence ) 2.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.2 0 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexande r Walters) 1.5 0 
U NSUNG HEROES . (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.5 0 
TH E SHADOW . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford). . 1.0 0 
TH E VOIC E OF TH E NEGRO . (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.5 0 
NEGRO CULTURE I N WES T AFRICA . 'Georg e W. Ellis) 3.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E. B. D U Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGRO PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson ) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.7 5 
DARKWATER. (W . E. B. DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E. KrehbieD 2.0 0 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe ) 2.0 0 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y Beautiful 
white teeth 
MADA M C . J . WALKER' S 
ANTISEPTIC DENTAL CREAM 
IS TH E SECRE T s and a slimy film are the great contriutions to decay. You r Dentist will tell you that * 
is not enough to merely clean the teeth 
and ordinary dentrifices will not preserve 
them from decay. Madam C.J.Walker's 
tiseptic Dental Cream keeps the j 
saliva alkaline, which counteracts acid-mouth, prevents^ 
slimy film, the formalicious, tion of tarter and 
purifies the effective germicide breath. and mouth wash for 
Cleansing, Polishing and Preserving the teeth. 
of Agents and at Drug Stores. 
^ ^ ( ^ M Or. 6-4- 0 NORT H WES T STREE T 
INDIANAPOLIS,lND. t U.S.A. Makers of Mme. C J. Walker's Wonderful Hair Grower. 