The Crisis 
SEPT 191 7 10c 
FRAN K 
WALTS President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H . GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
DR . J. E. SPIXGARN , Chairman of Board 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR . W . E. B. D U BOIS , Director of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR . C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR . F. N CARDOZ O 
Springfield , Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washington 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brooklyn 
DR. V . MORTO N JONE S 
DR . O. M . WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR . WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
Ne w Yor k 
REV. HUTCHINS C. BISHOP 
MRS. FLORENCE KELLE Y 
PAUL KENNADAY 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSEL L 
ARTHUR B. SPINGARN 
CHARLES H. STUDIN 
DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
LILLIAN D. WALD 
WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLIN G 
ENLIST ! 
With Memphis and East St. Louis fresh in our memories, 
we know that the fight for humanity and democracy abroad 
is not more important than the fight for humanity and 
democracy at home. 
Enlist now in the N. A. A. C. P. Your support was never 
needed more than now. 
Date , , 1917. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollan or more. 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer. 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street a 
$ City and State 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S DOUBLE EAST ST. LOUIS NUMBER-EDITION 43,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E 
BURGHARD T DU BOIS ; AUCUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for September, 1917 
PICTURES 
COVER . Blanche Deas, of the Negro Players. A study from life by 
Frank Walts. 
TH E MASSACR E OF EAS T ST. LOUIS 219-23 8 
TH E NEGR O SILENT PROTES T PARADE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 242-24 3 
DRAWING . By Laura Wheele r 24 8 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 25 7 
ARTICLES 
AGAI N IT IS SEPTEMBER . A Poem. By Jessie Fauset 24 8 
NEGR O SOLDIERS. A Poem. By Roscoe C. Jamison 24 9 
TH E SO CALLE D BLAC K PERIL IN SOUT H AFRICA . 
A n Article. By Alic e Werne r 24 9 
TH E RAGTIM E REGIMENT. A Story. By Henry Davis Middleton 25 2 
BLAC K SAMPSO N O F BRANDYWINE . A Poem 25 5 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIA L 21 5 
TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUIS. A n Investigation by the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 219-23 8 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 23 9 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 25 6 
TH E HORIZO N 25 9 
THE CRISIS for October 
Th e Octobe r Numbe r will be Children's Number. Picture s o f interesting children must reach 
us by Septembe r 1. N o picture s can be returned. Ou r Children's Numbe r is alway s on e o f the 
most interesting numbers o f the year. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS ; Th e date o f expiration o f each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due , a blue renewa l blank is enclosed . 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscribe r can be change d as often as desired. 
I n orderin g a change o f address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawing s relating to colore d peopl e arc desired. The y must be accompanied b y return postage . If foun d unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2 , 1910 , at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 212 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM, N. C. 
Open to Students of Either Sex. 
It is mor e than a mere school. It is a communit y at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections 
of the country in improved Negr o communit y life whereve r 
our trained workers locate. 
Th e following departments are already in successful operation: Teache r Training, Industrial, Literary, Academi c and 
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Househol d 
Economic s and Departments of Music. 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed by any School for 
the Education of Negro Youth in the South. 
The next term opens Monday, October I , 1917. For catalog and detailed information, address 
President, JAMES E. SHEPARD, 
DURHAM NORTH CAROLINA 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
Twenty-fourth Annua l Session. 
Fall term begins Sept. 1, '17. 
Thre e Strong Departments: Ag ­
ricultural, Mechanical and Aca ­
demic. 
Short Practical Courses of 
Thre e Months; Maintained by 
the Governments of North Carolina and of the United States. 
Special training for teachers of 
vocational subjects. 
Board, Lodging and Tuition, 
$9.00 per Calendar Month. 
For Catalog and Further 
Information, address 
President Dudley, 
A . & T . College, 
Greensboro, N . C. 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
For reasonably matur e students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses ar e offered during the regular term in academi c 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and meta l working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges for the year 
$100. Fall term begins Wednesday , September 19, 1917. 
The Bummer School for Teachers, from 
July 6 to August 2 inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English, mathematics, 
history, civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and metal 
working, physical training, and gardening. 
Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
For further Information writ e to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , 
Principal, 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 213 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-eight years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For farther information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA, GA. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 19, 1917. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE. TENN. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texa s and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yal e and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La. 
Situated on the main thoroughfare of the 
largest city of the South. 
Thorough training in Hig h School, Teachers' Course and College, with special work 
in Music and Manual Training. 
Teachers represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
country. 
For full Information, address 
J. T. Cater, Registrar. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
TOUGALOO COLLEGE 
MISSISSIPPI 
"Th e best school for Negroes In the State"— 
Bishop Theodore D. Bratton. 
COLLEGE 
Regular Four Year A. B. Course 
Two Yea r Teacher Training- Course 
ACADEMY 
Choice of Seven Courses—College Preparatory, 
Agricultural, Mechanical, Hom e Economics, 
Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical. 
Out In the country. Expense s low. 
Four Prize Scholarships of $25.00 Each Offered Boys 
for Best Entrance Examinations to ninth Grade. 
For Particulars 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
Tougaloo, Hinds County, Mississippi. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring 
First Semester begins September 27, 1017. 
For further information address 
W . A. FOUNTAIN, President 1 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board, 
Mention The Crisis 214 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opens October 3, 1017. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
TH E WES T VIRGINI A 
COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE 
NEA R CHARLESTON, W. VA. 
One of the leading schools in the 
United States for the education of 
Negro youth. Healthful surroundings, 
fine dormitory facilities, expenses low, 
strong faculty. 
For catalog address 
BYR D PRILLERMAN, A. M., Pres., 
Institute, W. Va. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P . O . DRAWE R 52 4 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
HARTSHORN MEMORIAL COLLEGE 
RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
A superior school for the separate, higher education of young women. Select Courses of study, 
Industrial, Music, Preparatory, Classical, Normal and 
College. Provides a pleasant home, careful culture 
and thorough training. 
Expense s very moderate. 
Send for Catalog to the President. 
1867 Howar d
 191 7 
Universit y 
Stephen M. Newman, A. M., D. D., 
President. 
COLLEGE OF ARTS AN D 
SCIENCES 
A. B. and B. S. COURSES 
TEACHERS ' COLLEG E 
A. B. and B. S. Courses in Education 
SCHOOL OF MANUA L ARTS AN D 
APPLIED SCIENCES 
B. S. Courses in 
Engineering, 
Home Economics, 
Manual Arts. 
CONSERVATOR Y OF MUSIC 
Mus. B. Courses 
ACADEM Y 
Two Preparatory Courses: 
Classical, 
Scientific. 
COMMERCIA L COLLEG E 
Secretarial Course, 
Accounting Course, 
General Course. 
LIBRAR Y TRAINING CLASS 
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOG Y 
B. D. Courses, 
Diploma Course. 
SCHOOL OF MEDICIN E 
M. D. Courses in Medicine, 
D. D. S. Courses in Dentistry, 
Phar. D. Courses in Pharmacy. 
SCHOOL OF LA W 
LL. B. Courses 
For catalog, address. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY , 
Washington, D. C. 
Educational Institutions continued on page 266. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 14—No. 5 SEPTEMBER, 191 7 Whole No. 83 
Editorial 
TH E WORL D LAS T MONTH . 
THES E are days o f confusion 
and contradiction. — Russia 
reacts from her ecstasy of 
| last spring and retreats 
spent and demoralized. Will the blood 
and iron methods o f Kerensky be able 
to reinvigorate her?—Th e new German Chancellor Michaelis offers peace 
terms which no one can or will accept. 
—Th e Great Wa r drags on indefinitely.— Congress keeps Americ a from 
doing her bit.— In the name of world 
democracy we land black soldiers in 
Franc e to fight for our white allies, 
while white soldiers in East St. Louis 
kill black Americans for daring to 
compete in the world of labor with 
their white fellowmen.— China seesaws again from a monarchy to a republic and by her declaration of wa r 
adds to the world's embroilment.— 
Out o f all this chaos and confusion 
calm and readjustment must finally 
come . But no man can guess when or 
how. 
MOR E SUGGESTIONS . 
WE spoke last month of the 
great call for team work 
on the part of American 
Negroe s and the pressing 
necessity o f turning that team wor k 
toward helping us to earn a living. 
Toda y the wa y is open for co-operation among 12,000,00 0 people on a 
scale such as we have never dreamed. 
Wha t we can do is shown in little 
things. Ten thousand o f us marched 
the other day in Ne w Yor k City. 
Everybod y said it could not be done. 
The ways wer e lined with rabbits, 
afraid even to walk for freedom, and 
yet, solemnly and simply, the Negroes 
o f Ne w Yor k told the other citizens 
of New Yor k their grief and resentment. That is but a little thing. We 
can do infinitely more . We can organize for industrial co-operation and 
we can begin with co-operation in 
distribution. In every large city 
where 10,00 0 or mor e Negroe s live, 
the business of buying groceries, 
food, clothing and fuel can, by a 
single determined effort, be put into 
the hands of colored people. This 
kind of distribution has been successful all over the world. Little is said 
about it because the leeches that have 
fattened on retail trade are too 
powerful with the newspapers. Distribution of the necessities o f life can 
be easily done with a tremendous 
saving to the people and the employment of colored men and women. The 
only thing necessary is for us to start; 
and to start we simply require that 
the same spirit of devotion and sacrifice, coupled with brains and training, that has sent young men and 
women to the ministry and the Y . M. 
and Y. W. C. A. work should be 
turned now among us Negroes and 
be put into business. 
Whit e people are not in business 
for their health. We should be in 
business for our health and for the 
health o f the world. 
EAST ST . LOUIS . 
LET no one fear that in the 
economic development o f the 
American Negro East St. 
Louis is not a bubble. Its 
significance is simply the shame of 
American democracy and the utter 
impotence of its justice. Neverthe-216 TH E CRISIS 
less, despite this pogrom, engineered 
by Gompers and his Trade Unions, 
the demand fo r Negr o labor continues 
and will continue. Negr o labor continues to come North and ought to 
come North. It will find wor k at 
higher wage s than the slave South 
ever paid and ever will pay, and, despite the Trade Unions and the murderers whom they cove r and defend, 
economi c freedom fo r the America n 
Negr o is written in the stars. East 
St. Louis, Chester and Youngstown 
are simply the pools of blood through 
which w e must march, but march we 
will. 
PICTURES . 
THI S month we are publishing 
the first of an art series of 
six pictures which will 
be studies of the Negro 
types in the United States from 
life by Frank Walts. They will 
appear every other month for a year. 
If they are successful and our readers 
like them they shall then have more . 
We would be glad of criticism. 
Th e Octobe r CRISIS will be Children's Number. A s always, w e want 
pictures o f interesting babies. W e do 
not want merely pretty babies or 
babies all dressed up, but we want 
real, living, movin g children. Please 
see that the pictures arrive in our 
office on or before September 1. 
Hitherto w e have undertaken to return pictures sent us but this year 
we cannot. Send us a copy that you 
can spare so that we can keep it and 
use it to the best advantage. 
AWAK E AMERICA . 
LET us enter this wa r for 
Liberty with clean hands. 
Ma y no blood-smeared garments bind our feet when we 
rise to make the world safe fo r 
Democracy. The New Freedom cannot 
survive if it means Waco , Memphis 
and East St. Louis. W e cannot lynch 
2,867 untried black men and wome n 
in thirty-one years and pose successfully as leaders o f civilization. Rather 
let us bo w our shamed heads and in 
sack cloth and ashes declare that 
when in awful wa r we raise our 
weapons against the enemies o f mankind, so, too, and in that same hour 
here at home w e raise our hands to 
Heaven and pledge our sacred honor 
to make our own Americ a a real land 
of the free : 
To stop lynching and mo b violence . 
To stop disfranchisement fo r race 
and sex. 
To abolish Jim Cro w cars. 
To resist the attempt to establish 
an America n ghetto. 
To stop race discrimination in 
Trade Unions, in Civil Service, in 
places o f public accommodation, and 
in the Public School. 
To secure Justice for all men in the 
courts. 
To insist that individual desert and 
ability shall be the test o f real American manhood and not adventitious 
differences of race or color or descent. 
Awake ! Put on they strength, 
America—put on thy beautiful robes. 
Become not a bye wor d and jest 
among the nations by the hypocrisy 
of your wor d and contradiction of 
your deeds. Russia has abolished the 
ghetto—shall we restore it ? India 
is overthrowing caste—shall w e upbuild it? China is establishing democ ­
racy — shall we strengthen our 
Southern oligarchy? 
In five wars and now the sixth w e 
black men have fought fo r you r 
freedom and honor. Whereve r the 
American flag floats today, black 
hands have helped to plant it. American Religion, America n Industry, 
American Literature, America n Mu ­
sic and America n Art are as muc h 
the gift of the America n Negr o as 
of the America n white man. This is 
as much our country as yours, and 
as much the world's as ours. W e EDITORIAL 217 
Americans, black and white, are the 
servants o f all mankind and ministering to a greater, fairer heaven. Let 
us be true to our mission. No land 
that loves to lynch "niggers " can lead 
the hosts o f Almighty God. 
THE BLACK BASTILLE. 
THER E is in Paris a place 
where once a notorious prison stood—the Bastille. For 
many years from the beginning o f its erection in 1369, it lowered, a stronghold o f cruelty and 
despotism. But on one marvelous 
fourteenth of July, 1789, it was 
stormed by a furious and desperate 
populace, and not a stone is left to 
indicate wha t once had been. Instead, 
no w on that spot, a lofty column, the 
Column o f July, rears skyward its 
slender, beautiful length, a carven 
oriflamme o f that liberty, fraternity 
and equality which is in verity the 
pride o f France. 
An d so the Bastille perished. 
Moreove r the key wa s brought to 
Americ a and tendered by Lafayette 
to General Washington in gracious 
recognition by one democracy o f another. But here the similarity between the two countries ceases. Fo r 
since the fall o f the French stronghold there has been building in this 
democracy a tower, a fortress fully 
as iniquitous in its purpose as the 
ill-famed Bastille o f old. Throughout the length and breadth o f this 
land, yes, in the Nation's very capital, are men bent on putting the 
crowning touch o f infamy to this new 
and monstrous superstructure—the 
Black Bastille o f Prejudice. Ho w 
many victims have been thrust into 
its pitiless confines! Into it have 
gone the ideals o f the Pilgrim Fathers, the dreams o f the Abolitionists 
and President Lincoln, and during 
the wee k before the fourteenth o f 
July—the very anniversary o f the 
fall o f its stone and morta r prototype 
—the democracy o f a nation! The 
shadow of the Black Bastille lies always across the path o f us Americans. Turn where we will we cannot 
escape its gloom. In those old unhappy, far-off days the French populace demolished their Bastille's 
frowning reality with every conceivable weapon, stones, maces, pickaxes, halberds and their poor naked 
hands. America's course must be as 
theirs. We have no choice but to 
bring to the annihilation of this structure—so insubstantial and yet so 
real our all—determination, effort— 
grim, unceasing—money, time, tears, 
our naked bleeding hearts. 
A PLAN FOR THE SOUTHERN MIGRANT. 
THE prevailing drift of the 
migrating Negroe s is toward 
cities where probably it will 
be easiest for them to start 
in, but where segregation is most 
pronounced, competition fiercest, 
houses most unsanitary and exorbitantly expensive, allurements to 
every sort o f wrong-doing most vicious, and the chances for healthy progress toward a competence and ultimate independence the smallest. 
You r survey indicates that a large 
proportion of these migrants are 
from the rural parts of the South. Wh y 
should they not seek homes in the 
rural parts of the North? They are 
needed there. All good tillers of the 
soil are needed on northern farm lands 
as they never have been needed before 
in the history of the country. They 
are needed to help raise food crops, 
not only for this country, but for 
half a dozen other great countries on 
the brink of starvation. Crops command high prices and it seems about 
as certain as anything can be that 
such high prices, probably higher, 
are going to prevail for at least five 
years, till there shall be a readjustment of economic conditions 
throughout the world to restore the 218 TH E CRISIS 
unparalleled devastations of the war. 
Ho w plain it is then that the farms 
offer the best chances for these people wh o have grown up in the South, 
away from cities, in country homes, 
and with the habit of workin g in the 
ground and handling stock. Surely 
they must find themselves mor e at 
home there than in the Ghetto of Ne w 
York , Philadelphia, Cincinnati or 
Chicago. They must find the occupations mor e to their mind, such as 
they can take up readily and learn 
thoroughly, till they excel and get the 
best wage s for this sort o f work. 
Here on the farms, too, are the 
finest prospects fo r accumulating 
property and becoming independent 
landowners. Of course, it will be the 
best wa y to begin as a hired farm 
hand, for this is the path to acquaintance with the methods of northern 
farming and to friendly relations 
with the neighborhood where one is 
at work. But one should not rest 
satisfied with being a mere farm 
hand. He should make up his mind 
at the start to buy some land as soon 
as he has the money to pay for it, and 
this should be kept steadily in view, 
till he has a farm and a home of his 
own, legally made over to him and 
with no mortgage on it. An d this 
is no wild hope fo r a frugal, industrious man to entertain. There are today thousands of good farms in the 
back districts of the North under 
cultivation and having decent buildings on them that can be bought for 
half wha t it would cost to put up the 
buildings alone. Bargains without 
number can be found all over the 
North when you go from the villages 
a few miles. They are farms that 
wer e cultivated by influential well-todo people twenty or thirty years ago, 
and men and women wer e brought 
up there who are no w in positions of 
responsibility and powe r far away 
from their old birth place. 
But the chance is great for those 
wh o are willing and have had a training in farm wor k to fit them fo r it. 
Wha t finer opportunity could be 
offered to these Negr o farmers wh o 
are comin g up from the cotton fields 
out o f which they have been pushed 
by the boll weevil and other things 
worse ? The laws will protect them 
here. No one will question their right 
to vote. Ther e will be no threats o f 
lynching in these farmin g districts, 
howeve r it may be in some northern 
cities. They will find their children 
welcomed in school and themselves 
welcomed at church, side by side with 
other Christian families. 
Is not this a ripe opportunity fo r 
the continued and enlarged activities 
o f the Association fo r the Advance ­
ment o f Colored People ? 
G. S. DICKERMAN. 
PRIZES . 
A READE R complains that 
after offering a prize fo r an 
article o f two hundred 
words on the "Best Summe r 
I Eve r Spent " we gave it to an article 
of six hundred words. W e did. The 
reason wa s that on the day the competition closed there had been no two 
hundred wor d articles submitted that 
wer e at all worth publishing. W e 
deemed it, therefore, better to break 
our rule of length than our literary 
standards. 
The prizes, which wer e four in 
number, wer e awarded as follows: 
First prize, H. H. Thweatt, Thomasville, Ga. His essay wa s published in 
the August CRISIS. Second prize, 
Walter Edwar d Tibbs, Industrial 
College, Georgia. Third prize, Carrie 
Jameson, Milestown, Md . Fourth 
prize, U. Simpson Games, Washington, D. C. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
THE NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE , 70 Fifth Avenue , New York , sent Martha Gruening and W. E. Burghardt Du Bois to East St. Louis, 
as special investigators of the recent outrages. These two collected in 
person the facts and pictures from which this article is compiled. 
ON the 2nd of July, 1917, the city of 
East St. Louis in Illinois added a foul 
and revolting page to the history of all 
the massacres of the world. On that day 
a mob of white men, women and children 
burned and destroyed at least $400,000 
worth of property belonging to both whites 
and Negroes; drove 6,000 Negroes out of 
their homes; and deliberately burdered, by 
shooting, burning and hanging, between 
one and two hundred human beings who 
were black. 
Such an outbreak could not have been 
instantaneous. There must have been 
something further reaching even than an 
immediate cause to provoke such a disaster. The immediate cause usually given 
is as follows: On the evening of July 1, 
white "jo y riders" rode down a block in 
Market Street, which was inhabited by 
Negroes, and began to fire into the houses. 
The Negroes aroused by this armed themselves against further trouble. Presently 
a police automobile drove up containing 
detectives and stopped. The Negroes 
thinking that these were the "jo y riders" 
returning opened up fire before this misunderstanding was removed, and two of 
the detectives were killed. Some of the 
policemen were in plain clothes. 
One naturally wonders why should the 
white "jo y riders" fire in the first place. 
What was their quarrel with the Negroes? 
In answering that question we get down to 
219 
TH E MASSACR E OF EAS T ST. LOUIS. 220 THE CRISIS 
the real story. It is here we meet with the 
facts that lay directly back of the massacre, 
a combination of the jealousy of white labor 
unions and prejudice. 
East St. Louis is a great industrial center, 
possessing huge packing and manufacturing houses, and is, therefore, one of the 
biggest markets in the country for common unskilled labor. The war, by the deportation of white foreign workers, caused 
a scarcity of labor and this brought about 
the beginning of a noticeable influx of 
Negroes from the South. Last summer 
4,500 white men went on strike in the packing plants of Armour & Co., Morris & Co., 
and Swift & Co., and Negroes from the 
South were called into the plants as strikebreakers. When the strike ended the 
Negroes were still employed and that many 
white men failed to regain their positions. 
The leaders of various labor unions realized 
that the supply of Negroes was practically 
inexhaustible and that they were receiving 
the same wages as their white predecessors 
and so evidently doing the same grade of 
work. Since it was increasingly possible then 
to call in as many black strike-breakers as 
necessary, the effectiveness of any strike 
was accordingly decreased. It was this 
realization that caused the small but indicative May riots. Evidently, the leaders 
of the labor unions thought something 
must be done, some measure sufficiently 
drastic must be taken to drive these interlopers away and to restore to these white 
Americans their privileges. The fact that 
the Negroes were also Americans meant 
nothing at such a time as this. 
The leader of a labor union must be an 
opportunist. The psychology of any unskilled laborer is comparatively simple. To 
the knowledge then that his job is being 
held by an outsider add his natural and 
fostered prejudice against an outsider who 
is black and you have something of the 
mental attitude of the rioters of East St. 
Louis. Doubtless it was with some such 
prophetic vision as this that Edward F. 
Mason, secretary of the Central Trades and 
Labor Union, issued a letter, the facsimile 
of which appears on the opposite page. 
One point in particular is emphasized, 
that of color: "The Southern Negro, " 
writes Mr. Mason, "has come into our community. No less than ten thousand of undesirable Negroes, " he continues, "have 
poured in and are being used to the detriment of our white citizens." There is the 
appeal direct to prejudice. It is not that 
foreigners—Czechs, Slovaks, Lithuanians— 
or whatever ethnic division is least indigenous to East St. Louis—it is not that 
they are ousting Americans of any color 
or hue, but the "Southern Negro, " the most 
American product there is, is being used "to 
the detriment of our white citizens." 
Mr. Mason has no hesitancy in suggesting "that some action should he taken to 
retard this growing menace" and "to get 
rid of a certain portion of those who are 
already here." Wa s not Mr. Gompers' excuse in Carnegie Hall a faint echo of all 
this? 
Mr. Mason wants to be fair. "This is 
not a protest against the Negro who has 
been a long resident"—so runs his superb 
English—"of East St. Louis, and is a lawabiding citizen of the state." In East St. 
Louis labor leaders are the arbiters of 
legal conduct and therefore 10,000 Negroes 
become undesirable citizens because they 
are strike-breakers and black. 
That the July riot grew out of the meeting called by Mr. Mason (see facsimile), 
we are not prepared to say; but that 
it grew out of this attitude is only too 
apparent. By all accounts of eye-witnesses, both white and black, the East St. 
Louis outrage was deliberately planned and 
executed. 
Says Richard L. Stokes, writing in the 
St. Louis Globe-Democrat, for Sunday, 
July 8: 
On the night of May 28th a delegation 
of about 600 union men marched to the 
City Hall to appeal to the authorities to 
prevent the importation of any more Negroes. Amon g them were many of the Aluminum Ore Company strikers. They took 
possession of an auditorium, and some of 
the leaders made speeches advising that in 
case the authorities took no action, they 
should resort to mob law. 
When genuine mob law did finally reign 
on July 2, the scenes were indescribable. 
Germany has nothing on East St. Louis 
when it comes to "frightfulness." Indeed 
in one respect Germany does not even approximate her ill-famed sister. In all the 
accounts given of German atrocities, no 
one, we believe, has accused the Germans of 
taking pleasure in the sufferings of their 
victims. But these rioters combined business and pleasure. These Negroes were TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUIS 221 
Central Trades 
AFFILIATED WITH THE AMERICAN 
FEDERATION OF LABOR 
and labo r union 
MEETS SECOND AND FOURTH TUESDAYS 
309 COLLINSVILLE AVENUE 
EAST ST. LOUIS, ILL., May 23, 1917. 
To the Delegates 
to the Central Trades 
and Labor Union: 
Greeting: -
The immigration of the Southern Negro into our 
city for the past eight months has reached the point 
where drastic action must be taken if we intend to work 
and live peaceably in this community. 
Since this influx of undesirable negroes has 
started no less than ten thousand have come into this 
locality. 
These men are being used to the detriment of our 
white citizens by soma of the capitalists and a few of 
the real estate owners. 
On next Monday evening the entire body of delegates to the Central Trades and Labor Unions will call 
upon the Mayor and City Council and demand that they 
take some action to retard this growing menace and also 
devise a way to get rid of a certain portion of those who 
are already here. 
This is not a protest against the negro who has 
been a long resident of East St. Louis, and is a lawabiding citizen. 
We earnestly request that you be in attendance 
on next Monday evening: at 8:00 o'clock, at 137 Collinsville Avenue, where we will meet and then go to the City 
Hall. 
This is more important than any local meeting, so 
be sure you are there. 
Fraterna1ly, 
CENTRAL TRADES & LABOR UNION, 
EDW. F. MASON. Sec'y. 
1 9 
(A FACSIMILE OF MR . MASON' S LETTER ) 
"butchered to make" an East St. Louis 
"holiday." 
Carlos F. Hurd, an eye-witness, realizes 
this fact and speaks of it in the article 
which he publishes July 3 in the St. Louis 
Post-Dispatch, of which he is a staff-reporter. Mr. Hurd writes: 
A mob is passionate, a mob follows one 
man or a few men blindly; a mob sometimes 
takes chances. The East St. Louis affair, as 
I saw it, was a man hunt, conducted on a 
sporting basis, though with anything but 
the fair play which is the principle of sport. 
The East St. Louis men took no chances, 
except the chance from stray shots, which 
every spectator of their acts took. They 
went in small groups, there was little leadership, and there was a horribly cool deliberateness and a spirit of fun about it. 
"Get a nigger," was the slogan, and it 
was varied by the recurrent cry, "Get another!" It was like nothing so much as the 
holiday crowd, with thumbs turned down, 
in the Roman Coliseum, except that here the 
shouters were their own gladiators, and 
their own wild beasts. 222 TH E CRISIS 
He goes on with another horrible account 
of which he was also an eye-witness: 
A Negro, his head laid open by a great 
stone-cut, had been dragged to the mouth of 
the alley on Fourth Street and a small rope 
was being put about his neck. There was 
joking comment on the weakness of the 
rope, and everyone was prepared for what 
happened when it was pulled over a projecting cable box, a short distance up the 
pole. It broke, letting the Negro tumble 
back to his knees, and causing one of the 
men who was pulling on it to sprawl on the 
pavement. 
An old man, with a cap like those worn 
by street car conductors, but showing no 
badge of car service, came out of his house 
to protest. "Don't you hang that man on 
this street," he shouted. "I dare you to." 
He was pushed angrily away, and a rope, 
obviously strong enough for its purpose, 
was brought. 
Right here I saw the most sickening incident of the evening. To put the rope 
around the Negro's neck, one of the lynchers 
stuck his fingers inside the gaping scalp and 
lifted the Negro's head by it, literally bathing his hand in the man's blood. 
"Get hold, and pull for East St. Louis! " 
called a man with a black coat and a new 
straw hat, as he seized the other end of the 
rope. The rope was long, but not too long 
for the number of hands that grasped it, 
and this time the Negro was lifted to a 
height of about seven feet from the ground. 
The body was left hanging there. 
These accounts make gruesome reading, 
but they are all true. Hugh L. Wood paints 
in the St. Louis Republic another horrible 
picture. He says: 
A Negro weighing 300 pounds came out 
of the burning line of dwellings just north 
and east of the Southern freight house. His 
hands were elevated and his yellow face was 
speckled with the awful fear of death. 
"Get him! " they cried. Here was a 
chance to see suffering, something that bullets didn't always make. 
So a man in the crowd clubbed his revolver and struck the Negro in the face 
with it. Another dashed an iron bolt between the Negro's eyes. Still another stood 
near and battered him with a rock. 
Then the giant Negro toppled to the 
ground. "This is the way, " cried one. He 
ran back a few paces, then ran at the prostrate black at full speed and made a flying 
leap. 
His heels struck right in the middle of 
the battered face. A girl stepped up and 
struck the bleeding man with her foot. The 
blood spurted onto her stockings and men 
laughed and grunted. 
No amount of suffering awakened pity in 
the hearts of the rioters. Mr. Wood tells 
us that: 
A few Negroes, caught on the street, were 
kicked and shot to death. As flies settled 
on their terrible wounds, the gapingmouthed mobsmen forbade the dying blacks 
to brush them off. Girls with blood on their 
stockings helped to kick in what had been 
black faces of the corpses on the street. 
The St. Louis Republic has still a further 
touch: 
A Negro lay a block east on Broadway, 
with his face beaten in. He was not dead. 
An ambulance, driven by white men, dashed 
up. 
"If you pick up that skunk we'll kill you, 
too, " cried the crowd. 
"I've got a wife and four children at 
home," said the white-faced ambulance man 
as he climbed back on the wagon. 
When the fire had eaten its way that far 
the body was tossed into the flames. Two 
blocks further east lay a Negro who had 
been beaten until he was dying. "Let's 
string him up," shouted a man. 
A rope was brought and the dying black 
in a moment was dangling from a pole. 
Several "good measure" shots were fired 
into the body and the crowd went further 
on. 
Mr. Hurd who writes with much restraint 
tells how he saw a man covered with blood 
and half conscious, raise himself on his 
elbow and look feebly about, when a young 
man, standing directly behind him, lifted 
a flat stone in both hands and hurled it upon his neck. This young man was much 
better dressed than most of the others. He 
walked away unmolested. 
The violence was confined not only to 
men. Women were in many cases the aggressors and always ready to instigate and 
abet. 
One woman, according to the St. Louis 
Globe-Democrat, wanted to "cut the heart 
out " of a Negro, a man already paralyzed 
from a bullet wound, who was being then 
maltreated at the hands of a mob. 
Mr. Hurd writes: 
I saw Negro women begging for mercy 
and pleading that they had harmed no one 
set upon by white women of the baser sort 
who laughed and answered the coarse sallies of men as they beat the Negresses' faces 
and breasts with fists, stones and sticks. I 
saw one of these furies fling herself at a 
militiaman who was trying to protect a Negress, and wrestle with him for his bayonetted gun, while other women attacked the 
refugee. 
"Let the girls have her," was the shout 
as the women attacked one young Negress. 
The victim's cry, "Please, please, I ain't 
done nothing," was stopped by a blow in 
the mouth with a broomstick, which- one of 
the women swung like a baseball bat. An -TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUI S 223 
The Fire. St. Lo224 THE CRISIS 
other woman seized the Negress' hands, and 
the blow was repeated as she struggled 
helplessly. Finger nails clawed her hair 
and the sleeves were torn from her waist, 
when some of the men called, "Now let her 
see how fast she can run." The women did 
not readily leave off beating her, but they 
stopped short of murder, and the crying, 
hysterical girl ran down the street. 
An older Negress, a few moments later, 
came along with two or three militiamen, 
and the same women made for her. When 
one of the soldiers held his gun as a barrier, the woman with the broomstick seized 
it with both hands, and struggled to wrest 
it from him, while the others, striking at 
the Negress, in spite of the other militiamen, frightened her thoroughly and hurt 
her somewhat. 
To this the St. Louis Republic adds: 
Seized with the mob spirit, two young 
white girls climbed on a car at Broadway 
and Main Street at about 4 p. m. and 
dragged a Negress from her seat. As they 
dragged the struggling Negress through the 
door to the street there was a great cheer 
from men on the sidewalk. 
As the Negress attempted to break away 
from her assailants one of the girls—for 
they were only about 17 years old—pulled 
off her shoe and started to beat the victim 
over the head. The victim flinched under 
the blows of the girl and was bleeding when 
she was rescued by militiamen. 
The girls were not arrested and started 
to walk away from the scene. There were 
bloodstains on their clothes and as they 
passed their friends they told about the part 
they had played in the riot. 
But this sort of Negro-baiting did not 
make a strong enough appeal to the jaded 
senses of the mob. Surely there must be 
some other means of adding to such pleasurable excitement. Somebody suggested 
fire. The idea was immediately accepted. 
Says John T. Stewart: 
The first houses were fired shortly after 
5 o'clock. These were back of Main street, 
between Broadway and Railroad avenue. 
Negroes were "flushed" from the burning 
houses, and ran for their lives, screaming 
and begging for mercy. A Negro crawled 
into a shed and fired on the white men. 
Guardsmen started after him, but when 
they saw he was armed, turned to the mob 
and said: 
"He's armed, boys. You can have him. 
A white man's life is worth the lives of a 
thousand Negroes." 
A few minutes later matches were applied to hastily gathered debris piled about 
the corner of one of three small houses 100 
feet from the first fired. These were back 
of the International Harvester Company's 
plant. Eight Negroes fled into the last of 
the houses and hid in the basement. When 
roof and walls were about to fall in, an aged 
Negro woman came out. She was permitted 
to walk to safety. Three Negro women followed and were not fired upon. Then came 
four Negro men, and 100 shots were fired 
at them. They fell. No one ventured out 
to see if they were dead, as the place had 
come to resemble No Man's Land, with bullets flying back and forth and sparks from 
the fires falling everywhere. 
A Negro who crawled on hands and knees 
through the weeds was a target for a volley. The mob then turned back to Main 
street and another Negro was spied on a 
Main Street car. He was dragged to the 
street and a rioter stood over him, shooting. 
The crowd then turned to Black Valley. 
Here the greatest fire damage was caused. 
Flames soon were raging and the shrieking 
rioters stood about in the streets, made lurid 
by the flames, and shot and beat Negroes 
as they fled from their burning homes. 
This district today was a waste of smouldering debris. Firemen fought the flames 
all night. In this stretch were burned the 
Southern Railroad freight house, the HillsThomas Lime and Cement Company plant 
and the Broadway Opera House. By desperate effort, firemen saved the Public Library Building, the Bon Bon Baking Powder Company, and the J. C. Grant Chemical 
Company. The warehouses of the latter 
contained 1,000 gallons of gasoline and coal 
oil. 
It was rumored that many Negroes were 
burned to death in the Broadway Opera 
House, an abandoned theatre structure. Bystanders claimed to have seen men, women 
and children seek refuge in the basement 
of the building. 
Rioters formed in gangs and trooped 
through the street, chasing Negroes when 
they met them, and intimidating white and 
Negro men alike, if they attempted to offer 
resistance. 
Here again according to the St. Louis 
Globe-Democrat, the women and children 
took a hand: 
They pursued the women who were driven 
out of the burning homes, with the idea, not 
of extinguishing their burning clothing, but 
of inflicting added pain, if possible. They 
stood around in groups, laughing and jeering, while they witnessed the final writhings 
of the terror and pain wracked wretches 
who crawled to the streets to die after their 
flesh had been cooked in their own homes. 
Where was the militia? A t best they 
stood idly about in tacit sympathy with the 
rioters. It was not their business to protect Negroes against white men. Richard 
L. Stokes makes their attitude plain in the 
St. Louis Globe-Democrat. He says: 
I wish to point out that in these riots all 
the antipathy toward the Negro was not 
confined to East St. Louis. Amon g the 
first militia to arrive from Central and 
Northern Illinois, were not a few who declared feelingly their understanding they 
were not here to protect Negroes against 
whites, but to guard whites against Negroes. TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUI S 225 
Subsequent testimony conflicted with this 
statement and showed that most of the militia, as one would suppose from the location 
of East St. Louis, came from Southern Illinois. 
And John T. Stewart continues in the 
St. Louis Star: 
The major riot ensued at 4:30 , with not 
a Negro in sight. A crowd of fifty young 
men and boys dribbling aimlessly south on 
Collinsville came to a pawn shop. At once 
there were shouts of "get his guns," and 
the whites crowded through the shop doors 
and looted the shop of every weapon and 
all its ammunition. A boy not over fourteen years old emerged with a rifle and several rounds of cartridges. Another boy 
dragged a shotgun too big for him to carry. 
A detachment of militia came along and 
made a half-hearted effort to disarm the 
civilians. The only persons who gave up 
their arms were boys. One white man 
walking beside me patted a large revolver 
in his shirt bosom. It was fully loaded. 
Another handed him two additional rounds 
of cartridges. Two guards passed. 
"You've got nothing on me," the rioter 
said, and showed the militiaman his revolver and shells. When the militiaman 
laughed, the rioter threw his disengaged 
arm around the guardsman's shoulder and 
they disappeared around the corner. 
Some of the militia were active in the 
fray. Miss Gruening tells of the two soldiers, members of Troop L, from Olney. 
She passed them a few days after the riot 
near Cahokia Creek and entered into conversation with them. They boasted that 
here "seven niggers" were thrown into the 
creek, "and every time the niggers came up 
people rocked them till they was all 
drowned." She imitated their vernacular. 
"And how many 'niggers' did you boys actually kill?" she asked. They were modestly uncertain—they were not quite sure 
how many, but they had certainly shot to 
kill. That had been their orders. 
'"What! " asked Miss Gruening, "to shoot 
to kill 'niggers'?" 
They grinned cheerfully. "Oh, no. Only 
to kill all we saw starting fires." 
St. Louis Globe Democrat. 
BROADWA Y OPER A HOUSE AFTE R TH E FIRE. $700,00 0 DAMAG E WA S DON E I N THI S VICINIT Y 226 TH E CRISIS 
"An d did you see any starting fires?" 
"No , all we saw was niggers flying." 
And they were to disarm every "nigger " 
of any kind of weapon—guns, razors, knives. 
They got everything away from them. 
Miss Gruening wanted to know if they 
hadn't disarmed any whites at all. 
They were doubtful. Yes, one remembered he had disarmed a drunken white 
man who was attacking a white woman. 
Subsequently, Miss Gruening met with 
the Military Board of Inquiry, whose members were: Brigadier General Henry R. 
Hill, Brigadier General James E. Stewart, 
Colonel M. J. Foreman, Colonel Taylor E. 
Brown, Major Edward B. Tollman, Colonel 
William D. McChesney and Major Richard 
J. Abbott. She told her story and offered 
to identify the boys. 
The Board was unenthusiastic and a trifle skeptical. Didn't Miss Gruening really 
suppose that the boys were joking? Doubtless they merely wanted to look big in the 
eyes of a lady. Yes, such jesting was in 
bad taste, but boys will be boys. A t any 
rate identification was impossible because 
the Olney troops had been withdrawn. 
Miss Gruening offered to go to Olney, to 
go anywhere to identify the two guardsmen. 
Well, that was unnecessary, it was rather 
late now—on the third day of the inquiry 
—to institute such a complaint. Wh y 
hadn't the lady gone immediately to the 
commandant, who was present, and made 
her charge. 
Miss Gruening had already been to the 
commandant on another matter and had 
been rebuffed. 
As she was about to leave they laid on 
her a solemn charge. 
"Youn g lady, as a writer, you have a 
heavy responsibility. If you go away and 
give the world the impression that the boys 
of the Illinois Militia or their officers failed 
in their duty you will be doing a serious 
injustice. We have gone exhaustively into 
the evidence. We have followed up every 
accusation made against Illinois guardsmen and we find not a single instance in 
which they misconducted themselves. On 
the contrary, we have found innumerable 
instances of the greatest heroism on the part 
of these young and untrained boys—instances in which Negroes were rescued 
from crowds of two or three hundred people. We have examined every body (Query: 
the burned and drowned bodies too?) and 
none of the wounds were made by rifles." 
Miss Gruening inquired why, in the case 
of so much heroism, were so many Negroes 
killed and only eight white men. There 
was no answer to that. 
Many white people told Miss Gruening 
that the militia had done remarkably well 
when one considered that most of them 
came from towns in Southern Illinois, like 
Olney, for instance, at whose railway stations were placards with the inscription: 
"Nigger, don't let the sun set on you." It 
was impossible, it was argued, for such men 
to suppose that they were being called on 
to protect "niggers" ! 
And now we come to a short list of savage 
deeds which most of the newspapers have 
failed to print. Some of them though hint at 
them, like the St. Louis Globe-Democrat for 
instance, when it says "enormities of savagery which would shame the jungle were 
committed in the presence of policemen and 
militiamen." All of the following statements were related by eyewitnesses to Miss 
Gruening and Dr. Du Bois. 
Miss Gruening writing in the Boston 
Journal says succintly: 
"One girl was standing at a window of 
a white woman's house in which she worked. 
Her arm was shot away. A policeman and 
a soldier, she said, did the shooting . 
An old woman, frightfully burned, dying 
in the hospital, was asked if the mob had 
done it and replied: 'No, they jes' set fire 
to my house and I burned myself trying to 
get out' . . . One of the St. Louis reporters said that he knew exactly how people felt who had seen atrocities abroad and 
were trying to 'get them across' to the rest 
of the world, 'although,' he added, 'not even 
Belgium probably has anything quite as horrible to show' . . . About 10 blocks of 
Negro homes were burned, and the mobs 
stood outside and shot and stoned those who 
tried to escape . . . The mob seized a 
colored woman's baby and threw it into the 
fire. The woman was then shot and thrown 
in." 
One dares not dwell too long on these 
horrors. There are the stories too related 
by Mrs. Luella Cox (white) of the Volunteers of America, a St. Louis organization. 
Mrs. Cox had gone over to East St. Louis 
on that memorable day on business connected with her society. She passed through 
scenes that she can never forget. She realized the storm that was brewing and tried 
to persuade some of the colored families 
living in what afterwards became the 
burned district to flee. They were afraid 
to venture out but remained hidden in their 
houses with what results one can shudderingly surmise. 
Mrs. Cox saw a Negro beheaded with a 
butcher's knife by someone in a crowd 
standing near the Free Bridge. The crowd 
had to have its jest. So its members laughingly threw the head over one side of the 
bridge and the body over the other. 
A trolley-car came along. The crowd 
forced its inmates to put their hands out 
the window. Colored people thus recognized were hauled out of the car to be beaten, trampled on, shot. A little twelve-yearold colored girl fainted—her mother knelt 
beside her. The crowd surged in on her. 
When its ranks opened up again Mrs. Cox 
saw the mother prostrate with a hole as 
large as one's fist in her head. 
Around a corner came a group of miners, 
fresh from work, their pick-axes over their 
shoulders. They plunged joyously into the 
arena. Presently Mrs. Cox caught sight TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUI S 227 
Looking for bodi
St. Louis Star. 228 THE CRISIS 
of them again resting from their labors, 
their pick-axes slung once more over their 
shoulders, and on their backs dripped blood. 
While Mrs. Cox was talking to Miss 
Gruening and Dr. Du Bois, a colored woman 
came up and exclaimed: "There's the lady 
that saved me! " The woman had spent all 
that terrible night crouching in a sewer 
pipe. 
It was Mrs. Cox, too, who saw the baby 
snatched from its mother's arms and thrown 
into the flames, to be followed afterwards 
by the mother. This last act was the only 
merciful one on the part of the crowd. 
This recital deals only with facts. But 
stop and picture for a moment Mrs. Cox's 
day and the memories which must haunt 
her and all others who spent those awful 
hours in St. Louis. 
First the mob, always a frightful thing 
—lowering in dense cowardly ranks through 
the streets. Then the fleeing Negroes, hunted, 
despairing. A hoarse, sullen cry, "Get the 
nigger! " A shower of bullets, of bricks and 
stones. The flash of meat-cleavers and pickaxes. The merciless flames. And everywhere bodies, blood, hate and terrible levity. 
All our hunting-songs and descriptions 
deal with the glory of the chase as seen and 
felt by the hunters. No one has visualized 
the psychology of the quarry, the driven, 
hunted thing. The Negroes of East St. 
Louis have in their statements supplied the 
world with that lack. 
The following accounts are published in 
the somewhat disjointed fashion in which 
they were necessarily collected by the investigators. No interpolation whatever is 
added to detract from their simplicity and 
sincerity. 
This is the testimony of Mary Edwards. 
She is twenty-three years old, directress of 
a cafeteria at Lincoln School at fifty dollars 
a month, has lived in East St. Louis for sixteen years: 
Knew at ten o'clock in the morning that 
white and colored had been fighting, but 
did not know seriousness of fight until five 
o'clock in evening when riot started at 
Broadway and Fourth Street. Heard shooting and yelling, saw mob pull women off 
street cars and beat them, but did not think 
rioters would come up to Eighth Street. 
Fires had started and were as far as Fifth 
Street and Broadway and swept through 
Fourth St., to Fifth and on to Eighth. The 
shooting was so violent that they were 
afraid to leave home. By this time rioters 
were on Eighth Street, shooting through 
homes and setting fire to them. Daughter 
and father were in house dodging bullets 
which were coming thick. Building at corner of Eighth and Walnut was occupied by 
whites. Some of mob yelled, "Save it. 
Whites live there." Some of the rioters 
went to Eighth and Broadway and set fire 
to colored grocery store and colored barber shop. Man in barber shop escaped but 
the man and wife in store were burned up. 
By that time Opera House was on fire and 
flats on side and back of it. East end of 
Library Flats caught and heat was so great 
that father and daughter tried to escape 
through alley and up street to Broadway, 
but encountered mob at Broadway. Soldiers were in line-up on north side of street 
and offered no assistance. Ran across street 
to Westbrook's home with bullets flying all 
around them and rioters shouting, "Kill 
him, kill him." Here daughter lost track 
of father. She beat on back door of Westbrook's home but no response, ran across 
alley to Division Avenue, ran on white lady's 
porch, but the lady would not let her in. 
Men were shooting at her for all they were 
worth, but she succeeded in dodging bullets. 
Ran across field and got in house and 
crawled under bed. Mob following right 
behind her, but lost sight of which house 
she went in and set fire to each end of flat. 
Rather than be burned to death she ran 
out and mob began shooting at her again. 
Just at that time a man ran out of the 
house, and mob let girl alone and started 
at him. She fell in weeds and lay very 
quiet. Could see them beating man. About 
one hour afterwards she heard someone 
say, "An y niggers in here? " She kept very 
quiet thinking them rioters. One said, "N o 
one does answer. Come on, boys, let's go 
in after them." She then raised up not 
knowing they were soldiers and pleaded for 
her life. They picked her up and took her 
over the same ground she had run from 
the mob : put her in a machine and took 
her to City Hall. When she came to herself she was in the doctor's office surrounded by friends and her sister, Josephine, who 
had escaped with the Westbrooks. It was 
about one o'clock when she reached the City 
Hall. Mr. Edwards succeeded in getting 
away from mob, hid under a white man's 
porch until three o'clock in the morning, 
crawled from under there and went under 
side walk on Broadway and stayed there 
till five o'clock. (In East St. Louis, Ill., the 
streets are higher than the houses). He 
got out from under the walk and walked 
over where his home was still burning and 
stayed there till five-thirty. Started out 
to find girls, saw a policeman who told him 
he would probably find them at City Hall. 
On way to City Hall, he met two policemen 
with two colored men. One man asked him 
if he would send a message to his wife. Mr. 
Edwards said he could not do so. Policeman then arrested him charging him 
with being one of the rioters. He was locked 
up in jail and did not get out until twelve 
o'clock, when he was carried before Justice 
of Peace for trial. They found him guilty 
and set his trial for nine o'clock Wednesday morning and told him he would have to 
give bond for three hundred dollars. They 
would not let him have an attorney nor 
would they let him send for any one. He 
then asked the Judge to let him make a 
statement to the court. That was granted. 
He got up and told of his experience 
from five o'clock Monday evening until he 
was arrested at 5:45 Tuesday morning. THE MASSACRE OF EAST ST. LOUIS 229 
Colored ma
Internationa230 THE CRISIS 
FRAN K SMITH , BURNED . AMO S DAVIS , AG E 84, SHOT. 
TH E REFUGEES . CAM P OF TROOP D, 1ST ILL. CAVALR Y FRO M 
SPRINGFIELD . 
AFTE R TH E FIRE. 
POLIC E HEADQUARTERS , ST. LOUIS , MO. TH E MASSACR E OF EAS T ST. LOUI S 231 
After hearing his story the Judge dismissed 
him. 
Nathaniel Cole is twenty-two years old 
and worked in a steel foundry. He says: 
I was on my way from Alton on an Interurban car. When the car reached East St. 
Louis I saw a crowd of whites hollering, 
"Stop the car and get the nigger." The 
car was pulled off and stopped and a Negro 
man pulled out and beaten. In the mean 
time a white child called "There's another 
nigger. " I was then pulled off the car, 
beaten and left in the street. After the 
mob left, I attempted to board a car and 
was ejected by the conductor. Not knowing anything about East St. Louis or the 
mob, I ran into a white neighborhood and 
a woman hollered, "Stop that nigger. Stop 
that nigger." Two fellows ran out of a 
gangway, one with a brick and the other 
with a long club. I ran and was well out 
of the way when a Ford car came along 
and about twelve of the rioters got in and 
overtook me after I had entered an alley. 
They then hemmed me in a yard, where a 
carpenter was at work and began beating 
me. The carpenter then asked the rioters 
not to beat me up there, but to turn me over 
to the police if I had done anything to deserve it. The rioters replied, "The nigger 
takes the white man's job. " I was beaten 
in the face with a cane and a rubber hose. 
I was beaten into insensibility and when I 
came to they were taking stitches in my 
head at St. Mary's Hospital. 
Observe the terseness of the statement of 
Nina Fleet: 
Husband worked at M. & O. Round House. 
Wa s a resident of East St. Louis for ten 
years. 
I stayed with white people in the neighborhood the night of the riot and when I 
returned home, Tuesday, found my house 
had been ransacked and burned. 
My husband was killed in the riot on his 
way home from work. 
Here follows the continued story of Mary 
Lewis and her sister Hattie House. Mary 
Lewis, who is thirty-three, speaks first. 
She says: 
The mob gathered about my house shouting oaths, etc., and after watching and 
listening for a long time, I decided to try 
to escape. Just as I started to leave I saw 
them shoot a man dead, less than thirty 
feet from my window. The mob then went 
to the rear of the house and I, with my four 
children, slipped out the front door. I had 
gone but a short distance when I was spied 
by one of the mob and they wanted to come 
back, but were urged by the leader to go on 
as he had seen some men on another street. 
His remark was, "Let her go and get the 
niggers running on the other street." 
I left in my house, my husband, Allen 
Lewis; sister, Hattie House, and a friend 
who was visiting Mr. McMurray. 
Her sister, Hattie House, continues: 
In less than twenty minutes from the 
time my sister left, the mob returned and 
began shooting and throwing bricks through 
the windows, while the three of us lay flat 
upon the floor, hoping to escape. The mob 
then set lire to both the front and back and 
when the roof began falling in we ran out 
through the rear door amidst the rain of 
bullets to the home of a Mr. Warren, white, 
begging him to save us. Mr. Lewis was 
shot just as he reached the door, and I ran 
into the house. 
Some women who were always at the 
Warren house began beating me and I was 
compelled to leave there. I ran through a 
shed and seeing a big tin box, I jumped in, 
pulling on the lid and succeeded in concealing myself. The mob pursued, looking in 
every place as they thought for me, but 
overlooked the box. As they stood discussing the riot, one said, "I felt sorry for that 
old nigger. He begged so for his life." 
The answer was, "Wh y should you feel 
sorry, Irene, you helped to kill him? " Some 
other person in the crowd then said, "He 
was such a hard nigger to kill, he was shot 
and then had to have his head smashed with 
an ax." 
Lulu Suggs is twenty-four years old, and 
has lived in East St. Louis since April. She 
tells of seeing children thrown into the 
fire. She says: 
My house was burned and all the contents. My husband was at Swifts' the night 
of the riot. I, with about one hundred 
women and children, stayed in a cellar all 
night, Monday night. The School for Negroes on Winstanly Avenue was burned to 
the ground. When there was a big fire the 
rioters would stop to amuse themselves, and 
at such time I would peep out and actually 
saw children thrown into the fire. Tuesday 
came and with that the protection of the 
soldiers. We escaped to St. Louis. 
Chickens were of more value than Negro 
human lives. Mabel Randall, who is twenty-four years old, and has lived in East St. 
Louis for one and one-half years tells us: 
Monday evening the mob broke out the 
windows and doors and we stayed under the 
bed. When dark came, we begged the white 
lady next door to let us get under her house 
and she told us that she had chickens in the 
yard and we could not. We then went next 
door and got into a coal-house piling stoves 
upon us until four o'clock next morning 
when we went to the M. & O. Railroad 
yards. We remained there until 5:30 and 
then reached the ferry. 
The statement of Josephine Jones is interesting. She says: 
Mrs. Jones made this statement to me, 
that the mob formed both times at the City 
Hall, May, 1917, and July 2, 1917. She also 
said that Mayor Mollman stood in the alley 
leaning on the bannister of the Justice of 
Peace Building when a white man ran down 
the alley chasing two colored men, whom 232 TH E CRISIS 
he afterwards shot and threw into the creek. 
When he returned to the street, Mayor Mollman was still standing there and he said, 
"Fred, I shot two niggers. How do you 
like that?" Mayor Mollman said nothing 
and made no protest. 
Rena Cook returned from a day's outing 
to horror and death. Her statement follows: 
While returning from a fishing trip on 
an Alton St. car, we were met by a mob at 
Collinsville and Broadway who stopped the 
ear and had the white people get out. The 
mob came in and dragged my husband and 
son out, beating them at the same time, 
threw them off the car and shot both my 
husband and son, killing them instantly. 
Two policemen stood by, but did not interfere. The mob came back in the car and 
ran me out and beat me into insensibility. 
I knew nothing more until I found myself 
in St. Mary's Hospital. After staying in 
the hospital for two days I was taken to 
City Hall in East St. Louis and from there 
the police and militia escorted me to St. 
Louis. 
Here is a brief but comprehensive tale 
of treachery as told by Edward Spence: 
Born in Lafayette, Alabama—came to 
East St. Louis five years ago. Worked in 
a Rolling Mill, Madison, Ill., but lived in 
East St. Louis. Wage s $3.25 a day. He 
had taken his family, seven children and a 
wife to friends out from East St. Louis for 
safety. He returned to East St. Louis and 
walked down the street with a white man, 
whom he thought to be a friend. When he 
passed this man's gate he was shot by this 
same man in both arms and back. He ran 
one and one-half blocks and was picked up 
and carried to the hospital by three colored 
men. His address is 1208 Colas Ave., East 
St. Louis. 
Comments are needless. Here is the testimony of Elsie L. Lothridge, twenty years 
old, and a resident of East St. Louis for five 
months. She says: 
Monday, about four o'clock, mob surrounded house. My husband and I were 
under the bed, and the mob threw stones 
and broke the windows and furniture up. 
The spread hid us from the people and after 
they broke up everything they left. Then 
we went to a white lady and asked could we 
hide in her house and she refused us, and 
we went in the next neighbor's house and 
hid in the coal-house until about four o'clock 
Tuesday morning. We hid in an engine 
until about 5:30 and then we went down 
to the Ferry and came across to St. Louis. 
Testimony of Giles Bowmer, sixty years 
old, and a resident of East St. Louis for 
four years: 
I was at my work when the rioting began. 
I witnessed the rioting and being so excited 
I could hardly idealize what the trouble was. 
My house was not burned but it was broken 
into and nearly everything was destroyed, 
things that I have had over twenty years. 
I saw many homes from a short distance 
of Fourth Street to Seventh Street burned 
to the ground. 
Testimony of Mose Campbell, for seven 
months a resident of East St. Louis: 
I was attacked by the mob of about 50 
or more with stones and shots, but gave 
chase. They shot continuously and before 
we reached the Southern Freight House one 
bullet passed through my hand, shattering 
the bone. The mob threatened to burn the 
freight house so I crawled to the other end 
and found safety under the trunks of a 
freight car. Another victim drew the mob 
away by this time. This man was beaten 
until unconscious and when he revived the 
soldiers who were watching him raised a 
cry which brought the mob back to complete the murder. 
While this excitement was at its height, 
it gave me an opportunity to make my way 
to Brooklyn by back lanes. I saw the mob 
fire into houses the first being my own, 
afterwards proved to be the bier for five 
men and two children. Amon g the men 
were Allen Lewis, Jas. Thomas and Arbry 
Jones. 
Testimony of twenty-year-old Vassie Randall, an employee of the Electric Sack 
Plant: 
The mob had benches stretched across the 
street facing both directions that no one 
might escape. A Negro came along and one 
fellow stepped out and struck him, and then 
others jumped on him, kicked out his eye 
and when he tried to get up, they returned 
and killed him. They then took him to 
Third and Main and swung him to a telegraph pole. 
I was trying to escape with my four children and the mob threatened to throw me 
and the children in the river. Some white 
people from St. Louis, Mo., came to us and 
then the mob let us alone and we were allowed to escape. 
The testimony of William Seawood shows 
the attitude of the soldiers. Seawood is 
thirty years old and has been a resident 
of East St. Louis seven years. He says: 
Age , thirty years old, and have been a 
resident of East St. Louis seven years. I 
left my work at 2 :30 P.M., went down Fifth 
Street to Walnut Avenue. I then went to 
a lunch stand, and as there was so much 
shooting I was afraid to leave. The mob 
came very close to the stand and I ran into 
an alley; there I found more of the rioters. 
I ran out of the alley between two buildings. I met a soldier who pointed a gun at 
me and told me to stop and throw up my 
hands. One of the men hit me on the back 
of my neck with his fist and another hit 
me across the head with a stick, and I also 
received a glance shot. One of the rioters 
also put a rope around my neck and said, 
"W e will hang this one." 
The statement of Troy Watkins is to the 
same effect: THE MASSACRE OF EAST ST. LOUIS 233 
At the municipal lod
St. Louis Star MINEOL A McGEE. SHOT B Y SOLDIE R AN D POLICEMAN . HE R AR M HA D TO B E AMPUTATED . 
234 TH E CRISIS TH E MASSACR E O F EAS T ST. LOUIS 235 
Tuesday I went to my house to get what 
I could. While inside a man was killed in 
front of my house. I thought since the soldiers were there to protect me I could go 
out of my house. I started out of my home 
and the white lady told me to go back, that 
they (the soldiers) had killed a man in 
front of my house. I went into the coal 
shed, got behind some tubs, when four men 
came in and saw me, but did not harm me. 
Then I went to where I was working (Kehlor Mill) where Mr. Cunningham gave us 
a team to go to my house and get my things. 
When I got there my house was burned 
down. 
Miss Gruening told of a girl who lost her 
arm. Here is the girl's own account. Her 
name is Mineola McGee (see page 234) and 
she has been a chambermaid at $3.50 a 
week. She has resided in East St. Louis 
since February 8, 1917. She says: 
Cannot locate a relative since riot, several 
cousins, aunt and uncle. 
Tuesday morning between seven and eight 
o'clock, as I was on my way to work (at 
Mrs. Gray's) I was shot in the arm, as I 
was about to enter the door. The only men 
whom I saw on the street were a soldier 
and a policeman, and I think I was shot 
by one of the two. I fainted after being 
shot, and when I came to I was being taken 
to the hospital in a patrol wagon. At the 
hospital the remainder of my arm was amputated. No insurance. 
And here is the testimony of Narcis Gurley (see page 236), who had lived for seventy-one years to come at last to this. She 
says that she has lived in East St. Louis 
for thirty years and had earned her living 
by keeping roomers and as a laundress. She 
says: 
Between five and six o'clock we noticed a 
house nearby burning and heard the men 
outside. We were afraid to come outside 
and remained in the house, which caught 
fire from the other house. When the house 
began falling in we ran out, terribly 
burned, and one white man said, "Let those 
old women alone." We were allowed to 
escape. Lost everything, clothing and 
household goods. 
The picture shows how terribly her arms 
were burned. 
Testimony of the Kendricks, residents of 
West Madison, Ill., since 1909: 
Monday about 1:30 P. M. I passed through 
East St. Louis from Belleville on my way 
to West Madison and the car met the mob at 
State and Collinsville. The mob shouted, 
"There's a Negro on the car, stop that car 
and get him off." The motorman stopped 
the car and all the white passengers left 
the car. leaving myself and sister-in-law 
and another lady, Mrs. Arthur. At that 
time three of the mob ran in the car and 
commenced beating me. I was shot through 
the left arm. They dragged me to the 
street. I was hit in the back of the head by 
one white, another hit me in the mouth. 
When I went to make a step another hit me 
on the side of the head and knocked me 
down. After this, one shot me in the leg. 
They jumped on me and beat me. After 
this they thought me dead and left me. 
There were three soldiers and a policeman 
in this mob, but offered me no assistance. 
In about twenty minutes I was carried to 
the hospital in an ambulance. 
Testimony of Mary Bell White, age fiftynine years. She was born in East St. Louis 
and did laundry-work at $1.25 a day: 
Saw two people burn an old man and a 
very old woman. They were thrown into a 
burning house. Monday at 4 P. M. I saw 
three women burned. By that time I was so 
excited that I ran to Tenth Street, where I 
met a white man who offered me and about 
one hundred others his protection. He had 
us go into an old building that had been 
used for a storage house. We stayed there 
all night. The next day I went to the City 
Hall and from there to St. Louis. I lost 
everything. 
Testimony of Thomas Crittenden: 
Ag e forty-six years and a resident of East 
St. Louis for five years. Worked as a laborer at $3.60 a day. Monday night his boss 
found out about the riot and secreted him 
and another fellow. The next day he found 
that the district in which he lived had been 
burned. His wife was pulled from her house 
by the women of the mob, who beat her into 
insensibility and knocked out three teeth. 
She was sent to Cleveland, O., where she is 
in a very serious condition. Through the 
kindness of his employer he escaped to St. 
Louis. 
Testimony of Lulu Robinson, age 33 years, 
has lived in East St. Louis for eight 
months: 
Between five and six o'clock Monday 
evening the mob began shooting into my 
home at me and my child. We backed up 
against the wall to dodge the shots, but I 
was hit three times, once through the finger, 
shoulder and face. My boy of twelve years 
was shot twice and killed. I ran away and 
luckily escaped the shots that were rained 
upon me, and found shelter in another house. 
My husband I have not seen or heard from 
since the riot. 
Testimony of Frank Smith, resident of 
East St. Louis for about twenty-five years 
and employed for the last fifteen years at 
the Acme Cement Company: 
His house was set afire by the mob, and 
they waited outside to shoot him. when he 
should emerge from the house. He waited 
till the last possible moment and was frightfully burned. 
Family consists of a sister and brother 
who lived at 2136 Gayety. East St. Louis. 
Lost everything and will probably have to 
stay in hospital for six or "even weeks 
longer. 236 TH E CRISIS 
NARCI S GURLEY , 71 NEX T BIRTHDAY . LIVE D I N HE R HOM E 30 YEARS . AFRAI D TO COME 
OUT TILL TH E BLAZIN G WALL S FEL L IN, TH E MASSACR E OF EAS T ST. LOUI S 237 
Testimony of Samuel J. Green, age 34 
years: 
I lived with my wife in East St. Louis; we 
have no children. I was born in Alabama 
and attended school through the fourth 
grade. I came to East St. Louis last October in search of better wages and better 
treatment from the white folks. I worked 
for the Loomin Owin Company; I received 
$3 for eight hours' work. 1 rented our 
home ; I paid $10 a month rent. Before the 
riot things were fine, but on Sunday the rioting began. At night when I was going home 
from work I got off the car right into the 
thickest of the rioters. I ran and they 
chased me, firing at me all the time. I saw 
the state guards but they were helping the 
mob to club the Negroes. It is wonderful 
how I escaped unhurt. I hid in the weeds 
and was lost to the mob. It was about ten 
o'clock Monday when I saw the state guards 
clubbing the colored people. I shall stay 
here a while, then I shall go farther north. 
Testimony of Salena Hubble, age 42 years: 
I am a widow. I lived in East St. Louis 
five years. I came to wait on my sick 
daughter. 
Before the riot the people of both races 
were friendly and pleasant in manners. On 
the evening the rioters told me to leave because they were going to burn up the whole 
block, as they thought I was a white woman, 
so they warned me to flee. I talked with a 
neighbor, Mrs. Clemens (a white woman) 
and asked her if she thought the mob would 
do any more harm. She said: "I don't 
know, but you get ready and leave by the 
way of the cars over the bridge." 
Just as I started over the bridge the mob 
broke my windows out with rocks. I escaped because the mob didn't know I belonged to the Negro race. Before I got out 
of East St. Louis I saw the mob with a rope 
and I heard them say: "There's a nigger. 
Let us hang the S of a B ," and 
they threw the rope over the telegraph pole, 
but I didn't know what came of that; I saw 
the soldiers and they offered no assistance 
to the colored people. I saw the fire department come before the fire was started, but 
when the fire was started they did nothing 
to stop it. I also saw the mob throw a rope 
around a colored man's neck and shoot him 
full of holes. The soldiers offered no assistance to the man who was shot, neither did 
the police. I saw a crowd of soldiers go into 
a saloon and engage in drinking heavily of 
beer. The mob burned the houses in the 
localities where colored lived mostly. The 
women were as vile as the men in their vile 
treatment to the Negroes. I saw the soldiers driving a crowd of colored men in the 
streets. The men were made to hold their 
hands above their heads as they walked. 
Testimony of Beatrice Deshong, age 26 
years: 
I saw the mob robbing the homes of Negroes and then set fire to them. The soldiers stood with folded arms and looked on 
as the houses burned. I saw a Negro man 
killed instantly by a member of the mob, 
men, small boys, and women and little girls 
all were trying to do something to injure 
the Negroes. I saw a colored woman 
stripped of all of her clothes except her 
waist. I don't know what became of her. 
The police and the soldiers were assisting 
the mob to kill Negroes and to destroy their 
homes. I saw the mob hang a colored man 
to a telegraph pole and riddle him with bullets. I saw the mob chasing a colored man 
who had a baby in his arms. The mob was 
shooting at him all of the time as long as I 
saw him. I ran for my life. I was nearly 
exhausted when a white man in the block 
opened the door of his warehouse and told 
me to go in there and hide. I went in and 
stayed there all night. The mob bombarded 
the house during the night, but I was not 
discovered nor hurt. The mob stole the jewelry of Negroes and used axes and hatchets 
to chop up pianos and furniture that belonged to them. The mob was seemingly 
well arranged to do their desperate work. I 
recognized some of the wealthy people's sons 
and some of the bank officials in the mob. 
They were as vile as they could be. 
Testimony of Jerry Mayborn: 
I saw the mob running the Negroes and 
beating them and killing them. I saw thirty 
white men beating one Negro. They clubbed 
the Negro to death. I saw the mob shooting 
into the homes of Negroes and throwing 
stones into them. The women and children 
were as bad as the men. The man that 
worked with me in the Stock Yards swam 
the creek to escape the mob and they stopped 
to beat another Negro man to death. He 
escaped. I saw the mob set fire to the 
church and to the school; then they ran. 
This was about seven o'clock in the evening. 
I ran through the Stock Yards and down the 
railroad to Brooklyn, carrying my three 
children. I saw the soldiers, who seemed to 
run a little pretense, and the mob just kept 
on killing Negroes. The soldiers searched 
the colored men, but I never saw them attempt to search any of the white men. 
Testimony of Robert Hersey, age 20 
years: 
I have lived in East St. Louis since the 
25th of March, 1917. I came here because 
of bad treatment and poor wages. I worked 
in a tobacco factory in St. Louis, Mo., and 
received two dollars a day. 
Before the riot everyone seemed friendly 
toward me. I never got into the thickest of 
the men or riot, but they hit me with clubs, 
bricks, and stamped me on the head. They 
broke my arm. But for all of that I got 
away from them. 
I shall never return to the South whatever 
may happen to me here, for in the South it 
is always killing and burning some of our 
people. No let up on bad treatment and no 
wages either. Men must work for eighty 
cents a day, women for fifty cents a week, 
and if the whites choose not to pay that, 
they won't do it. I shall stay in St. Louis, 
Mo. 238 TH E CRISIS 
The damning statements go on and on. 
Amon g the Negroes one finds a note sometimes of blank stark despair. John T. 
Stewart in the St. Louis Star draws a pathetic picture: 
One aged Negro woman passed the police station carrying in her arms all that 
mob spirit and fire had left of her belongings. They consisted of a worn pair of 
shoes—she was barefooted—an extra calico 
dress, an old shawl and two puppies. Tears 
were streaming down her face and she saw 
neither soldiers nor her enemies as she 
passed beneath the lights of the City Hall, 
going she knew not where. 
Saddest of all is Miss Gruening's account 
of the old woman whom she saw poking 
about in the desolate ruins of what had once 
been her home. Her family had escaped to 
St. Louis, but not a fraction of their possessions remained intact. The woman was old 
—sixty-five—not an easy age at which to 
begin life anew. 
"Wha t are we to do? " she asked Miss 
Gruening. "W e can't live South and they 
don't want us North. Where are we to go? " 
From the statements gathered by the 
investigators, many of these driven people 
seem to feel that the example of the South 
in dealing with Negroes is responsible for 
the methods of East St. Louis. Many of 
them express firmly their resolve, in spite 
of all, never to go back South. They will, 
stay in St. Louis, they say, or push further 
North. 
How does East St. Louis feel? According to all accounts she is unrepentant, surly, 
a little afraid that her shame may hurt 
her business, but her head is not bowed. 
In this connection Miss Gruening supplies the statement of East St. Louis Postman No. 23, who said: "The only trouble 
with the mob was it didn't get niggers 
enough. You wait and see what we do to 
the rest when the soldiers go. We'll get 
every last one of them." 
And here follows a sort of composite 
statement of the best citizens, editors, and 
liberty-bond buyers of East St. Louis and 
its surroundings: 
"Well, you see too many niggers have 
been coming in here. When niggers come 
up North they get insolent. You see they 
vote here and one doesn't like that. And 
one doesn't like their riding in the cars next 
to white women—and, well what are you 
going to do when a buck nigger pushes 
you off the sidewalk?" 
This last pathetic question was put to 
Miss Gruening by three different editors 
on as many separate occasions. 
The St. Louis Post-Dispatch gives the 
views of District Attorney Karch on the 
attitude of the rioters. He says: 
Those men have not left the city, and 
they have not repented of their excesses. 
They are just as bitter as they were, and 
the action of the Chamber of Commerce in 
forcing these Negroes down their throats is 
only inflaming the men who participated 
in the riot. 
The District Attorney told of seeing a 
man on a street car exhibit a revolver openly Thursday night, and remark that "it had 
killed niggers, and would kill some more as 
soon as the damned militia leaves." Other 
men near by expressed similar sentiments, 
he added. They were laboring men, apparently going home from work. 
Karch emphatically confirmed the statements made to the Post-Dispatch Tuesday 
by City Clerk Whalen, who is president of 
the Central Trades and Labor Union of East 
St. Louis, to the effect that large employers 
of labor had given marked and continuous 
preference to Negroes. 
"Their attitude for some time has been 
that they would give jobs to white men when 
they couldn't get any more Negroes, " Karch 
declared. "This, as Mr. Whalen said, is because the Negroes will not unionize. Before the tenseness of this situation is relieved, these employers must convince the 
laboring whites that they will be given preference over imported blacks in applying for 
work. Instead of doing that, they are declaring they will put all the Negroes back 
to work, and protect them, if they have to 
keep troops here indefinitely. That kind of 
flamboyant talk only angers the men who 
should be quieted. 
"A s long as the heads of these big plants 
break up strikes by importing Negro strikebreakers, so long can they expect to have 
race riots. This is no defense for the rioters; there is no defense for them. It is 
just a fact that when a man's family is 
hungry his sense of justice doesn't operate 
very accurately." 
Prejudice is a bad thing. But prejudice 
in the hands of Organized Labor in America! The Central Trades and Labor Union 
of East St. Louis has perpetrated a grim 
jest. Its motto as one may see by glancing 
back at page 221, is "Labor omnia vincit." 
Latin is apt to be a bit obscure, so we 
translate : "Labor conquers everything." It 
does. In East St. Louis it has conquered 
Liberty, Justice, Mercy, Law and the Democracy which is a nation's vaunt. 
And what of the Federal Government? The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE. 
"His OWN COUNTRY " (Bobbs-Merrill Co., $1.50), by Paul Kester, has 
too many characters, and is too long for 
such strenuous times as these, but it is completely absorbing. It tells of a slave-boy, 
Julius Caesar, who, after the Civil War, 
goes to Canada, marries a white woman, 
studies medicine, and becomes a successful 
physician. But "his own country," Virginia, calls him; he buys, through agents, 
the property which had once been his 
master's and returns to his home. Thence 
the story—a dire and terrible one of humiliation, suffering and blood-shed for both 
races. Mr. Kester offers no solution of the 
problem, but his work is, however, in spite 
of a leaning toward melodrama, significant 
in that he shows the increasing realization 
of the literary value of the relations between the two races. And again he directs 
attention to the crux of the whole situation 
when he speaks of the possession by Julius 
Caesar of "those blended qualities which resulted from the union of the white and 
black blood and which refused to be AS ­
signed to either, independent of the other." 
Magazines for June and July have published articles of interest to us as follows: 
"Race Problems in South African 
Churches," Biblical World, June, 1917; 
"Black Music and its Future Tran3latio n 
into Real Art, " Current Opinion, July 1, 
1917; "Negro Vote in Old New York, " D. 
R. Fox, Political Science Quarterly, June, 
1917; "Farm Training for Negroes, Essential Factor in Colored Education in the 
South," Surrey, June 23, 1917; "Negro 
Goes North," Ray Stannard Baker, World's 
Work, July 1, 1917; "Eugenics of the Negro 
Race, " Kelly Miller, Scientific Monthly, 
June 1, 1917; "Negro Education," Nation, 
June 28, 1917. 
W e have received the following pamphlets: "The Farmer and the Single Tax, " 
by Henry George; "The Mexican People and 
Their Detractors," by Fernando Gonzalez 
Roa ; "The Truth About Lynching," by As a 
Philip Randolph; "Whenc e Came the Negro 
Race? " by Rev. William St. Augustine 
Lynch, and "The Chinese Social and Political Science Review, " by The Chinese Social 
and Political Science Association. 
The following book has been received: 
"The Wolf Brother," by James R. Reynolds. 
We announce also an important new book: 
"Culture and Ethnology," by Robert H. 
Lowie, Ph. D. 
THE LESSON OF DETROIT 
DETROIT is meeting and solving with 
great success the problem of caring 
for its increasing colored population. If 
other northern towns would employ the 
same sensible and practical methods, race 
friction engendered by the migration upheaval would be greatly decreased. Mr. 
Forrester B. Washington, the Negro director of the Detroit League on Urban Conditions among Negroes, tells at length in the 
Survey of his city's philanthropy. He says: 
The first prerequisite in the task of organizing a local community is the establishment of a vocational bureau which should 
strive to make itself acquainted with every 
possible industrial opening for Negroes in 
the city and, on the other hand, make its 
presence widely known so that the immigrant Negro will be directed to it immediately on arrival. The Detroit League on 
Urban Conditions among Negroes, therefore, has not been content merely with locating vacant jobs but has approached manufacturers of all kinds through distribution 
of literature and personal visits and has 
been successful during the last twelve 
months in placing 1,000 Negroes in employment other than unskilled labor. It has 
made itself known to immigrants by cards 
of direction placed in the hands of Negro 
employees about railway stations and intends, as soon as its funds permit, to station 
a capable, level-headed representative at 
each of the railway stations of Detroit to 
direct Negro immigrants to the league's 
office or to other responsible individuals and 
societies who will look after their welfare. 
It has persuaded the proprietor of a local 
moving picture theatre, which is a great 
gathering place for colored newcomers, to 
run lantern slides nightly announcing that 
employment and other services can be secured free at the office of the league. 
In order to care for the women and girls 
who are beginning to appear in appreciable 
numbers, five cigar manufacturers in the 
city were induced to experiment in employing them, and a sixth has started a new 
plant employing only colored help. To solve 
the difficult problem of the first week's 
board, the league has arranged with certain 
factories a system of checks issued to guarantee payment for bills incurred at restaurants and boarding houses. Some direct 
arrangements previously made between certain factories and boarding-house keepers 
239 240 TH E CRISIS 
resulted in exploitation of the immigrant 
by the latter. 
The establishment of a bureau of investigation and information regarding housing 
comes next in importance. The character 
of the house into which Negro immigrants 
go has a direct effect on their health, their 
morals and their efficiency. The rents 
charged determine whether the higher 
wages received in the North are real or 
only apparent, whether the change in environment has been beneficial or detrimental. The tendency is to exploit the 
Negro immigrant in this particular. Rents 
charged him in Detroit have risen by from 
50 to 200 per cent in one year. He is forced 
into a district inhabited by colored people 
where housing accommodation is inadequate for those already there. The proximity of the colored district in most northern cities to the center is responsible for 
the imposition of the vice district upon the 
Negro. This bureau should, therefore, scour 
the city for every available house, tenement 
or room inside or outside the recognized 
Negro district. It should make also a thorough investigation of comparative rents 
charged Negroes and whites and give the 
findings the fullest publicity. The bureau 
should constantly remind employers of 
Negro labor that it is to their advantage to 
see that the Negro is well housed and that, 
if nobody else will build, it is good business 
for them to do so. 
The Detroit Urban League has induced 
one of the largest foundries to build lowpriced homes for its colored employees near 
the plant. It also has somewhat relieved 
the housing problem by the purchase of 
leases from the proprietresses of a number 
of disorderly houses which were closed by 
the police. In each case the league persuaded some manufacturer to take over the 
lease, and in this way a large number of 
colored families were accommodated. It also 
keeps a list of empty houses and has been 
surprised to find how many of them are not 
listed by commercial real estate agents. It 
uses the daily and Negro press in appeals 
for more notifications. A list of furnished 
rooms also is kept and immigrants are kept 
away from those connected with disorderly 
houses. Lists of these rooms are furnished 
to factories. 
Much strength can be added to the program and much energy saved by enlisting 
the aid of every possible organization in the 
city whose functions can in any way be construed as touching on Negro migration. The 
Urban League found the Board of Commerce 
exceedingly willing to co-operate in a movement for the investigation and improvement 
of working conditions of Negro employees 
in the various manufacturing plants in the 
city. The Board of Health gave considerable assistance in obtaining better and more 
sanitary housing conditions. The aid of 
several mothers' clubs among the colored 
women was enlisted to instruct immigrant 
mothers in the proper diet and clothing for 
children in a northern climate. From the 
outset, the aim was not only to put each 
immigrant in a decent home but also to connect him with some church. Many times 
the churches have reciprocated with considerable material as well as spiritual assistance. 
But the greatest co-operation received has 
been that of the Young Negroes' Progressive Association to which reference has already been made. This is a body of thirtyfour young colored men, most of them attending the various schools and colleges 
about Detroit. They have been the finest 
possible agent in the development of all the 
different activities. 
In the adjustment of the Negro, a definite place must be given to the development 
of industrial efficiency. This is perhaps the 
most important feature in the program; the 
welfare of the Negro in his new environment depends upon the opinion that the 
community has of him. If the community 
can be convinced that the Negro is and always will be a business asset, we need not 
worry much about his housing, employment 
and recreation. But the Negro has got to 
convince the captains of industry. This he 
can only do by developing to a maximum 
his industrial efficiency. The more trades 
and occupations Negroes become familiar 
with, the more efficient they will be as a 
race, and the greater an asset to the community. Therefore the league has endeavored to get them into as many different 
kinds of employment as possible. It also 
uses every opportunity to develop individual 
efficiency by calling the attention of Negro 
employees to the fact that they must be 
punctual, zealous and ambitious in their 
work. These points are always emphasized 
when a Negro is sent to a job. 
In pursuance of this object the league, 
with the assistance of the progressive association, is carrying on a movement which, I 
think, is unique. Representatives of the two 
organizations visit the various factories 
where large numbers of Negroes are employed and talk to them during the noon 
hour on the necessity of creating the best 
possible impression at the present time so 
that they may be certain of retaining their 
jobs in the future. At the same time, the 
speakers circulate these cards: 
WH Y HE FAILE D 
He watched the clock. 
He was always behindhand. 
He asked too many questions. 
His stock excuse was "I forgot. " 
He wasn't ready for the next step. 
He did not put his heart in his work. 
He learned nothing from his blunders. 
He was contented to be a second-rater. 
He didn't learn that the best part of his 
salary was not in his pay envelope 
SUCCESS. TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 241 
NOTE: By not paying strict attention to 
the above details you may not be able to 
keep your job after the war is ended and 
foreign labor is again available. 
Ne w Comers to Detroit 
You can find employment 
and 
be directed to decent lodgings 
FRE E of charge 
at the 
DETROIT LEAGUE ON URBAN CONDITIONS 
AMONG NEGROES 
297 St. Antoine St. Cherry 1325 
Forrester B. Washington, Director 
THE NEGRO SILENT PARADE 
ON the afternoon of Saturday July 28, 
a vast body of Negroes marched 
through the streets of New York in silent 
protest against the recent race riots and 
outrages. The New York American says: 
In silent protest against the recent killing 
of Negroes in race riots in Waco, Memphis 
and East St. Louis, 15,000 Negroes marched 
here yesterday afternoon. The parade 
formed in Fifth avenue and marched from 
Fifty-seventh street to Madison Square. 
Placards carried by boy scouts, aged men 
and by women and children explained the 
purpose of the demonstration. 
A detailed account of the causes for 
which the parade was held is given as follows by the New York Times: 
During the progress of the march circulars were distributed among the crowds telling of the purpose which brought the Negroes together. Under the caption, "Wh y 
Do We March? " the circular read, in part, 
as follows: 
"We march because by the grace of God 
and the force of truth the dangerous, hampering walls of prejudice and inhuman injustices must fall. 
"We march because we want to make impossible a repetition of Waco, Memphis, and 
East St. Louis by arousing the conscience 
of the country, and to bring the murderers 
of our brothers, sisters and innocent children to justice. 
"We march because we deem it a crime to 
be silent in the face of such barbaric acts. 
"We march because we are thoroughly 
opposed to Jim Crow cars, etc., segregation, discrimination, disfranchisement, 
lynching, and the host of evils that are 
forced on us. It is time that the spirit of 
Christ should be manifested in the making 
and execution of laws. 
"We march because we want our children 
to live in a better land and enjoy fairer 
conditions than have fallen to our lot. 
"We march in memory of our butchered 
dead, the massacre of honest toilers who 
were removing the reproach of laziness and 
thriftlessness hurled at the entire race. 
They died to prove our worthiness to live. 
We live in spite of death shadowing us and 
ours. We prosper in the face of the most 
unwarranted and illegal oppression. 
"We march because the growing consciousness and solidarity of race, coupled 
with sorrow and discrimination, have made 
us one; a union that may never be dissolved 
in spite of shallow-brained agitators, scheming pundits and political tricksters who secure a fleeting popularity and uncertain 
financial support by promoting the disunion 
of a people who ought to consider themselves as one." 
Although the paraders marched by in 
silence their sentiments were proclaimed by 
many mottoes, a complete list of which follows : 
"Memphis and Waco—Centers of American Culture?" 
"Alabama needs 75,000 Ballots to elect 
10 Congressmen. Minnesota needs 300,000. 
How do they do it? " 
"350,000 voters in the South have as much 
political power as the 1,500,000 voters of 
New York State. How do they do it? " 
"Each white man in the South by disfranchising the black working man casts 
from 3 to 13 times as many ballots as 
YOU. " 
"Georgia and New Jersey have the same 
vote for President. Georgia casts 80,000 
votes; New Jersey casts 430,000." 
"Make America safe for Democracy." 
"Taxation without representation is tyranny." 
"Thou shalt not kill." 
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against 
thy neighbor." 
"We hold these truths to be self-evident 
that all men are created equal. That they 
are endowed by their Creator with certain 
unalienable rights. That among these are 
LIFE, LIBERT Y and the pursuit of 
HAPPINESS. " 
"If you are of African descent tear off 
this corner." 
"America has lynched without trial 2,867 
Negroes in 31 years and not a single murderer has suffered." 
"200,000 black men fought for your liberty in the Civil War. " 
"The first blood for American Independence was shed by a Negro— Crispus 
Attucks." 
"We have fought for the liberty of white 
Americans in 6 wars; our reward is East 
St. Louis." 
"12,000 of us fought with Jackson at New 
Orleans." 242 
The Cri
TH E NEGR O SILEN T PARADE , A T FORTY-SECON D STREE T AN D FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . 
C . T. Adams. NEGRO SILENT PARADE 243 
TH E NEGR O SILEN T PARADE , FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Underwood & Underwood. 244 TH E CRISIS 
"W e fought with Perry at Lake Erie." 
"10,000 of us fought in the Spanish American War. " 
"From Bunker Hill to Carrizal we have 
done our bit." 
"The world owes no man a living, but 
every man an opportunity to earn a living." 
"W e are maligned as lazy and murdered 
when we work. " 
"We are excluded from the unions, and 
condemned for not joining them." 
"Repelled by the unions we are condemned 
as scabs." 
"They refuse us opportunity, then deny 
our capacity." 
"Suffer little children and forbid them 
not." 
"Unto the least of these my brethren." 
"3,000 Negroes fought for American Independence under George Washington." 
"We helped to plant the flag in every 
American Dominion." 
"Were we first in France? Ask Pershing." 
"Thirty-four Negroes have received Carnegie hero medals." 
"Our music is the only American music." 
"Give us a chance to live." 
"So treat us that we may love our country." 
"Interpret for us in living, loving acts, 
the religion of Jesus Christ." 
"India is abolishing caste; America is 
adopting it." 
"Race prejudice is the offspring of ignorance and the mother of lynching." 
"If fault is to be found with color, blame 
God and yourselves." 
"Not alms but OPPORTUNITY. " 
"Patriotism and loyalty presuppose protection and liberty." 
"We have 1,000,000 farmers." 
"We have 30.000 carpenters." 
"We have 30,000 clergymen." 
"We have 12,000 brick and stone masons." 
"We have 30.000 teachers." 
"We have 3,000 physicians." 
"We own 250,000 farms with 20,000,000 
acres of land worth $500,000.000." 
"We have church property worth $76,-
000,000." 
"A square deal for every man."—T. R. 
"The Negro has never betrayed the flag, 
attempted to assassinate the President or 
any official of this government." 
"We have 60,000 iron and steel workers." 
"We have 20,000 slaughter and packinghouse operators." 
"No land that loves to lynch 'niggers' 
can lead the hosts of Almighty God." 
"Put the spirit of Christ in the making 
and execution of laws." 
"You r hands are full of blood." 
"Mother, do lynchers go to heaven?" 
"Cain, where is Abel, thy brother?" 
"The great contradiction—love of God and 
hatred of man." 
"Color, blood and suffering have made us 
one." 
"Pray for the Lady MacBeths of East St. 
Louis." 
The New Yor k World says: 
The Rev. Dr. H. C. Bishop was President 
of the parade. The Rev. Dr. Charles D. 
Martin was Secretary. The Rev. F. A. 
Cullen was Vice President. The first Deputy Marshal was J. Rosamond Johnson. 
Others were A. B. Cosey, C. H. Payne, formerly a member of Troop A, Ninth Cavalry; the Rev. E. W. Daniels, Allen Wood, 
James W. Johnson and John Nail, Jr. 
Rev. G. M. Plaskett and Dr. W. E. B. Du 
Bois were in the line of officers. 
THE WAR IN AFRICA 
H. G. WELL S writes in Cassell's magazine : 
"This talk of 'legitimate expansion' is 
indeed now only an exploiter's cant. The 
age of 'expansion', the age of European 
'empires' is near its end. No one who can 
read the signs of the times in Japan, in 
India, in China, can doubt it. It ended in 
America a hundred years ago; it is ending 
now in Asia ; it will end last in Africa, and 
even in Africa the end draws near 
"As administrators the British are a race 
coldly aloof. They have nothing to give a 
black people, and no disposition to give. 
The Latin-speaking peoples, the Mediterranean nations, on the other hand, have 
proved the most successful assimilators of 
other races that mankind has ever known. 
Alexander Dumas is not the least of the 
glories of France. In a hundred years' 
time black Africa, west of Tripoli, from 
Oran to Rhodesia, will, I believe, talk 
French. And what does not speak French 
will speak the closely related Italian. I 
do not see why this Latin black culture 
should not extend across equatorial Afric a 
to meet the Indian influence at the coast and 
reach out to join hands with Madagascar. 
I do not see why the British flag should be 
any impediment to the Latinization of tropical Africa or to the natural extension of 
the French and Italian languages through 
Egypt. I guess, however, that it will be an 
Islamic and not a Christian cult that will be 
talking Italian and French. Fo r the Frenchspeaking civilization will make roads not 
only for French, Belgians and Italians, but 
for the Arabs whose religion and culture 
already lie like a net over black Africa. . . 
" A unification of Africa under Latin Auspices carries with it now no threat of missionary invasion. Africa will be a fair 
field for all religions and the religion to 
which the Negro will take will be the religion that best suits his needs. That reli-THE LOOKING GLASS 245 
gion, we are told by nearly everyone who 
has a right to speak upon such questions, 
is Islam, and its natural propagandist is 
the Arab. There is no reason why he 
should not be a Frenchified Arab. " 
TWO POINTS OF VIEW 
THE other man's point of view is strikingly afforded by the African Times 
and Orient Review in a comment on the 
article by John H. Harris on "Native Races 
and Peace Terms " in the Contemporary 
Review. Mr. Harris says: 
To this one may fittingly add a quotation 
from the article by John H. Harris on "Native Races and Peace Terms " in the Contemporary Review: 
"Wh o gave the European nations the 
right to barter these people as a result of 
war for which they had no shadow of responsibility? The answer to these questions 
is self-evident. But whilst in equity there 
can only be one answer common sense forces 
us to admit the impracticability of summoning to a European Peace Congress illiterate 
Mandingoes, Fiots, Herreros, Fans, the senile Polynesian, or the wild Bedouin. Yet 
there is one point at least which the European powers should concede to these native 
races, namely, to agree that within one 
year of the declaration of peace another 
European and American International Congress should be held to amend the existing 
agreements for maintaining the rights, liberties and welfare of native races. 
"This course is dictated no less by equity 
than by the truest interests of the colonizing powers of Europe and America. It 
must not be overlooked that almost every 
acre of those two million square miles is 
sparsely populated and that hardly fifty 
miles of it is capable of white colonization, 
except by the aid of an adequate supply of 
colored labor. If the Great Powers should 
make the fatal blunder of reshuffling these 
territories without at the same time agreeing to consider once again the supreme 
problem of conserving the native population, they would be almost better advised 
to surrender such areas once again to the 
recuperative forces of so-called barbarism, 
say to the third and fourth generation, for 
by that time the indigenous populations 
might possibly regain their stamina. 
"Apart altogether from the dictates of 
right action and material interests the lapse 
of time demands another International Congress. It is now thirty-two and twenty-six 
years respectively since the Berlin and 
guiding principles for the abolition of slavery, the restriction of the sale of arms and 
Brussels congresses met and laid down 
alcohol. That these congresses did not accomplish all that was hoped of them is notorious, but equally is it true that they 
raised to a higher level than ever before 
the accepted standards for the treatment of 
native races. Thus there are at least three 
cogent reasons, each of which constitutes 
an all-sufficient argument for securing as 
a condition of peace, that within a defined 
period after the declaration of peace there 
should be held another International Congress on Native Affairs. 
"The suffering of native peoples and the 
depopulation of their territories within the 
last fifty years has demonstrated the evils 
of white industrialism, and if civilization 
will heed the lessons this martyrdom would 
teach it, there is yet time to stop that degradation, disintegration of tribal life and 
the thoughtless exploitation which will ultimately spell economic ruin to the white 
races no less than to the native tribes." 
To this the African Times and Oriental 
Review replies: 
Mr. Harris has written a very clever 
article. This article has been reprinted by 
his Society for distribution at threepence 
per copy, and the glowing criticisms of the 
Press have been printed on the cover. We 
said that Mr. Harris's article is clever because the plea he makes for the native is 
both excellent and able; but underlying it 
all is that patronising Anti-Slavery Society 
slime which sets down all Africans as illiterates, thereby showing the prime necessity 
for the existence of an Anti-Slavery Society 
in these days of freedom, enlightenment, 
and progressive European civilisation, and 
the incapacity of any African to voice intelligently the requirements of his people. 
Of course, we quite understand that Mr. 
Harris's duties necessarily take him among 
"illiterate Mandingos, Fiots, Herreros, 
Fans, and wild Bedouins," and we regret 
that during the reverend gentleman's wanderings he has met none other. We wonder what Mr. Harris's West African friends 
will think of these statements. Save us 
from our friends! ' W e merely quote Mr. 
Harris's article to show what a pernicious 
influence such statements have upon the 
African and Oriental. It is because Mr. 
Harris's article is so cleverly written, showing on the face of it purity of intention, 
that it is dangerous to our aims and desires. The average Briton—even many 
members of the British House of Commons 
—knows nothing whatever about native peo-246 TH E CRISIS 
pies. The British people depend, for the 
most part, upon such persons as Mr. Harris 
for information. This gentleman issues a 
statement which bears the stamp of reason 
and fairness, but when read in the light of 
local conditions we find the fairness is not 
so fair as first it seemed, but that it contains a mendacious undercurrent of native 
inferiority and illiteracy which needs to be 
sheltered under the protecting mantle of 
Mr. Harris and the Anti-Slavery Society. 
In order to illustrate more clearly our 
point, it is only necessary to quote a few 
paragraphs from a memorial sent to the 
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs by 
Mr. Harris's Society, dated Jan. 22, 1917:— 
"1 . Whatever the final outcome of European hostilities may be, it is quite clear that 
the political status of large areas of tropical 
and sub-tropical territories will be vitally 
affected. An ideal step would be that before 
such changes take place the inhabitants 
should be given a voice in shaping their own 
destiny. We admit, however, that so far as 
most territories are concerned, this would 
not be a practical proposal. But this very 
fact appears to make it more than ever incumbent on the stronger Powers to devise 
means for adequately safeguarding the 
rights and welfare of the native inhabitants." **** * 
"3. It will be admitted that the last 
twenty-five years have witnessed in tropical 
and sub-tropical territories the most deplorable treatment of native peoples which has 
resulted in an appalling depopulation reaching several millions. Apart from humanitarian considerations, this represents a grave 
disaster to industrial progress which is only 
possible in such countries by the help of an 
adequate supply of willing' indigenous labor." 
So far good, but under the sub-head 
"Suggested Reforms," we find this pertinent 
paragraph:— 
"(1 ) Reserve Areas of Land.— Experience has shown the social and economic advantage of setting aside a large area or 
areas in every dependency of suitable lands 
for the exclusive and secure use of native 
tribes, at the same time making provision 
for the entrance of white missionary and 
administrative forces to guide these tribes 
in the evolution of a sound administration 
of purely native affairs." 
* * * * * * * 
The whole difficulty which faces the AntiSlavery Society and other European bodies 
dabbling in native affairs is to be found in 
the assumption that such bodies consider 
themselves capable of dealing with native 
conditions without first consulting the native as to his own requirements. For this 
reason such efforts are foredoomed to failure. Throughout the continent of Africa 
the various peoples and tribes have managed their own affairs for centuries before 
the coming of the European, and we claim 
that the native, being neither child nor fool, 
can continue to "carry on" without the meddling of these busybodies. It is indeed true 
that many of the old administrative injustices and abuses which the natives suffered at the hands of oppressive Europeans 
have been rectified by the efforts of the 
Anti-Slavery Society, but we feel that the 
Society, to put it mildly, is out of touch with 
progressive native thought. The African 
and Oriental want equal opportunity and 
no favor. They want a better system of 
education on secular and industrial lines. 
And above all, they do not want the white 
missionary. For it were more desirable to 
have a healthy community of moral pagans 
than a psalm-singing tribe of moral lepers 
and hypocrites. 
ENCOURAGEMENT 
THE present condition of the Negro is 
by no means static. These times of 
confusion and uncertainty are merely the 
backwash of revolutionary changes produced by the great war. The difficulties 
set in the Negro's path are really milestones along the way of his progress. Says 
the Philadelphia Public Ledger: 
The avidity of the Negro race for education is positively amazing. Few are the 
parents who do not send their children to 
school, no matter what the sacrifice. In a 
certain section of South Carolina, during 
the draft process, it was discovered that the 
percentage of illiteracy among the whites 
was far in excess of that among the Negroes; a situation considered so alarming 
that radical measures for its rectification 
have been proposed. Compulsory education 
in South Carolina, a big political issue, became a political issue because the poor 
whites would not be educated and the poor 
Negroes would not be uneducated. The 
Governor of Georgia, when recently inaugurated, intimated that the situation was serious. He proposed to meet it, and emigration, not by reducing school facilities for 
Negroes, but by increasing those school facilities, thereby capitalizing an enormous 
dormant asset. 
Never has the Negro race, as a race, 
been in such a strong strategic position as 
it is at present. But the golden opportunity 
for progress is being seriously jeopardized 
by such outbreaks as occurred a few weeks 
ago in East St. Louis, and this week in 
Chester. The class of Negroes recruited for 
industrial work in the North is unfortunately not the best class. Loafers and more or 
less desperate characters from the river districts of New Orleans, Mobile, Savannah 
and Charleston have been induced easily to 
migrate. They find life harder, work more 
severe, the restrictions of society more rigorous and the opportunities for petty criminality greater. They are not unionized. 
They are not versed in the vernacular of 
labor. They are not class conscious and 
they exasperate men who are. Race riots 
in the North are in origin often industrial 
riots. TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 247 
In the South there are powerful elements 
working to prevent the Negro from leaving; in the North there are powerful elements working to prevent the Negro from 
coming. Both, we believe, are wrong. The 
South needs a different population ratio between the races. It needs more than anything else an influx of small white farmers, to whom its rich lands should be a compelling inducement. The North, on the 
other hand, has rare opportunities for certain types of Negroes, in certain types of 
labor, where none are superior to them in 
ability. A competitive labor market for 
Negroes would increase rapidly the prosperity of the race, and, therefore, the prosperity of the entire country. 
The nation, and every citizen of it, assumed a direct responsibility for the Negro 
when he was emancipated. Out of indefensible riots some good will come if earnest, capable leaders are made to feel the 
burden of helpfulness which rests on them. 
The Negro should not be driven back; he 
•should be aided in fitting himself to the 
new conditions he meets in the North. We 
should regard it as a national misfortune 
if prejudice at this crucial time should stifle 
the Negro ambition and tear the heart out 
of a race which has just begun to realize its 
possibilities and its future. 
"FRESH FIELDS" 
"IDA CROUCH-HAZLETT writing in The 
Call, New York, foresees a remarkable 
future for the Negro. She says: 
August Forel, the world's authority on 
the sex question, states in his work, "The 
Sexual Question," that the North American 
mixed race will diminish and gradually become extinguished and will be replaced by 
Chinese or Negroes. In other words, the 
white race is a vanishing factor in this 
country. What we are pleased to call the 
"old Americans " are not having children. 
Look among your friends and count for 
yourselves. W e have depended on the prolific Balkans for our population increase. 
Not only is that supply cut off for generations to come by slaughtered Europe, but 
those who come here get the American habit 
and cease to have large families. And then 
we have acquired birth control, which accelerates the tendency. Moreover, the Southern white workers are degenerate. Sprung 
originally in great part from criminals and 
derelicts transported from England to her 
penal colonies their powers of rehabilitation 
were poor to begin with. They were forced 
to compete with slave labor, and for generations their existence has been one of the 
most miserable poverty, with the direful 
consequences. 
They have had no schooling and live in 
the grossest ignorance, the name "poor 
white trash," "southern crackers," being a 
synonym for all that is ignorant, dirty and 
degraded. Their systems are poisoned by 
their horrible food, a poverty diet, and their 
extreme ignorance about preparing it; 
while men, women and children fairly eat 
tobacco, and drink the vilest coffee habitually. They are anaemic, diseased, suffering 
from pellagra, hook-worm, tuberculosis and 
universal affections. Their families are becoming small, high death rate among the 
children and high rate of barrenness. 
The Negroes are taking the place of this 
vanishing and worthless race. They do all 
the work. The whites are disappearing 
from the farms, the landlords preferring 
Negro tenants because they are better workers, and men, women and children can be 
exploited to a greater degree. Those whites 
that have energy enough to get out of the 
country are moving westward. Moreover, 
the Negro race has the elasticity of a young 
race, developing into its prime. In spite of 
the brutality of their treatment for hundreds of years they are light-hearted and 
happy. Both men and women have remarkably beautiful figures, strong, well-developed, beautifully molded, fitted for models 
for the New York studios. Wherever they 
have a working chance they show thrift. 
They are already in possession of large 
tracts of southern farmland. The writer 
has driven a distance of some seven or eight 
miles, where the whole surrounding country 
was owned by Negro farmers. 
A comrade of Winston-Salem, N. C , a 
large tobacco manufacturer, said to me, "I 
have worked Negroes all my life: I am thoroughly familiar with them, and I want to 
say that they are going to become the landed aristocrats of the South." How is that 
for a Southern man? In Ocala, Florida, the 
largest and best department store in the 
town, is owned by Negroes in the Negro 
quarter, and often the whites go there for 
goods that they cannot get at their own 
stores. 
They respond rapidly to any advantages 
that are given them. They absorb knowledge like a sponge. The public school was 
established in the South at the point of the 
rifle. The whites have always feared the 
educated Negro. The only education they 
get now is given grudgingly, and with the 
poorest equipment, and buildings which are 
tremendously overcrowded, and in many localities no provision is made for their education whatever. But, as evidence of the 
power of economic compulsion, in the cotton 
mill sections we see the white children in 
the mills, their existence sapped by an increasing ignorance, degeneracy and mortality; while the Negro children are in school, 
becoming educated, dressing well, as their 
parents do the work that is more highly 
paid. This is especially noticeable at Columbus, Ga. As more blacks leave for the 
North those that remain are more highly 
paid, as the whites cannot do effective work 
in the terrible heat. 
According to this writer the Negro is 
also the true Socialist. 248 TH E CRISIS 
Again It Is September 
By JESSIE FAUSET 
With a Drawing 
By LAURA WHEELER 
Again it is September! 
It seems so strange that I who 
made no vows 
Should sit here desolate this 
golden weather 
And wistfully remember— 
A sigh of deepest yearning, 
A glowing look and words that 
knew no bounds, 
A swift response, an instant 
glad surrender 
To kisses wild and burning! 
Ay me! 
Again it is September! 
It seems so strange that I who 
kept those vows 
Should sit here lone, and spent, 
and mutely praying 
That I may not remember! TH E SO-CALLE D BLAC K PERIL IN SOUT H AFRIC A 249 
NEGRO SOLDIERS 
By ROSCOE C. JAMISON 
THES E truly are the Brave, 
These men who cast aside 
Old memories, to walk the blood-stained 
pave 
Of Sacrifice, joining' the solemn tide 
That moves away, to suffer and to die 
For Freedom—when their own is yet denied! 
O Pride! O Prejudice! When they pass by, 
Hail them, the Brave, for you now crucified! 
These truly are the Free, 
These souls that grandly rise 
Above base dreams of vengeance for their 
wrongs, 
Wh o march to war with visions in their 
eyes 
Of Peace through Brotherhood, lifting glad 
songs 
Aforetime, while they front the firing-line. 
Stand and behold! They take the field 
today, 
Shedding their blood like Him now held 
divine, 
That those who mock might find a better 
way ! 
Carleton Thorpe 
THE SO-CALLED BLACK PERIL IN SOUTH 
AFRICA 
By ALICE WERNE R 
I HAV E often been asked by Englishwomen whether I was not afraid to go 
about alone in Africa, and have always had 
to answer that I never found cause to regret doing so. It is true that my solitary 
journeyings took place not in South Africa 
but in Nyasaland and other regions where 
white people were comparatively few. In 
Natal, to which my South African experience was confined, there was the same need 
for reasonable precaution (or perhaps not 
quite so much!) as in any "civilized" country. 
South Africa is, or was till recently, subject to periodical outbursts of panic in connection with what is termed the "Black 
Peril" (or, in my day, the "Social Pest"), 
and this involves a great deal of wild talk 
and writing—as usual, from those who 
know least about the matter. This was especially marked just after the "rising" of 
190C (another story, and a deplorable one). 
I have a note, e. g., of some articles by Mr. 
Arnold White—one of them in the Sunday 
Sun, in which he said that there was 
"scarcely a family" in South Africa, Dutch 
or British, without some tragedy to serve as 
an excuse for race-hatred. No evidence was 
offered and I have no hesitation in saying 
that the statement, as it stands, is untrue. 
My business is with that aspect of the 
question which especially concerns women. 
The subject is one which many people shrink 
from handling at all, while others cannot 
touch it without losing their heads,—and 
this does not make it easier to ascertain the 
truth. 
I lived for some years in Central and 
Southern Africa—part of the time virtually alone with another white woman among 
"kraal" natives, and but for the newspapers 
should scarcely have known that a Black 
Peril existed. One heard of bad characters 
sometimes, though I, personally, did not 250 TH E CRISIS 
happen to come into contact with them;— 
but we do not talk of a White Peril when 
our neighbor's house is burgled, or even if 
a murder takes place in the next street. If 
we begin to compare criminal statistics, the 
number of convictions per head in Cape 
Colony and Natal compares favorably 
enough with the figures for Great Britain, 
especially when we consider how large a 
proportion of the former should never have 
been placed under the heading "crime " at 
all; e. g., such offences as failure to pay the 
dog-tax or contravention of incomprehensible forest regulations. 
If a Black Peril does exist, I cannot believe that it is only or chiefly the "Blacks " 
who are responsible for it. If, as some 
writers complain, "the black man has lost 
awe of the white," whose fault is that? 
Nothing is more pathetic than the belief in 
English justice which has survived one disappointment after another, as witnessed by 
the deputation which came over in 1914 to 
appeal to the King against the Lands Ac t 
passed by the Union Government. 
It is undeniable that cases of the kind 
more particularly intended by those who 
use the expression—that is, outrages by 
black men on white women—have occurred 
in South Africa ; perhaps that they have, 
as some assert, increased of late years. We 
may doubt, however, whether they are relatively more frequent than outrages by 
tramps on lonely English roads. Of course 
there are native criminals, just as there 
are European ones,—but it is utterly false 
to say, as some do, that the native, as such, 
is more likely to be a criminal than not. On 
the contrary, a careful study of the magistrates' annual reports conveys the impression that the bulk of the population, away 
from the towns, is, if anything, exceptionally peaceable and law abiding. 
It is agreed on all hands that "outrages" 
in the conventionally specialized sense were 
unknown in the early days of our South 
African colonies, when settlers were few 
and more defenceless, in relation to the 
"savages" surrounding them, than they are 
now. Women may sometimes have been 
killed in the border frays of the old times,—-
the Boer women were wont to share the 
fortunes of war with their men—but, as a 
rule, both Zulus and Cape "Kafirs" were 
careful to spare them. For white women 
as captives, the Zulus had, emphatically, no 
use. This arose partly from superstition, 
but also in a measure from racial self-respect. The Zulu has his own pride of race, 
and, without implying any depreciation of 
the white, his feeling, on the whole, is that 
"it is best each should keep to his own. " 
A word must be said as to the part played 
by superstition in this matter. The more 
we know about the ways of primitive peoples, the less reason we find for the supposed necessity of killing women before 
allowing them to fall into the hands of 
such. That is, speaking broadly, and without references to tribes who seem, like some 
of the Amerindians, to have been in the 
habit of torturing their captives. This 
is not the rule in Africa—if it occurs, there 
are special circumstances which need investigation. Where the sex relation in its 
most normal and legitimate form is a matter of dread and mystery, and surrounded 
by stringent taboos, the stranger woman 
will be avoided rather than sought, even 
when in the power of her captors. Even 
so comparatively advanced a culture-stage 
as that of the Hebrew legislation required 
a system of elaborate ceremonies to be gone 
through before the captive could be safely 
taken to wife. Perhaps Ara b influence has 
done something towards breaking down this 
feeling in East Africa, where the system of 
harem slavery has been responsible for 
some peculiarly horrible cases of violence 
and wrong. 
In Nyasaland, as I knew it, an Englishwoman who respected herself was perfectly 
safe among any number of "savages, " and 
the same is true of other parts of Afric a 
where conditions are at all primitive. 
I would not be understood as saying that 
one ought to encourage superstition as a 
safeguard and deliberately try to keep up 
the mystery; but one can at least see to it 
that respect does not diminish on closer 
acquaintance. Natives are discriminating 
critics of morals and manners, even where 
standards differ in detail. 
Zulu girls, before marriage, are very 
carefully looked after, though without any 
idea of restraint or seclusion. They never 
go to a distance from the kraal unattended, 
and should they come into town it is in 
troops of a dozen or more, attended by one 
or two matrons and perhaps a male relative. A woman walking alone may seem to 
invite familiarity by neglecting reasonable 
precautions. But this risk diminishes as 
the distance from European contact is in-TH E SO-CALLE D BLAC K PERIL IN SOUT H AFRIC A 251 
creased. In Nyasaland, for instance, or in 
remote parts of East Africa, it seemed to 
me that the Englishwoman traveling alone 
was accepted as illustrating one more 
vagary of an unaccountable race, and allowed to pass as such. True, I heard myself described with unflattering directness, 
though with no intentional lack of respect, 
as "an aged person"; but others, of whom 
as much could not be said, have had the 
same experience. Why, then, do we hear 
so much of this particular danger in South 
Africa ? 
I would remark, in the first place, that 
many cases are wholly imaginary—the outcome of preconceived erroneous notions and 
momentary panic. I remember one case 
when an excitable woman, walking home 
with her husband, on a Sunday evening, 
fancied that a passing native, who may 
or may not have accidentally brushed 
against her, had touched, or was about to 
touch, her arm. She screamed; the native, 
finding attention called to him, and knowing only too well what was likely to be 
the result, took to his heels, thereby establishing his guilt in the eyes of the bystanders, who immediately gave chase. Fortunately he was the better runner, and no one 
present knew him—so there was no case in 
court. At Kimberley, five years ago, a 
circumstantial story gained currency, which 
on inquiry proved to be entirely imaginary. 
Mr. Douglas Blackburn's "Leaven"—that 
work of fiction crammed full of fact—contains a scene which, if not actually as it 
stands taken from life, shows, at least, how 
such charges are sometimes manufacture!. 
The mistress of a boarding house, whose 
kitchen-boy has become possessed of a diamond, persuades him to give her the stone 
"to take care of " and afterwards denies all 
knowledge of it. When he persists in asking for it, she raises the alarm and brings 
the whole house down on him; and he is 
nearly lynched by the enraged boarders before being handed over to the police. In 
court he has not the ghost of a chance and 
receives a heavy sentence. 
If the whole question is impartially examined, the number of these alleged cases 
will have to be materially reduced. For 
those that remain, we have to remark: 
(1) Familiarity, as already implied, has 
bred contempt. Closer acquaintance has 
dispelled the mystery investing the white 
man and shown him to be no supernatural 
being, but of like passions with the black— 
if not, on occasion, actually worse—for the 
African is not deliberately cruel. There is 
no need to dwell on what the unspoilt native learns in towns, in mining camps and 
compounds, in gaol (he sometimes lands 
there while still unspoilt)—or to discuss 
how much the men, and still more the 
women whom he meets are able to do by 
way of increasing his respect for their race. 
What can be the moral effect produced by 
Europeans who make money out of the 
"Kafir" by the sale of alcohol and of objectionable photographs? 
(2) The native working in a town is not 
only exposed to the risks of evil association 
and example but removed from all the restraining influences of home and tribal life. 
We talk as if it were inevitable and nobody's fault that, with the advance of "civilization" the natives should be spoilt and degraded. This, at least, has been done, and 
done of set purpose:—we have tried our 
best to break up the tribal organization and 
destroy the power of the chiefs. We are 
finding it out too late—in South Africa— 
elsewhere, it may be, just in time. 
(3) Something must be allowed for retaliation. There is a consensus of testimony in this respect. Take that of Sir 
Liege Hulett, who said at Verulam (Natal) 
in April, 1906, that the (white) mounted 
police were "detested throughout the native 
locations on account of their immoralities." 
Or take the strong language used by Justice 
Dove-Wilson in the Barend Nel case (1911), 
when a white man charged with violence 
to a Zulu girl was acquitted by tae jury. 
Shortly before this, another white man had 
been tried in the Orange Free State on a 
similar charge. He pleaded consent, which 
his victim denied, and was discharged. 
In the same year occurred the famous 
Lewis case at Bulawayo, when a white man 
had killed a natice for "alleged indecent suggestions to his daughters (no acts 
were even alleged) the white community 
guaranteed his bail of £3,000 five times 
over; other white men throughout South 
Africa sent him telegrams congratulating 
him on his confessed act." (S. T. Plaatje 
in An African World, July 8, 1911). Putting these cases side by side, one finds it 
difficult to sympathize with a zeal for morality which is so conspicuously confined to 
one direction. 
I am aware that cowardly attempts are 252 THE CRISIS 
sometimes made to throw the whole blame 
on the native girls. Without discussing the 
value of this excuse from the abstract point 
of view, it is quite safe to say that, unless 
there has been demoralizing contact with 
Europeans, it is quite exceptional to find a 
native girl "soliciting." To forestall contradiction from people "on the spot," possessed of that amount of knowledge which 
is such a dangerous thing, I may say 
here that it seems, from the reports of various independent observer's, to be a common thing if not the rule among the Bantu 
for the first advance in sexual relations, 
whether legitimate or otherwise, to come 
from the woman. But whatever the reasons for this fact, which is deeply rooted 
in sociological conditions, it is an entirely 
different matter from that referred to 
above; and I repeat that if native girls are 
found making immoral advances to white 
men, it is the latter—or the conditions they 
have created— who are to blame. To illustrate this point I may recall how in man> 
books dealing with the West Coast of Africa 
(the first one that comes to mind is Tuckey's 
"Expedition to the Cataracts of the Congo, " 
1818), the statement is repeated with 
sickening iteration, that the natives have 
no morality, that the men are always on 
the look-out to hire their wives to strangers, 
or entrap the latter into adultery so that 
they may claim damages, etc., etc. They 
omit to notice, as a rule, that the places 
where these things happen were the very 
foci of the slave-trade. Before this plague 
had eaten into the vitals of the Coast, William Finch, in 1607, could write of Sierra 
Leone: "The men of this country . . . 
keep most faithfully to their wives, of whom 
they are not a little jealous. . . . They 
are very just and true in their dealings." 
The same was doubtless true of other 
places at that time, or somewhat earlier. 
To conclude, there is no proof that exceptional legislation, which is sometimes 
demanded, is needed to meet this kind of 
case in South Africa . Still less is there 
to justify the panic-stricken cry occasionally raised for the abrogation of all law 
and the condoning of such acts as that of 
Lewis at Bulawayo or of a resident of Nairobi (East Africa), who some years earlier, 
"took the law into his own hands" with 
even less excuse. But it sadly discounts 
our hopes of progress in the only real sense 
to find any one at this time of day seriously 
advocating such a remedy. 
THE RAGTIME REGIMENT 
By Henry Davis Middleton. 
"WAR ! War!! War!!! " John Brown, 
startled, let his weak watery 
eyes wander aimlessly across the way where 
a street orator stood upon a soap box 
haranguing a mass of idlers grouped about 
him. 
"This merciless war! This pitiless war!! 
This ruthless war!!! " roared the speaker. 
John Brown crossed the street and nudged 
and elbowed his way through the outer 
fringe of the crowd. 
"O, the horrors of this war! " bellowed 
the man on the box, the echo of his voice 
resounding above the rumble and roar of 
the noisy traffic of wagons, motors and 
street cars. 
With his hand cupped to his ear, that he 
might catch at once the sound and sense 
of the speaker's harangue, John Brown 
stood wedged in the midst of the eddying, 
pushing, polyglot mob. 
"Peace! Peace!! Peace!!! " suddenly 
roared the speaker, "World peace, peace 
without honor if you will, but peace at any 
price! " 
John Brown, veteran of the civil war 
gleaned from this last bit of oratory that 
the speaker was a pacifist, fat, pat, impatient and unpatriotic. He glared wildly 
up at him as the crowd lustily yelled its 
approval of the speaker's sentiments. His 
seventy year old body, electrified and fired 
by the patriotism that burned unquenchably and eternally within him, vibrated 
and pulsated with emotion; his scrawny 
gray beard fairly bristled as he mouthed 
murmurings of deprecation; his hands 
clenched in a frenzy of righteous anger. 
He wanted to cry out against this villifier, 
to refute his imputations, to stem the tide 
of abuse aimed by the speaker against his 
country—the country he had once fought TH E RAGTIM E REGIMEN T 253 
four long years to preserve—but the words 
stuck in his throat; and but for a sort of 
wheeze that escaped his chattering teeth, 
only to be lost in the uproarious din of the 
riotous rabble, like sparks as they flare up 
and flicker out as they are cast off from a 
tire-brand hurled through space—no sound 
escaped him. 
John Brown's eyes were unused to such 
scenes of anarchy as they now beheld; his 
ears were unaccustomed to such cowardly, 
undemocratic utterances as smote thorn— 
preachments of this demagogue that, 
dwarfed the souls and dampened the patriotism of men and dammed the deeds of 
their brave countrymen, 
"Whos e bones are dust, 
Whose good swords rust." 
Baffled but not beaten, distraught by the 
actions and utterances of these traitorous 
people, he wormed his way through and 
from this motley throng. For just then he 
remembered a spot in the great metropolis, 
far from the dm of downtown Chicago, 
where the shard of the pacifist propaganda 
had failed to hit its target; where Americanism and Democracy, real and unalloyed, 
permeated the very atmosphere—thither he 
resolved to turn his steps. 
Hailing a passing street car, Veteran 
Brown was soon within the proscribed 
realms of a despised, oppressed, rejected, 
but not depressed people—his own beloved 
people with whom loyalty is a hereditary 
trait and patriotism a passion perpetual, 
reverential and profound. 
He alighted unsteadily from the car and 
with the aid of his cane hobbled homeward, 
pausing here and there wherever his friends 
and neighbors were grouped discussing the 
declaration of war. 
"He's daffy," laughed the first group he 
encountered and to whom he unfolded his 
practical scheme of preparedness by suggesting the formation of a regiment of the 
citizens of the neighborhood for service in 
the present strife. "He's daffy, but he's 
all right at that price," they commented respectfully. 
"Bug-house, simply bug-house," was the 
slangy sentiment of the second group as he 
tottered about the walk endeavoring to define and impress upon them their duty. 
"He's bug-house, but we're with him just 
the same," they concluded. 
"Nutty, nutty, nutty," was the swan song 
of the next group, to whom he vigorously 
expounded the aims, purposes and ambitions 
of the proposed regiment. "He may be 
nutty, but what he says is true, beyond 
question," was their final verdict. 
Leisurely and reminiscently Veteran 
Brown resumed his stroll homeward, heartened by the unmistakable signs of approbation he had read beneath the outward unenthusiastic appearance of indifference of 
those with whom he had conferred. For he 
knew most intimately his people and their 
natures. He realized that while smarting 
under the lash of proscription and of the 
curse of civil and civic narrowness at the 
hands of an arrogant, despotic, defiled democracy, they would now in this crisis, as 
they always had, arise as one man in defence of the only country they knew—the 
only home they had. 
Just as Veteran Brown reached his home, 
his entrance thereto was arrested by the 
distant blare of bugles, the rattle of drums 
and piping of fifes. With the instinct of 
a homing pigeon, John Brown retraced his 
steps, circled the block and brought up at 
"attention" by the fence of the play-ground 
where the boy-scouts were manoeuvering to 
perfect themselves in the artifices of the 
scouts as set down in their manual. 
"Ah wants to borrer dem scouts of yourn 
termorrer," announced he to the scout-master lounging on the other side of the fence. 
"Yo u do? " laughed the scout-master indulgently rising to reach over the fence and 
shake hands with his old friend, the veteran, 
whom he had known since his boyhood 
days. "I am afraid they are too young as 
yet to enlist in the army and go into actual 
war, but they can help out," he encouraged. 
"Dat's jes' it," laughed the old veteran, 
good naturedly, "Ah wants dem jes' fo' to 
hep out." 
"When do you want them?" rejoined the 
scout-master, puzzled as to the veteran's 
intent. 
"Termorrer aftahnoon," replied the veteran with serious mien. 
"Then," replied the scout-master, "I will 
be able to furnish you three times the number of scouts here this afternoon, as tomorrow we have a mass drill of three 
troops of scouts with a massed drum, fife 
and bugle corps." "And"—added the scout-254 TH E CRISIS 
master, with a twinkle in his eye, "we are 
going to make a hike for a mile or two 
around the neighborhood. Come along," he 
added. 
"I'll be heah," promised the old veteran, 
"I'll be heah," he assured while the scoutmaster, at a total loss to know just what 
he had up his sleeve, bade him good-bye 
and turned to the inspection of his boys as 
John Brown turned his steps again homeward. 
The next afternoon the old veteran got 
out his G. A. R. uniform, brushed it up, 
polished up and pinned on his medals and 
prepared to make his way to the drill 
grounds of the boy-scouts. 
Strutting down the street on his way, 
he was overtaken and passed by two rollicking joyous youths. "He certainly is a 
ragtime old man," laughed one of them. 
"Ragtime, " muttered Brown to himself, 
"ragtime—I'll show them young fellers a 
thing or two, " thought he as he turned in 
at a garage. 
"Hello Brownie, old scout," greeted the 
day foreman as the veteran entered and 
approached him, "is your G. A. R. Post parading today? " he added. 
"Well, " stammered the veteran, "yas, an' 
no, dat is, de 'John Brown Post' is paradin'; 
but what I wants ter say is dis: has yo' 
ah saw an' hammer an' nails an' some light 
strips ob wood I kin git fo' tei mek ah 
bannah?" he queried. 
The foreman not only secured the desired 
material, but put together himself the 
rough wooden frame-work; sent out for a 
piece of white cloth to cover it and borrowing from a neighboring store, a paint 
pot and brush with which to letter it, he 
inquired of the veteran just what lettering 
he desired on it. 
"Nevah yo' mine, I kin do dat mahsef," 
grinned the old veteran enthusiastically as 
he perched his spectacles on the end of his 
nose, seized the brush and inscribed the 
banner with this legend: 
WANTED!—FITIN ' MENS ! 
N.LIST A T ONCE! 
JINE DE RAGTIM E REGIMENT ! 
Without waiting for the inscription to 
dry, John Brown bore his banner aloft and 
hurried to the drill ground of the scouts 
just in time to fall in at the rear as, led by 
the scout-master, who had forgotten all 
about his promise to the old veteran on the 
day before, they started on their hike about 
the neighborhood. 
With his head high John Brown hobbled 
and limped along in their wake surrounded, 
followed and escorted by innumerable street 
urchins and irrepressible small boys who 
rallied to his aid valiantly whenever he 
tired of carrying the cumbersome banner. 
Very soon the scouts turned into a side 
street which they traversed for a ways, 
when suddenly they swung into and up a 
business street and headed back toward 
their drill ground. 
When the scouts, with John Brown and 
his urchins trailing them, swept into this 
busy humming artery of trade and traffic 
there was a near-riot. 
The sight of the old veteran and his sign 
with its ragged guard of honor enticed 
loafers and loiterers from barber-shop, 
bath-house, pool-room and palm-garden. 
Restaurants contributed their hordes 
while the Y. M. C. A. and social centers 
along the line of march, added interested 
ones—flocking to view, jeer or join the odd 
procession. 
As the march proceeded the ranks behind John Brown filled up until, by the 
time the scouts reached their drill-ground, 
more than a hundred young fellows, of 
splendid physique, tramped swelteringly behind him and his loyal urchins—a fine nucleus for a regiment! 
As the scouts entered their play-ground 
and proceeded to disband John Brown, with 
difficulty, drew up his nondescript recruits 
in the street and lined them up at the curb. 
These stragglers would have disbanded 
and departed in double-quick time had not 
something in the old veteran's eyes, something in his manner, something in his 
speech—grim determination—overwhelmed 
them. 
The crowd stood about agape, while the 
old veteran tottered up and down the line 
in soldierly fashion, straightening up a 
shoulder here, pushing up a chin there, or 
ordering heels together and toes out yonder. 
In the meantime the scout-master and 
several of his boys came up and volunteered 
their services. When at last all the 
rookies were regulated in a line, as nearly 
perfect as possible, the old veteran stood 
back and scanned the whole line up and 
down. Then straightening his own stoop 
shoulders and bracing up with the air of a BLAC K SAMSO N O F BRANDYWIN E 255 
Brigadier-General, he utilized his cane as a 
sword as he called out: "Comp'ny, 'tenshun! 
—Mark time—huh!—Lef—right—lef— 
right—lef—right—lef—right—." 
One hundred pairs of eyes were focussed 
on the veteran drillmaster; one hundred 
pairs of feet shuffled gingerly as he sang 
out the see-saw count of beats—"Lef— 
right, lef—right, lef—right—." 
"Comp'ny, fo'ward—huh!," commanded 
the grizzled veteran. One hundred pairs of 
feet tramped, tramped, tramped irregularly 
across the street in the wake of the old 
drillmaster till at the opposite curb his 
abrupt command, "Comp'ny halt," brought 
them to a stop. 
"Fou'ahs—right, fo'ward huh!," was the 
next perplexing command. As the rookies 
started into the intricate execution of this 
order the massed drum, fife and bugle corps 
of the scouts fell in ahead of them and led 
them around the block, cheered every step 
of the way by the patriotic crowd of onlookers who came to cheer but remained to 
be fired by the enthusiasm of the drilling 
rookies. 
Day after day this nucleus of the regiment met, gathering recruits, ever improving both in quality and quantity. Soon 
public spirited citizens interested themselves to the extent of securing for them a 
drill hall. Others formed, organized and 
furnished a band. The Regular Army now 
furnished expert drillmasters and special 
instructors for officers. 
Within eight weeks John Brown's dream 
had come true. He had actually organized 
and put under arms a brawny, yet trim 
smart regiment, recruited up to full war 
strength, mustered into the Federal Service 
and ready to go into training camp to get 
its finishing touches. 
When at last, resplendent in their new 
uniforms, shouldering their infantry equipment and accoutrements, with their colors 
flying and the Regimental Band playing 
ragtime airs, they marched away to camp, 
riding beside the Colonel of the Regiment in 
the place of honor was John Brown, veteran, too old, but not too proud or too 
scared to fight. 
The regiment henceforth will be known 
officially as the 115th Volunteers, Illinois 
National Guard—but to every mother who 
has a son, to every girl who has a sweetheart, to every dad who has a boy and to 
every wife who has a husband whose name 
is enrolled upon its roster; to all of its well 
wishers and friends—and to whatever enemy 
they may encounter—it will be known forevermore as The Ragtime Regiment. 
Black Samson of Brandywine 
IN the fight at Brandywine, Black Samson, a giant Negro, armed with a scythe, 
sweeps his way through the red ranks." 
—C. M. Skinner's "Myths and Legends of 
Our Own Land." 
Gray are the pages of record, 
Dim are the volumes of eld; 
Else had old Delaware told us 
More that her history held. 
Told us with pride in the story, 
Honest and noble and fine, 
More of the tale of my hero, 
Black Samson of Brandywine. 
Sing of your chiefs and your nobles, 
Saxon and Celt and Gaul, 
Breath of mine ever shall join you, 
Highly I honor them all. 
Give to them all of their glory, 
But for this noble of mine, 
Lend him a tithe of your tribute, 
Black Samson of Brandywine. 
There in the heat of the battle, 
There in the stir of the fight, 
Loomed he, an ebony giant, 
Black as the pinions of night. 
Swinging his scythe like a mower 
Over a field of grain, 
Needless the care of the gleaners, 
Where he had passed amain. 
Was he a freeman or bondman? 
Was he a man or a thing? 
What does it matter? His brav'ry 
Renders him loyal—a king. 
If he was only a chattel, 
Honor the ransom may pay 
Of the royal, the loyal black giant 
Who fought for his country that day 
Noble and bright is the story, 
Worthy the touch of the lyre, 
Sculptor or poet should find it 
Full of the stuff to inspire. 
Beat it in brass and in copper, 
Tell it in storied line, 
So that the world may remember 
Black Samson of Brandywine. Men of the Month 
A POET AND PLAY-WRIGHT. 
RIDGEL Y TORRENCE is a poet who 
has spent much of his life among colored people in southern Ohio and has come 
to know and understand them, though not 
in the sense in which they are usually "understood" or even "loved" by their Southern 
white friends. Some of this knowledge he 
embodied in the three plays given last spring 
by the Negro Players and recently brought 
out in book-form ("Granny Maumee" : 
Macmillan, $1.50) "The Rider of Dreams," a 
charming and poetic comedy; the inspired 
tragedy, "Granny Maumee," the vivid story 
of an old Negro woman, whose son was 
burned by white men for a crime he did not 
commit; and the wonderfully beautiful passion interlude, "Simon the Cyrenian," whose 
hero, the black man who carried the cross 
for Christ, he portrays first as a revolutionist and liberator of Rome's slaves and later 
as the disciple, conquered by Christ's message of non-resistance. 
The plays, unique and lovely as they are, 
do not, however, sum up Mr. Torrence's contribution to the Negro Theatre which gave 
to Negro actors their first chance at selfexpression in dignified and beautiful drama 
and revealed to a public hitherto incredibly 
blind the wealth of dramatic material inherent in the daily lives of colored people, 
as well as their remarkable dramatic power. 
The very fact of its existence is due to Mr. 
Torrence, with whom the idea originated 
some years ago, when he first tried to secure 
a production of "Granny Maumee" with colored actors. He failed at the time because 
the almost universal prejudice against them 
made such a performance impossible, but he 
never gave up the idea and was able to 
realize it last spring, through the backing 
of Mrs. Emilie Hapgood, under whose management the Players will open again this 
fall. 
No white man has written of colored people more sympathetically than Ridgely Torrence. No one has done as much as he in 
opening up to them a new field of art, and 
none ever approached the people of another 
race in a more generous spirit. 
A SECRETARY OF EDUCATION. 
REV. J. A. BRAY , son of Andrew Jackson Bray, a prosperous and successful farmer of north Georgia, was born in 
1871 in Franklin County near Carnesville, 
Ga. He received his early training in the 
rural schools of his native state, and attended also Knox Institute, an American 
Missionary School at Athens, Ga. In 1893 
he received his A. B. from Atlanta University and in 1905 his A. M. In 1907 he 
received from Paine College the degree of 
D.D. and in 1909 from Wilberforce the degree of LL. D. He has also received credit 
from Harvard for summer work in philosophy and ethics. 
Dr. Bray has served as pastor of some of 
the leading charges of his church, also as 
presiding elder for some years. His principal efforts have been in the educational 
work in the Colored Methodist Episcopal 
Church. He was the first Negro president 
of Lane College, Jackson, Tenn. After serving in this position for four years, he accented the presidency of Miles Memorial 
College, Birmingham, Ala. In 1914, five 
years later, he was elected General Secretary of Education by the General Conference of the C. M. E. Church, which convened 
in St. Louis. 
A MASTER OF ARTS, 
MISS MAR Y E. CROMWEL L is the 
daughter of John W. Cromwell of 
Washington, D. C. She was educated in the 
schools of her own city and then took her 
A. B. from the University of Michigan. 
Since then she has been a teacher of 
mathematics in the Dunbar High School. 
Miss Cromwell has always been intensely 
interested in social work. She spent two 
summers in New York doing Fresh 
Air work on San Juan Hill and was 
instrumental in starting the West Side 
Neighborhood Association. She has carried on philanthropic work in Washington 
for many years. Her especial interest has 
been the Penny Provident work. Probably 
no one in that city is more familiar than 
she with the alley life among the colored or 
more sympathetic with their efforts for 
thrift and betterment. She is a very active 
worker in the Washington branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P., and one spring, owing to 
the meetings held in her home, hundreds of 
new members were secured to the branch. 
She received her Master's Degree this 
June from the University of Pennsylvania 
and is the first colored woman to be so hon256 MEN OF TH E MONT H 257 
REV . C. M. TANNER . MISS MAR Y E. CROMWELL . TH E LAT E REV . J. E. SMITH . 
LIEUTENANT-COLONE L YOUNG— A GALLAN T SOLDIER . 
RIDGEL Y T0RRENCE . ALDERMA N L. B. ANDERSON . REV . J. A. BRAY . 258 TH E CRISIS 
ored by that University. Her success gains 
an extra significance when one considers 
that owing to her position it was possible 
for her to attend the University only on Saturdays. In spite of a very heavy schedule 
of school work and the fatigue engendered 
by the weekly double trip, Miss Cromwell 
persisted until she won her well-merited degree. 
A CLERGYMAN FROM THE RANKS. 
TH E late Rev. Joseph E. Smith was born 
in slavery in Virginia and sold more 
than once as a slave. The end of the Civil 
Wa r found him at Newnan, Ga., eager for 
an education. After freedom he went to 
Atlanta, where he attended the Storrs 
school, after which he entered Atlanta University. He had the distinction of being in 
the first graduating class from the college 
and theological departments of the institution. After serving as pastor of a small 
church in Georgia he took up the pastorate 
in Chattanooga. A short time afterwards 
he, with another representative of the 
American Missionary Association, established a Congregational mission at Sierra 
Leone, Africa. He then returned to Chattanooga, where he served his people and 
the community for thirty-eight years. On 
the 26th, 27th and 28th of February, 1917, 
his congregation and friends celebrated the 
thirty-eighth anniversary of his pastorate. 
This proved to be his last appearance in his 
own church, for, after a brief illness, he died 
March 9, 1917. 
He was a trustee of Atlanta University, 
statistical secretary and treasurer of the 
Tennessee Association of Congregational 
Churches, a member of the American Missionary Association and of other organizations of national importance. He served for 
several years on the Chattanooga Board of 
Education. 
A PROMINENT LAWYER. 
LOUIS BERNAR D ANDERSON , son of 
Moses E. and Elizabeth C. Anderson, 
was born in Petersburg, Va., April 7, 1871. 
He attended the public schools of Petersburg and was later a student at the Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute, 
Petersburg, Va. In 1897 he was graduated 
from the Kent College of Law in Chicago. 
From 1898 to 1914 he was Assistant County 
Attorney in Cook County, and from 1915 to 
1917 he has been assistant corporation counsel of the City of Chicago. On April 3, 
1917, he was elected Republican Alderman 
from the Second Ward, succeeding former 
Alderman Oscar DePriest, and thus becoming the second colored man elected to the 
Chicago City Council. In 1916 he received 
the degree of LL.D. from Morris Brown 
University of Atlanta, Ga. He served for 
four years as captain and adjutant in the 
8th Infantry, Illinois National Guard. He 
belongs to the Masons, Odd Fellows, Knights 
of Pythias, Elks, and is a charter member 
of the Appomattox Club. In 1897 he married Miss Julia E. Barr of Mattoon, Illinois. 
A DISTINGUISHE D MINISTER . 
REV. C. M. TANNER , D. D., was born 
in the old office of the Christian Recorder, Pine street, Philadelphia, Pa. He 
is the younger son of Bishop B. T. Tanner 
of the A. M. E. Church and the brother of 
H. O. Tanner, the artist, and Dr. Hallie T. 
Johnson, the first woman who ever passed 
the Alabama state examination to practice medicine. Beginning his education 
at the old Institute for Colored Youth, 
under Prof. E. A. Bouchet, Fannie 
Jackson Coppin and Frazelia Campbell, 
he later finished at the Philadelphia 
Protestant Episcopal Seminary. This seminary is well known for its high scholastic 
standing and in all its history but few 
colored men have finished there. He was 
there trained under such teachers as Drs. 
Ezra P. Gould. Loring Batten, E. T. Bartlett and John Fulton. He has traveled extensively in the British Isles, continental 
Europe and the West Indies, and served his 
church for two years in the South African 
field. He has served the largest churches 
in his denomination, in Pittsburg and Atlanta, being the only man who ever remained five years at Big Bethel Church, 
with 2.800 members, in Atlanta, Ga. He 
was recently assigned pastor of the largest church in the A. M. E. denomination, 
Metropolitan, at Washington, D. C. He has 
written a number of books on the history 
and polity of his church, two of which, "The 
Probationers' Guide" and the "Manual, " 
have been adopted by his church. He is at 
present making a study of the cause and 
occasion of the present Negro Emigration 
Movement. His book, called the Second 
Exodus, is nearing completion. He is a life 
trustee of Wilberforce and Morris Brown 
Universities. The Horizon 
TH E WAR . 
ACCORDING to the tabulation of the 
Wa r Department for draft registration, 7,347,794 white men registered and 
953,599 colored men. 
Alonzo Myers, a policeman in Philadelphia, Pa., has been commissioned an army 
captain. He has served in Cuba and in the 
Philippines and was awarded a McKinley 
medal for bravery by Congress. 
The colored auxiliary to the Red Cross 
in Birmingham, Ala., raised more than 
$5,000 during Red Cross Week. 
The 15th Colored Infantry, N. Y. N. G., 
is stationed at Camp Whitman, N. Y., under Colonel Hayward. It has been recruited 
to full war strength with '200 more than the 
number required, and has been commended 
for "excellence in behavior,- drilling and 
marksmanship." 
Among the Army officers who sailed June 
2 from Halifax was Colonel M. L. Henry of 
the 24th Colored Infantry. 
It is reported that the 10th U. S. Cavalry is "somewhere in France" under direct 
command of Gen. Pershing. 
Chaplain W. E. Gladden of the 25th Infantry has been retired with the rank of 
major. 
Captain T. B. Campbell has been appointed a major by Adjt.-Gen. Baldwin of Colorado and empowered to organize a colored 
battalion of infantry to be officered by Negroes. 
The 8th Illinois colored regiment has 
been called to Houston, Tex., with other Illinois regiments, for national service. 
Mr. Ralph E. Langston was appointed 
chairman of Exemption Board 148 in New 
York City. 
Major Robert R. Jackson, for twentyfive years a member of the 8th Illinois colored regiment, has been retired. He will 
remain a member of the Illinois State Legislature. 
Savings accounts have been opened in 
Des Moines, Iowa, for 10 per cent of the colored men in training for officers, averaging 
over 50 per cent of their first pay checks. 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
The Washington Artists' Association is 
a recently organized club of Washington, 
D. C , the purpose of which is "to study, 
foster, interpret and originate all forms of 
art." Mrs. C. F. Cook is president, E. C. 
Williams, vice-president, E. H. Lawson, secretary, and Miss Jessie Fauset, corresponding secretary. 
At the Cornell University Summer Music 
School, Ithaca, N. Y., Dr. Dann, head of 
the music department, is teaching Negro 
spirituals. 
An interesting movement has resulted 
in the Frederick Douglass Film Company 
which aims to improve the portrayal of 
Negro life on the stage. By this means it 
is hoped a better sentiment will be awakened among white Americans and a new 
field offered for the development of colored 
talent. The company has recently produced 
The Scapegoat, an adaptation of the novel 
by Paul Laurence Dunbar. Its home office 
is 354 Pacific Avenue, Jersey City, N. J. 
Charles Gilbert Spross, an American 
composer, has made an effective arrangement for mixed voices of his solo song, 
"Lindy." 
Mr. N. Clark Smith, of Kansas City, has 
set to music a serenade by Paul Laurence 
Dunbar. The poem, "Goodnight," is an unpublished lyric which was given to Mr. 
Smith by the poet during his last illness. 
EDUCATION . 
MISS H. E. WILSON received the degree of Bachelor of Arts from the 
University of Michigan, instead of Master 
as was stated in our last Education Number. 
Three gold medals were awarded to Miss 
Margaret Leedle, a pupil in the Catholic 
elementary school, Yonkers, N. Y. 
Miss V. E. Bentley has received her senior diploma and teacher's certificate from 
the Chicago Musical College. She led a 
class of eighty-eight in harmony, receiving 
a mark of ninety-nine. 
Miss M. Neale and George Winston graduated from the Freehold, N. J., High School, 
Miss Neale receiving first rank. They are 
the first colored graduates in the history of 
the town. 
Miss Vivian Roberts was the only colored graduate to receive the degree of Bachelor of Arts among 173 graduates from 
Hunter College, of the city of New York. 
Miss R. O. Marshall was valedictorian 
of her class at the 88th commencement of 
259 260 TH E CRISIS 
St. Frances Academy, Baltimore, Md. She 
received the Rev. Chaplain prize, for the 
best essay on Christian Doctrine, and the 
gold music medal given by the Hon. T. J. 
Fielding, of Maywood, Ill. 
Professor W. H. Green, Livingstone College, Salisbury, N. C , has been made president emeritus, and Prof. D. C. Suggs has 
been elected to succeed him as president. 
Miss Ruth Smith has received the degree 
Bachelor of Arts from Wittenburg College in Springfield, Ohio, with honor in 
French. 
Miss Naida McCollough of Los Angeles 
was one of the five honor pupils in the 
graduating class of the Los Angeles High 
School. She had the distinction of having 
two parts on the commencement program. 
Miss Cecelia E. Smith was awarded two 
$50 scholarships and two gold honor pins at 
Lincoln High School, Kansas City, Mo. 
H. Eustace Williams was graduated from 
Fordham University, New York, in law. 
David Milburry graduated from the Lebanon, Pa., High School, as the first colored 
graduate. 
L. H. Norwood and N. M. Sykes received the degree of Doctor of Medicine from 
the University of Illinois. Mr. Norwood 
held one of the four Rea scholarships for 
the season 1915-16. 
Three colored priests were among the 
graduates to receive the degree of Bachelor 
of Divinity from the General Theological 
Seminary in New York City: the Revs. O. 
H. Brown, S. N. Griffiths and E. C. Young. 
Miss Jennie Osby and Theophilus Mann 
were awarded gold medals for high averages in American history in the grammar 
schools in Springfield, Ill. 
Dawson Hall at the West Virginia 
Collegiate Institute, which was destroyed 
by fire in July, is being rebuilt. The school 
will open September 19. 
INDUSTRY. 
THE Philton Holding Company, Inc., 
directed by P. A. Payton, Jr., a colored real estate man, has purchased six 
modern elevator apartment houses worth 
$1,500,000 in Harlem, New Yor k City, for 
colored people. The buildings are named 
Attucks, Toussaint, Wheatley, Dunbar, 
Douglass and Washington Courts. 
The salaries of the custodians of the 
fourteen divisions of the Circuit Court, St. 
Louis, Mo., have been inreased from $60 to 
$75 a month. 
The Southern Pacific has replaced its 
white help in restaurants in California and 
Arizona with colored labor. 
One hundred colored longshoremen from 
New Orleans' have arrived in France to 
work for the U. S. Government under contract for one year with salaries ranging 
from $65 to $100 monthly with board, lodging and medical treatment free. 
Colored women are working as section 
hands on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad 
in St. Louis, Mo., and East St. Louis, Ill. 
Two hundred colored stevedores on the 
Old Dominion piers, Norfolk, Va., have 
struck. 
The Bingham and Garfield mines, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, are seeking colored labor. 
Colored women are guarding the crossings of the Pennsylvania Railroad at Philadelphia, Pa., and Camden, N. J. 
It has been proposed that Secretary Wilson approve as a Wa r emergency proposition 
the introduction of a bill to establish a colored labor bureau in his department, under 
a colored person. 
Because of prejudice and lack of training, the colored men employed as deliverymen by Kaufman's, "the Big Store" in Pittsburgh, Pa., have been replaced by white employees. Thirty-two of the colored men 
proved themselves 100 per cent, proficient, 
44 falling below the efficiency mark. 
The Illinois State Council of Defense is 
making efforts to stop the migration of 
Negro laborers from the South. 
In an effort to stop the exodus of Negroes, the Central of Georgia, Atlantic Coast 
Line, Southern and Georgia and Florida 
Railroads will no longer accept "prepay 
order " transportation for Negroes migrating from the South. 
Because of the exodus of Negro laborers 
from southern farms, 1,000 Boy Scouts are 
digging 400,000 bushels of potatoes along 
the eastern shore of Virginia. 
The Industrial Savings Bank in Washington, D. C , has purchased the two-story 
brick building at 11th and Yo u Streets, 
which will represent an outlay of $30,000 
when completed. 
In Shreveport, La., Sheriff T. R. Hughes 
and Police Chief J. J. Gray blocked plans 
for the exportation of 200 Negroes to Pittsburgh, Pa. TH E HORIZO N 261 
In Rockford, Ill., colored men are beingemployed in the steel mills. 
T. J, Elliott, a colored business man in 
Tulsa, Okla., will open a furnishing store 
for men and women in the Gurley Building, 
with a stock valued at $15,000. 
At Kiln, Miss., Negro women have taken 
the place of men in a sawmill. 
A. J. Lindermann and Hoverson Company, Milwaukee, Wis., have work for colored molders, mechanics and laboring men. 
July 26 was Afro-American Business 
Day for the colored people in Philadelphia. 
The object of the effort was to further 
patronage of colored business enterprises. 
West Broad Street School won first honors among colored schools in the waste 
paper contest of the Savannah Paper Bailing Company. It collected 430,331 pounds 
of waste paper. 
The Savannah, Ga., Home Association, 
costing $15,000, has been completed. It is 
a three-story brick structure. On top is a 
roof garden. 
Mrs. J. H. Johnson, a colored farmer's 
wife of Shawneetown, Okla., has sold 198 
pounds of butter since December 1, 1916, 
and fifty-three dozen eggs. She has a new 
Ford car which she has bought out of her 
produce and milk business. 
The Langwell Hotel, Elmira, N. Y., has 
replaced white girls in the grill room with 
a colored male force. Mr. G. H. Faucet is 
the head waiter. 
A clothing factory with colored workers 
is to open in New York City September 1. 
H. D. McLaughlin, 512 Columbus Avenue, 
is general manager. 
The Waiters' Union, Local 34, Boston, 
Mass., has invited colored waiters to become members. 
The porters on the Canadian Pacific Railroad have been given increased wages. 
White carpenters employed by Albert 
Tolle, contractor, Hammond, La., have 
struck because of colored labor. 
In Shreveport, La., the City Council 
has increased the wages of common laborers, which raises the wages of about 75 
colored employees of the city from $1.40 
to $1.75 per day. 
Thirty Italian laborers tried unsuccessfully to oust colored workmen from Camp 
Meade, the National encampment at Admiral, Md. 
At Cincinnati, Ohio, the State Board of 
Health has warned companies and contractors of Negro labor from the South that 
they will be held responsible for the health 
of their employees. 
SOCIA L PROGRESS . 
UNDER the direction of its president, 
Mrs. Albert S. Reed, the Utopia 
Neighborhood Club gave its annual Fashion Show, Friday, June 20, at Manhattan 
Casino, New York City. The affair was in 
every way a success, besides having a great 
educational value. All the exhibits were 
pleasing and modish. The work of the following ladies was represented: Mesdames 
Catherine B. Reed, J. H. Ready, Hattie 
Lynch Green, Annie D. Grantland, Essie P. 
Boston, Laura Williamson, Mrs. James 
Campbell, Mrs. Charles McDowell, and Miss 
Muriel Smith, gowns; Mesdames Odessa 
Gray and Grace Morris, hats; Mrs. Gertrude B. Needles, summer furs. 
Mr. H. Fisher has been elected treasurer of the Darby Township Board of 
Education, Philadelphia County, Pa. He is 
the only colored member. 
Governor Burnquist appointed Attorney W. T. Francis a representative on the 
Minnesota Public Safety Commission in 
connection with the Military Draft in the 
8th Ward of St. Paul. 
Lake Erie steamers, Finaster, Juneretta, and Octorara, have contracted for 
twelve colored musicians, members of Local Union 533, A. F. of M., Buffalo, N. Y. 
C Mr. A. Jackson has been made librarian of the Supreme Court of West Virginia. 
The New York Globe and Advertiser 
is carrying news of colored people. Mr. 
J. E. Robinson, a colored man, has been 
selected correspondent. 
Dr. W. S. Holder, a colored minister, 
was elected scribe at the ordination of 
ministers into the Congregational ministry 
held at the Broadway Tabernacle Church 
in New York City. The degree of Doctor 
of Divinity was conferred upon Dr. Holder 
last June by Oskaloosa College, Iowa. 
John Taylor, a colored man in New 
York City, rescued Daniel Curran, a white 
working man 65 years old, from drowning 
in the Hudson River, after a crowd of white 
men had watched Curran sink twice. 
The first prize for "Clean-Up and 
Paint-Up" during Negro Health Week, 
April 21-28, offered by Mr. A. W . Clark, 
Chairman of this bureau in St. Louis, Mo., 262 THE CRISIS 
was awarded to Atlanta, Ga. The second 
and third prizes, respectively, to Salisbury, N. C , and New Madrid, Mo. 
Ira Braxton, a colored man, rescued a 
white woman and a white man from 
drowning in Fox River in Illinois. 
The grave of Paul Laurence Dunbar 
in the Dayton, Ohio, Cemetery has been 
marked by a natural stone and a bronze 
plate. The first of a series of scholarships in his name has been assigned to 
Paul Laurence Dunbar Murphy at Wilberforce University. 
J. C. Dancy, Jr., has succeeded C. C. 
Allison, Jr., as secretary of the colored 
Big Brother Movement in New York. 
Mr. Albert Smith won a silver cup, 
coming in first in the 100 yard, and a 
smaller cup, coming in third in the 300 
yard dash, at the meet given by the Jersey City, N. J., Harriers. 
Alderman L. B. Anderson in Chicago, 
Ill., has been presented with a diamond 
star, costing $650, as an appreciation of 
his services. 
The 65th Anniversary of the Christian 
MISS FER N CALDWELL , 
Recorder, Philadelphia, Pa., was celebrated 
during July. 
Miss Fern Caldwell, Los Angeles, Cal., 
is the undefeated ladies' tennis champion 
of South California in ladies' singles and 
mixed doubles. 
Masons in Ohio have established Councils of Royal and Select Masters. The 
work of the Council immediately follows 
that of the Royal Arch and is supplementary thereto. 
The National League on Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes issued in July Volume 6 of its Bulletin. 
The Salem-Crescents won the team 
trophy in the Red Cross benefit games 
held at the Lewissohn Stadium at the College of the City of New York. 
One hundred colored real estate men in 
Chicago, Ill., have formed an organization 
to aid colored property owners. Mr. H. A. 
Watkins is president. 
Dr. B. F. Allen has been re-elected 
President of Lincoln Institute, Jefferson 
City, Mo. 
The 50th Anniversary of St. John's 
Baptist Association in Austin, Tex., was 
celebrated July 17-30. The association includes thirty-eight church organizations 
with more than 20,000 communicants. 
Bookertee, an exclusively colored town 
in Oklahoma, was opened July 4. 
J. E. Griffith, a graduate of the University of New York, has been admitted to 
the Nova Scotia Bar at Halifax. 
Mrs. C. F. Cook has been reappointed a 
member of the Board of Education of the 
District of Columbia. 
Dr. J. L. Wilson of Jersey City, N. J., 
was one of five out of sixty to successfully 
pass the examination of the National 
Board of Medical Examiners. 
Dr. C. W. Flint, Meharry graduate, 
successfully passed the Texas State Board 
medical examination with the highest 
average in a class of eighty. 
J- C. Waters, Jr., has been appointed 
an expert accountant of government 
freight rates in the transportation division 
of the depot quartermaster's office, Washington, D. C. 
Mr. Judson Moore has completed 
twenty-five years' service as mail carrier 
in Elmira, N. Y. He has a prominent 
route in the business section of the city. 
H. M. Reynolds, Jr., has been appointed THE HORIZON 263 
messenger to Secretary McAdoo in the 
Treasury Department. 
Hon. G. H. White has succeeded the 
late H. W. Bass as Assistant City Solicitor in Philadelphia, Pa. 
Kelly Miller, Jr., is in the Structural 
Materials Testing Laboratory of the Bureau of Standards in Pittsburg, Pa. He 
has received a fellowship in physics at 
Clark University. 
Mr. J. H. Woodson, of Hook and Ladder Company 106, Brooklyn, N. Y., who 
rescued Mrs. Katherine Meterity and her 
baby from a fourth floor tenement fire, 
has been awarded a medal by Mayor 
Mitchell. 
Mr. J. A. Dorsey of Pittsburg, Pa., has 
been appointed physical director at Washington Park. 
On June 15 the Idlewild Hotel was 
opened in Chicago, Ill., for Negroes. It 
has 100 rooms, with all conveniences, and 
is under the active management of Beauregard F. Moseley. 
The Sherman House in Waukegan, Ill., 
has been made a colored hotel. 
John McRoberts in Cincinnati, Ohio, a 
former slave, has subscribed to $4,000 worth 
of Liberty Bonds. 
PERSONAL. 
BISHOP JOHN HURST has left Freedman's Hospital greatly improved. 
The following marriages are announced: 
Miss Victoryne G. Gates, private secretary to the Hon. George W. Hayes in Cincinnati, Ohio, to Mr. Milton Rogers of Columbus; Miss Ellen Rhetta Harris to Mr. 
Gale P. Hilyer, in Montgomery, Ala.; Miss 
Julia A. Brown of Winton, N. C , to Dr. 
L. T. Delaney at Wilson, N. C ; Miss Alice 
Eloise Ellis to Bishop Elias Cottrell. 
Rev. and Mrs. M. W. D. Norman in 
Washington, D. C , have celebrated the 
fiftieth anniversary of their marriage. 
Mrs. C. M. Sterling-Pipes of Wilmington, Del., principal of the Harvey Public 
School, has received the honorary degree 
of Master of Arts from Wilberforce University. 
Mr. Harry Spurlock, a member of the 
police force in Cincinnati, O., has been retired after twenty-nine years' service. 
The Misses Emily Johnson and Susan 
Wilson, colored employees in the home of 
late Judge Charles J. Willett, Pasadena, 
Cal., have been bequeathed valuable family 
effects and $4,000 with which to purchase 
a home in Pasadena. 
Dr. Hollis Burke Frissell, principal of 
Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute, died August 5, 1917. His death means 
an incalculable loss to the advance of constructive and practical education for Negroes and Indians. Besides serving as principal of Hampton, Dr. Frissell was also a 
member of the Anna T. Jeanes Fund. Dr. 
Robert R. Moton, Hampton's former commandant, now principal of Tuskegee, delivered an address at the funeral which was 
held in the Hampton Institute Memorial 
Church. 
Robert Holmes, a young colored policeman, was shot and killed while pursuing a 
burglar in Harlem, New York City. 
The bulk of the $100,000 estate of the 
late James L. Hitchens, a colored furniture 
mover in Baltimore, Md., has been settled 
on a white adopted son. 
The late John Heppenstalls bequeathed 
$500 and a share in the stock of the First 
National Bank of Wrightsville, Pa., to Levi 
Taylor, an employee in the family since the 
Civil War. 
FOREIGN. 
The 9th U. S. Cavalry won the championship of the Philippine Islands in baseball for 1916-17 over five white opponents. 
A jury in Cristobal awarded Joseph 
Foppen, a colored man, $10,000 for injuries 
received through negligence in the Panama 
Railroad. 
Minister Curtis initiated the observance 
of Memorial Day, May 30, in Monrovia, 
Liberia. 
Mr. Gale Carr, who has been with the 
British Army in France for two years, has 
received two medals for bravery. 
The European system of education, in 
which schools continue almost the entire 
year, is to be continued in the Virgin 
Islands. 
The University of Porto Rico conferred 
the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws 
upon Gov. Arthur Yage r and Dr. J. C. 
Barbosa, a member of the Executive Council, of African extraction, and graduated 
5 students in Liberal Arts, 25 in law, 12 
in pharmacy, 38 from the normal department, 6 with rural course certificates and 
17 from the University High School. 
Private Helasi Sempa, Uganda Police 
Service Battalion, won the medal for 
bravery in the defence of a British post. 264 TH E CRISIS 
GHETTO . 
OSCA R DEPRIEST, the colored alderman in Chicago, Ill., who was charged 
by the State with conspiracy to protect gambling, has been found not guilty by the jury. 
Judge Butler of the County Court at 
West Chester, Pa., handed down a decision 
in favor of Mrs. Rebecca Simms, a colored 
woman who refused to send her children to 
a basement schoolroom in a Downingtown, 
Pa., institution. 
David Wood, a Negro charged with vagrancy, induced a local Justice of the Peace 
in San Diego, Cal., to impanel a jury of 
Negroes. The jury returned a verdict of 
not guilty and Wood was set free. 
C A t Jackson, Miss., in the case of Jackson 
Holt vs. Illinois Central, the jury awarded 
the Negro plaintiff $5,000 for injuries received when shot by a special agent of the 
defendant company. 
Because a number of colored laborers 
have migrated to Jamestown, N. Y., to take 
positions with the Gurney Ball Bearing 
Company, the white residents started a 
movement to prohibit colored people from 
coming to Jamestown to live. Corporation 
Counsel Price informed the segregationists 
that he doubted "both the wisdom and legality of such action," and the movement 
failed. 
Colored women delegates to the Northeastern Federation caused the Smith-Lever 
rights bill to be enforced in Stamford, Conn. 
Justice Strahl in the 6th District Municipal Court, Brooklyn, N. Y., has decided 
against Keeney's theatre for discriminating against Misses Dorothy Hampton and 
Katherine Mars. 
Residents in the eastern section of Trenton, N. J., are opposing the erection of two 
portable Negro schools in that neighborhood. 
The commission on the unification of the 
Methodist Churches in America has adjourned, failing to reach an agreement as 
to whether colored Methodists in the South 
should have a seat in the law-making body. 
The conferees will meet in January in a 
southern city. 
The Potomac Steamboat Company has 
been ordered by the Interstate Commerce 
Commission to abolish its color line through 
the agitation of a committee of colored citizens in Washington, D. C. 
The Georgia Sheriffs' Association is protesting against "Jim-Crow" car rides while 
taking colored prisoners from one town to 
another. 
White citizens of South Nashville, Tenn., 
protested against the establishment of a 
colored church in their community and succeeded in having the transaction canceled. 
Because he is colored, J. H. Fuller has 
twice been refused appointment in the Post 
Office at Danville, Va . 
A white man, Cecil Dupont, has been sentenced to life imprisonment in the State 
Penitentiary at Railford, Fla., for criminal 
assault on a colored child. 
The Board of Education in San Antonio, 
Tex., has increased the salary of white 
teachers ten dollars per month; colored 
teachers five dollars per month. 
Max Kohler, a contractor in Paris Ky., 
who married a colored woman and is the 
father of their two children, has found that 
he is white. His relatives now refuse to 
recognize him. 
Two white men were killed and more 
than one hundred white and colored people 
injured as a result of race rioting in Chester, Pa. 
Thirty guardsmen and a score or more 
colored people in Youngstown, O., resorted 
to rioting. 
The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Riesel, Tex., June 23, Elijah Hays, beaten to death for striking a white man. 
Reform, Ala., July 16, unidentified man 
hanged, charged with petty burglary. 
Pickens County, Ala., July 23, Poe Hibbler, hanged—attempted assault on a white 
girl. 
Montgomery, Ala., July 25, Will Powell 
and Jesse Powell, hanged, charged with 
hold-up. 
Amite, La., July 30, Dan Rout and Jerry 
Rout, charged with murdering Simeon Bennett. 
Garland City, Okla., July 31, Arland 
Avery, charged with assault and robbery 
on William Woods, a white contractor. 
Butte, Mont., Aug. 1, Frank Little, 
white, hanged; he was a member of the executive board of the I. W. W. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 265 
If You Ar e Permanently Disabled 
Completes Your Life-Line 
So that you cannot follow any gainful occupation and earn your own living, 
Standard Life Insurance Company will, under the provisions of its new policy 
contracts, carry your insurance in full force without the payment of another 
premium by you. No matter how long you live thereafter, whenever you die 
your beneficiary will receive the full amount due under the policy, just as if you 
had continued to pay the premiums. 
The Cash Surrender and Loan Values and Extended Insurance Values will 
increase from year to year in the same manner, and exactly as if the premiums 
were paid by the policyholder. In short, should the time ever come in your life 
when you are completely and permanently disabled so that it is impossible for 
you to support yourself, you would not lose your insurance protection but it 
would go right on carrying an indefinite period of grace which would not end 
until you were completely recovered. Then you would not have to pay any back 
premiums but would merely take up from that date. 
The liberality of such a provision is very apparent to all and the usefulness 
of it can be easily imagined. 
OLD POLICYHOLDERS can have this new provision inserted in their protection by making application for one of these new policies in exchange for their 
old ones, and the change will not cost them a cent. We are desirous that old policyholders be given every opportunity to secure this additional feature; and upon 
application the Company will receive any old policy and issue in lieu thereof 
a contract of the same kind, age, rate, amount and date and containing the same 
splendid features of our present policies in addition to the Disability Benefit Clause. 
Write Us Today for Full Information. 
The Company desires the services of men of good character, intelligence and 
ability as insurance salesmen. Liberal contracts given. Excellent opportunities for advancement. 
The Company also desires to hear from competent office workers. Natural growth occasions frequent promotions and the need of additional 
bookkeepers, stenographers and clerks. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
HOM E OFFIC E ATLANTA , GA . 
Over $4,000,000.00 Insurance in Force 
HEMA N E. PERRY , President 
/ Please send 
me particulars 
about your Disability Benefit Clause 
/ Name 
' Address 
City 
HARR Y H . PACE , Sec-Treasure r I have a Policy with you. 
Age Weight Height 
Mention TH E CRISI S 266 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
(Continued from page 214 ) 
WALDE N COLLEGE 
Nashville, Tenn. 
A classical and industrial college of the 
first rank. 
OU R AI M 
Christian character, loyal citizenship and 
education for service. 
LITERAR Y COURSES 
College, normal, preparatory, musical, 
domestic science and art. Full commercial 
and business courses. A good library and 
reading room, a strong faculty, a beautiful 
campus, good board, expenses low, clean 
athletics. Graduates from the normal course 
receive State certificates without examination. 
School Opens September 27th 
Electric lights and furnace heat in all the 
buildings. The new Science Hall for recitation purposes has sixteen rooms, steam heat, 
electric lights and all modern conveniences. 
Come to Walden this fall and bring one 
6tudent with you. 
For information write the President, 
E. A. WHITE 
MORGAN COLLEGE AND BRANCHES 
John O. Spencer, President. 
MORGA N COLLEGE , Baltimore , Md . 
LOCATION: Central, in great college town between North 
and South. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, music, advanced educa ­
tion, collegiate,—appropriate degrees. 
INSTRUCTORS: College and university trained, Seven 
colleges and universities represented in faculty. 
DORMITORIES: For a limited number, furnished. 
TERMS: Very reasonable. 
DEAN: Willia m Pickens , Lit.D . 
PRINCES S ANN E ACADEMY , Princes s Anne . Md . 
(The Eastern Branch of the Maryland State College of 
Agriculture.) 
LOCATION: The famous Eastern Shore of Maryland, 
Somerset County. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, industrial, domestic science, music. 
INSTRUCTORS: College and technically trained. 
DORMITORIES: Carefully supervised, furnished. 
TERMS: Free tuition: other expenses moderate. 
PRINCIPAL: Rev. Thoma s H . Klah , A.M . 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS: June 25th to 
August 3rd. 
VIRGINIA COLLEGIATE AN D INDUSTRIAL INSTITUTION, Lynchburg , Va . 
LOCATION: On beautiful hill, suburbs of growing city. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, domestic science, gardening, music. 
INSTRUCTORS: College trained; carefully selected. 
DORMITORIES: Furnished; steam heat; accommodations 
for fifty girls; carefully supervised, 
TERMS: Within the reach of all. 
PRINCIPAL: Lee M . McCoy . A.M . 
AL L SCHOOL S OPE N SEPTEMBE R 25, 1917. 
GEORGIA STATE INDUSTRIAL COLLEGE 
OPENS OCTOBER 1 
This institution gives Agricultural, Industrial, Normal 
ind Collegiate Courses; the industries consist of 
Masonry, Wheelwrighting, Painting, Shoemaking, 
Blacksmithing, Tailoring, Carpentry, Laundering, 
Domestic Science, Sewing. Dairying, and Poultry 
raising; the Normal and Collegiate courses embrace 
the usual literary subjects. W e give a full Commercial Course consisting of Stenography, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Business English, etc. Students 
graduating from the Commercial Course will receive 
certificates. It is our purpose to add music this 
year. Total cost will be $8.50. $7 for board and 
laundry. $1 for athletic fee, and $.50 for medicine. 
For catalog or other information address R. R. 
Wright, President, Industrial College, Ga. 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religious Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College. Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys anil Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session Opens Wednesday , October 3, 1917. 
For Further Information Address 
D . C SUGGS , President or 
J. E. Aggrey , Registrar . 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
All Race s 
Prepare in the best school of its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 8 9 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W . Mottley, President. 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
Fall Term opens October 1, 1917. Shorthand, 
typewriting, bookkeeping, business correspondence, 
business law, multigraphing, mimeographing, 
arithmetic, grammar , spelling, reading and writing. Ap t students operate typewriter s blindfolded 
accurately in two months and are able to pass 
Civil Service Examinations with ease in eight 
months. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President, 
1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
100 CALLIN G CARD S 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The Hous e of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
ROLAN D W . HAYES , Teno r 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Oper a 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good ' 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 257 
A Christian Duty 
compels you to provide for your family and dependents. Then why not 
provide for a perpetual income during sickness and accidental injuries? Will 
you consider your duty properly discharged if you make provision only 
down to death, and leave the widow and those dear little orphans penniless 
after your death? It is the privilege of every man and a duty every man 
owes himself and family to carry sufficient insurance to provide the necessities of life during illness, and to pay off the expenses and the mortgage 
on the home after death. 
Wh y would a man provide well for his wife and children during his life 
and leave them beggars after his death? A good Insurance Company is next 
to the Church; a SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y policy is better than a bank 
account; you draw from the bank your deposit plus interest; you draw from 
SOUTHER N AI D SOCIETY , not what you put in, but as long as you are sick 
and an undiminished death claim paid to the family after death. Some 
have put in $50.0 0 and drawn out $500.00 . Wh y not act today ? Tomor ­
row you may not be able to pass the examination for a good policy in a 
reliable Insurance Company. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOM E OFFICE: 52 7 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va . 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINS T SICKNESS, ACCIDEN T AN D DEATH . 
A . D. PRICE, President. THOS . M. CRUMP , Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN , Asst. Secretary. 
iiiiilillliiiiiniiiiii IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII i i iiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiiniiiiiiiiii illinium niuiliiliiiiiiiiini num i i; i j -., 11... 11. - 1111 INIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIUII 
Mention TH E CRISI S 268 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BOOKS BY PROMINENT NEGROES 
Issued by The Neale Publishing Company, New York, N. Y. 
The American Cavalryman. By HENR Y F. DOWNIN G 
Mr . Downing perhaps has had a more varied career 
than any other living Negro from the Civil Wa r to 
the war between the United States and Germany. 
He was the first colored man to represent the United 
States at a city of a white government, by appointment of President Cleveland. He introduced Coleridge-Taylor to the London Public. He persuaded 
Liberia to open its doors to foreign capital. Merely 
to recount his activities in public life of the past 
fifty years would take a volume. But his highest 
renown has been won as a man of letters, and this 
is a romance of Liberia—a romance of a very high 
order, written by the only man who could have written it. $1.50 by mail. 
Haiti: He r History and He r Detractors 
By J. N. LEGER 
M. Leger, formerly represented Haiti as Minister 
to the United States, and later represented Haiti 
as a member of the Peace Conference, at The 
Hague. In Europe as well as in America he is regarded as one of the ablest men of his race. Two 
editions: one in English and one in French. Illustrated. Each edition $3.20 by mail. 
The Facts of Reconstruction By JOH N R. LYNC H 
Major Lynch, an officer of the United States Army, 
lived through Reconstruction, and took a lively 
part therein. He served as a Member of Congress, 
later became Fourth Auditor of the Treasury, and 
by far the greater part of his adult life has been 
passed in public service. The late Sen. Hoar in his 
"Autobiography" referred to Major Lynch in high 
terms. Illustrated. Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Redder Blood By WILLIA M M . ASHB Y 
Prof. Ashby was recently graduated from Yale. This 
novel, his first book, is a valuable contribution to 
the literature of his race. $1.00 by mail. 
Ethiopia By CLAYTO N ADAM S 
Mr . Adams writes of the Land of Promise in this 
powerful novel,—the adjective is used deliberately. 
The ancient Kingdom of Ethiopia has passed away, 
but its name still lives, not only as the proper 
appellation of the Negro race, but also figuratively, 
principally to designate the invisible kingdom of native Africans and their descendants. $1.00 by mail. 
Rac e Adjustment By KELL Y MILLE R 
Prof. Miller, Dean of the College of Arts and 
Sciences, Howard University, is easily in the 
first rank of Negro teachers, writers, orators, and 
leaders, and is so recognized on both sides of the 
Atlantic. This volume comprises his essays on the 
Negro in America that won for him fame as a man 
of letters when they were first published periodically. 
Third edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Out of the House of Bondage By KELL Y MILLE R 
This volume by Dean Miller contains the essays that 
he had written up to the time of its publication that 
were not included in his earlier volume, "Race Adjustment," and have been written since the earlier 
volume was published. Already the sale of this new 
volume has beer, large. $1.65 by mail. 
Negro Culture In Wes t Afric a By GEORGE W. ELLI S 
Mr . Ellis was for eight years Secretary of the 
United States Legation in Liberia. Since his 
return to America, he has written extensively on the 
Negro and his problems, and has taken a prominent 
place among the leaders of his race. In many respects this latest book of his is the most important 
work on the Negro yet published,—the Negro in 
Africa. Illustrated. $2.1 6 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church By JOH N H . REE D 
The Rev. Dr . Reed, D.D. , K.C. , writes authoritatively on the subject matter of his book. Introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D. , LL.D . $1.6 0 
by mail. 
The Black Man's Burden 
By WILLIA M H. HOLTZCLA W 
Prof. Holtzclaw is the founder and the principal of 
the Utica Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and Young Women , 
already one of the largest educational institutions in 
the South. Introduction by the late Booker T. 
Washington. Third thousand. $1.0 0 by mail. 
Negro Tale s By JOSEPH S. COTTEB 
Prof. Cotter is the principal of one of the largest 
schools for Negroes in the South. Like Prof. 
Ashby and Mr . Adams, Prof. Cotter reveals Negro 
life in imaginative prose fiction,—a branch of literature to which Negro authors should give greater attention. $1.00 by mail. 
The Voic e of Mizriam By JOH N WALTE R PAISLE Y 
Prof. Paisley, for many years a professor of 
English Literature, has assembled in this volume 
his own poems. The book deserves a place on the 
library shelf where Dunbar's fine poems are to be 
found. $1.25 by mail. 
The Ne w Negro By WILLIA M PICKEN S 
Dean Pickens, Dean of Morgan College, was graduated from Yale in the highest grade of his class. 
There he won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the 
Ten Eyck Oration. In this book, the full title of 
which is "The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status," he discusses with great force and 
clarity nearly all the pressing political problems that 
now confront his race. $1.60 by mail. 
The Ke y By JAME S S . STEMON S 
Mr . Stemons is the Field Secretary of the Joint 
Organization for Equalizing Industrial Opportunities and the League of Civic and Political Reform. He holds this work to be what its full title 
implies: "The Key ; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem." Undoubtedly the work is a powerful study of the Negro and his problems. $1.0 0 by 
mail. 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., 440 Fourth Avenue New York City or THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue N
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 269 
Do you Want to Read a Live, Red-blooded Story with a Regular Punch in it? Then, 
do not fail to get "FROM SUPERMAN TO MAN" by J. A. Rogers. 
The most sinking vindication of the Negro ever penned. Brilliant arguments hacked by an invincible 
array of the world's greatest thinkers—Shakespeare, Schopenhauer, Darwin, Huxley, Finot. Anti-Negro 
uarangue-outangs overwhelmed with ridicule, The case against the Negro laughed out of court. All in 
an easy, breezy style you'll enjoy. 
Prat. George B. Foster, University of Chicago: "A stirring story, lultiitul to truth and helpful to a better understanding and feeling." 
W, N. C. Carlton Kay... Librarian. Newberry library, Chicago (in a letter to the author); "I shall place your book in 
the permanent collection of the Library where present day and future students of the history of your race will find it a 
most significant document." 
The Brooklyn Dally Eagle: * * Fro m Superma n to Man Is a vindication of the American Negro." 
Attorney Charles Scrutchin, Bemidji, Minnesota: "A thoughtful, courageous book." 
Hon. George W. Kills, K. C . V. It. O. S. (eight years Secretary of the U. S. Legation to Liberia, author of "Negro 
Culture in West Africa." etc.): "Fro m Superma n to Man by J. A. Rogers is a significant contribution to interracial 
literature in more ways than one. Its breadth of scholastic research, its selection and concentration of matter are as 
amazing as its wealth of information. The book is well written and the skillful management of materials shows not only 
the author's mastery of his subject, but his knowledge of the technique of the literary art. In the program of the broadest 
education of the races and the promotion of social concord and co-operation this volume should be in every library and 
home of the country. In his absorbing story we see the souls of the white and darker worlds groping and struggling 
toward the better day of peace and good understanding between the races." 
New York Evening Post: "This porter who had attended 'Yale, had travelled extensively and spoke several languages, 
had at his fingers' end the arguments necessary- to prove that his race was not a whit inferior to the Caucasian." 
We are trying to get the truth before the people and ask your support. Copies of this fearless book have been sent to 
over one hundred leading thinkers; also to the leading anti-Negro authors and politicians. Please order today. 
$1.00 (cloth bound ) By Mal l $1.10 
Additional Agents Wanted— Dept. "A. " Hayes Book Store, 3640 S. State St , Chicago, III . 
AGENT S WANTED : $1 8 t o $4 5 pe r wee k 
Now being made selling Prof. Kelly Miller's new book PROGRES S OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE. 50 0 large pages, only $1.95 . Teachers, students, ministers, widows, 
anyone with a little spare time can make $1 per hour. Everybody buys, it's easy 
to sell. Writ e for outfit and terms at once. This is an extra-ordinary offer. Ac t 
today. AUSTI N JENKINS CO. , No. 52 3 Ninth St., Washington, D . C . 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY a ATLANTA. GA. 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. 'Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
Th e Journa l o f 
Negr o Histor y 
Published Quarterly 
100 Pages 
Edited by CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
TH E JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y is 
the official organ of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $l.0 0 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 26 cents extra. Single numbers, 26 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to TH E 
JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y and 
addressed to 
CARTER G. WOODSON 
1216 You St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Mention THE CRISIS 270 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr . BELL , 470 9 Stat e St. , Chicago , Ill. 
A Cheyney graduate wishes a position teaching grade work or domestic 
science. Address O. R., in care of the 
CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
City. 
WANTED AT ONCE-- Male or Female 
A n experienced double-entry bookkeeper and also an expert stenographer to work in the offices of an 
established colored Insurance Company. Both parties must be able to 
furnish satisfactory reference as to 
competency, experience, health, age 
and reliability. Only those need apply who are willing to make the work 
a study and a career. 
Mail application to the office of 
THE CRISIS 
7 0 Fifth Ave. , New York City 
A N EXPERIENCE D TEACHE R 
DESIRE S POSITIO N 
Instructor in agricultural science and practice. 
Graduate of a reputable college. Ten years' experience with State Test Farm, five years' experience 
with United States Indian Schools. Proficient in all 
grammar grades, in Latin and in the science and 
practice of agriculture. Very good references. 
Prof. J. E. H. , Box 32, Harmony Grove, Maryland. 
STAR T TH E YEA R WIT H 
THE COLORED TEACHER 
A PRACTICA L EDUCATIONA L JOURNA L 
CONTAININ G 
A Department of Methods and Practical 
Helps; 
A Department of Rural Education; 
A Department of Current Educational News; 
Articles on All Phases of Negro Education; 
News of the Universities, Colleges and Public Schools; 
Question and Answe r Department; 
Teachers' Exchange , etc. 
$1.00 per Year 10 cents per copy 
Address 
THE COLORED TEACHER 
Box 22 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
EXCELLEN T OPPORTUNIT Y fo r Me n an d Wome n 
Schoo l o f Mechanica l Dentistr y 
Complet e in Eight Months. Night or Day . Writ e for Booklet, etc . 
A . O . BRANSO N & CO. , 52 W . 135th St., New York City 
TH E STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENCY , Est. 1897. 
1011 Ne w Yor k Avenue , Washington, D. C. 
Situations Wanted—Domestic Science, Biology. Music, Academic work (College, Seminary, Graded School)—Graduates. 
TEACHERS A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1408 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help Yo u Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Services Free to School Officials. 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , O. 
This suit FREE 
To Introduce Our 
Nobby Clothes in Your Town 
It's the ver y finest suit 
you eve r saw . $50 couldn't 
buy a better one , but you 
can ge t it easy. It's mad e 
to your measur e from the 
most beautiful cloth, choice of 
stripes, checks or plain pat1
 terns. Send us your name and 
address today. Don't fail to get 
one of these suits. You can earn 
it while you wear it and make 
$5 0 a Wee k 
by taking orders. Dro p us a 
POSTAL for latest sample outfit, 
select the style you want and 
the cloth. Let us prove our 
amazing offer. Don't delay. We 
send everything free the same 
day your request is received. 
We pay postage on everything. 
your name and address on it. 
Parago n Tailorin g Co . Dept. 851 Chicag o 
$1.00 PANT S made to measure 
No t $1.00, no t even 50c, not one cent 
cost to you under our easy conditions. 
No extra charges fo r extr a big , extrem e pegtops, fanc y belt loops, pear l buttons, no extr a 
charg e fo r anything , all free . Befor e you take 
another order , befor e you buy a suit o r pants, 
ge t our sample s and new offer. Writ e and say 
'Send Me Your Offer" the big , ne w different 
tailoring deal. Costs nothing and no extra charges. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 569 Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 271 
WE'R E OU T O N A 
Whirlwind Introductory Campaign 
of 
Mme . Rose's 
Hy-Qualit y Beaut y Preparation s 
These goods must be introduced into more than 100,00 0 American homes 
during the next six months. We realize that this is going to be a stupendous 
task, but we are PREPARE D T O PAY BIG MONE Y FOR TH E WORK . 
Yes, we are prepared to pay YO U for the introduction of our goods to your 
neighbors and friends, from 7 5 cents to $3.0 0 on each dozen articles sold. If 
you have the slightest ability to sell you can at least match the record made 
by our Boston lady representative, who by devoting only a few spare hours 
each day to the work earned from us during the month of July $73.60 . 
Each of Mme. Rose's Hy-Quality Beauty Preparations 
Is strictly all that the name Hy-Quality implies. Only the purest of 
properties are used in their manufacture. The containers of the goods 
are also selected with the same careful forethought that is given to 
everything else sold bearing Mme. Rose's name. Following is a list 
of Mme. Rose's preparations : 
MME. ROSE'S HY-QUALITY 
FACE POWDERS 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Indian Brown 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Beauty Brown 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Natural Flesh 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Carnation Pink 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Rose Whit e 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Life of Roses 
MME. ROSE'S HY-QUALITY 
LOTIONS AND SHAMPOO 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Skin Beautifier 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Cucumber Lotion 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Flake Shampoo 
MME. ROSE'S HY-QUALITY 
SKIN CREAMS 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Vanishing' Cream 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Cold Cream 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Massage Cream 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Beauty Cream 
MME. ROSE'S HY-QUALITY 
HAIR PREPARATIONS 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Hai r Grower 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Brilliantine 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Templ e Grower 
Mme . Rose's Hy-Quality Tetter Salve 
Add An Extra $15 Weekly to Your Income 
If you wish to earn big money and will devote either your daily spare hours 
or all of your time to this great introductory campaign, send a $2.2 5 money 
or express order for a one dozen trial assortment of the 2 5 cents sizes. 
For further particulars address 
Dept. C 
2288 Seventh Ave. New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S 272 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E 
A . C. E. 
WILL GIV E 
$10.0 0 in Gold 
for the three best essays written on the following question: 
"SHOULD COLORED PEOPLE LEAVE THE 
SOUTH AT THIS TIME?" 
FIRST PRIZE $5.00 SECOND PRIZE $2.50 
THIRD PRIZE $2.50 
Letters must not contain more than 500 words 
and must be written only on one side of the 
paper. 
The Prize Winning Essays will be published in New York's leading weekly, the 
"New York News" the. first week in October. 
Contest closes with the last mail on 
September 15, 1917. 
JUDGES : J. S, Brown, George "W. Harris, 
Dr. Charles Martin, Augustus Granville 
Dill and F. Harrison Hough. 
This Association is an Employees Union 
which assists its members in securing positions 
free of cost, investigates and opens up new 
fields for colored labor and obtains better industrial and living conditions for Negroes. 
Our Association is the largest fraternal 
brotherhood of colored employees in the 
world. 
For further information write or call 
ASSOCIATED COLORED EMPLOYEES OF AMERICA 
436 LENO X AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Wh y Ar e Ne w Yor k Wome n 
S o Beautifu l ? 
RED ROSE FACE POWER 
AN D 
FL0RESSENCE PRODUCTS 
Quality high and prices reasonable 
Floressence Mfg. Co., Inc. 
1919-192 9 BROADWA Y NE W YORK , N . Y . 
N O 
MONE Y 
NEEDE D 
This suit is yours without a 
penny's cost. Just send us a 
postal or letter today Let 
us show you how to get it 
by our easy plan. No expert 
enee needed. Be our agent 
and make 
$10 to $15 a Day 
in your spare time. It is dead 
easy—you never saw a nobbier 
suit or a more stunning pattern, 
cot in very latest style. Your choice 
of 60 fabrics and 32 styles. Drop us 
a postal card for heavy pattern book, 
inside information about styles, 
self-measuring blanks, etc. DON'T 
WAIT. We prepay Delivery Charges. Mail Postal NOW! 
American Woolen Mills Co . 
Dent 851 Chicago 
Beaut y for Wome n 
CLEAR , SMOOT H SKI N 
—PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
FAMOUS DELUXE BEAUTY BOOK, ILLUSTRATED 
AND COMPLETE. SENT TO YOU POSTPAID FREE 
OF CHARGE. TELLS ALL ABOUT THE KASHMIR 
WA Y AND DESCRIBES THE WONDERFUL METHODS 
WHICH HUNDREDS OF WOMEN ARE USING TO GET 
A Kashmir GIRL PRETTY SKIN AND HAIR. YO U CAN DO THE SAME. 
5 OR 1 0 MINUTES A DAY CARING FOR YOUR SKIN AND HAIR THE KASHMIR 
WA Y WILL BRING WONDERFUL RESULTS. YO U WON'T KNOW YOURSELF IN A 
FEW DAYS. 
WRIT E TODA Y DON' T SEN D AN Y MONE Y 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO., De Pt . K 
4709 State Street Chicago, Ill. 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 273 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8t h & . Plu m 
Cincinnati . Ohi o 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M Introducin g 
LLYRA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
A Guaranteed Food Preparation for 
the Hair. Price 5 0 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs . E . Slaughte r Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS . MO . 
ALLIANCESKIN 
Pants only $1 
We Pay Express or Parcel Post Charges 
Made a s yo u lik e them . No extra 
charge for tunnel belt loops, cuffs on 
pants, etc. Your own initials embroidered in colors on the left tunnel pocket. 
See our" Alligator'' trimming on pants. 
< See all our latest original 
Agents novelties. Get acquainted 
Wante d 'with this Alliance—order 
A t Onc e your own clothes at less 
— J than wholesale price. We 
make suits to measure from $8.50 up. 
Just mail us your name and address and receive FRE E our agency outfit and ail samples. 
You will want to be our agent. Make big 
money. Satisfaction guaranteed. Our references will convince you. 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE A 
Dept. 372 Wholesale Tailors, Chicago 
We GIVE It to YOU 
Quality 
and Fit 
guaranteed 
Take this fine Made-toMeasure Suit and don't 
pay us one cent for it. 
We want you to get one of our high 
class suits, absolutely Free , sO you 
can show it to your friends. It will 
be a big advertisement for us 
If you have a little spare time, 
you can easily make from 
$35 to $ 5 0 extra every week 
and beside s that be the bestdressed man in your town. It's an 
opportunity you cannot afford to 
overlook. Don't delay a minute. 
Write for this Big Offer at Once 
Drop us a line or send us your name 
on a postal card and we will send 
you absolutely Free , our wonderful 
style book, containing dozens of samples and fashion plates to choose from 
Writ e Now . Everything sent Free 
and postag e prepaid . 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept . 981, CHICAG O 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class service for First-class people 
3428 Sout h Park Avenue , Chicago , Ill. 
Hand Made Natural Human Hair Wigs 
Transformations, 
Switches, Puffs, Plaits, 
Bangs, Corone t Braids, that 
can be combe d the same as 
your ow n hair. Human 
hair for sale by ounc e or 
pound. Hair NETS . 
W E CARR Y TH E 
LARGES T STOCK I N 
ELECTRI C 
COMBS 
Mail Orders sent to any part of the U. S. or B. W . I. Send 2c for catalog-. 
Mme . Baum' s Hai r Emporium , Inc. , 48 6 Eighth Avenue , Ne w Yor k City 
Between 84th and 36th Streets 
Mention TH E CRISI S 274 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
$60 A WEEK and this free automobi
Every agent can get an auto free no contest 
Tub 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Years 
You—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Free 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with. me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to ad. 
vertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 50 years—the ROBINSON FOLDING 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives ever y home a modern up-to-date 
bathroo m in any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years, Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is goo d if you mean business. But you must be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcar d now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
R. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG, CO. 
4733 Factories Buildin g TOLEDO , OHI O 
FEET 
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS. BUNIONS. IN-I GROWN NAILS and ALL 
other AILMENTS of the FEET 
DR . WILLIA M J . CARTE R 
m CHIROPODIS T 
Registered In the States of New York and New Jersey 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 Wes t 136th St. . New York City . 
$3.00 Brings This 
SUIT 
Tailore on an offer sod easy to, s You o liberal,r sO Measur won­ e 
derful, you can hardly believe it. The 
very latest 1918 style, a perfect fit 
magnificent new design, delivered 
prepaid. Send no money now, not 
one cent, just write us a letter or 
postal and say, "Send m e your new J 
amazing $3 suit offer" and get \ 
the latest big set of cloth samples 
to pick from, a great book of all the brand 
new 1918 fashions shown in gorgeous colors 
all FREE, a tailoring offer so splendid, 
so marvelous, it's hard to believe; greater 
and better than any tailoring offer you ever 
saw. Ho w t o get all your ow n 
clothes free, how to make all your 
spending money in your extra spare time 
how to become more important, influential 
and prosperous. Don't wait, don't put it 
off, write us your name and address 
now, today, this very minute. Address 
BANNER TAILORING CO.. DEPT. 507 CHICAGO 
HARRY E. DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building, Rooms 603 and 604 
Office 'Phone, 3297 Mulberry 
Residence 'Phone, 5277-M Market NEWARK, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Office,: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. P . McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARR Y M. COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotation 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Lenox Ave., New York 
$1.95 Made t0 
your order 
Special offer - to prove our fine quality: These fine 
•
Pants fo r Dress or 
Business, choice of man y handsome styles, guaranteed for 18
 1 
months solid wear and satisfaction 
or MONE Y BACK , absolut e 
$5.00 value-whil e they last. 
one pair to a customer , / — 
Express prepaid $1.9 5 Pants 
for only .. . 
No Extr a Charge s 
No charg e for big Extrem e Pe g Tops or 
Cuff Bottoms, nothing extra for fanc y 
Belt Loops or Pocket Flaps, no charg e 
for Open Welt Seams or Large sizes—all novelty 
features Free - no extra charges of any kind 
Cash profits to you for taking measures of relatives and neighbors. 
Young George Gekovich made $66.16 in one 
day. Write for FREE samples today. ^ 
Chicag o Tailor s Associatio n Send No money 
DEPT. A-1 2 515 S. Franklin St.. Chicago 
Mention TH E CRISI S A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , AUTHOR OF "SOULS OF BLACK 
FOLK, " "QUEST OF THE SILVER FLEECE," "SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY OF 
THE NEGRO AMERICAN, " ETC. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
DR . D U BOIS'S NEW BOOK IS THE LATEST ADDITION TO A REMARKABLE 
SERIES OF LOW-PRICED NEW BOOKS WITH WHICH EVERYBODY SHOULD BECOME ACQUAINTED. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
9 4 VOLUME S NO W READY 
Published by HENR Y HOL T & COMPANY , 3 4 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A . L. FISHER, W . T. BREWSTE R 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Cloth bound , good paper, clear type , 256 pages per £!f\s+ 4 -
volume . Each complet e an d sold separately - - 60C. NET. 
POSTAGE EXTRA 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 60 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N By J. A . Thomson LATI N AMERIC A By W . R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENCH REVOLUTIO N VICTORIA N LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROM E By W . Ward e Fowler GERMAN Y O F TODA Y 
PROBLEMS O F PHILOSOPH Y By Charles Towe r 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AN D HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H. A . L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A . C . Pigou 
ORDER THROUGH TH E PUBLISHERS OR THROUGH 
TH E CRISIS , 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS Book m
Yo u can order through the CRISI S any boo k printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIVE LIFE I N SOUTH AFRICA. (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) . 1.2 0 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare ) 1.5 0 
TH E LIFE AND TIME S OF BOOKER T . WASHINGTON . (B . F . Riley). 1.5 0 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amo s Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge ) 1.0 0 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley ) 1.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.0 0 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
M Y LIFE AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexande r Walters) 1.5 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.2 5 
PRINCE HAL L AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford ) .. . 1.0 0 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION. (T . G. Steward) 1.2 5 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WES T AFRICA. (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W . E. B. Du Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson ) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch ) 1.5 0 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W . C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS. (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyma n Bee^her 
Stowe ) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 