EDUCATIO N NUMBE R 
The CRISIS 
Vol . 20—No. 3 JULY , 1920 Whol e No . 117 
ONE DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENTS A COP Y HAVE YOU SEEN 
Th e Brownies' Boo k 
a Monthly Magazine Designed
Especially for Our Children ? 
PARENTS ! 
W e all adore the BROWNIES ' BOOK ! I do think it is charming ! 
I am sure I enjoy it as much as any child. I was much interested in the 
story of Sojourne r Trut h (Apri l issue), and I hope yo u wil l frequently tell 
us of great men and women of our race so that our children may learn to 
know the lives of Dunbar, Douglass, Booke r Washington , DuBois, and a 
score more as well as they know the stories of Washingto n and Lincoln . 
M y own little boys are four and five years old. Tonigh t after tuckin g 
them into bed as 1 came down stairs they called, first "Smiles " (the baby) 
then "Happv" : "Mother, I'll wake early tomorrow mornin g so's I can read 
the BROWNIES ' Boo K , hear?" 
Juli a Pric e Burrell , 
St. Helen a Island, Frogmore , S. C. 
TEACHERS ! 
Please send me 150 additional copies of the June BROWNIES ' BOO K 
(100 copies were received yesterday 1. Please send by return mail if possible. 
The children can scarcely wait for each new number. 
Ell a Lynch , 
Washington , D . C. 
I think the BROWNIES ' BOO K is tremendously interesting. I am 
teaching in a school for boys and they all enjoy reading it so much. I wis h 
you had more about our colored heroes. I am very anxious that my boys 
become acquainted with the deeds of the great men and wome n of our race. 
Nanni e E . Jewell, 
St. Louis, Mo . 
CHILDREN ! 
I am delighted to tell you that the BROWXIES ' BOO K has created 
quite a sensation here. Everyon e enjoys its little stories, poems, pictures 
and letters. It is surprising to know how many high school girls kno w nothing or very little about our own N'egro heroines such as Harriet Tubman 
Francis Harpe r and Sojourne r Truth . I hope that the BROWNIES ' BOO K 
will be a great success. 
Audre y Wright , 
Washington , D . C. 
Th e BROWNIES ' BOO K appeared wit h the issue of January, 1920, and we 
have still a few copies of each issue for those wh o desire a complete file of the 
magazine. 
Th e Jul y issue contains a record of our hig h school graduates for the yea r 
and there are lots of pictures and stories and other things of value. 
15 CENTS PER COPY $1.50 PER YEAR 
Write for sample copy. We shall be glad to send it. 
SUBSCRIBERS WANTE D AGENT S WANTE D 
ADDRES S 
Th e BROWNIES ' BOO K 
DUBOI S AN D DILL , Publisher s 
2 West 13th Street New York, N. Y. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO B TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 20—No. 3 JULY, 1920 Whole No. 117 
PICTURE S Page 
COVER . Portrait of Ev a R. Marshall. 
PICTURE S O F 84 GRADUATES . 
ARTICLE S 
WEAKNESSE S O F TH E NEGR O COLLEGE . G . Davi d Houston
TH E YEA R IN NEGR O EDUCATION . M . G . Alliso n
TH E NEGR O AN D TH E NATIONA L GUARD . Hon . Newton D . Bake r
BROW N LEAVES . A Poem. Winifre d Virgini a Jordan
TH E WIS E GUY S O F UNOBI A
A N ANSWER . Senator Medil l McCormic k
PEONAG E IN GEORGI A
 122 
 126 
 137 
 137 
 138 
 138 
 139 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINIO N 117 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E 132 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 141 
TH E HORIZO N 145 
TH E AUGUS T CRISI S 
Th e Augus t CRISI S wil l be Vacatio n Number , an d wil l carr y the first half o f a ne w novelett e 
b y Jessi e Fauset . Th e Septembe r CRISI S wil l be Haitia n Number . Th e Octobe r CRISI S wil l be 
Home s Number . Sen d u s photograph s 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e dat e of expiratio n o f each subscriptio n is printe d o n the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscriptio n is due , a blu e renewa l blan k is enclosed . 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address o f a subscribe r ca n be change d as ofte n as desired . 
In orderin g a chang e o f address, both the ol d an d the new address must be given . Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S an d drawing s relatin g to colore d people are desired . The y must be accompanie d b y retur n postage . If found unavailabl e the y wil l be returned . 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at Ne w York , Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of Marc h 8, 1879. 114 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENS SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
Washington, D. C. 
J . STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D. , Presiden t 
EMMET T J . SCOTT . A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer . 
Collegiate and Professional Schools 
Junio r College , coverin g the Freshma n an d Sophomor e years, an d leadin g to the Senio r Colleges. 
Senio r College , consistin g o f the Schools of Liberal Arts, Education, Journalism and Commerce 
and Finance, grantin g respectivel y the degrees, A.B . or B.S. ; A.B . o r U.S . i n Edu ­
catio n ; B.S . i n Journalism ; B.S . i n Commerce . 
Schoo l o f Applie d Science , fou r yea r course , givin g degree , B.S . i n C.E. ; B.S . i n E.E. ; B.S . 
i n M.E. ; B.S . i n Architecture ; B.S . i n Agriculture , an d B.S . i n Househol d Economics. 
Schoo l o f Music , four yea r course , givin g degre e o f Mus.B . 
Schoo l o f Religion , thre e yea r course , givin g decre e of B .D . (Als o Diplom a an d Correspondenc e 
Courses.) 
Schoo l o f Law , thre e yea r evenin g course , givin g degre e o f LL .K . 
Schoo l o f Medicine , includin g Medical , Dental , Pharmaceutica l Colleges. Fou r yea r cours e for 
Medica l an d Denta l students; thre e years fo r Pharmaceutica l student * Followin g dedegree s given : M.D. , D.D.S. , Phar.C . 
Students may enter for Collegiate Work at the beginning of any quarter. 
REGISTRATION : 
Autum n Quarte r Septembe r 27 t o 29, 1920 
Winte r Quarte r Januar y 3, 1921 
Spring : Quarte r Marc h 19 an d 21 , 1921 
For Catalog and Information, write 
DWIGH T O. W. HOLMES , Registrar 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY , Washington, D. C. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 115 
Atlanta University Is beautifull y located In the City of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, norma l 
School and College , wit h Manua l trainin g and domestic science. Amon g the teachers ar e graduates 
of Tale , Harvard , Dartmout h and Welleeley . Fift y 
year s of successful work have been completed. 
Students some fro m al l part i of the south. Grad ­
uate* ar e almost universally successful. 
Fo r farthe r Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E ATLANTA , O A 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location . 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following departments: College, Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, 
Nurs e Trainin g and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses ver y reasonable. 
Begins Septembe r 15, 1920. 
Fo r catalo g and other information address 
PRESIDENT . J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
1870 1920 CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildln£B with modem conveniences, talented faculty: 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories; co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Course s of Study : 
Domestic Scenes, Public Speaking. Musle, 
P re-Academy. Smit h and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, four years with AB degree. 
51st year opens September 15, 1920 
Expenses, $15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expenses. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING. President. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the ^nly institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FIS K UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Blddle University, eperated ander the a ass-Ices »f 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first vear 
of the High SchooL 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two course* 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific. German Is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely amgliab, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept 
The For further Information, address Florida Agricultural President H. L. MeCrorty, 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
The Alumni of 
LINCOL N UNIVERSIT Y 
ore raising $50,000 for ALM A MATE R 
Lincoln train* for leadership and success. 
Address: 
President John B. Rendall, D. D. 
Lincoln Universit y Chester County, Pa. 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South, Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wei l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics unde r faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training . Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins September, 1920. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN , President BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board, 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 116 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Wiley University The Cheyney Training 
Marshall , Texas School for Teachers 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN , Presiden t 
Talledeg a College 
Talledega , Alabam a 
Founde d i n 186 7 for the Educatio n of 
Negr o Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful location. 
Literary , Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration , Journalism, 
Nurs e Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christia n Man ­
hood and Womanhood . 
Fo r further information address 
F . A . SUMNER , President 
The Agricultural 
& Technical College 
of Nort h Carolina 
Maintaine d by the Stat e an d Federa l 
Governmen t 
Fo r males only. Practical 
and Strong Courses by the 
following Departments: 
Agricultural, Mechanical, 
Academic, Teacher Training, 
and Military. 
Summer School for teachers 
of both sexes began June 21, 
and continues six weeks. 
Write today for catalog. 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , 
President, 
Greensboro, N . C. 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
Course s includ e the regula r academi c an d 
professiona l subjects an d specia l departments 
i n domesti c art, domesti c science , manua l 
trainin g an d agriculture . Boar d an d tuitio n 
$125. Nex t regula r ter m begin s Wednesday , 
Septembe r 15, 1920. Summe r schoo l fo r 
teachers i n activ e service , beginnin g Jul y 1. 
Boar d an d tuitio n fo r the mont h $20.00. Fo r 
furthe r particulars an d catalo g writ e Lesli e 
Pinckne y Hill , Principal , Cheney , Penna . 
WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
SUMMER SCHOOL WILBERFORC E OHI O 
Seventh Annual Session, June 21 to July 31, 1920 
Location ideal; facult y large ; dormitor y 
room ample , teaching- facilitie s the best. 
Special lectures; mode l school for observation and practice ; fees and expenses reasonable, 
Credit in regula r session given for work done 
in the summer ; all courses standard. 
Courses offered—professional, normal, collegiate and high school. 
Fo r furthe r particular s writ e 
GILBER T H . JONES , 
Bo x 44 Directo r Summe r School, 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , 
President of the University . 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
G1BSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A , B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O . L . COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L A n Episcopa l boarding school fo r girls, unde r the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
Richmond, Va. 
A separate school for higher education of girls 
Thirty seven years of success 
Offers superior advantages 
College, Normal, Academic, Junior 
and Music courses 
Expenses moderate 
Send for catalog to the President 
Educational Institutions continued 
on page 150 
Mention TH E CRISIS , THE CRISIS 
Vol. 20. No. 3 JULY, 1920 . Whole No. 117 
Opinion of W.E.B. Du Bois 
I N GEORGI A 
THE eleventh annual conference 
of the N. A . A . C. P. marked 
an epoch. Fo r the first time 
since Reconstruction a radical 
Negro organization, whose aims were 
well known and clearly enunciated, 
has met openly in the center of the 
South and demanded without equivocation : 
The right to vote 
The Federal suppressing of lynching 
Free compulsory common school 
training 
The abolition of "Jim Crow" cars 
Decent conditions of labor and 
wage. 
To those white Southerners who 
despite their education and training 
and despite their deep and passionate convictions stood for and insisted 
on fair play for us, we hold out 
hearty hands in greeting and fellowship. We know as they know that 
this meeting does not mean the conversion of the white South. By no 
means. The South was never more 
determined than today to keep the 
Negro "i n his place". Moreover 
among the audiences which' aggregated perhaps 15,000 persons during 
the four days, less than 50 were 
southern whites. 
Wh y then did our meeting mark an 
epoch ? 
Fo r two reasons: 
1. It marked a decision on the part 
of the leaders of the white South that 
it is no longer wise to prevent Negroes from openly expressing their 
grievances. 
2. It marked the realization by the 
whole country that there is no difference of aim and desire between the 
southern and northern Negro. 
Fo r fifty years the white South 
backed by organized northern philanthropy has attempted to gag the black 
man. By charity, promises, cajolery, 
threats and mob law it has made 
it next to impossible for the Negro to 
complain in the South and if he complained in the North about the South 
it was plausibly explained that he did 
not know what he was talking about; 
that only southern Negroes knew 
southern conditions and they were 
silent and satisfied! 
Again, if northern Negroes presumed to go into the South they not 
only faced the "Jim Crow" car and 
the threat of the mob but they were 
branded as dangerous "agitators" 
seeking to stir up the quiet and happy 
southern Negroes; their words were 
distorted and twisted or entirely suppressed and to cap the climax the 
ubiquitous "white folks' nigger" appeared, denounced the intruders and 
lauded the lynchers to the skies. 
The firm, unwavering stand of the 
Atlant a Branch of the N . A . A . C. P. 
brought these tactics to naught. The 
"white folks' nigger" lost his glib 
tongue. Hurried conferences between 
whites and blacks convinced the 
whites that the blacks demanded this 
meeting, that their objects were lawful and that the only trouble that 
117 118 TH E
could ensue would come from the 
whites. 
Finally, there can be no doubt but 
that a small portion of the white 
South is thinking and learning. To 
them T H E C RISI S and the N . A . A . 
C. P. hold out frank hands of fellowship. But we do this without shuffling or deception. We black folk demand the rights of men—no more, no 
less. Ar e you with us or against us? 
If you are with us we are with you, 
willing to toil and strive in patience 
and bloody sweat for a real American 
democracy. But if you are against 
us there is no compromise possible. 
It is fight and fight to the bitter end. 
TW O METHOD S 
A VIGILANC E Committee in 
Des Moines, Iowa, under Mrs. 
L . B. Smith, has arranged the 
following program for the 
care of colored children in mixed 
schools: 
I. OU R POLICY : 
(a) To establish friendly relations with teachers and school authori­ ties (b) To urge parents to wash and dress their children properly 
(c) Help with poverty and truancy 
(d) Arrange home work and tuition for the backward 
II. THI S VIGILANC E COMMITTE E which 
endeavors to fit the colored American child 
for the public school will deftly intertwine their effort in the mission: (a) To make colored children realize that being "colored" is a normal 
beautiful thing 
(b) To make them know that other colored children have grown into beautiful, useful and famous per­ sons 
(c) To turn their little hurts and re­ sentments .into emulation, ambi­ tion and love of their own homes and companions 
(d) To inspire them to prepare for definite occupation and duties with a broad spirit of sacrifice 
(e) To teach universal love and broth­ erhood for all little folks—black, brown, yellow and white 
(f) To teach them delicately a code of 
honor and action in their relation with white children 
III. WE ask the cooperation of all the teachei-s and principals in helping us to accomplish this splendid duty at this critical 
hour. 
 CRISIS 
Mr. L . F . Artis, assistant secretary 
of the colored Y . M . C. A . writes us 
from Indianapolis: 
It will interest you, I feel sure, to know of a piece of work that has just been com­ pleted here in Indianapolis, the effect of 
which is quite favorable. 
Under the direction of the IndustrialDepart
the Y . M . C. A . a vocational guidance con­ ference was held with every colored boy 
who was graduated from the 8A grammar grades at the spring term. The hearty sup­ port and interest of the supervising princi­ pals of the colored schools and of the teach­ ers of the schools concerned brought a full measure of success to the effort. 
The purpose of the conferences was three­ fold : To urge a continuance in high school of every boy; to guide those who MUS T 
stop school and enroll them in a night high 
school; and to suggest high school courses in relation to future life-work. Each boy was carefully charted on a psychological 
analysis sheet. His temperamental and 
hereditary qualities were considered and 
his school history was added. The personal 
choice of his future vocation was secured 
from each boy and a thorough effort was made to correlate native endowments and 
vocational choices. Only two colored boys in the entire city failed to enter the local 
high schools. 
A group of experienced men has been formed into a Vocational Guidance 
Committee which any boy in the city can consult and talk over the problem of his life-work. It is also purposed to carefully follow-up 
the boys who were interviewed in this man­ ner with the aim of guiding their young and 
fertile minds into profitable lines of en­ deavor. 
This plan, we feel sure, could be put into operation in a number of our larger cities with marked success and with great poten­ tialities for rendering a much needed ser­ vice. 
Finally, the Alpha Phi Alpha 
Fraternity during the week of June 6-12 
put on an enthusiastic and nationwide "drive " to encourage colored 
boys and girls to go to Hig h School 
and College. These efforts are the 
ones that tell. Ma y they spread 
widely. 
RAC E INTELLIGENC E 
F0R a century or more it has 
been the dream of those who 
do not believe Negroes are 
human that their wish should 
find some scientific basis. Fo r years 
they depended on the weight of the 
human brain, trusting that the al­OPINION 119 
leged underweight of less than a thousand Negro brains, measured without 
reference to age, stature, nutrition or 
cause of death, would convince the 
world that black men simply could not 
be educated. Today scientists acknowledge that there is no warrant 
for such a conclusion and that in any 
case the absolute weight of the brain 
is no criterion of racial ability. 
Measurements of the bony skeleton 
followed and great hopes of the scientific demonstration of race inferiority were held for a while. But they 
had to be surrendered when Zulus and 
Englishmen were found in the same 
dolichocephalic class. 
Then came psychology: the children 
of the public schools were studied and 
it was discovered that some colored 
children ranked lower than white children. This gave wide satisfaction 
even though it was pointed out that 
the average included most of both 
races and that considering the educational opportunities and social environment of the races the differences 
were measurements simply of the ignorance and poverty of the black 
child's surroundings. 
Today, however, all is settled. " A 
workably accurate scientific classification of brain power" has been discovered and by none other than our 
astute army officers. The tests were 
in two sets for literates and illiterates 
and were simplicity itself. For instance, among other things the literates were asked in three minutes "to 
look at each row of numbers below 
and on the two dotted lines write the 
two numbers that should come next." 
3 4 5 6 7 8 
8 7 6 5 4 3 .. . .. . 10 15 20 25 30 35 
81 27 9 3 1 Y3 
1 4 9 16 25 36 
16 17 15 18 14 19 
3 6 8 16 18 36 
Illiterates were asked, for example, 
to complete pictures where the net 
was missing in a tennis court or a ball 
i n a bowling alley! 
Fo r these tests were chosen 4730 
Negroes from Louisiana and 
Mississippi and 28,052 white recruits from 
Illinois. The result? Do you need to 
ask? M . R. Trabue, Director, Bureau 
of Educational Service, ColumbiaUnive
gence of the average southern Negro 
is equal to that of a 9-year-old white 
boy and that we should arrange our 
educational program to make "waiters, porters, scavengers and the like" 
of most Negroes! 
Is it conceivable that a great university should employ a man whose 
"science" consists of such utter rot? 
A QUESTION 
CONSIDER , my pale friends, 
what should be done in cases 
such as these: 
A t the recent convention 
of the Y . W. C. A . at Cleveland a final 
banquet was arranged at the Hotel 
Statler. This hotel refused to admit 
the forty colored delegates who were 
in attendance. Instead of removing 
the banquet to any one of several 
other first class hotels which have 
never drawn the color line, a separate 
banquet for the colored delegates was 
given in the dining-room of the Y . W. 
C. A . 
A t New Orleans the annual convention of the National Conference of 
Social Work met. A t first all the sectional meetings were arranged in 
white hotels which would not admit 
Negroes even to attend the meetings. 
When the conference threatened to 
withdraw on this account other meeting places were hastily arranged. A t 
the evening mass meeting five rows 
of seats for Negroes were roped off 
in the gallery. Only two Negroes attended. A t one of the meetings when 
a Negro arose to speak, Miss Jean 
Gordon, a leading progressive southern white woman, withdrew: "I'm not 
going to stay and listen to a nigger 
speak," she said. Governor-elect 120 TH E CRISIS 
Parker of Louisiana, who represents 
the best white people of the state and 
has just beaten the "ring" , made a 
speech filled with reactionary sentiment and invective against Negroes. 
Finall y when the conference was compelled to ask pledges to cover a deficit, 
a Newark Negro rose and pledged 
$50, "despite the insults we have endured, because we do not believe 
that the attitude of the city is the attitude of the conference." 
Now what shall we do in such 
cases? Shall we be silent? The white 
press is unanimously silent. Is this 
the best method? Wil l silence improve matters at future conferences? 
Does it show greater love for one's 
fellowman to ignore his sins or to 
point them out? 
SOLDIERS 
THE statement by the Secretary 
of Wa r in this number is a 
most disappointing pronouncement. It means that the 
Negro-hating section of the General 
Staff has had its way and that 
Negroes in the National Guard are not 
to be treated as soldiers; that, taking 
advantage of a strained interpretation of the law, Negro militia is not to 
be organized as an integral part of the 
state guard, but is to be regarded as 
potentially in separate divisions. 
This, however, would call for training 
in all arms of the service and by inference it would demand Negro officers. To avoid this the Negro militi a 
units are to be admitted to none of 
the arms of the service but organized 
as "pioneers" from which in case of 
stress either laborers or real soldiers 
could be recruited. 
If the United States Arm y used 
half as much brains and ingenuity to 
make an effective fighting machine as 
it uses to exclude the Negro as an officer and soldier it might in time escape 
the derision of the military world. 
Let this nonsense cease. Let us 
make organized and systematic demand on the Wa r Department for: 
1. The organization of colored units 
as integral parts of state organizations; or 
2. The organization of a National 
Colored Corps with Negro officers. 
LATI N 
THE principal of a State school 
for Negroes writes us: 
"Fo r seven years I contended for the right to make 
this school available for such students 
as desired to prepare for college or 
professional schools as well as for 
those who would go at once to work 
as teachers or in some other way to 
earn a livelihood. 
"In consequence I have been called 
stupid and stubborn. Stupid because 
I could not see the wonderful advantages of dedicating all efforts to 
the study and teaching of the farm, 
and stubborn because unwilling to 
yield unreservedly to the advice of 
those who did see. 
"Under threat of loss of the 
Federal appropriation our board of trustees at last ordered me to cease the 
teaching of Latin . Something of a 
compromise was made when it was 
agreed that except for the Lati n we 
should have a course equivalent to 
that in the accredited high schools of 
the state." 
Why does this man insist on 
"Latin?" some will ask. Do colored people 
especially crave for Lati n and Greek? 
No. But as long as the leading 
Northern colleges require Lati n i n 
their entrance examinations our 
schools must meet that requirement 
or our children wil l be refused admission. When the great colleges recognize the educational value of other 
studies beside the classics, we wil l be 
ready to adopt other studies but for 
Negro fitting schools voluntarily and 
alone to cut themselves off from the 
educational system of the land as established by the white universities, is 
suicide. HELE N F. CRAWFORD S. ELIZ. TOWNSEND MAMIE DIGGS FLORIDA M. THOMAS 
A.B. , Radcliffe 
ALTHE A A. MERCHAN T 
A.B., Hunter 
VER A N. GUILFORD 
A.B., Iowa 
EDITH M. 'HOWARD 
A.B., Chicago 
BERY L R. JONES 
A.B.,
CORNELIA
 Illinois 
 L. LEGGETT 
A.B., Boston 
LAUR A E. TYNE R 
A.B., Cincinnati 
BOBBIE B. SCOTT 
A.B., Oberlin 
HELE N D. BESHEARS 
A.B.
MARIE
 California 
 F. STEVENS A.B., Temple 
HELE N LUCAS 
A.B., Oberlin 
WILLREN E WOODS 0.
A.B.,
 M. C.
 Iowa 
 DAVIDSON 
A.B. , Illinois A.B., Iowa A.B., Washburn A.B., Radcliffe 
12 1 WEAKNESSES OF TH E NEGRO COLLEGE 
G . DAVI D HOUSTO N 
RECONSTRUCTIO N is the watchwor d 
of the age! Whil e political, educational, and social institutions are hearkening to its cry, the Negr o college is 
stil l standin g aloof i n its mediaeval tendencies, apparently deaf to the newer demands 
of the age. I n fact, the most disheartening 
aspect of the Negro's advancement is reflected i n his unpardonable neglect of his 
own college; fo r the same mildewed objective of makin g professing Christian s 
and developing prospective preachers stil l 
prevails i n the minds of trustee boards. The 
Negr o college is hemmed i n so tightl y by 
adamant walls of religious dogmatism tha t 
it cannot be expected to take an outstandin g place among America n institutions of 
learning . True , its alumn i have frequently 
ranked among the most distinguished 
thinkers of America , but, generally, not 
before they first have breathed the religious 
and academic freedom of other institutions. 
The first obvious weakness of the Negr o 
college lies i n the delusion that the president must be a "Ministe r of the Gospel" . 
It is not essential that he be an educator 
of ripe and successful experience, or a 
scholar of copious industr y and promisin g 
renown, or an administrato r of tried and 
approved judgment. He need only be " a 
ma n of soul" , wit h sufficient zeal and fervor 
to lead benighted souls out of the land of 
darkness. Thu s the curriculum becomes 
evangelized, and so man y practices of the 
church are introduced that like Franklin's 
Presbyterians, "the more you dar n them, 
the more they grow. " A s a most natura l 
consequence of this religious domination, the 
Negr o college is more of a mediaeva l monastery than a modern and progressive in ­
stitution of academic freedom and initiative . 
Thus the Negr o college is becoming more 
and more repulsive to the broadminded, 
liberal-thinkin g Negr o professor, who is 
more ambitious to direct the trainin g of 
promisin g minds, or to make some recognized contribution to education, than to establish an enviable record for chapel and 
prayer-meeting attendance. 
^ This monastery type of college ma y have 
been invaluabl e durin g the pioneer period 
of the Negr o college. Perhap s i n those 
days, every recitation was properl y opened 
wit h a prayer-meeting an d closed wit h a 
reviva l service ; but the modern Negr o professor is too fa r removed from the influences 
of those days to accept, withou t vigorous 
protest, man y of the practices of half a 
century ago. The educated Negr o yearns 
for freedom—political, religious, an d academic. Just the other day, he helped to 
dethrone oppression. H e cannot be persuaded, argued, or cajoled into any type 
of serfdom. H e inhales the love of freedom i n his very being. Accordingly , he is 
becoming more and more tenacious of his 
privilege of worshipping the Supreme 
Being in a manner suited to his own views 
of duty. College professors, who merit the 
distinction of their title, are men of enlightened views—magnanimous i n their 
character—of war m and ardent feelings. 
Suc h men are sure to be jealous of their 
righ t to serve God as they see fit, and a 
clash is inevitable whenever an y fanatica l 
college president trie s to force upon them 
his notion of religious devotion. Ther e is 
but slender chance of attractin g and holdin g scholarly colored men, as lon g as their 
wort h to a college is measured b y their 
chapel attendance. The triump h of the 
most progressive America n colleges has 
come through the divorcement of religious 
dogmatism and mental discipline. The 
Negro college should emulate such examples. 
The Negr o youth, moreover, needs less 
preaching and more teaching. H e has 
heard about every possible sermon that 
can be preached on preparin g fo r death. H e 
needs a few now on preparin g fo r life . His 
preachers have been altogether too numerous; fo r man y who have had the most virtu e 
i n their mouths, have had the least i n their 
bosoms. Ther e is reall y more genuine 
Christia n trainin g i n placin g before the im ­
pressionable college youth, i n his several 
classrooms, men of stron g personality, in ­
dependent thought, an d exemplar y character, than there can possibly be i n the 
various extrinsi c agencies employed b y the 
Negr o college. It is time now to modernize the Negr o college youth, by liberatin g 
122 TH E NEGRO
him. It is questionable i f the preacherpresident is the kin d of emancipator that is 
needed. Th e whit e colleges, wit h the notable exception of denominationa l schools, 
have virtuall y declared tha t the day of the 
preacher-president has passed. The 
Negro college should follow their lead. 
The second glaring weakness of the 
Negro college—and one which must be discussed frankl y i n the ligh t of present day 
conditions—is the mistake of callin g a whit e 
ma n to the presidency. B y some strange 
lapse of reasoning, man y Negroes feel that 
their college is better administered by a 
whit e president. The y argue that a whit e 
ma n bring s prestige and money to a Negr o 
college. Some even maintai n tha t a colored 
president could not secure the respect and 
co-operation of his fellow colored professors. 
No w as a matte r of fact, these cloistered 
or fugitive virtue s of a white president are 
like man y statistics; they make more noise 
tha n their intrinsi c wort h justifies. Neithe r 
the prestige nor the income of any Negr o 
college has ever been appreciably augmented 
b y the administratio n of a white president. 
I n these days of intricat e relations between 
the races, i t is impossible fo r a Negr o college to attrac t a wel l qualified white ma n 
to the presidency. A whit e ma n who wears 
the measurements of a college president 
wil l experience no difficulty i n securing a 
hig h administrativ e berth i n one of the 
hundreds of whit e colleges, whic h can offer 
hi m muc h mor e fascinatin g inducements 
than a Negr o college. Moreover, every 
whit e president of a Negr o college is sociall y ostracized. His own people wil l not 
receive him cordially, and he has no desire 
to mingl e too freely wit h his sable charges. 
Once he presides over a Negr o college, he 
loses al l chances of being called to a white 
college presidency. Obviously, no young, 
scholarly, and progressive whit e man, lookin g fo r a career, is going to accept the 
presidency of a Negr o college. Onl y two 
types of whit e men are attracted i n these 
days; namely, the one whose career is just 
about spent, and now wants a "retirement 
job" ; and the other who finds that his remuneration as president of a Negr o college 
is fa r i n excess of any amount that his talents can brin g him from his own people. 
The oft-repeated "spiri t of sacrifice" has 
more rhetoric than trut h i n it. 
 COLLEG E 12 3 
This unfortunate situation is sure to 
place over scholarly Negroes eager fo r a 
career, a very ordinar y whit e ma n who is 
inferior in intelligence, experience, an d ability. Wha t a sad outlook fo r the Negr o 
scholar! Afte r he spends years in study, 
ripens wit h experience, and aspires to the 
coveted professorship, the very best he can 
hope fo r i n the field of education is a position under a conspicuously incompetent 
white president. Smal l wonder that the 
best Negr o minds are going into the other 
professions! 
The most lamentable phase of this abominable situation is that a weak whit e president is sure to tr y to destroy his strongest 
colored professors, for he is sure to feel 
uncomfortable i n their presence, and knows 
that he cannot control them. He , however, 
enjoys a strategic position, for he alone has 
access to the trustee board. Consequently, 
the grossest kinds of injustice i n matters 
of professoria l promotions, increased compensation, and the like , are vindictivel y 
practised. Wheneve r a question of increase 
i n salar y arises, preferment is sure to be 
given to the whit e professors, although the 
colored, professors do the wor k and give the 
college whatever prestige it enjoys. 
Atlanta's prestige has always rested upon Dr. 
DuBois; Fisk's, upon Dr. Haynes; and 
Howard's, upon Dean Miller. Matc h these 
names wit h those of whit© professors i n the 
same institutions. The sober trut h is tha t 
there is no white professor holding a chair 
i n a Negr o college, i n these days, who could 
hold the leg of a stool in a reputable whit e 
college. Bu t aside from the palpable in ­
justice of givin g poorly equipped white men 
positions which ought to be filled by well 
equipped colored men, there is another tendency which is overlooked. These whit e professors have almost no sympathy wit h the 
Negr o youth's aspirations. It is not uncommon, therefore, for such professors to 
discourage their students, and point to the 
approach to manhood by the "back door", 
rathe r than by the "front door". 
This condition of the Negr o college is 
entirely unnecessary. The race has produced men full y qualified and competent to 
administe r the affairs of the college. In 
fact,' the most successfully conducted 
Negro college is administered by a colored 
president, and its possibilities are limite d 
only by its denominationalism. Elementary , 124 TH E CRISIS 
secondary and norma l schools are intrusted 
to the administratio n of educated Negroes. 
Wh y should the college furnis h the exception? One of the most worth y incentives 
to scholarly endeavor on the part of the 
boy i n the Negr o hig h school comes through 
the realization that it is possible for hi m 
some day to become principa l of tha t school. 
Booke r T. Washington , cautious but sagacious, realized wha t an inspirin g effect 
an entirely colored facult y had upon colored 
students, and consequently appointed only 
colored persons to teacherships and positions of administrativ e responsibility. A s a 
result, the influence of Tuskegee has been 
vastly more widespread than that of 
Hampton, an institution which has employed just 
the opposite method. 
Since America n democracy has decreed 
that there shall be two races i n this country,—a huma n race and a Negr o race, and 
since conditions have forced Negroes to 
have their own institutions of learning, from 
the kindergarten through the university, 
every effort should be made to brin g these 
institutions up to the highest standards. 
The college must be made a strong unit 
i n the scheme of educating Negr o youths, 
as it is for educating white youths. It cannot be strong wit h a weak and incompetent 
president at the head. A president is powerless unless his professors second his efforts, and, being loya l and faithfu l themselves, brin g their assistants into the same 
attitude. The president cannot expect the 
support of his professors unless he can in ­
spire i n them respect and affection. Bu t 
the president and the professors cannot cooperate unless there is practica l agreement 
on their part respecting the ends to be 
sought. Herei n lies the danger when a 
whit e president is at the helm, for his 
"whit e man's attitude " cannot be accepted 
by any self-respecting Negro . Afte r all , the 
best person to state the needs of a Negro 
college and to attrac t friends is the Negr o 
himself. The passionate plea of a white 
president, receiving a very generous portion of the income, is not likel y to unlock 
philanthropi c or federal coffers. 
The thir d grave weakness of the Negr o 
college is found in its trustee board. 
Usually, the board of trustees is an airtight corporation, self-perpetuating and self-terminating . Their tenure of office and their 
acts are based upon the "Divin e Rights of 
Trustees" ; and as a result of their divine 
ordination, they are responsible to no power 
on earth. Their chief dut y seems to be to 
elect periodically a president, whose qualifications fo r the position they refuse to discuss. I n addition to their president-creatin g function, they meet two or three times 
a year; indorse the president's program, 
without attempting to know its import ; re 
elect themselves fo r three or more years; 
and adjourn, after enjoying a "State 
Dinner", and complimenting one another on the 
vast amount of business they accomplished 
i n such a limited time. N o doubt, such a 
self-perpetuating board can, throug h its 
colloquial ease, brin g man y benefits to the 
college, but the most progressive trustee 
boards are those elected by the alumn i of 
the college. Th e most insignificant alumnu s 
of Harvar d College has a vote equal i n 
weight to that of the most distinguished 
alumnus, i n determinin g wha t overseers are 
to supervise the interests of the college. 
It is hardl y conceivable that the alumn i of 
a college would stand fo r any other procedure. If a college does not send fort h 
alumn i sufficiently interested and competent 
to have a voice i n the government of their 
Alm a Mater, their college has no righ t to 
exist. 
Trustees of Negr o colleges apparentl y derive their greatest pleasure from tellin g 
how long they have served on the board, 
instead of how well they have served the 
college. It would be to the everlasting renown of any board to point to some meritorious achievement, whic h it has made memorable. The board must lear n tha t serviceableness is not necessarily coextensive wit h 
longevity. It is a question of serious concern whether or not a trustee can actuall y 
serve a college, as the college should be 
served, fo r thirt y or fort y years. Surely, 
the responsibility of a trustee should extend beyond the days of meeting. His in ­
terest should be perennial. H e should keep 
i n intimat e touch wit h the management of 
the college, and should not depend wholl y 
upon the president's annua l report fo r in ­
formation concerning the importan t phases 
of the college work. If he has not the time 
to pay the college an occasional visit, and 
see the institution in operation, he had better give his place to another. A trustee's 
serviceability, therefore, has its limitations. 
Fo r this reason, a trusteeship must not be TH E 12 5 NEGRO COLLEG E 
considered an ornament for lfe, but a good 
stiff job for a short period. 
Moreover, it is difficult to inspir e confidence i n the public, when the trustees are 
responsible to themselves only. If the 
Negro colleges were privately endowed, the 
situation would be different. Bu t these 
colleges are constantly begging fo r funds,— 
for the privilege of the board to spend 
as it sees fit. Money is thus actuall y wasted by the unbusinesslike practices of an in ­
competent president and the superficial genera l management of the trustees. The trut h 
is tha t an incompetent president and a selfperpetuating board of trustees can wreck 
a college. The donors, i f no one else, should 
force the board into some kin d of responsibility—i f not to the alumn i where it belongs, 
then to the donors who keep the college 
alive . Th e board should not, under any consideration, be responsible for its own membership. 
Th e first two weaknesses cannot be ver y 
wel l removed until after this thir d weakness has been removed; for trustee boards, 
as they are constituted at present, are most 
likel y to elect white men, preferably ministers, to the presidency. An d let it be said 
frankl y tha t the colored members of the 
board are primaril y responsible fo r these 
selections. The colored members take the 
initiativ e i n finding the man. The whit e 
trustees take the stand that "i t is your 
college, and we wil l vote for wha t yo u 
want. " I n one notable instance, a white 
trustee warned the colored trustees not to 
make a certain selection, but to no avail . 
Unfortunately , colored trustees do not want 
colored men to preside over their colleges. 
The y prefer a second or thir d class white 
ma n to a first class colored man. The white 
trustees, on the other hand, would gladly 
vote fo r the election of a colored president, 
i f the colored trustees would brin g i n such 
a recommendation. The motive is har d to 
interpret, except that there stil l exists that 
type of Negr o who lacks confidence i n his 
own race, and tha t type usuall y gets a place 
on college trustee boards and wields in ­
fluence. Anothe r possible explanation is 
that a weak whit e president is more likel y 
to give patronage, than a colored president. 
Afte r every presidentia l election, it is in ­
teresting to note the appointments made, 
apparently at the request of certain colored trustees of politica l propensities. Bu t 
aside from these mere conjectures, the writer wil l not attempt to answer the puzzle. 
Le t the colored trustees answer. 
No t unti l these weaknesses are frankl y 
admitted and remedied, should the Negr o 
college expect a successful career. Neithe r 
philanthropi c nor federal funds can be expected to revive the decadent Negr o college. A rea l administration is needed. Give 
the Negr o college an efficient administra ­
tion ; select a competent Negr o educator, 
instead of an incompetent whit e ma n as 
president; and reorganize the boar d of 
trustees i n order tha t the alumn i ma y have 
representation; then watch the Negr o college take an outstanding place among 
America n colleges. 
MAR Y G. GOULD, HAZE L M t
 WELLS BEULA H TYRRELL , VIVIAN OSBORNE, A.B., A.B., A.B., A.B., Oberlin Oberlin Oberlin California TH E YEAR IN NEGRO EDUCATION 
M . G. ALLISO N 
SINC E the cessation of the wa r man y 
Negroes who ordinaril y would have 
continued their education, instead have entered into industry. This is inevitable ; 
however, we are especially prou d of those 
of our race who keep the ranks in education. 
I n 1914 we graduated 267 bachelors; i n 
1915, 281; i n 1916, 338; and i n 1917, 455, 
the hig h wate r mark . The effect of the 
wa r has been seen in the successive years: 
396 in 1918; 373 i n 1919, and 364 i n 1920. 
This last figure is tentative as there are 
several omissions. Fro m northern institutions 38 Negroes were graduated i n 1915; 
77 i n 1917, and 175 i n 1918. Fo r 1919 this 
figure fell to 53 and rose to 100 this year. 
This yea r there are two Doctors of Phil ­
osophy; 12 Masters of Arts ; 79 Bachelors 
of Arts; 17 Bachelors of Science; 11 
Bachelors of Law; 1 Bachelor of Divinity; 1 
Bachelor of Music ; 8 Doctors of Medicine ; 
3 Doctors of Denta l Surgery ; 1 Doctor of 
Veterinar y Medicine ; 2 Chiropodists; 13 
Graduates i n Pharmacy ; 1 each i n Mechanica l and Civi l Engineering,—a tota l of 152 
graduates from leading whit e institutions. 
The names of students, their degrees and 
the institutions from whic h they are gradu ­
atin g follow: 
CLAR K UNIVERSITY : Ph.D. Thoma s I. 
Brow n i n sociology and Francis C. Sumne r 
in psychology. Mr . Brow n has the distinction of havin g been appointed Assistan t i n 
Sociology i n the Collegiate Departmen t for 
this academic year. H e wil l retur n next 
fal l to his wor k as Professor of Histor y 
and Economic s i n Atlant a University . 
A.M. Joh n H . Alsto n i n experimenta l 
psychology and Edwar d F . Frazie r in sociology. Dr. Fishe r says: "Mr . Frazie r 
has impressed me as a ma n wit h an unu ­
sually good mind . H e thinks clearl y and 
incisively and has demonstrated to my own 
satisfaction that he is capable of doing 
hig h grade wor k of a scholarly nature. B y 
competitive examination held in the colleges and universitie s throughout the countr y Mr . Frazie r won a fellowship amountin g to $850 at the Ne w Yor k School of 
Socia l Work. " Mr . Alsto n has carried on 
an" "experimental investigation throughout 
the yea r whic h he has completed successfull y and whic h wil l be published unde r the 
title of the "Psychophysic s of the Spatia l 
Condition for the Fusio n of Warmt h and 
Col d into Heat " i n the Jul y issue of the 
American Journal of Psychology. H e is the 
first Negr o ever to publish a n origina l scientific study i n this journal . 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY: A.M. J. E. 
Harris in English and C. H. Mills in romance 
languages. A.B. William D. Hooper, 
Edward E. Rivers. S.B. William L. Hansberry, for honorable service i n the war, 
havin g completed three-fourths of the requirements fo r the regula r degree. Owin g 
to militar y service he was unable to complete the entire course. 
BROW N UNIVERSITY : A.M. and A.B. L . 
D . Milton ; A.M. Rudolp h J. C. Fisher; 
A.B. C. W . Chin n who completes the 4 yea r 
course i n 3 years. 
COLUMBI A UNIVERSITY : A.M. Plenyono 
G. Wolo , Willis Huggins, George W . A . 
Scott, Emor y E . Fennel ; B.S. Willia m A . 
Robinson, Esland a Goode. 
BATE S COLLEGE : A.B. Ellis D . Barrow , 
Benjami n C. Mayes. Mr . Barro w is a member of the Phil-Helleni c Clu b and of the 
Cercle Francois. Mr . May s took first priz e 
in public speaking as a sophomore and i n 
his junio r yea r was awarded a Dre w meda l 
as a member of a winnin g team i n intercollegiate debating; as a senior he has 
been given a scholarship honor in the 
Department of Philosophy and graduates as 
Class Da y orator. H e has been the president of three college organizations. 
AMHERS T COLLEGE : A.B. Frederic k A . 
Parke r who has been elected to the Phi 
Beta Kappa. 
SMITH COLLEGE: A.B. Miriam L. 
Courtenay 
BOSTON UNIVERSITY: A.B. Vera N. 
Guilford, Marion V. Cuthbert; LL.B. Leslie E. 
Becker, Benjami n W . Clayton , Clayborn e 
George, Clifto n R. Wharto n 
SIMMON S COLLEGE : A.B. Doroth y C. 
Bouldin g 
RADCLIFF E COLLEGE : A.B. Hele n F . 
Crawford , Opheli a M . C. Davidso n (cum 
laude), Charlott e L . Smit h 
126 NEGRO 12 7 EDUCATIO N 
THOMAS I. BROWN, PH.D., 
Clark University 
WELLESLE Y COLLEGE : A . B. Doroth y 
Lewis 
WILLIAM S COLLEGE : A.B. Carte r L . 
Marshal l who is on the preliminar y list of 
Commencement appointments wit h cum 
laude rank . 
DARTMOUT H COLLEGE : A.B. M . Gran t 
Lucas, Jr. 
YAL E COLLEGE : A.B. Edwar d G. Howel l 
who has been chiefly self-supporting 
throughout his course; a ma n of reliable 
character. 
COLGAT E UNIVERSITY : A.B. Howar d F . 
Lewis who has been a member of the 
Freshman Assembly and of the House of 
Representatives, honorary oratorical societies; 
B.D. Willia m T . Parke r 
NE W YOR K UNIVERSITY : A.B. Edwi n J. 
Morgan , winne r of the $7 5 Sandham ora ­
torica l priz e wit h a speech on "Lynchin g 
an d Democracy" ; a member of the Andiro n 
Clu b and Dramati c Society; held scholarships, "state and university, to the amount 
of $1,000; winner of William Kendall 
Gillett medal; elected to Phi Beta Kappa in 
his senior year. 
SYRACUS E UNIVERSITY : A.B. Clarenc e 
Maloney . Mr . Malone y has studied at 
Cambridge University , England , and at 
Dalhousle University, Halifax. B.S. 
Nathaniel Green 
HUNTE R COLLEGE : A.B. Doroth y M . 
Hendrickson, S. Marie Malloy, Eva R. 
Marshall, S. Elizabeth Townsend. Miss Townsend has been doing volunteer work in socia l service durin g her four years i n college 
and is the founder and first president of 
Kappa Gamma Kappa, a club of college 
girls. Miss Hendrickson is a charter 
member of the Phi Beta Kappa. 
NE W YOR K STAT E COLLEGE : A.B. James 
W . Phillip s 
POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE : Mechanical 
Engineer, Darnley Howard, the first colored 
graduate. H e is a member of the America n 
Society of Mechanica l Engineers. 
UNIVERSIT Y O F PENNSYLVANIA : A.B. 
Joh n M . Wisema n whose general average 
for four years is 96. 5 per cent.; winne r of 
the George Schleicher priz e in German . 
CARNEGI E INSTITUT E O F TECHNOLOGY : 
B.S.. Joh n C. Robinson 
NORTHWESTER N UNIVERSITY : A.B. V . D . 
Johnson; B.S. G. E . White ; LL.B. Mrs. 
Jessic a D . Morris; B.M. Thurma n C. 
Charleston ; D.D.S. R. R. Church ; M.D. 
W . P. Gran t 
FRANCIS C. SUMNER, PH.D., 
Clark University 128 TH E CRISIS 
MASTERS OF ARTS 
SCOTT M. TAYLOR JOHN H. ALSTON L. D. MILTON 
Ohio State Clark Brown 
KEN T COLLEGE : LL.B. Winsto n T. 
McGehe e 
CHICAG O NORMA L TEACHERS ' COLLEGE : 
A.B. Florid a M . Thoma s who is the only 
Negr o among 15 0 graduates i n Domestic 
Science. He r rankin g was hig h throughout her course. 
ILLINOI S COLLEGE : A £ . M . Luthe r 
Macka y who is completing the 4 yea r course 
i n 3 years. H e is a member of the track 
and football teams and a regula r contributor to the college paper; his wif e and three 
children are students in the Conservatory 
of Musi c at this institution. Mr . Macka y 
wil l enter Boston Universit y i n the fall . 
UNIVERSIT Y O F ILLINOIS : A.B. Mari e F . 
Stevens, Althe a A . Merchant, W . Ellis 
Stewart. Mr . Stewart is a member of 
Beta Chapter, Kappa Alpha Psi. B.S. 
Mrs. Clar a S. Mosely ; Civil Engineer, Oscar 
Randal l whose scholastic average is 87% 
for the 4 year term. M.D. Homer V. 
Wilburn. Mrs. Mosely and Miss Merchant are 
members of the Alpha Kappa Alpha 
Sorority. 
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO: A.M. in 
Divinity, William H. Jones; A.B. Virginia 
James, George C. Campbell. Mr . Campbell 
is now i n the graduate divinit y school for 
the A.M. degree. H e has been the pastor of 
Armou r Avenu e Christia n Churc h fo r nine 
years. " LL.B. Ear l B. Dickerson 
OBERLI N COLLEGE : A.B. Mar y G. Gould , 
Haze l M . Wells, Beula h Tyrrell , Octavi a 
B . Wynbush , Bery l R. Jones, Mildre d C. 
Mitchell , Bobbie B. Scott. Miss Scott is a 
member of the Phi Beta Kappa. Miss 
Tyrrell has been the only colored member of the 
College Y . W . C. A . Cabinet. 
OHI O UNIVERSITY' : A.B. Lul u C. Gee, 
Willia m C. Matney , Jame s E . Newsome. 
Mr . Matne y is finishing the 4 yea r course 
in 3 years. H e is president of the Alpha 
Phi Alpha, a member of the College Band , 
of the West Virgini a Student Clu b and of 
the Advisor y Boar d of the Y . M . C. A . In 
191 9 he was selected as delegate to the 
Student Convention at Lak e Geneva , Wis. 
Mr . Newsome was a member of the 351st 
F . A . and saw active service i n France . 
OHI O STAT E UNIVERSITY : A.M. Scott M . 
Taylor; A.B. Albert S. Hand, Earl D. 
Alexander, Phila M. McGillery, Tulman R. 
Thompson, R. Clyd e Minor ; B.S. Julia n H . 
Wilson ; M.D. Charle s H . Minor ; D.D.S. 
Hubert L. Wallace; Ph.G. George D. 
Bryant, Arlington Anderson 
UNIVERSIT Y O F CINCINNATI : A.B. Emm a 
M . Belsinger, Cleopatr a
Howar d 
BUTLE R COLLEGE : A.B.
Ad a Haskin s 
INDIAN A UNIVERSITY :
Wilso n Eagleson, Patto n
 C. Hall , Edit h M . 
 Murra y Atkins, 
A.B. Ro y Halford , 
 Hill , Cheste r H . NEGRO EDUCATION 129 
MASTERS OF ARTS 
C. H. MILLS EDWARD F. FRAZIER GEORGE W. A. SCOTT 
Harvard Clark Columbia 
Lyda ; LL.B. Joseph Biggs. Mr . Eagleso n 
is a member of the Kappa Alpha Psi. 
DEPAU W UNIVERSITY : A.B. Perc y L . 
Julian . In addition to election to the Phi 
Beta Kappa, Mr . Julia n is on the Hono r 
List of seniors on the Commencement program, whic h is a smalle r list generally than 
the Phi Beta Kappa list and for whic h a 
highe r ratin g is necessary. 
WASHBURN COLLEGE: A.B. Thomas 
Harvey, Sherman D. Scruggs, William 
Bradshaw, Willrene Woods, Faye Schuck 
STAT E UNIVERSIT Y O F IOWA : A.B. Hele n 
Lucas, Hele n Beshears, Mami e Digg s 
IOW A STAT E COLLEGE : D.V.M. L . C. 
Bowlin g 
DRAK E UNIVERSITY : LL.B. Howar d E . 
Drew . Mr . Dre w is widel y known in athletics, specializin g i n short races and the 
10 0 and 22 0 yar d dashes. 
TABO R COLLEGE : A.B. Myrtl e Brown . 
Th e president writes: "Miss Brow n came 
to us 4 years ago an d has earned her own 
wa y throug h college. She has done an exceptiona l piece of wor k and is unusuall y 
well-fitted to teach either commercia l 
branche s or Englis h or Latin . She was my 
privat e secretary one yea r durin g her college course and I found he r reliable and 
trustworth y i n every way. " 
UNIVERSIT Y O F DETROIT : LL.B. Fran k 
J . L . Staff 
UNIVERSIT Y OF MICHIGAN : Ph.G. M . H . 
Van n 
MICHIGA N AGRICULTURA L COLLEGE : B.S. 
Olive r M . Green, Miss Tate , Herbert F . 
McFadden . Mr . Green is a member of the 
Cosmopolitan Cub , the College Ban d and 
the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity. 
UNIVERSIT Y O F MINNESOTA : B.S. Alfre d 
B. Zuma , a man above the average i n 
scholarship. Mr . Zuma expects to retur n 
to Cape Colony, South Africa , after gradua ­
tion. 
MACALESTE R COLLEGE : A.B. Dougla s 
Crane who is a member of the Hono r 
Scholarship Society. 
STAT E COLLEG E (Pullman , Wash.) B.S. 
and D.V.M. Wilfre d A . Jordan , the first 
Negro graduate. Mr . Jorda n is secretary 
of the Ca p and Gown Committee and a 
member of the Washingto n Veterinar y 
Medica l Association. 
UNIVERSIT Y O F MANITOBA : M.D. H . N . 
Greenridge, who has the distinction of bein g the first Negr o to be graduated from 
this university. H e entered the universit y 
in 1913, coming from his home in 
Georgetown, British Guiana. In 1916 he went 
overseas and resumed his studies on his 
return in 1918. He will enter the 
Liverpool School of Tropical Science in the fall, 
specializing i n tropical'diseases. Late r he 
wil l retur n to Guian a to practice among his FRANKLI N J. GAYLES LILLIA N K. WILLIAMS CLARISSA V. KYLE S CLARENC E MALONE Y A.B. and B.D., Payne A.B., Wiley A.B., Hartshorn A.B.. Syracuse NATHANIEL TILLMA N THOMAS P. TURNER HENR Y C BROWER MA Y MILLER A.B,, Morehouse A.B,, Virginia Union A,B.. Bennett A.B., Howard ANDREW J. POLK EVERET T E, SMITH RUBY I. THOMAS CLARENC E O. HILTON A.B., Lane A.B., B.D., Virginia-Union B.S., Payne A.B.. Biddle SONOMA C. TALLE Y MILBIA, A. JOHNIKIN BESSIE R. ARNET T EUGEN E E. ALSTON 
A.B., Fisk A.B., Orangeburg, S. C A.B., Benedict A.B., Lincoln 
130 NEGRO 131 EDUCATION 
own people. H e was active i n athletics 
earl y i n his student career. 
TEMPL E UNIVERSITY : A.B. Jessie M . 
Watkins, Laura E. Tyner; B.S. in 
Education, The Rev. Edward C. Young. Mr. 
Youn g holds the A.B. and A.M. degrees in 
Divinit y and intends to do more graduat e 
work; he is pastor of Phillips Brooks 
Memorial Chapel in Philadelphia. M.D. G. 
Virgil Clark, George I. King, Frederick C. 
Morgan ; Ph.G. Warre n N . Bowser, Ann a 
J. P. Comegys, Romanus M. Fields, 
Phillippe Dartiguenave, Gelia V. Harris, Oley 
E . Horsey , George T. Hunter, Joh n H . Lassiter, Henry M. Thomas, Benjamin 
Williams. Miss Comegys' average for the 
term is 88.7%. Miss Harris is the man ­
ager of White's Pharmacy . Chiropody, 
Orlea n V . Manley , Sterlin g C. Re x 
UNIVERSIT Y O F CALIFORNIA : A.B. Vivia n 
Osborne who intends to retur n next term 
for an A.M.; Corneli a L . Leggett who has 
already been appointed a teacher in the 
cit y schools. 
UNIVERSIT Y O F KANSAS : A.B. Jenni e A . 
Alexander, Augustu s R. Cain , Irm a G . 
Frazier, Pertilla Penn, Hallie A. 
Thompson; B.S. Frank C. Heariold; LL.B. 
Benjamin H. Brown 
KANSA S STATE : B.S. Hele n C. Bec k (20 
years of age), Edlen a O'Nei l 
WESTERN RESERVE: A.B. Raymond 
Jackson; M.D. Armon Evans; D.D.S. Daniel 
Stewart; LL.B. George A . Mund y 
COLORE D COLLEGE S 
(The names are of ranking students in 
the college course) 
Last yea r there wa s a tota l of 466 gradu ­
ates wit h degrees from colored colleges. 
This yea r there are 213 Bachelors of Arts ; 
27 Bachelors of Divinity ; 50 Bachelors of 
Science; 14 Bachelors of Law ; 2 Bachelors 
of Music ; 64 in Medicine ; 96 in Dentistry ; 
17. Graduate s i n Pharmacy ; 57 i n Nurs e 
Training,—a tota l of 540 graduates. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY : A.B. 41 ; B.S. 43; 
LL.B. 14; B.D. 1; B.M. 1; D.D.S. 36; M.D. 
33; Ph.G.' 4. Ma y Mille r 
LINCOL N UNIVERSITY : A.B. 37; B.D. 3. 
Eugen e E . Alsto n 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL : A.B. 2. 
Joh n F . Johnson 
PAYN E COLLEGE : A.B. and B.D. Frankli n 
J. Gayles; B.S. Rub y I. Thoma s 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE: A.B. George A. 
Parker 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE: A.B. John M. 
Finney 
BENNET T COLLEGE : A.B. Henr y C. 
Browe r 
A . & M . COLLEG E (South Carolina) : A.B. 
Milbi a A . Johniki n 
BIDDL E UNIVERSITY : A.B. 22; B.D. 10. 
Clarence 0 . Hilto n 
MOREHOUS E COLLEGE : A.B. 12; B.D. 5. 
Nathanie l Tillma n 
WILE Y UNIVERSITY : A.B. 12. Lillia n K . 
Williams who graduates magna cum laude. 
SHA W UNIVERSITY : A.B. 12. Noa h H . 
McMurre n 
MORGA N COLLEGE : A.B. 11. Alic e I. Kell y 
NE W ORLEAN S COLLEGE : A.B. 9. Enol a 
E . Rroche 
VIRGINI A UNIO N UNIVERSITY : A.B. 7; 
B.D. 7. Thoma s P . Turner, Everett E . 
Smit h 
A . & M . COLLEG E (Florida) : A.B. 7; 
B.M. 1; i n nurse training 3. Arthu r Floy d 
WES T VIRGINI A COLLEGIAT E INSTITUTE : 
A.B. 6. Danie l B. Scott 
A . & T. COLLEG E (Nort h Carolina) : A.B. 
5. James H . Barnhil l 
HARTSHOR N MEMORIA L COLLEGE : A . B. 4. 
Clariss a V . Kyle s 
GEORGE . R. SMIT H COLLEGE : A.B. 4. Ethe l 
H . Simpson 
BENEDIC T COLLEGE : A.B. 4; i n nurse 
training 2. Bessie R. Arnet t 
LAN E COLLEGE : A.B. 3. Andre w J . Pol k 
CLAFLI N UNIVERSITY : A.B. 3; B.S. 6. 
Seabron F . Hal l 
TILLOTSO N COLLEGE : A.B. 2 
TOUGALO O COLLEGE : A.B. 2. Rache l C . 
Polk 
STAT E UNIVERSIT Y (Kentucky) : A.B. 2. 
Joseph P . Johnson 
VIRGINI A THEOLOGICA L SEMINARY : A.B. 
1; B.D. 1. George A . Moor e 
MEHARR Y MEDICA L COLLEGE : D.D.S. 54; 
M.D. 30; Ph.G. 13; in nurse training 5. 
UNIVERSIT Y O F WES T TENNESSEE : D.D.S. 
6; M.D. 1; i n nurse training 9. Augustu s 
Rivers 
PROVIDEN T HOSPITA L (Chicago), i n nurse 
training 10. 
LINCOL N HOSPITA L (Ne w Yor k City) , i n 
nurse training 28. 
This record is incomplete, but as fa r as 
it goes, it shows 378 college graduates. 
Norma l and Hig h School graduates to 
the numbe r of 3,015 are recorded i n the 
Jul y issue of The Brownies' Book. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored- People. 
TH E ATLANT A CONFERENCE 
THE Atlant a Conference—greatest i n dren, as well as fran k discussion of rememany respects of the eleven annua l dies for these and other evils, were carried , 
meetings of the N . A . A . C. P.—is over. most of them as the speakers made them. 
Muc h doubt wa s expressed prio r to theConference Ther e was littl e editoria regardin l commen g the exten t on tht t e o which the 
trut h migh t be told at Atlant a durin g the Conference, however, by the southern press. 
first annua l session eve*- held i n the South. OPENING SESSION 
Tha t question has been answered. Ever y The Conference opened on Sunda y afterspeech, every testimonial, every conversa­ noon, Ma y 30, wit h Arthu r B . Spingar n of 
tion, was frank , straight-forward , spoken Ne w Yor k presiding. Mayo r Jame s L . Ke y 
withou t fea r and i n earnest sincerity that of Atlanta spoke briefly, welcoming the 
was completely convincing. Al l seemed de­ Conference to the city. It had been hoped that 
termined to make the Conference wholly Mr . Storey would be able to be present i n 
successful b y givin g the facts, facin g them, person but due to his advanced age and a 
and devising solutions to the man y prob­ recent illness i t wa s decided tha t it woul d 
lems facin g the Association . Tw o hundred be inadvisabl e to have hi m make the long 
and twenty-eight delegates and members journey South. H e prepared, however, a 
registered, representing 92 branches and 29 paper on "Th e Lega l Aspects of the Negr o 
states; there were man y visitors from sur­ Question" , whic h wa s read b y Mr . Spingarn , 
roundin g states, whil e the total attendance i n whic h he pointed out the direfu l conseat the four mass meetings held on Sunday quences of furthe r neglect of the Negr o 
afternoon and on Monday , Tuesday and problem b y Americ a and b y the South i n 
Wednesday nights and at the business ses­ particular. Mr . Storey quoted Henr y W 
sions exceeded fifteen thousand persons. Grad y i n tha t grea t orator's declaration 
Man y more were turned awa y at every mass that: 
meeting, for the auditorium of Bethe l A . M . "Th e problem of the South is to carr y on 
E . Church , the largest that could be se­ withi n her body politi c two separate races, 
cured, was totally inadequate to accommo­ equal i n civi l and politica l rights and nearl y 
equal i n number. She must carr y them date the crowds tha t attended every meet­ separately, fo r assimilation means debase­ ing . ment. She must carr y those races i n peace, 
for discord means ruin . She must carr y 
them i n equal justice, fo r to this she is 
PUBLICITY pledged i n honor and i n gratitude . She 
must carr y them even unto the end, fo r i n Especiall y gratifyin g was the attitude of human probability she wil l never be quit of 
the press. Owin g to the illness of our Pub­ either. " 
licit y Director, Herbert J . Seligmann, the Wit h reference to separateness, Mr . ­
publicit y fo r the Conference was handled Storey declared: 
by Edwar d L . Bernay s of Ne w Yor k City , "This cannot be understood as meanin g tha t 
engaged especially for the Conference, as­ segregation, whic h the Supreme Court of 
the Unite d States has declared forbidden by sisted b y Miss Doris K . Fleischman , a mem­ the Constitution, or any separation incon­ ber of his staff. Mor e publicit y was secured sistent wit h 'equal civi l and politica l rights' 
at this annua l meeting than ever before. and 'equal justice ' to all. " 
Th e proceedings of each day's session were The Rev. M . Ashb y Jones, pastor of the 
carried throughout the country and were Ponce de Leo n Avenu e Baptist Churc h of 
reported wit h gratifyin g fullness and ac­ Atlanta , made a plea fo r cooperation becuracy. Denunciations of lynching , dis­ tween the intelligent elements of both races. 
franchisement, the "Ji m Crow " car, unequal The keynote of the Conference wa s struck 
educationa l opportunity for colored chil- by James Weldon Johnson, the last speaker, 
132 N . A . A .
when he declared that the five principa l demands of all Negroes were : guarant y of 
safety of lif e by the abolition of lynchin g 
through federal action, if necessary; the 
Negro's untrammeled righ t to the ballot 
upon the same terms as other races; the 
abolishment of "Ji m Crow " cars; equal educationa l and industria l opportunities; and 
the abolition of segregation, especially in 
the governmental departments in 
Washington. 
MONDA Y 
O n Monda y mornin g committees on resolutions, time and place and one to act on 
the resignation of Mr . Shillad y as secretary , were appointed. Delegates were then 
introduced and given an opportunity to 
state briefly the principa l achievements of 
their branches since the 1919 Conference. 
This proved to be so instructive that it was 
continued during the afternoon session. 
Following this, a round table discussion of the 
problems of the branches wit h solutions 
found to be efficacious b y other branches, 
consumed the rest of the afternoon session. 
The Monda y evening session, given over 
to the subject, "Th e Labo r Problem and 
Migration" , at whic h Harr y E . Davis of 
Clevelan d presided, proved to be the most 
interesting of the evening meetings. The 
causes and effects of the recent migratio n of 
large numbers of colored people northwar d 
wer e treated from the viewpoint of the 
North , of the South, and of the Negro . Mrs. 
Florenc e Kelley , secretary of the Nationa l 
Consumers' League , told of the tremendous 
changes now being undergone by the colored woma n worker, urgin g that through 
the development of cooperative movements, 
the singleness of interests of the whit e and 
colored woma n workers be emphasized for 
the betterment of conditions of both. 
Eugene R. Black, president of the Atlanta 
Chambe r of Commerce, spoke briefly. The 
Atlant a Pla n of Inter-Racia l Cooperation 
wa s explained b y Dr . Plat o Durham , Dean 
of Emor y University . 
The closing speaker at this meeting wa s 
the Rev. R. W . Bagnal l of Detroit who has 
made a careful study of the heavy migra ­
tio n to tha t city. Mr . Bagnall , after givin g 
a brie f historica l sketch of the various migrator y movements of the past, declared 
tha t inter-racia l conferences ha d been pronosed wit h no success i n the past, particu ­
larl y i n 1879, when a migrator y movement 
was at its height. Statin g that the colored 
 C . P. 133 
population of Detroit had increased i n three 
years from 8,000 to well over 35,000, Mr . 
Bagnall gave several concrete examples of 
the way i n which colored men from the 
South were makin g good in northern industries. A recent survey of one hundred 
plants i n Detroit employing colored labor 
showed that seventy per cent, of the employers were wholl y satisfied wit h Negr o 
labor, twenty per cent, considered Negr o 
labor as fairl y efficient, whil e of the ten 
per cent, who considered them inefficient, 
several had southern white men over their 
colored employees. Mr . Bagnal l declared 
that the only hope of the Negr o la y i n his 
continued migratio n to the Nort h until the 
South was forced through economic necessity to gran t the demands of the Negro. 
The address of Mr . Bagnal l aroused great 
enthusiasm. 
TUESDAY 
The Tuesday mornin g session was given 
over to a discussion of the handlin g of lega l 
cases by the branches and to problems relatin g to voting. 
Most picturesque of all the sessions was 
the presentation of the Spingar n Meda l to 
Dr. W . E . B . DuBois on Tuesday afternoon 
on the campus of Atlant a University . The 
ceremony, wit h appropriat e music, was held 
directly i n front of Stone Hall , the ivy -
covered building , green trees and grass makin g a beautiful and impressive background. 
Tribute s were paid to the recipient by Dr . 
M . W . Adams, Actin g President of Atlant a 
University; President John Hope of 
Morehouse College; and Miss Ovington. The 
presentation wa s made by Bisho p John 
Hurst , Chairma n of the Spingar n Meda l 
Awar d Committee. The presentation was 
made to Dr . DuBois for his work i n organizin g the Pan-Africa n Congress. 
"Lynchin g and Segregation" was the subject for discussion on Tuesday night, at 
which meeting Mr . Joe l E . Spingar n presided. Mr . Spingar n in his opening address 
proposed the formation in each of the 
Southern States, of a permanent race commission composed of five members of each race 
who would not be politicians or demagogues 
but fearless and intelligent leaders, whose 
duty should be to investigate causes o f fric ­
tion, to make recommendations fo r legisla ­
tive action, and to have all matters pertainin g to race relations submitted fo r approva l 
to such commissions before the Governor 
approves any such measures. Mr . Spingar n 134 TH E
showed tha t no commission wil l ever be effective unti l its white members recognize the 
equality of its colored members and lear n to 
welcome frankness instead of resenting it. 
Charle s Edwar d Russell, i n attackin g the 
lynchin g evil, showed that back of much of 
that practic e la y the ignorance and illiterac y 
of the Southern States, and urged the formation of a United States Bureau of 
Education with a secretaryship in the Cabinet. 
The Rev. Pete r Jame s Bryan t of Atlant a 
and Willia m Pickens of Ne w Yor k were the 
other speakers. Mr . Pickens wa s especially 
effective i n showin g the growt h of the lynchin g evil and the dangers to America , i f allowed to flourish unchecked. 
WEDNESDA Y 
The Wednesday mornin g session was 
given over to a discussion of branch finances. 
At the request of the Cleveland 
Conference the retiring Secretary, Mr. Shillady, 
had prepared a budget and method for raisin g the budget, whic h was presented to the 
Atlant a Conference. Eac h branch was assigned a quota based upon its forme r contribution and the colored population of its 
city, wit h other facts. These quotas represented money sent i n memberships and 
contributions. They did not include money 
for special funds or for TH E CRISIS and 
Branch Bulletin subscriptions and sales. 
The ninety-one branches present at the 
meeting accepted their quotas wit h a few 
changes. Al l these quotas are published 
i n the Branch Bulletin for June. The chairman, Miss Ovington , gave a careful explanation of the expenditures of the 
Association and of the increases attendant upon 
highe r prices i n printing , traveling , salaries, etc. The followin g resolution was 
proposed b y Dr. Garrett of Houston, Texas, 
seconded at once by a number of delegates 
and carried unanimously: "That the 
Conference gives its unqualified endorsement of 
the able manne r i n whic h the finances of 
the Nationa l Office are handled. " 
W e trust that every branc h member readin g this wil l take a personal interest i n seein g tha t the quota of his branc h is raised. 
It was agreed tha t the wisest wa y to raise 
the quota wa s to bend all efforts on the 
membership drive i n the first half of the 
year; then, i f on Jul y 1, the branch 
lacked its quota, to spend the next six 
months raisin g the money i n whateve r wa y 
seemed wisest, by lectures, entertainments, 
 CRISI S 
donations secured from publi c spirite d citizens; the branc h holdin g to the chie f issue 
that by the end of the yea r it should have 
sent to 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , its 
money pledged. 
O n Wednesday afternoon representatives 
from the committee on Churc h Cooperation 
met representatives of the N . A . A . C. P . 
an 1 the Atlant a Pla n wa s explained. 
Atlanta , throug h the Christia n Counci l 
of Evangelica l Churches, carrie s on a socia l 
service wor k wit h five committees, Religious, 
Racia l Relationship, Industria l Economics, 
Civi c and Women's work . Ther e ar e two 
church councils—one whit e and one colored 
—each complete i n itself. The council is 
made up of a ministe r from each- church 
and two layme n appointed b y the congregation of each church. Th e colored council 
meets wit h the whit e council once a month 
and minutes of other meetings are exchanged between the two groups. Th e advantage of the Atlant a Pla n over the race 
committees tha t are growin g throughout 
the South is tha t the Negroe s are chosen 
by their own people, not by the whites. 
Wor k had already been accomplished i n education and housing. Dr . E . P . Johnson. Dr . 
R. H. Singleton, and Dr. Peter James 
Bryant are all officers in the Church Council 
and were instrumenta l i n bringin g about 
this most interestin g meeting. 
The closing session of the Conference on 
Wednesday nigh t wa s on the importan t 
questions of "Educatio n and the Ballot" . 
Th e speakers were Mrs. W . Spence r Murra y 
of Ne w York , the Rev. C. B . Wilme r of 
Atlant a and Dr . D u Bois. Th e last speaker 
declared: 
"It is the Negr o question whic h is and 
must be the mai n question i n every election 
i n the South ; it is and must be the mai n element i n every social problem, and it must, 
particularl y i n the Negro's defenseless state, 
be an invitatio n to every lawless and reactionar y element." 
Dr . D u Bois furthe r declared tha t a n entirel y whit e worl d is impossible and showed 
that lynching , flourished directly i n proportion to the extent to whic h Negroe s were 
disfranchised. H e stated tha t a ful l and 
untrammeled freedom of the ballot wa s the 
Negro's greatest weapon and tha t there 
would be no solution of the race problem un ­
ti l the Negr o voted. 
A t this session reports of the committees 
were read and adopted. Invitations had been N 135 . A . A . C . P . 
received fo r the 1921 Conference from Sa n 
Antonio , St. Louis, Omaha , Newark , Jersey 
City , Detroit, Lynchburg , Des Moines, Boley, 
Okla. , and Atlanti c City . Detroit was 
chosen, the session to be held durin g the 
latte r part of June . A resolution was read 
regrettin g the resignation of Mr . Shillady . 
The full report of the Resolutions 
Committee follows: 
Once more we cal l upon the nation to 
consider the grievous injustices and discriminations heaped upon its colored citizens and to hear their urgent demands. 
Wit h lynchin g and mob violence, poor 
schools, "Ji m Crow " methods of travel, unequal justic e i n courts and i n things economic, wit h disfranchisement i n man y 
states, the colored people are called upon 
to bear their ful l share of responsibility and 
burdens of government. 
W e - demand such federal legislation as 
shall give the government at Washingto n 
adequate control of the investigation of and 
punishment for lynching . 
W e denounce "Ji m Crow " laws as being 
illegal, unconstitutiona l and contrary to the 
spirit of true America n democracy. 
W e call upon Congress to take such action as wil l abolish the "Ji m Crow " ca r i n 
interstate traffic. 
We demand the enforcement of the 
Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution of the Unite d unquestioned share of freedom fo r al l States whic h guarantee to every citizen, regardless of race, creed, color or previous America n citizens—regardless of color. 
condition of servitude, the ful l and free exercise of the ballot and the enjoyment of 
all rights inherent therein. 
We demand that i n the states where separate schools are maintained fo r the education of the races, tha t the per capit a expenditures fo r the education of colored children 
shall be equal to tha t for whit e children. 
We urge upon Congress such legislation as 
wil l give federal aid to common school train ­
ing , wit h such provision as wil l insure each 
colored child its ful l proportionate share. 
It cannot be expected tha t leaders of colored people can foreve r hold out empty hope 
to their people and perpetually have them 
accept promise instead of performance. W e 
war n Americ a that the patience of colored 
people can find its limit. 
The politica l parties of the country were 
also memorialized, embodying the demands 
for the ballot, anti-lynchin g legislation, educational and industria l opportunities and 
the ending of segregation and "Ji m Crowism" . 
The results of the Conference remai n to 
be seen. The Conference ended, however, 
wit h a deeper determination on the part -of 
all the delegates and members to make a 
stronger and more determined fight than 
ever before to achieve the objects fo r whic h 
the Association stands—for a complete and 
DOROTHY E. PETERSON SADIE T. MOSSELL DOROTHY M. HENDRICKSON 
A.B.. Porto Rico A.M. , Pennsylvania A.B., Hunter Teacher of Spanish in New York Frances Serjeant Pepper, Fellow­ Charter Member of Chapter Nu High Schools ship in Economics, 1920-21 Phi Beta Kappa JOHN M. WISEMAN WILLIAM C. MATNE Y A.B., Pennsylvania ARTHU R FLOYD A.B., Ohio ELLIS D. BARROW PATTON HILL A.B., Florida CARTER L. MARSHALL A.B., Bates A.B., Indiana BENJAMIN C. MAYES 
WILSON EAGLESON A.B., Bates A.d., Williams O. W. CHINN 
A.B., Indiana W. ELLIS STEWAR T A.B., Brown HOWARD F. LEWIS EDWIN J. MORGAN JAMES E. NEWSOME A.B., Illinois A.B., Colgate A.B., New York A.B., Ohio M. LUTHE R MACKA Y EDWARD E. RIVERS H. P. DRE W A.B., Illinois A.B., Harvard LL. B, Drake 
136 TH E NEGR O AN D TH E NATIONA L GUAR D 
HON . NEWTO N D . BAKER , SECRETARY OF WA R 
REPLYIN G to the request for informa ­
tion contained i n your letter of Ma y 
12th, I take pleasure i n placing before you 
the reasons on whic h the Wa r Department 
bases its policy i n dealing wit h colored 
units of the Nationa l Guard . 
In brief, this policy is to assign Nationa l 
Guar d units recruited from colored men to 
duty that wil l not incorporate them i n a division composed of white organizations. 
This ha d led to the decision that colored 
troops i n Nationa l Guar d service be organized into pioneer infantr y units that, i n accordance wit h our tables of organization, 
can be assigned to duty under the command of Corps Headquarters. The Corps 
is the next large r tactica l unit above the 
Division , and it consists normall y of four 
divisions, and, i n addition, several other organizations unde r direct control of the 
Corps commande r to be used to supplement 
the wor k of the divisions. These additional 
organizations include units of various 
branches such as Engineers and Ai r Service 
as well as Pioneer Infantry . 
The Wa r Department's decision to main ­
tai n separate divisiona l organizations fo r 
white and colored troops is well founded. 
The division , as yo u know, is the smallest 
unit of our Arm y i n whic h all branches of 
our militar y service are represented. It 
operates as a small Arm y of 27,000 men, 
and fo r it to be successful, it is imperative 
that sourees of interna l dissensions be reduced to a n absolute minimum. On this 
account, the Wa r Department has always 
avoided mixin g the races withi n a division. 
Wheneve r it is necessary and feasible to 
do so the Wa r Department plans to organize complete divisions of colored troops, 
but a t the present time i t appears that this 
BROW N
measure should be resorted to only i n time 
of war. The components of such a division, even if its recruitment would be practicable at all durin g peace time, would 
necessarily be dispersed over all sections 
of our country and consequently efficient 
trainin g for it would be an impossibility. 
It is believed that dispassionate thought 
will indicate the wisdom of the War 
Department's present policy affecting colored units 
of the Nationa l Guard . Certai n members 
of the colored race have made the mistake 
of assuming that the Pioneer regiments assigned to Corps headquarters are the same 
as the Labo r battalions or the Stevedore 
regiments of colored personnel which were 
organized durin g the Worl d War . The men 
makin g this mistake should be assured that 
their assumptions are altogether erroneous, 
since the mission of Corps troops is not the 
same as that of troops organized solely for 
labor purposes. The doubters that are open 
to reason should also be assured that the 
avenues now open to colored men volunteerin g for the Nationa l Guar d lead to service 
that is as honorable as any to be had. The 
trainin g to be given colored infantr y units 
wil l be the standardized infantr y trainin g 
that is given to all infantr y organizations. 
Finally , I hope you wil l see fit to assure 
our colored citizens through the columns 
of your periodica l that the Wa r Department 
full y appreciates the very creditable qualit y of service rendered by our colored organizations durin g the Worl d War, and that 
i n arrivin g at our decision concerning the 
future employment of colored Nationa l 
Guar d units, we were guided solely by considerations bearin g on militar y efficiency, 
and wit h no intention whatever of discrimination between the races that go to make 
up our country's population. 
 LEAVE S 
WINIFRE D VIRGINIA JORDAN 
NO more upon
I hear your
N o more sweet
The flowers
 the
 fra
 are
 wal k 
 tread ; 
granc e
 dead! 
 wings— 
N o more I stand and wait 
An d watch for you : 
The win d but shifts brown
Whe n day is through ! 
 leaves 
137 TH E WISE GUYS O F UNOBIA 
ONC E upon a Time the Wis e Guy s of 
Unobi a held a Convention and passed 
a Resolution to the Effect that Horse s were 
Horses. At the Time this Important 
Resolution was being Discussed the Wise Guys 
were Thinkin g only of Blac k Horses, and 
fo r these they Provide d Suitable Stables 
and Food . Afte r a Whil e it was Discovered 
that there was a numbe r of Whit e Horse s 
i n the Kingdom, but as all the Stables and 
Foo d had been given to the Blac k Horses, 
the Wis e Guy s knew not Wha t To Do . 
Afte r Ponderin g over the matte r for a Lon g 
Time , they finally settled the matte r by 
passing another Resolution, declaring that 
Whit e Horse s were Mules, and an Edic t to 
this Effect was sent throughout the 
Kingdom. 
So Persistently was this Edic t Insisted 
Upo n that man y of the Horse s and the 
alleged Mule s began to
Wisest Edic t ever sent
Guys. Eve n the Wis e
after a whil e Believed
that Whit e Horse s were
of the Horses and some
 Thin k it was the 
 out by the Wis e 
 Guys themselves 
 that it was Tru e 
 Mules. Bu t some 
 of the Mule s had 
Hors e Sense, a ver y rar e sixth sense possessed by only a few, and Insisted tha t the 
alleged Mule s were reall y Horses and ought 
to have the same Stablin g and Foo d as 
the Blac k Horses. Bu t the Wis e Guys 
would not have it so, and Continued to 
Trea t the Whit e Horse s lik e Mules, spendin g a grea t deal of Time and Effort i n 
tryin g to make them Liv e as Mule s should 
Live . 
Ther e came a Day—day s do come, even 
to dogs, as I have Heard , but do not Assert 
—whe n the Wis e Guy s desired to go o n a 
Picnic . Bu t they found tha t a large number of the Blac k Horses, bein g neglected, 
did a strange thing—o r rather, a thin g ha d 
happened to Them whic h had not been 
Thought Of, even by the Wis e Guys—the y 
had become Wil d and Unmanageable , so 
that only a Fe w of them could be ridde n 
wit h Safety. So the Wis e Guy s ha d to ride 
Mules—some of them. 
So Splendidly did the Mules Do 
Everything that the best Horse Would, Could or 
Should Do, tha t when the Picni c was Ove r 
and the Wis e Guy s had returned to their 
homes, they said i t was the best Picni c 
they ever had had, whil e the Ridin g wa s all 
that could be Desired. 
The n the Mule s said, "W e have Prove d 
that we are Horses; give us Stables and 
Foo d the Same as the Blac k Horses. " 
Bu t the Wis e Guy s said, "Nay , not so, 
you are Mules, fo r W e have so Decreed. " 
So the Mule s tha t were not nor ever had 
been Mules, but Horses, went awa y thinkin g 
—thinking—thinking—wha t do you think ? 
A N ANSWE R 
SENATOR MEDILL MCCORMICK 
IN the Februar y numbe r of TH E CRISIS, 
of which I am i n receipt of a copy, there 
is republished i n part an interview attributed to me i n the public press some 
weeks ago and which utterly misrepresented 
my views, partl y by actua l misquotation 
and partl y by omission of the essential context of that small portion of my remarks 
whic h was accurately quoted. I do not have 
to point out how completely the meaning 
of a statement ma y be distorted by such 
an omission. 
I had commented upon the violence whic h 
had broken out i n some northern cities and 
expressed fears—only too well grounded, it 
was subsequently proved—tha t there woul d 
be other outbreaks because of the conduct 
of certain whites and Negroes. A s I said 
in a statement published i n the New York 
Times and other newspapers and whic h 
served in some measure to correct the previous misrepresentation of m y views: 
"Lawless elements, both among the whites 
and the blacks, have been responsible for the 
138 PEONAG E 139 IN
bloodshed. I n Chicago the homes of good 
citizens—respectable and law abiding 
Negroes—were bombed. In some quarters men 
have tried by violence to prevent Negroes 
from working . 
"O n the other hand, among the thousands 
of Negroes who have come north durin g the 
war, there have been some miscreants like 
those who, i n Washington , have attacked 
women, and others whose truculence i n public places invited resentment. 
"Th e city of Chicago and the state of 
Illinois resorted to force i n order to restore and maintai n order. Tha t was necessary , but it is not enough. 
"Th e two races wil l live side by side, i n 
peace, only i f we honestly face the elements 
of frictio n and candidly take steps to accommodate Jheir differences and their in ­
terests. 
 GEORGI A 
"Th e successful, law abiding colored people, many of whom have lived i n Chicago 
Tor years, and the white citizens immediately concerned i n the problems of Negr o employment and residence, no less than the 
civi l authorities, have got to unite upon a 
policy and find a solution or we shall live 
i n danger of a renewal of race rioting. 
"An d there must be equal justice i n the 
punishment of violators of the peace. 
"W e cannot have race riotin g in the 
Nort h become the bloody counterpart of 
lynchin g i n the South. " 
Whethe r we are agreed or disagreed as 
to the measures necessary now to be taken 
to brin g about a better concord between the 
colored and whit e races, I feel certain that 
the Edito r of TH E CRISIS wil l not wis h to 
leave uncorrected the misrepresentation of 
my views which found its wa y into his columns. 
PEONAG E IN GEORGIA 
THE question of labor i n the part of 
the country where I liv e is quite different from that whic h obtains here. We 
have no labor unions; we have no large, established industries i n whic h to find our 
people work ; but we are mostly farmers 
and we deal directly wit h the red-nosed 
Georgi a cracke r on the farm, and the bulk 
of the labor there is ignorant. The Negroes 
there have been the victims of crooks who 
prey upon their ignorance. The y get them 
to sig n labor contracts and hold out to them 
large possibilities at the beginning of the 
year, move them to their farms, and furnish 
them wit h such things as they need to begi n with . I n a few months, when the crops 
ar"e almost made, they shut down. In too 
man y instances I have met, my people wit h 
as man y as six to twelve i n family . They 
had worke d a year, the head of the famil y 
had been charged wit h some petty crime, 
and they had been driven from their farms. 
Th e whit e farme r has taken advantage of 
conditions tha t have grown out of the war, 
and as he gives the laborer better wages, he 
runs up the rent i n proportion to the in ­
crease of wages, so that the black ma n is 
practicall y on the farm just where he was 
before the war. If I rented a far m for 
1,500 pounds of cotton last yea r and that 
cotton went up to thirty-five cents, the owner went back and put on a thousand pounds 
more. The owner wil l demand not diversified farming , but wil l so arrange it that you 
cannot far m intensively. Yo u must plant 
cotton. Yo u cannot plant and wor k a grai n 
crop. 
Anothe r feature is that when these people 
sign these contracts, they find themselves all 
tied up, and the man i n the famil y tries to 
get himself out by runnin g awa y somewhere. 
A warran t is sworn out and that man is 
hunted down, arrested and locked i n chains 
and brought back and put i n jail . H e is in ­
carcerated for the next two years. No t one, 
not two, but scores of instances have been 
brought to me. This condition obtains i n 
Earl y County, Dooly County, Wort h County, 
Decatur County, Toombs County and 
Morgan County. G. E. WHITE HELE N C. BECK OSCAR RANDALL CLAR A S. MOSELY 
B.S., Northwestern 
W. A. ROBINSON 
B.S., Kansas 
MISS TAT E 
B.S., Illinois 
NATHANIEL GREE N B.S., Illinois 
HERB. F. McFADDEN B.S., Columbia 
JOHN H. LASSITER 
Ph.G., Temple 
GEORGE I, KING 
M.D., Temple 
B.S., Michigan 
GELIA V. HARRIS 
Ph.G., Temple 
HUBER T L. WALLAC E 
D.D.S., Ohio 
B.S., Syracuse 
A. J. P. COMEGYS 
Ph.G,, Temple 
STERLING RE X 
Chiropody, Temple 
B.S., Michigan 
GEORGE T. HUNTE R 
Ph.G., Temple 
HOMER V. WILBUR N 
M.D., Illinois 
140 THE Lookin g Glass 
LITERATURE 
ANDRE A RAZAFKERIEF O after the 
poem by Joh n McCrae : 
I n Flanders fields where poppies blow, 
Beneath the crosses, row on row, 
W e blacks an endless vigi l keep—­
Yea , we, though dead, can never sleep -
Ingratitude has made it so. 
Wh y ar e we here? Wh y di d we go 
Fro m lovin g homes, that need us so? 
Wa s it fo r naught we gave our lives, 
O n Flanders fields? 
Y e blacks who live , to you we throw 
Th e torch ; be yours to face the foe 
A t home ; and ever hold it high, 
Figh t fo r the things for which we die, 
Tha t we ma y sleep, where poppies grow, 
I n Flanders fields. 
* * * 
W e have received The Up-Reach, a new 
magazine hailin g from Chicago, 111., edited 
by Willis N . Huggins. We have found this 
first issue interesting and able and welcome 
the newcomer into the field. 
* * * 
"Negr o Migratio n Durin g the War " has 
come to us, edited by Davi d Kinle y of the 
Carnegi e Endowmen t for Internationa l 
Peace. It is compiled b y Emmet t J . Scott 
and others and consists of fourteen chapters. 
These cover the causes, spread, points of 
penetration and methods of meeting this 
phenomenon i n the regions where • it is 
most concentrated. The volume besides bein g wel l indexed has an especially valuable 
bibliography. It should be introduced into 
al l the colleges i n the country. 
* * * 
H . F . Vivia n write s us from London : 
"Gen . Vo n Letto r wa s the Commande r of 
the Germa n forces i n East Afric a and his 
'Reminiscences' have been published recently 
b y Hurst and Blackett of London, but the 
Times U at present featurin g a series of extracts from the book that make ver y in ­
teresting reading. W e learn from them of 
Vo n Letter's anticipation of the Grea t War, 
of the steps he took i n preparation for it, 
of the trainin g of his native troops and of 
his organization of the militar y defences of 
the colony. W e glean facts ful l of a sad 
interest, such as tha t the total Germa n 
forces i n East Afric a consisted of 3,500 
European s and 16.000 black men ; but that 
the proportion of European s to natives was 
greater among the Germans than among the 
Allies. We learn of Vo n Letter's complete 
satisfaction wit h his native troops, of his 
appreciation of their fidelity and devotion, 
and of his slightl y critica l attitude towards 
some of his own countrymen who were lackin g i n a decent, self-respecting belligerency. 
"Th e publication of Vo n Letto r Worbeck's 
book of reminiscences has excited much in ­
terest here. It has also furnished the occasion for the showering of many bouquets on 
the Africa n soldier for his fighting qualities. The Times itself asserted the equality 
of the 'well trained Africa n soldier, led by 
whit e men, to all but the finest white troops'. 
An d it added that the militar y prowess of 
the black men suggested uneasy thoughts 
to the South African . Ther e is a mora l i n 
this, and it needs no pointing. 
* * * 
"Th e Daily Telegraph publishes a long 
articl e from a Specia l Correspondent i n 
Liberi a dealing wit h the economic future 
of that country. The write r after defining 
the cause of Liberia's backwardness i n the 
past as her obstinate refusa l to allow 
'Whit e Capital ' a free hand i n the development of the country, gives an interesting 
picture of Mr . President King . His portrait is of a cultivated and intellectually 
vigorous man, havin g a sound appreciation 
of the good points of 'commercialism' which 
(so we gather) tend so largel y to be overlooked today. The articl e concludes: 'The 
time of Liberia's stagnation is assuredly 
past; wit h President Kin g i n the saddle the 
future is rosy. The point is whether 
Britain will share in that future.' The nature 
of Britain's share was suggested i n the preceding paragraphs: 'Hence the necessity for 
Briton s to study this littl e hermit Republic , 
that is to say, i f they desire to profit whil e 
there is yet time.' " 
FRANCE AND HER "COLONIALS" 
SOMEWHERE , somehow, the idea is bein g disseminated that black soldiers who 
were good enough to fight for Franc e are 
for some inexplicable reason not good 
enough to guard France. The London 
Nation says: 
It is not generally known tha t the Frenc h 
have stationed thousands of Negr o troops 
i n the Rhine province and the Palatinate . 
Ther e are, I believe, something like 30,000 
of them in the area occupied under the peace 
treaty. The bulk of these men, let it be well 
understood, are primitives, some of them 
torn from their homes under circumstances 
which compelled the resignation of the governor-general of Frenc h West Africa . Bar141 142 TH E
barism per se is no crime, and no subject for 
opprobrium. Ih e crime is that of those who 
trai n barbarism for scientific slaughter, and 
who thrust barbarians—barbarians belongin g to a race inspired by Nature , and for 
good reason, wit h tremendous sexua l in ­
stincts—into the heart of Europe . The marvel is that the abhorrence which this policy 
is creating does not find more frequent expression. 
The Ne w Yor k Globe affects to base its 
disapprova l of this procedure not on preju ­
dice but on the hig h mora l ground that to 
approve is to counsel the use of mercenaries: 
Whateve r the reasons advanced by the 
Frenc h government for policin g German y 
wit h imperfectly civilized natives of Africa , 
any layman's conscience would condemn the 
action as wron g and indefensible. No t because the soldiers are Negroes, not mainl y 
becausa they migh t be objectionable to the 
inhabitants of the occupied regions—though 
this last is probably true—but because they 
are, i n al l essentials, mercenaries i n the pay 
of a government to whic h they owe no nationa l allegiance. In the case of Constantinople, patrolled i n part by Britis h Indians 
and Frenc h Africans, the excuse of expediency ma y be sufficient. These forces were 
near at hand. Bu t there are plenty of 
Frenchme n under'arms to keep guar d over 
the territorie s to the north, and it appears 
a gratuitous and somewhat sinister threat 
that irresponsible aliens should be detailed 
to that region. 
* * * 
It is a little difficult to explain why 
England, who lost far fewer men in the recent 
struggl e than France , ma y wit h impunit y 
employ colonials i n the Levant. Certainl y 
the Germans cannot complain of worse treatment tha n that whic h they themselves accorded to the inhabitants of northern 
France . Marian o de Cavi a asks i n El Sol 
of Madrid , Spain : 
Ho w are these black Senegalese who arc 
encamped on the grounds of the Universit y 
of Frankfort to the shame and chagri n of 
the aforesaid Chancellor—how are they conducting themselves withi n the Temple of 
Minerva ? Hav e they profaned its lecturehalls ? Hav e they destroyed its laboratories? 
Hav e they sacked and wrecked its library ? 
Just to the contrary. The Negroes have 
conducted themselves i n direct contrast to 
the manne r i n whic h those great blond giants 
(after Nietzsche) threw themselves against 
Europ e six years ago. 
Le t the inhabitants of Frankfort remind 
themselves of the Universit y of Louvai n and, 
upon seeing themselves guarded by Negroes 
who neither burn them, rob them or fix them 
on bayonets, they wil l be forced to accept 
i n gratitude that whic h today seems to them 
 CRISI S 
a cause fo r shame. I say "seems" because 
the people of Frankfort , although they have 
lost the art of takin g responsibility, have 
surely not lost al l memory. Stil l ver y recent 
is the case of Louvain , where those who took 
on the form of barbarian s wer e not Negroes. 
. # * * 
E . D . More l write s i n the Freeman of 
more significant dealings of the Frenc h 
"militarists " wit h Africa n troops: 
On 30 July , 1919, conscription was decreed 
for all natives throughout the entire are a 
of French West Africa and French 
Equatorial Africa—an area over two million 
square miles i n extent and containin g a 
native population estimated at just unde r 
twenty millions. A decree of 12 December, 
1919, applies the West Africa n decree to 
Madagascar, whic h covers 228,000 square 
miles and has a population of over three 
millions. Th e recruitin g of a furthe r 28,900 
men i n West Afric a is now proceeding i n 
the followin g proportions: Senegal, 7,000; 
upper Senegal—the Nige r region—5,600; 
uppe r Volta , 5,600; Guinea , 4,000; Ivor y 
Coast, 4,200; Dahomey, 2,500. Fro m 1922 
onwar d it is estimated tha t this Negr o 
army wil l consist of three classes an d wil l 
total 100,000. It is anticipated that 
Madagascar, the French West Indian Islands, the 
Frenc h Somali Coast and the group of 
islands i n the Pacific wil l furnis h amon g 
them a furthe r 100,000 men. This, of course, 
does net take into account the Ara b and 
Berbe r contingents from Algeria , Tunis and 
Morocco, whic h ma y be reckoned up another 
100,000 at least. Th e Negr o conscripts wil l 
serve three years, and two out of the three 
wil l be spent, according to the Frenc h mili ­
tar y and colonia l newspapers, i n France. . . . 
Wha t of the distinctively Europea n issue? 
Fo r the Europea n democracy, this militariz ­
in g of the Africa n tropics and this introduc ­
tion of Africa n troops upon Europea n soil 
is a terrific portent. Th e Frenc h militarists 
whose schemes i n Europ e are a menace to 
the world , inform us tha t they intend to 
have a standing army of 200,000 colored 
troops i n France , of whom 100,000 wil l be 
primitiv e Africans. The y wil l be used by 
the Frenc h militarists al l over Europ e i n 
pursuance of their avowed purposes. The y 
wil l garriso n Europea n towns. The y wil l 
be billeted i n Europea n homes. The y 
wil l kil l European s who object to the policy 
of the Frenc h militarists. The y wil l be used, 
no doubt, to fire upon Frenc h workingme n 
should these at an y time come into collision 
wit h the rulin g classes i n France . These 
are some of the vista s whic h this policy un ­
covers. . . . Negroes, Malagasies, 
Berbers, Arabs, flung into Europe by the hundred thousand i n the interests of a capitalist 
and militarist order. Tha t is the prospect 
—nay, tha t is the actuality—whic h the 
forces of organized Europea n labor have 
got to face, and face squarely. TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 143 
EARLY AFRICAN AND MODERN 
ART 
A COLLECTION of early African 
sculpture exhibited at the Chelsea Book 
Club, 25 Cheyne Walk, London, England, 
seems, according to some critics, to be the 
forerunner of modern art. The London 
Sunday Express opines—rather nastily— 
that Jacob Epstein "has still a lot to learn" 
from these ancient black sculptors. The 
article proceeds: 
It seems to be undoing the work of many 
sedulous art critics if you call the modernist 
sculptors a set of incompetent plagiarists who have invented nothing new, but simply 
stolen their ideas from unknown long dead 
Ethiopians. . . . This collection repre­ sents the cream of savage art accomplished 
between the eleventh and sixteenth centuries. There are wooden statues and statuettes of unknown African kings and hierophants. These are not the familiar fetishes of the ethnological galleries or the travellers' col­ lection of grotesques, but are essentially por­ traits. The chisels are unknown Negro disciples of Phidias who have cut out of the hard wood a National Portrait Gallery of the Congo swamps. Here are proud potentates, witch doctors capable of malevolent magic, women priestesses of Voodoo and Obeah. Al l are savage primitive decorative works;, but nevertheless they are Art. They present an accurate parallel with 
modern futurist sculpture. . . . This is where the futurists, vorticists, neo­ cubists, and the Negroes all agree. They all want to do the same thing. They want to distort all the beauty of the human form into a grotesque, deformed design or pattern. The savages' carvings show a wonderful 
plastic quality, and it is remarkable what a high standard their native art achieved. They have several advantages over our mod­ ern sculptors, though. There is no mock Agricultural modesty about the Negroes, for one thing, and their living subjects were highly tat­ tooed as well. They have been able to em­ bellish their portrait statues by leaving the tattoo design in high relief, and certain holes in the structures have evidently been meant 
to hold artificial beards or wigs in order to give an even more lifelike representation of 
the deceased chief. 
* * * 
Mr. John Middleton Murry says in the 
London Nation: 
Here we touch a fons et origo of what is vaguely known as modern art. There is another: the painting of Cezanne. We are beginning to know a little about Cezanne. We know a good deal less about Negro sculpture. Not for the lack of opportunity; 
for the British Museum contain.-, the finest 
collection in the world. . . . These Negro sculptors were doing their utmost, in some 
cases, to represent the human form exactly, in others to express its salient plastic quali­ ties. Some were artists, some were not. Al l of them were hampered to some extent by a lack of knowledge; all of them, we are inclined to believe, were fascinated by the problem of rendering the head. That was to them more important than anything else. With the rest of the body they dealt sum­ marily, with one remarkable exception, the figure of a Dog-headed God, where the arms are rendered with surprising mastery and 
the figure from the waist up is indubitably 
beautiful. . . . 
There are many strange conventions to be seen in this exhibition; but the only one which seems to me to be triumphantly suc­ cessful is that which is employed to render the face in the Dog-headed God and the Ceremonial Mask. The face is conceived as a single, slightly carved surface stretching 
from the eyes to the raised mouth. It is im­ possible to describe; but I cannot help feel­ ing that it is a plastic discovery of the first 
importance. 
SCHOOLS FOR COLORED 
GEORGIA 
THE Atlanta Independent says: 
The population of the State of Georgia is approximately, white—1,700,000; colored, 1,300,000—colored people constituting ap­ proximately 44 per cent of the whole popu­ lation. 
For For White Colored 
Youth Youth 
Maintenance State University $ 75,000.00 Nothing 
Extension Agricul­ tural College 20,000.00 Nothing 
Georgia School of 
Technology 110,000.00 None 12 District Agricul­ tural Schools . .. 180,000.00 None North Georgia 
College 26,500.00 None State Medical 
College 35,000.00 None
State Normal 
School 70,000.00 None Georgia Normal and 
Industrial College 97,500.00 None' 
South Georgia Nor­ mal College 35,000.00 None Georgia
Agricultural and
Industrial College
(Wright, princi­ pal), Savannah $10,000.00 
Georgia Agricul­ tural Industrial 
Normal Teachers' 
College (Holley, Principal), 
Albany 5,000.00 
Total $649,000.00 $15,000.00 144 TH E
The New Beford, Mass. Sunday Standard 
considers: 
The problem of Negro education is the problem of the education of a nation in the practice of justice. 
That the Negroes are not getting justice at the hands of very many communities of 
the South needs only this one piece of evi­ dence to prove—that the per capita expen­ diture in public school teachers' salaries in Georgia for instruction of white children, six to fourteen years of age, is about six times the per capita expenditure for teach­ ing colored children of the same ages. This is on the authority of the Georgia State Bureau of Education, which further says that "the only provision made by the State for agricultural, industrial, higher and nor­ mal schools was, up to 1917, an appropria­ tion of $8,000 toward the Georgia State
Agricultural and Mechanical school, largely 
supported by federal funds. Negro teach­ ers in rural districts are poorly trained, the houses are in bad condition, and in the black belt they are inadequate for the masses of Negroes who live on plantations. With this the acknowledged situation in one of the recognized more progressive Southern States, exact figures are not need­ ed to show how far less than justice the southern Negroes are receiving in the mat­ ter of education. A t other points justice lapses before the equitable degree. Conditions justify the statement that "this is a crucial time for the Negroes of the United States; the next 
few years are freighted with possibilities of 
progress or of disaster." 
THE NEGRO PRESS SPEAKS 
JAMES WELDON 
JOHNSON writes in the New 
ON THE ANTI-LYNCHIN G York Age:
BIL L News despatches of May 
22 from Washington state that the House Judiciary 
committee had reported out an "Anti-Lynch­ ing Law" and had it placed on the cal­ endar for early consideration. This is the result of the organized and persistent effort 
which has been going on for nearly a year
to have Congress pass a Federal law regard­ ing lynching. 
Of course, the reporting out of the bill 
does not mean that it is certain that it will 
become a law; but it is an important step, in that it places the measure before
Congress, where it must be discussed and voted up or down. The mere fact that an anti­ lynching bill is before Congress ought to have some effect on those sections where lynching is a pastime. 
Colored organizations and individuals 
throughout the country should immediately
take the initiative in a supreme effort to lift 
the Anti-Lynching Bill over this third hurdle. They should at once telegraph and 
write to their representatives in Congress urging them to support this bill, and they 
 CRISIS 
should get as many white organizations and 
individuals as possible to do likewise. 
It will be very effective if the women in those states where women have the vote write personal letters to their Congressmen urging the passage of this law; there is 
nothing to which a Congressman from a suffrage state listens more attentively than 
to a request from a woman voter. 
People and press should get behind this matter and push it to the finish. We must 
not let the Anti-Lynching Bill die where it 
is, after getting it so far. 
with the This deplorable fact is true 
A "back to the farm" moveO N NEGRO ment is advocated by the Richmond 
FARMER S , Va., S i .Luke's Herald: 
City life is working havoc race. in the South and North alike. Many of our finer types are criminally destroyed by the brilliant though vicious attractions found in all of the larger civic centers in the coun­ try. The victims may be counted in the thousands. The result is demoralizing and 
perceptably lowers the physical and moral 
stamina of the entire race. . . . 
Farm life in the North is attractive in that its social prospects are on a level with 
its compensating advantages. This is proven by the existence of prosperous and progres­ sive farming groups of the race in Illinois, Michigan, Iowa and even in the Dakotas. 
The cities have their attractive features but don't overlook the profit and health of 
farm life in the North. It is one hundred 
per cent. .real. 
* * * 
The Baltimore, Md., AfroO N TH E American discusses the signifM. E. icance of the M . E . ConferCONFERENCE ence held recently at Des 
Moines: 
Of the 850 delegates attending the con­ ference just seventy-seven of them are col­ ored, two being from Liberia. Without the help of the better thinking element in the church, the motion for colored bishops would 
have failed in this conference, just as it has failed in every conference of the past twen­ ty-five years. But it did not fail. It went over with a record vote. 
This vote carries with it more than is evident on the surface. It is an announce­ ment to the Methodist-Episcopal Church 
South, that the Methodist Episcopal Church 
North will not compromise on the color ques­ tion. With the conference voting for col­ ored bishops, the conference knows that the Southern Branch of Methodism will be more than ever opposed to unification. Yet know­ ing this thing, and ardently wishing for a united church North and South, the 
Conference deliberately voted for colored bishops over colored churches. THE HORIZON 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G . ALLISO N . 
EDUCATIO N 
AMONG 10 men chosen at Brown 
University in the Preliminary Trial for 
the Varsity Debating Team, is Louis L. 
Redding, a graduate of the colored Howard 
High School, Wilmington, Del. 
C In the Dartmouth-Columbia meet in New 
York, J. A . Shelburne, a Negro sprinter of 
Dartmouth, won the 100 and the 220 yard 
dashes. 
C Among two Harvard Historical Studies 
to go for third impressions is "The 
Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the 
United States" by W. E. B. DuBois. The 
book contains 335 pages and is listed at 
?2.00. 
C Dr. E . E . Just of the Department of 
Zoology and Physiology at Howard 
University has received the first grant to be made 
by the National Research Council to a 
Negro scientist. Dr. Just is a graduate of 
Dartmouth. 
C Naurice N . Francis is the first Negro 
to receive a degree from Illinois College of 
Chiropody. 
C F. Eugene Corbie, a colored student of 
DeWitt Clinton High School, New York 
City, won first prize in the inter-scholastic 
oratorical contest held at Swarthmore College and was awarded the Phi Kappa Psi 
cup. 
C A colored fraternity, the Alpha Phi 
Alpha, has for the first time in the history 
of Ohio University had charge of the convocation. A large number of students and 
visitors, white and colored, were present. 
d The State Organization of Teachers of 
Colored Children of New Jersey has held 
its annual meeting at Camden, N . J., with 
200 teachers present. A feature of the organization is the development of Study 
Centers where teachers study together their 
problems. The meeting next year will be 
held in Atlantic City. W. R. Valentine, 
Principal of the Bordentown Industrial 
School, was re-elected president. 
C Because of the clause prohibiting 
Negroes from membership in fraternities at 
the University of Pennsylvania, colored 
students have formed the Daniel H . 
Williams Surgical and Oral Society in honor 
of this well known Negro physician. Russell Nelson is president. 
C Mr. Benjamin G. Brawley of Morehouse 
College has been on leave of absence to visit 
Liberia and to report on the condition of 
Monrovia College to the American Coloni­
• WINSTO N T . McGEHE E JOSEP H BIGG S GEORG E A . MUND Y EAR L B. DICKERSO N 
LL.B. , Ken t LL.B. , Indiana LL.B. , Wester n Reserve LL.B, , Chicago 
145 146 T H E
VASHT I C. MAXWEL L 
A.B. , Brow n 
Executiv e Secretary of Gicharbu Club of Girls i n 
Ne w York , for whom a committe e is endeavoring 
to secure a clubhouse. Th e organization is nonsectarian, self-governing and hopes to be selfsupporting. 
zation Society. He was accompanied by his 
wife and has just returned to America. 
C Virgini a Union University debating team 
is winner of the triangular debate with 
Wilberforce and Lincoln. The subject was, 
"Resolved: That Compulsory Arbitration 
Should Become a National Policy". 
C The Y . M . C. A . has an unexpended balance of $5,000,000 which was raised for 
educational work during the war work campaign, $2,000,000 of which has been appropriated for use in 1920. Ex-servicemen having honorable discharges should communicate with the United Y . M . C. A . Schools, 
347 Madison Avenue, New York City, for 
information and scholarships. 
C The Rev. Pezavia O'Connell, for three 
years pastor of Cary M. E. Church, 
Cleveland, Ohio, has accepted the Deanship of 
Morgan College, Baltimore, Md., succeeding William Pickens. Dr. O'Connell was a 
professor at Gammon and Howard before 
coming to Cleveland. 
C Dr. Albert Bushnell Hart of Harvard 
University and Dr. Charles R. Brown of 
Yale University have been elected to mem­
 CRISIS 
bership on the Board of Trustees of Howard 
University. 
POLITIC S 
EDWAR D H . WRIGH T has been elected 
Committeeman in the 2nd Ward, 
Chicago, by a plurality of 2,906 votes. He will 
be the only Negro on the County Central 
Committee. 
C A Negro, J. H . Blount, at Forrest City, 
Ark., will run for Governor as an 
"Independent Republican". 
(I Mrs. S. Joe Brown, a colored woman of 
Des Moines, was one of 7 women delegates 
to the Iowa State Presidential Convention 
of the Republican Party. 
G Republicans of Missouri included among 
8 alternates to the National Convention, a 
colored woman. 
C E . Bernard Taylor of Baltimore, an alternate delegate at large to represent 
Maryland at the Republican National 
Convention, is the first Negro appointed since 1880. 
TH E CHURC H 
FIRST Presbyterian Church, Santa 
Barbara, Cal., added 271 subscribers to 
current expenses and 165 to benevolences 
during last year and raised $12,648. The 
Rev. Clarence A . Spaulding is pastor. 
C Concord Baptist Church in Brooklyn, N . 
Y. , has celebrated its 73rd reunion. It has 
1600 members and 614 Sunday School pupils. During last year $20,400 was raised, 
of which there is a balance of $4,103. 
C The General Conference of the A . M . E . 
Church has been held in St. Louis, Mo., 
with Congressman Dyer as a speaker. The 
plan of organic reunion of the A . M . E. Z., 
the C. M . E. and the A . M . E . Churches 
was adopted. Five bishops were elected: 
W. D. Johnson, A . J. Carey, W. Sampson 
Brooks, W. T. Vernon and W. A . Fountain. 
Bishops were assigned as follows: W. 
Sampson Brooks, Sierra Leone, West Africa; J. 
A . Johnson, Baltimore; W. D. Chappelle, S. 
Carolina; W. W. Beckett, Mississippi; W. 
D. Johnson, Texas; John Hurst, Florida; 
I. N. Ross, Arkansas; J. M. Connor, 
Canada; A. J. Carey, Tennessee; W. T. Vernon, 
South Africa ; W. A . Fountain, South 
America. The resolution granting equal 
suffrage to women, which carries with it 
the right to elect and be elected trustees as 
well as to be elected to the electoral college 
where delegates are elected to the general 
conference, was adopted. The Committee on 
Revision of the Discipline reported a pension TH E HORIZO N 147 
fund to be under the Financial 
Department, by which widows, orphans and superannuated ministers will be paid direct from 
that department instead of by the annual 
conferences. Ministerial salaries were 
raised for presiding elders to $1,800; for 
married elders, $1,200; and unmarried ministers, $700. 
C The Rev. Drs. Robert E . Jones and 
Matthew W. Clair were elected bishops by 
the M . E . Conference at Des Moines, marking the first appointment of colored bishops 
in this denomination. 
G. The A . M . E . Z. Conference in session 
at Knoxville, Tenn., adopted the vote for 
unification with Brazil, South America, 
which adds 200,000 members and 300 
churches. Dr. John W. Wood and the Rev. 
P. A . Wallace were elected bishops. 
C The A . M . E . Z. Church has passed its 
quota 41% in the Interchurch World 
Movement drive, having collected $300,000 instead of $212,000. 
C The Rev. R. D. Merchant has been pastor of First Baptist Church at Coolwell, Va., 
for 44 years. 
C Antioch Baptist Church, Cleveland, is 
the first of that denomination to reach its 
quota,—$21,494, in the Interchurch World 
Movement campaign. The Rev. H . C. 
Bailey is pastor. 
MEETING S 
THE 7th annual session of the InterState Dental Association will be held 
at Bayshore Hotel, Buckroe Beach, Va., 
July 7-9. 
C The B. M . C. of the Morris faction 
of Odd Fellows will convene in New York 
City September 13-19. The organization 
represents a membership of 600,000 and it 
is expected that 20,000 delegates and visitors will be present. 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE colored Quality Amusement 
Corporation has acquired control of the 
Putnam Theatre in Brooklyn, N . Y . 
C. The Varsity Dramatic Society of New 
York University has accepted "The Return", 
a one act play by a Negro student, Edwin 
J. Morgan, for production. 
(I Alice M . Pettyjohn, of Amherst, Mass., 
a soprano, is having successful recitals at 
San Antonio, Tex. Miss Pettyjohn has 
studied at Oberlin and the New England 
conservatories. 
C "Golden Crown" and "Standin' in de 
Need o' Prayer", Negro spirituals, have been 
sung by Oscar Seagle, baritone, for the 
Columbia Company. 
(I The Quality Amusement Corporation has 
accepted for production a drama, "The 
Racial Tangle", by Henry F. Downing. The 
corporation and Mr. Downing are colored. 
G Sagaston St. Pierre, a 1920 colored 
graduate of the Henderson School of 
Oratory, in New York City, presented several 
numbers on the program. 
d Wilbur P. Johnson, Bachelor of Music 
from Syracuse University, has given a recital at St. Phillips Church, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
Mr. W. Carman Hardy was accompanist. 
(I Cleota Collins, soprano, and Louie Jones, 
violinist, have appeared in recitals at St. 
John's Church, Cleveland. The afternoon 
concert was free for Sunday School children, over 600 of whom attended; in the 
evening 1,200 adults were present? 
C The Community Musical and Sing 
Association of Olivet Baptist Church, 
Chicago, has given a pageant and masque at 
Orchestra Hall, under the direction of Mr. R. 
A . Austin. Twenty-four hundred dollars 
were raised. 
C The choir of St. Mark's M . E. Church, 
of New York City, gave its annual concert 
at Carnegie Hall, under the direction of E. 
Aldama Jackson, organist and choirmaster. 
The program included works of the following Negro composers: S. Coleridge-Taylor, 
J. Rosamond Johnson, H . T. Burleigh, R. N . 
Dett, A. R. Grant and E. A. Jackson. 
Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" was used as 
Part II of the program, with the Misses 
Minnie Brown, Marianna Johnson and Ethel 
Clarke, and Messrs. Charles Waters and 
Garfield Warren Tarrant as soloists. Miss 
Lydia Mason and Mr. A . R. Grant were at 
the pianos and Melville Charlton at the organ. 
TH E GHETT O 
IN answer to our annual inquiry as to 
Negro graduates, Dean Olive Thomas 
writes from Ohio, "Oxford College is exclusively for white women." 
C Governor Cooper of South Carolina, 
speaking at the annual dinner of the 
Palmetto State Society, advocated the repeal 
of the 14th and 15th Amendments and said: 
"I do not approve of any further surrender 
of State sovereignty to the Federal 
Government." 
G Four colored women are in jail at 
Muskogee, Okla., for refusing to ride in the 
Jim-Crow section of a street car. 148 TH E CRISIS 
CRIM E 
THE following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Tampa, Fla., May 8, unidentified porter 
of the Atlantic Coast Line, shot; alleged insult to a white woman. 
Beaumont, Tex., Charles Arling, flogged 
to death by masked men; charged with 
threatening a white man. 
INDUSTR Y 
MESSRS. H. H. WILLIAMS, R. B. 
Bassa and J. F. Johnson, Negroes at 
Hastings, Fla., netted $25,000 each this 
spring in their Irish potato industry. 
G Property including 26 stores and 54 
apartments in the South Side of Chicago, 
has been purchased by Jesse Binga, a Negro 
banker. 
G Negroes at Stephens, Ark., have oil land 
from which they have collected $75,000. 
G At Shreveport, La., oil producing wells 
are on the former cotton farm of Charley 
Jackson, a Negro, and he is scheduled to become a millionaire. William Chatham is 
drawing large royalties each month as a result of oil wells on his land. The Frost 
Oil Company has 4 wells on land owned by 
William Hardy. 
G Machinists of Oregon and Washington 
in convention at Tacoma, voted: Hereafter 
all non-whites (Negroes, Japanese, 
Filipinos, etc.) will be admitted on the same footing with whites. 
C Mr. F. V. Babb, a Negro in the employ 
of Kriebel & Co., investment bankers in 
Chicago, 111., has been promoted to manager of 
a colored branch which the company has 
established. 
G The United Investment Company, organized last year by Negroes in Atlanta, Ga., 
has purchased at $100,000 a three-story 
structure for an office building. The company has acquired rights to several hundred thousand feet of timber and has installed its own sawmill and other machinery 
for producing material with which to erect 
homes. Mr. J. B. Long is president. 
C The Domestic Life and Accident 
prime factor in the organization, has served 
the Standard Life, Atlanta Mutual, 
Mammoth Life and Fireside Mutual Insurance 
companies. 
G Gordon V, Green, a Negro at Montclair, 
N . J., has been appointed to an $1,800 position through civil service examination in 
which he was first among 53 white applicants. His average was 98 1/2%. 
C A t Louisville, Ky., Negroes are organizing the First Standard Bank; $60,000 of a 
$100,000 capital has been subscribed. 
Thirty-five members of the Organization 
Committee each subscribed for $1,000 to 
$2,500 worth of stock. Mr. W. W. 
Spradling is chairman of the committee. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
COLORE D citizens of Richmond, Va., 
have bought Lakeview Park for a 
playground and recreation center. The Rev. 
W. H . Branch, pastor of Seventh Street 
Baptist Church, is chairman of the Board 
of Directors. 
C Judge Skinner, of the Civil District 
Court at New Orleans, has rejected the petition of residents against the erection by 
Albert Fabacher of a Negro tenement in 
Dryades Street. 
G The colored population of Freehold, N . J., 
is 250; their real estate holdings amount to 
$52,000. 
C The Council of Colored Women of 
Richmond, Va., with a membership of 1,400, has 
closed a drive in which $2,500 was raised 
for the Community House for Colored 
People, and $1,000 for the salary of the colored 
Visiting Nurse. Mrs. Maggie L. Walker is 
president of the Council. 
C Charles W. Brown at Buffalo, N . Y. , has 
won a case of $750 against the Gaiety 
Theatre for discrimination. 
C Merle Harper, a Negro of Buffalo, N . Y. , 
who was temporarily employed as a special 
officer of the New York Central Railroad, 
has been promoted to the position of patrolman. 
C Iola Day of the Ohio Board of State 
Charities, at Columbus, is making a state 
wide appeal for intelligent Christian homes 
for colored dependent children. Among 
these are several lads from 8 to 14 years, 
two girls 13 years, one bright, dark-skinned 
girl of 6 years and two bright, dark-skinned 
brothers, aged 2 and 4 years. Of 1,000 chilare colored. 
G Negroes at Hastings, Fla., own 5,000 
acres of land valued at $1,500,000. 
G Dr. Leon J. Reid, of Hastings, Fla., has 
been appointed Surgeon for the Clifford 
Insurance Company has been chartered at Louisville, Ky., by Negroes. Mr. G. P. Hughes, dren under the care of the State, one-sixth TH E HORIZO N 149 
Keay Lumber Corporation, a white concern 
that employs 300 men. Dr. Reid is a graduate of Meharry, 1916. 
0 Negro delegates, to the number of 20, at 
the convention of the American Federation 
of Musicians meeting in Pittsburgh, were 
denied the use of passenger elevators at 
Hotel William Henry; but they carried a protest to the Mayor, and the discrimination 
was stopped. 
C Mayor Taylor at Wilmington, Del., has 
appointed Dr. Harvey Murray, head of the 
City Board of Health, and Harry Irons, as 
Health Inspector. Both appointees are Negroes. 
C A t Trenton, N . J., 4 Negroes were recently appointed to the police force, 2 
Negroes as inspectors in the Ash Collection 
Department and a number of colored firemen 
are soon to be appointed. 
C According to Dr. W. H . Wright's directory, colored people in Memphis, Tenn., have 
$2,000,000 in colored banks and own $8,000,­
000 worth of property; there are 89 physicians, 28 dentists, 17 lawyers, 4 jewelers, 76 
tailors, 66 dressmakers, 20 music teachers, 
2 candy manufacturers, 210 hair-dressing 
establishments, 130 restaurants, 107 
churches, 87 barber shops, 14 undertakers, 8 
drug stores, 12 taxi stands and 4 newspapers. 
C Negro physicians have opened the Booker 
Washington Sanitarium in New York City 
and Alpha Hospital in Columbus, Ohio. 
C In Judge Davis Freeman's court, 
Genevieve Lowe, a teacher in Cuyler School, has 
won a verdict of $537 in a Jim-Crow suit 
against the Savannah Electric Company. 
When Miss Lowe failed to obey the conductor's Jim-Crow orders, he had her arrested, causing her to be "humiliated, embarrassed and mortified". 
C George W. Watty, John B. Cooper, John 
A. Matthews and John Goldsborough, 
Negroes at Baltimore, Md., have been appointed constables. 
G Mrs. La won R. Biuce, a colored woman 
in New York City, has been appointed policewoman. 
C Victor R. Daly, in New York City, formerly a Lieutenant in the 367th Infantry, 
has won a verdict of $300 against the "Pi g 
and Whistle" for refusing to serve him and 
his party. 
MR . AN D MRS . CORNELIU S W , JOHNSO N 
G Mr. and Mrs. Cornelius W. Johnson at 
Erie, Pa., have celebrated their fiftieth 
wedding anniversary. The Army and Navy 
Auxiliary presented the couple with a goldlined loving cup. 
FRATERNITIE S 
SEVENTEE N candidates received the 33d 
degree in Masonry at the annual session of the United Supreme Council in 
Philadelphia. James R. Rickards, of 
Detroit, Mich., is Grand Commander. 
G The Diamond'Jubilee, commemorating its 
75th anniversary, has been celebrated by 
Most Worshipful Grand Lodge Free and Accepted M
G Pioneer and East Bay State Lodges of 
Elks at Boston, Mass., have amalgamated, 
with a membership of over 1,000. Ten 
Negro policemen acted as escort for the street 
parade, which was a part of the ceremonies. 
C Household of Ruth No. 16 held its 21st 
annual session at Daytona, Fla., during 
May, with Mrs. Alice L. Anderson presiding. 
It has 5,853 financial members and funds of 
$31,626. After paying 99 death claims and 
the expense for one year, a balance of $15,­
029 was retained in the end treasury and 
$1,002 in the district treasury. 
G Judge Isaiah Herndon, in the Circuit Court 
of Princeton, W. Va., has dissolved the temporary injunction against Alfred C. Goodwyn, Grand Master o
all costs on the plaintiff, H. B. Handley, who 
secured this injunction to prevent the 
Masons of West Virginia from using the words 
Most Worshipful Prince Hall Grand Lodge 
of West Virginia, A. F. & A . M . The Judge 
ruled that the colored Prince Hall Grand 
Lodge had a Masonic right to all the secret 
rituals, buttons, badges, etc., used by 
Masons. 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational. 
Nurs e Training at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - • Principal. 
VA . UNIO N UNIVERSIT Y 
RICHMOND , VA . 
Founde d 1865 
College, Academi c and Theologica l departments. Th e school of Arts and Sciences 
offers classical and scientific courses. Special 
emphasis on Pre-Medica l Work . Theologica l 
department confers B.Th . and B.D . Fore ­
most in Debating and Athletics. Fo r furthe r 
information, address WM . J . CLARK , President. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
HAL E INFIRMAR Y AN D NURS E TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
30-DAY SYSTEM 
DERRICK BUSINESS SCHOOL 1435 CHESTNUT STREET, PHILADELPHIA. PA. 
Only School of its Kind. 
ENROL L NO W FO R 
SUMME R COURS E ! 
Shorthand Bookkeeping Touch Typewriting Filing, Etc. 
M. J. DERRICK. Prin. and Mgr. 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. The only Institution in the State having for its object Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Col­ ored citizens in Kentucky. 
.Special training in Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and Hospital Work. 
Normal, Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary (mining class. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C . H . Parrish 
WANTE D 
Bright young lady as Private Secretary and 
Stenographer. Fo r further information write 
the Royal Fraternal Association, P. O . Bo x 
371, Charlotte, N . C. 
MOTHER S 
FIT YOUR DAUGHTERS FOR LIFE 
Now is the Tim e to "STUDY " the School to 
which you are going to send your daughter s 
next Fall . 
THI S INSTITUTIO N IS 
DEEPL Y CHRISTIA N 
It Permits No Shabby Wor k and Tolerate s 
No Loose Habits 
SIXT H GRAD E THROUG H TH E NORMA L 
Togethe r Wit h 
VOCATIONA L TRAININ G 
MUSI C ATHLETIC S Ou r AI M is to turn out well-rounded women, 
trained in intellect 
and 
Disciplined in self-reliance 
TH E TRAININ G SCHOO L GIR L GOE S 
BAC K T O HE R COMMUNIT Y PREPARE D 
T O HEL P LIF T TH E STANDARD S O F 
LIVING . 
REQUIREMENTS : 
Sound in Healt h and Mora l Characte r 
No t UNDE R FIFTEE N Year s of Ag e 
ABOV E the FIFT H GRAD E 
Good record in institution formerl y attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR 
WOMEN AND GIRLS 
Miss Nanni e H . Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights Washington . D . C . 
The Stenographers Institute 
1227 S. 17th Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
SHORTHAN D TYPWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
No need to study Shorthand and Bookkeeping two or three years. Tak e our Five-month or 
Eleven-month Course in Benn Pitma n Shorthand. Touch Typewritin g and Practica l Bookkeeping . 
Instructions given on the Multigraph , Mimeograp h and Addin g Machines. Classes are organized 
Januar y 1st. Apri l 1st, June 1st and October 1st. Classes in the "Touc h System of Typewriting " 
organized every Monday . Students operate Typewriter s blindfolded or in the dark rapidl y and 
accurately when they finish the course. EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President. 
Mention TH E CRISIS , TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 151 
HAMPTO N INSTITUT E 
HAMPTO N VIRGINI A 
REVISED COURSES 
NORMA L SCHOO L 
Two-year course, based on fouryear secondary course. 
AGRICULTURA L SCHOO L 
Collegiate course of 3 years (36 
months), based on four-year secondary course. 
TRAD E SCHOO L 
Four-year course in 11 trades; 
hort course in 3 trades. 
BUSINESS SCHOO L 
Four-year course, based on twoyear secondary course. 
HOME-ECONOMIC S SCHOO L 
Two-year course, based on fouryear secondary course. 
ACADEMI C SCHOO L 
Four year secondary course; also 
preparatory course. 
JAME S E. GREGG , D.D., Principal 
Doe s th e Negr o Appreciat e Ar t ? 
HI S is the question which I, wit h 
the assistance of Alber t Smith, 
an artist wel l known to readers 
of the CRISI S and BROWNIES ' 
BOOK , had to answer i n reproducing, i n a for m suitable for 
framing , Andre a Razafkeriefo's paraphras e 
on Joh n McCrae's "I N FLANDER S FIELDS. " 
% A numbe r of m y advisers told me frankl y 
colored people ar e poor appreciator s of art 
and tha t I was makin g a mistake in producin g anything so artisti c for disposition 
among them. 
r I refused and still refuse to "believe this 
and have placed on sale the finest, most artisti c and most elaborate ar t card ever produced for colored people. 
H Th e size is 7 x 10 1/8 in. Th e pric e is 50c. 
(postpaid), which wil l be promptl y refunded if the card fails to measure up to your 
expectation. 
WILLIA M M. KELLE Y 
Three Quincy Street 
Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Extraordinary Special Offer 
DAR K WATER , the new book by Dr . 
W . E . B . DuBois $2.00 
Th e CRISIS , one year's subscription 1.50 
Tota l $ 3' 6 0 
SPECIAL , if ordered together $3.00 
Address 
Th e CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , N . Y . 
WANTE D 
for July and August 
Tuto r 
(or eight year old boy. College graduate preferred. 
References required 
Address: M . G . % THE CRISIS 70 Fift h Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
Atlanta University 
Studie s o f th e Negr o Problem s 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately Addreu ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ti ATLANTA . GA . 
Missionary 
Training School 
for 
Negro Women 
will be re-opened at Shaw University, October 1, 1920. For 
information write Mrs. J. L . 
Peacock, East Northfield, Mass. 
Can We Help You Make Money? 
REA D WHA T W E SA Y 
The Greatest Opportunity offered 
the Negroes of Americ a 
To Increase their Earning Power 
To Enter into a Dignified Calling 
To Help Their Fellow Man 
THE NATIONAL BENEFIT 
LIFE INSURANCE CO. Assets over $500,000.00 WASHINGTON , D, C. 
Issuing Ordinary and Industrial Insurance at their best has 
A Position Open for You 
If you are an energetic young man or woman in search of a field of unlimited 
opportunities—here is a profession that 
will yield you a large income. 
Write Today for Your Position W e need 20 Managers, 15 Assistants, 150 
Special Men, 325 Inspectors, 600 Genera l 
Agents, 25 Stenographers. Don't long for 
Opportunity. Grasp it. 
The National Benefit Life Insurance Co­
"Protection for the Negro. " 
Dept. A , 609 F St , N . W . Washington , D . C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Plant of The E. A. WELTERS ' TOOT H POWDE R CO. , Inc. 
T o B e Erecte d I n Baltimore , Md . 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
TH E E . A . WELTERS ' TOOT H POWDE R COMPANY , which incorporated five year s ago wit h 
a capitalization of $5,000.00, wit h stock sold at $10.00 per share, is now a Corporation capitalize.! 
at $100,000.00 wit h "no shares for sale at any price," yet—it is understood tha t a smal l numbe r 
of shares have been donated by some of the large r stockholders for certain Dentists and Druggists, 
whose names have already been listed ,and wil l be called on personally in the near futur e by the 
President of the Company. 
Th e Dentists and Druggists who wil l be solicited, were selected by the Director s of the Com ­
pany because of their progressiveness and the great advertising value tha t thei r connection wil l 
mean in the distribution of this exceptional Dentrifice to the Rac e throughout the Unite d States. 
Th e E. A . WELTERS ' TOOT H POWDE R CO. , Inc . 410 Broad St., Jacksonville, Fla. 
Beautify The Skin—Glorif y The Hair ing and Soothing 
to the Tenderest 
Skin. 
Amro n 
Ski n AMRO N SKI N 
Soa SOAP is the most p satisfactory of all 
Is Nature's Best SHAMPOO Soaps, 
Aid In Promoting and because of Its 
Bright. Clear Skin instant LATHER ­
and in bringing re­ ING and CLEANS ­
newed Vigor and ING qualities one 
Youthfulness to the cake of A^O N 
Hair. AMRON SKIN SOAP will 
last quite as lonn 
AMRON SKI N SKIN SOAP is two cakes of 
SOAP Is composed Jther kinds. 
99 per cent, of Humania Hair For your SKIN'S Vegetable Oils , 
prino:paJJy of 01LS and Specialty M. F. G. CO sake—buy a cake 
of AMRON SKIN of t h o COCOA- New York, U.S.A SOAP — today. NUT. It provides Twenty-five cents an Instant thick, the cake. 1 dozen rich, cream y cakes for $2.25. lather in cither 
hard or warm Send for our water. It is ador- Profusely I I I u s • ably Cleansing, trated Catalog con­ Exquisitely Fra­ taining a full and grant and of Guar­ complete line of anteed Purity. It every Useful Toll- U Intensely Heal- lette Requisite. 
HUMANI A HAIR & SPECIALT Y MFG . CO . 
23 DUAN E STREE T NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 153 
Neither the mailed fist nor resolutions will cure the present state of unrest. But the everyday 
practice of the Business Golden Rule—"To live and let live"—by all individuals, associations and 
corporations engaged. i n business, will do much toward restoring confidence and contentment to 
the public. 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Ino., did not raise its rates of premiums during the war 
period-—nor since. It did not reduce the benefits to its members by any form of eva3ion. It did 
not withdraw its Unmatched Policy of Ful l Coverage and Lif e Time Protection to its members— 
and as a result of this liberal treatment to its members, the Southern Aid Society has now the 
good will of all its members and enjoys a larger patronage in its field of operation than ever before. 
Thousands of contented members are constantly expressing themselves like the following;— 
An Eminent Physician and Surgeon Writes 
267 W . Mai n St., Charlottesville, Va. , 
Ma y 6th, 1920. 
T O WHO M IT MA Y CONCERN: — 
It is my pleasure to state that I have been engaged in the practice of medicine in this city 
for about sixteen years. Having had ample opportunity to observe the great Southern Ai d Society 
i n action, noting their prompt payments and excellent business procedure, I take pride in recommending them as Above Them All . 
(Signed) Geo. R. Ferguson, M.D . 
Paid Claim After 3 Days Membership 
Anderson Ave., Danville, Va. , 
Ma y 10th, 1920. 
T O WHO M IT MA Y CONCERN: — 
This is to certify that my husband, Sam Watkins, was a member of the Southern Ai d Society, 
receiving his policy on Monday, died on Wednesday, and I received his Death Claim on the following Monday. H e had paid the Society only 50 cents dues, and I received $28.76. 
I wish to say that the Southern Ai d Society is the best company I know for the prompt payment of both sick and death claims. 
Wishing you continued success, I am, 
Very truly yours, 
(Signed) (Mrs.) Lizzie Watkins. 
Weekly Benefits Each Week for 4 Years 
Prominent Physician Certifies to Fact 
1607 Taylor St., Lynchburg, Va-, 
Apri l 3, 1920. 
T O WHO M IT MA Y CONCERN: — 
I, Laur a Jackson, of 1607 Taylor St., Lynchburg, Va. , carry a poJicy, No. 62573, Premium 
35 cents a week, with the Southern Ai d Society of Va. , was taken sick Marc h 1, 1916, and have 
received my weekly benefits every week up to and including Apri l 3, 1920. 
I recommend the Southern Ai d Society to be prompt in their payments, "and can say truthfully that they carry a perpetual paying policy. 
I have received during my illness the amount of $710.93. 
(Signed) Laura Jackson, 
(Witness) Irene Jackson. 
This is to certify that the above statement is correct and that I have filed certificates each 
week during Mrs. Laur a Jackson's illness. 
(Signed) J. A . Brown, M.D . 
N o insurable person in Virgini a should be without the Superior Policy 
issued by the— 
Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc. Home Office: 527 N. Second Street 
Richmond, Va . 
District Offices and Agencies thruout the State. Policy provides protection 
against Sickness, Accidents and Death—All for One Premium. 
A. D. PRICE—Pres. B. L. JORDAN—Sec. W. A. JORDAN—Ass't Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 154 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Newto n Braithwait e CYRIL A. Crichlow CRICHLOW & BRAITHWAIT E I. EXPER T SHORTHAN D REPORTER S 
Verbatim Reports of CONVENTIONS , CONFERENCES , INVESTIGATIONS , HEARINGS , LEC ­ TURES , SERMONS , etc. Engagements accepted anywhere i n the Unite d States Teachers of Stenography and Typewritin g at North Harlem Community House, 200 West 139th Street, New York , N . Y . Correspondence Courses to al l parts of the world. 
N e w York N Y
2297 Seventh Avenue Telephones 1128 Morningside 6817 Audubon - - ' 
A Better Community 
YOUNG WOMAN is the Ambition of Every Good Citizen 
Through Patriotism, Education and Thrift as taught 
by the U . S, System, any community will be improved HERE IS YOUR CHANCE intellectually, morally and socially. 
Is there a Club in your town? 
GOOD POSITIONS—GOOD SALARIES NATIONA L LITERAR Y ASSOCIATION 
1230 Yo u St., N.W. , Washington, D. C. Answe r the Cal l for Social "Workers and Ente r the World's Greatest Fiel d for Service For a Selected List of Books bearing on Efficient, Earnest, Constructive Leaders are 
in the Negro Problem write The CRISIS. 
DEMAN D 
We Trai n for Christian leadership—The 100 FIN E CALLIN G CARD S 60 CTS . Only Kin d of Leadership That Wil l Stand Neatly printed with your name and address. 
the Test i n the Most fashionable styles and sizes for ladies or 
NE W DAY . gentlemen. You r card represents you, there­ fore only the best quality should be used. Department open to those who have had. at Business and Professional Cards least, one year of training in a good Hig h furnished in several styles appropriate for School. any business or profession at the following prices: 100 for 85 cents, 250 for $1.50, 500 for $2.35. Ge t Read y Fo r Servic e Below are a few styles of our lettering: 
Th e Worl d Need s YOU 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
Mrs. George K. Franklin
NATIONALTRAININ G SCHOO L Mrs. John W. Andrews 
Mr. Clifford Roy Langford FO R WOME N AN D GIRL S Miss Christina Mae VanDyke 
MR . FREDERIC K A . HARRINGTO N Miss Nannie H . Burroughs, President AGENTS WANTE D Lincol n Heights, "Washington, D. C. Good pay can be earned taking, orders for our cards. Pleasant, dignified and profitable spare time work. There is a big demand everywhere for Calling and Business Cards and you will have no trouble in getting or­ Tel. 5437 Fort Hil l Cable Address, Epben ders. No experience necessary as we furnish 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N instructions with outfit. Al l orders filled 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W promptly and sent prepaid. Writ e now for samples and agents' terms. 54 School Street Boston, Mass. The HOUSE OF CHOWNING, Indianapolis, Ind. Telephone Connection 
TW O GREA T BOOK S for $2.50 
NO LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) The Histor y of the Negro Race and Negro Soldiers i n the Spanish-American War, Dating Back to Egyp t and the Pharoas—400 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alone for $1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina State Board of Education. 
(2) The Pictoria l Histor y of the Negro i n the Great Worl d 
War, giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of battle scenes by Colonel Haywood of the Fighting Fif­ teenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph Tyler and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think, only $2,50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESS : E . A . JOHNSON , 17 West 132nd Street, New York , N.Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 155 
Cleota J. Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
''Judging from the appear­ ance of a large number of music lovers, lier sweet lyric voice held them spellbound. She was applauded again and again after each number."— Boston Chronicle, 
Address: 
166 HAMILTON AVENUE, 
COLUMBUS, OHIO 
JOSEPHIN E A . JUNIU S 
CONTRALT O 
"She is the possessor of a Contralto voice, lovely in quality, which she uses artistically."— Oscar Saenger. 
AVAILABL E FO R CONCERT S 
74 "W. 142nd Street, New York , N . Y , 
Clarence Cameron White Violinist 
Recitals, Concerts, Instruction 
Studio: 
€16 Columbus Avenue Boston, Mass. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N Graduate of Institute of Musica l Art Organist-Director of Music o f St. Marks M . E . Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, Theory, Instruction Conducting, Coaching. Harmony taught from beginning to com­ pletion. Private or correspondence. Geothius system. Studio: 186 W. 136th St., New York , N. Y . Telephone Morningside 1708. 
They Played For The Crowned Heads of Europe— 
They Are Now Playing For You ! 
IIKli L FIGHTER S 369TH BAND , INC. 
HEL L FIGHTER S 369TH ORCHESTR A 
1'inuixisi'il uf llio sumo musicians that made this band the 
sensation ot tiurope during the "WORL D WAR. " 
ENGAGEMENT S SOLICITE D 
Lieut. F . Eugene Mikell , Conductor 
Jus. w . Grey. Mgr. W. Woodruff Chlsuin. Secretary 
17C West 135th Street. New York . N . Y . 
SPECIAL 
The CRISIS one year - $1.50 
The BROWNIES* BOO K one year - 1.50 
One year's subscription to each if ordered 
together - - - - - $2.50 
SONG S That the Whole Country Is Whistling! 
"I'V E COM E BAC K TO YOU, " wonderful ballad. "CA N YO U FORGET, " being featured by leading stage artists. 
"SHEL L SHOC K SHAKE. " on U . S. piano records. "L \ A GARDEN, " sentimental ballad. 
"YO U SH O KNO W HO W TO STRU T YOU R STUFF. " jazz melody. 
25 cents per copy, or wil l mail the five numbers to you for only Si . Address Hell Fighters 369th Band. 176 W. 136th St., New York, N. Y . 
MUSI C FO R CONCER T AN D HOM E 
PICKANINN Y ROS E 30c A Wonderful Lullaby which will add to any repertoire 
SPHINX , by J . Bern i Barbou r 30c THA T THIN G CALLE D 30c 
A n Egyptia n Intermezzo for Piano Study Now Yo u Can Learn Al l About It 
IT' S YOU R MOV E NO W 30c Sung by Bert Williams on Columbia Record No. 2778 - A 
MAUVOLEYEN E WALT Z 30c THINKIN G O F THE E 30c 
A Sweet, Flowing: Movement by Fred'k M . Bryan Another Beautiful Concert Number by H. H. Pace 
BEAUTIFU L LAN D O F DREAM S 15c A Wonderful Ballad with a Heart Throb 
SAXOPHON E BLUE S 15c LOVIN ' BLUE S 15c 
Hea r It On Emerso n Records A Typica l Blues Song 
I WONDE R I F YOU R LOVIN G HEAR T STIL L PINE S FO R M E 15c 
A Song for Al l Lovers, Beautiful Music 
REMEMBER AND BE CAREFUL 15c EV'RYTHING IS GOING UP 15c 
Advic e from a Mother to He r Chil d More Trut h Than Poetry 
THIN K O F M E LITTL E DADD Y 15c As great a favorite as "A Good Man Is Hard to Find" 
CHASING THE BLUES by Al.Piantadosi 15c BLIN D MAN' S BLUE S 15c 
Eas y to Pla y and Long Remembered The Funniest Song Eve r Writte n 
Al l of these songs may be had from your music dealer or direct from the publishers. 
PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C CO. , Inc., 
Mention TH E CRISIS, 156 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HERE IS YOUR OPPORTUNITY 
TO SECURE A WOODVILLE COUNTRY ESTATE 
CONSISTING OF 10 OR 20 ACRES OR MORE 
FO R $32 5 0 
ONL Y PER ACR E 
VER Y EAS Y TERM S 
Special advertising discounts to those who act quickly 
Free Lot With Each 10-Acre Tract! 
We have only a limited number of Woodville estates for sale, making 
quick action necessary. People from all over the country will want 
these estates, which means that they will all be sold within a short time. 
Get yours before it's too late. Send for booklet containing full details. 
IT'S FREE . Address 
THE SWAN-ARENSON REALTY & DEVELOPMENT CO. 19 SOUT H L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL. 
TH E SWAN-ARENSON REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO., 
CHICAGO, ILL. Date 192 
GENTLEMEN:—Please send me full particulars about your Woodville offer without any 
obligation to me. 
Name Address.. 
Town State.... 
C-7-20 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 157 
MADEto MEASURE 
$15.00 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $15.00. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
make you a suit for $15.00, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
save 50% on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
$
9 to $1 You Save 5
This suit for $15.00 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell 
you about them. We would rather you did BIG SAMPLE OUTFIT FREE 
not send us any money until we Bend our g " 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don'tdelay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 60 1 CHICAG O 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 158 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Patti's Brazilian Toilette Luxuries 
Compounded wit h the same care as used in filling a doctor's prescription. Don't he ashamed and hide your face, Get Patti's Brazilia n Secret Booklet and learn how to care for your skin . Eac h day your skin grows smoother and your complexion clearer. Patti's Beauty Secret Book, how to care for your skin, and six Toilette Preparations for $5.00, 1,000 agents wanted. Patti's Four Toilette Preparations without the "Beaut y Book, " $2.50. Price List Brazil's Sweetest Odors PatW Beauty Cream 68c Anita Lilac Perfume ...$1.25 oz. bottle Patti Night Cream 66c Anita Lotus Perfume .. . 1.25 oz. bottle Patti Day Cream 68c Anita Rose Perfume .. . 1.25 oz. bottle Patti "La Traviata" Powder 68c Anita Trefle Perfume .. 1.25 oz. bottle 
Agents Wanted—No Samples or C. O. D. Orders. 
Send postage for mailin g 
Address all orders to A . A , Brown , Manager 
PATTI'S BEAUTY EMPORIUM 
4723 St. Lawrence Ave., Apt. 3, CHICAGO , II 1 . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. JOS . L . JONES , Pre. . 
N . E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sli. , Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E ADVOCAT E ROBERT J. NELSON, Editor and Publisher 800 French Street Wilmington, Delaware THE ONLY RACE PAPER IN DELAWARE 10 Pages We cover Delaware, the Eastern Shore of Marylan d and Southeastern Pennsylvania Lik e a Blanket. . . , A n 
Intensive Circulation. . 22,500 People read TH E 
ADVOCAT E EAC H WEEK . If you have any proposition that appeals to the Race and you want it to reach virgin territory, advertise in The Advocate. Send for a sample copy and see the high grade class of advertisers who use our advertising columns. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau Wil l Help Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , O. 
LUC DORSINVILLE & CO. MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS 
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
PORT A U PRINCE, HAITI 
EXPORT : IMPORT : 
COFFE E FLOU R COCO A SOA P CASTO R BEAN S HARDWAR E LIGNU M VITA E DR Y GOOD S MAHOGAN Y LO G WOO D COTTO N FABRIC S 
COTTO N FURNITUR E 
COCOANU T PAINT S 
Colored American business men desiring to transact business between Haiti and the United States 
of America, are cordially invited to communicate with us. 
WANTE D WANTE D 
Liv e Agents A t Once To Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hard­ wood floors and hundreds of other things that have a varnished surface. Makes them look lik e new. Agents can make $50.00 to $75.00 per week selling Dudley's Polis h to furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile stores, paint stores and grocery stores. Special Offer: For 90 days we wil l ship to al l new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this special offer at once. 
Dudle y & Porte r Manufacturin g Co . 
116 South Main St.. Muskogee. Okla. 
Bathe in Comfort 
Anywhere Th e Robinso n FoIdin g Bat h Tu b make s home bathing easy and convenien t withou t the necessity of runnin g water, ^ expensive plumbin g o r sewer connections. Tu b is made o f special material (railed steeline), soft and pliable—instantly warmed. No cold clammy iron or porcelain to touch the body. Guaranteed non-leakable. Exceptionally well con­ structed and reinforced. Cannot tip nor spill. Entir e weight of water and occupant rests on floor. Special device makes Tub self-emptying. When bath is finished, pul l plug and the tub is empty, ready to be folded and put away by the time you are dressed. 
Agents Make $35 to $100 Weekly Go into business—work for yourself—make big money whole year 'round. Our Co-operative Sales Pla n insures success. Wonderful opportunities selling Robinson's Bat h Tubs. 70 % of homes need them. Customers highly pleased, well satisfied. To u can buil d a wonderful business selling this home necessity. Our complete pten and practical sales aid assures big results. Hustlers coin money. 
•SO CA N YOU ! Whitehead made J75 one day: Rev. Pasko of New York made 575 In two hours; Sunderland $90 in two weeks; Stepp $2o in ten minutes—selling Robinson Folding Bath Tubs. And Robinson agents go on making big money month after month and year after year. Hundreds of them are doing it. Ex­ perience unnecessary. Get into this mon­ ey-making business for yourself. Mail a postcard today. Don't doubt --- get the facta. Write for information today. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO, 5202 Factories Bldg., TOLEDO, OHIO 
Mention TH E CRISIS , TH E 159 CRISIS
FREE FASHION BOO K MAILED 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r All our wigs are 
hand made and 
•tried: to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS , Trans 
formations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price $10.60 
We carry the largest selection of Hair Dressers' Tool-. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
which makes the tklm velvetlike, the hair 
•ilklik*. 
Mme . Baum' s Mai l Orde r Hous e P. O. BOX 145, 
Penn. Terminal Station, New York, N . Y. 
When writing, mention this paper. 
Learn Oar System - Use Our Goods AN D 
See Yourself Not as You Are—But 
as You Would Like to Be 
Manufacturers and 
Importers 
of 
HAWAIIAN BEAUTY 
PREPARATIONS 
for 
Men and Women 
Hair Beautlfler ....$1.00 Vanishing Cream.. S0.60 
Dressing Oil SO Face Powder 75 Shampoo 50 Rouge .50 
Hair Tonic 1.00 Toilet Water 1.00 
Face Cream 50 Tetter and Eczema Ointment 50 
For Sale at all Drug Stores 
and first class Beauty Parlors. 
By mall—postage extra. ) 
Agents Wanted. 
HAWAIIA N PRODUCTS CO., Dept. B., 3147 Calumet Ave., Chicago, 111. 
 ADVERTISE R 
HOTE L DAL E CAPE MAY , N. J . 
Comfort and Elegance Without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in the 
Heart of the Most Beautiful Seashore 
Resort in the World, 
is replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, garage, bath 
houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention 
given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. With Sanitarium added and 
Dr. C. A . Lewis of the University of Penn in attendance. 
A MONEY GETTER because It is A CROWD GETTER. 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that wil l afford an evening of Side Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention An entertainment In one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores or churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night PRICE, 50c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author Lincoln Heights. Washington. D. C_ 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for tlie time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game flab of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
D o you want a place to go where you can buil d up 
your health, vitality, energy and buslnesa efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
Do you believe in progress and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely 1 
Then you wil l be Interested In, and want to 
own. a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * 
can a beautiful lot for only I30. M each; 
16.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot wil l be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good Uve energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford BIdg 
So. Dearborn Si . 
Chicago, III 
Mention The CRISIS 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Kelly Miller's Authentic History of Negro in World War 
A new and greatly 
improved history 
JUST OFF TH E PRESS 
200 Pictures 
Price only $2.75 
750 Pages 
16 Color Plates 
Bize BY, x 8Vi inches, 7B0 rapes As we have fought for the rights of mankind and for the future peace and security of the world, the people want to he correctly and fully informed of the facts concerning OUR heroes—and this is TH E BOOK they are looking for. 
THE 
ONLY 
HISTORY 
THAT 
WILL 
FULLY 
SATISFY 
THE 
AMERICAN 
COLORED 
PEOPLE 
This Book appeals to the Colored People. They are 
eager to buy it. Why? Because it is the only Wa r 
Book published that thrillingly, graphically, yet faithfully describes the wonderful part the Colored Soldier 
has taken in the World War and is absolutely fair to 
the Negro. 
It relates to the world how 300,000 Negroes crossed 
the North Atlantic, braving the terrors of the Submarine Peril, to battle for Democracy against the bloodthirsty hordes of a war mad Lord of the House of 
Hohenzollern. 
More than fifty pages of the Book devoted to the 
ACHIEVEMENT S O F TH E NEGR O IN TH E 
AMERICA N NAVY—Guarding the Trans-Atlantic 
Route to France—Battling the Submarine Peril—The 
Best Sailors in any Navy in the World—Making a 
Navy in Three Months from Negro Stevedores and 
Laborers—Wonderful Accomplishments of Our Negro 
Yeomen and Yeowomen. 
AGENTS WANTED—Millions of these hooks will he sold, BIG MONEY is being made by our sales people. Will you join us in the distribution of good helpful race hooks 1 Then send 21 cents for agents canvassing outfit. Write to 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. No. 523 9th Street Washington, D . C. 
Mention THE CRISIS . Let Us Send 
You a suit 
Made to your measure, payable 
after received, with the clear 
understanding that if the fit is not 
perfect, or if you are not satisfied in 
every way; if you are not convinced 
that you have received a fine, highgrade, stylish, splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your measure 
and have saved at least $15.00 
to $20.00, you are not under the 
slightest obligation to keep it. 
Don't hesitate or feel timid, 
simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. Yo u are not out 
one penny. An y money you may 
have paid us is refunded at once. 
SEND NO MONEY-just your 
name and address for FRE E 
sample s and latest styles, 
beautiful NEW samplebook all sent FRE E if you answer now. 
SAMPLE S FRE E 
An y man young or old, interested in saving money, who wants 
to dress well and not feel extravagant, is invited to answer at 
once and get our free book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply write letter or postal today, just say "Send me your 
samples" and get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have 
a special deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FRE E 
SAMPLE S and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Send at once. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING COMPANY 
Department 847, CHICAGO . ILL. N I L E Q U E E N 
FO R HAI R AN D SKI N 
The preparations used by Cleopatra, The NIL E 
QUEEN , were of the same fine quality as those your 
druggist or beauty shop offers you today. Send for 
free descriptive Beauty Book. 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO. NE W KASHMI R BLDG . 
3423 Indiana Ave. CHICAGO, ILL. 