The CRISIS 
Louis 
Portlock 
JUL Y 1922 
FIFTEE N CENTS A COP Y Another Lighthouse to Help 
Chart Negro Business into 
The Right Channel. 
The Southern Aid Society's 
New Modern 3 story and 
basement building located 
at 106 and 106À South Ave., 
Petersburg, Va. 
Petersburg's first colored 
bank and its leading professional and business interests now have modern 
quarter s withi n which to 
display thei r talents and 
wares. The Society's District Office is located on 3rd 
floor. 
In addition to providing a superior policy of protection to 
its policyholders— the Society renders a threefold service to 
the race: 
It gives employment to hundreds of young women and 
men—It provides ready cash to its policyholders in times of 
sickness, accident and death—It provides, in the largest cities 
in its field of operation, modern office facilities to the colored 
professional and business interests. It is indeed a Servant of 
the People. 
SOUTHER N AID SOCIETY O F VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N . Second Street, RICHMOND , VA . 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
J . T. CARTER , Pres. and Gen'l Counsel B. L. JORDAN , Seoty. 
W . A. JORDAN , Asst. Secty. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITO R ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINESS MANAGER . 
Vol . 24-No . 3 JULY , 1922 Whole No. 141 
Page 
COVE R 
Drawing by Louis Portlock. 
OPINIO N 
The Worl d and Us; Virginia ; Mississippi; Hampton College; The 
Rhodes Scholarships; Haiti; The Army ; Fraud ; Evil; First Blood; Te n 
Phrases 103 
NEGR O HIGHE R EDUCATIO N IN 1921-22. Illustrated 108 
TH E FRENC H COLONIA L EXPOSITIO N A T MARSEILLES . Illustrated 
William S. Nelson 116 
TREASURE . A Poem. Georgia Douglas Johnson 120 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E 121 
L A VI E C'ES T L A VIE . A Poem. Jessie Fauset 124 
TH E HORIZON . Illustrated 125 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 130 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ONE DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The data of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of addres's, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavadable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 100 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciencea The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E . Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training and Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution tor the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training far «II 
students. 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trade« for beys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic science and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
Now girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
equipped. 
Terme reasonable. 
For Information address 
W. R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1910-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN, President 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B. Kendall, D.D., Lincoln University, 
Cheater County, Fonna. 
Th e Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa . 
A Pennsylvani a Stat* Norma l Schoo l offering. In additio n 
to the regula r Norma l Cours e of two years, professional 
three year courses i n Hom e Economic s and Shop Work . A 
diploma from any of these courses make s a graduat e 
eligibl e to teach i n the publi c schools of Pennsylvania . 
A three-year Hig h Schoo l Cours e is offered to al l who 
have completed the eighth granimer grade. 
Nex t term begins September 18, 1922. 
Fo r further particulars and catalog , writ e 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal 
Cheyney, Pa . 
There Will Be No Summer School for 1922 
Mention THE CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 101 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta , Ga . 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers courses in the following departments. College. Normal, High School, 
Grammar School, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training and Industrial. 
Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term begins Wednesday, Sept. 13, 1922. 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y G1FFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
Founded 1870 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Over 100 «eres of beautiful campus. Twelre buildings 
with new $150,000 administration buildin g wit h modern 
chapel, gymnasium an d laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admissio n only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junior Hig h School—7th an d 8th Grade s and 1st and 
2nd years' Hig h School Courses, wit h certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Yea r Hig h School wit h 
Freshma n and Sophomore years of College work, wit h 
Diploma . 
College—Four years above Hig h School, or two years 
above Junio r College Course, wit h degree of A.B . 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medica l Course 
54th year of nine months opens September 20, 1922. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition , board room and laundry. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING . President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State harm s for Its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial , Medical , an d Lega l trainin g for Col -
ored citizens In Kentucky . 
Specia l trainin g In Insurance, Socia l Serrtce. Nursin g and 
Hospita l Work . 
Normal, Commercial, Music . Dornest!« Science, Missionary 
training olaaa. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C . H . Parrish 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Collège, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address. 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 186 6 
Thorough Literary, .Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and (rounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
KIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddl e University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church , has four Deportments—Hig h School, Arts and Sciences, Theologica l 
and Industrial, The completion of a Gramma r School 
course Is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the Hig h School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classica l an d the Scientific. I n the 
scientific, Germa n is substituted for Greek or Latin . 
The entrance requirement for the Freshma n Class is 
15 units of Hig h Schoo l work. 
The Theologica l Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. Th e first is purely English , 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
Al l students In the Hig h School Dept. are required 
to take trades i n the Industria l Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MoCrerey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
Fer further information address 
JOHN H . LEWIS, President 
Bishop J , S. FLIPPER , Chairma n Trustee Board 102 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
Founded by GENERA L O. O. HOWAR D 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D., D.D. , President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIAT E AN D PROFESSIONA L SCHOOLS 
REGISTRATIO N 
Autumn Quarter Friday, Sept. 29, and Saturday, Sept, 30, 1922 
Winter Quarter Tuesday, January 2, 1923 
Spring Quarter Saturday, Haren 17, 1923 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON , Registrar 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y WASHINGTON , D. 0. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1901 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave. & N. 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Spring Term Opening April 4th, 1922 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSIONS 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Fa . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help Yon Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NOW REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, O. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Man ­
hood and Womanhood. 
Fo r further information address 
P. A . SUMNER , President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
SAMUE L A. OWEN , President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Koma 
Mission Society of Chicago and Bolton and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on trat (rada by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episoopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE, 61SS Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia. Pa. 
"JUST THE PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. TH E CRISIS 
Vol . 24. No . 3 JULY , 1922 Whole No. 141 
Opinion of W. E. B. Du Bois 
TH E WORL D AN D U S 
A HIG H tariff means that every 
laborer pays more in higher 
prices than he receiver in 
higher wages. This is the 
reason big employers love the tariff. 
"Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors", says Europe to the 
United States, and we, the richest 
country on earth answer never a 
word. An d yet we could cancel our 
foreign debts and actually make 
money by the deed. 
Abraham Lincoln was a Southern 
poor white, of illegitimate birth, 
poorly educated and unusually ugly, 
awkward, ill-dressed. He liked smutty stories and was a politician down 
to his toes. Aristocrats—Jeff Davis, 
Seward and their ilk—despised him, 
and indeed he had little outwardly 
that compelled respect. But in that 
curious human way he was big inside. He had reserves and depths and 
when habit and convention were torn 
away there was something left to Lin ­
coln—nothing to most of his contemners. There was something left, 
so that at the crisis he was big enough 
to be inconsistent—cruel, merciful; 
peace-loving, a fighter; despising Negroes and letting them fight and 
vote; protecting slavery and freeing 
slaves. He was a man—a big, inconsistent, brave man. 
We have no sympathy for the railway unions, we black men; because 
they admit only white men and do all 
in their power to lower the wages of 
black porters and laborers. We are 
glad to see them swallow dose after 
dose of their own bad medicine. We 
hope the Railway Labor Board will 
keep up its interesting program of 
robbing Laborer Peter to increase the 
dividends of Railway Executive Paul. 
Congress is in a pretty mess; pot 
calls kettle black, and tells the truth. 
Democrats lynch, and steal Haiti ; Republicans keep Haiti and let lynchers 
be. Both want to pay the soldiers to 
vote for them, but cannot dig up the 
small change. The while the fall election looms. Watch your Congressman. Forget the President and the 
Minister to Siam, but watch your 
Congressman and knife him if he 
falters. 
VIRGINI A 
DETERMINE D effort is being 
made to prove that the 
Southern states are treating 
Negro schools so justly and 
decently that the Nation can afford 
to trust them with fifty million dollars and more to educate all the people without Federal supervision or 
oversight and without even the legal 
safeguard of declaring that all children must have equal treatment. Is 
this true? 
The Petersburg, Va., Progress, a 
white paper, said October 3, 1921 : 
"The city of Petersburg has many valuable assets. We shall not endeavor to decide as to which is the most valuable. But 
we believe the vast majority of people wil l 
agree that none is of greater value than 
its schools, which are sincerely believed to 
be the best i n Virgini a and the equal of 
those of any city of our size i n any State." 
103 104 TH E CRISIS 
To this the Weekly Review, a colored paper, replies October 8, 1921 : 
"Withi n the past ten years the school 
population of both the colored and whites 
of the city, has nearly doubled. To care 
for the increase of the white, several new 
and modernly equipped schools have been 
erected. In figures the city of Petersburg 
has spent close to a million dollars. It is 
still spending it, and as the Progress says, 
there are others i n contemplation. In this 
same length of time—with the increase 
about the same—there has been erected for 
the colored children one lone school building, which was i n no sense an addition. 
This was called upon to accommodate the 
population of all the old schools, as they 
were abandoned on its completion. This 
building is now over-crowded, and i n order 
to accommodate all, the training of the 
children must be and is neglected. In other 
words, with a constantly growing population, the colored school accommodation here 
is practically the same that it was ten years 
ago." 
MISSISSIPP I 
THE latest biennial report of 
the State Superintendent of 
Public Education of the State 
of Mississippi has just 
reached us. It covers the scholastic 
years of 1919-20 and 1920-21. First 
of all we note that the compulsory attendance law was rejected in four 
counties of which Claiborne with 78 
per cent, of non-voting Negroes was 
one. The superintendent adds this 
illuminating statement. "Altogether 
33,186 white children over 7 years of 
age who had never been to school before were brought into our schools by 
this law." In other words, as a Mississippi colored citizen informs us, no 
attempt is made to enforce this law 
so far as colored children are concerned. 
There are 353 consolidated county 
schools for whites, but none for Negroes. There are 125 teachers' homes 
for whites and none for Negroes. In 
14 counties one or two extra teachers 
have been added to the colored county 
schools by the Jeanes Fund to teach 
industries. By the help of $52,000 
from Julius Rosenwald and private 
funds raised by colored people, after 
they had received nothing from their 
taxes, $92,000 was spent for Negro 
school houses in 1921. None of the 
money came from the State and if 
any came from the counties it is not 
reported. Forty-nine agricultural 
schools were supported by the State 
and taught 6,000 white boys and girls. 
The State appropriated $550,000 for 
these schools during two years. There 
are no such high schools for Negroes. 
There are 160 accredited high schools 
for whites in the State. There is one 
for Negroes. 
The per capita expense of educating each child enrolled for the year 
1920-21, together with the average 
salaries paid white and colored teachers is as follows for the 20 counties 
of the State in which 70 per cent, or 
more of the population is Negro : 
Aver. Monthl y Salary Pe r Capit a Exp . 
County, 1920-21 Pai d Teachers for each child enrolled 
Whit e Colore d Whit e Colored 
Adams $76.00 $33.00 * * 
Boliva r 78.27 36.35 $24.01 $2.17 
Claiborne 81.85 38.00 3,29 .70 
Coahoma 141.32 42.00 46.06 2.86 
D e Soto 78.74 35.10 17.41 2.10 
Grenada 78.54 33.80 3.37 .74 
Hind s 84.00 33.00 15.31 3.00 
Holme s * * * * 
Issaquena 42.00 24.00 37.00 8.00 
Jefferson 59.83 37.30 4.85 .61 
Leflor e * * * * 
Lownde s 84.00 29.35 2.83 .46 
Madiso n 107.33 25.34 34.64 2.03 
Marshal l 54.00 33.00 10.20 2.85 
Noxube e 99.73 33.59 47.99 3.26 
Quitma n 106.00 38.00 30.92 3.60 
Sharkey ......119.5 4 48.61 35.72 3.46 
Tunic a 115.00 53.00 43.87 2.99 
Wilkinso n ... . 60.00 30.00 21.52 3.32 
Yazo o 67.50 29.50 14.56 1.62 
*No report. 
The advocates of the SterlingTowner bill are asking the nation to 
give Mississippi millions of dollars 
of federal funds "to be distributed 
and administered in accordance with 
the laws of the said State in like manner as the funds provided by State 
and local authorities for the same 
purpose." 
HAMPTO N COLLEG E 
THOS E who take up the 53rd 
and 54th annual catalogs of 
Hampton Institute will realize that this institution has 
at last become a college. Last year, 
the agricultural school offered a OPINION 105 
course with the degree of Bachelor of 
Science in Agriculture. This year "a 
standard college course of 44 weeks" 
is open for teachers, upon the completion of which the degree of B.A . in 
Education will be given. 
This marks the end of a long and 
bitter fight. For years many persons 
in authority at Hampton looked upon 
that school as the bulwark in the 
great battle against higher education 
for Negroes. But despite every effort the logic of events forced Hampton to do exactly what she had long 
tried not to do. Her graduates with a 
grammar and a high school course 
were unable to meet the demands of 
the very Southern whites who wanted 
to employ them in the school systems ; 
if the Hampton graduate sought additional training he found himself seriously handicapped by the fact that 
the Hampton course was not recognized by reputable colleges. 
Hampton thus found itself between 
the devil and the deep sea. If it 
wanted to spread the Hampton doctrine it must give its men modern 
training. But what was the Hampton doctrine? It was not necessarily 
opposition to higher education as 
General Armstrong himself would 
have said. On the other hand, if 
Hampton transformed herself into a 
college, what was left of that long 
and elaborate argument by which the 
superiority of the Hampton course of 
study over Howard, Fisk, Atlanta 
and Union had been so effectively 
proven? Would not Hampton become 
simply one of many colored colleges, 
efficient because she had excellent 
teachers and a splendid plant, and not 
because she had discovered a new gospel of education? 
It has been this latter alternative 
that Hampton has at last been forced 
to accept and she is to be congratulated upon the decision. 
Along with Lincoln University in 
Pennsylvania she has one more step 
to take and that is to put colored 
teachers and officers in real places of 
power and influence upon her faculty. The time has gone when the 
colored people of the United States 
are going to have the world interpreted to them solely by white people. 
Not that they are prepared or we 
trust ever will be prepared to have 
their teaching, preaching, healing and 
writing done solely by black folk;— 
they want men and women of the 
best trained mind and heart to guide 
them, and in the choosing of these 
leaders they will brook no color line. 
TH E RHODE S SCHOLARSHIP S 
RHODE S scholars are students 
appointed in the United 
States to Oxford University, 
England. They receive at 
present about $1,500 a year for three 
years. 
Two scholarships are assigned to 
each State. Since the scholarship is 
tenable for three years, there will be 
one year out of every three in which 
there will be no election. In each of 
the other two years one scholarship 
will be filled up if a suitable candidate 
offers. 
A candidate to be eligible must— 
(a) Be a citizen of the United 
States, with at least five years' domicile, and unmarried. 
(b) By the 1st of October of the 
year for which he is elected, have 
passed his nineteenth and not have 
passed his twenty-fifth birthday. 
(c) By the 1st of October of the 
year for which he is elected (i.e., 
1922), have completed at least his 
Sophomore year at some recognized 
degree-granting university or college 
of the United States of America. 
Candidates may apply either for 
the State in which they have their ordinary private domicile, home, or residence, or for any State in which they 
may have received at least two years 
of their college education before applying. 
Institutions should select their rep-TH E CRISIS 
resentatives on the basis of the qualities which will be considered by the 
State Committee in making the final 
selection. These are: 
(1) Qualities of manhood, force 
of character, and leadership 
(2) Literary and scholastic ability and attainments 
(3) Physical vigor, as shown by 
interest in outdoor sports or in other 
ways. 
HAITI 
WE must strictly maintain 
and scrupulously observe, 
in letter and in spirit, the 
mandates of the Constitution of the United States. We are 
not doing so now. We are at war, 
not alone technically with Germany, 
but actually with the little, helpless 
republics of our own hemisphere. 
The wars upon our neighbors to the 
south were made and are still being 
waged through the usurpation by the 
Executive of powers not only never 
bestowed upon him, but scrupulously 
withheld by the Constitution. 
"Of the fact there can be no question. Practically all we know now is 
that thousands of native Haitians 
have been killed by American marines, and that many of our own gallant men have sacrificed their lives 
at the behest of an executive department in order to establish laws drafted by an Assistant Secretary of the 
Navy, to secure a vote in the League 
and to continue at the point of the 
bayonet a military domination which 
at this moment requires the presence 
of no less than 3,000 of our armed 
men on that foreign soil." 
—Warren G. Harding, at Marion, 
Ohio, September 17, 1920. 
TH E ARM Y 
THE Republican administration is not only carrying out 
Democratic policies in Haiti 
but also in the army. The 
Secretary of War, in a letter to Dr. 
DeHaven Hinkson of Philadelphia, asserted, first, that Negroes and whites 
are not going to be combined in the 
same organizations. Secondly, that 
the 92nd and 93rd Divisions have 
been disbanded forever. Thirdly, that 
colored organizations are not going 
to be integral parts of state National 
Guard units, but, upon request, may 
be organized into "separate allotments" ; and that finally the Wa r Department is going to reserve the right 
"to assign citizens to duty which they 
are most capable of performing" 
meaning, of course, that they propose 
to put Negroes in Labor Battalions 
under white southern slave drivers. 
Finally we note with deep interest 
the following quotation from the 
Army and Navy Register: 
"The retirement of Chaplain Oscar J. W . 
Scott (colored), U . S. Army , on account of 
physical disability incident to the service, 
leaves the 10th cavalry (colored) without 
a chaplain. Unde r the announced policy of 
the Wa r Department of making no appointments of chaplains until the excess occasioned by the reduction of the Arm y to 
150,000 is absorbed no colored chaplain wil l 
be available to take Chaplain Scott's place. 
This wil l probably result i n a white chaplai n being assigned to duty wit h the 10th 
cavalry. If this is done, the experiment 
wil l be watched wit h interest, for very many 
officers who have served wit h colored regiments have expressed the belief that the 
right kind of white chaplain could be eminently successful i n serving Negro troops 
and at the same time could minister to the 
white officers and their families." 
Mr. Harding is certainly piling up 
Negro votes for next November. 
FRAU D 
THER E is a widely prevalent 
method of defrauding people 
by offering to furnish mus:c 
for their "lyrics " and publish 
the same at a little "compensation," 
varying from twenty-five to two hundred and fifty dollars. Persons continually write to us asking for details 
about such offers. Ninety-nine out of 
a hundred of these things are barefaced frauds. If you have a poem 
which is worth setting up to music, 
you can find a composer and a publisher who will issue it without charge 
to you. OPINION 107 
EVIL 
WE are not the only ones who 
are suffering. In Massachusetts two Italians have 
been sentenced to death for 
a crime which has never been properly proven against them. In Leavenworth prison ninety-six white men 
are serving from five to twenty-year 
terms for no crime but simply because they belonged to an organization which some people do not like. 
A t the White House, a Children's Crusade has been inaugurated to plead 
for the release of hundreds of white 
political prisoners. In West Virgini a 
80,000 white men, women and children are "gaunt and pallid with hunger." Here in New York, "mothers, 
wives and children in your own city 
appeal to you for food, shelter, clothing and protection. The bread winner is in prison." Just as black people in Texas were unable to get a 
lawyer who dared to defend Mr. Shillady in the local courts, so in Louisiana white men cannot get a lawyer 
in a similar case. In Newport, Kentucky, a strike has been put down by 
tanks and machine guns among white 
men, while among black brick-makers 
in New York, Cossacks have done 
similar work. In Russia the starving are eating their own children and 
the melting snows disclose heaps 
upon heaps of the bodies of the 
starved dead. Five million people are 
still starving. Al l the evil is not ours, 
my brother. 
FIRST BLOOD 
WE would respectfully call the 
attention of the cowards in 
Congress and particularly 
in the Senate to the shadows of certain coming events. First, 
the Attorney-General of Pennsylvania who helped kill the Civil Rights 
Bil l and who publicly opposed the 
Anti-Lynching Bil l was defeated for 
the governorship by Gifford Pinchot, 
who has openly stated his advocacy 
of the Anti-Lynching Bill . Secondly, Congressman E . J. Jones of the 
10th Pennsylvania district, who voted 
against the Dyer Bil l was defeated 
in the primary. Congressman William Vare, who was "absent" when 
the Madden "Jim Crow" Bil l came 
up two years ago and also when the 
Dyer Bil l came up, has had his machine so smashed by independent Negro voters that his end is in sight. 
In Michigan and New Jersey, Republican Congressmen who opposed the 
Dyer Bil l were fought bitterly by 
colored voters, with the result, at this 
writing, in doubt. 
An d in spite of this, some one actually writes us and asks "if " they 
shall oppose Slemp of Virginia , the 
leader of the "Lil y Whites" and the 
southern adviser of Mr. Harding. 
If Black Virgini a does not oppose him 
by every means in her power, let 
them never look American Negroes 
in the face again! 
TE N PHRASES 
THE following ten phrases are 
recommended to white students in Southern colleges as 
quite sufficient for all possible discussions of the race problem : 
1. The Southerner is the Negro's 
Best Friend. 
2. Slavery was Beneficial to the 
Negro. 
3. The Races will Never Mix . 
4. Al l Negro Leaders are Mulattoes. 
5. The Place for the Negro is in 
the South. 
6. I love My Black Mammy. 
7. Do you want your sister to marry a Nigger ? 
8. Do not disturb the present 
friendly relations between the 
races. 
9. The Negro must be kept in his 
place. 
10. Lynching is the defense of 
Southern womanhood. Negro Higher 
Education in 
1921-22 
A CCORDIN G to our custom we are presenting names and numbers of persons 
of Negro descent who have received higher 
degrees i n colleges and universities. We 
are not attempting this year to 
give complete statistics until later 
as we go to press too soon after 
Commencement to get full returns. 
Also to our great regret we must 
omit high schools. The number of 
high school graduates has become 
so large that it is impossible for 
us to keep track of them within 
reasonable limits. We may be able 
to take some note of them in future 
numbers. 
PROFESSORS AND FELLOWS 
The most outstanding occurrence 
of the year is the appointment of 
Julia n H . Lewis of Chicago, Illinois, as assistant professor of pathology in the University of Chicago. Dr. Lewis was born in Illinois in 1891 of parents who were 
both teachers in the public schools. 
He was graduated from the Uni ­
versity of Illinois in 1911, receiving 
his M.A . in physiology in 1912. He 
was a teaching Fellow in the University of Chicago from 1912 to 
1915, receiving his Ph.D. in pathology and physiology in 1915. In 
1914 he received the Ricketts' prize 
of $250 for "presenting the best results in research in pathology or 
bacteriology." In 1917 he received 
the degree of M.D . from the Rush 
Memoria l College, together wit h the 
Benjamin Rush medal valued at $50 which is 
given annually to the member of the graduating class "who passes the highest examination i n every department of medicine". 
JULIA N H . LEWI S 
108 R. C. JACKSO N 
A.B. , Indiana 
H . M . SMIT H 
A.B. , Colgate 
THEODOR E B. NIX , JR. 
A.B. , Colorado 
ARTHU R F. REDDIN G 
A.B. , N . Y . City 
L. BEATRIC E MORTO N 
A.B. , Cincinnati 
K. V. LAMBKIN S 
A.B. , Cincinnati 
LOUISE MASON 
A.B. , Hunter 
L . S. HAR T 
A.B. , Williams 
CATHERIN E GRIGSBY 
A.B. , Smith 
ALIC E I. BROW N 
B.S., N. Y . University 
T, T. RILE Y 
A.B. , Northwestern 
JAME S A. GARDINE R 
B.A. , Fa . State 
GEORG E R. DORSE Y 
A.B. , Michigan 
RUSSEL L DAVI S 
B.S., Case School 
STERLIN G A. BROW N 
A.B. , Williams 
R, A. HAREWOO D 
A. B. , Illinois 
109 110 TH E CRISIS 
EDWAR D PORTE E DAVI S 
From 1917 to 1922 Dr. Lewis was in ­
structor i n the Department of Pathology i n 
the University of Chicago and member of 
the Sprague Memoria l Institute for medical 
research. His publications, which are about 
twenty i n number, deal mostly wit h serology, which is the study of serum injection 
for the prevention of disease. A t present 
he is also studying the causes of cancer. 
Durin g the late world wa r he was first lieutenant and was assigned to the University 
of Chicago to investigate means of protection against poisoning during the manufacture of munitions. The Sprague Institute 
has granted him a fund for investigation 
on pathology among Negroes i n all countries. 
Dr. Lewis married Miss Ev a Overton of 
Chicago i n 1919. He is pathologist of the 
Provident Hospital, a member of the Sigma 
Xi , the honorary national scientific fra ­
ternity, of the Alph a Omega Alpha , the 
honorary national medical fraternity; the 
Illinois Academy of Science; the Chicago 
Pathological Society and the Chicago Medical Society; also of the colored fraternities, 
the Alph a Ph i Alph a and the Sigma P i Phi. 
Edwar d Porter Davis, head of the Department of German in Howard University, has 
been appointed Fellow i n German i n the 
University of Chicago for 1922-23. Uni ­
versity Fellows are nominated by the Professor of the Department, recommended by 
the President and elected by the trustees 
''The candidate must have attained proficiency in some department. In general he 
should have spent at least one year in resident study after receiving his Bachelor degree. In making appointment special 
weight is given to dissertations indicating 
the candidates' ability to conduct original 
investigation." Mr . Davis was born in 
Charleston, S. C , educated at Aver y and 
Howard, and has received his Master's degree from Chicago. He has received one 
year's leave of absence from Howar d to 
cover the period of his fellowship at the 
University of Chicago. 
Dr. William S. Quinland, assistant in 
Pathology at the Brigham Hospital, Boston, 
and for three years holder of a Rosenwald 
Fellowship i n Bacteriology and Pathology 
at Harvard , has been appointed head of the 
department of Pathology at Meharr y Medical College. 
J. A . Lane was graduated i n veterinary 
medicine from Ohio State University i n 
1921. He made high grades i n the State of 
Ohio Civi l Service examinations and has 
been appointed Fiel d Veterinarian for the 
State of Ohio. (Alph a Ph i Alpha.) 
PROFESSIONAL DEGREES 
Harvard University graduates three men 
in law: Charles H . Houston, Ph i Beta Kap ­
pa of Amherst, who was elected in 1921 as 
one of the editors of the Harvar d La w Review, an unprecedented honor. He belongs 
to the Alph a Ph i Alpha ; Lama r Perkins, a 
graduate of Lincoln and also a member of 
the Alph a Ph i Alpha ; Jesse S. Heslip, a 
graduate of Howard. 
Yale University graduates two students 
from the La w School: Jasper A . Atkins, 
graduate of Fis k and elected to the Board 
of the Editors of the Yal e La w Journa l in 
1920, having maintained an average of A 
during his first year. He is Grand Basileus 
of the Omega Psi Phi . John F . Williams. 
Mr. Williams has also been for two years a 
member of the Editoria l Board of the Yal e 
La w Journa l and received the Waylan d debating prize i n 1921. 
The Northwestern University School of CICERO C. SIMMONS 
A.B. , Arizona 
LAMA R PERKIN S 
LL.B. , Harvard 
CORNELIU S JOHNSON 
S.B., Harvard 
FRAN K E . BOWLE S 
A.B. , Illinois 
R. C. CRUMP 
LL.B. , St. Paul 
M . E . GOODE 
A.M. , Pennsylvania 
JULI A RUMFOR D 
A.B. , Hunter 
JOH N F. WILLIAM S 
LL.B. , Tal e 
HARCOUR T A. TYNE S 
A.B. , City of New York 
KATHARIN E ROBINSON 
A. B. , Wellesley 
WILL A L. HARRISO N 
B. S., Cincinnati 
JAME S W. PRYO R 
B.S., Kansas State 
WILLIA M POWEL L 
B.S., Illinois 
JASPE R ATKIN S 
LL.B. , Yal e 
SIMONE CHAPOTEA U 
B.A. , France 
ROBER T W. CHEER S 
S.T.B. , Boston 
111 112 TH E CRISIS 
La w graduates Carter W . Wesley with the 
degree of Juris Doctor. Wesley is from 
Fis k University and since February has 
been connected wit h the law firm of Stewart and Corbitt of Muskogee, Oklahoma. 
Ohio State University has the followingprofessional graduates : N . L . Barnett, 
M.D. , J. H . Wilson, M.D. , E . E . Simpson, 
LL.B. , H . S. Lindsay, Pharmacy; S. M . 
Greene, Pharmacy. Mr . Greene was a 
member of the Pharmaceutical Association 
and the football squad (Kapp a Alph a Psi). 
University of Pennsylvania graduates L . 
F. Miller, in Law. 
The University of Minnesota graduates 
P. Eugene Davenport as B.S. 
Boston University graduates the folowing students : 
Irwi n Tillma n Dorch, LL.B. ; 
George Washington Gregory, 
LL.B. ; Robert Wesley 
Cheers, S.T.B. ; George Ar -
nett Singleton, S.T.B. ; Peyton Elliott Womack, S.T.B.; 
John Herman Bougs, M.D. ; 
Willis Gittens Price, M.D. ; 
A . W . Easton, LL.B . 
Tufts College graduates 
C. A . Hays, i n medicine. 
New York University graduates Demerald Williams as 
LL.B. , and two women, Mrs. 
Ann a Jones Robinson and 
Miss Eni d Thorpe as Juris 
Doctor. Both these women are graduates 
of Hunter. 
Howard University graduates 22 Doctors 
of Medicine, 27 Dentists, 19 Pharmacists, 56 
Bachelors of Law, 3 Bachelors of Divinity . 
Meharry Medical College graduates 32 
Doctors of Medicine, 43 Doctors of Dental 
Surgery, 42 Pharmacists and 6 trained 
nurses. The names of those graduating i n 
Medicine are Garland N . Adamson, Ernest 
F . Alleyne, Oscar L . Barland, Theodore 
Blake, Wilhelmina B. Bowles, Emerson W . 
Brown, Perry M . Brown , Roscoe C. Bryant, 
Herman H . Clay James A . Crooke, Rodman 
F . Doyle, Alfre d C. Dungee, Frederick DFunderburg, William B. Glenn, James M . 
Holloway, Richar d H . Jackson, James H . 
Lewis, Andrew J. Love, Cassell A . Mott, 
James M . McGriff, Jr., Lee M . Owen, Titus 
M . Perry, Linwood L . Rayford, James W . 
Ross, Braxton R. Seiden, Edwar d C. Smith, 
William M . Smith, Jackson P . Taylor, Price 
Terrell, Lucilius C. Youngblood, Walte r A . 
Zuber. James H . Lewis was the ranking 
scholar of the class. He was educated at 
Wheaton Academy and Wheaton College, 
Illinois. He graduated from Meharr y wit h 
highest honors having made for the four 
years the general average of 93 3/10 per 
cent. He enters the Cit y Hospita l No. 2 of 
St. Louis, Missouri, as interne. 
Wilberforce University graduated 5 
Bachelors of Divinit y as follows: Gertrude 
Donaway, Robert H . Gross, T. C. Hammons, 
Hard y Haywood, Arthu r Morris. 
L . B. Bake r was graduated from the Chicago Medical School. 
R. C. Crump was graduated from the St. Paul College of Law. 
A . E . Greene was graduated in pharmacy from the 
Massachusetts College of 
Pharmacy. He received highest honors in materia medica 
with distinction in chemistry 
and bacteriology. 
Temple University, Phila ­
delphia, had the following 
graduates: W. M . Bishop, 
M.D. ; R. N . Gordon, D.D.S ; 
J. R. Hackney, D.D.S. ; E . A . 
Bennett, Ph.G. ; W . N . Bowser, Ph.G ; G. L . Brown , 
Ph.G. ; M . N . Gibbs,, Ph.G. ; 
C. L . Holland, Ph.G. ; P. L . Martin , Ph.G. ; 
J. H . Patterson, Ph.G. ; S. L . Scott, Ph.G. ; 
W. H . Wormley, Ph.G. 
Gammon Seminary graduates 3 Bachelors of Divinity , James Edwar d Carraway, A.B. ; Timothy Bertram Echols, 
A.B. ; Arthu r Buxton Keeling, A.B . Mr . 
Keeling graduated with highest honors from 
Clark i n 1920. 
The Virginia Theological Seminary graduates 3 Bachelors of Divinit y and 7 Bachelors of Theology. 
Morehouse College graduated 3 Bachelors 
of Divinity . 
Virginia Union University graduates 2 
Bachelors of Divinit y and 8 Bachelors of 
Theology. 
Roger Williams graduates one Bachelor 
of Theology. 
Allen University graduates 2 Bachelors 
of Divinity. 
JAME S H . LEWI S ARTHU R B. KEELIN G 
B.D. , Gammon 
S. M . JENKIN S 
B.S., Paine 
LUCILL E B. HERRO N 
B.A. , Wisconsin 
ANTONI E E . GREEN E 
Ph.B. , Mass. Pharmacy 
MAR Y C. CARROL L 
A. B. , Benedict 
VIVIA N E. BEL L 
B. S., Knoxville 
BERNIC E A. BROW N 
Worcester Ar t 
DON D. GOODLOE 
M,A. , Harvard 
D, M. HENDRICKSO N 
M.A. , Columbia 
ENI D T. THORP E 
J.D. , N . Y . University 
ANN A J . ROBINSON 
J.D. , N. Y . University 
ARTHU R P. DAVI S 
Hampton 
ALEX . J . BRICKLE R 
M.E. , Colorado 
L. B. BAKE R 
M.D. , Chicago Medical 
JOH N H . CALHOUN , JR. 
Hampton 
D. H . WILLIAM S 
LL.B. , N . Y . University 
113 114 THE CRISIS 
NORTHERN COLLEGES 
Harvard—S.B., Cornelius L . Johnson, Bi ­
ology (Alph a Ph i Alpha). A.M. , Don D. 
Goodloe, Philosophy (Howard University 
A.B. ) B.S. i n Engineering, Raymond Jackson, an A.B . of Western Reserve. A . G. 
Smith, S.B., i n Metallography. He is a 
graduate of Talladega and did excellent 
work. 
Columbia.—Robinson M . Haden, Master 
of Arts i n Chemistry. He graduated as 
pharmacist i n 1919 having received the Lascoff prize which carried with it honorary 
membership in the New Yor k State Pharmaceutical Association. He received his 
A . B. from Columbia in 1921. (Kapp a Alph a 
Psi.) A.M. , L . P. Jackson, i n history. A.M. , 
Miss D. M . Hendrickson i n economics. A.M. , 
Miss S. Elizabeth Townsend. B.S., Florence Coffer Willis. 
Indiana—A.B., Robert C. Jackson, Economics. 
Michigan—B.A., George R. Dorsey, Edu ­
cational Administration (Kapp a Alph a 
Psi). 
Southern California—A.B., Rut h Prince, 
S. A . Beane. 
Colgate—A.B., H . M . Smith, completed 
course i n three years with A average (Omega Psi Phi). 
Nebraska—A.B., William N . Johnson, 
Dorothea M . Nelson, Sirild a B. Spicer; 
B. F.A. , Aaro n Douglas. 
Wellesley—A.B., Katharine Robinson, 
Margare t Allen . 
Smith—A.B., Catherine V . Grigsby. 
Ohio State—B.A., and B.Sc , Sedonia Rotan; B.A. , Alexander I. McCown ; B.Sc , 
Bernice N . Copeland. 
Pennsylvania—A.M., Mar y E . Goode. 
Radcliffe—A.B., Mariett a 0 . Bonner. 
Washington—B.S., Lodie M . Biggs. 
Colorado—M.E., Alexander Brickler. He 
was the star two-mile man on the University of Colorado track team and won first 
place in the Rocky Mountain News Mara ­
thon this year. This is the fourth year he 
has competed i n this race, and he has won a 
place each time. 
Syracuse—B.A., Maeme Moon ; B.S., 
Rosamond Alston. 
University of Cincinnati—B.S., Will a L . 
Harrison ; A.B. , Katherine Lambkins; Graduate Diploma in Education, Francis Lesley and Helen C. Walker; B.A. , Lena B. 
Morton. 
College of the City of New York—B.S., 
Aubr e DeLambert Maynard ; A.B. , Arthu r 
F . Redding; A.B. , Harcourt Adderly Tynes. 
Hunter College—A.B., Louise Mason, Ju ­
li a Rumford, Lucil e Spence. 
Pennsylvania State—B.S., Daniel B. Taylor; B.A. , James A . Gardiner, who finish:.! 
the course in 3 1/2 years. 
New York University—Bachelor of Commercial Science, Lucius Smith ; Master of 
Business Administration, Clarence B. Curley, Wilme r F . Lucas; B.S. , Alic e I. Brown. 
Kansas State Agricultural—B.S., in Me ­
chanical Engineering, James W. Pryor. 
Illinois—A.B., Mar y Lorene Barnett, 
English ; A.B. , Vivia n Elizabeth Hicks, 
English ; B.S. , Willia m Jenifer Powell; 
A.B. , Richard Alexander ' Harewood; A.B. , 
Fran k Edwar d Bowles, Economics and History; A.B. , Ear l Ryder, Chemistry and Bacteriology. 
Williams—A.B. Sterling A . Brown , who 
entered Williams College from Dunbar, 
Washington, D. C , September, 1918; won 
prize in Sophomore year; won prize in 
Latin , and Ph i Beta Kapp a Ke y i n Junior 
year; won prize i n Graves Essay Contest 
Senior year; won $600 Fellowship i n Senior 
year awarded on scholarship basis. Anticipates doing graduate work i n Harvar d Uni ­
versity. A.B. , LeRo y Hart. 
Northwestern—A.B., Traqueelia Riley, 
Warre n Williams. 
California — A.B. , William Alexander 
Johnson, Ida Louise Jackson, Ellis O'Nea l 
Knox ; A.M. , Vivia n Costroma Osborne 
Marsh , Anthropology. 
Case School—B.S., in Chemical Engineering, R. H . Davis. Mr . Davis received his 
A.B . from Western Reserve i n 1920. 
Arizona—A.B., Cicero C. Simmons. 
Colorado College—A.B., Theodore B. Nix , 
Jr. 
Temple—B.S. in Education, William Griffin. 
The University of Wisconsin graduates 
Miss L . B. Herron as Bachelor of Arts. 
The University of Kansas graduates the 
following Bachelors of Arts: Norva l P. 
Barksdale, DeKoven French, Lois O .Hill , 
Burt A . Mayberry, Henr y N . Stone and 
Helen V . White . Matthew E . Carroll, Jr., 
received the degree of Master of Arts. 
Western Reserve University graduate s TH E CRISIS 115 
Stanley E. Brown as Bachelor of Arts from 
Adelbert College. 
University of Pittsburgh graduates James 
S. Nicholas as Bachelor of Chemistry; 
James H . Bynoe, Harr y Webber, William 
C. War d and William H . Robinson as Bachelors of Science. 
French Department of Education, Paris, 
France, Mile . Simone Chapoteau, 1921 , A.B . 
COLORE D COLLEGE S 
The following graduated from the college 
department of Fisk University: Richard 
H . Harris, Hatti e E . Walker, Robert G. 
Fletcher, Matti e H . Rowan, Mannie L . 
Owen, Miria m Atkins, Mar y B. Jackson, 
Willia m M . Jones, Charlotte L . McFall , 
Ulysses G. Gibson, Thomas P. Harris, Jr., 
Hubert E . Mitchell, Alvi n K . Smith, James 
G. King , Alm a A . Oakes, Ethe l S. Robinson, 
Arthurene N . Scott, John D. Whitaker, Jr., 
Eunic e G. Brickhouse, Lucil e H . Caruthers, 
Vern a M . Guinn, Mott a L . Sims, Catherine 
J. Watkins, Blanche M . Smith, Nelli e S. 
Baker, Samuel J. Flanagan, Charles W . 
Jones, Alvi n H . Moss, Joseph J. Blount, 
Elenor a Coleman, Gaston T. Cook, Charlotte P. DeBerry, Edmond W . Fortson, 
Ann a G. Fraser, Minni e B. Gilbert, Earlin e 
L . Good, Maude E . Green, Pearl R. Hay -
man, Horatio W . O'Bannon, Louise W. Rochelle, Orlando W . Stewart, Huld a B. Ware , 
Robert S. White , Jr. 
Howard University graduates 2 Masters 
of Arts, 4 2 Bachelors of Arts; 6 2 Bachelors of Science and 4 Bachelors of Music . 
The following graduated from the College Department of Wilberforce University: 
George J. Banks B.S. , Albert L . Brown, 
A . B. ; Theodore I. Brown , B.S. ; Bernice M 
Cable, B.S . i n Ed. ; Gertrude A . Clarke, 
B. S;; Ernest F . Clarkson, B.S. ; Ann a L . 
Dorsey, A.B. ; Grace W . Edwards, B.S. ; 
Jani e E . Everett, B.S. in Ed. ; Alroma M . 
Ford , B.S . i n Ed. ; Fran k L . Flake , B.S. in 
Ed. ; Clarence W . Galloway, B.S. ; Ralph 
Gayden, B.S. ; Prathe r J. Hauser, A.B. ; 
Josephine B. Hill , B.S. i n Ed. ; William K . 
Hopes, A.B. ; H . Hanniba l Hull , A.B. ; Samuel B . Hutchinson, B.S. ; Pauline K . Johnakms, B.S. ; Edn a B. Johnson, B.S. ; Mari e 
J McNeal, A.B. ; Alphonso A . McPheeters, 
B.S. ; Daniel C . Morrison, B.S. ; June E . 
Moss, A.B . i n Ed. ; Dorsey T. Murray , A.B. ; 
Samuel C. Packer, B.S. ; C. Milliar d Perry, 
E.S. ; Eliz a A . Robinson, A.B. ; Ralp h H . 
Scull, B.S. ; Alexander M . Shearin, B.S. ; 
Ethelyne Smith, A.B . in Ed. ; Wallis Townsend, A.B . ; Marcell a Wallace, B.S . 
Lincoln University graduated 2 8 Bachelors of Art . Atlanta graduated 1 5 Bachelors of Ar t and 2 3 from the Norma l Department which comprises two years of a college course. Talladega College graduated 
2 6 Bachelors of Art . Spelman graduated 
one Bachelor of Art . Virginia Union graduated 8 Bachelors of Ar t and 4 Bachelors 
of Science. Virginia T. S. and College graduated 2 Bachelors of Art . Tougaloo graduated one Bachelor of Art . Knoxville had 
the following college graduates: Inez M . 
Boyd, Ralph W. Bullock, J. Herman Daves, 
Andrew J. Taylor, A.B. ; Vivia n F . Bell, Ar -
vella Pickett, B.S . Southern graduated 3 
Bachelors of Art . Clark University, Atlan-. 
ta, graduated 6 Bachelors of Art . Shaw 
University had the following graduates : 
A.B. , Alm a Adams, George F . Allen , Bessie 
Broadnax, Berth a Boaz, Willia m R. Collins, 
Samuel H . Mumford, Sar a Wooten. B.S. : 
Fleetwood Bowens, Joseph Cowan, Wile y 
Crump, Henr y R. Furlonge, Julius High , 
Roya l D. Keene, Clarence Sumner and 
Ezr a Turner. Hartshorn graduated 3 
Bachelors of Ar t and 1 Bachelor of Science. 
New Orleans graduated 3 Bachelors of Pedagogy. Lane College graduated A.B. , 
Vashti Barnett, Frankli n Myles Dickey, 
Dewey Washington Ragan, Andrew Washington Carter, Abraham H . Rice, James 
Adams W. Hutson, Brawlus Benj. F . White. 
Roger Williams graduated 6 Bachelors of 
Art . Edward Waters graduated one Bachelor of Art . Benedict graduated the following : A.B. , Rosa L . Brown, Tressie J. Boyd, 
Mar y C. Carroll, Robert L . Robinson, Clarence A . Rubens, Cecil B. Williams. Livingstone College graduated A.B. , Luc y B. 
Adams, Beresford Cole, Mar y Graham, Le ­
roy Hall , Sallie V . Headen, Herman Howell, 
Raymond Jones, Rosalie Massey, John Moreland. Wiley University's college graduating class contained 2 9 ; the ranking member was Robert Smith. Morehouse College 
graduated 2 0 Bachelors of Arts. Florida 
A. and M. College graduates 6 Bachelors of 
Science. Morris Brown University graduated 9 Bachelors of Arts, with Walte r M . 
Clar k as ranking student. Allen University 
graduates 3 Bachelors of Arts. TH E FRENCH COLONIAL EXPOSITION A T 
MARSEILLES 
WILLIA M S. NELSO N 
"TODAY, " declared M . Sarraut, French 
Ministe r of the Colonies, upon the 
occasion of the inauguration of the French 
Colonial Exposition i n Marseilles, "on the 
soil of France, here where are gathered all 
of her colonies, acknowledged children of 
the mother-land, amid the fascinating decorations of these palaces, of these temples, 
of these citadels, of these pagodas, of these 
mosques, of these monuments, each of which 
is a true and pure visage of a tradition and 
a race, we behold a striking résumé, the imposing recital of the success and the force 
of the French Colonial Empire , attesting 
before the universe to the vigor, the perseverance and the dignity of the national genius. Would that Franc e would come here, 
would regard, would meditate!" 
An d even before the desire of M . Sarraut 
found echo beyond the exposition walls 
France was coming, was admiring, was 
meditating. Proud fathers pointed out to 
their sons the magnificence of France's possessions; stalwart youths dreamed dreams 
before the invitation which read: "The development of the lands of greater France 
offers to the young generation occasion to 
seek a marvelous adventure worthy of their 
curiosity and of their patriotism." Old and 
young regarded and meditated upon the 
panorama of the fabulous riches, of 
"France's granary. " 
An d not only France but the world was 
regarding and meditating. Ever y principa l 
European nationality could be recognized i n 
the crowds that pressed; also America . 
More to be remarked were the French colonials, Senagalese, Malays of Madagascar, 
Annamites and Laotians of Indo-China, 
Moroccans, Algerians, Tunisians, all i n the 
uniform of the French army or the brilliant 
costumes of their native lands, admiring and 
meditating with interest upon that marvelous synthesis of their own lands and 
life. 
116 TH E MARSEILLES EXPOSITION 11 7 
It is the Palace of the Ministe r of the 
Colonies that serves as an introduction, a 
real index to the exposition. Magnificent 
Gobelin tapestries, precious souvenirs, paintings, trophies, designs, admirably strike the 
theme which the entire exposition is destined 
to develop. The first chord of that development is the testimony to France's colonizing genius. We read: "The colonial genius 
of Franc e has founded successively two 
grand empires. The old régime conquered 
Canada, Louisiana, the Antilles, India, and 
established many settlements. A t the end of 
the eighteenth century these colonies were 
lost. Since that time we have, i n less than 
one hundred years, created a second empire 
more magnificent than the first." A long 
hall presents i n brief outline the history 
of each colony. There is traced the long 
series of conquests and annexations that 
have crowded the last century. Portraits 
recall those military commanders or civil officials, to whose audacious leadership or colonizing ability are credited the most celebrated exploits. Photographs and paintings 
depict realistically life i n the colonies. The 
murderous arms employed by the natives 
are displayed i n a generous quantity and attract prolonged attention. 
A room is devoted to the Great Wa r and the 
part played therein by the colonies. Above 
the entrance is written: "Ou r colonials, 
from the depths of the thickets, warmed 
the hearts of the French during peace wit h 
that flame of heroism, the rays of which 
during the wa r shone upon the world. " On 
one side of the room, a monument to 
"the dead, the wounded, the mutilated, the 
mobilized", on the other, the painting of a 
cemetery where cross on cross marks the 
resting place of native Frenchmen, and 
French colonials sleeping side by side; in 
the room ahead, a panorama representing 
the Senegalese taking Douamont, the 24th 
of October, 1916; everywhere, paintings, 
photographs, standards, all paying tribute 
to the service rendered to Franc e by her colonies during the war. 
In the corner of one room a series of panoramas, wit h detailed explications, set forth 
the great results achieved i n the fight 
against disease i n the colonies, by the in ­
troduction of modern medical methods, and a 
placard reminds that while developing the 
lands "it is necessary for us to carry to our 
loyal native populations the medical aid of 
which they have need in order to protect 
them against the terrible endemic diseases 
which decimate them". 
Another room is devoted to a synopsis of 
the products of the French colonies. Their 
numbers defy enumeration. We count alone 
159 specimens of woods. An d the following 
is a résumé of the extent of the French colonial empire: surface 6 1/4 million miles (19 
times the surface of France) ; population 
50 millions; commercial movements 2 billion 
dollars. 
An d the Palace of the Ministe r of the 
Colonies is but an index to that which the 
exposition presents. Eac h colony or group 
of colonies has its palace, each of large proportions and of fine architectural beauty, 
each a faithful reproduction of the architecture characteristic of the colony it is designed to represent, the interior of each presenting by charts, photographs, concrete 
specimens the extent of the colony's natural 
resources and the variety of its human types. 
The Grand Palace of French West Afric a 
is a monumental pile, red like the burning 
soil of the tropics, dominated by a colossal 
tower, its sober lines rising to a great 
height as we are told rise the Sudanese 
structures at Jenne and Timbuktu. Withi n 
the wall is a native village where West Africans, brought to the exposition for the 
purpose, fashion by native methods a variety of curious objects. The interior of 
the palace graphically tells the story of the 
illimitable resources of Frenc h West Af ­
rica, of its riches i n oils, in textiles, in 
woods, etc. Charts show the enormous increase in the importation of oils by France 
and recall the nourishing of France during 
the wa r by the oils of her colonies. The important exposition of woods suggests that 
the future wil l find France depending less 
upon the forests of other countries than 
upon the rich and practically untouched forests of her colonies. The effort of France 
to cultivate cotton in West Afric a affords 
an interesting study. A project, including 
the employment of a system of irrigation 
in the Nige r valley based upon a study of 
that successfully employed in the valley of 
the Nile , is under serious consideration, and 
according to colonial authorities, if successful, should have for the colonies and for 
France incalculable consequences in that 
France would be relieved in part of the 
heavy duties she now pays to other coun-118 TH E CRISIS 
tries. Alread y West Africa's exports of 
cotton have increased since 1906 by 600%. 
Eac h of the colonies of French West Afric a is provided with a booth i n the palace 
i n which are displayed attractively the products of the particular colony—the Ivory 
Coast with its beautiful products of ivory, 
Guinea, Senegal, Dahomey, Togo, Kamerun, 
the French Congo, each making its contribution to a rich and varied whole. 
Nort h Africa . The palaces of Morocco, 
Algeria , and Tunis present a panorama, 
indeed interesting and instructive. The 
walls of the palace of Morocco inclose the 
reproduction of a quarter in a Moroccan 
town where the Moroccans and Arabs fashion before the eyes of the curious innumerable objects of art. In the entrance hall of 
this palace hangs a portrait of the Sultan, 
who, according to an inscription on the wall 
"has been permitted to retain his rights 
and prerogatives as sovereign and his religious prestige as chief of the Mohammedan community", and, who, but recently 
avowed for Franc e on the part of Morocco, 
Morocco's "indefectible attachment". Nea r 
the portrait of the Sultan hangs that of 
Marshall Lyautey, the highest French official in Morocco, whose modest duties in ­
clude "the reorganizing of the administration of the country and the methodical utilization of its riches". On every hand charts 
call attention to the manner i n which 
Franc e is utilizing the natura l resources of 
Morocco. Exports are shown to have in ­
creased i n value from 34 million dollars i n 
1911, the year before Franc e assumed the 
protectorate, to 254 million dollars in 1921. 
A place of importance is given to an explicit statement of the medical aid France 
has carried to Morocco. The reduction of 
mortality is shown to have been from 30.03% 
per 1,000 men i n 1912 to 18% i n 1920; consultations have increased from 400,000 to 
1,400,000 during the same period; and hospital groups have increased from 32 to more 
than 400 thousand. Relative to the instruction of the natives i n Morocco we find that 
the school attendance has increased from 
an average of 210 i n 1912 to 4,405 i n 1921. 
The theme of the display i n the palace of 
Algeria , as wit h that of all the palaces i n 
reality, is the great potentiality i n natural 
resources of the colony, on the one hand, 
and on the other, the miracle of development wrought by Franc e since her occupation. It is a theme convincingly presented. 
Specimens of the fine cereals produced in 
Algeria , of its wines, its oils, its cork, its 
woods, esparto grass skins, wool, tobacco, 
are all artistically arranged and accompanied by explanations to guide the interested. The goal announced by those responsible for the colonizing of Algeri a is " a 
development, by an appropriate colonization 
of the soil of Algeri a to the same fecundity 
of that of the best lands i n the Mediterranean basin". 
Behind the walls of the palace of Tunis 
is reproduced a native street, tramped by 
brilliantly uniformed Tunisian soldiers and 
flanked by the booths of native merchants 
displaying a tempting variety of handworked articles. The palace is replete wit h 
an exposition of the principa l products 
of Tunis, its carpets, sponges, tobaccos, 
narghiles or Turkis h pipes, its potteries 
and objects in copper and precious metals, its 
wines, dates and fish. Exportations from 
Tunis are shown to have increased by 400% 
from 1912 to 1921. A reproduction of a 
corner i n the city of Tunis by means of a 
panorama, wit h its Ara b market and numerous small merchants picturesquely sheltered, offers an interesting glance at life 
characteristically Tunisian. 
The Palace of Madagascar, of a quiet 
unimposing beauty, reproducing the palace 
of the Queen Ranavalona, the last i n Mada ­
gascar, is interesting i n its story of the 
variety of the products of that tropical 
island and of the life of its fifteen or more 
tribes. The exports of coffee have increased 
from 93 tons i n 1904 to 1,400 tons i n 1919. 
In 1902 Madagascar produced 12 tons of 
vanilla ; her yearly production at present is 
200 tons, the total production of vanill a in 
the world being 600 tons per annum. In 
1910 Madagascar imported rice for her own 
use; during the past few years her annual 
exports of rice have passed 3,000 tons. 
The palace of the colonies possessing autonomy, including the Islands of Réunion, 
Martinique, Guadeloupe, the French West 
Indies, and the French colonies of the ocean, 
Saint-Peter and Miquelon and New Calcedonia, together wit h the Palace of Syria , 
presents, as can be imagined, a picture of 
natural resources of inestimable value and 
of races and tribes of infinite variety. The 
beautiful carpets made i n Syri a and the delightfully beautiful articles of silk are such 
as to please the connoisseur with an appreciation however nicely judicious. TH E MARSEILLES EXPOSITION 119 
Monumental indeed is the Palace of IndoChina . Built largely with funds supplied 
by the natives (each colony having contributed to the expense of its exposition), designed to throw into relief the immense importance of this colony which Lor d Northcliffe describes as "one of the most beautiful 
domains of the earth, the richest in Asia , 
the most remarkable by its striking variety 
of riches, the land of the young", the palace, temporary i n structure though it is, of 
an architecture at the same time strangely 
complicated and beautifully harmonious, 
"achieves an effect without precedent in 
the magnificence of expositions". It is said 
to be "the faithful reconstitution of the temple of Angkor-Vat—the celebrated Cambodian vestiges of the Khme r art, which in ­
clude the most grandiose ruins of the 
world" . Nea r the palace is an Annamite 
and a Laotian village, which afford a glance 
at the life i n Indo-China. The interior of 
the palace presents i n a no less striking 
fashion than the palace itself the invaluable 
prize France has in Indo-China. 
Completing the exposition are numerous 
other palaces presenting France's industrial 
life, her provincial arts, her progress i n automobile and aeroplane manufacture, these, 
wit h the palaces of the colonies, with the embellishments of flower gardens, groves, and 
fountains, present a whole characteristically 
harmonious and surpassingly beautiful. 
The means at the disposal of the exposition management consist, not only in the 
admirable concrete display that has been 
created, but comprise also a series of congresses to be held at various intervals between the inauguration of the exposition 
in Apri l and its closing i n November. The 
first congress will be held the later part of 
June and wil l treat the general subject 
of agriculture in the colonies; the second to 
be held in Jul y wil l have for its subject the 
various agencies of development as the railroads and the navigation companies; the 
third, in September, wil l treat the question 
of public health and general social uplift 
i n the colonies ; and the last, i n October, 
wil l be concerned with the very important 
subject of colonial organization, to include 
among others, the discussion of colonial administration and legislation and technical 
and professional instruction for the natives. 
We visited the French Colonial Exposition 
i n search of the answer to three questions: 
what is the nature of the natura l resources 
of the French colonies and to what extent 
are these being developed by France ; what 
is the attitude of Franc e toward her colonial peoples; and finally, what wil l be 
her policy in the future: to liberate in time 
her colonies or to control them indefinitely? 
We found everywhere a clear answer to the 
first query. Questioned on the last two 
points one of the officials of the exposition 
declared that the policy of France toward 
her colonies was certainly one of munificence. "No t only have we developed the 
lands," he declared, "but we are developing 
the people and giving to them a part in the 
government in the proportion i n which they 
are able to exercise it. " An d we asked, "Ul ­
timately, what will be the policy of France, 
to liberate her colonies, or to maintain her 
control perpetually?" "Ah! " he responded, 
with a forbidding gesture, " I can only say 
wit h Victo r Hugo, 'L'avenir est à Dieu (the 
future is in the hands of God)'. " 
M . Sarraut, Ministe r of the Colonies, summarizes his idea of what should be the colonizing program of France as follows: "Ou r 
immense colonial empire is an inexhaustible 
reservoir of material and mora l resources. 
This our colonies proved during the war by 
giving for the defense of the mother country, their heroic soldiers and the products 
of their soil. The mother-country has contracted, as the head, toward the colonial 
populations, obligations, the accomplishment 
of which is in harmony with their interests. 
The future of France, i n reality, depends 
upon the development of the production, of 
the moral conceptions, of the well-being in 
her colonies as well as the realization of 
progress upon her own soil. Indeed, the 
wa r has more closely contracted the Planet. 
It has revealed the rigorous solidarity, economic and social, which binds the continents; 
it has imposed upon the nations the duty to 
insure the intensive development of all lands 
in which they assume the functions of administrator. The program of the development of the colonies as it is understood by 
the Parliament will mark the evolution of 
our colonial policy i n the direction of the 
new material and social realizations toward 
which aspires the world. This project is 
destined to impart a powerful impulse, as 
much for the development of the riches of 
the French colonial domain as for the humane task of civilization pursued by Franc e 
among her subjects and the natives under 
her protection." 120 TH E CRISIS 
An d i n the exposition grounds the newsvenders cried their papers containing the 
discourse of President Milleran d delivered 
in Algeria , which aided me i n the search 
of an answer to my questions. The President declared: "The representatives of 
France in Algeria , of all degrees, must redouble their solicitude and their activity, 
to the end that they may conduct gradually, 
without troubling their beliefs, i n rhythm 
with their own faculties of evolution, the 
populations which they administer, to a 
social, political and economic plane each day 
ameliorated, ceasing never to respond to the 
exigencies of their mentality and their 
traditions. And, " he declared, "between 
France and Algeri a the union is indissoluble." 
We take it that this declaration not only 
expresses the attitude of M . Milleran d toward Algeria , but the attitude of Franc e 
toward the French Colonial Empire . 
A NATIV E VILLAG E 
TREASURE 
GEORGI A DOUGLA S JOHNSO N 
WHE N we count out our gold at the end 
of the day, 
An d have filtered the dross that has cumbered the way ; 
Oh ! what were the hold of our treasury 
then 
Save the love we have shown to the children of men? National Associatio n for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
BLAC K NE W YOR K MARCHE S AGAINS T LYNCHIN G 
A TEXA S HORRO R 
THE Nationa l Association for the Ad -
vancement of Colored People as soon 
as it heard of the burnings and lynchings 
at Kirwin , Texas, sent a special representative there. He has returned with his report and these appear to be the facts : 
A white land-holder named Kin g owns 
many farms i n the vicinity. The town is 
i n a backwoods district and everybody, 
black and white, with only a few exceptions, 
is backward and illiterate. A road runs 
past King's house. Next to Kin g lives an 
old colored man and next to him, a white 
family,—the Prowls (at least that is the 
way we spell it—they themselves did not 
know how it was spelled). King , a man of 
65 years had an orphan grand-daughter who 
was the apple of his eye. She rode to 
school daily past the Prowls and down the 
pike about a mile where there was a consolidated white brick school. 
Between the Prowls and the King s there 
was a long standing feud beginning with 
an accusation by Kin g of cattle stealing 
by the Prowls and culminating two years 
ago i n a murderous attack upon one of 
King's sons by a Prowl who promptly disappeared from the community. Consent for 
Lis return had been asked by the family 
but Kin g offered him "six foot of ground". 
The Prowls swore vengeance and women 
folk of the families quarreled. 
South of Prowls' home and skirted by the 
highway to the schools is a dense, impenetrable thicket. Beyond the thicket and to 
one side is the square of the town with two 
churches, stores and, further on, the railway. 
Still further to the south is the Negro part 
of the town where colored folk work on detached farms owned by Kin g and others. 
Here lived Snap Curley and several other 
colored families. Here too was an old 
121 122 TH E CRISIS 
shack called the Negro school but it was 
not in session. 
One day King's granddaughter failed to 
return from school. He telephoned anxiously and traced her as far as the thicket. He 
said that he had a presentiment that she 
had suffered harm at the hands of the 
Prowls. He sent his colored neighbor down 
to look for her and the neighbor found the 
horse tied by the road but no trace of the 
girl. The black man brought the horse back 
and declares that no sooner had he done this 
than one of the Prowl women upbraided him 
and asked what business he had bringing 
the horse up. 
Then the search began. They found the 
girl in the thicket murdered by knife 
wounds i n the abdomen, but the physician 
found no evidence of rape. Immediately 
the neighborhood gathered. There were 
footsteps leading from the thicket to the 
Prowls' home. One of the three remaining 
Prowl men disappeared but another was arrested. He explained the footsteps as leading from his whiskey still. The sheriff did 
not search for the still. Several parties 
scoured the neighborhood looking for the 
missing Prowl and for any other suspicious 
characters. In the searching party was 
Snap Curley and other colored men. Finally they came to Negro town. By the time 
they got there Snap Curley had disappeared. They claimed that his wife said 
that he had brought home a bloody shirt. 
Immediately he and two other Negroes were 
captured. The King s were urged to kil l them 
immediately, but they did not believe them 
guilty. They were taken to the jail . That 
night the mob came. They beat the sheriff 
black and blue and secured the prisoners. 
They took the prisoners to the square where 
there was an old steel plow. One by one 
the Negroes were seated on the plow, wood 
piled about them and gasoline poured over 
them. They were allowed to burn a while 
and then pulled out by a great wet rope. 
A t last the rope burned and the last man, 
hugging the red hot plow, refused to come 
out. The Prowl arrested was released and 
the whole family, without waiting to sell 
their property, has gone to Oklahoma. 
Afterwar d another Negro was hanged 
and a fifth "disappeared". No one i n town 
believes all the Negroes guilty. Curley 
never confessed. He simply, under torture, 
named his companions. Some think one or 
two may have been hired to do the deed. 
Others think all were innocent. 
LINCOLN, HARDING, JAMES CROW 
AND TAF T 
"I A M calling your attention to the dedication of the Lincol n Memoria l here on 
Memoria l Day. The conditions which confronted us as a race were most shameful. 
Platform tickets had been distributed to 
representative colored citizens. The platform seats which were reserved for the 
whites were chairs and were situated within reasonable distance of the speakers. Back 
of these chairs were the platform seats reserved for colored people. They were roped 
off from those occupied by the whites and 
placed nearly a block away from the memorial i n the grass and weeds. They consisted of rough hewn benches without backs 
or supports. A t the entrance to these seats 
marines were placed who were discourteous 
and even abusive. Some of our people, be 
it said, to their credit, as soon as they saw 
the situation, turned and left the dedication 
rather than submit to the abuses offered. 
Many, we are sorry to say, of our reputable 
colored citizens accepted without a protest 
the indignities heaped upon them. Yo u 
would be surprised if I should mention the 
names of some of those among this number." 
TH E MEMORIA L TO TH E SENAT E 
SO much space was taken u/p i n last 
month's CRISI S by the Memoria l to the 
Senate urging prompt enactment of the 
Dyer Anti-Lynchin g Bill , and the signatures to it, that it was impossible to in ­
clude a number of letters which were printed with the memorial. These letters bring 
the number of governors signing up to 24. 
CRISI S readers know, of course, though it 
was not so stated last month, that all of the 
signatures to the memorial and the following letters were obtained by the national 
office of the N . A . A . C . P. In a number of 
instances individuals have written expressing disappointment that their names were 
not included. In reply it can only be stated 
that signers were asked, not for personal 
reasons, but in order that the weight of N. A. A. C. P. 123 
their signatures, or of their section of the 
country, their religious body or fraternal 
or other organization might lend effectiveness to the memorial. Ha d the signatures 
of all those willin g to sign been included, 
the document would have become utterly 
unwieldy by reason of its size. Those who 
were willin g to sign the memorial, whose 
names did not appear, can still aid the antilynching cause by working unceasingly to 
bring about sentiment favorable to the 
passage of the Anti-Lynchin g Bill . 
The additional letters appended to the memoria l follow: 
"The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon our country throughout the 
civilized world and threatens organized government i n the nation. 
"Legislation which wil l put a stop to such 
atrocities or decrease the number thereof is 
highly commendable. Mob violence has no 
place in the leading civilized nation of the 
world and I earnestly urge the passage of 
Federal legislation to correct this evil. " 
(Signed) ARTHU R M . HYDE , 
Governor of Missouri. 
" I am in thorough sympathy with the 
purposes of the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill , 
and I hope it wil l become a law. " 
(Signed) SAMUE L R . MCKELVIE , 
Governor of Nebraska. 
"The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon our country throughout the 
civilized world and threatens organized government in the nation. 
''In only a few instances has prosecution 
of the lynchers been even attempted. I believe that national action is required to cope 
wit h this evil. The Dye r Anti-Lynchin g 
Bil l was adopted i n the House on January 
26, and the undersigned earnestly urges the 
prompt enactment of this measure." 
(Signed) R. A . NESTOS , 
Governor of Nort h Dakota. 
''The lynching of human beings is the 
most barbarous and villainous practice that 
a supposedly civilized nation wil l permit. 
The only remedy, it appears to me, is to 
have the federal government institute proper legislation to meet it. Disrespect for law 
is the most dangerous element which could 
come into our thought, and there is a growing tendency which must be stifled. Lynch ­
ing shows an absolute disregard for the 
process of law. In places where most of 
the lynchings take place, even the officers 
who are sworn to uphold the law are afraid 
to move in these cases of ruthless murder. 
" I most certainly and emphatically desire 
the passage of proper federal laws to hold 
these crimes to the minimum. " 
(Signed) D . M . DAVIS , 
Governor of Idaho. 
"The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon our country. The House of 
Representatives has passed the Dye r AntiLynchin g Bil l invoking the power of the federal government to end the infamy of 
American mob murder and I earnestly urge 
its prompt enactment by the Senate of the 
United States." 
(Signed) WAD E H . ELLIS , 
Washington, D. C. 
Forme r Assistant to the United 
States Attorney-General. 
" I have not seen the Dye r Bil l and am, 
therefore, unprepared to commit myself 
regarding it. It may or may not propose a 
proper remedy for a serious abuse. I do 
believe, however, that it is the duty of the 
Federal Government to lend its aid in 
stamping out lynching which constitutes, 
perhaps, as serious a violation of the prin ­
ciples of this government as may be found 
anywhere within the country." 
(Signed) EMME T D . BOYLE , 
Governor of Nevada. 
" I am in favor of the enactment of national legislation which wil l tend to prevent the practice of lynching and to assure 
to persons within the jurisdiction of every 
state equal protection of the laws." 
(Signed) EMER Y J. SA N SOUCI, 
Governor of Rhode Island. 
"The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon our country throughout the 
civilized world and threatens organized government in the nation. I favor such legislation as wil l end this mob violence." 
(Signed) WM . D . STEPHENS , 
Governor of California . 124 TH E CRISIS 
"It has come to my attention that a Me ­
morial is being circulated to be presented to 
the United States Senate to urge the enactment of legislation which would make lynching a crime against the United States. I 
am heartily in favor of such legislation." 
(Signed) JOSEP H H . GAINER , 
Mayor, Providence, R. I. 
"Mob law and mob action constitute anarchy in its worst form, being open, flagrant and violent disrespect of and contempt for law and order and the constituted 
authorities. 
"The communities or states which permit 
repeated examples of mob rule, thereby 
demonstrate their inability to maintain law 
and order within their limits, or to protect 
their inhabitants in the enjoyment of the 
human rights guaranteed in the Federal 
Constitution. 
"Therefore, it is the duty of the United 
States Government, under the obligation 
laid upon it by Amendments V and V I of 
the Constitution, to interfere to protect the 
Constitutional rights of its citizens, and to 
provide redress for the relatives, families 
or dependents of the victims of mob action 
against the local, so-called governments 
which fail or refuse to furnish their citizens 
adequate protection." 
(Signed) WM . HAL E THOMPSON , 
Mayo r of Chicago. 
"It appearing that the States cannot all 
be depended on to enact legislation against 
mob murder, I believe that Congress should 
invoke the power of the Federal Government to end that infamy. " 
(Signed) CHARLE S W . ELIOT , 
President Emeritus, Harvar d University. 
"The killin g and burning alive of human 
beings by mobs in the United States is a 
reproach upon a government established on 
the basis of security to life and property, 
and upon a people claiming the most advanced state in civil government. 
''The figures of 3,443 known mob murders 
since 1889 should arouse the Congress of 
the United States to provide immediate and 
effective measures to stamp out this heathenish practice, which if permitted to one 
will extend to all classes. 
"It is to be hoped that the Senate wil l 
give immediate and hearty support to the 
Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bil l passed by the 
House on the 26th of January, 1922, and to 
such procedure I heartily subscribe." 
(Signed) S. F . SNIVELY , 
Mayor, Duluth, Minnesota. 
" I am in favor of this or any law that will 
eliminate lynching or mob violence." 
(Signed) JAS . J . THOMAS , 
Mayor, Columbus, Ohio. 
L A VIE C'EST L A VIE 
JESSI E FAUSE T 
ON summer afternoons I sit 
Quiescent by you in the park, 
An d idly watch the sunbeams gild 
An d tint the ash-trees' bark. 
Or else I watch the squirrels frisk 
An d chaffer in the grassy lane; 
An d all the while I mark your voice 
Breaking wit h love and pain. 
I know a woman who would give 
He r chance of heaven to take my place; 
To see the love-light in your eyes, 
The love-glow on your face! 
An d there's a man whose lightest word 
Can set my chilly blood afire; 
Fulfilment of his least behest 
Defines my life's desire. 
But he wil l none of me. No r I 
Of you. No r you of her. 'Tis said 
The world is full of jests like these— 
I wish that I were dead. The Horizon 
COMPILED BY MADELINE G. ALLISON 
MAR Y MORRI S BURNET T TALBER T 
EIGHT H SPINGAR N MEDALIS T 
Ct The Spingarn gold medal, valued at $100, 
is offered annually by J. E . Spingarn 
through the Nationa l Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People "for the 
highest or noblest achievement by an American Negro during the preceding year." The 
award for the year 1921 goes to Mrs. Mar y 
B. Talbert of Buffalo, Ν. Y . "i n consideration of her services in organizing the women 
of the country so that the debt was paid off 
the home of Frederick Douglass, the home 
restored and made a shrine i n memory of 
the great Douglass ; also because of the fact 
that she represented the colored women of 
Americ a at the International Council of 
Women held in Norway. 
"The award was made specifically for the 
above reasons. However, the Committee 
could not fail to take into consideration also 
the fact that Mrs. Talbert was twice President of the Nationa l Association of Colored 
Women and that all her life she has been 
identified with uplift work, religious and 
civic, and has been a leader of the women of 
her race." 
The seven other holders of the medal 
are: Ernest E . Just, the late Charles Young, 
Harr y T. Burleigh, William S. Braithwaite, 
Archibald H . Grimke, W . Ε. B. DuBois and 
Charles S. Gilpin. 
C Colored citizens of Greenville, South 
Carolina, have purchased a Community Center and are employing a full time community service worker. They raised $1500 in 
a recent drive and have just had a mass 
meeting of over 3000 persons in Textile 
Hall . 
(L The First Standard Bank, Louisville, 
Ky. , reports its condition of Marc h 15, 1922. 
It has capital stock paid in and surplus of 
$110,000, total deposits of $109,676. Joseph 
R. Ra y is cashier. 
C The Colored Savings Bank of Danville, 
Va. , has a capital and surplus of $30,000 
and deposits of $112,000. Watki n Thompson is the president. 
G The Keystone Cooperative Bankin g Association, formed by colored people, have 
opened offices at 1405 South Street, Phila ­
delphia. John T. Asbur y is president and 
F . D. Tucker, secretary. 
125 126 TH E CRISIS 
BISHOP HAMLET T SECRETAR Y PORTE R BISHOP MARTI N BISHOP McKINNE Y 
d Robin City, a colored man of Miami , 
Fla. , rescued a white woman, Mrs. L . D. 
Johnson, from burning. He was given a 
prize by the local Red Cross. 
C A n association of the former internes of 
Freedman's Hospital, consisting of over 150 
doctors, has been formed and has met i n 
Washington. 
C The General Conference of the Colored 
Methodist Episcopal Church has met i n St. 
Louis. Legislation was passed concentrating educational work and assisting the 
POLIC Y DEPARTMENT , LIBERT Y LIF E INSURANC E COMPANY , CHICAGO TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 127 
D U BOIS STUD Y CLUB , COLORADO SPRINGS, COLO. 
building of a theological seminary. The 
law which automatically retires bishops at 
70 years of age was repealed. Fou r new 
bishops were elected. Dr. R. T. Brown, 
president of the Mile s Memoria l College, 
Birmingham; Dr. J. C. Martin , for the 
past ten years book agent of the church 
and reputed to be a man of considerable 
wealth; Rev. J. A . Hamlett, editor of the 
Christian Index and a Master of Arts from 
Northwestern, and Dr. J. W. McKinney , a 
presiding elder and formerly a lawyer. 
Amon g the General Officers elected were 
Rev. H . B. Porter, Publishing Agent; Mr. 
G. F . Porter, Financia l Secretary; Rev. G. 
C. Parker, Edito r of the Christian Index; 
Rev. J. H . Moore, Secretary of Missions. 
• The Great Southern Fir e Insurance 
Company of Atlanta , Ga., a colored company, has $100,000 capital paid in besides 
over $40,000 i n cash. Durin g the last 6 
months of 1921 they wrote $1,715,430 worth 
of fire insurance and paid $5,643 in losses. 
W. C. Thomas is president and J . S. Alle n 
secretary-treasurer. 
• Miss Dorothy C. Boulding, a sophomore 
at Tufts College Medical School has been 
elected to the Zeta Ph i fraternity. This is 
an honor sorority of medical women. Miss 
Boulding is from Norfolk, Virginia , and a 
Bachelor of Science of Simmons College. 
(I Bernard Lewis graduated from high 
school i n Chicago on Thursday and on the 
following Monday was appointed teacher 
of (printing and manual training i n the 
public schools of the city. 
• Mrs. Mar y Hawkins Locke, widow of the 
late Plin y Ishmael Locke, died at the home 
of her son, Professor Alai n Leroy Locke, 
Sunday, Apri l 23, i n her 70th year. The 
deceased was a member of an old Philadelphia family, educated at the Institute for 
Colored Youth, and was for a period of 
thirty-six years a school teacher i n Camden 
and Camden County. Since 1916 she had 
MRS. LOCK E 128 TH E CRISIS 
TH E LINCOL N MEMORIA L 
been retired and was livin g with her son 
i n Washington. 
• In Colorado, Mitchell County, Texas, 
three colored men own nearly 9,000 acres 
of land. D. W . Wallace has 4,800 acres 
with 500 head of cattle, 50 horses and 
mules and 6 Mexican tenant families. Dave 
Robertson has 2,240 acres and 200 head of 
cattle. C. C. Gilroy has 1,200 acres of land 
and 100 head of cattle wit h 2 Mexican 
tenant families. 
• Kojo Tokalou Houenou, a nephew of the 
former kin g of Dahomey has written a book 
on the theory of the formation of languages 
followed by a series of moral reflections 
which has been published in Paris. He says 
of his native land : "Afric a has not yet 
contributed her share to the life of cities 
and to civilization. He r turn wil l come. Beware of those men of bronze; their strength 
and radiancy wil l astound your land of 
mist; theirs is the country of the sun." 
• Alpheus Cary, 7th grade pupil i n the 
colored schools of Richmond gained first 
prize for a poster entitled "Milk , the 
Foundation of the World" . 
• Amon g 500 railway postal clerks P. P. 
Flowers, a colored man of St. Louis, Mo., 
made a score of 113 out of a possible 120 
in revolver practice. The highest score 
was 114. Eight y per cent of the clerks 
were white. 
• The 75th annual report of the Colored 
Orphan Asylum, New York , shows a total 
attendance October 31, 1921, of 272 orphans. 
The expense of operating the institution 
for the last year was $116,950. The land 
and buildings are estimated to be worth 
over $500,000. 
• The number of colored students at the 
College of the Cit y of New Yor k has been 
increasing recently. They have formed the 
Douglass Society, with H . A . Tynes as 
president, and have brought a number of 
colored speakers. They closed the season 
with a concert of Negro music. 
• Mario n Cumbo, the young New Yor k 
'cellist, assisted wit h great success i n Phila ­
delphia at the Pupils' Concert of Edwi n F . 
Hill , the violinist. 
• The Coleridge-Taylor Choral Society presented the ''Atonement" in Washington, 
D. C , with Melvill e Charlton at the organ, 
Mar y L . Europe at the first piano, and 
Mesdames Tibbs, Quivers and Burrell and 
Messrs. Brooks and Wesley as soloists. Professor Roy Tibbs conducted the concert. 
• The Morga n College Dramati c Club presented Shakespeare's "Mid-Summe r Night's TH E HORIZON 129 
MR . GANAWA Y AN D HI S PRIZ E PHOTOGRAPH—"TRANSPORTATION " 
Dream" at the Douglass Theatre, Baltimore, under the direction of Mrs. V . N . 
Jones. 
• A t the commencement of Howar d University, E . E . Slosson delivered the commencement address and the Howard players gave the pantomime "Danse Calinda " 
by Ridgley Torrence. The new $200,000 
dining room was opened to visitors. The 
Howar d players have also presented two 
original plays, "Genifrede" and "The Yel ­
low Tree." 
• Kin g B . Ganaway has been for 17 years 
butler on Lake Shore Drive in Chicago. 
A t the same time he has been an amateur 
photographer and recently in a competition wit h 900 photographers, many of them 
professionals he won the first prize for the 
photograph "The Spirit of Transportation" 
which we reproduce. The jur y says of the 
work : "The Jur y of Selection and Awar d in 
this year's Wanamake r Photographic Competition was composed of decidedly varying 
elements. There was M . Pau l Philippe 
Cret, the celebrated French architect; Mr. 
Leon Holtsizer of the Public Ledger, of 
Philadelphia ; Mr . Arthu r B. Carles, Professor lof Paintin g at (the Pennsylvania 
Academy of The Fine Arts; Mr . Clarence 
H . White , Director of the White School of 
Photography and President of the Society 
of American Pictoria l Photographers; and 
Mr . Alfre d Stieglitz. Mr . Joseph Pennell, 
the celebrated etcher and art critic intended 
to be present but was unable to arrive in 
time." 
• In the registration for voters i n Atlanta , 
Ga., 7,341 Negroes and 39,747 whites were 
registered. 
• The Russell colored school of Lexington, 
Ky. , was awarded first prize in the educational thrift, service with a percentage of 
94 per cent. 
• Baltimore has just made an appropriation of a thousand dollars for a colored municipal band of 35 musicians. They will 
give a series of six concerts during the 
summer. A . J. Thomas, who led the band 
of the 368th Regiment during the world 
war, is the leader. 
• The Lincoln School players, led by J. L . 
Myers, gave a musical play at Gallipolis, 
Ohio. 
• Highland Beach, a summer colony on 
Chesapeake Bay, founded by the late Major 
C. R. Douglass, has been chartered as an 
incorporated town with a commission form 
of government by the state of Maryland . 
• The fourth annual convention of the Na ­
tional Association of Negro Musicians 
meets in Columbus, Ohio, this month. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
RALP H CHAPLIN , in The World Tomorrow : 
Mour n not the dead that in the cool earth 
lie— 
Dust unto dust— 
The calm, sweet earth that mothers all who 
die 
A s all men must; 
Mour n not your captive comrades who must 
dwell— 
Too strong to strive— 
Withi n each steel-bound Coffin of a cell, 
Buried alive; 
Bu t rather mourn the apathetic throng— 
The cowed and the meek— 
Who see the world's great anguish and its 
wrong 
An d dare not speak! 
* * * 
D. D . T. Jabavu writes i n the International Review of Missions on native unrest i n 
South Africa . Amon g other causes he cites 
the land question and the low salary schedule: 
The so-called native reserves are becoming over-populated, and more land is required from somewhere. The story is the 
same for the Transvaal, the Transkeian territories and Eastern Cape Colony. Basutoland, for instance, has less than 10,000 
square miles of habitable land for her already crowded 420,000 agrarian people who 
double their number every twenty-five years. 
Municipalities i n many towns deny security of tenure to natives who supply their 
town labor, reserve the right and frequently 
threaten to move their native inhabitants 
from their dwellings and sites at any time 
and to anywhere, and then blame these people for not beautifying their homes. How 
the latter can be expected to rise i n the 
scale of civilization under such conditions 
it is difficult to conceive. 
Another important cause of unrest comes 
from the shockingly low salaries paid by 
Government to native teachers. The enormity of neglect in this particular can hardly be exaggerated, for the tremendous power 
for good this class of native is to the state 
in inculcating ideas of loyalty and admiration for Britis h justice in the hearts of the 
young is well known. The native teachers 
have not been agitators for political privileges, but today even they, after enduring 
miserable salaries long before the Great 
War, salaries which never enabled them to 
lead decent lives, salaries which today are 
worth about half the pre-war scale, after 
seeing the salaries of Europeans, Indians, 
and colored teachers advanced by substantia l margins, have had the chagrin of being 
treated as the Cinderella of the family. 
ILLUSIONS DISPELLED 
THER E is a popular belief to the effect 
that Negro mortality is on the increase. 
On the contrary the Statistical Bulletin of 
the Metropolitan Lif e Insurance Co. shows 
a noticeable decline: 
A remarkable decline i n the mortality of 
of Negroes has taken place i n the last decade. This is clearly indicated by the experience of the Metropolitan Lif e Insurance 
Company, which has i n excess of 1,600,000 
premium-paying colored policy-holders i n its 
Industrial Department. These policy-holders 
are located i n virtually every state of the 
Union. In 1911, the mortality of colored 
policy-holders was 17.5 per 1,000. In 1921, 
the provisional death rate of these insured 
Negroes had declined to 13.2 iper 1,000, 
which represents a drop of 25 per cent, in 
this period. There would have been 7,000 
more deaths of policy-holders than actually 
occurred in 1921, if the 1911 death rate had 
prevailed in that year. 
This marked decline, on analysis, can be 
traced to improvements in the death rates 
from tuberculosis, pneumonia, heart disease, 
Bright's disease, malaria, typhoid fever, and 
pellagra. It is difficult to say just what 
forces have operated to brin g about these 
changes. There are, obviously, a great 
many factors at work which are operating 
favorably on the life and health of our 
Negro population. The last decade has 
seen a very encouraging development of 
health activities in the South and Southwest. A t the same time, the economic status 
of Negroes has risen, both during the war 
period and thereafter. 
The improvement in the mortality of Negroes is not localized. So far as the experienc e of the Metropolitan indicates, it represents a very broad movement affecting 
virtually all areas. Scarcely a state with 
a significant Negro population but shows a 
decided decline i n the death rate. 
That Negro labor is inferior to white labor 
is another bogey which recent investigations 
have dispelled. The Chicago News says: 
"We wouldn't continue to employ Negro 
women if their production was not satisfactory." This is the tenor of the remarks 
made by employers of Negro women to 
130 TH E LOOKING GLASS 131 
agents of the women's bureau of the United 
States Department of Labor, who set out 
to discover the conditions under which Negro women were working in industry. 
Four-fifths of, the employers of Negro 
women whose establishments were investigated by the womens' bureau, expressed this 
idea and said that Negro women in industr y had no faults which were not common 
to and shared by all other labor. 
About 90 per cent, of the employers interviewed said they expected to continue to 
employ Negro women and many of them 
stated that there was no difference in the 
quantity and quality of the product of their 
Negro and white women employes and that 
the Negro women caused no greater loss of 
material in the processes of production. 
Of sixty-three managers who reported on 
the subject of punctuality, fifty-four found 
no difference i n the punctuality of the two 
groups. The majority of the managers considered that labor turnover was about equal 
for the two races. Wha t complaints were 
made about Negro women as industrial 
workers can be accounted for, the women's 
bureau thinks, by the lack of industrial experience and routine working habits among 
these women. 
FRANCE IN AFRICA 
PRESIDEN T MILLERAN D of France is 
making a tour through northern Africa . 
The Boston Transcript discusses the reasons for his trip : 
Primarily , the object of M . Millerand's 
voyage through Algeria , Tunis and Morocco 
is to express the formal thanks of the Thir d 
Republic to the citizens of Algeria , Tunis 
and Morocco—both black and white—for 
their services i n repelling the German invaders from France. Fe w would deny the 
value of these services; from a Frenchman's 
point of view, indeed, their value is not to 
be measured. A natural tendency, however, 
exists to overlook the sacrifices made i n the 
common cause by France's Nort h Africa n 
dominions, and the President's visit will 
constitute a concrete token of the republic's 
gratitude. To convey that gratitude is M . 
Millerand's chief mission. 
Nevertheless there are other reasons whj 
France's Chief Executive should be making 
a tour of that large portion of North Afric a 
over which the Tri-color waves. The French 
colonies in North Afric a have not escaped 
the effects of the restlessness which at present runs through the Moslem world. Alarm ­
in g reports also have reached Paris that 
Bolshevist propagandists in Nort h Afric a 
are capitalizing the disaffection of the Moslems to stir up anti-French sentiment. Conditions in Spanish Morocco are another disturbing factor, and although the trouble 
so fa r appears to be confined to the Spanish 
zone, there is always the possibility that 
it wil l spread beyond the limits of the Spanish sphere of influence, and cause a sympathetic uprising among a people akin in race 
and religion to those who are now causing 
so much concern to General Berenguer ami 
his army. Hence the tour of President Mil ­
lerand may be expected to exert a steadying 
and quieting influence where such influence 
is peculiarly needed. 
His tour wil l have other effects also. It 
will turn the limelight at home upon the 
work already achieved by French administrators, notably General Lyautey's in North 
Africa , and in a measure also it wil l draw 
the attention of the public in other lands. 
French colonization of Nort h Afric a began 
i n 1830, and since that time the progress, 
though slow, has nevertheless been sure. 
OUR ARTISTS 
HELE N HAGA N was on the program of 
the fourth annual concert which the 
Burleigh Club gave recently in New Bedford, Conn. The Morning Mercury writes: 
Miss Haga n has filled forty concert engagements in the last ten weeks. Notice of 
her New Yor k appearances were very favorable. She is a young woman of great 
charm, wit h a lovely speaking voice 
The Schumann "Etudes Symphoniques" 
were a complete and serious technical offering. The public could take Miss Hagan 
or leave her—her program admitted of no 
coquetry. The pianist revealed a grasp of 
the composition i n hand, the desirable 
amount of shading; a feeling of rhythm and 
phrasing, a refined and somewhat poetic 
tone with a breadth that went beyond mere 
sentimentality; but there was no sense of 
latent power for climax. There seemed a 
lack of real physical strength for a brilliant 
recapitulation. This was observed strongly 
in the Schumann number. The Chopin was 
interestingly done, with some lovely passages in the Scherzo. Miss Hagan has a bent 
toward pearls and turquoise rather than 
diamonds and opals. A n anticipated and 
much enjoyed group was the transcriptions 
of Negro melodies by Coleridge-Taylor, 
very sympathetically played. The Lizst 
Rhapsody lacked strength, yet had a clear 
and racia l exposition. Fo r encore, Miss 
Haga n gave the "Liebestraum" in poetic 
and lovely vein. A n encore for the Coleridge Taylor group was the memorable exponent of Miss Hagan's art at its finest. 
She gave the Gluck-Saint-Saens "Caprice " 
on an Alsatian air in a ravishingly. perfect 
style. Eighteenth century music appeared 
to be her specialty. Ever y grace, every 
pretty turn, every winning form of the 
period she seemed to have made absolutely 
her own. Some passages had the piquant 
quality of a finely balanced string quartette 
at music of the day when style was à la 
mode. 
* * * 
Albert Smith, who is now studying art 
in Paris, writes us 
The Salon National of Paris has accepted 132 THE CRISIS 
and hung for its current exhibition three of 
my etchings. They are "Plantation Melodies" (once published by the CRISIS ) ; "Ambition", depicting a figure with hands outstretched toward the ideal, while clinging 
to his garments in the shadow are the idlers 
in life ; and finally a Natur e Study. 
* * * 
The Philadelphia Ledger comments on the 
work of Maria n Anderson, the young contralto: 
Miss Anderson, who is but twenty years 
old, is a pupil of Giuseppe Boghetti. He r 
program contained nothing weak nor unworthy, and she brought to it a serious and 
conscientious disposition as well as a voice 
of exceptional resonance and richness i n its 
lower register. 
Italian songs were first sung—Secchi's 
"Lung i dai caro bene" among them; and 
Chaminade's "Summer " in the middle of 
the program had to be given again; but the 
best results were achieved i n the Negro 
"spirituals" , and the best of these was 
''Deep River" . Here the quality of the 
voice told to the fullest advantage. 
Wha t the youthful artist most needs is 
to develop enlivening passion, and an emotional accent of warmth and color i n her 
remarkable voice. The technical particulars of intonation, enunciation, sustained 
legato, voice-placement and breath control 
are admirable, and the audience appreciated 
to the full the rare promise of this worthy 
representative of musical Philadelphia. 
William L . Kin g excellently accompanied. 
NEW ASPECTS OF THE LABOR 
MOVEMENT 
THE Methodist Federation for Social 
Service publishes some new developments i n the Labor Movement. Durin g the 
recent migration, many southern Negroes 
were used as strike-breakers. The Bulletin 
issued on "Negro Migratio n 1916-1917" 
(U . S. Dept. of Labor), tells us: 
It may be that employers use Negroes 
against labor unions or against securing 
the eight-hour day. One employment agent 
of a great industrial plant pointed out that 
one of the great values of Negro migration 
lies in the fact that it gives him a chance 
to mix up his labor forces and to establish 
a balance of power, as the Negro is mure 
individualistic, does not like to group, and 
does not follow a leader as readily as some 
foreigners do. 
The attitude of one superintendent who 
believed in ''welfare work " but was unalterably opposed to unionism, may be indicative 
of a generally favorable disposition of some 
groups of Northern employers toward the 
migrants. They may see in these colored 
workers the effective means of staving off 
or preventing the movement toward organization and the attainment of the eight-hour 
day, which is now spreading among the foreign workers. The employment manager 
of a Pittsburgh plant which had a bi g strike 
pointed out that one of the chief advantages of the Negro migration lay in the 
fact that it gives him a chance to "mi x up" 
his labor force and so secure a "balance of 
power." 
Consciously or otherwise the Labor Movement is breaking down race prejudice in the 
South : 
In the coal fields around Birmingham, the 
United Mine Workers have organized the 
black and white miners without discrimination. This is true of the United Min e Workers throughout the country. In many of 
the local unions, the Negro workers predominate and many of them occupy offices. 
In ore local in West Virginia , composed of 
about 70 white men and 10 Negroes, the 
president is a Negro. 
In the offices of the United Mine Workers 
in Birmingham, the Negro organizers sit 
at desks in the same room wit h the whit e 
men and on terms of apparent equality. 
They are paid the same salaries. A t the 
miners' meetings, no discrimination is made. 
Negro delegates sit in both the Central 
Labor Union at Birmingham and at the 
State Federation of Labor. Repeated attempts have been made by the newspapers 
and employers to drive a wedge between 
the black and white workers i n the miners' 
organization, but without success. 
The secretary of the Georgia State Federation of Labor stated last year, that a 
few months previous there had been a strike 
in the oil refinery at Brunswick, Ga., i n 
which all the employes, 1,500 men, had 
gone out spontaneously without previous 
organization. They formed a union of their 
own. Eigh t hundred of the men were white 
and seven hundred black. Afte r a few 
weeks the company called some of the whit e 
leaders into conference and offered them 
their terms, if the white men would come 
tack. They promised to employ only white 
men thereafter. The leaders declined to 
make an agreement, saying that they had 
no power to act and referred the proposal 
to a mass meeting of the union. Although 
the white men were in a clear majority, the 
meeting voted unanimously that all should 
go back or all stay out. This incident was 
told by the secretary of the State Federation of labo r as just one of a number of 
striking examples of the growing rank and 
file solidarity of the black and white workers, despite attempts to raise the race issue. 
THE MELTING POT 
HER E is a list of the elements which 
go to make up "Americanism. " We 
read in Unity: TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 133 
A teacher in a well-known private school 
i n New Yor k Cit y has given us some facts 
of amazing interest as regards the question 
of the soundness and vitality of our faith 
i n Democracy. This teacher has in her 
school a class of pupils who have been segregated from the rest of the school because 
of their exceptional mental ability, as tested 
by the familia r Binet methods. These children have "intelligence quotient" records of 
between 140 to 171. This means that, at 
ten years of life-age, they average from 
fourteen to seventeen years of mental-age. 
These pupils as listed include: (1) " a liberal cultured Jew, home of modest comfort" ; (2) "a boy of Negro descent, a sociological not ethnological Negro, since he 
is lighter than his teacher"; (3) "boy of 
lower East Side, orthodox Jew, father a 
brilliant rising young physician" ; (4) "boy, 
son of rich uptown doctor, Gentile"; (5) 
''child of East Side tenements, born in Austria , parents speak no English, child's clothing ragged, face often dirty, father beginning to push up to success, orthodox Jew" ; 
(6) "daughter of very orthodox Episcopalian, Y . M . C. A . leader, limited means"; 
(7) "son of very wealthy manufacturer, 
liberal Jews, cultured people"; (8) "son of 
Roumanian peasants, ignorant but very in ­
telligent, thrifty and successful, renegade 
Jews" ; (9) "fairl y dark Negro, grandparent Oberlin students"; (1,0) "idolized 
baby i n Jewish home of great wealth" ; 
(11) "son of radical thinker of moderate 
means, Jewish" ; (12) "son of Russian 
Jewish socialists, very poor indeed, quite 
the 'Red' type, disgruntled with everything, 
parents have both worked through poverty, 
dirt, and disorder to get Ph.D.'s at Columbia" ; (13) "son of a radical poet, a fairdegree of wealth" ; (14) "daughter of poor 
but successful doctor of lower East Side" ; 
(15) "son of rich manufacturer, Jewish" ; 
(16) "son of progressive public school principal, liberal Jews" ; (17) "daughter of a 
merchant of moderate means, Jewish. " We 
count this a remarkable record! Here in 
this segregated group of exceptional children are rich and poor, Gentile and Jew, 
black and white, orthodox and liberal, 
American, Austrian , Roumanian and Rvssjan. Surely this is a vindication of democracy. We wonder also if it does not have 
direct bearing on the proposal now being 
agitated in Washington for the restriction 
c r stoppage altogether of immigration. 
READ AND RUN 
In The U. S. Senate PAT HARRISO N (Democrat), 
Mississippi (really Byron Patton Harrison)—developing into the 
demagogue type. A young man 
who, as a colleague for John Sharp Wil ­
liams, forms an odd contrast to the erudite 
senior Senator. Lately the scold for the 
Democratic side, who takes every opportunity to ridicule and belittle Republican 
moves. Logi c weak. Typica l campaign orator who could sway the multitudes. Lawyer. 
Educated at Louisiana and Mississippi State 
Universities. In four successive Congresses; to Senate 1919. Less than 41. 
The youngest Democratic Senator. 
James Thomas Heflin (Democrat), Ala ­
bama—Ditto, with less common sense. New 
member. Talks a great deal. Says little. 
Educated at Southern University and the 
A . and M . College, both Alabama . Profession: "Lawye r and public servant." Gave 
up practice of law on entering Congress to 
devote time to study of public questions, 
domestic and international. Wa s one of 
the most ardent opponents of woman suffrage. In Congress more than sixteen 
years; in Senate since November, 1920. 
Fifty-three.—The Woman Citizen. 
* ** 
BRAV E AMERICANS CHARLE S ATKINS , Negro, 15 years old, was 
seized by a mob of 20,000 people, and then he was tied to a log which was 
placed over a slow fire. He was told that 
unless he admitted an attack upon a white 
woman he would be burned to death. 
The boy resisted the fire for 15 minutes 
and then, as the flesh was roasted and the 
shin and thigh bone broke through the blisters, he "confessed." 
Havin g "confessed," the log to which the 
body was attached was raised by chains to 
a pine tree and a huge fire was built at the 
base of the tree. Before the body was 
burned completely 200 shots were fired 
into it. 
An y innocent boy of 15, white, black, red 
or yellow, with his feet roasted would admit 
any crime, if he believed "confession" would 
end his torment. 
Poor Atkin s is another victim of the vile 
Georgia crackers, the most despicable race 
of people upon God's earth. 
—Boston Telegram. 
GRADUATE S FLORID A A . and M , 134 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"Tuskegee stands for Order, System, Cleanliness, Industry, Courtesy and Usefulness. There are no sink-holes around the place, no 'back-yards'. Everything is 
beautiful, wholesome and sanitary. Al l trades are represented. The day is crammed 
so full of work from sunrise to sunset that there is no time for complaining, misery 
or fault-finding—three things that are usually born of idleness." 
Elbert Hubbard, in " A Little Journey to Tuskegee." 
The 
TUSKEGEE NORMA L and 
INDUSTRIAL INSTITUTE 
Founded by DR. BOOKE R T. WASHINGTO N 
Offers Splendid Opportunities to Negro Youth to Secure an 
Excellent Normal School Course and a Course in Mechanical 
Industries, Women's Industries or Agriculture 
TH E MECHANICA L INDUSTRIA L DEPARTMEN T FO R BOY S is composed of 
forty trades, including Auto-Mechanics, Applied Electricity, Photography, Printing, Machine-Shop Practice and Tailoring. The plant consists of five large 
buildings equipped with modern tools and machinery. The latest methods of in ­
struction are employed and practical work is an important part of each course. 
TH E WOMEN' S INDUSTRIE S consist of such courses as Domestic Science and 
Domestic Art . This Department offers splendid training for young women 
desiring to be Domestic Science and Art Teachers as well as those who are 
planning to enter commercial fields in other industries offered. 
TH E AGRICULTURA L DEPARTMENT , covering 2,000 acres of land, offers a 
splendid four-year course in Secondary Agriculture and a four-year course i n 
advanced Agriculture ; training young men to be Farm Demonstrators, Teachers 
of Agriculture and Scientific Farmers. 
GRADUAT E AN D SPECIA L COURSE S are offered in Mechanical Industries 
and Agriculture. 
Smith-Hughes Vocational Courses, Nurse Training, Business Courses and 
Teacher-Training Courses are offered to Advanced Students. Location unsurpassed for healthfulness. Writ e for catalog of information. 
ROBER T R. MOTON , Principal, 
TUSKEGE E INSTITUTE , ALABAMA . 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 13 5 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSITY 
Richmond Virginia 
is offering young men an excellent 
opportunity to secure a liberal education. We are offering work in the 
High School Department 
College of Liberal Arts 
Pre-Medical Scientific Department 
Pedagogical Department 
Theological Department, and in 
the Department of Public Health 
Nursing 
Strong faculty—healthy and attractive surroundings. Reasonable rates. 
WILBERFORC E UNIVERSIT Y 
WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
THRE E MILES FRO M XENI A 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location, 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment, 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Institution offers full courses i n the following departments: College, Theological, Normal, Academic, Commercial, Nurse Trainin g and Industrial. 
Militar y training a feature under Regular Army officer. Junior and Senior divisions of R. O. T. C. 
Good Water, Steam Heat, Electri c Lights, Splendid 
Dormitories, Seasonable Expenses. 
Fal l term begins September 19, 1922. Fo r catalogs 
and other information address Registrar or C. C. 
Jenkins, Secretary. 
J . A . GREGG, 
President of the University 
1882 LANE COLLEGE 1922 
Jackson, Tennessee 
A growing College with a splendid history 
and a bright future. It offers modern courses 
in Collegiate, Theological, Musical, College 
Preparatory, Teachers Training, Home Economics, Agricultura l and Pre-Medical subjects. 
Several vocational courses are also taught. 
Proper standards o f conduct as well as 
scholarship are maintained. Registrations of 
students are now being made for the next 
session. Wel l equipped laboratories, dormitories with modern conveniences and facilities 
under positive Christian influences are supported. Fo r further information address 
J . F. LAKE , President, Jackson, Tennessee. 
HAMPTO N INSTITUTE 
AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL 
HAMPTON , VIRGINIA 
Opportunity Knocks at the Door of 
the Man Who Knows and Can Do 
If you wish to prepare yourself to fill a responsible position of wide usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teacher of vocational agriculture 
Rural-school principal 
Hampton Now Offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEG E COURS E 
Leading to the Degree of B.S. in Agricultural Education With Work in WellEquipped Classrooms, Shops, and Laboratories; With Summer Field Practice; With 
Ail-Round Training Under High-Grade Instructors. 
James E . Gregg, Principal 
Warren K . Blodgett, Director 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS ) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Write for Bulletin. 
Artemisi a Bowden , Principal 
TALLADEG A THEOLOGICA L 
SEMINAR Y 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Frederick A. Sumner, President 
Is training men for the Gospel Ministry at 
home and abroad. Students are also being 
trained for work in the fields of 
SOCIAL SERVICE 
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
TH E Y . M. C. A. , AND 
TH E Y . W. 0. A. 
The Seminary has an enviable record of it 
years of service. For full information address 
JAMES P. O'BRIEN, Dean 
399 W. BATTL E ST., TALLADEGA , ALA . 136 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Morgan College and Branches 
John O, Spencer, Ph.D., President 
Lee M . McCoy , Litt . D. , Dean. 
Morgan College, Baltimore, Md . 
Locution:—I n great coJleKe town between North and 
South. 
Polic y :—do-educational. 
Courses:—Four years, appropriate decrees. Preparation for professional study. Advance.1 education. 
Graduates certified for elementary and high school 
teaching. (College extension credit courses i n city. 
Faculty:—College ami university trained men ami 
women. 
Site-.—Eighty-five acres of most beautiful scenery, 
stream, hil l and forest. Athleti c fields; fraternltj 
house. 
Terms :—Ver y reasonable. 
Information :—Address the Registrar, Morgan College, 
Italtimore, Mil . 
SUMME R SCHOO L JUN E 26T H TO AUGUS T 4T H 
Morgan Academy, Balti i ore, Md . 
Location:—In the suburbs of Baltimore on a beautiful campus: Healthful surroundings. 
Dormitories:—Kuuipped and supervised. Can care for 
100 boarders and 100 day studenîs. Athletic s and 
physical education. 
Courses:—Preparatory, music. 
Terms :—Ver y moderate. 
Principal:—-lohn \V . Haywood, S. T. 1). 
Princess Anne Academy, Princess Anne, Md . 
Eastern Branch of the University of Maryland 
Location :—Somerset County, famous Eastern Shore 
of Maryland : 
Courses:—Preparatory, normal, agricultural, industrial, 
domestic, music. 
Terms:—Fre e tuition ; other expens.s moderate. 
Principa l :—Thomas II. Kiali , Peil. I). 
Information :—Address the Principal. 
AL L SCHOOL S OPE N SEPTEMBE R 25th. 1922 
Dormitories Open Sent. 23rd. 1922 
PAIN E COLLEG E 
AUGUSTA " GEORGI A 
offers 
Courses in 
HIG H SCHOO L 
NORMA L (college grade) 
HOM E ECONOMIC S (college grade) 
PRE-MEDICA L 
COLLEG E (A.B. , B.S. , B.S . in Edu -
THEOLOG Y (B.Th.) cation) 
For further information address 
RA Y S. TOMLIN , Acting President 
PAIN E COLLEG E 
AUGUSTA , GA . 
THE ANCRUM SCHOOL OF MUSIC 
Offers Courses in Piano, 
Pipe Organ, Violin , Voice, 
Theory, Solfeggio, Harmony, Composition, etc. 
New England Conservatory method. Excellent 
faculty. Fine dormitory 
rooms. 
Registration begins first 
Monday in September. 
Director : 
MRS. ESTELLE ANCRUM FORSTER, 
Graduate N.E.C. , 1919-20 
Send for year book. 
Address : 
74 West Rutland Square, Boston, Mass. 
Capitalize Your Summer Months 
at the Nation's Capital 
Jennifer Business 
College 
Special Summer Courses 
Now Forming 
ENROLL TODAY 
W. E. JENNIFER, President 
Southern Aid Bldg., 7th & Tea Sts., 
N . W., Washington, D. C. 
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
COLLEGE OF OSTEOPATHY 
INCORPORATED 
1826 9th St., N.W. , Washington, D. C. 
A professional school devoted to the 
training of worthy colored men and 
women to become proficient Osteopathic 
Physicians. A thorough course of study 
leading to the degree of DOCTO R O F 
OSTEOPATHY . 
T. THEO . PARKER , D.O., Oph.D., 
President. 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A separate school for the higher 
education of young women. 
College Department greatly improvedAcademic course of 16 high school 
units. 
Normal course of two years. 
Three grammar grades. Music 
course. 
Expenses very low. 
Send for catalog. 
GEORG E W . RIGLER , PRESIDEN T TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 13 7 
MEHARR Y MEDICA L COLLEG E 
with departments of 
Medicine , Dentistry an d Pharmac y an d a Nurse Trainin g School 
AL L DEPARTMENT S RECENTL Y REORGANIZE D 
Two years (Class One) college work required for admission to the study of medicine. Graduation 
from a four years' Hfgh School or Norma l School required for admission to the departments of dentistry and pharmacy and 'nurse training. For catalog and application blank address 
John J . Mullowney, M.D., President of Mehärry Medical College, Nashville, Tenn. 
MISSIONARY TRAINING SCHOOL 
of 
SHAW UNIVERSITY 
RALEIGH , NORT H CAROLIN A 
The Missionary Training School offers courses 
to fit students to become home and foreign 
missionaries, social-service workers, pastors' 
assistants and Sunday-school leaders. 
For further information address 
MRS. J . L . PEACOCK, Dean, 
Summer Address: East Northfield, Mass. 
ATLANT A SCHOOL OF 
SOCIAL SERVICE 
at Morehouse College, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
A n institution devoted to the general training of 
social workers. Courses include case work, community organization, statistics, medical-social problems, criminology and rural sociology. Term commences in October and ends in May . 
ARMSTRONG CORRESPONDENCE 
COLLEGE 
Announces COURSES B Y MAI L 
Our system enables you to study at home at 
small cost. 
Our system is so simple that anyone can get 
our courses by means of our simplified text 
book digests. 
Our school is for the masses, not the classes. 
We offer courses in : 
Business Common School subEducation jects 
Collegiate subjects Journalism 
High School subjects Civil Service 
Commerce Insurance 
Stenography Banking, etc. 
If you don't see what you want, write. If it 
can be given by mail, we give it. 
Send for catalog. Writ e to-day. 
We want Agents. Wh y not be a State or 
District Agent? We pay a handsome commission on every course sold. 
Agents Wanted. Write for terms. 
BYRO N K. ARMSTRONG , M.A . 
(Columbia) Director 
WESTFIELD , INDIAN A 
A RACE COLLEGE FOR RACE PEOPLE 
KINDERGARTEN DEPARTMENT 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
A tan ta University Atlanta , Ga , 
MANASSA S INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
MANASSAS , VIRGINI A 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct 
railroad connections. 
The only school of its kin d In historic Northern Virginia . 
State, standard Four-Tea r High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business an d Trade Course». 
Hig h mora l standards. Prepare boys and girls to become 
useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
Fo r Information address 
EDWAR D D.HOWE , PRINCIPAL 
Placement Bureau For Colored Graduate Nurses 
317 West 138th Street, New York, N . Y . 
Telephone Audubon 5602 
Mrs. Adah Belle Thorns, R. N. 
For many years Assistant Superintendent of Nurses 
of Lincoln Hospital, New York, N . Y . 
REGISTRA R 
SHORTHAN D TAUGH T B Y MAI L 
World's Standard System, Trial lesson free. 
GEO. B. THORNTON, 
Southern University Baton Bouge, La, 
BOYD' S 30 -DA Y SYSTE M DA Y AN D NIGH T CLASSE S 
DERRIC K BUSINESS COLLEGE 
PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Only School of its Kin d in Americ a 
$5 enrolls you at once for special Complete Summer Course. 
6—8 weeks of study. Ear n while you learn. Positions secured I We teach Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Filing , 
Office Practice, Languages and Lecture Courses including Salesmanship. Dormitories $2.50 weekly. Summer Session Now! 
Writ e for information and list of graduates. M . J. DERIUCK , 
Prin . and Mgr. , X514 Pin e Street. Tuitions arranged with 
you—cash or easy payments. 
EXPER T TYPEWRITING 
From Juveniles to septuagenarians—youth to old age—are 
studying Expert Typewriting at Prof. Duncan's Business 
School. Shorthand and Bookkeeping also taught. Address 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
(227 South i7tf) Street Philadelphia , Pa . 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Fo r a nigh grade line of Callin g Cards, Business Cardi , 
Invitations, Socia l Stationery, etc. Bi g demand •rerywhere. 
Libera l commission!, prompt deliveries. Writ e for sample* 
and terms. 
TH E MOUS E O F CHOWNINO . INDIANAPOLI S iw n 
The MAYESVILLE EDUCATIONA L and INDUSTRIAL INSTITUTE 
Mayesville, S. C. 
There is N o Bette r Plac e in the South for a thorough Academi c and Industrial Trainin g 
Ou r graduate s stan d hig h m man y professions, some ar e Presidents o f larg e schools, man y ar e masters o f 
Trades an d of_Domesti c Scienc e an d Art . Th e grounds, building s an d th e healthfulness of th e Institut e ar e 
ideal. There is no better place for ambitious boys and girls. Expenses far belo w th e average . Fo r furthe r information write MISS EMMA J. Wilson, President. 13 8 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
AMERICAN CIVILIZATION AND THE NEGRO 
(ILLUSTRATED) By C . V. ROMA N 
"The soul of a man has gone into this hook." (Dial.) 
We especially commend the volume to those of colored blood." (Independent, New York.) 
The most comprehensive work on this subject written by a colored man." (Crisis.) 
Postpaid $3.00 Net 
Address L . E . BADGER , 1303 Churc h St., Nashville, Tenn . 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated in publi c and secondary school 
libraries as an introduction to the study of American 
History from the America n Negro viewpoint. 284 pages, 
32 chapters, 17 full page illustrations. Index and 
bibliography other features. Pric e $2.00; postage prepaid 
$2.15; sent on receipt of net price. Order through any 
bookseller; C. O. 0 . or postage remittance. Fo r further 
information address the author. 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St.. Washington, D . C. 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily Newt. 
GEOEGE LACY , Manager, 
116 Hamilton Avenus Columbus, Ohio 
CHESTER A . SMITH 
Baritone 
Concerts and Recitals 
For terms and dates, 
address 
67 MOUNTFOR T STREET . 
BOSTON , MASS . 
WANTED 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
A MONEY GETTE R because it is A CROWD GETTE R 
Churches and Clubs loosing for a flay that will afford an 
evening of Sidt-Spllttlan Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment In nut art; full ef wit 
sad seen humor. Scores of churches have cleared feast 
One to Two Hundred Dollars la Ont Night. PRICE, Ms. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, AuUlSr 
Lincoln Helena. Washington. D. c. 
REDUCTIO N SAL E 
for 30 DAY S ONLY ! 
Beginning June 26th and 
ending midnight July 26th, 
the busts of Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, 
Paul Laurence Dunbar, Bish ­
op Richard Alle n and Rev. 
C. T . Walker, D.D. , are reduced from $2.50 to $1.75 
each, f.o.b. Pine Bluff, Ark . 
If you missed this sale two 
years ago, here is your chance. 
On July 27th these busts wil l 
be $2.50 again. Order now. 
The Isaac Hathaway 
Art Company 
810 S. Hickory St., 
Fine Bluff, Ark. 
$$ FREE—$ $ FREE—$ $ FRE E 
Wanted—2500 men and women who wil l use their spare 
time to make BI G MONEY , or go into business for 
themselves; $3 to $5 per day and up to a hustler. W e 
wil l furnish you the goods to start with FREE . Al l 
we ask is that you pay the postage. Our line is a sure 
repeater and fast seller. HURRY . HURR Y I HURRY ! 
Do not delay, but write to-day, 
DIXIE SALES AGENCY, 3161 S. Stale St., CHICAGO, ILL. 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOT H POWDER — 
Asbolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 2 7 Cents in Stamps 
for a ful l size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
Tie Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth. "BLEACHING" the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 139 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
The Only Records Using Colored Singers and Musicians Exclusively 
JUL Y RELEASES 
25001 
75c 
HAWAIIA N TWILIGH T Roya l Hawaiian Guitars 
CIRIBIRIBI N Roya l Hawaiian Guitars 
23001 
75c 
M Y MARYLAN D Buffalo Militar y Band 
NATIONA L EMBLE M Buffalo Militar y Band 
60001 
75c 
NEAPOLITA N MEDLE Y (Accordion Duet) Smith Brothers 
DOLORE S WALT Z (Accordion Duet) Smith Brothers 
40001 
75c 
N O NEWS , O R WHA T KILLE D TH E DO G (Comic Monologue)....Jack Green 
TH E THRE E TREE S (Descriptive Story) Jack Green 
10065 
75c 
WHY , DEAR ? (Fox Trot) Baltimore Blues Orchestra 
LEAR N T O SMIL E (Fox Trot) Baltimore Blues Orchestra 
10066 
7Sc 
SON G O F LOV E (Waltz) Johnson's Ai l Star Orchestra 
FIGAR O (One Step) Johnson's A U Star Orchestra 
10067 
75c 
SOM E ON E ELS E (Fox Trot) Laure l Dance Orchestra 
LEARNIN G (Fox Trot) Laure l Dance Orchestra 
m LOVE' S OL D SWEE T SON G (Male Quartet) Four Harmony King s 
CAROLIN A LULLAB Y (Male Quartet) Silvertone Quartet 
18046 
75c 
MIGHT Y LA K A ROS E (Soprano with Orchestra) Ev a Woods 
SOMEWHER E A VOIC E IS CALLIN G (Baritone with Orch.). .Charles Whit e 
In addition to the above, the Black Swan catalog presents at all times a great 
variety of entertainment to meet every musical requirement. The following will 
prove welcome in any collection of records. 
7103 
$1.00 
TH E BEL L SON G (Lakme) Florence Cole-Talbert 
Soprano with Orchstra. 
7104 
$1.00 
TH E KIS S (II Bacio) Ardit i Florence Cole-Talbert 
TH E LAS T ROS E O F SUMME R (Balfe) Florence Cole-Talbert 
7101 
$1.00 
CAR O NOM E (Rigoletto) Verdi Antoinette Garnes 
Soprano with Orchestra. 
7102 
$1.00 
AH , FORS ' E ' LU I (Traviata) Verd i Antoinette Game s 
Soprano with Orchestra. 
16056 
75c 
SO LONG , BER T (Baritone) George Jones, Jr. 
NIGH T AN D YO U (Baritone) George Jones, Jr. 
18045 
75c 
DEE P RIVE R (Contralto) Nettie Moore 
SON G O F INDI A (Contralto) Nettie Moore 
An y Dealer will be glad to play these numbers over for you. 
Call for them. 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
2289 Seventh Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Agents Wanted in Every Community 14 0 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
National Capital Book of Etiquette 
Combined with Floyd's Flowers or Stories for Colored People 
A book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderful pictures of Washington's prominent colored society leaders 
on the street; at the theatre; at church; in the home; at receptions, balls, parties, 
weddings, dinners, etc., etc. The illustrations are so perfect and natural that 
the well-bred, correctly clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any and all occasions; correct dress 
for men and women; suggestions in colors and materials for the ladies; hints as 
to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, etc., for both sexes. 
What to serve guests for breakfast, 
lunch or dinner. 
How to converse intelligently; how to 
know when to talk and when to remain silent; how to make friends and 
gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member of society or the most 
humble. 
Illustrating Table Manners 
Agents Wanted 
We are looking for 1,000 hustlers, men and 
women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 
to $9 per day. Such an opportunity comes but 
once in a lifetime, AGENT'S SAMPLES showing specimen pages and the pictures and covers of book will he mailed to you for 25 cents. 
A Book you will want—Must have in 
your home—a most excellent gift. 
100 pages of pleasing pictures taken from 
best photographs. A BIG BOOK, containing 
over 500 pages. The people are much pleased 
with this new publication and are sending 
thousands of orders to us. We send by insured parcel post; return your money if not 
perfectly satisfied, 
Price ONLY $2.50. Write today. 
Dea r Frien d : -
Ar e yo u energeti c an d enterprising , ar e yo u 
intereste d i n th e developmen t o f th e colore d people ? Ar e 
yo u intereste d in . seein g members o f th e rac e bu y an d rea d 
goo d books , becom e self-educate d an d enterprisin g 
citizens ? I s you r incom e perfectl y satisfactory , o r 
woul d yo u lik e t o make 50 ct s t o $1.0 0 pe r hou r fo r a 
littl e extr a tim e pu t i n fo r u s i n you r community ? 
Hav e yo u give n th e rac e problem s an y thought ? 
Ar e yo u a thinker ? Pleas e paus e a moment an d conside r 
th e GOOD YOU MAY DO b y sellin g ou r publications , NATIONAL 
CAPITA L BOOK OF ETIQUETTE , PROGRESS 0 E COLORED PEOPLE , 
DUNBAR'S POEMS, KELL Y MILLER' S WAR HISTORY , EMMET SCOTT'S 
WAR HISTORY , DUBOIS'S DARKWATER, FLOYD'S FLOWERS an d 
othe r specia l book s o n th e rac e an d ou r ful l lin e o f 
bible s an d religiou s books . 
Schoo l teacher s an d student s shoul d giv e thi s 
propositio n thei r carefu l attention . $ 4 t o $1 0 pe r da y 
ca n b e easil y made b y workin g fo r u s durin g vacation . 
Your s truly , 
Austi n Jenkin s Co , 
#523 Nint h St . N. W. , Washington , D. C. 
Sen d fo r catalo g o f 16 0 books . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 14 1 
ARE YOU PREPARED FOR THE FUTURE ? 
AR E YOU 
MAKING 
INVESTMENTS 
THAT WILL 
HELP YOU 
ON THE ROAD 
TO FINANCIAL 
INDEPENDENCE? 
OPPORTUNITY IS CALLING YOUR ATTENTION TO 
ORCHARDVILLE 
Where, if you act soon enough, you can secure 
ideal BUILDING LOTS for only 
$35 ON VERY EASY TERMS. $3.00 DOWN 
AND $1.50 A MONTH. NO INTEREST. 
CLEAR TITLE. EACH LOT SOLD UNDER 
MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE 
Real Estate is the foundation 
of all wealth. 
Yo u have heard that said many times and you 
know it to be true. Yo u know how people have 
made large sums of money out of Real Estate 
investments and you know that most of those 
people bought at TH E RIGH T TIME . That is 
an important factor. 
People from all parts of the country are buying Orchardville lots because they know that 
they have an excellent opportunity to earn BI G 
PROFIT S on their investment. They know 
that when a place is developed i n the way 
Orchardville is being improved, the property 
there should INCREAS E I N VALU E CONSID ­
ERABLY . 
That is why they are buying their lots now, 
while the price is low. 
You can do likewise, 
if you wish. 
Space here is too limited to cover all the details 
of this attractive offer, but we would like to 
have you know all about Orchardville and the 
opportunities it offers you. 
If you will write your name and address on the 
coupon below and send it to us promptly, we 
will gladly send you full particulars without obligation) on your part. The stamp on your envelope is all it will "cost you. 
Perhaps this is the very opportunity you have 
been waiting for. Wh o knows? 
I n view of the increasing demand for these lots, 
we suggest that you send the coupon without 
delay. 
ARENSON REALTY 
DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL. 
WEIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Eoalt y Dev'pt Corp. 
Chicago, 111. 
Gentlemen : 
I am interested i n your Orchardville offer and 
would be glad to receive full particulars, without obligation on my part. 
Name 
Address 
Town and State 
CRI-7-22-85 14 2 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
HOTEL DAL E 
CAP E MAY , N . J . 
Open March 15 
Rates reduced i n keeping with the times. This 
magnificent Hotel, located i n the heart of the 
Most Beautiful Seashore Resort i n the world, 
is replete with every Modern Improvement. 
Superlative in Construction, Appointments, 
Service and Refined Patronage. Orchestra 
daily. Garage, Tennis, etc., on Premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Booklet. 
E . W. DALE , Owner. 
DON'T GAMBLE ! 
If you are afraid of oi l and other speculative 
investment propositions and prefer 
SAFETY OF INVESTED CAPITOL 
plus reasonable profits, we have an Ideal investment opportunity i n a wel l established and seasoned, nationally known film corporation tha t 
shows wonderful indications of substantial 
profits. Our illustrated booklet Ko . 678 explains 
in detail. Send for a copy, Its FKE E ! 
Southern California Investment Co. 
1154 Central Ave., Los Angeles, Calif. 
MADE TO YOUR ORDER 
Pants $1.95 
NO EXTR A 
CHARGES 
Postage 
Prepaid 
Send no 
Mone y 
We make this special 
offer for SO days, to 
prove the wonderful 
value, style and fit of Progress tailoring. We will tailor to your special 
order, a pair of these stylish 16.00 pants, 
send them to you postage prepaid and 
guarantee two years' solid wear or 
money back for only $1.95. *? 
AGENTS WANTED 
Earn $30 to $35 extr a ever y week , taking orders from 
your friends and neighbors for our highclass tailoring. No experience necessary. 
Big Sample Outfit FRE E 
Drop us a line today and we will send 
you absolutel y f ree»our big assortment 
of woolen samples, style book and special wholesale prices, on our made-to-measure 
suits—$12.45 up and made-to-measure pants 
^-$1.95 up. Pull details of this offer sent FREE . 
Th e Progres s Tailorin g Co. . Dept.Cr>117Chica £0 , 111. 
Agents Wante d 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAST INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG . CO. 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA 
SOUTHER N SALESMA N WANTE D 
A n established Northern Corporation doing a national business desires the services of a live, honest 
and trustworthy salesman (or woman) i n the Southland. 
Only persons with ability and experience need apply. 
Salary and commission paid. Address 
BERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATIO N 
No . 413 S. Broad St. Philadelphia, Pa . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Churc h Societies 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L . JONES, Pre.. 
641 W. 9th Si. Cincinnati. Ohio 
YOU CA N BAN K B Y MAI L 
FIRST STANDARD BANK 
Louisville , Ky . 
Capita l and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilson Lovett, President 
MME . G . B . NEEDLES 
FIN E FUR S 
FU R GARMENT S MAD E T O ORDE R 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N . Y . 
Telephone Morningside 7S90 
Tel. 5417 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
54 School street Boston. Mass. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
TH E HEART OF A WOMA N AN D OTHER POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
TH E SOUL OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHER PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
UNSUN G HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.00 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINCE HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOICE OF TH E NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKER T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.50 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
TH E NEGRO I N LITERATURE AN D ART . (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTY YEAR S AN D OTHER POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
TH E HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO CHURCH . (Carter J . Woodson).. 2.15 
TH E UPWAR D PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S I N TH E GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G. Steward)...: 2.70 
HARLE M SHADOWS. (Claude McKay) 1.35 
TH E BOO K OF AMERICA N NEGRO POETRY. (James Weldon Johnson) 1.75 
AMERICA N CIVILIZATION AN D TH E NEGRO. (C. V . Roman) 3.00 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. Tw o Soap s for Milady's Use 
A Suggestion 
Fo r You r Sunbur n 
The 
Madam C. J. Walker 
Co . 
640 North West Street 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Makers of 18 Superfine Preparations 
for the Hair 
and Skin 
COMPLEXIO N SOA P 
An excellent soap, made of the 
highest quality oils and essences 
compounded i n such careful proportion as to assist Nature i n preserving 
the most delicate skin and healthful bloom 
so much desired by woman . 
Unsurpassed for complexion's needs. 
ANTISEPTI C SOA P 
THI S Soap is guaranteed to be made 
from strictly pure vegetable oils and 
can not be excelled for washing the 
hair, scalp and hands. Delightfully soothing for cuts, wounds or for an y use where 
a strictly pure soap is required. 
Unexcelled for softening the hands. 