TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGES 
Volume Two AUGUST , 1911 Number Four 
John Henry Adams 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORED PEOPLE 
y 
OBJECT.—Th e National ^.ssijciation 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of ihen and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights -»ahd 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
, COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Barnum, New York. 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New York. 
•Rev. W. H. Brooks, New York. 
Prof. John Dewey, New York. 
*Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott, New York. 
"Mr. Thos. Ewlng, Jr., New York. 
"Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr. Hamilton Holt, New York. 
Miss Maud 11, Ingersoll, New York. 
*Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
*Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York. 
*Mrs. F. R. Keyser, New York. 
Dr. Chas. Lenz, New York. 
Mr. Jacob W. Mack, New York. 
"Mrs. M. D. Maclean. New York. 
*Mr. John E. Milholland. New York. 
Rev. Horace G. Miller, New York. 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., New York. 
Mr. James F. Morton. Jr., New York. 
Mr. Henry Moslcowltz, New York. 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly, New York. 
"Rev. A. Clayton Powell, New York. 
*Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Mr. Jacob H. Sehiff, New York. 
Prof. E. R. A. Seligman, New York. 
•Dr. Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Anna Garlin Spencer, New York. 
•Prof. J. E. Spin gam, New York. 
Mrs. Henry Villard. New York. 
"Miss Lillian D. Wild, New York 
*Mr. Wm. English Walling, New York. 
"Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise. New York. 
Miss M. R. Lyons, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
"Dr. O. M. Waller, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mr. D. Macon Webster. Brooklyn, N Y. 
Mr. Geo. E. Wlbecan, Jr., Brooklyn. N Y 
Mrs. W. H. Talbert, Buffalo, N. Y. 
Hon. Thos. M. Osborne, Auburn. N. Y. 
"Mr. W. L. Bulkley, Ridgefleld Park, N. J. 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New Haven, Conn. 
Miss Maria Baldwin. Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Mass 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Boston. Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston. Mass. 
"Mr. Albert E. Plllsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, Brookline, Mass. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter. New Bedford, Mass. 
Rev. Harvey Johnston, Baltimore, Md, 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter, Baltimore, Md. 
Prest. Chas. T. Thwlng, Cleveland, O. 
Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. 
Hon. Harry C. Smith, Cleveland. 0. 
Prest. H. C. Kins, Oberlln. O. 
Prest. W. S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, O. 
"Miss Jane Addams. Chicago, 111. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Burnett, Chicago. 111. 
"Dr. C. E. Bentley, Chicago, HI. 
Miss Sophronlslia Rreckenridge, Chicago, 111. 
Mr. Clarence Darrow, Chicago, 111. 
Mr. Julius Rosenwald, Chicago, 111, 
Mrs. Cella Parker Woolley. Chicago, 111 
Mr. F. L. McGhee, St. Paul. Minn. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia Pa 
•Dr. N. F. Mossell, Philadelphia, Pa. 
"Dr. Wm. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia. Pa. 
Miss Susan Wharton, Philadelphia. Pa 
Mr. R. It. Wright. Jr., Philadelphia. Pa. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa. 
Rev. narvcy Johnson. D.D., Baltimore Md 
Hon. Wm. S. Bennet, Washington, D C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford. Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller. Washington. D, C. 
Prof. L. B. Moore, Washington, D. C. 
Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington. D. C. 
"Mrs. Alary Church Terrell. Washington. D. C. 
•Rev. J. Milton Waldron, Washington. D. C. 
Prest. John Hope, Atlanta, Ga. 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill. Manassas, Va. 
Mr. William Pickens. Talladega. Ala, 
•Executive Committee. 
Secretary—Miss Mary W . Ovington, 
New York, 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New "York. TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
CONTENT S FO R AUGUST , 1911 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 139 
ME N O F TH E MONTH : 
Mr . J. E . Spingarn 146 
Mr . Gilchrist Stewart 147 
Mr . Robert N. Wood 147 
OPINION : 
The Bristow Amendment 148 
A Brave Young Man 148 
A Southerner Speaks 150 
The Open Door 150 
Music 151 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE : 
The New York Branch 152 
The Oklahoma Lynching 153 
Dr. DuBois in Europe 154 
Incorporation 155 
TH E WORL D IN COUNCIL : Picture by John Henry Adams 156 
EDITORIA L 157 
A SOUTHER N WOMAN' S VIEW S 160 
TH E HEART' S DESIRE : Poem by R. W. Justice 162 
TH E CONG O EXPRESS . By Virginia Wright 163 
SOM E LETTER S 166 
WHA T T O REA D \ . . 168 
EXCAVATION S IN ETHIOPI A 169 
Agents, wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter In the post office at New York City 
W. E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS, Editor ( OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
M . D. MACLEAN . Managing Editor Contributing J CHTRLE^ESWAR D RUSSEL L 
FRANK . M . TURNER . Circulation Manager Editors ) w S. BRA1TH WAIT E 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager ( KELL Y MILLE R 136 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
orce University 
The only school in the country for 
Negro Youth which has a Military Department equipped by the National 
(rovernment, and commanded by a detailed 
United States Army Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITARY SCIENTIFIC 
NORMAL TECHNICAL 
COMMEBCIAL THEOLOGICAL 
CLASSICAL MUSICAL 
P BE PA EAT O BY 
Banking taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve 
Industries,. 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Ten Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
part by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fall term begins September 19th, 1911. 
Write for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH . President 
WM. A. JOINEB, Superintendent, C. N. 
I. Department. 
Address all (-oiniiiiinii'itl icmK to 
BOX 36, WILBEBFOECE, OHIO. 
Mention T: 
Wilbttfa m lltttwrHttg 
WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Opens first Tuesday in September 
Located in Greene County, $M miles from Xenia, 
Ohio. Healthful surroundings. Refined community. Faculty of 32 members. Expenses low. 
Classical and Scientific, Theological, Preparatory, 
Music, Military, Normal and Business Departments. Ten industries taught. Great opportunities for High School graduates entering College or 
Professional Courses. Two new buildings for girls 
to be erected this year—one now in process of 
erection, and the other to be begun in the spring. 
Catalogue and Special Information furnished. 
Address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH. Preiident. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA. 
Howard University 
WILBUR P. THIRKIELD , President 
Washington, D. 0. 
The College of Arts and Sciences—Kelly Miller, 
A.M., Dean. 
The Teachers' College—Lewis B. Moore, A.M., 
Ph.D., Dean. 
The Academy—George J . Cummings, A.M., Dean. 
The Commercial College—George W. Cook, A.M., 
Dean. 
School of Manual Arts and Applied Sciences— 
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
The School of Theology—Isaac Clark, D.D., Dean. 
The School of Medicine: Medical, Dental and 
Pharmaceutical Colleges—Edward O. Balloch, M.D., Dean. 
The School of Law—Benjamin ' F. Leighton, 
LL.D. , Dean. 
For catalogue and special information address 
Dean nf Department. 
Uirginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library, prepare a 
faithful student, for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORGE RICE HOVEY President 
:E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 137 
SHAW UNIVERSITY 
This institution of learning established in 1865, 
has industrial departments tor both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. There are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine, Pharmacy and Theology. 
The facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that will 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year in advance, for it has become Impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who apply. 
The present enrollment is over 500. 
The academic year begins on the Thursday 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. The charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDENT 
Shaw University, Raleigh, N. C 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
JEFFERSON CITY, MISSOURI 
Founded by tho Soldiers of the 02d and 66th 
Regiments of the u. S. Colored Infantry. 
Supported by tho State of Missouri. Haa 
Normal, Collegiate, Agricultural, Mechanical and 
Industrial Courses. Buildings and equipment 
unsurpassed. Thirty teachers representing the 
best schools of the country. Students from all 
sections of the country. For catalogue and further information address 
BENJAMIN FRANKLI N ALLEN , 
President. 
KnoxvUle College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
Ti e Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opens Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
MNOXVHXE, TENN. 
PAIN E COLLEG E 
AUGUSTA, OA. 
Normal, Preparatory, College and Theological 
Departments 
Oirls receive superior training in Domestic 
Science. Instruction in Vocal and Instrumental 
Music. High Location, Large Campus, Thorough 
Instruction. Session of 1911-12 begins September 26th. 
For full information write 
H . 8. DUNBAR. Reg. 
TRAD E JOURNA L 
-SMALL' S NEGRO TRAD E JOURNAL 
^ A paper devoted to the commercial, financial 
and business world. 
We list you and send you our paper once each 
month—all for $1.00 a year. 
Send us your business card. 
T. FREDERICK SMALL CO. 
2'226 Fifth Avenne New York City 
BOOKS 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G . DIL L 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
JOINTNO TH E NAVY ; OR, 
ABROAD WITH UNCL E SA M 
By JOHN H. PATNTER, A.M. 
First Rac e Contributio n to Navy 
Literatur e 
Ordered by tho Government for Libraries of 
War Vessels 
"It is a perfect picture of life on board 
ship when I first went to sea. The story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so, that I read it through 
at one sitting."—Richardson Clover, Rear 
Admiral, U. S. N., Retired. 
Cloth Bound. 300 Pages. Folly Illustrated. 
SECOND EDITION 
Sent Postage Paid on Receipt of On* Dollar 
Address care of 
SUDWABTH PRINTING OO. 
WASHINGTON, D. O. 
PUBLICATION S O F TH E N . A . A , C. P. 
The N. A. A. C. P. has for sal) the loflowins punphieu: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Haynes Holmes, 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. The Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of Hull 
House. , 
5. The Negro as a Soldier. By BrigadierCeneral Burt, U. S. A. 
Five Cents Each, Three Dollars a Thousand 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
J AME S F. M ORTON , J K . , A.M. , Author and Publuhtr 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. An arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "The Bugbear of Social Equality," which Is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRICE 25 CENTS 
Address the Author at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York. N. Y. 
Mention 'fin: C KISIS . 138 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
PICTURE S 
TELEPHONE 5277 MORN1NCSIDE 
Dr. Gertrude Curtis 
471 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
SURGEON 
DENTIST 
Office Hours: Bcllevue Dental Clinic 
9-12 a. m. Mondays from 
2-9 p. m. 2 to 5 p. m. 
SUNDAYS BY APPOINTMEN T 
WOMEN' S and CHILDREN'S WOR K A SPECIALT Y 
Most beautiful works of art. Suitable 
for home decorations. Should be i n every 
Negro home. Al l pictures 16x20. 
Jesus Died for Both Protecting Angel 
Clinging to the Cross New Memorial 
Beacon Light Heavenward 
Booker T. Washington Onward 
All Our Presidents Jack Johnson 
The Colored Troops Charge San Juan Hill 
Moses, the Little Shepherd 
Price, by mail, 25 cents each, postpaid 
Fifteen beautiful art post cards. B y 
mail, postpaid, 12 cents. Agents wanted. 
JACO B GRIFFET H 
252 West 53d Street Ne w Yor k 
Telephone 3253 Harlem CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 13ST H STREE T 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture, we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOING CARPETS AND BUGS OTJE SPECIALTY 
Thi s Is 
TH E CRISIS 
Fe w peopl e se e yo u 
Man y people see you r letters 
Correc t in Type , 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Use Good Stationery 
Correc t in Type , 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
No t the cheapest; but the ~ 
best for the money charged 
— — SPECIALT Y 
Weddin g Invitations printed 
or engraved — correct style 
As k Edito r 
W . E.B . DuBoi s 
b y permissio n WRIT E O R 'PHON E T O 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printe r 
202 East 99th Street New Yor k City 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Along the Color Line 
POLITICAL . 
President Taft has ordered the imme ­
diate release of W . S. Harlan , C. C. Hil ­
ton and S. E . Huggins, officials of the 
Jackson Lumbe r Company , of Lockhart, 
Ala. , wh o are now serving sentences in 
Atlant a penitentiary for peonage. Th e 
President extended executive clemency 
to the men at the request of Senator 
Fletcher, of Florida , wh o has been active 
in their behalf for some time. 
Tw o other men, Gallaghe r and Grace, 
convicted at the same time and for the 
same offense, are not included in the 
clemency extended to the other three. 
It is understood, however, that Senator 
Fletcher has asked President Taft also 
to release them. 
The cases of the five men attracted 
wide attention. Harla n is a successful 
lumberman of some wealth. President 
Taft first commuted his origina l sentence 
to six months and a fine of $5,000. Harlan later applied for pardon, and the 
President refused it. Hilto n was sentenced to six months and fined $1,000, 
and Huggin s received a like sentence 
and fine. Grace, however, was sentenced 
to thirteen months and fined $1,000, and 
Gallagher was sentenced to fifteen 
months and fined $1,000. Th e general 
charge against the men was that they 
had imported foreign laborers from Ne w 
Yor k to a lumber camp i n Alabama , and 
forcibly detained them there. 
Th e action of the President in pardoning the wealthy lumbermen reminds us 
of a story of a little girl of eight wh o 
lived in an aristocratic section of Ne w 
Yor k City . She was present when it 
was announced that a wealthy friend of 
the family wh o had violated the law had 
been sent to jail. Th e chil d looked up 
indignantly and said wit h conviction : 
"Ric h people ought not to be in jail. " 
1 Th e officials of Annapolis, Md. , were 
in a great to-do over the election whic h 
has just taken place in that town. Anna ­
polis recently took pains to disfranchise 
the Negr o voter, but its action has been 
declared unconstitutional. Pendin g an 
appeal the question was what should be 
done about allowin g the black man to 
vote. A number of officials, finding the 
problem too knotty for them, resigned. 
In the end it was decided to disregard 
the recent disfranchising clause, and 
Negr o voters cast their ballots on the 
same footing as before the passage of 
the ordinance. 
<] Th e Rev. J. Milto n Waldro n has addressed a letter to President Taft, thanking him for his stand against race prejudice in the army, as shown in his recent 
letter about the Jewish soldier. Mr . 
Waldro n then reminds the President that 
there is a race prejudice in the army 
and the navy against the colored man, 
and the President is asked to use his 
utmost effort to eradicate it. 
<] Th e colored voters of Jacksonville , 
Fla. , made an energetic campaign to elect 
two Republican candidates for the city 
council. The y published a'circula r sayin g that several colored men had been 
shot by street-car conductors and that 
nothing had been done about it. Th e 
attempt to elect the Republicans was not 
successful. Th e Jacksonvill e TimesUnio n in an editorial says it does not 
believe colored people want to see their 
own race holdin g office, although it admits that there are "some other circumstances" whic h contributed to the victory 
of the regular Democrati c ticket. Some 
changes have been made in the boundaries of the wards which contain a 
large Negr o population so that more 
whites.vote for their councilmen. More ­
over, many of the colored men could not 
mark their ballot correctly in the time 
allowed. This latter fact, it may be mentioned, is not remarkable, for the Florid a 
ballot is extraordinarily long, and only, a 
man thoroughlv familiar wit h the political situation is able to mark it in the 
brief time allowed. Fe w of the officers 
are voted for directly and a very large 
number of ballots, even when cast by 
well-informed voters, may be invalidated. 
<I A Colore d Citizens' Associatio n has 
been formed in Memphis, Tenn., for the 
purpose of improvin g the condition of 
the Negr o population. Voters wil l be 
registered and urged to pay their poll 
taxes and try to vote. Th e colored men 
declare that they wil l demand from candidates assurance of park facilities, paved 
streets i n the sections where Negroes 
reside, and an extension of the sprinklin g service to such streets. The y wil l 
also insist, they say, that Negr o physicians be permitted to attend their patients at the city hospital, a privilege 
whic h they are now denied. 
<I Representative Caleb Powers recently 
spoke in Washingto n in a colored church 
and made some radical remarks. H e 
informed his audience that if there is 
a race question, the white man is re-140 THE CRISIS 
sponsible for it; that the Negroe s should 
stand together and fight for their rights. 
" I am not afraid of Negr o domination, " 
he said. "If I can't match my intellect 
against that of my neighbor, I wis h him 
good luck and success. So far as lies 
in my power, the colored man shall have 
equal rights with the white man. " 
Senator Clapp, of Minnesota , speaking 
to colored people, also said recently: 
"Go d never made any race for permanent 
bondage and servitude to other and in 
the to-morrows to come you r descendants wil l glor y in the triump h accomplished through your efforts 'to-day. 
Ther e is absolutely nothing in the lim ­
itations of color to prevent the black 
man from being fully as honest, sober, 
industrious, and of as much service to 
the communit y and nation as the white 
man. " 
Bot h these gentlemen doubtless had in 
min d Senator Bailey, of Texas, wh o announced not lon g ago that the South 
woul d be "just and even generous" wit h 
the colored man if he woul d "accept permanent inferiority. " 
1$ Th e Mexica n government declares 
that it is not satisfied all has been done 
to apprehend the men wh o lynched one 
of its citizens in Texa s and has protested 
to Washington . 
JUDICIAL . 
Th e West segregation ordinance, 
passed by the city council of Baltimor e 
on Ma y IS last, has been defined for 
enforcement by Attorne y Alonz o L . 
Miles, counsel to the Boar d of Polic e 
Commissioners. Th e law as construed 
is broader than the previous segregation 
ordinance. One of the important features is the clause relative to existing 
"mixed " blocks. Th e police wil l permit 
either white or colored persons to move 
into "mixed " blocks. Th e inspector of 
buildings is authorized to declare a block 
a "mixed " block on application made to 
him by a majority of the owners. 
It is unlawful for a colored person't o 
move into or use as a residence any 
building in a block in whic h all the residents and occupants of houses, so far as 
they are occupied at all, are white persons. Penalty, fine $5 to $50 a day. 
It is unlawful for a white person to 
move into or use as a residence any 
buildin g in a block in whic h all the residents and occupants of houses, so far as 
the same are occupied at all by colored 
persons. Penalty, fine $5 to $50 a day. 
Block s in whic h there are buildings occupied by both white and colored residents are defined as "mixe d blocks. " 
Such mixe d blocks are still open to rent 
and occupancy by either white or colored 
persons just as they were prio r to the 
passage of this ordinance. 
<I A most extraordinary case, in whic h 
two colored men have been punished for 
the same offense, although it is admitted 
only one'could possibly have been guilty, 
is reproduced in the Docket, a legal 
paper published in St. Louis, from the 
Southern Reporter. It is the case of 
Tole s vs. the State of Alabama . Tole s 
had been found guilty of assault, but his 
counsel move d to have the verdict set 
aside, since one Joh n Colvi n had already 
been convicted for the offense of whic h 
Tole s was now accused. Judge Summervill e decided, however, that the verdict 
must stand. It was true, he said, that 
the alleged victim had identified Colvi n 
and that it was know n onl y one man 
entered the house, but what was identification wort h under the circumstances? 
So little that the aggressor migh t have 
been Tole s instead of Colvin . There ­
fore Tole s should go to prison as well 
as Colvin . 
ECONOMIC . 
On e hundred and sixty-one union 
Negr o miners of Ogden , Iowa , are suing 
the internationa l president, the Iowa 
president and other mine officials for 
more than a millio n and a half dollars 
on the ground that they were used, 
against their knowledge , as strikebreakers. Th e men are asking for $10,000 
each. The y claim that when they were 
imported to Ogde n the miners' officials 
told them there was no strike in progress; that they are denied transfer union 
cards to the Ogde n branch of the Min e 
Workers' Union , that the loca l union 
refuses them membership, participation 
in the union benefits, and other rights 
and privileges of union men. The y ask 
that they be permitted to form a union 
of their own, and that the mine officials 
be compelled to recognize the union 
after it is formed, and that they be assured all the rights, benefits and privileges of union men. 
(& Mr . Pinn , of Bethany Baptist Church , 
speaking before the social workers of 
Syracuse, N . Y. , declared that there are 
about 1,800 Negroe s in Syracuse wh o 
cannot find proper livin g quarters because of prejudice. The y also had difficulty in'obtainin g work, he said. Ther e 
are onl y two factories that give employment to colored people. Th e fact that 
so many were thus made idle was responsible in part for immora l conditions. 
Mr . Pin n declared also that they have 
no place to go for amusement. 
<I Ne w Orleans appears to be concerned 
over the fact that there is not complete 
segregation in some factories and work ­
shops of that city. A woman, factory 
inspector points out that the laundries 
particularly have whit e girls, black 
wome n and white and black men work -ALONG THE COLOR LINE 141 
in g promiscuously. "Th e white and 
black employees are prohibited from rid ­
in g to the factory or laundry in the same 
compartments of cars, or eating in the 
same restaurant or confectionery, and 
yet they are permitted to wor k all day 
together." Al l of whic h distresses her, 
but there is no law prohibitin g it. 
T o get their licenses to work, too, 
"pretty timid little white girls " have to 
stand in line wit h colored girls, and 
even wit h colored boys. .The inspector 
thinks there should be separation but 
hasn't been able to "study out" a way. 
«J Fro m 1900 to 1910 the number of 
farms in South Carolin a increased by 
20,825; but the number owned by 
Negroes increased by 11,295 against an 
increase of only 9,530 in the number 
owned by whites. I n a total of 176,180 
farms, 96,696, or more than one-half, are 
now owned by colored people. 
Th e Cit y Times, of Galveston, gives 
some statistics about that city's colored 
population of 8,000 souls. The y are engaged in twenty-nine different industries 
and professions. Ther e are three public 
schools, one Catholi c school, together 
representing an attendance of about 
1.200. Ove r 250 homes are owned in the 
city of Galveston alone, valued at about 
$200,000. Ther e are fifteen churches, 
their property representing about $120,-
000. Ther e are eight organizations in 
Galveston, ownin g real estate to the 
value of about $75,000. Th e total wealth 
of the colored people in Galveston from 
all sources wil l fairly represent a sum 
over $600,000. 
<J Answerin g the question wh y there are 
so few Negr o members of the molders' 
union, the International Molders' Journal says that the largest union in the 
South has recently voted to take qualified 
Negr o mechanics into membership, and 
that, whil e this action may not be in line 
with the prevailing sentiment of twenty 
years ago, it is in line wit h justice both 
to whites and to Negroes, "for industrial 
competition pays no heed to questions of 
social equality." 
RELIGIOUS . 
Th e Ne w Englan d Colore d Baptists' 
Missionar y convention, in Providence , 
voted to send a delegation of 5,000 to 
Washington , wit h a committee of fifteen 
for spokesmen, to tell President Taft of 
the wrongs the race suffers in the South. 
Non e of the details were fixed, but a 
membero f the executive committee said 
that they woul d probably gather in a 
Washingto n church and ask President 
Taft to address them, and send the committee to the Whit e Hous e later. Th e 
plan was introduced by the Rev. G. L . 
P. Taliaferro, D.D. , editor of the Christian Banner, of Philadelphia . 
<J Th e Rev. E . C. Morris, president of 
the Nationa l Baptist Conventio n of 
Nort h America , has been honored by 
being made one of the America n members of the executive committee of the 
Baptist Worl d Alliance . Th e colored 
Baptists of Americ a have now suitable 
recognition in this international association. Dr. Morris has been prominent in 
the Allianc e since the first meeting, held 
in Londo n six years ago. 
<J A n exhibition of mission wor k called 
"Th e Orient in Providence, " is planned 
in Providence , R. I., and representative 
Negroe s have protested against a proposed drawin g of the color line. A meetin g of colored ministers proposed that 
their churches withdraw from the move ­
ment. "Whil e all other churches are 
grouped according to locality, the Negr o 
churches are all grouped by themselves," 
the ministers say in their statement. 
"This narrow, unchristian spirit is resented by the colored people. It is 
strange that a 'missionary exposition' in 
reference to the people of China , Japan 
and Kore a cannot be given in Providenc e 
without also givin g an exhibition of race 
prejudice." 
<J In keeping wit h its policy of turning 
its large colored schools over to the 
management of Negroes as soon as practicable, the America n Baptist Hom e Mission Society has recently named Prof. 
Z . T . Hubert, president of Jackson Col ­
lege, Jackson, Miss. , to succeed Dr. 
Luthe r G. Barrett, a white man. Mr . 
Hubert is a graduate of Atlant a Baptist 
College , of Massachusetts Agricultura l 
College and Bosto n University , and has 
had lon g experience as a teacher in the 
Florid a State Agricultura l College and 
wit h the Hom e Missio n schools in 
Atlanta . 
EDUCATION . 
A council of presidents of the schools 
of the Africa n Methodist Episcopa l 
Churc h was formed by the sixteen heads 
of colleges attending the convention in 
connection wit h the Wilberforc e Uni ­
versity commencement. Joh n R. Haw ­
kins, of Kittrell , N . C , secretary of education, was elected president, and J. A . 
Jones, of Turne r Norma l School, Nash ­
ville, Tenn., secretary. Special committees on college wor k and general school 
management were named. 
<I Th e Tennessee State Boar d of Educa ­
tion is receiving bids for the Negr o norma l school to be erected near Nashville . 
*J Th e color question in the public 
schools is before the Supreme Court of 
Illinois. Aaro n Brown , of Quincy , has 
two children, nine and twelve years old. 
Th e board of education of Quinc y built 
a school for the colored children of the 142 THE CRISIS 
city, but as it is one and three-fourths 
miles from Brown's home he refuses to 
send his children to that school and the 
board of education wil l not admit them 
to the white school near his home. Th e 
board of education has prosecuted Brow n 
for not sending his children to school. 
In spite of the broilin g heat the municipal games for colored boys in Wash ­
ington were successfully held on the 
Howar d Universit y campus on Jul y 4. 
Th e papers remark that the boys were 
in such good physica l shape that only 
one was affected by the abnorma l heat. 
<î A thirteen-year-old colored girl in the 
San Juan district captured the highest 
of the several prizes offered in Ne w 
Yor k by the fly-fighting committee of the 
America n Civi c Association for the best 
essays on "Th e Hous e Fl y as a Carrie r 
of Disease." written by school children. 
Will e Henderson, the lucky little girl, 
got a ten-dollar gold piece for her essay, 
whic h is an eloquent arraignment of the 
dangerous fly. "If we only believed," she 
writes, in her painstaking roundhand, 
"that the filthy fly was the germ carrier 
we woul d not spend so much time disinfecting ourselves and avoiding the houses 
or streets in which disease may be found. 
Instead we woul d clean our rooms, make 
our homes sanitary and inspect the shops 
from which we buy our food." 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e first colored policeman appointed 
to the police force of Greater Ne w Yor k 
has been named by Polic e Commissione r 
Rhinelande r Waldo . His name is Samuel J. Battle ; he is six feet tall, weighs 
230 pounds, and is twenty-eight years 
old. 
Commissione r Waldo , in addressing a 
group of forty-four men newly appointed 
to the period of one month's probation,' 
called attention to the fact that there 
was a colored man among them. "I am 
glad to see that there is a representative 
of the Negr o race tryin g to become a 
policeman, " he said. "H e was on the 
civil service list, and no color or race 
condition could have prevented his 
appointment." 
Commissione r Waldo , in his appointment of a colored man to the police 
force, has continued a policy consistent 
with his former conduct. Th e Negroe s 
of the city have lon g know n him as a 
believer in justice to the colored race. 
Th e Commissione r is a Spanish wa r veteran wh o saw colored troops under action and wh o appreciated and remembered their fine discipline and courage. 
Whe n two years ago he ran for Congress 
in the Fifteenth Congressiona l District, 
he wo n many Negr o votes because of his 
unquestioned admiration of the Negr o 
soldiers and his detestation of the injustice done them at Brownsville . Thank s 
are due also to Mayo r Gaynor, wh o in ­
sists that civil service rules shall be 
respected. Th e appointment of Battle 
to the police force after he had passed 
a creditable examination was only an act 
of justice, but it is just this justice that 
the Negr o desires. 
'<! Mayo r Lambert, of East St. Louis, 
has announced that when the appropria ­
tion budget for 1912 is made up, it wil l 
include an item to be used for the establishment of a combination fire and police 
station to be manned by colored men. 
This station wil l be i n the Negr o section 
of the city, and the fire-fighters and 
policemen wil l deal solely wit h Negr o 
citizens and Negr o property. A t this 
time there are no colored men in the 
municipa l service, except the Cit y Hal l 
and police headquarters janitors, and 
four special officers, wh o wor k solely 
with their own race. " I feel that it is 
fair and just to both Negroe s and whites 
that the Negr o fire and police station 
be established, because of the numbe r of 
Negr o voters and taxpayers in the city, " 
Mayo r Lambert said. 
<I President R. R. Wright , president of 
the Georgi a State College and of the 
Colore d State Fair Association , has received offers of prizes from railroads for 
the best exhibit grown alon g their lines 
and shown at the fair next November. 
One railroad gives prizes of $100 and 
$60, another of $75 and $50, and several 
other roads are likely to follow suit. 
<J Th e colored people of Hartford , a city 
in which , as in Providence , there are 
many of the race, have combined to buy 
a farm near the city, on whic h they wil l 
care for the waywar d youths of their 
communit y and provide profitable wor k 
for them. 
CRIME . 
Publi c opinion in the State of Georgi a 
seems somewhat aroused over a recent 
lynchin g and it is possible the offenders 
may be prosecuted. Tw o colored men had 
been arrested, Alle n for an alleged attack 
on a white woman , and Watts for "loitering " nearby in a "suspicious manner." 
Judge Charle s H . Bran d ordered Alle n 
brought to Monro e for trial. It was 
known that the citizens had organized 
to lync h the man and Governo r Brow n 
asked Judge Bran d if he wanted troops 
at the trial. Judge Bran d returned an 
evasive answer and referred the Governor to Sheriff Stark. Th e latter said that 
Judge Bran d woul d have to ask for 
troops. N o wor d came, and the man was 
sent to Walto n Count y in charge of two 
officers. Th e train was stopped by a ALONG THE COLOR LINE 143 
mob, Alle n taken off, tied to a telegraph 
pole and shot, whil e the passengers on 
the train looked on. 
Th e mob, several hundred strong, and 
unmasked, then marched to Monroe , 
about six miles away, where Joe Watts 
was confined in jail. The y boldly proceeded to the jail, stormed it, took out 
the Negro , hanged him to a tree and 
shot him. 
Bot h mon denied that they were guilty, 
and there seems to have been no strong 
evidence against them. Members of the 
legislature say there wil l be an investigation and probably impeachment proceedings. Tw o months ago a Negr o was 
lynched at Lawrenceville , Judge Brand's 
home town, for alleged attack on a white 
woman. O n that occasion Judge Bran d 
also refused to ask for troops, although 
urged to do so, saying there was no danger. Tw o hours later the man was 
lynched. 
Judge Bran d admitted to a press representative, in an amazing interview, that 
he had realized the peril. 
"Whil e I want to discharge and have 
performed every duty whic h the law imposes upon me," he said, " I don't propose 
to be the engine of sacrificing any white 
man's life for all such Negr o criminals 
in the country. Whateve r other people 
may think about it, I am in perfect accord wit h my conscience and my God . 
I woul d not imperil the life of one white 
man to save the lives of a hundred such 
Negroes. I am opposed to lynching , but 
if I had called the militar y and some 
young man amon g the soldiers was killed 
or some of the citizens of Walto n County 
were kille d I woul d never forgive 
myself." 
<I A correspondent of the Charleston 
News and Courier, Be n S. Williams, 
writes a letter to point out that Southerners should be careful in their lynch -
ings lest they kil l the wron g man. H e 
tells a story to show how difficult identification sometimes is: 
"In your issue of the third inst. there 
appeared an account in whic h was correctly stated that the wife of a merchant 
of the town of Brunso n sitting alone on 
the piazza of her dwellin g just at dusk 
was approached by a Negr o man who, 
comin g on to the piazza, used insulting 
language; that fortunately a loaded pistol, near at hand, was quickly procured 
by the woman ; the Negr o fled and was 
fired at through the darkness but escaped 
unhurt. Th e Negr o on his first approach 
gave the name of Reverend Best (the 
name of a Negr o man resident of the 
town) as his name. Th e lady knew, 
slightly, the Negr o whose name was used 
and noticed in the twilight that the color 
and size of the Negr o present were about 
the same as of Best. So confident was 
she that she paid to him some change 
due the family of Best at first asked for. 
"Th e pistol shots brought persons hastily to the place of shooting and a rapid, 
eager search was begun for the Negr o 
Best. H e was not at home and was not 
in town. In the early followin g mornin g 
he was found and captured at a Negro's 
house a mile distant from town by two 
discreet men. Whe n taken before the 
woma n she said: 'Yes, that is the man ; 
that is Reverend Best.' It looked badly 
for Best. H e was hurried to jail. De ­
veloped the followin g day was that fact 
that at the time of the pistol shooting 
Best was on his way to the house in 
which he was found, and that a Negr o 
man about the age, size and color of 
Best—resident of the town—was seen on 
the street near where the firing occurred 
just before the firing. This man, John 
Sanders, was arrested quietly by the 
same two men who captured Best, his 
spirit of effrontery deserted him and he 
confessed guilt, gave a detailed statement of the whole affair and went wit h 
his captors and dug up at the root of a 
tree the half dollar he had collected and 
hidden when it seemed the 'game was 
up.' John Sanders was hurried to jail 
and Best was released. 
"These are the facts. No w for the 
conclusion. Th e husband of the insulted 
woma n was away from home. H e is a 
man of strong passions, violent temper 
and extraordinarily powerful physique. 
Ha d he been near home or had he returned before the landing of Best in jail 
about the time the intended victim of 
Sanders was mistakin g Best for Sanders, 
it is quite easy to imagine what would 
have happened to Best, innocent yet apparently so clearly guilty. 
"Ha d Sanders not been met by the 
woman wit h a pistol, had he succeeded 
in getting into the house and after making his escape as Reverend Best, it is not 
difficult to imagine a proceeding when 
Best was captured in which Best, though 
innocent, woul d have figured very prominently. 
"It is best to 'be sure yo u are right 
before yo u go ahead.' " 
Q Th e Wagone r (Okla.) America n is responsible for the followin g tale: 
"Pon y Starr and Joe Davis, of Porum, 
Muskoge e County, Okla. , made it known 
to the worl d that those who are members 
of a mob are nothing more than commo n 
cowards who seek to take the life of a 
human being without the sanction of law. 
I n this little town last week, thirty or 
more men in broad daylight went to the 
home of Pon y Starr for the purpose of 
putting to death Starr and his family and 
Joe Davis. Mrs. Starr first saw the approaching mob dressed in all forms of 
disguise; some wearing mother hubbards, women's dresses, etc. She 
quickly notified her husband of the comin g mob, and as they were sitting on the 
front porch of their home, they imme-144 THE CRISIS 
diately went into their rooms and returned wit h their automatic Wincheste r 
rifles and revolvers, and opened a continual fire on those wh o sought to take 
their lives. This momentary battle was 
so spirited that three were kille d in ­
stantly and eight or ten of the members 
of the mob were seriously wounded 
and several have died since from their 
wounds, and the survivin g members 
retreated in fast order. A few days 
after this battle Starr and Davis gave 
themselves up to the officers of the 
law, and as popular sentiment was so 
much in their favor the officers refused 
to incarcerate them. Th e old saying that 
mobs are usually made up of cowards 
wh o are willin g to take life but unwillin g 
to give up their own is a true axiom. " 
VAGARIE S O F PREJUDICE . 
Th e Clanmorgan-Collin s suit i n St. 
Louis has received much attention in the 
daily press, but it is sufficiently curious 
to be summarized here. Cor a Clanmorgan married John Collin s last August. 
In June the youn g husband, who is only 
nineteen years old, sued for annulment 
of the marriage on the ground that the 
wife had Negr o blood. Thoug h the percentage of Negr o blood is very small, it 
appears that the Clanmorga n family were 
know n by many people not to be entirely 
white. Th e laws of Missouri forbid the 
marriage of whites wit h persons of 
Negr o or Mongolia n blood. Mr . Clan ­
morgan said that he had opposed the 
marriage of his daughter but that the 
youn g couple had eloped. Th e case is 
further complicated by the fact that there 
is a new-born baby. 
Mrs. Collins' sister has been active in 
the Christian Science Churc h in St. 
Louis, where she had been accepted as 
white. Th e papers report that a meeting was held to consider the case and 
that it was decided not to ask Miss Clan ­
morgan to retire from such positions as 
she held. Th e two youngest Clanmorga n 
children are at white schools. 
Th e St. Louis Republi c reporter after 
a lon g description of the case remarked 
that "much sympathy was felt for the 
Collin s family, " though he went so far 
later as to observe that some persons 
extended a portion of that sympathy to 
the wife. Th e Clanmorgans have lived 
in St. Louis for over 100 years. 
•I A s the direct result of the agitation 
of the Collins-Clanmorga n case six members of the senior class at the Christia n 
Brothers' College notified Brothe r Justin, the president, that they refused to 
accept diplomas or participate in the 
commencement exercises, June 23, if a 
diploma was given to Albert Wilkinson , 
a colored boy. Brothe r Justin announced 
that Wilkinso n woul d receive his diploma 
publicly, and that the others migh t attend or stay away, as they pleased. Al l 
the boys but one gave in. Wilkinso n has 
been an honor student. H e is very light, 
and some of the teachers did not kno w 
he was colored until the six boys made 
their protest. Ther e was no objection 
to him whatever until the Clanmorga n 
case came up. 
<J A Denve r physician's automobil e ran 
over a colored ma n and injured him 
badly. H e was taken in the car and 
driven to four hospitals. H e was refused at all of them though he was 
thought to be dying . Finall y the owner 
of the automobil e took him to his own 
home. 
•I Applicatio n to admit a Japanese girl 
to the public schools caused a split in 
the Memphis Schoo l Board . It finally 
resulted in the passage of resolutions declaring that the Japanese are not of the 
white race, and therefore wil l not be permitted to share the same privileges in 
the public schools as whit e children. 
' <I A correspondent signin g himself 
"Protection " writes to the Ne w Origans 
Times-Democrat : "Whil e escorting a 
lady friend to the railroad train one 
mornin g during the week past, I was 
brought face to face wit h a condition 
that it woul d seem could not exist in 
this Southland of ours, and yet, it was 
painfully apparent does exist, to the disgrace it woul d seem of our State legislatures of the past. I refer to the fact 
probably undreamed of by man y of our 
citizens, that Negroe s are allowed free 
access to the Pullma n coaches of our 
railroads and by payment of the regular 
fare can occupy seats in these coaches 
for as lon g journeys as they care to take, 
the fare also entitling them to a berth, 
if the journey be at night. " 
"Protection " gives a livel y description 
of the horro r of the "lady friend, " and 
appeals to the "chivalr y and fearlessness" 
of legislators to "take up the fight for 
the sake of wome n and children, their 
own mothers, wives and sisters." It is a 
"vita l point, " he says. 
PERSONAL . 
Theodor e Cable, Harvard's colored 
athlete, wh o broke the university's record for the hamme r throw on Apri l 30, 
competed wit h twenty-two Harvar d and 
Yal e athletes in the internationa l meet 
wit h Oxfor d and Cambridg e i n July. 
Cable is twenty years old, weighs 185 
pounds and is 5 feet &y2 inches in height. 
In his freshman year at Harvar d he wo n 
the hamme r event in the freshman meet 
against Yal e wit h a throw of 117 feet. 
His athletic ability is not confined to the 
hammer, for he wo n places at Harvar d 
both in the sprints and the hurdles. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 145 
Last fall in the handicap games he 
took first place in the 220-yard low hurdles. This past winte r he wo n second 
place in an indoor broad jump competition wit h a leap of 20 feet 7 inches. Mr . 
Cable is a good violinist as well as an 
athlete. H e is partially workin g his way 
through college. 
q Dr. Burt C. Wilder, of Cornell , the 
great authority in this country on the 
brain, has just received a handsome lov ­
in g cup with the inscription : "T o Pro ­
fessor Burt G. Wilder, from a group of 
colored citizens of Ithaca, N . Y. , in appreciation of his services to the race and 
his unfailing courtesy and friendliness to 
the colored people of Ithaca." 
Dr. Wilde r said his first definite association wit h the Negr o was as a student 
at Harvar d under Prof. Jeffries Wyman . 
Durin g the Civi l Wa r his observations of 
the physica l and mora l courage of the 
colored troops had convinced him that 
they could be not only efficient soldiers 
but worth y citizens, and the publication 
of these records wil l be his first duty 
after retirement from university work . 
MISCELLANEOUS . 
Vardaman , of Mississippi, can always 
be relied on for entertainment of a melodramatic nature. I n his capacity of 
white man's champion he recently 
paraded through the streets dressed in 
white linen in a cart drawn by sixteen 
white oxen and surrounded by attendants also arrayed i n white. Variou s fair 
ladies wh o believe that the Negr o should 
be kept down threw white flowers at the 
gentleman and the populace generally 
had an entertaining time. 
Governo r Blease, of South Carolina , 
is having history written to suit himself. 
It is a disputed point whether or not the 
Federa l army fired Columbi a in 1865 
when the city was burned. Th e author 
of the history of South Carolin a whic h 
is to be used in the public schools said 
there was some doubt about it, but Gov ­
ernor Blease said there was none in his 
min d and ordered the offending paragraph changed. Th e author of the history obligingl y did as he was told and 
his text book has been adopted. 
Q '"Chocolate" is the stage name of a 
colored clown in Paris wh o has delighted 
that city for twenty-seven years, whil e in 
his spare hours he has gone to hospitals 
and amused sick children. H e is now 
retiring and at a meeting i n his honor 
he wil l be decorated by the Frenc h 
government. 
*J Gideon Welles, Secretary of the Nav y 
in Lincoln's cabinet, felt that he owed 
his life to Chester Stanton, his colored 
body-servant, and on his deathbed requested that the man should be buried 
beside him. Stanton died a few weeks 
ago and was duly buried in the Welle s 
plot in Hartford , whereupon a reporter 
i n search of a sensation sent out 
dispatches to the effect that the "exclusive" owners of cemetery lots objected 
to the interment to such an extent that 
they woul d remove the bones of their 
own relatives from the pernicious' contact. This sill y story, of course untrue, 
was quite widely circulated and believed. 
Onl y the Ne w Yor k World , among the 
papers that printed it, was honest enough 
to investigate and contradict its own 
dispatch. 
A t last 250 colored children of Mem ­
phis have seen the Zoo. Fo r four hours 
they were permitted to look upon the 
wonders of that white sanctum, the park, 
in whic h colored folk may not walk, 
though they have always the simple 
pleasure of payin g taxes for it. ' Ther e 
were "special deputized executors of the 
law " to see that their conduct was 
seemly. A s nothing desperate occurred, 
the children may go again some day. 
<J It may safely be said that the colored 
Georgi a convict by the name of Nea l has 
.established a record for honesty. H e 
was convicted of assault wit h intent to 
murder in 1909. His offense consisted 
of pointin g a gun at another, and the 
jur y recommended Nea l to mercy. Th e 
judge felt that the recommendation was 
not justified and sentenced Nea l to imprisonment on two counts, four years for 
one and one year for the other. B y 
mistake the man was liberated after 
having served one year. H e presented 
his case to Judge Edward s and said that 
he did not kno w what to do about it but 
felt he ought to serve his full time. Th e 
judge told him to go back to prison, but 
was so much impressed wit h the man's 
honesty that he has petitioned the Gov ­
ernor for a pardon saying that he himself was mistaken in not accepting the 
jury's recommendation to mercy. 
<J Mrs. Isabelle Worrel l Bal l made an 
address, in presenting a play to a colored 
social settlement in Washington , and 
said: "If the Unite d States government 
were to pay ten cents a day to the descendants of the slaves, wh o tilled the 
soil in the South during the eighty-seven 
years that slavery existed in this country, it woul d be indebted to them more 
than $11,000,000,000." 
<J Life , the humorous weekly, becomes, 
serious in speaking of several recent 
cases of Negro-baitin g in Ne w York . 
"Ne w York, " it says, "is a cosmopolitan 
city. It should have more cosmopolitan 
manners. It is quite intolerable that 
light-complexioned voters should regard 
themselves as clothed wit h congenital 
police powers for the regulation of voters 
whose skins are dark." , Me n of the Month 
J . E . SPINGARN . 
Joe l Elia s Spingarn, president of the 
Ne w Yor k branch of the Nationa l Asso ­
ciation for the Advancement of Colore d 
People, stands in the front rank of the 
younge r group of America n scholars. 
H e is widely known in this country and 
in Europ e as an authority on literature, 
J. E. SPINGARN. 
especially of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
H e was born in Ne w Yor k in 1875, and 
was graduated from Columbi a in 1895. 
Afte r four years of post-graduate study 
at Harvar d and Columbi a he received the 
degree of Docto r of Philosoph y from the 
latter in 1899, and was immediately made 
assistant in literature, under Professor 
George E . Woodberry . H e was promoted 
to tutor in comparative literature the 
followin g year; and when Professor 
Woodberr y resigned from Columbi a in 
1904, Dr. Spingarn succeeded him as 
adjunct professor of comparative literature; he was promoted to a full professorship in 1908, and was elected chairman of the division of modern languages 
and literatures in 1910. Ph i Beta Kapp a 
poet, 1901; represented the university at 
the Ne w Yor k Universit y Poe Centenary, 
1909. H e recently engaged in a controversy wit h President Butle r over a question of academic freedom and was "relieved from academic service" without 
explanation in Marc h last. 
Dr. Spingarn was the Republican nominee for membe r of Congress from the 
eighteenth Ne w Yor k district in 1908; 
this is a hopelessly Democrati c constitGILCHRIST STEWART, 
uency, but Professor Spingarn received 
eight thousand more votes than any preceding Republican candidate. Besides 
numerous contributions to periodicals, 
chiefly articles of a scholarly nature and 
some verse, he has written the followin g 
books : 
"Histor y of Literar y Criticism in the 
Renaissance, " 1899; second edition. 1908; 
translated into Italian, 1905. 
"America n Scholarship : A n Address 
Before the Congress of Comparative 
Histor y at Paris, " 1900. 
"Critica l Essays of the Seventeenth 
Century, " in three volumes, published by 
the Oxfor d Universit y Press, England , 
1908-9. 
"Th e Ne w Criticism: A Lectur e De ­
livered at Columbi a University, " 1911. 
"Th e Ne w Hesperide s and Othe r 
Poems, " 1911. 
"Seventeenth Century Criticism. " a MEN OF THE MONTH 147 
ROBERT N. WOOD 
chapter in the new "Cambridge Histor y 
of Englis h Literature, " published by the 
Cambridge Universit y Press, England . 
Professor Spingarn has always been 
deeply interested in the colored race as a 
race and in its struggle for justice and 
equal opportunity as an ideal. Last year 
he founded a little club for the colored 
men livin g near his country home at 
Amenia , Dutchess County , N . Y. , the 
"Heart of Hop e Club, " wit h its own 
ritual of initiation, clubhouse, etc. 
GILCHRIS T STEWART . 
Mr . Gilchrist Stewart, a youn g business 
man and the chairman of the vigilance 
committee of the Ne w Yor k branch of 
the Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d People, was born 
in Ne w Yor k and received his first education in the city's public schools. Late r 
he went to Tuskegee Institute and to 
Claflin University . H e began the fight 
for the Brownsvill e soldiers under the 
auspices of the Constitution League and 
went to the spot to investigate. 
Mr . Stewart was for some time a member of the Republican Count y Committe e 
and other politica l organizations. H e 
has been identified with a good many 
movements for the betterment of the 
condition of the colored people on the 
west side. In the matter of the Ne w 
Yor k branch the president hands to him 
a large part of the credit for the wor k 
of the vigilance committee so far. A n 
account of some of the cases taken up 
by the branch is given under Associatio n 
notes. 
ROBER T N. WOOD . 
W e give this month the photograph 
of Mr . Robert N . Wood , the leader of 
the Ne w Yor k State Democracy, in connection with the success of the colored 
people in obtaining the lon g desired 
Negr o regiment. Durin g the last election Mr . Wood's organization did signal 
service to the Democrati c party in sendin g out literature and in getting the 
colored men to vote the ticket. Ove r 
250,000 circulars were distributed and 
there is no doubt but that the colored 
vote materially helped to elect Governo r 
Dix . 
Amon g the demands made at the time 
was one for a colored regiment. Th e 
Democrati c party was virtually pledged 
to give such an organization. Whe n the 
election was wo n the colored Democrats 
asked for the regiment and made it clear 
that colored officers only woul d be accepted. Th e bil l was introduced in the 
Alban y Assembl y and was lost, at first, 
largely owin g to the fact that officers 
in the Nationa l Guar d rank according to 
length of service, and it is therefore inevitable that at some future day a 
colored colone l wil l take official precedence of a white colone l and the colored 
man's wife of the white man's wife. O n 
the defeat of the bill Mr . Woo d conferred wit h the leaders of the Demo ­
cratic party in the State, wh o urged the 
Legislatur e that the measure be reconsidered and the promise of the party to the 
Negr o be kept. Th e bill was reintroduced and passed, although the governor 
has not yet signed it. 
Fo r sixteen years the colored citizens 
of the State have been tryin g to get a 
regiment of their own. When , at the 
outbreak of the Spanish-American war, a 
committee of colored men called on Gov ­
ernor Blac k and asked that a colored 
regiment be formed they were told thai 
the Negr o was not called on to show his 
patriotism. Governo r Hughes, when a 
simila r request was made, referred it to 
a committee which said nothing about it 
and later sent it to the Adjutant-Genera l 
who disapproved it because of "social 
complications. " 
Mr . Woo d is a good fighter and a born 
leader, as one must be to hold his position. H e was born in Washingto n and 
was educated in the Ne w Yor k Cit y 
public schools. T o this education he 
adds information acquired by extensive 
reading, especially "along the color line. " 
H e is a very ardent advocate of the rights 
of the colored man and is one of the 
most active members of the Nationa l 
Association. OPINIO N 
TH E BRISTO W AMENDMENT . 
Th e Bristow Amendmen t to the bill 
providin g for the popular election of 
Unite d States senators has not been very 
favorably received by the press. I n our 
last issue we described the way in whic h 
this amendment had passed the Senate 
by a majority of one vote. Most papers 
think that the introduction of the amendment was insincere—that the senators 
wh o voted for it had no feeling whatever on the question of Negr o disfranchisement, but thought it a good opportunity to drag in the Negr o question, 
frighten off the Southern votes and defeat the so-called progressive measure. 
Th e Ne w Yor k World , for instance, 
calls the Bristow Amendmen t unnecessary and mischievous, and claims that 
it was put in for no purpose except to 
arouse sectional animosity and repeal the 
movement for the election of senators 
by a direct vote. It thinks "the fact that 
Lorimer, du Pont, Gallinger, Gamble , 
Guggenheim, Root, Smoot, Penrose and 
Stephenson voted for it explained its real 
meaning far more clearly than the text 
itself." 
Th e Ne w Yor k Press, a "progressive " 
Republican paper, also thinks that nothin g shows the insincerity of the Bristow 
Amendmen t to the Bora h joint resolution more than the character of most of 
its supporters. "Unde r cover of protecting the freedom of suffrage in the Blac k 
Belt, the promoters of this insincere and 
unenforcible project intend to deny the 
people of. all the States the right to elect 
their senators." 
Th e Ne w Yor k Globe thinks the 
amendment was "fathered of the desire 
to mi x things up." 
Th e Brookly n Eagl e is of the opinion 
that the effect of the Constitutiona l 
amendment in its amended form woul d 
be the nullification of the restrictions 
now imposed by the Southern Mate s 
upon Negr o suffrage, but to this the 
Ne w Yor k Tribun e replies: "Ther e is no 
ground of powe r in the Senate amendment whic h is not as old as the Constitution. " 
Th e Ne w Have n Courier-Journa l says 
the issue of direct election of senators 
has been clouded by the injection of the 
Bristow Amendment. It declares that 
"the people of this country have a right 
to decide what is best for them in the 
organization of their politica l household, 
and if in this regard the Senate has 
played fast and loose wit h them, those 
responsible wil l feel the lash of popula r 
discredit when the time comes. " 
I n fact, it is difficult to find a paper 
whic h approves the Bristo w Amendment . 
The y are either silent or vigorousl y declare that the whol e thin g was an attempt to defeat a measure that woul d 
have benefited the whol e population of 
the country. 
Th e Southern papers naturally object 
strongly to the amendment. Th e Mont ­
gomer y Advertiser, wbic h favors the direct election of senators, saysr "Th e 
proposed reform is prohibitivel y dear, if 
we have to buy it wit h our complaisant 
acceptance of the atrocious Forc e Bill , 
whic h a small band of devoted and courageous senators defeated i n the last generation whe n it appeared certain of 
enactment." 
Ther e is practically no voice raised in 
praise of the amendment givin g Congress 
control over the popula r election of 
senators. 
A BRAV E YOUN G MAN . 
Th e Dalla s Mornin g News is the most 
influential paper in its section of Texas. 
It publishes i n full the oration on the 
Negr o problem by a whit e lad, Alex . 
Spence, eighteen years old. Th e youn g 
orator took part in a contest at the high 
school, and we believe was awarded the 
first prize. Tha t the boy deserves a 
prize for the clearness and logi c of his 
address, regardless of subject, is evident. 
W e are informed that the editor of the 
Mornin g News has received a numbe r 
of protests about the publication of Mr . 
Spence's address, and it is as gratifyin g 
to find a Texa n newspaper printin g such 
sentiments as to find a Southern whit e 
boy entertaining them and expressing 
them in public, necessarily wit h the approva l of his parents. Afte r outlinin g 
the history of slavery and summarizin g 
the progress of the colored man, youn g 
Mr . Spen?e describes the attitude of that 
portion of the Southern people whic h 
urges that the Negr o be "discouraged 
and kept down" : 
"Th e advocates of the forceful repression theory, as it is called, usually urge 
about the followin g principles: 
"1. Th e 'nigger' must remain a 'servant to the whites.' 
"2. H e must not be educated, for 'education ruins niggers.' 
"3. H e must have no politica l rights. 
"4. Ther e must be no justice between 
'nigger' and white—if a 'nigger' kills a OPINION 149 
white, he must be lynched, if a white 
kills a 'nigger' he must go free. 
"5. Th e last and most important, the 
'nigger must be kept down' and 'must 
know his place.' 
"Needless to say, all our modern methods of thought rebel at the idea that one 
race is doomed to be a 'hewer of woo d 
and drawer of water' for another. Th e 
logic that Negroes can't be educated has 
been shown to be a mistake by the fact 
that the race has taken education. Th e 
argument that 'education ruins Negroes' 
for wor k is proven false by the fact that 
the race as a whole has done better work 
since the war than it ever did in slavery. 
"The remainder of these principles has 
for its foundation a mixtur e of fear and 
jealousy—jealousy of the Negro's past 
progress—and fear that in the future he 
wil l become an industrial riva l of the 
white man. I n the words of Thoma s 
Dixon , 'nobody believes that the white 
wil l allow the Negr o to master his industrial system, take the bread from his 
mouth, crowd him to the wall, and place 
a mortgage on his house, what wil l he do 
when put to the test? H e wil l do exactly 
what his white brother of the Nort h does 
when the Negr o threatens his bread— 
kil l him.' 
"Withou t stopping to consider that if 
the white man, wit h his thousand years 
head start, can't keep ahead of the 
Negro, he deserves to have his fields 
taken from him, let us consider the truth 
of these assertions. I said that this 
theory had for its foundation a mixture 
of jealousy and fear, but it has ignorance 
for its groundwork. It believes that the 
prosperity of the one race must be at the 
expense of the other. This belief was 
at the bottom of the ol d mercantile 
theory, which imagined that one party 
to a trade is necessarily cheated, but 
Ada m Smith, in his Wealt h of Nations, 
showed that instead of one being cheated 
that both were benefited by the exchange. So it is wit h the two races, the 
prosperity of one is the gain of the other, 
the adversity of one is the loss of the 
other. 
"In order to compare the two theories 
let us notice the theory of uplift, which 
is advocated by the leading thinkers of 
both races. The y believe that the Negr o 
is a fellow man, that we the whites owe 
him something for past injustices done 
him, and that the economic future of the 
South depends upon makin g him an intelligent laborer. The y realize that such 
a treatment of the Negroe s is highly expedient for the whites, since the Negr o 
is either to be one-third of the producing powe r of the South or one-third of 
its retarding, non-productive. If the 
Negr o is prosperous, the white can trade 
wit h him and each wil l be benefited; if 
he is kept in poverty, the white has just 
one-third less to do business with. Wit h 
proper training the Negr o can till the 
fields, work the cotton mills and do the 
other work of the South, whic h is not 
being done to-day on account of insufficient labor. 
"Bu t Dixo n asserts that this wil l take 
the bread from the white laborer's 
mouth. No t at all. Th e increase in 
earning powe r of the Negr o wil l raise 
his standard of living , enlarge his demand for commodities, hence makin g a 
larger supply necessary, and givin g additional employment to the white labor. 
Fo r instance, here is a Negr o wh o can 
neither read nor write, who lives in a 
one-room shanty, eats bacon and cornbread, lies around and sleeps when not 
workin g the least possible amount. Suppose we send his son to school. Soon 
that son wil l demand books and papers, 
then knives and forks, then better food, 
and finally a new house and some luxuries, and at the same time wil l have 
learned some useful trade. Ca n it be 
doubted that that Negr o is of more benefit to his community than was his father, 
yet whom has he crowded to the wall , 
and whose bread has he taken away? 
"No w let us notice the theories in regard to the civil and politica l phases. 
Is it wise to have different standards of 
justice for the two races? I answer no. 
Justice for every man, and every man 
for justice, was the cornerstone on whic h 
this government was builded, and on 
which it rests to-day. If we discriminate between men of different races it 
is only a question of time until we discriminate between men of the same race. 
I know of an instance where a Negr o in 
Dalla s county was given twenty-five days 
on the county road for stealing a rooster 
worth about five cents; I know of another, where, through the 'peonage system,' a Negr o worked a year on a farm 
for carrying a pistol, whil e how often do 
we read of officers murdering Negroes 
because they thought they were about 
to do something; the officers are rarely 
tried, yet what woul d be the result if the 
victims were white and the officers 
black? 
"Next, is it advisable to exclude the 
Negroe s from the ballot? Layin g aside 
the fact that history teaches 'where 
there are no politica l rights, civil rights 
also disappear,' and granting that the 
universal suffrage given by the Fifteenth 
Amendmen t was a mistake, and granting 
that the majority of the Negroe s are incapable of voting wisely at present, yet I 
maintain that the taking of the vote from 
them woul d be both unwise and unjust; 
unwise, because a large number of the 
Negroe s have acquired education and 
property, and to exclude them woul d 
necessarily make them discontented and 
rebellious; unjust because 'taxation with ­
out representation' is still not right, and 
governments do still 'derive their just 
powers from the consent of the governed.' Such devices as the 'grandfather 150 THE CRISIS 
clause' are strongly to be condemned, 
not only because they deprive a large 
number of our citizens of their wellestablished rights, but because they are 
educating our white people in the way 
of deceit and fraud, in the way of 
legal illegality. The y teach us to obey 
the letter and break the spirit of the law, 
and in a country where laws are as little 
respected as they are i n this country, 
this is a most insidious danger. 
"No w we approach the last phase, the 
Negro's position in our society. It is 
here that the Dixon s and Vardaman s 
raise their most strenuous cry, resurrecting that old ghost of 'social equality,' answer every argument with, the retort, 'Ho w woul d yo u like for your 
daughter to marry a nigger.' Th e advocates of the uplift plan do not urge 
social equality, they do not believe that 
the Negr o is a social equal, but they do 
believe that in his right to walk down 
the street without being jeered at, in his 
right to earn an honest living , in whatever trade or profession he makes himself proficient in, he is your equal and 
the equal of any man alive. Ther e are 
plenty of educated, refined Negroe s in 
this town, yet they never intrude, nor 
ever desire to mi x wit h the whites. The y 
do not ask to attend you r receptions, 
they do not ask to marry your daughters, 
but they do ask a square deal in the 
struggle of life. 
" I have tried to show wherein it is 
expedient that we succor these people 
we brought to our shores, but there is a 
greater reason than that of expediency, 
there is a higher law than that of dollars 
and cents. W e are strong and they are 
weak, we are rich and they are poor. 
Th e oppressor suffers more by his actions than does the oppressed, the benefactor reaps a greater reward than does 
the benefited. Remember, that when yo u 
choose, you choose for yourselves no less 
than for the Negro. " 
A SOUTHERNE R SPEAKS . 
Mr . Joseph C. Manning , formerly a 
member of the Alabama Legislature , has 
been touring Ne w Englan d to speak 
against the "Le t the South Alone " policy. 
Fro m the Brockto n (Mass.) Time s we 
take a report of some things he said: 
"This issue in the South is a national 
problem, and knowin g the conditions as 
I do I am tryin g to make the people of 
the Nort h realize what the condition of 
politics is in the South and to know ttte 
seriousness of the situation. It is popularly believed that the big majority of 
white voters in the South are Demo ­
crats. Th e opposition vote to the Demo ­
cratic party, the white vote and the 
black vote, has beeen kept down through 
frauds of many kinds. Ballot-bo x stuffin g and other things have been resorted 
to by the Democrats, causing the adoption of a new system, whereby the tricks 
of that party could be met and overcome . 
Th e conditions demanded this. 
"I n the last Presidentia l election, out 
of the 300,000 white men in the State of 
Alabama over 21 years of age, but 125,000 
were qualified voters. O f the 200,000 
colored men of votin g age less than 
3,000 of them were at the polls to vote. 
It is not enough. Th e last Governo r of 
Alabama wis elected on a ballot showing about 75,000 votes, whereas there are. 
combinin g whites and blacks, 500,000 
male citizens in the State of votin g age. 
The last Presidentia l election showed 
twelve Southern States votin g for the 
Democrac y on a total vote from these 
States of less than 1.200,000, whic h is 
800,000 less than the total of colored 
men of votin g age alone, saying nothin g 
of the 4,000,000 whites. 
"It was not many years ago that whit e 
men enslaved the Negro . No w some of 
these white man, bent on bossism, are 
using the Negr o to aid in the enslaving 
of other white men. This is in the form 
of ballot-box stuffing that is loomin g up 
in Alabama . 
" I have taken this matter up because 
I am of the South ; I have lived among 
the conditions and have seen them. Th e 
Negr o should vote. Th e same Go d that 
created the white man created the black 
man, and Go d intended, I believe, that 
every man should have equal opportunity under the law to protect his own. 
I have made some pretty definite charges 
against the Bourbo n Democracy , and I 
have been sustained by the Federa l 
authorities after investigations, but certain 
localities in the South were made pretty 
hot for me as a result. T o critics wh o 
have condemned me in my wor k I have 
always replied, as I now say to« you , 
'Wha t I am doing is for the sake of the 
South itself.' " 
TH E OPE N DOOR . 
President Taft, in his letter to Fis k 
University , observed that industria l education wil l be the salvation of the colored people, although there should be a 
few colleges where those wh o are to 
"lead the people" may be trained. 
Th e Ne w Yor k Worl d thinks this 
woul d have been better left unsaid 
"W e do not dislike this expression because it is new or because it is false 
but because it falls from the President 
of the Unite d States—the President of 
whites as well as the President of blacks. 
W e have in this country plenty of men 
and wome n learned in pedagogy and 
sociology wh o are perfectly able to give 
us all that we care to read or hear on the 
subject of selected classes. 
"It is obviously true that no great nation can be made up wholl y of members 
of the learned professions, but in a republic of equal rights and supposedly OPINION 151 
of equal opportunities, if an element or a 
race is to be set aside and devoted forever to the hard tasks of labor, we 
should prefer to have the sentence pronounced by somebody other than the 
Chie f Magistrate . 
"To o many American s have acquired 
the habit of condemning universal education. The y fancy a peasantry, ignorant, 
respectful and content. The y fancy also 
an aristocratic social organization in 
which they woul d take places near the 
top. N o doubt we shall have these superior thcorizers, philosophers, snobs, or 
whatever they may be called, always at 
our elbows, but they wil l exert little 
influence except as they occasionally bedevil men in great positions wh o ought 
to know better. 
"W e advise Mr . Taft to let the subject 
of education alone. Ther e is no compulsion about college training. Youn g 
men and youn g women , whether white 
or black, wh o get it by their own exertions are not to be stopped by anybody's 
ideas on the subject." 
MUSIC . 
The St. Louis Republi c prints a tribute 
to the Negr o as a musician. It points 
out that when Dvora k wanted melodies 
for his Ne w Worl d Symphon y he could 
get them only from the America n Negro . 
"Alon e of the three racial strains, the 
Negro has an inalienable native musical 
inheritance; black laborers in field and 
forest, black mothers in the whitewashed 
cabins of the South have a great store 
of song whic h belongs to them by right 
of creation. It has come out of the soul 
of the race; it is distilled of its melodies 
and its joys, its oppressions and achievements. 
"The citizen of St. Louis doubtful of 
the musical capacity of the Negr o woul d 
do well to visit the schoolhouse which 
stands near Jefferson Avenue , on the 
floor of the Mil l Creek Valle y at Papi n 
Street. This school, named for L'Ouverture, the black liberator of Haiti , enrolls 
1,600 pupils, which , is more than any 
other in St. Louis. Principa l Gordo n 
realizes the importance of cultivating the 
musical gift the children of his. race possess and takes an active personal interest 
in the work. Tw o things are specially 
notable—the quality of tone and the responsiveness to musical ideas. These 
colored boys and girls sing fortissimo 
without splitting their throats, like so 
many blackbirds (no witticism intended). 
An d the beauty and effectiveness of their 
crescendo passages must be heard to be 
appreciated. 
"Caucasians might as well admit the 
artistic superiority of the Negr o in the 
matter of susceptibility to music. " 
<J The Manassas (Va.) Journa l says 
there is no race problem in that part of 
the country, and pays a tribute to the 
influence of the colored industrial school 
there, and the capacity of the students 
for hard wor k and good manners. 
"N o matter how large the attendance 
may be at any of their public meetings, 
neither town nor county has ever found 
it necessary to appoint a single extra 
policeman or deputy sheriff, and nobody 
ever dreams of peril of either life or 
property in consequence of the presence 
of the school. Th e school itself, conducted in the manner i n which it is, is 
a safeguard to both. A s to the great 
racial bugbear about whic h theorists 
exploit theories and dreamers dream 
dreams—social equality. This is purely 
a personal and private matter about 
which neither white man nor black man 
here bothers himself. Ther e is no such 
thing as social equality among the members of any race itself on the face of the 
globe. Me n and women choose their 
likes and ignore their dislikes in every 
community in the world . Me n and 
women wh o do things in the worl d never 
trouble themselves about any question of 
equality." 
*J Th e Afro-America n Ledger, of Baltimore, says that the accommodations in 
the colored school of that city are insufficient. Th e trouble is, it thinks, that 
there is no one on the School Boar d who 
represents the colored race and knows 
personally the school's needs. Ther e are 
fair men, it admits, on the board. "An d 
yet, wit h all this in our favor the fact 
still remains that, as a separation exists 
in the entire social and economic life of 
the Negroe s so that the ordinary facilities of gaining a real insight into conditions among them do not obtain, it is 
essential for the community at large, as 
well for the Negroes themselves, that 
some sympathetic and adequately intelligent representative of that race 
should be a member of the board of administration. Unti l this obtains the 
board must be at a serious disadvantage 
in satisfying the real needs of the situation. " 
«I Th e Portlan d (Ore.) Leade r says: 
" A Louisian a Negr o stole a watering 
trough, worth $5. H e resisted arrest, 
and a mob finally effected his capture. 
H e was hanged without a trial, and with ­
out authority of law. The mob resolved 
itself into the courts, the law and the 
State, and acted summarily. Lif e at the 
price of a $5 watering trough is very 
cheap. In no country in the worl d is it 
held more lightly than in the Unite d 
States. If citizens, acting in a mob capacity, take life in defiance of law, what 
can we expect but that the crooks wil l 
also ignore the law, the courts, justice 
and constituted authority? " TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
TH E NE W YOR K BRANCH . 
Thoug h the headquarters of the Na ­
tiona l Associatio n for the Advancement 
of Colore d Peopl e are in Ne w York , the 
Associatio n has for some time felt the 
need of a Ne w Yor k branch, in order 
that the national organization might devote all its energies to the whol e field 
and not dissipate them by too much attention to the local problems of Ne w 
York . A s a result the Ne w Yor k branch 
was formed last winte r wit h the following officers: President, Mr . J. E . Spin -
gam ; vice-president, Bisho p Alexande r 
E . Walters; recording secretary, Mrs. 
F . R. Keyser; corresponding secretary, 
Miss M . W . Ovington . 
Th e branch proceeded immediately to 
organize its wor k and to spread the 
propaganda of the Association . Meetings have been held in various places, 
especially in colored centers, in order 
that the colored people of the city might 
themselves be brought to realize the 
need of organization and effective work. 
Several important cases have been in ­
vestigated,'with more or less satisfactory 
results. One of the most interesting is 
the Ming o case. 
Willia m Mingo , a colored man of good 
character, livin g at 351 West 36th Street, 
was hired by the Walwoo d Win e Com ­
pany as teamster and driver in place of 
a white man wh o had to be discharged 
because of continual periods of intoxica ­
tion. Th e stable at whic h the Walwoo d 
company put up its horse and wagon is 
in 38th Street, where most of, if not all, 
the other wagons and teams were driven 
by white men. In addition to these a 
very rough crowd or gang of white men 
made it their headquarters for lounging. 
A s soon as Mr . Ming o took up his 
wor k all kinds of threats were made 
against him, not only by the discharged 
employee but by the gang in sympathy 
wit h him. The y repeatedly stole things 
off of his wagon, followed it and purloined goods when he woul d be on the 
inside of places delivering orders. This, 
of course, was much to Mingo's annoyance and to the discomfiture of his 
employers. 
O n Saturday evening, June 3, when he 
was drivin g his wagon to the stable, 
Ming o was attacked by this crowd of 
hoodlums, but as he was carryin g a 
hatchet from the store to the stable in 
order to mend his harness, he held them 
off until the stable was reached. Puttin g 
up his horse, 'he came out wit h his wife, 
wh o is an intelligent woma n and wh o in 
the meantime had joined him. 
Whe n in the middl e of the block and 
near Eight h Avenue', he was struck on 
the head by one of this gang. Imme ­
diately his wife screamed, "Help ! Mur ­
der!" and he started to run for the store 
pursued by the gang, now augmented by 
large numbers wh o saw him running. 
Just as he reached the store and turned 
to open the screen door so that his wife, 
wh o had been runnin g behind him, might 
enter, a policeman wh o had been following on a bicycle got off his wheel, and 
runnin g to the middl e of the sidewalk, 
deliberately, and without any provoca ­
tion, shot Ming o twice. Th e man fell 
half way into the store, and as soon as 
possible an ambulance was called and he 
was taken to the Ne w Yor k Hospital, 
where his woun d was pronounced serious, but where he rallied more swiftly 
than had been deemed possible. 
Th e policeman, to justify his action, 
sent in a report that Ming o had the 
hatchet raised to strike him and that he 
shot in self-defense. Th e case came before the Magistrate's Court, 314 West 
54th Street, on Jul y 3, Judge Kernocha n 
presiding. Th e policeman's testimony in 
many instances contradicted that of the 
defendant's best witness, Mrs. Mingo , 
and the judge declared the case should 
go before the Gran d Jury . This wil l 
be, probably, some time in September. 
In the meantime Ming o is out on bail. 
Th e Associatio n secured the attorney, 
Counselor Willia m Smith , to defend the 
case and intends to do all in its powe r 
to see that justice is secured. 
Th e branch feels that it is especially 
important to fight the Ming o case to a 
final conclusion, in order that the police 
of Ne w Yor k may be made to realize 
the rights of colored citizens. 
Ver y typica l is the Mitchel l case: 
Robert Mitchel l was walkin g along 
150th Street, near Walto n Avenue , the 
Bronx , when two youn g white wome n 
suddenly turned a corner, and surprised, 
probably, by seeing a Negro , screamed. 
Mitchel l was attacked at once by two 
white men, and seeing that he woul d not 
be able successfully to war d them off, he 
started to run. Th e two white men were 
joined by others until he was pursued byhundreds, beaten and kicke d and cuffed 
and knocked down until he sank helpless 
in a doorway through whic h he was attempting to escape for refuge. THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 153 
He would undoubtedly have been 
beaten to death had it not been for Mr. 
John Huble and Mr . Arthur Graham, 
two white men, who successfully warded 
off the crowd, fighting the crowd back 
and themselves receiving very rough 
treatment until the police officer appeared. Instead of the officer arresting 
some of his assailants or commissioning 
Mr. Huble and Mr. Graham to do so as 
citizens, he blew his whistle, and upon 
the arrival of other officers, Mr. Mitchell 
was taken to jail where his wounds were 
dressed by a physician, who had accompanied the officers and who was returning from a visit, Dr. Hall. 
By the evidence of a Mr . Gregory, a 
white man, who fortunately had seen the 
whole thing, the evidence of the girls 
that Mitchell had sprung at them was so 
thoroughly discredited that Mitchell was 
discharged. Mr . Gregory was passing on 
the other side of the street and saw 
Mitchell leisurely walking along when 
the girls turned the corner. 
The case was investigated by Mr . MacNeal, 219 West 63d Street, who secured 
Mr. Gregory's attendance at court, as 
well as that of the other witnesses. 
This case illustrates the proposition 
which has been laid before the Police 
Commissioner that in the cases where 
hoodlums are attacking colored men, 
whenever the officers arrive and have to 
beat back the crowd, a number should 
be arrested, even if at the point of revolvers, in order that charges of felonious assault may be brought against 
them. District Attorney Whitman has 
promised to prosecute to the utmost extent of the law any bona fide case of 
these outrages that come within his 
province. 
But the most important work of the 
branch has been the creation of a New 
York Vigilance Committee for the immediate investigation and relief of all cases 
of outrage or discrimination against colored people in Greater New York and 
its vicinity. The executive chairmanship 
of this committee has been entrusted to 
Gilchrist Stewart, whose work in the 
Brownsville investigation is well known. 
The committee will welcome all factions and sections of the community to 
its membership, regardless of their affiliation with the national organization or 
local branch, and will make every attempt to stop the outrages which have 
been perpetrated against colored people 
in this city. 
The city has been divided into districts, each with its "captain," who is to 
report all cases of injustice immediately 
to the executive offices. A corps of 
voluntary investigators is also being 
formed. A campaign of publicity will 
soon be started, so that all colored people in the city may realize that in case of 
trouble they should immediately communicate their case to the committee. 
The New York Vigilance Committee 
will feel that its work has been successful when every colored man and woman 
in the city has come to feel that their 
rights are safeguarded by a disinterested 
and responsible body which will leave no 
means unemployed to give them justice. 
TH E OKLAHOM A LYNCHING . 
After the lynching in Oklahoma of a 
colored woman and her child the Association sent a letter to the Governor of 
Oklahoma commenting on the horror of 
the action and expressing the association's belief that the State would bring 
the guilty parties to justice. The following reply was received from Governor 
Cruce. With his permission we print it 
in full: 
June 9, 1911. 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, Chairman 
of Ex. Com. of National Assoc. for 
Advancement of Colored People, 
New York City. 
My Dear Sir: 
I was out of the city when your letter 
of the 27th ult. reached my office, and 
have had no opportunity to reply to it 
until this date. 
With reference to the. lynching of the 
Negro woman and boy at Okemah, to 
which you call attention, I beg to state, 
that immediately after this lynching the 
District Judge of that district called a 
Grand Jury investigatioa to try to apprehend the perpetrators of this outrage. 
The result has not been satisfactory, but 
the effort is still being made and will 
continue to be made to apprehend the 
guilty parties. 
It is not a question of the civilization of our people, as you seem to think. 
In this connection, permit me to state to 
you, that our people are just as highly 
civilized as the people of New York; in 
fact, more highly civilized than the 
masses of your people. There is not a 
State in the Union that can boast of a 
citizenship more cultured than Oklahoma 
when you take its population as a whole. 
With our Negro population eliminated 
we can show a higher percentage of lit' 
efacy than most of the States in the 
Union. 
It was simply a question of passion 
and race prejudice that resulted in the 
unfortunate lynching of the Negro 
woman and boy. An officer in the discharge of his sworn duty was wantonly 
shot to death by this woman and her 
son. I thoroughly agree that there was 
no justification for this lynching, and as 
Governor of the State I shall do everything it is possible for the Chief Executive to do to see that those who are 
guilty are brought to punishment. 154 THE CRISIS 
Yo u are engaged in an effort to advance the colored race, and it occurs to 
me that if yo u woul d let your efforts 
take a more practical turn yo u woul d do 
this race a greater service. Ther e is a 
race prejudice that exists between the 
white and Negr o races wherever the 
Negroes are found in large numbers, 
world-wide in its scope and by no means 
confined to the South. O n the other 
hand, the prejudice against the Negroes, 
when they become a menace by their 
increasing numbers, is much stronger in 
your section of the Unio n than in the 
South. 
Yo u wil l understand in the county 
where this lynchin g occurred that the 
Negroes outnumber either the white or 
Indian race. Just yesterday I received 
a communication from the Secretary of 
the State, callin g my attention to the 
fact that Oklahoma Negroe s were going 
to Canada, and that there was an effort 
on the part of the Canadian government 
to exclude them from that province, and 
asking that I call the same to the attention of the Oklahoma Negroes to prevent this migration, I hold that the 
Negr o has as much right to seek his 
fortune where he thinks his opportunities 
are better as any whit e man has, and 
if he thinks he can better his condition 
by goin g to Ne w Yor k or Canada, he 
should be given the privilege of going 
there. Ye t the chivalry of the North , 
speaking through the Secretary of State, 
to the chivalry of the South, says, "keep 
the Negr o in the South—we don't want 
them in our section of the world. " 
Just this week the announcement 
comes as a shock to the people of Okla ­
homa that the Secretary of the Interior, 
another chivalrous Norther n man, has 
appointed a Negr o from Kansa s to come 
to Oklahoma and take charge of the 
supervision of the Indian schools of this 
State. Ther e is no race of people on 
earth that has more antipathy for the 
Negr o race than the Indian race, and yet 
these people, numbering many of the best 
citizens of this State and nation, are to 
be humbled and their prejudices and passions are to be increased by having this 
outrage imposed upon them by one of 
the highest officials of the Federa l 
government. 
If your organization woul d interest itself to the extent of seeing that such 
outrages as this are not perpetrated 
against our people, there woul d be fewer 
lynchings in the South than at this time, 
and you can do a great deal more to aid 
the Negr o by seeing that other people of 
our section of the country are considered 
in these matters than yo u can issuing 
abusive statements against this country 
when a crime of this kin d is committed. 
I am as much opposed to mob law as 
any man on earth, and don't think that 
conditions ever justify a mob taking the 
law into its own hands. Oklahoma is 
especially favored as being practically 
free from any attempt to take the law 
in its own hands. Ther e have been since 
Statehood six hangings in this State by 
mob, and four of these were white men. 
Ou r laws are adequate and our juries 
competent, and except in cases of extreme passion, whic h no law and no civilization can control, the administration 
of justice is attended in this State wit h 
as little cause for criticism as in any 
other section of this country. 
Ver y respectfully, 
(Signed) LEE CRUCE, 
Governo r of Oklahoma . 
A t the same time the Chairma n 
received the followin g quite unexpected 
letter from an Oklahoma citizen : 
Dea r Sir: Oklahoma City , Okla . 
Send yo u a clippin g I saw and cut out 
of the automobil e magazine, which , 
think wil l convince you , we as a whole, 
are from the Nort h and are as whol e law 
abiding, and try to give the Negr o the 
privileges of advancements; certainly we 
have a few of the rougher border element 
whic h are fast disappearing. 
Ver y respectfully, 
B. R. HARRINGTON. 
Afte r diligent searching of the newspapers, and after correspondence wit h 
friends in Oklahoma , we cannot find that 
anything has been done to convict the 
guilty parties. Th e Negr o knows how 
difficult it is to secure justice on "simpl y 
a question of passion and race prejudice." 
DR . DUBOI S I N ENGLAND . 
Fro m Londo n the Directo r of Re ­
search and Publicit y reports a most successful campaign. Th e address before 
the Ethica l Cultur e Society was made to 
an audience apparently most appreciative. Th e Society gave a dinner in honor 
of Dr. DuBois on Jul y 7. 
O n June 26 Dr. DuBois was the guest 
of honor at the Lyceu m Clu b dinner. 
Th e Lyceu m Clu b from time to time 
entertains various distinguished guests 
and assembles other distinguished persons to hear them speak. O n this occasion her Highness the Ranee of Sarawak, wh o was in Londo n to take part in 
the coronation ceremonies, presided at 
the dinner. Th e guests of honor invited 
to meet Dr. DuBois were : Th e Countess 
of Bective ; Muriel , Viscountess Helmsley; the Rt. Rev. the Bisho p of Britis h 
Hondura s and Mrs. Bury ; Mr . Mauric e 
Hewlett, Sir Harr y and Lad y Johnston, 
Sir Perc y and Lad y Bunting , Sir Robert 
and Lad y Morant, Sir Lawrenc e and Lad y 
Gomme , Sir James Chrichton-Browne , 
Lad y Low , Miss Elizabet h Robins, Mrs. 
Comings, Mr . Henr y Nevinson , Mr . Fairbanks, Mr . Milholland . 
Dr. DuBois' address was listened to 
with great interest. Th e Bisho p of Brit-THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 155 
ish Hondura s and Centra l Americ a spoke 
on the subject; Miss Elizabeth Robins, 
the author; Mrs. Arthu r Phili p and Mr . 
Mauric e Hewlett also made brief 
addresses. 
Dr. DuBois described conditions in 
America , the denial of civil rights, the 
insults and humiliation the colored man 
and woman must face: 
"Wh y is this? It is not because the 
America n white people are unusually 
devilish—they are on the whol e about 
the same kin d of people that yo u are 
and yo u under simila r circumstances in 
India and Afric a have shown simila r 
tendencies. Consequently the American s 
interpret the public opinion of Europ e 
as justify them to make what I may call 
the three refusals: 
"1. Th e refusal to treat civilized black 
men as civilized. 
"2. Th e refusal to allow particular 
black men to become civilized. 
"3. Th e refusal to assume the possibility of civilizin g most black men. 
"These refusals involve great and 
threatening social cost. 
"Amon g the whites they give rise to 
insulting manners toward the lowly ; they 
prevent the contact of the cultured and 
the undeveloped; they lead to an absurd 
lack of logic, as, for instance, accusing 
of bad manners those against who m 
every effort is made to give them no 
chance to see good manners, and above 
all 'crying for purity of race after the 
whites have been responsible for two or 
three millio n mulattoes. Furthe r than 
this the three refusals lead to injustice 
in the courts and a terrible paradox in 
religion, for whil e professing a religion 
of humilit y and equality the Christian 
Church in Americ a has for the most part 
refused fellowship wit h black men. 
"Amon g Negroe s these three refusals 
lead to a loss of self-respect or immode ­
rate self-assertion; they hinder the natural differentiation into classes according 
to culture and efficiency, and they force 
thinking Negroe s either into subservient 
hypocrisy or paralyzin g bitterness. 
"Ho w far now is America's interpretations of Europe's attitude toward the 
darker worl d justified? It must be confessed wit h sorrow that modern Euro ­
pean civilization has fallen victim to the 
temptation of all former civilizations— 
the temptation of despising men ; of assuming that no other peoples are wort h 
consideration and respect but those who 
share their own culture. Th e tendency 
is to assume an inevitable aristocracy of 
races, with whites at the top and blacks 
at the bottom. N o sooner is this assumption boldly stated, however, than we 
remember that the same assumption was 
made less than a century ago concerning 
classes in the same nation, and that today European culture is largely sustained by descendants of social classes 
who m the eighteenth century pronounced 
incapable of uplift. 
"Moreover, science to-day places no 
meets and bounds to the development 
of races given the favorable environment 
and there is no scientific proof that an 
individua l of any race may not reach the 
highest. Fo r this reason is it not the 
wisest and best course to refuse to tread 
the paths of exclusion and human 
despisery and to see that the gates of 
opportunity are absolutely closed in the 
faces of no race or people?" 
O n Jul y 19 Dr. DuBois spoke before the Sociologica l Society, of whic h 
ex-Premie r Balfour is president. Sir 
Sidney Olivier, Governo r of Jamaica, 
presided. O n Jul y 24 he spoke before 
the Subject Races Society. 
Dr. DuBois has met and been entertained by many persons interested in 
social problems as well as by a number 
of persons distinguished in literature, 
Sir Harr y Johnston, Sir Perc y Bur>ting, 
editor of the Temporar y Review; Mr . 
Kie r Harding , the labor leader; Mr . 
Herbert Burrowes, the socialist; Mr . 
Arthu r Ponsonby, the M.P. ; Mr . Mauric e 
Hewlett, Mr . and Mrs. Haveloc k Ellis, 
Miss Elizabet h Robins and many others. 
Th e Ranee of Sarawak has been particularly interested in the problem of the 
color line in this country. O n Jul y 11 
she gave a reception in honor of Dr. 
DuBois, invitin g the Archbisho p of Can ­
terbury and various distinguished guests 
to meet him. Receptions to the delegates of the Races Congress have' been 
given by the Countess of Warwic k and 
one of the Indian princes. 
INCORPORATION . 
Th e Nationa l Associatio n is now a 
duly incorporated body. Th e incorpora ­
tion took place June 19, 1911. Lac k of 
space prevents our givin g the articles 
and by-laws in this issue, but next month 
we hope to present them to our readers. 
A t the first meeting of the Boar d of 
Directors, June 20, the officers already 
serving the committee were nominated: 
President, Mr . Moorfiel d Storey; vicepresident, Mr . John E . Milholland ; vicepresident, Bishop Alexande r Walters; 
chairman of board, Oswal d G. Villard ; 
secretary, Miss Mar y Ovington ; treasurer, Mr . Walte r Sachs: director of publicity and research, Dr. W . E . B. DuBois. 
Th e followin g appointments of committees were announced by the chairman: 
Finance—Walte r E . Sachs, chairman; 
Oswal d G. Villard , Dr. W . E . B. DuBois. 
Miss Mar y Ovington . Lega l Redress— 
O. G. Villard , Thoma s Ewing , Jr., chairman ; Willia m M . Wherry , Jr., C. Ame s 
Brooks. Publications—Dr. W . E . B. 
DuBois, chairman; Mrs. M . D . Maclean , 
W . L . Bulklcy . Membership—Miss L . 
O'Reilly , Mrs. M . D . Maclean , Rev. Clay ­
ton Powell . Genera l Attorney—C. Ame s 
Brooks. 156 THE CRISIS 
THE WORLD IN COUNCIL, LONDON, JULY 26-29 
"I believe that all men, black and brown and white, are brothers, 
varying through time and opportunity, in form and gift and feature, but 
differing in no essential particular, and alike in soul and in the possibility of 
infinite development." EDITORIA L 
RACES . 
I F THOS E Americans who have 
long since said the last word concerning the races of men and their 
proper relations will read the papers 
laid before the First Universal Races 
Congress, they will realize that Amer ­
ica is fifty years behind the scientific 
world in its racial philosophy. 
Before the publication of this epochmaking volume, TH E CRISIS would not 
dare to express the statements which 
are contained therein. The leading 
scientists of the world have come forward in this book and laid down in 
categorical terms a series of propositions which may be summarized as 
follows: 
1. (a) It is not legitimate to argue 
from differences in physical characteristics to differences in mental characteristics, (b) The mental characteristics differentiating a particular people or race are not (1) unchangeable, 
or (2) modifiable only through long 
ages of environmental pressure; but 
(3) marked improvements in mass 
education, in public sentiment, and in 
environment generally, may, apart 
from intermarriage—as the history of 
many a country proves—materially 
transform mental characteristics in a 
generation or two. 
2. The civilization of a people or 
race at any particular moment of time 
offers no index to its innate or inherited capacities. In this respect it is of 
great importance to recognize that in 
the light of universal history civilizations are meteoric in nature, bursting 
out of relative obscurity only to plunge 
back into it. 
3. (a) One ought to combat the 
irreconcilable contention prevalent 
among the various groups of mankind 
that their customs, their civilization, 
and their physique are superior to 
those of other groups, (b) In explanation of existing differences it would 
be pertinent to refer to the special 
needs arising from peculiar geographical and economic conditions and to related divergencies in national history; 
and, in explanation of the attitude of 
superiority assumed, it should be 
shown that intimacy leads to a love of 
our own customs, and unfamiliarity, 
among precipitate reasoners, to dislike 
and contempt for others' customs. 
4. (a) Divergencies in economic, 
hygienic, moral and educational standards are potent causes in keeping peoples apart who commercially or otherwise come in contact with each other, 
just as they keep classes apart, (b) 
These differences, like social differences generally, are in substance almost certainly due to passing social 
conditions, and not to inborn characteristics ; and the aim should therefore be, as in social differences generally, to remove these differences 
rather than to accentuate them by 
regarding them as fixed. 
5. (a) The deepest cause of misunderstandings between peoples is perhaps the tacit assumption that the 
present characteristics of a people are 
the expression of permanent qualities. 
(b) If this is so, anthropologists, sociologists and scientific thinkers as a 
class could powerfully assist the movement for a juster appreciation of peoples by persistently pointing out in 
their lectures and in their works the 
fundamental fallacy involved in taking 
a static instead of a dynamic, a momentary instead of a historic, a fixed 
instead of a comparative, point of view 
of peoples; (c) and such dynamic 
teaching could be conveniently introduced into schools, more especially in 
the geography and history lessons, 
also into colleges for the training of 
teachers, diplomats, Colonial administrators, preachers and missionaries. 
6. (a) The belief in racial or national superiority is largely due, as is 158 THE CRISIS 
suggested above, to unenlightened 
psychological repulsion and underestimation of the dynamic or environmental factors, (b) Since, therefore, 
there is no fair proof of some races 
being substantially superior to others 
in inborn capacity, our moral standard, 
or the manner of treating others—seeing how under favorable circumstances one people after another rises 
to fame, and how members of all 
human groups pass through universities with equal success—should remain the same whatever people we are 
dealing with. 
7. (a) So far at least as intellectual and moral aptitudes are concerned, we ought to speak of civilizations where we now speak of races, 
(b) Indeed, even the physical characteristics, excluding the skin color of a 
people, are to no small extent the 
direct result of the physical and social 
environment under which it is living 
at any moment, and hence these characteristics differ measurably both in 
the history and in the different social 
strata of one and the same people; 
and (c) these physical characteristics 
are furthermore too indefinite and elusive to serve as a basis for any rigid 
classification or division of human 
groups, more especially as there has 
been much interbreeding among all 
peoples and because race characteristics are even said to distinguish every 
country and almost every province. 
8. (a) The most fruitful cause of 
race crossing is ill-will—as illustrated 
by war, conquest, slavery, exploitation 
and persecution—for where there 
exists mutual respect the differences 
in differing traditions, etc., make it 
almost an invariable rule that intermarriage is avoided—as is shown by 
any two nations friendly to each 
other; (b) but intermarriage, we find 
—contrary to popular tenets—improves the vitality and capacity of a 
people, and cannot, therefore, be objectionable in itself, (c) Th e chief 
drawback to intermarriage between 
peoples is the same as the drawback to 
intermarriage between different social 
classes—i. e., the different traditions 
of the partners in marriage, (rf) 
Those who dread intermarriage 
should, therefore, reflect both that 
there is no such thing as purity of 
race, and that the rate of crossing decreases with the increase of interracial and international amity. 
9. (a) Eac h people might study 
with advantage the customs and civilizations of other races or peoples, 
including those it thinks the lowest 
ones, for the definite purpose of improving its own customs and civilization, since the lowliest civilizations 
even have much to teach, (b) Dignified and unostentatious conduct and 
deferential respect for the customs of 
others, provided these are not morally 
objectionable to an unprejudiced mind, 
should be recommended to all who 
come in passing or permanent contact 
with members of human groups that 
are unfamiliar to them. 
These are a fair summary of the 
conclusions of writers who are among 
the best-known names in modern 
science. In the next number of TH E 
CRISIS we shall give some of their 
views at length. 
LYNCHING . 
TH E mob spirit in Americ a is far 
from dead. Time and time 
again the disappearance of 
lynching has been confidently announced. Still this species of murder 
and lawlessness flourishes blithely. Its 
sickening details in the last few weeks 
have been as bad as could be imagined. Th e cause of this is obvious: 
a disrespect for law and a growing 
cheapness of human life. Wh y should 
America lose respect for law ? Because for years some of its best brains 
have been striving both in the profession of law and on the bench to show 
how worthless legislation is and helpless to accomplish its ends. T o cite an 
instance: The Constitution of the 
United States, the highest law of the 
land, says that citizens of the United 
States cannot be disfranchised on account of race or color. Ye t every 
schoolboy knows that Negro Americans are disfranchised -in large areas 
of the South for no other reason than 
race and color. This is but one instance of our laughing at law. EDITORIAL 159 
Wh y should America count human 
life cheap? Because it is cheap. Be ­
cause it is difficult to punish a rich 
murderer and extremely difficult for a 
black suspect to escape lynching. Back 
of the despising of life lies the contempt for men who live. They are 
not ends, but means—"hands" for 
doing my work, "masses" for me to 
contemplate, "niggers" for me to keep 
down. Thei r lives, their hurts, their 
thoughts and aspirations—what is 
that to me as long as I live and enjoy 
and rise? Shall my race be disturbed, 
my fortune taxed, my world turned 
upside down because six black men in 
Florida are murdered or a woman and 
a child hanged by ruffians at Okla ­
homa? Nonsense. They are not 
worth it. They can be bought for 
fifty cents a day. Thus we despise 
life. 
The result is mob and murder. The 
result is barbarism and cruelty. The 
result is human hatred. Come, 
Americans who love America, is it not 
time to rub our eyes and awake and 
act? 
LONDON . 
THER E is in the world no city 
like London. No r is its distinction merely a matter of size. 
To be sure, it is a vast aggregation of 
men—it gives the visitor a curious 
sense of endlessness by its very disorganization, by the fact that one can 
find center after center of busy running life stretching away mile after 
mile and yet all is London. London 
has no beauty that will compare it to 
Paris, no blare and flare like New 
York . 
Ye t London has an individuality, 
a tradition and an importance that 
make it the capital of the world in a 
sense, true of no other center since 
the days of imperial Rome. The individuality is peculiar, subtle, striking 
—yet difficult to express. One sees a 
busy mart of endless interests, worldwide ramifications, tremendous power. 
One sees a tradition, a memory clothed 
in living flesh and word, and a power 
which makes this city an expression of 
the empire on which the sun never 
sets. 
This empire is a colored empire. 
Most of its subjects—a vast majority 
of its subjects—are colored people. 
An d more and more the streets of 
London are showing this fact. I seldom step into the streets without 
meeting a half dozen East Indians, a 
Chinaman, a Japanese or a Malay, and 
here and there a Negro. There must 
be thousands of colored people in the 
city. They do not, of course, color 
the world so obviously as in an American city, but one senses continually 
the darker world. 
N o pageant to-day in London is 
complete without the colored representatives. In the two great coronation processions it was the black and 
brown and yellow Indian princes in 
the brilliant magnificence of their silk 
and jewels who shared the plaudits of 
the crowds with the king himself, and 
the black Prince of Abyssinia rode 
among the royal guests. 
London is polite and considerate to 
her darker brothers. There is color 
prejudice and aloofness undoubtedly 
here, but it does not parade its shame 
like New Yor k or its barbarity like 
New Orleans. Hotel, theater and restaurant stand not only open, but studiously attentive and polite. The 
courtesies of the street and the tramcar are thoughtfully passed, and in the 
highest social life colored men and 
women at the last days of festivity sat 
at the tables of the highest in the 1-and. 
Ye t London is uneasy. London is 
sensing the strength and determination 
in the darker world and is wondering 
what it all portends in the future. The 
unrest in India and Egypt causes deep 
and widespread apprehension in all 
England, and the situation in South 
Afric a is being narrowly watched. 
Wha t more fitting center then than 
London for the coming together of the 
first world conference of the races 
and peoples of the world! The y are 
to meet not as master and slave, missionary and heathen, conqueror and 
conquered—but as men and equals in 
the center of the world, and the meeting will be watched with intense interest and remembered for many a long 
day. W . E . B. D . View s of a Southern Woma n 
B y ADELEN E MOFFA T 
A n Address Before tne Thir d Annual Conference of tne National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
I have been asked to speak for a few 
minutes at this conference for much the 
same reason, I suppose, that families at 
feud wit h each other in the part of the 
country from whic h I came originally 
choose the county line for the scene of 
their more explosive undervaluations of 
each other. Th e probability of the 
sheriffs of both counties appearing simultaneously ig so small that differences 
may be discussed in the most carefree 
manner if only a subconscious sense of 
geography and a policy of rapid transit 
across the line be maintained by both 
sides. 
Havin g been brought up in the South 
and having lived the latter part of my 
life in the North , I find myself a North ­
erner in the South and a Southerner in 
the North . Since it is this personal point 
of view that I have been asked to express, I hope I may be forgiven for a 
too frequent use of the personal pronoun 
and for quoting personal experiences. 
I think because I am both Southern 
and Norther n I am more keenly aware 
than many of the inconsistencies on both 
sides—inconsistencies of phrase, of feeling and of policy. It seems to me that 
one of the most important functions of 
this association is that it wil l serve as 
a clearing house for misunderstandings 
and misrepresentations. 
O n this race question we seem to be 
unable to reach real issues because we 
are to so great a degree governed by 
phrases rather than by facts; and most 
of the facts are new and most of the 
phrases old. I often wonde r if there 
has ever been outside the realm of religion a cause so phrase-ridden. This 
woul d be less deplorable if many of 
these ready dicta had not become so distorted from their origina l intention and 
application that on both sides of the line 
we believe we think many things we do 
not think at all. 
W e are quite sure we have feelings 
whic h it has been clearly demonstrated 
we have not. W e think we have race 
prejudice in the South, but we have not: 
we have only caste prejudice; the race 
prejudice is in the North , and the caste 
prejudice is growin g here. Th e ways in 
whic h caste and race prejudice find expression in the Nort h are beyond the 
comprehension of the Southerner and 
arouse his humor or his indignation according to the seriousness of the in ­
cident; often accordin g to the extent of 
the hardship inflicted upon the colored 
person. O n the other hand, the North ­
erner stands amazed and helpless before 
the incomprehensibl e mental processes of 
the Southerner, his utter lack of logic . 
I shall never forget the amazement of 
a youn g Southern woma n when she first 
came Nort h to discover that a colored 
woma n had been unable to find anyone 
to make a dress for her. A s she turned 
around from the stamp windo w i n the 
post office, a large, not too clean, middle -
aged "darkey" fell upon her. "Yo u all 
from the South, isn't you? Well , the 
Lor d certainly have sent you ! Won' t 
yo u please, ma'm, make me a dress? I 
came up here to wor k i n the clothes I'm 
standing in, thinkin g I could buy me 
somethin' or git somethin' made, and the 
store clothes is all too little and too 
fancy, and I've been everywhere there is 
to go an' there ain't anybody wil l make 
a dress for colored folks. Ain' t that the 
beatenest?" Th e youn g Southern lady 
thought it was. O f course she made the 
dress, to the horro r of some of her 
Norther n friends, saying to herself: "An d 
this is Massachusetts! " She had been 
accustomed all her life to see the youn g 
girls of good famil y make money for 
their Easte r offerings by sewing for 
colored people. 
O n the other hand, a white trained 
nurse who m I knew in the South is in 
settlement wor k in a neighborhood where 
there are white and colored. She never 
asks when a case is reported to her what 
the complexio n of her patient is—she 
goes to white and colored alike. She 
wil l care conscientiously and tenderly 
for a colored patient and perform all 
those menia l offices glorified by her profession without a thought of doin g otherwise, however diseased, ignorant or debased her patient may be, but she wil l 
not hand her patient's chart to a colored 
doctor, though he be immaculate in person, of irreproachable morals, and wit h 
an education and an accent whic h she 
woul d boast wit h pride were as good or 
better than her own ! 
Th e artificiality of the barrier between 
the two races could be shown by hundreds of better incidents than these. It 
is this artificiality that creates the problems and prevents each race from having 
the freedom to wor k out its own destiny. 
Ther e is no Negr o problem except as we VIEWS OF A SOUTHERN WOMAN 16 1 
think there is a problem. The problem 
is a common problem of humanity—it is 
the problem of bad housing conditions, 
bad sanitary conditions, bad political 
conditions, bad industrial conditions, insufficient education, of both white and 
black. 
The "white Southerner will come to 
realize, I think, that what is good for 
any other race is good for the colored 
race. There is a growing company of 
white Southerners who feel that we want 
for our colored Southerner every 
advantage and every help, every advancement that has been found to be 
good for any other handicapped race. 
The time has gone by, if it ever existed, 
when there was but one type of Southerner, with but one kind of a political 
and social creed. 
Unfortunately, until comparatively recent times there has been, with one or 
two notable exceptions, but one kind of 
Southerner who talked. But the silent 
minority, silent because speech was useless, has always been larger, I think, 
than is generally realized, and silence 
has not prevented thinking. And the 
thinking begins very early sometimes. 
The little daughter of a friend of mine, 
a child between four and five years old, 
was watching one of the colored women 
washing up the hearth in the nursery 
one morning. The woman sighed. 
Louise said, "What make you do lak' 
that, Viney?" 
"I reckon I'se tired, honey." 
"What makin' you tired, Viney? Is it 
'cause you'se always washing up the 
hearth?" 
"I reckon so." 
"Is you washing up the hearth all the 
time 'cause you'se black, Viney?" 
"I reckon so." 
"Oh, Viney, what's the matter with dis 
worl' anyhow!" 
It is this "insurgent" element in.the 
South that most needs the help and 
co-operative sympathy of the North— 
intelligent, farsighted and progressive 
co-operation. We feel that the beauty of 
desolation is all very well; but we like to 
be sympathized with for present conditions and not for past. We feel that the 
war was fought a very long time ago, 
before most of us were born. That 
forty-five years is a long time to be 
talking about it. We do not feel in a 
strong personal way the loss of wealth 
because we have never had it. We are 
like the mountaineer who when asked 
how he was getting on, said: "Oh, tolerable; I'm still a-holding my own. I began 
with nothin' and I ain't got nothin' yit." 
What we do want is help to outgrow our 
prejudices an,d fears, our hysterical politics, which are the result of having had 
in our country an institution which we 
have had to defend to ourselves and to 
the outer world. The North could give, 
and has right to give, a more certain, 
more vital aid in this direction. 
There are two classes North and 
South, perhaps I should say one class, 
who form a serious obstacle to the right 
and speedy solution of our Southern 
problem. These are the charming people, the charming Southerner who makes 
one believe that nothing can be wrong 
in a social system where the people are 
so delightful. "Just leave them alone! 
They know how to deal with their questions better than anyone else." This is 
the attitude toward them. There are 
also the charming, sympathetic Northern 
people who go down south for the winter or less, and say, almost with an air 
of virtue, "If I lived in the South I 
should feel just as the Southerners feel." 
One is tempted to make the reply of the 
Italian official to Bismarck, "The explanation is ample, the excuse is insufficient." 
I think the progressive party in the 
South needs, more than it has ever 
needed, the moral support of the North 
and its active assistance in a campaign 
of education. It is most discouraging to 
see many intelligent Northerners who 
would not for a moment tolerate in their 
own State, no matter what the cost, conditions they acquiesce in in the South, 
accepting the point of view of the least 
progressive, least thoughtful Southerners, permitting them unhesitatingly to 
dictate what shall be the attitude of 
Northerners in the North—sometimes 
even treating the aggressive prejudices 
of silly young Southern students as serious questions, instead of mere provincialisms soon worn off by contact with 
a broader world. One young Southern 
student at least received a much more 
wholesome and educative consideration. 
Soon after her arrival in the North, when 
her acquaintances were few and her 
social impulses many, a certain distinguished and delightful New Yorker said 
to her: 
"I am so sorry I can't ask you to come 
to the tea I am giving in my studio. 
There is to be a young colored artist 
there, just returned from Paris; knowing 
your feeling I thought it would be more 
polite not to ask you. Perhaps some 
other time', etc." The young take disappointments hard. The other time never 
came, and this particular student wondered somewhat wistfully if prejudice 
paid. Some way or other it didn't seem 
so fundamental to the preservation of 
society when she was excluded. If the 
young colored student had been debarred 
it would have seemed a patriotic virtue. 
The responsibility for race discrimination, whatever the race discriminated 
against, seems to lie largely upon people 
who do not hold themselves responsible 
and who can hardly be held responsible 
except through an enlightened public 162 THE CRISIS 
conscience—that is to say, the ordinary 
citizen goin g about his business or pleasure. A very large responsibility rests 
upon all agencies for socia l uplift. If 
they do not take the right stand it is 
hard to expect individuals here and there 
to do so. Th e encouraging aspect of the 
matter is that the difficulties are usually 
much more imagined than real, and this 
wil l be realized sooner or later. I n a 
certain social work, covering a period of 
some years, there has been the opportunity to observe and compare most in ­
terestingly the working s of this unintelligent tendency to race prejudice. 
Th e first to appear on the scene were 
the Irish, the next were the Frenc h 
Canadians; upon the approach of the latter the Irish rose in a body and demanded that the French-Canadians be 
excluded, saying that they did not want 
them comin g there, that they woul d 
break up the club if they came, and that 
many of the best members woul d leave. 
Th e reply of the authorities was: "This 
institution is open to all nationalities and 
all creeds. Th e only basis of admission 
is good character and good behavior. 
The French-Canadia n members fulfil 
those requirements. Th e house is here 
for those wh o come to it; if yo u do not 
come, then yo u have nothing to say 
about how it shall be run. " Th e Irish 
and French-Canadians soon found that 
they liked each other very well indeed. 
The Jews were the next to approach. 
Bot h Irish and French-Canadians united 
against them. Agai n the management 
stood firm and the results were the same. 
This experience was repeated wit h 
more than fifteen nationalities. Finall y 
all combined against the Negro . Th e 
management again withstood the combined pressure, saying cheerfully, "If yo u 
all leave, the place can still be run for 
colored people, and if you remain and 
make it uncomfortable for them or any 
other nationality yo u most certainly wil l 
be requested to leave." Agai n the result 
was the same as on previous occasions. 
Almost immediately the whol e incident 
was forgotten. 
In a social settlement in Cambridge , 
in a colored and whit e district, colored 
and white have been comin g to the house 
in equal numbers for over fifteen years. 
So little is the question of color thought 
of that it not infrequently happens that 
i n selecting persons for a play the youn g 
people entirely forget that perhaps some 
of the audience may feel that the dramati c unities are not being altogether 
preserved, when a flaxen-haired, blueeyed boy or girl and a very dark colored 
child elect to be brothe r and sister in 
the play. Th e Woman's Clu b has always 
had about an equal numbe r of white 
and colored members. Th e colored people are often in greater demand than 
some of their whit e neighbors owin g to 
their agreeable and refined manners. 
Th e distinctive traits of the colored 
people, those in whic h they seem to surpass the other nationalities whic h go to 
make up the America n people, are urbanity, love of music, poetic imagination and 
social adaptability. Ha s Americ a so 
many of these qualities that it can afford 
to cavil if the gift comes to it wrapped 
up in brown paper instead of white ? 
Whe n one looks at wha t the Negr o 
has accomplished i n a generation since 
the war, when one considers the amount 
of education he has been able to acquire, 
the amount of his savings and his in ­
vestments, when one catches i n the literature of his race the strong, clear note 
of a rising people, a people meaning to 
rise to the highest America n ideals (they 
know no other), it seems to be no longe r 
a question of the education of the black, 
but of the education of the educated 
whites. 
TH E HEART' S DESIRE . 
By Robert W. Justice. 
Floa t ever by me 
In countless numbers, 
Lik e waves in the mighty sea, 
Strange faces of alien gaze, 
Hurryin g on to and from the daily strife, 
This way, and now that, yet all, all 
Foreign , unfamiliar—still I stand and call 
In hushed breath, and wait for one 
Wh o passeth by, never. 
Ye t 1 fear to leave my lonely place— 
M y watch-towe r of delight where wit h me 
Dwel l Hop e and Patience; 
Th e one—sweet counselling voice— 
Make s day grow short, and I rejoice 
Whe n Patience laves my distressed soul 
Wit h reason and points to the goa l 
Where , though faint and dim, 
I shall stand face to face, 
An d in love's sweet embrace, 
Fin d and kno w M y Heart's Desire . Th e Congo Express 
B y VIRGINI A WRIGH T 
"Express train for Timbukt u ready!" 
announced the Parisian papers a few 
weeks ago. "This way to buy your 
ticket for the Congo! " 
The y were not announcing the arriva l 
of some new sort of exhibition wit h a 
miniature desert enlivened by real 
Arabs; they were stating sober fact. If 
you live in Paris and want to go to the 
heart of Afric a yo u just go and buy your 
ticket as yo u woul d for any other place. 
In short, a railway has been built 
across the desert from the West Coast of 
Afric a to the Congo, running along the 
course of the Nige r passing Timbuktu , 
that ancient city of mystery, stopping at 
Gao, the capital of a mighty empire until 
the demand for slaves sent raiders across 
the sands to capture and sell, going on 
safely and comfortably until it reaches 
the frontier of the Belgia n Congo . It 
means the rapid development of that part 
of Afric a and the restoration of the civilization so cruelly uprooted two hundred 
and fifty years ago. 
Th e country is fertile if properly cultivated. Th e Nige r carries wealth along 
wit h it and fine crops of grain are being 
raised along its banks. Th e Soudanese 
are industrious and capable, and above 
all the Frenc h apparently are really trying to do the right thing—they want the 
native to get an education and they respect his point of view. "Whit e superiority " is not the chief clause in their 
credo. 
Timbukt u is becoming a center of 
trade. Its houses are growin g larger 
and it takes on the appearance of a 
modern city. Th e town of Gao, once 
the capital of the empire, is still a collection of huts, but all along the banks 
of the Nige r busy emporiums are springing up and the natives share largely in 
the development of the country. 
A lively Frenchman , Monsieu r Feli x 
Dubois, has written a book in which he 
gives an account of Frenc h progress in 
the Soudan which is extremely entertaining reading. Seventeen years ago be 
studied the country. A t that time all 
the papers in Franc e were cryin g out 
that there was nothing wort h having in 
that sandy desert. Alon e among all the 
critics, Monsieu r Dubois stoutly held to 
his belief that the country woul d prove 
a tremendous commercia l asset to the 
Frenc h and that its people woul d prove 
the best of citizens. 
The Soudanese, he says, is brave at 
the same time that he is gentle, industrious and good tempered. Crime is 
almost unknown among them. The y deserve, he declares, the best possible education. H e thinks that Franc e has done 
better than any other Colonia l powe r in 
the country of the blacks because the 
Frenc h soul shrinks from the brutal exploits of the native people and regards 
color prejudice as a vice rather than as 
the virtue "certain other nations woul d 
make it." 16 4 THE CRISIS 
H e sees wit h the comin g of the railway and the-spread of the Frenc h powe r 
the return of the old glor y of the Frenc h 
Soudan, a glor y of whic h most of us 
were ignorant until withi n recent years 
scholarly men like M . Dubois and others 
found in Ara b libraries and withi n the 
TH E POST AND TELEGRAP H OFFICE AT 
TIMBUKT U 
walls of Timbukt u itself the story of 
the greatness of that dead Soudanese 
empire. 
One of the most interesting parts of 
his narrative is that in whic h he gives a 
description of a school he found in the 
desert. Her e the little dark-faced scholars are taught the stories familiar to 
children of European civilization, but 
they.are changed to give them an Africa n 
setting. N o patriotic America n can fail 
to recognise the origin of this tale: 
"Durin g the feast of Ramadan, the 
father of Saliou gave him a pretty little 
knife. Littl e Saliou was very glad. H e 
went out. H e cut everything. H e cut 
the grass. H e saw a little lemon tree. 
Littl e Saliou cut it with his knife. Th e 
father of Saliou saw the dead lemon tree. 
H e said, 'If I knew wh o cut the little 
lemon tree I woul d give him fifty blows 
wit h the whip.' 
"Littl e Saliou was afraid. H e reflected. 
H e said, 'Father, I cut the little lemon 
tree. If yo u strike, strike; if yo u forgive, 
forgive.' " 
Yes, it is the story of George Wash ­
ington transferred to the Soudan, on the 
edge of the Sahara, hundreds of miles 
from a white settlement. Th e mora l is 
as poignant as ever, though the setting 
be a Mohammeda n festival, and though 
the language of little Saliou may possess 
a tropical exuberance lackin g in our own 
sedate Washington . 
Ther e is the story of the sour grapes, 
too, but as there are no grapes in the 
Soudan, the fruit is made a pawpaw and 
the fox, also non-existent in the desert, 
is a little boy : 
"Littl e Assa i sees a large, ripe, yellow 
pawpaw. Th e pawpaw tree is high. H e 
climbs a little. H e is tired. H e comes 
down. H e looks for a stone. H e does 
not see any. H e looks for a stick. H e 
does not see any. H e raises his head 
and sees the pawpaw. H e says, 'Paw ­
paws are not good. I do not eat pawpaws. Onl y pigs eat pawpaws.' " 
Her e is another story whic h points out 
the evils of exaggeration: 
"Opposit e the mosque is a great palm 
tree. A nut falls. A rat hears it. H e is 
afraid. H e rushes into the bush. H e 
sees a hare. H e says, 'The palm tree 
by the mosque has fallen.' Th e hare 
goes and says to the dog, 'Th e mosque 
of Jenne has fallen.' Th e do g goes. H e 
sees a cow in the bushes. She says, 
'Jenne has fallen.' " 
An d yet another whic h indicates the 
evils of boasting: 
"Littl e Bab a goes into the field wit h 
a servant. H e says, 'The rice holds up 
its head and is good.' Th e servant says, 
'No , the rice whic h lowers its head is 
good. Ther e is something in it. Th e 
rice whic h holds up its head is not good. 
Ther e is nothin g in it.' " 
M . Dubois was particularly delighted 
wit h the eagerness and intelligence the 
children showed in tellin g these stories. 
Th e little black hands waved at him 
madly from the benches, and he says he 
thought sadly of the children in the rura l 
schools at home, wh o possessed no 
"poise" at all before the unaccustomed 
visitor and promptl y forgot all they 
knew. "Ho w pleasant a vitality, suggestive of a youthful race, reigned here," he 
reflects. 
Abov e all, the visitor was charmed 
with the wa y in whic h the stories were 
told. Ther e was nothin g monotonous; 
there was not one wor d used whic h 
seemed to have been learned in parrot 
fashion. Whe n a story teller hesitated 
his companions fell over each other in 
their desire to give the missin g word . 
The y almost quarreled to initiate the 
stranger into the mysteries of the 
WHER E TH E RAILROAD RUNS THE CONGO EXPRESS 165 
NATIVE TROOPS ENTERING A CITY OF TH E FRENCH SOUDAN 
Soudanese L a Fontaine and to explain 
the meaning of a local word. H e went 
away delighted because he believes that 
"i n every race this pride of knowledge 
among the youn g is a most valuable 
sign. " 
This school has been established at 
Jenne, an ancient city whic h played an 
important part in the empire of the 
Soudan for thirteen centuries. Monsieu r 
Dubois only regrets that there is not 
such another school at Timbuktu , whic h 
was, in the Middl e Age s and before that, 
the seat of the great universities. Th e 
Soudanese proverb says: "Salt comes 
from the north, gold comes from the 
south, but the wor d of Go d and wisdom 
and history and beautiful tales, they are 
found only at Timbuktu. " So it woul d be 
particularly fitting to have a school 
established here. 
H e did see, however, in Timbuktu , 
many evidences of the benefit of Frenc h 
rule. H e commented to one of his 
Soudanese friends on the many signs of 
trade he saw on every side, and remarked that these seemed to have grown 
up in the last seventeen years. 
"Th e truth is," replied his black friend, 
"that in the old days we were never safe 
from attacks by the marauding troops 
of the desert. Trade was carried on, but 
every man sought to conceal his prosperity. Barterin g was done largely at 
night and in secret. O f recent years 
the brigands have been afraid to attack 
us and we are now able to lead a norma l 
life. " 
It was, of course, the slave trade that 
disturbed the splendid Soudanese empire. 
Eve r since the white man discovered 
that the black man's labor could be ex-166 THE CRISIS 
TH E MOSQUE AT JENNE 
ploited in the plantations of the New 
Worl d the cities of the desert have been 
laid waste by enemies, who, if they didnot have more courage than their black 
opponents and certainly were morall y 
their inferiors, were able to conquer 
them by superiority of weapons. Whe n 
the black man was weakened by perpetuous warfare against such tremendous 
odds, the rovin g tribes of the empire of 
Morocc o preyed on him still further. 
Onl y within recent years has he learned 
how to defend himself. It is safe to prophesy that now he has learned a lesson, 
the march of progress in the Soudan wil l 
be startlingly rapid. . 
Th e railway wil l put the country in 
touch wit h modern ideas and the Frenc h 
are willin g to be fair wit h the people. 
Althoug h they may fall short of their 
ideal of liberty, equality, fraternity, it is 
still an ideal. The y are still ashamed 
when it is violated. 
Th e black Soudanese of the West is 
comin g into his own again. Before very 
lon g there may be re-established along 
the yellow waters of the Nige r the old 
civilization and perhaps even the old 
power. 
SOME LETTERS 
FRO M TH E SOUTH . 
Ma y 8, 1911. 
KIN D SIR : 
I am not an educated man. I wil l give 
you the peonage system as it is practised 
here in the name of the law. 
If a colored man is arrested here and 
hasn't any money, whether he is guilty 
or not, he' has to pay just the same. A 
man of color is never tried in this country. It is simpl y a farce. Everythin g 
is fixed before he enters the courtroom. 
[ wil l try to give yo u an illustration of 
how it is done: ' 
I am brought in a prisoner, go through 
the farce of being tried. Th e whol e of 
my fine may amount to fifty dollars. A 
kindl y appearing man wil l come up and 
pay my fine and take me to his farm to 
allow me to wor k it out. A t the end of 
a mont h I find that I owe him more 
than I did when I went there. Th e debt 
is increased year in and year out. Yo u 
would ask, "Ho w is that?" It is simply 
that he is charging yo u mor e for your 
board, lodgin g and washin g than they 
allow yo u for your work, and yo u can't 
help yourself either,, nor can anyone 
else help you , because yo u are still a 
prisoner and never get your fine worke d 
out. If yo u do as they say and be a 
good Negro , yo u are allowed to marry, 
provided yo u can get somee one to have 
you, and of course the debt still in -SOME LETTERS 167 
creases. This is in the Unite d States, 
where it is supposed that every man has 
equal rights before the law, and we are 
held in bondage by this same outfit. 
O f course we can't prove anything. 
Ou r work is nothing. If we state things 
as they are, the powers that be make a 
different statement, and that sets ours 
aside at Washingto n and, I suppose, in 
Heaven, too. 
Now, I have tried to tell yo u how we 
are made servants here according to law. 
I wil l tell yo u in my next letter how the 
lawmakers keep the colored children out 
of schools, how that pressure is brought 
to bear on their parents in such a manner they cannot help themselves. Th e 
cheapest way we can borrow money here 
is at the rate of twenty-five cents on the 
dollar per year. 
You r paper is the best I have read of 
the kind. I never dreamed there was 
such a paper in the world . I wil l subscribe soon. I think there are a great 
many here that wil l take your paper. I 
haven't had the chance to show your 
paper to any yet, but wil l as soon as I 
can. Yo u know we have to be careful 
with ' such literature as this in this 
country. 
Wha t I have told yo u is strictly confidential. If yo u publish it, don't put my 
name to it. I woul d be dead in a short 
time after the news reached here. 
One wor d more about the peonage. 
The court and the man yo u wor k for 
are always partners. One makes the fine 
and the other one work s yo u and holds 
you, and if yo u leave yo u are tracked up 
wit h bloodhounds and brought back. 
FRO M A UNITARIA N CLERGY ­
MAN . 
PHILADELPHIA . 
T o the Editor of TH E CRISI S : 
I cannot forbear expressing my hearty 
sympathy, not only wit h the wor k yo u 
are doing, but wit h the way yo u are doing it. Th e five numbers of your magazine so far received have been to me of 
great value—I drew on them somewhat 
for my Memoria l Sunday address on the 
'Aftermat h of Slavery. " It is well., to 
have the issue made clear, to know 
where Americ a stands to-day. Fo r all 
our disappointment, it may help to 
awaken all lovers of true Democrac y and 
inspire them to fresh efforts to complete 
the wor k begun a ce'ntury ago. Her e in 
Philadelphia—such at least is my impression—race antagonism is relatively 
slight. No r has the spirit whic h inspired 
the anti-slavery movement wholl y died 
out. Ye t even here your appeal is 
needed—on the one hand for character, 
on the other for justice and brotherhood. 
Th e earlier Abolitionists may have solved 
or thought to solve the race problem too 
easily. Neither emancipation nor enfranchisement could suddenly overcome 
the handicaps of long centuries of semibarbarism or generations of slavery. Ye t 
real progress has been made; and I 
believe there are hundreds of thousands 
whose hearts wil l respond to your challenge to keep wide open the door of industrial opportunity, of intellectual progress and of social recognition. W e want 
no helot race in this twentieth century. 
Negr o inferiority, if real, is not something to be rejoiced in, but to be overcome, ere it drags us down. An d to this 
end—well, among many things—the children of the freedman, I believe, must not 
only develop still more widely efficiency 
and culture and self-control—but be prepared to contend more strenuously for 
their rights as men. Whateve r the faults 
of the "white man, " he has as a rule 
more respect for the man wh o knows 
what he wants and wil l fight for it. 
"Oh, " said a colored girl to Dr. How e 
on that black day when Burn s was 
marched down State Street, back into 
slavery, "Oh , if he only had the courage 
to commit suicide! " 
Suicide is not called for to-day—but 
frankly, I believe the role of suffering 
servant has been a bit overdone. 
So keep up the good fight. 
Fraternally yours, 
K . E . EVANS . 
A FRIEN D O F TH E CRISIS. 
Before I close I want to express my 
deep interest and pleasure in TH E 
CRISIS . Ther e is no better way to keep 
up one's enthusiasm and to learn more 
regarding any subject than to take some 
fair-minded periodical devoted to the 
subject; for no matter how far away 
duty or pleasure may take us between 
times, the regular arriva l of the magazine calls us back and commo n courtesy 
demands that we at least say "Ho w do 
yo u do? " by running over the pages, 
thereby getting an idea of the contents, 
and even in the briefest glance always 
something to stimulate fresh thought. 
The June CRISI S is perhaps the finest yet, 
there being so many interesting illustra ­
tions, whil e the reading matter maintains 
the high standard set in the first number. 
It is impossible to overestimate the in ­
fluence for good exercised by such a 
periodical, dealing as this does so fearlessly and yet so fairly wit h this great 
problem of our national life. 
Ma y we not sometime have pictures of 
the offices of the association? I feel 
sure I am not the only subscriber wh o 
woul d welcome them amon g the other 
fine things presented from month to 
month. 
Ver y truly yours, 
KATHERIN E TIFFAN Y SPRAGUE . WHA T TO REA D 
BOOKS . 
Holm, J; J.—"Race Assimilation; or, The Fading 
Leopard's Spots." J. L . Nichols & Co., Atlanta, 
Ga. 
Johnston, Sir H . H.—"Opening U p of Africa. " 
Williams & Norgate, London. 
Kaler, James Otis—"Wit h Sherman to the Sea: 
a Boy's Story of Gen. Sherman's Famous 
March and Capture of Savannah." A . L . Burt 
Company. 
McBryde , J. McLaren—"Bre r Rabbit in the FolkTales of the Negro and Other Races." Sewanee 
(Tenn.) University Press. 
This is a study of the rabbit and the fox 
and the other creatures made famous in Joel 
Chandler Harris' books in the folk-lore not only 
of the South but of other countries. 
"The Photographic History of the Civil War; 
Thousands of Scenes Photographed, 1861-65, 
with Text by Many Special Authorities." Edited 
by F. Trevelyan Miller. New York Review of 
Reviews Company. 
"Whittier's Correspondence from the Oak Knoll 
Collections, 1830-92." Edited by J. Albree, 
Salem, Mass. Essex Book and Print Club. 
PERIODICALS . 
" A Distinguished Negro." Outlook, June 24. 
"Dick. " Major A . R. H . Ranson. Harper's, 
July. 
"Equality: A Study in Social Philosophy." Robert Gunn Davis. The Westminster Review, 
June. 
"Forty Years of Freedom: The Progress of the 
American Negro Since the Civil War. " W. E. 
B. DuBois. Missionary Review, June. 
"In Love-Lady Court." L . Frank Tooker. Everybody's, July. 
"Recent Geographic Advances in Africa. " A . W . 
Greely. National Geographic Magazine, April. 
"The Direct Election of Senators." Coe I. Crawford. Independent, June 22. 
"The Indelible Stain." Independent, June 22. 
"The Ma n Farthest Down: Child Labor and the 
Sulphur Mines. " Booker T. Washington. 
Outlook, June 17. 
"The Ma n Farthest Down: The Women Who 
Work in Europe." Booker T. Washington. 
Outlook, July 1. 
"The Unlimited Franchise." Ma x Eastman. Atlantic, July. 
"Thomas Wentworth Higpinson." Edwi n D. 
Mead. New England Magazine, May. 
"Wha t the Orient Can Teach Us. " Clarence Poe. 
World's Work, July. 
"Wreckers of the Florida Keys. " George Harding. 
Harper's. July. 
HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE . 
"Lif e of Harriet Eeecher Stowe." By Charles 
Edward and Lyman Beecher Stowe. HoughtonMifflin Co., Boston. Illustrated. $1.50. 
Th e "Lif e of Harrie t Beecher Stowe, " 
by her son, Charles Edwar d Stowe, and 
her grandson, Lyma n Beecher Stowe, is a 
volume of unusual interest. Th e publica ­
tion of this biography marks the centenary of the remarkable little woma n "as 
thin and dry as a pinch of snuff," who 
amid the difficulties of continued poverty 
and ill-health brought into the worl d and 
reared a family of seven children, yet 
found time to write thirty books in addition to "short stories, essays, letters of 
travel and magazine articles well-nig h 
innumerable. " 
Thos e of us wh o as children wept over 
"Uncl e Tom's Cabin " and wondered if it 
could be "really true" are both pleased 
and saddened to learn the stories of the 
real Legree , Eliz a and Topsy . Here , too, 
we find an account of absorbin g interest 
—-an account of the incidents and events 
in the life of Harrie t Beecher Stowe that 
aroused in her the burnin g indignation 
against "man's inhumanit y to man " 
whic h could not rest until it had written 
itself down in an epoch-making protest 
against the institution of chattel slavery. 
Th e sense of havin g a missio n in the 
worl d was a dominant characteristic of 
Harrie t Beeche r Stowe. Accordingly , in 
her writings we find "the artist dominated by the preacher and reformer. 
'Uncl e Tom's Cabin ' was to her a sermon hurled against a great mora l evil. " 
Th e influence of "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " 
and "Th e Repl y to the Address from the 
Wome n of England " upon public opinion 
in both Americ a and Europ e was prodigious. A tribute to the influence of the 
former was President Lincoln's greeting 
to Mrs. Stowe on meeting her for the 
first time : "So you're the little woma n 
who wrote the book that made this great 
war! " 
Th e America n public is less familiar 
wit h "Th e Repl y to the Address from 
the Wome n of England, " yet its influence brought about results hardly second 
in importance to those produced by 
"Uncl e Tom's Cabin " itself. This reply 
"did much to prevent armed intervention 
(by England ) in behalf of the Confederacy, and it was one of the great influences that changed the sentiment of the 
Englis h people toward the Confederacy. " 
Thu s to a frail overburdened Yanke e 
woman wit h a steadfast mora l purpose 
we Americans, both black and white, owe 
our gratitude for the freedom and the 
union that exist to-day in these Unite d 
States. 
Dr. Chas. A . Eastman , the Siou x In ­
dian, in his new book, "The Sou l of the 
Indian, " says: 
"Lon g before I ever heard of Christ, 
or saw a white man, I had learned from 
an untutored woma n the essence of 
morality. Wit h the help of dear Nature 
herself, she taught me things simple 
but of might y import. I knew God . I 
perceived what goodness is. I saw and 
loved what is really beautiful. Civiliza ­
tion has not taught me anythin g better. WHAT TO READ 169 
"A s a child, I understood how to give; 
I have forgotten that grace since I became civilized. I lived the natural life, 
whereas now I live the artificial. An y 
pretty pebble was valuable to me then; 
every growin g tree an object of reverence. No w 1 worship with the white 
man before a painted landscape whose 
value is estimated in dollars! Thu s the 
Indian is reconstructed, as the natural 
locks are ground to powder, and made 
into artificial blocks which may be built 
into the walls of modern society." 
Th e very rare tenth book of the "History of the Ethiopians, " by Heliodorus, 
printed in 1552, was one of the treasures 
of the recent Ho e sale in Ne w Yor k 
City . It was bought by Walte r M . Hill , 
of Chicago, for $5,000. 
EXCAVATION S I N ETHIOPIA . 
T H E CRISIS has from time to time mentioned the remarkable explorations on 
the site of the ancient Ethiopia n city of 
Meroe, the capital of the great black 
empire of the eastern Soudan. Fo r more 
than one hundred years the pyramids of 
Meroe have been known , but only within 
the last three years have explorers 
known that a great city lay buried under 
the sand not far from them. Professor 
Garstang, wh o has been in charge of the 
work of uncovering Meroe , has just returned from Afric a wit h many treasures 
and a description of a wonderful civiliza ­
tion. , 
Great temples, roya l palaces, public 
buildings and splendid tombs have been 
rescued from the desert. Th e result 
shows that the black men were in close 
relation to Greece as well as Egypt. A 
magnificent temple in the Greek style has 
been uncovered. Th e architecture, the 
explorers say, in the construction of its 
columns, as well as in the elegance of 
their forms, recalls the best Greek work s 
of antiquity and not at all the styles 
common upon the Nile . Th e sanctuary 
is in the middle and raised above the 
level of the rest of the temple. It was 
approached by a number of steps in 
black stone. Its floor and its walls were 
originally covered wit h glazed tiles, blue 
and yellow. A number are still in position. Roun d the sanctuary was a kin d 
of corridor exposed to view on the outside, to show the processions and the 
ceremonies of the priests. 
In the tombs vases of a special and 
rare kin d were recovered, made of thin 
pottery decorated wit h paintings in 
colors. Th e subjects were animals, trees 
or natural features, or wit h designs 
stamped upon the clay. In addition to 
pottery vessels there were in these tombs 
a variety of objects not merely funerary 
in character. 
In obedience to primitive instinct the 
dead man was laid to sleep on his bed 
in his subterranean chamber, surrounded 
by the things which would be to him the 
most useful on his awakening. Th e soldier had his weapons, sword, lance, dagger, etc., all of iron ; the huntsman his 
bow and arrows—even the dogs were 
sometimes sacrificed with him. The 
women had equally their beads and their 
jewels. 
Professor Garstang thinks he has 
found evidences of human sacrifices. 
Th e Ethiopians apparently were reluctant to take life, their worse criminals 
being told to commit suicide so that 
blood guilt might not rest on an executioner, and the matter of the human 
sacrifices is not yet settled. 
Well-preserved remains have been 
found of the period of great splendor, 
six or seven hundred years B. C , when 
the Ethiopians conquered Egypt. Ther e 
are also relics of Roma n influence, and 
among the art treasures is a beautiful 
head which is placed at the end of the 
first century B. C. Th e eyes are of 
alabaster, with the iris and pupil inlaid, 
whil e the eyelashes are in bronze. It is 
twice life size. It is possible that this 
head represents Germanicus, who is 
known from the Annals of Tacitus to 
have made a voyage by the Nil e to 
Assouan. 
THE NATIONAL RELIGIOUS TRAIN
Offers special training to young 
men and women as Settlement 
Workers, Association Secretaries, 
Missionaries, Literary and Other 
Branches. 
The following departments are now 
i n successful operation: 
Commercial, Literary, Music, Theological 
Religious Training and Industrial 
FALL TERM OPENS OCTOBER 12 
SUMMER SCHOOL. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua opened Jul y 5, 1911, and closes 
August 14. 
Tho attractions and advantages 
offered in the Summer School are 
unsurpassed in the country for colored young men and women. 
Applications should bo sent in at 
an early date. 
Loan Scholarships have been established for deserving young men 
and women. 
Fo r further information address 
The President, National Religious 
Training School, Durham, N. C. 170 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHER E T O STO P 
• J Our readers are urged to use these columns in outlining their vacation 
and travel plans. These hotels and stopping places are modern in every 
sense, and the traveling public is assured comfort and efficient service. 
(ft For detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
The Travel Editor of Tlie Crisis, 20 Vesey St., New York 
NEW YORK CITY 
MARSHALL'S HOTEL 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
COMFORT — Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE — I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminatin g 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3. 30c. Dinner. 6 to 8. 35c. 
Special Course Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, . 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J. L . MARSHALL , Proprieto r 
TH E CLIF F HOUS E 
253 WEST 134TH STREET 
NEWL Y OPENE D 
Special summer rates to permanent or transient guests. Special attention to out-of-town 
tourists. Up-to-date private house in every 
respect. Telephone connection. 
MRS. W. E. PERKINS, Prop. 
Telephone 4121 Harlem 
"TH E IDL E HOUR " 
Mrs. P. Brown 
HANDSOME FURNISHED ROOMS 
With All. Improvements 
Permanent and Transient Guests Accommodated 
MEAL S SERVE D A T AL L HOUR S 
77 WEST 134TH STREET NEW YORK 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Third Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for -working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS. PRANCES R. KEYSER, Supt. 
'Phone Chelsea 2957 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WEST 20TH STREET 
Between 7th and 8th Avenues NEW YORK 
Neatly Furnished Rooms for Permanent 
or Transient Guests by Day or Week 
MRS. THOMAS L. TE N EYCK, Proprietress 
Mention 
" A quiet place for quiet people to diue' ' 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WEST 134TH STREET 
Between Fifth and Lenox Avenues NEW YORK 
Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Sandwiches, Etc. Regular Dinner, 25c, from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at Al l Hours! 
Privat e Dinin g Room. Furnished Rooms To 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOHN E. BRADFORD, Proprietor 
TH E ALLE N HOUS E 
62 WEST 132D STREET 
SELECT, NEATL Y FURNISHED ROOMS 
All Improvements 
Wash-rooms, hot and cold water in every room 
FOR RENT BY DAY OR WEE K 
Prices Moderate 
MRS. M. A. ANDERSON JOHNSON 
TH E ROSALIN E 
128 WEST 29TH STREET NEW YORK 
FURNISHE D ROOM S 
B Y DA Y OR WEE K 
EDWARD D. SMALL, Proprietor 
Telephone 5395 Chelsea 
TH E LAW S HOUS E 
FURNISHED ROOMS 
BY DAY, WEE K OR MONTH 
Convenient to the Pennsylvania 
Depot and All Car Lines 
245 WEST 20TH STREET NEW YORK 
MRS. L. D. LAWS, Proprietress 
TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 17 1 
WHER E TO STOP—(Continued) 
HARLE M PRIVATE HOUSE 
Furnished rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Hot and cold water in every room. 
MRS. BERR Y L. HICKS, Proprietress 
258 WEST 133D STREET NEW YORK 
Four doors from Eighth Avenue 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
(Under New Management) 
2229 FIFT H AVENU E 
Between 135th and 136th Streets NEW YORK 
Real home cooking. Come and be convinced. 
Our motto is to please you. Meals at all hours. 
MRS. M. J. FERDINAND, Proprietress 
TH E VIRGINI A HOUS E 
MRS. MARY E. TTTT.T . Proprietress 
NEATL Y FURNISHED ROOMS 
Good Old Southern Cooking 
"Just Like Home" 
37 WEST 133D STREET NEW YORK 
NEW JERSEY 
TH E ROBINSO N COTTAG E 
220 BEAC H STREET, RED BANK, N. J. 
Newly Opened 
Special Attention to Saturday and Sunday Parties 
Terms Reasonable 
MRS. M. H. ROBINSON, Proprietress 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Telephone Strictly First-class 
TH E NE W DELMONIC O HOTE L 
16th and Rid go Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
STRICTLY PRIVATE AND HOME COMPORTS 
Ten large bedrooms, with electric light, steam 
heat and baths. 
Cafe on second floor. Best meals only. 
This hotel is newly furnished and up to date 
in every particular. We solicit your trade. 
Permanent and transient rooms; they are thi 
best. Try one of our meals. 
(Ring bell after 12 m.) 
L. B. SMITH, Prop. A. R. SMITH, Mgr. 
ILLINOIS 
J. N. Washington Mrs. J . N. Washington 
Proprietor Manager 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
3252 WABASH AVENU E 
CHICAGO 
First-class Service for First-class People 
Rates: 75c, $1.00 and $2.00 Per Day 
Telephone Aldtne 516 
OHIO 
Home 'Phone B-3244 American—European 
HOTE L PLEASAN T 
P. H. WOOD 
NEW WITH MODERN EQUIPMENT 
9-11 ERIE STREET 
TOLEDO, OHIO 
NEW JERSEY 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAP E MAY , NE W JERSE Y 
This magnificent four-story structure, with 
every modern convenience, has just been completed at a cost of $50,000. 
It is, without exception, the finest and most 
complete hostelry in the United States for the 
accommodation of our race. 
It is located on the highest elevation in the 
heart of the residence portion of cool Cape 
May. 
The view from the hotel is magnificent; on 
the front, overlooking the celebrated golf links, 
the vista stretches away to take in the beautiful driveways and farms of the inland section 
of the Cape. The rear commands an extensive 
view of the harbor and sea. The invigorating 
ocean breezes reach every section of the hotel. 
The interior of this hotel may be described as 
the acme of luxury, comfort and elegance. 
The Hotel Dale contains one hundred light, 
airy and luxuriously furnished rooms with every 
modern convenience. Electric lights throughout 
the entire house. Suites with bath andv long 
distance telephone connections. 
The elegantly furnished dining room is operated under both European and American plans. 
The cuisine will contain all the delicacies of 
the season, prepared by a master of the culinary 
art. Sea foods a specialty. 
One of the unique features of the hotel is the 
beautiful grill room. The management has engaged the full Abyssinian Orchestra to render 
afternoon and evening concerts in the room 
daily during the entire season. 
The open-air amusements available to the 
guests are numerous. The lawn of the hotel 
contains both croquet and tennis courts. 
The sea bathing at Cape May is unsurpassed 
on the Atlantic Ocean. It is remarkable for its 
fine surf and is perfectly safe at all times for 
women and children. The hotel has its own 
private bath houses. 
The sailing and fishing in the harbor and 
adjacent sounds are always attractive and boats 
may be had at all times. 
The hotel is under the personal management 
of the owner, E. W. Dale, one of the most 
progressive and successful business men of our 
race. His experience as a hotel man has enabled him to use his very thorough knowledge 
of details in bringing the equipment of his 
hotel to perfection. 
This hotel is easy of access from the stations 
of either the Pennsylvania or the Reading 
Railroad. 
Literature and additional information will 
be mailed upon request. 
E , W . DALE , Owne r and Proprieto r 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 17 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHER E TO STOP—(Continued) 
BA Y STAT E HOTE L 
EUROPEA N PLA N 
Voca l and instrumental nrusic ever y evening. Ou r 
motto: T o please our patrons in the matte r of 
servic e and comfort. Moder n in ever y particular . 
HARD Y & OTTERY , Proprietors 
334 Nort h Tennesse e Avenu e ATLANTI C CITY , N . J . 
MASSACHUSETTS 
HOTE L UPTO N 130 Dartmouth Street and 
5 Harwich Street 
BOSTON , MASS . 
tf|T Long Distance Telephone in each room. AL L 
™ OUTSID E ROOMS . Steam Heated. One dollar 
and upwards. Vocal and Instrumental Music 
every evening. Service and comfoit unexcelled. 
The UPTO N INVESTMEN T COMPAN Y 
WM . H . HARDY , President 
'Phone Tremont 41771. 
ISRAE L RUE , Treasurer 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New York City 
Tel. 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Office: Room 502, Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW. 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 17 3 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
•I Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
<J If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
CJ If you want a POSITION , TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
<I You will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
<I Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
<J Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCIES 
RELIABLE HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MISS I. L. MOORMAN 
463 Lenox Avenue New York 
£%«end1n°nee d of} ™ «r POSITION? 
If so, 'phone, call or write the 
MIDDLESE X EMPLOYMEN T AGENCY 
2229 Fifth Ave., near 136th St. 
CHAS. A. KNOWLES, Mgr. 
References Carefully Investigated 
'Phone 0370 Harlem 
SITUATIONS WANTE D 
YOUNG LAD Y desires position as teacher in 
an Industrial School. Two yearB' experience. 
References furnished. 
Address: 
E. R., care TH E CRISIS MAGAZINE 
20 Vesey Street, New York 
REA L ESTATE 
I make a specialty of buying, selling, exchanging aDd managing New York City and suburban 
real estate. Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
S. AUGUSTUS DUNCAN 
REA L ESTAT E AND INSURANCE BROKER 
2229 Fifth Avenue, New York 
MUSIC 
SONGS.—There is money to be made in songwriting. 
If you write poems or compose music, send us 
your work for examination. If terms are satisfactory we will publish and pay one-half profits. 
GOTHAM-ATTUCKS MUSIC CO. 
136 WEST 37TH STREET NEW YORK 
HELP WANTE D 
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVES for TH E CRISIS 
wanted in each locality. 
Some agents Bell • over 800 copies monthly. 
Write for particulars. 
Address: 
FRANK M. TURNER 
CIRCULATION MANAGER 
Suite 311 
20 Veaey Street, New York 
SCHOOLS 
YOUNG MAN, HAV E YOU A TRADE? 
liy our method we teach the Barber Trade in 
six weeks. 
We give you a complete set of tools and 
secure you a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NEW YORK BARBER SCHOOL 
Costello & Wise 
Cor. Bowery and Rivington St. NEW YORK 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 174 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
SEND US 50 CENTS for a beautiful 1%-inch 
messaline silk shirred elastic belt, with a fine 
gilt or gray pearl trimmed buckle. All colors. 
State size. Buckle alone 25c. If not satisfactory, money refunded. Send for free catalogue. 
PERFECTION NOVELT Y CO. 
102-106 WOOSTER STREET NEW YORK 
iSST A CRISIS representative has visited the factory of the Perfection Novelty Co., and was 
favorably impressed with the numerous bargains. 
Seventeen Years' Experience 
WORK TURNED OUT PROMPTLY 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Late with Broadway houses 
PRACTICAL FURRIER 
All kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. White furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Prices reasonable. 
24 WEST 135TH STREET NEW YORK 
To Colored People 
F
OR SALE—We have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. For investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Farm land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
Any of these are in good locations. Write for 
further information. 
THIS IS A COLORED ENTERPRISE. 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Real Estate 
12181Ml. Vernon Ave. Columbus, Ohio 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Co. 
100 Linen Finish Cards by Mall, 50c. 
COMMERCIAL PRINTING 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOOK AND JOB PRINTING 
2315 MARKE T ST. ST. LOUIS, MO. 
CORNS, CALLOUSES, BUNIONS, CHILBLAINS positively removed by using Dr. 
Moore's wonderful discovery or your money 
refunded. Write to-day, explaining your troubles, with stamped envelope, your name and 
address. 
DR. E . L . MOOR E 
C141 MONTCALM STREET, E. 
DETROIT, MICH. 
c
Ike Rock City Sanitarium 
Corner Foster and Stewart Streets, 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
A quiet health home for invalids and 
sufferers from chronic ailments. Locate d 
on an elevation, surrounded by spacious, 
shady lawns. 
Full y equipped for the successful 
treatment of diseases of the stomach, 
liver, kidneys, blood and nerves, by other 
methods than drugs. 
Th e famous Battle Creek Methods— 
water, in the form of baths of all kinds, 
sprays, douches, packs, etc., electricity, 
massage, Swedish movements, dieting, 
etc., are used under the direction of a 
physician of fifteen years' experience in 
these procedures and a graduate of the 
Battle Creek Sanitarium. Surgica l and 
obstetrical cases received in special 
wards. Lad y physic-ian gives especial 
attention to diseases of wome n and children. Rates, $10 per week and upwards. 
Fo r further information address 
TH E ROC K CIT Y SANITARIU M 
Nashville, Tenn. Telephone Walnut 87 
VISITORS ALWAY S WELCOME 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mention T. H E CRISIS. Giv e the Chil d a Dol l 
The Most Beautiful of Al l the Toys on the Marke t Ar e the 
NEGR O DOLL S 
<I YOU R child would be happy if it had a Negro 
doll such as are sent out by the National Negro 
Dbll Company, Nashville, Tennessee. Every race 
is trying to teach their children an object lesson by 
giving them toys that will lead to higher intellectual 
heights. The Negro doll is calculated to help in 
the Christian development of our race. Al l dolls 
are sent by express, charges paid. 
DOLL S FO R TH E SEASO N 1911-1912 NO W READ Y 
Prices from 50c. up to $8.50 
Fo r Illustrated Booklets, Prices and Other Information, Send Five Cents to the 
Nationa l Negr o Dol l Compan y 
519 Second Avenu e N. , Nashville , Tenn . 
R. H . BOYD , President H . A . BOYD , Manager 
O. II. Waller, M.D., Pres. A. M. Thompson, Treas. B. 0. Waller, M.D., Sec. 
Sphinx Silver Polish 
The unsurpassed renovator of silver and plated ware. No acids; no scratching; absolutely harmless. Adopted in the largest hotels. Best for family use. Endorsed by silversmiths. Sells readily to the trade. Doubles your income. Agents wanted in every city 
and town. Fift y per cent, commission. Write to-day. 
Manufactured by 
Sphinx Labor-Saving Soap Co., Inc. 
Office an d Factory : 117 West Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
BROWN-SPENCER Correspondence School of Shorthand 
TH E LORD' S PRAYER . A system that can be learned during spare moIn the Benn Pitman Syitem of Phonography-urrre&ndeng Style. an d increas e you r Balar y frQ m 5 Q t Q 
y J 10 ^/l ^
 S \ s
 (v ^^_ x per cent. A thorough knowledge of Shorthand 
-m . _»Sr\J s'X,.l ,J ' A 
L. . r -) ~ ""1 U, ) ^ -(- : ^ TH E BES T TH E EASIES T 
6 - —r^ , F V, , T^. ^ ini MOS T RELIABL E 
Brown-Spencer Correspondence School of Shorthand ^ri^°Y^ E^ : 
Mention 7 H E Cms IS, 
makes the position sure and the one so skilled in 
great demand. You pay as you learn. Terms reasonable. Write for particulars. A limited number of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Other ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Private rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Five thousand dollars endows a free 
bed. 
Andrew F. Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F. MoneD, M.D.. 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro i n Ne w Yor k 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
"My father has always lived in the 
South," a young colored man once said to 
me, "and has attained success there; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North, where my manhood 
would be respected. He himself cannot 
continually endure his position of inferiority, and in the summer he comes North to 
be a man. No," correcting himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negro is wholly a 
man only in Europe."—From the Author's 
"Introduction." 
Miss Ovington's description of the status 
of the Negro in New York City is based on 
a most painstaking inquiry into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties under 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of New York. It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negro 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failure to advance more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS , GREE N & CO., Publishers, NE W YOR K 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 