The CRISIS 
Vol. 19—No. 5 MARCH , 1920 Whole No. 113 
ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENT S A COP Y FOR TH E DEFENSE 
DURING 1919 
SEVENTY-EIGH T Negroes were lynched i n America. 
ON E was a woman. 
ELEVE N were ex-soldiers. 
FOURTEE N were burned at the stake. 
WHIL E 
TWENTY-EIGH T cities staged race riots. 
In these, MOR E THA N ON E HUNDRE D NEGROE S 
were killed. 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E AD ­
VANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E sought 
the facts, placed the truth before the America n public, 
and defended those unable to help themselves. 
What are you doing to help ? 
As long as it is possible for one Negro to be lynched or 
mobbed no Negro is safe. 
You r contribution, no matter how small, aids directly i n 
safeguarding the lives of all Negroes whether i n 
Mississippi or Massachusetts. 
Ar e you willing to help ? 
If so, send your check today to 
JOEL E. SPINGARN, Treasurer 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION fo r the ADVANCEMENT of COLORED PEOPLE 
70 FIFT H AVENUE, NEW YORK , N. Y . 
President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Chairman Board of Directors 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Treasurer 
J. E SPINGAR N 
Assistant Secretary 
WALTE R F. WHIT E 
Secretary 
JOH N R. SHILLAD Y 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR . w. E . B . DUBOI S 
Field Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Associate Fiel d Secretary 
WILLIA M PICKEN S SIXTY-FOUR PAGES AND COVER. 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED B Y TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FO E TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NEW YOR K CITY. CONDUCTED B Y W. E . BURGHARD T DU BOIS; JESSIE REDMON FAUSET, LITERAR Y EDITOR; 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 19-No. 5 MARCH, 1920 Whole No. 113 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . PHOTOGRAPH . By Battey 
CRISPUS ATTUCK S MONUMEN T 239 
OFFICERS OF TH E N. A . A . C. P. 240, 242 
MA P O F TH E N. A . A . C. P. 246 
WINNING TH E 100-YARD DAS H 251 
TH E REASON . Cartoon. Albert A . Smith 264 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 272-274 
WHITELA W HOTE L 275 
ARTICLES 
EL TISICO. A Story. Illustrated. Anita Scott Coleman 252 
ATTAR . A Poem. Georgia Douglass Johnson 253 
DAR K HEROES OF PEACE . Illustrated 254 
TH E CRISIS IN NEGRO LEADERSHIP. Illustrated. Harry H . Jones 256 
CECILIA ISABEL WARREN . A Poem. Brian P. O'Shashnain 259 
TIT FOR TAT . Illustrated. William Pickens 260 
"NORTHERNERS DON'T UNDERSTAN D TH E NEGRO. " Sarah N. Cleghorn 263 
A NATION'S GREATNESS . A Poem. Edwin Garnett Riley 266 
AFTERGLOW . A Poem. Georgia Douglass Johnson 266 
UNREST. A Poem 274 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 233 
ANNUA L REPORT, NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCE ­
MEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE 240 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 267 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 272 
TH E HORIZON 276 
TH E APRIL CRISIS 
The Apri l CRISI S will be our annual Easter number, and will contain "Bir d Romance" by 
Mar y Effie Lee, a study of the unrest in Egypt, and the first installment of a story by l>orothy 
Canfield Fisher, "A n American Citizen. " 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1679. 230 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School 
The Academy 
The School of Arts and Sciences 
The Department of Music 
The Teacher Training Department 
The Divinity School 
The Commercial Department 
The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address President James 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA: 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuitio n $125. Last regula r term began 
Thursday, September 18 , 1919 . Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July I. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00 . For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
1888 1919 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Thirty - Second Session 
OPENE D SEPTEMBE R 1919 
COURSES 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State High 
School Certificate which will 
admit to Standard Normal 
Schools and Colleges 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
EXTENSIVE TRADE COURSES 
Athletic Training, Football, Baseball, Tennis, Etc. 
FULL COURSE IN MILITARY TRAINING 
For Catalog and Further Information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D. D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 231 
Atlanta University 
Is beautlfully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal 
School and College, with Manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fifty 
years of successful work have been, completed. 
Students some from all parts of the south. Graduates are almost universally successful, 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
The Alumn i of 
Lincoln University 
are raising 
$50,000 for ALMA MATER 
Lincoln trains for leadership and success. 
Address: 
President John B. Rendall. D. D. 
Lincol n University 
Chester County , Pa. 
1870
 CLARK UNIVERSITY
 1919 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildings with modern conveniences; talented faculty; 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories; co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Courses of Study : 
Domestic Science, Publlc Speaking, Mule; 
Pre-Academy, Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, four years with AB degree. 
Fiftieth year opened September 24, 1919. 
Expenses, $15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expenses. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :: ATLANTA , GA . 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Blddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
Al l students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
Far further Information, address 
President H. L. MeCroray, 
Charlotte. N. C 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta. Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training. Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 10. 1919. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 232 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUA L TRAINING and 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN, N. J . 
A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
trades for boys, including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly 
equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
modernly equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term began September 15, 1919. 
For information address. 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
The Agricultural 
and Technical College 
of North Carolina 
Maintained by the State and Federal 
Government 
Fo r males only. Practica l 
and Strong Courses by the 
following Departments: 
Agricultural, Mechanical, 
Academic, Teacher Training , 
and Military . 
Summer School for teachers of both sexes. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , 
President, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Wile y University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas. Louisiana, Arkansa s and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A, B. H . Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on lint grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
WILBERFORC E UNIVERSIT Y 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
WILBERFORC E OHIO 
Seventh Annual Session, June 21 to July 31,192 0 
Location ideal; faculty large; dormitory 
room ample, teaching facilities the best. 
Special lectures; model school for observation and practice; fees and expenses reasonable. 
Credit in regular session given for work done 
in the summer; all courses standard. 
Courses offered—professional, normal, collegiate and high school. 
For further particulars "write 
GILBER T H . JONES, 
Box 44 Director Summer School, 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, 
President of the University. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School. Domestic Science 
and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Spring term opens March 4, 1920 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT . J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
Mention The CRISIS . TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 19. No. 5 MARCH , 1920 Whole No. 113 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. Du Bois 
A SOLDIER 
D0 you 
want 
thi s 
bo y 
to be hanged? 
This is the 
pictur e of 
Edgar 
Caldwell, who is 
under sentenc e of 
death, fo r 
defendin g 
himsel f 
against the 
crew of a 
street car i n 
Anniston , 
Ala. , an d 
killin g on e 
of them. 
His cas e 
wil l be argued before 
the Supreme 
Court of the 
Unite d 
States , 
about Marc h 1. 
We want 500 Negroes who believe 
in Negro manhood, to send immediately one dollar each to J. E. 
Spingarn, Treasurer of the N. A. A. C. P., 
70 Fift h Avenue, New Yor k City, for 
Caldwell's defense. 
EMPLOYMEN T 
THER E is a great and insistent 
call for Negroes of education 
and ability, but because of our 
scattered habitations, it is 
hard for the job and the man to meet. 
From time to time TH E CRISI S has 
personal knowledge of men of ability 
who want work, and we shall from 
time to time publish such lists. This 
is done without charge to any party 
and further information may be had 
by addressing the Editor. 
" I am fitted fo r a teacher. M y trainin g 
is as follows: A.B . Lincol n Universit y 
(highest honors) 1915; A.B. , Clar k College 
(Massachusetts) 1916; Instructor in 
German and Psychology, Lincoln University, 
1916-17; A.M. , Lincol n University , 1917; 
Junior Fellow in Psychology, Clark 
University, 1917-18; Sergeant U. S. Infantry, 
A.E.F., 1918-19; Senior Fellow in 
Psychology, Clark University, 1919-20. I am a 
candidate for the doctorate i n Philosophy 
here i n June. M y major is psychology; m y 
mino r is philosophy. " 
TH E DAILY HERALD 
THE Baltimore Daily Herald is 
two years old. We have not 
hitherto spoken of this venture in race journalism because, frankly, it seemed too good to 
be true. We have had many attempts 
to start daily papers for Negro readers, but none have lasted longer than 
a few months and most of them have 
died in weeks. We feared this same 
result for the Herald, because the difficulties are tremendous, the cost high, 
and the question of public demand unsettled. But a colored daily paper 
that has passed its second birthday, 
that misses no issues, has strong editorials, and publishes news, is an accomplishment which deserves unstinted praise. Our hats off to William T. Andrews, of Baltimore! 
TH E AMERICA N LEGION 
ALL former soldiers and sailors 
who wish to organize a post 
of the American Legion 
should write for printed 
literature and application blanks to 
23 3 TH E CRISIS 
the National Adjutant, American 
Legion, Indianapolis, Ind. Any colored 
post having difficulty in obtaining a 
charter, should inform Major J. E . 
Spingarn, President Ameni a Post, 
Amenia , N . Y . 
DUNBA R 
EVERYON E familia r with the 
life of Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, remembers his struggle 
for an opportunity to acquire 
higher education. In recognition of 
this fact and in memory of Dunbar, a 
fund has been established at Fis k University for the purpose of aiding the 
exceptional student—someone, perhaps, who, with this aid, may develop 
into another Dunbar. A friend of education stands ready to add a dollar to 
every dollar contributed to this fund, 
which is called "The Dunbar Fund. " 
A n opportunity is thus afforded all 
who wish to see erected a suitable 
monument to Dunbar, to join in the 
project. Contributions should be 
sent direct to Fisk University, 
Nashville, Tenn. 
WOMA N SUFFRAG E 
THIRTY-ON E states, wit h 
a population of 681,325 colored women, 21 years of age 
and over, in 1910, and at least 
750,000 today, have ratified the proposed Woman Suffrage Amendment: 
Main e 401 
N . H'pshire . 176 
Mass 12,648 
Ne w York . . 49,300 
P a 62,949 
Ohio 33,683 
Illinois 34,372 
Michigan . . . . 5,318 
Wisconsi n . . 939 
Minnesot a . . 2,061 
Virgini a . . . 4,124 
Missouri . . . 48,057 
N . Dakota. . 158 
S. Dakota. . 220 
Nebrask a . . 2,369 
Kansa s 15,289 
Arkansa s ..102,917 
Texa s 161,959 
Montan a . . . 553 
Colorado . . . 3.861 
Uta h . . 313 
Californi a . . 6,936 
Rhode Island 3,178 
Kentuck y . . 73,413 
Oregon ... . 443 
Indian a 18,386 
Wyomin g . . 494 
Nevad a 202 
Ne w Jersey . . 29,866 
Idaho 187 
Arizon a ... . 635 
It seems probable that at the next 
presidential election, three million 
Negro women will have the right to 
vote. 
Le t them get ready. 
Nort h and South, study clubs 
should be formed, wit h teachers and 
reading matter. Know the government of your ward, county, and state. 
Master the qualification laws. 
Register, and pay any necessary taxes. 
Get ready. 
They may beat and bribe our men, 
but the political hope of the Negro, 
rests on its intelligent and incorruptible womanhood. 
JUST LIKE—FOLKS ! 
WE Negroes, i n our natural, 
present state of hyper-criticism say, among ourselves, 
"just like colored folks! " 
when something is muddled or forgotten or goes distressingly wrong. 
Bu t let us for a moment look beyond: The best civilized people of 
the world fought each other for four 
years, when ninety-nine out of every 
hundred did not want to fight at all ; 
the Peace Conference took three 
months to arrange for stopping the 
war; the United States filled the circumambient air wit h ululations at 
their delay. Thereupon, this same 
United States proceeded to take nine 
months to refuse to ratify the Treaty! 
The wa r stopped,—the world was at 
Peace, the League of Nations was established, and still the United States 
was at wa r wit h Germany. No 
amendment of the Peace Treaty could 
get consideration in the Senate until 
a foreign statesman showed us how; 
the Pacifists and the War-to-the-bitter-enders rejoiced together at the 
delay. Protagonists i n the fight for 
democracy, meantime, turned into 
heresy hunters, to protect the "sacred" rights of property. Workers 
were scared, browbeaten, and deported, at the very time when work was 
the demand of the hour. Just when 
thinking was necessary, the Attorney 
General and the United States 
Congress united to make Thought a 
Crime. Fo r two years we trained Ne-OPINION 235 
groes to fight, and now we are stiff 
with fright, lest they may fight. 
An d Lansing, and Fiume—but why 
add? Isn't itall"just like white folks! " 
INFORMATION WANTE D 
LAS T summer, Negro farmers 
in Arkansas organized the 
"Progressive Farmers an d 
Household Union of 
America," to better their condition. 
Robert L. Hill, a farmer, was one of the 
chief organizers, and the Union was 
incorporated under state law. When 
the trouble occurred in Phillips 
County, a thousand Negroes were arrested, 
over twenty-five murdered, twelve 
sentenced to death, and scores to the 
penitentiary. Amon g the victims were 
four of the most prominent professional colored men in Helena. 
Hil l was accused of "instigating" 
this riot. He fled, protesting his innocence. Recently he was arrested 
i n Kansas. The N . A . A . C. P., which 
is straining every sinew to secure 
justice in Arkansas, immediately 
protested by wire, asserting that Hil l 
could not be fairly tried in 
Arkansas. Governor Allen of Kansas is a 
progressive, humane man, and listened willingly to the attorneys whom 
we put on the case— 
But 
The sheriff produced a petition 
signed by three prominent black leaders of Arkansas, asking that Hill be 
returned to Arkansas! 
These men are: 
BISHO P J. M . CONNER , African 
Methodist Church; J. M. COX, 
President, Philander Smith College; JOSEPH A. BOOKER, President, Arkansas Baptist College. 
TH E CRISI S wishes to do no man an 
injustice, and, therefore, we pause 
one month to ask: 
Bishop Conner, President Cox, and 
President Booker—did you sign that 
petition ? 
If you did—why did you?-
DIVES, MOB AN D SCAB, LIMITED 
HE sat in a massive arm-chair, 
before a carved mahogany 
desk. Beneath him lay a 
Turkish rug, and behind him, 
through the window, one saw his steel 
mills, minting millions. 
"Yes, " he said; "I recognize the 
new power of the Negro in Industry. 
He broke the steel strike for us!" 
M y heart stopped. Merciful God! 
It is to this, we have come. I saw the 
squalor and toil and endless hours of 
the stricken workman. I saw him 
sink beneath the murk, while at his 
throat were the hands of my people! 
Then to my heart the blood came 
surging back. Wh y were these rivals 
wallowing in the swill and offal of the 
Steel Barons ? Was the work so lovely and the pay so high? No ; but because black peonage of the South is 
worse than the foreign white slavery 
of the North ; because the black worker has small choice: to be lynched, to 
work for nothing in Georgia and 
Arkansas, or to be a scab in 
Pennsylvania. It's better to be a scab. But who 
forced on the black man this choice ? 
Two men,—the White Worker and the 
Steel Baron. The white worker, when 
he said in the South, "Yo u shan't 
vote," and when he said in the North, 
"Yo u shan't join my Union ! Or, if 
you do join, you're still a nigger, and 
I'm white." 
In part, then, the guilt lies with the 
worker; but only in part, and, perhaps, when we think of ignorance and 
poverty,—in smaller part. The deeper, bloodier, guilt lies with those 
Masters of Industry, who today, yesterday, and tomorrow, plan to make the 
petty, human jealousies, hatreds, rivalries, and starvations of workingmen, 
the foundation of their colossal fortunes. They are the breeders of mobs 
and lynchings, of unrest and despair, 
of race war and class struggle. They 
stand above the squabble, like ringmasters cracking their whips, and at 23(5 THE CRISIS 
every writhin g coil of the long snakelike lash, some white man mobs a 
"nigger," and some black man takes 
the bread from the white man's 
mouth. Thus, i n vicious, unending 
circle, the hate and harm rise, 
mount, and spread. 
AGAIN , SOCIAL EQUALIT Y 
MR. PALEFAC E entered his 
P
ar l° r
 mincingly,—"My 
dear man, " he said, expres-
" I am Brownson, " said the dark 
man quietly. 
"O f course—of course—I know you 
well, and your people. M y father was 
an abolitionist, and I had a black 
mammy " 
Mr . Brownson looked out of the 
window, and said rapidly: 
"I have come to ask for certain 
rights and privileges. M y people " 
" suffer; I know it; I know it. 
I have often remarked what a shame 
it was. Sir, it is an outrage!" 
" yes; we want to ask " 
Mr . Paleface raised a deprecating 
finger, "Not social equality," he murmured,—"I trust you are not asking 
that." 
"Certainly not," said Brownson. "I 
think the right of a man to select his 
friends and guests and decide with 
whom he wil l commit matrimony, is 
sacredly his and his alone." 
"Good—good! Now, my man, we 
can talk openly, face to face. We can 
pour out our souls to each other. 
Wha t can I do? I have already sent 
my annual check to Hampton. " 
"Sir, we want to vote." 
"Ah ! That is difficult—difficult. 
Yo u see, voting has come to have a 
new significance. We used to confine 
our votes to politics, but now—bless 
me!—we are voting religion, work, social-reform, landscape-gardening, and 
art. Then, too, women are i n politics 
—you see—well, I'm sure you sense 
the difficulties. Moreover, what is 
voting? A mere form—the making 
and execution of the laws is the 
thing, and there I promise you that 
I " 
"Well, then; we would help i n carryin g out the laws." 
"Commendable ambition. Very , 
very commendable. Bu t this involves 
even greater difficulties. Administra ­
tors and executives are thrown closely 
together—often i n the same room— 
at the same desk. They have to min ­
gle and consult. Muc h as I deplore 
the fact, it is true, that a man wil l not 
sit at a desk or work at a bench wit h 
a man whose company at a theatre he 
would resent." 
" I see," said Brownson, thoughtfully. "I presume, then, it is our business to demand this right to sit in 
theatres and places of popular entertainment." 
"Good Lord , man, that's impossible ! Civi l rights like this cannot be 
forced. Objectionable persons must 
grow, develop—er wash, before " 
"Then I am sure you wil l help me 
clean and train my people. I want to 
join in the great movements for social uplift." 
"Splendid! I wil l have some movements organized for your folks." 
"No , I want to be part of the general movement, so as to get the training and inspiration, the wide outlook 
—the best plans." 
"Ar e you crazy? Don't you know 
that social uplift work consists of a 
series of luncheons, dinners, and teas, 
wit h ladies present?" 
"Um, " said Brownson. " I see. I, 
also, see that in answering your first 
question, I made a mistake. In the 
light of your subsequent definition, I 
see that social equality, far from being what I don't want, is precisely 
what I do want." 
" I knew it! " screamed Mr . Paleface. 
" I knew it all the time ; I saw it sneaking into your eyes. Yo u want—you 
dare to want to marry my sister." 
"No t if she looks like you, " said OPINION 23 7 
Brownson, "and not if she's as big a 
liar. " 
"Get out—get out—leave my house, 
you ungrateful " 
A NEGR O OFFICER 
SOM E days ago, the following 
letter was received: 
AMERICA N OFFICER S O F TH E 
GREA T WA R 
24 Broadwa y 
Detroit, Michiga n 
DEA R SIR : December 5, 1919 . 
'Ther e seems to be an impression among 
officers of the Regula r Army , tha t they ar c 
not eligible for membership in the 
"American Officers." The General Staff of the 
Society is pleased to inform you that this is 
emphaticall y not the case. 
'Th e "America n Officers" is founded on 
practicall y the same pla n as the Militar y 
Orde r of the Loya l Legion , whic h was 
formed by and fo r "Officers and honorably 
discharged officers of the Army , Navy , and 
Marin e Corps " immediately followin g the 
Civi l War . 
'I have been instructed to extend to you a 
cordia l invitatio n to become a member. 
Whe n yo u read the enclosed booklet of the 
"America n Officers," I am sure you wil l desire membership i n a Society, whic h holds 
promis e of such grea t usefulness, not only 
to its members, but to our country. 
'This is the only organization whic h admits to membership, the officers of every 
branc h of the Army , Navy , and Marin e 
Corps, thus makin g i t the ready spokesman 
and common socia l meeting-ground for the 
commandin g element of the whole armed 
forces of our country. Its members, alread y numberin g several thousand, are scattered not only throughout every state i n the 
Union , but i n Canada , Alaska , Centra l and 
South America , the West Indies, the Pacific 
Islands, Asia , Europ e and Africa . Charte r 
membership is stil l open, and an applicatio n 
blan k is enclosed fo r you r .signature.' 
Yours ver y sincerely, 
(Signed) F . B . AINGER , JR . 
For the Committee. 
"A s I had had an unpleasant experience once before with one of these 
patriotic associations, I replied, expressing my appreciation of such an 
organization and of the honor of 
membership therein. I then said that 
I was called in this country a 'colored 
man'; but that my people had been in 
the country since before the Revolution, and the ancestors of some of my 
family had served in the Continental 
Army ; and I concluded by saying: 
If I can be received as a 100 per cent. 
American with no hyphen, and no 
modifiers, I shall be glad to join the 
Association; if I cannot be thus received, I shall be just as glad to stay 
out' 
"To this reply the Association sent 
the following response: 
'You r very courteous and thoughtful letter of Januar y 9 , has been received, i n whic h 
you declined membership in the America n 
Officers of the Grea t War . 
'Thankin g you for your expression of in ­
terest and of goodwill towar d the Society, I 
remain, 
Yours ver y sincerely, 
(Signed) F . B . AINGER , JR.' " 
ENGLAND , AGAI N 
TWO criticisms have been made 
of the editorial on England in 
the January number of TH E 
CRISIS . One write r reminds 
us of the great work of emancipation 
and the suppression of the slave trade, 
started by England early in the nineteenth century. , The other, would not 
have us forget the hostile attitude of 
Irish Americans toward Negroes. 
Of none of these facts are we a moment forgetful. In the Emancipation 
of Negroes, Englishmen, like 
Clarkson, Wilberforce, and Sharpe, were 
splendid pioneers; and the riots 
against Negroes in Cincinnati, Philadel
nineteenth century, in nearly all cases, 
were instigated and led by Irishmen. 
More than this: Today, the decisive 
influence in the American Catholic 
Church, which keeps black priests out 
of her pulpits, is the Irish influence, 
—for the mother Catholic Church is 
not, and never was, anti-Negro. He r 
black priests and bishops have for a 
thousand years sat in her counsels, 
and the first Catholic bishop of North 
America, was a full-blooded Negro. 
Again,—it was liberal, far-sighted 
Englishmen who gave to the world 
the democratic parliamentary ideal, 
which all races and colors receive today as civilization's rightful heritage. 
Nevertheless, two things are sure: 
One cannot indict a whole nation, nor 238 TH E CRISIS 
can one excuse a national wrong, because of individual right, or past desert. 
Ireland today deserves freedom. 
She has suffered, and suffered horribly at the hands of Englishmen. In 
Ireland and Russia, have arisen the 
greatest spiritual movements of the 
twentieth century. An d we who suffer i n slavery and degradation,—shall 
we hesitate to extend a hand of sympathy to the Irish, simply because 
their descendants i n Americ a are so 
largely the followers of American 
snobbery? We must not forget that 
Irish-Americans, like John Boyle 
O'Reilly and Archbishop John 
Ireland, and Irishmen like Daniel 
O'Connell, have always recognized Negroes 
as fellow-men. 
The great services of England to 
the world and to the Negro race must 
not for a moment blind us to the fact 
that today the dominant powers in 
England are moving heaven and hell 
to keep black and brown men in economic and political slavery, to minister to Britis h power and luxury. 
Let us cite just one instance: 
It has been proven by English testimony, beyond the shadow of a 
doubt, that Sir Starr Jameson, who 
died November 26, 1917, was a liar 
and a thief. The Britis h Aborigines 
Protection Society says: 
O n August 14, 1893, Dr . Star r Jameson 
signed a Secret Agreement, unde r whic h he 
promised to each ma n who woul d assist him 
i n makin g wa r upon the Matabele , the righ t 
to take from the Matabel e 6,000 acres of 
their lan d (conditionally redeemable by the 
Company , payin g £9,000 to each raider.) 
Some 600 men volunteered on these terms, 
and thus the tota l lan d agreed to be taken 
from the Matabele , before an y Chartere d 
Company's Official entered the country, wa s 
over 3,000,000 acres. 
Bu t though wa r was strongl y desired, 
though every preparatio n was made locally, 
the difficulty la y wit h the Imperia l Govern ­
ment, who, represented by the High 
Commissioner, Sir H. B. Loch, for a time refused to allow the invasio n of Matabeleland . 
It was clear tha t something must be devised 
to force the han d of the Imperia l Govern ­
ment. Wha t is known as the "Victori a Incident " then took place. 
A Mashon a Chie f was alleged to have cut 
some telegrap h wire . This chie f wa s i n 
charge of cattle belongin g to Lobengula . 
Th e Company , it wa s alleged, seized these 
cattle as part punishment, knowin g them to 
be Lobengula's property. Lobengul a sent a n 
impi , "to punis h the Mashona s fo r cattle 
thefts an d fo r damagin g the telegrap h 
wires. " This wa s a n act (as Lobengul a 
maintained ) of positive friendliness to Dr . 
Jameson, wh o ha d insisted on somethin g bein g done to "protect " the telegrap h wire . 
Th e Matabel e Imp i attacked (Jul y 9) the 
Mashonas, nea r Victoria , the headquarters 
of Dr . Jameson, an d killed , i t is said, 
twent y (some sa y seven, bu t none sa w even 
that number) Mashonas. Dr. Starr 
Jameson then ordered the Matabele to leave 
Mashonaland; they started to return. Thirtyeight Chartered Company men followed, 
and withou t (as is officially admitted) any 
provocation, shot nin e to eleven Matabele , 
includin g the Chief. 
Some days later, Dr . Jameso n sent a telegra m to the Hig h Commissioner, whic h in ­
cluded the false statement tha t the Matabel e 
ha d fired on the Company's whit e men—a n 
allegation whic h the Imperia l Authoritie s 
only ascertained to have been withou t a 
shred of foundation afte r the Matabel e ha d 
been "smashed. " Si r Henr y Loc h had , 
naturally , taken a grav e vie w of this alleged 
action. Acceptin g Dr . Jameson's ex parte 
statement, he telegraphed to Lobengula , an d 
thus admonished him : 
"Whe n tha conduct of you r induna s and 
people became dangerous, not onl y to the 
property, but to the lives of the whit e men, 
and they dared to fire on the whit e men, 
then the limits of patience wer e passed. " 
Wa r on the Matabel e followed this fals e 
statement to the Hig h Commissioner, an d a 
genera l scrambl e fo r their best lands a t 
once ensued. Th e neighborin g Mashona s 
wer e robbed of their land , b y the simpl e 
process of declarin g tha t the Mashona s wer e 
a t the same time subjects of the Matabel e 
(whic h they wer e not), and, therefore, wha t 
the Matabel e lost, the Mashona s lost, although i t Is interestin g to note tha t the 
Compan y recruite d Mashona s to assist i n 
the invasio n of Matabeleland . 
Wha t happened to Mr . Jameson? 
He was knighted by Great Britain ; 
he became Prime Ministe r of Cape 
Colony; he died rich and respected. 
His Majesty George V "deplored the 
loss of one who has rendered such 
great service to the empire." 
This is one incident, but it is an in ­
cident of terrible warnin g to black 
men. We have a right to suspect a 
land that honors the thief of 90 million acres. We have a right to ask: 
Where is liberal England? Where 
are the spiritual sons of William 
Wilberforce? TH E CRISPUS ATTUCK S MONUMENT, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, 
MARC H 5, 1770—MARCH 5, 1920. 
239 National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
J. E. SPINGARN, 
Treasurer 
M. STOREY, 
President 
M. W. OVINGTON, 
Chairman 
J. W. JOHNSON, 
Field Secretary 
J . R. SHILLADY , 
Secretary 
The Annual Report of the N. A. A. C. P. 
will be ready for distribution, in. printed 
form, in March. The following abridged report has been compiled from the secretary's 
manuscript: 
WHA T HA S TH E ASSOCIATIO N DONE ? 
1. It began, i n 1911 , a lega l fight against 
segregation, fighting these ordinances i n 
local campaigns, as i n St. Louis, Mo. , i n 
1916 ; arguin g the case twic e before the 
Supreme Court, until , i n 1917 , the anti-segregation decision wa s secured. 
2. It has defeated "Ji m Crow " marriag e 
legislation repeatedly, i n Congress and i n 
twelve states. 
3 . Fro m 1913-15 , it filed briefs and helped 
pa y costs i n the case of Quin n and Bea l 
vs. the Unite d States, whic h resulted, i n 
1915 , i n a decision b y the Supreme Court, 
makin g the "Grandfather " disfranchise ­
ment legislation unconstitutional. 
4. It drafted and helped to pass i n Ne w 
Yor k State, a model Civi l Rights Bill , i n 
1914 , and furnishe d needed amendments, i n 
1918 , makin g this the strongest and most 
effective legislation of its kin d i n the 
Unite d States. 
5 . It has fought lynching , not only i n 
the courts, but by publicity , makin g a score 
of careful investigations, givin g the awfu l 
trut h worldwid e publicity , callin g a nation ­
a l conference, and securin g publi c condemnatio n from leadin g citizens, from the 
President down. 
6. It made the initia l move whic h secured 
1,000 Negro officers in the American 
Expeditionary Forces, and then sent its representative abroad to secure and preserve 
the facts as to Negr o soldiers. 
7. It called a worldwide Pan-African 
Congress, in Paris, after the war and during 
the Peace Conference, and thus brough t 
the matte r of color discriminatio n to the 
attention of the civilize d world . 
8. It has established the Spingar n Medal , 
to reward the meritorious conduct of 
Negroes, and it founded THE CRISIS magazine, 
the greatest Negr o periodical. 
9. It has fought color discriminatio n o f 
every kind; legislation in Congress and 
Legislatures; attempts to refuse places to 
competent officials, as i n the case of Judg e 
Terrel l and Colone l Young ; attempts to refuse wor k b y Labo r Unions; and it has carried a score of successful civi l rights cases 
through the courts. 
10 . It secured the introductio n of resolutions fo r a Congressiona l investigatio n of 
race riots and lynching s and sought to 
create nationwid e support fo r the resolu240 N. A . A . C. P. 241 
GROWTH OF N. A. A. C. P. MEMBERSHIP B Y YEAR S 
tions by a n extensive an d intensive publicit y campaig n an d by muc h persona l 
work . 
11. It has organized an effective fighting 
machine of nearl y 100,000 members, i n over 
300 branches,—fighting to make democracy 
safe fo r all Americans. 
WHA T TH E ASSOCIATION IS DOING 
MEMBERSHIP 
The membership of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People has increased from 329 in 1912 to 91,203 
on December 31, 1919. Th e numbe r of 
branches has increased from 3 i n 1912 to 
310 i n 1919. Th e exact figures are : 
Branches Members 
1912 3 329 
1913 10 1,100 
1914 24 3,000 
1915 50 6,000 
1916 70 8,785 
1917 80 9,282 
1918 165 43,994 
1919 ' 310 91,203 
This membership is distributed as the 
42,588 
The South 
38,420 
The North 
7,440 The West 
2,755 
Foreign 
and 
at 
large 
DISTRIBUTION OF N. A. A. 0. P. MEMBERSHIP PRESIDENTS OF SEVE N OF TH E LARGEST N. A. A. C. P. BRANCHES 
A. H. GRIMKE 
Washington, D. C. 
F. E. YOUNG 
Cleveland, Ohio 
J. A. GRUMBLES 
San Antonio. Texas 
W. H . STEWAR D 
Louisville, Ky. 
REV . F. A. CULLE N 
New York City 
W. A. BUTLE R 
North California 
JUDGE E. 0. BROWN 
Chicago, 111, 
24 2 N. A . A . C. P. 243 
chart shows; the exact location of the 
branche s is shown on the ma p (page 246). 
It wil l be seen tha t this trul y is a na ­
tiona l organization . N o other organizatio n 
of colored people, fo r genera l objects, has 
an y such numbe r of members nor so wide 
an d even n distributio n as compared wit h 
the Negr o population. Nine-tenths of the 
membership is composed of colored people; 
there ar e probably 10,000 whit e members. 
LYNCHING AND RIOTS 
One of the greatest efforts of the Nationa l 
Associatio n is its campaig n against lynch ­
in g and mob violence. The extent of the 
lynchin g evil is shown b y the followin g 
table : 
31 years — 1889-1919 — 3,308 persons 
lynched. 
Negroe s 2,600 
White s 708 
O f Negroes.. . 2,549 men and 51 women 
O f whites... . 697 men and 11 women 
Durin g the yea r 1919, 78 Negroes, 4 
America n whit e persons, an d 2 Mexican s 
wer e lynched—a tota l of 84 persons. Te n 
of the Negroe s wer e ex-soldiers, and one, 
a woman . 
Against this awfu l evil, the Associatio n 
communicated, during 1919, with 25 
Governors, 7 Chambers of Commerce, and 5 other 
officials. It received acknowledgment from 
5 Governors, 1 Chambe r of Commerce, and 
1 official. 
It sent out to the press, 32 stories of fac t 
and protest. It pointed out to the publi c 
the increase i n the cruelty and ferocity i n 
lynchings, as shown by 14 Negroe s burned 
a t the stake—11 before death—durin g the 
yea r 1919. It called attention to the fac t 
tha t durin g the yea r 1918, 13 victims were 
take n from the hands of Peace Officers, or 
out of the jails, whil e i n 1919, there were 
34 such victims; and tha t durin g the years 
1918-19, convictions against lynchers were 
secured i n only two cases, i n one of whic h 
fines were imposed upon 12 men ; and i n 
the other, priso n sentences upon 15 men. 
I n 14 cases, lynching s were prevented b y 
the acts o f publi c officials. I n Tennessee, 
the State Constabular y la w wa s passed, and 
called " A Bil l to Preven t Lynching. " I n 
Wyoming , a la w against mob violence was 
enacted. Th e Constitutio n of Kentuck y was 
amended, so as to permit the remova l of any 
sheriff or othe r official fo r neglect of duty. 
Fiv e states proposed anti-lynchin g measures. 
In the United States Congress, 
Congressman Dyer has introduced a bill to make 
lynchin g a Federa l offense, and at the in ­
stance of the Association , Senator Curtis 
has introduced a resolution, callin g for an in ­
vestigation of mob violence and lynching . 
A simila r resolution has been introduced i n 
the House. Organization s of note have 
passed specia l resolutions condemning lynch ­
in g and askin g fo r legislation. Amon g these 
organizations are : The Federa l Counci l of 
Churches of Christ in America, the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, 
the Southern Sociologica l Congress, the 
Freedman's Ai d Society of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church, and the National 
Council of the Congregational Church. 
Members of the staff of the Associatio n 
personally investigated 9 lynchings, 1 attempted lynching , 3 race riots, 1 case of 
deportation, and 1 tria l of lynchers. 
A Nationa l Conference on Lynchin g was 
held i n Ne w Yor k City , a t the instigation 
of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, May 5-6, 
1919. Th e "Call " was signed by prominent citizens from all over the Unite d 
States. The "Address to the Nation, " 
signed by 150 citizens, including exPresident Taft, Attorney General Palmer, the 
Governors of seven states, an d the heads of 
leadin g universities, wa s sent broadcast. 
The Associatio n was active i n investiga ­
tion, publicit y and lega l defense i n the riots 
at Washington, D. C; Omaha, Neb.; 
Longview, Tex., and Phillips County, Ark. 
FIGHTING TH E COLOR LINE 
Throug h the active intervention of the 
Association , together wit h Senator Hardin g 
and Representative Emerso n of Ohio, the 
Unite d States Railwa y Administratio n was 
induced to rescind its extraordinar y order, 
whic h prevented a person i n the Nort h 
from pre-payin g transportation for a colored person i n the South who wished to 
come North . 
Throug h efforts of the Association , attempted discriminatio n against four colored girls i n the dormitorie s of Oberli n 
College, was stopped. Th e Associatio n is 
stil l fighting discriminatio n i n the assignment of norma l students to practic e wor k 
in the schools of Philadelphia. In 
Cincinnati, it is opposing the establishment of a 
separate colored school. I n Washington , D . 
C , discriminatio n i n the dining-room of the 244 TH E CRISIS 
new Court House , has been stopped. Th e 
color line i n restaurants wa s successfully 
fought _ i n Lansing , Mich. , Denver, Colo., 
and Cleveland , Ohio. Theatr e discrimina ­
tions were fewer, but the Associatio n won 
a verdic t of $100 fo r the plaintiff i n a case 
at Syracuse , N . Y . The Associatio n has 
been fighting discriminatio n i n Labo r 
Unions, particularl y the Longshoremen and 
Shi p Workers i n Florida , railwa y employees, etc. I n two cases, satisfactory adjustments were promised. O n the other hand, 
the Stationar y Fireme n and Oilers' Unio n 
has voted to admit colored men on terms of 
equality. Th e Associatio n sought i n vai n to 
have a representative of the Negr o race appointed on the first and second Industria l 
Conferences. Muc h effort has been made 
to stop discriminatio n against soldiers, particularly in cantonments and in the 
American Legion. We have also tried to secure 
the retention of colored officers i n the 
Unite d States Army , and this has gained 
the co-operation of severa l members of 
Congress. 
LEGA L DEFENS E 
During the year 1919, the National 
Association advanced $100 to aid in the investigation and punishment of a certain body of 
lynchers; $300 to aid i n the defense of 
Edga r Caldwell , the Negr o soldier on tria l 
in Alabama , fo r killin g a street ca r conductor. Durin g December, $5,738 was raised 
as a Specia l Lega l Defense Fund . Fo r 
lega l defense, commitments totalin g $10,000 
have been made. W e have been unable 
to handle man y interesting cases, because 
of the lack of funds,—particularl y the cases 
of Joh n Snowden and Isaiah Fountain , i n 
Baltimore , Md. , and the cases of colored 
soldiers a t Camp Sherman , and of Mauric e 
Mayes, at Knoxville , Tenn . 
A very importan t case handled b y the 
Associatio n durin g the yea r 1919, was that 
of Edga r Caldwell , the colored soldier accused of murder, who was turned over to 
Civi l authorities. H e was convicted and 
sentenced to death, but through the wor k of 
the Association, a stay of execution was 
granted by the Supreme Court of Alabama . 
Th e court affirmed the death sentence, but 
late r it granted a re-hearing. Th e Attorne y 
Genera l of the Unite d States was appealed 
to and finally consented to intervene, and a 
certificate of reasonable doubt wa s issued. 
The case wil l be heard by the Supreme 
Court of the Unite d States i n March . Th e 
Annisto n Branc h of the Associatio n spent 
over $1,500 on this case, an d the Nationa l 
Office, $300. 
PUBLICIT Y 
Exclusiv e of the circulatio n of TH E CRISI S 
and of the BRANC H BULLETIN , 130,000 pieces 
of literatur e were distribute d durin g the 
yea r 1918; durin g the yea r 1919, 427,093 
pieces of literatur e were distributed, a n in ­
crease of 297,093 pieces. 
Mr . Herbert J . Seligman n began his wor k 
as Directo r of Publicity , wit h the wor k in ­
cident to the National Conference on 
Lynching, and has become a permanent member 
of the staff. A considerable amoun t of 
editoria l comment i n leadin g papers of the 
country has been give n durin g the year. 
The followin g is a report of the literatur e 
distributed durin g the yea r 1919: 
General— 
Reconstruction and the Negro . . . 9,448 
Afric a i n the Worl d Democrac y 2,460 
Annua l Report 6,772 
Th e Futur e of Afric a 1,922 
Ho w the N . A . A . C. P . Began . . 14,000 
Reconstruction and the KuKlu x 
i n South Carolin a 2,408 
Wil l Ohio Mak e Good 3,000 
Othe r literatur e 15,983 
Tota l 55,993 
Lynching — 
Address to the Natio n 24,000 
A Lynchin g Uncovered 3,135 
Burning s at Stake 6,200 
Law s Against Lynchin g 5,375 
The Senator Curtis Resolution. . 10,000 
Th e Negr o Question 10,550 
The Mobbin g of Joh n R. Shillady . 6,000 
Twelv e Month s of Lynching... . 10,000 
Thre e Thousand Wil l Bur n Negr o 18,182 
Othe r literatur e 9,079 
Tota l 102,521 
Organization— 
Progra m fo r 1919 20,000 
Wh y and Wherefor e 149,050 
Wh y Yo u Should Enlist i n the 
N . A . A . C. P 53,600 
The Wor k of the Branche s 10,000 
Othe r literatur e 35,929 
Tota l 268,579 
Gran d Tota l 427,093 
Th e tota l numbe r of copies of the BRANC H 
BULLETI N circulated durin g the yea r 1919, 
was 27,439. 
Whenever there is news of the 
Association's activities, or anything else of interest, the Associatio n sends out a "story " to 
a selected list of whit e and colored newspapers. It then collects clipping s from those N. A . A . C. P. 245 
papers whic h prin t the story, i n whole or 
i n part. O f course, only a part of these 
clippings come to the attention of the 
Association. During the year 1919, the followin g press stories were sent out, and the 
followin g numbe r of clipping s were received : 
Press Stories Clippings 
Januar y 5 52 
Februar y 8 57 
Marc h 4 42 
Apri l 15 230 
Ma y 19 234 
June 10 113 
Jul y 10 113 
August 16 113 
September 13 94 
October 10 55 
Novembe r 10 104 
December 14 91 
134 1,298 
O f the 134 press stories, 45 were on lynch ­
in g subjects and 89 were on general subjects. 
Of the 1,298 clippings received (to 
January 20, 1920) 923 were from the white 
press and 375 were from the colored press. 
Specia l articles were contributed by members of the staff of the Association , as follows, durin g the yea r 1919: 
B y Mar y Whit e Ovington— 
Justic e fo r the Negro , 
—The Evangelical Herald 
Th e Gunpowde r of Race Antagonism, 
—American City, September 
Mo b Violence , 
—The Independent, September 
B y Herbert J. Seligmann— 
Th e Press Abets the Mob , 
—The Nation, October 4 
Democrac y and Jim-Crowism , 
—The New Republic, September 3 
Wha t is Behin d the Negr o Uprising , 
—Current Opinion, September 
Rac e War , 
—The New Republic, August 13 
Darkest Mississippi , 
—The Crisis, Jul y 
Protectin g Souther n Womanhood , 
—The Nation, Jun e 14 
Everybody's Say-So , 
—The Chicago Evening Post, Sept. 13 
Chicag o i n Gri p of Risin g Fear, 
—The New York Call, August 3 
B y Walte r F . White -
Massacrin g White s i n Arkansas, 
The Nation, December 6 
Th e Rac e Conflict i n Arkansas, 
-—The Survey, December 13 
Trut h Abou t Arkansa s Massacre , 
—The New York Age, October 
Find s N o Massacr e Plo t i n Arkansas, 
—Chicago Daily News, October 18 
Chicago and Its Eigh t Reasons, 
—The Crisis, October 
Wor k or Figh t i n the South 
—The New Republic, Marc h 1 
Accoun t of Trials at Tuscumbia , 
—New York Evening Post, Februar y 19 
Addresse s and conferences to the number 
of 288 were given and held by members of 
the Association's staff durin g the yea r 1919, 
as follows: 
Alabam a 1 
Californi a 17 
Connecticut 6 
Distric t of Columbi a 4 
Florid a 1 
Georgi a . . . .• 35 
Illinois 11 
Indian a 10 
Kansa s 3 
Kentuck y 8 
Louisian a 1 
Marylan d 3 
Massachusetts 14 
Michiga n 28 
Missouri 2 
Ne w Jersey 15 
Ne w Yor k 43 
Nort h Carolin a 4 
Ohio 22 
Oregon 1 
Pennsylvani a : 22 
Rhode Island 2 
South Carolin a 3 
Tennessee 4 
Texa s 1 
Virgini a 19 
Washingto n ' 5 
Wisconsi n 2 
Canad a 1 
The followin g figures show the numbe r 
of miles covered on Associatio n business 
durin g the year: 
Mr . Whit e 25,954.3 
Mr . Shiliad y 22,709.6 
Mr . Johnson 19,556 
Mr . Bagnal l 11,241 
Mr . Towns 5,620 
Miss Ovingto n 3,274 
Tota l 88,354.9 
In other words, representatives of the 
Association last year traveled a distance equal 
to three and one-half times the distance 
aroun d the earth. 
BRANCHE S 
On December 31, 1919, the Associatio n 
had 310 Branches, in 43 states and the 
District of Columbia; one each in Canada, the 
Philippine Islands and the Isthmus of 
Panama. 
N o other organization, we are certain, can 
boast of more loyal, devoted workers tha n to 
BRANCHES OF TH E N. A. A. C. P., JANUAR Y 1, 1920 
(Additional dots should appear in Canada, the Philippine Islands, and the Canal Zone) N. A . A . C. P. 247. 
ar e the officers and active members of the 
Association's branches. I n the topica l summary , given below, much is necessarily omitted. Particularly , we regre t tha t we are 
unable to exhibit to the reader the enthusiastic, co-operative spiri t of these branches 
and al l tha t they promis e fo r better Negr o 
citizenship, and thereby for better 
Americanism. None respond more promptly in 
time and money, to every demand fo r service, tha n do our Branc h members. 
LEGISLATION 
A t Lansing , there was introduced i n the 
Legislatur e of Michigan , a bil l simila r to the 
Ne w Yor k Civi l Rights Bill . Wit h the 
co-operation of our Michiga n Branches, 
particularl y the Detroit Branch , and the 
Distric t Organizer, the Rev. Bagnall , this 
bil l wa s passed. Ne w Mexico , Providence , 
Pueblo, and Washington , Pa. , were other 
branches whic h attempted to get effective 
civi l rights legislation passed. Wheeling , 
W . Va. , failin g to secure a cit y ordinance, 
has planned to push a bil l throug h the State 
Legislature . Th e Ohio Branches, through 
a specia l conference committee, worked energeticall y on this legislation, but were disappointed. Pueblo and Denve r co-operated 
i n suppressing a bil l prohibitin g inter-marriage between the races,* whil e Nashvill e 
addressed the Governo r i n behalf of a constabular y bill , whic h has since been enacted 
into a law. I n anti-lynchin g legislation, the 
Branche s have petitioned their respective 
representatives i n Congress. Th e Texa s 
Branches held a conference with the 
Governor, in the interest of a state bill against 
lynching . 
Atlant a has shown wha t a Southern 
branc h can do i n cit y legislation activities, 
by increasin g the colored registratio n from 
700 to 3,000 names. Usin g this vote solidl y i n the recent cit y election, i t succeeded i n 
relievin g the deplorable school conditions 
i n Atlanta , thus securin g a new gramma r 
school an d a new hig h school fo r colored 
pupils. 
Becaus e of a simila r increase i n registra ­
tio n secured b y the Columbi a Branch , four 
* Th e Association , as is wel l known , opposes anti-intermarriag e legislation, on the 
groun d tha t to prohibit intermarriag e is to 
assert the racia l inferiorit y of the Negr o 
an d to open the door wide r fo r violation of 
Negr o Womanhood . Th e Association , on 
the other hand, does not advocate intermarriage . 
men were called fo r jur y duty i n Columbia . 
Ashevill e encouraged her men i n registering , because of her interest i n a school bond 
issue. Birmingha m and Falls Churc h ar e 
now carryin g on registratio n campaigns, 
whil e Boston is promotin g good citizenship 
by encouraging the naturalizatio n of foreign 
colored people. 
EDUCATIO N 
Muc h attention was given to the conditions of the schools i n various cities. Bette r 
schools i n rura l districts wa s an object of 
Wilmington, Frankfort, New Orleans; 
Tucson and Asheville asked for more and better 
buildings; St. Rose secured a five months' 
session, whic h encouraged he r to wor k for 
eight months; Wharto n lai d plans fo r three 
new buildings; Rome reformed sanitar y arrangements in one of her schools; the 
District of Columbia has been battling with the 
unequal distributio n of school appropria ­
tions between whit e and colored schools, 
whil e Ypsilant i fought against a separate 
school. To stimulat e a desire fo r education 
i n their communities, has been the aim of 
the Falls Church , Plainfield , and Rome 
Branches, and St. Pau l has taken a surve y 
of the childre n i n the hig h and gramma r 
schools. Des Moines, by formin g a Parents 
and Teachers Association , has trie d to 
brin g about a closer relation between schools 
and parents. One o f the outstandin g victories i n education, is the placin g of colored 
teachers i n the Charlesto n schools, i n whic h 
the Charleston and Columbi a Branche s cooperated. 
DISCRIMINATIO N 
Th e Branche s i n the different parts of the 
country, report numerous cases of discrimination. Columbus secured action i n the 
case of a nurse who wa s refused fo r dut y 
i n one of the camps, on account of color. 
Lo s Angele s won an importan t victor y i n 
obtaining the admission of colored girls to 
the Count y Hospita l Trainin g School, despite the opposition of the nurses. 
Discrimination in the courts was a matter of 
concern to Pueblo, Wilmington, and 
Danville. Cleveland succeeded in preventing the 
establishment of a separate Detention 
Home fo r colored girls. Ther e were man y 
cases of discriminatio n i n restaurants, 
stores, bath-houses, and the like , i n whic h 
Orang e and Toledo were particularl y active, 
the latte r handlin g 24 cases, of whic h 18 
secured satisfaction. Th e discriminatio n i n 248 TH E CRISIS 
bath-houses, municipa l and private , wa s 
investigated by Salt Lake, Toledo, and 
Sacramento. Grand Rapids has now under consideration the case of the Congregationa l 
ministers who were ejected from a cafeteria. 
Th e Distric t of Columbi a continues to 
investigat e discriminatio n i n the employment of the Government. Correspondence 
wit h the chiefs of bureaus has brought forth 
the statement tha t they do not practice discriminatio n i n appointin g colored clerks 
from Civi l Servic e eligibles. 
Discriminatio n i n trave l has been investigated by Charleston, Danville, San 
Antonio, Bowling Green, and New York City. 
Discriminatio n i n the Y . M . C. A . was in ­
vestigated by Ne w York , Lincoln , and 
Pueblo. Man y Branche s were uniforml y 
successful i n havin g objectionable signs removed—namely, Pueblo, Cleveland, 
Portland, Denver, Ottumwa, and Providence; 
Wheelin g and Henderson protested against 
such signs. 
Kansa s Cit y and Oklahoma Cit y have 
both ha d to fight attempts at housin g segregation. In Kansa s City , the burnin g of 
homes and the dynamitin g of a churc h were 
used to intimidat e Negroes. 
CRIM E 
Ther e have been four cases tha t Branche s 
have investigated, i n whic h whit e men 
killed color jd men. Mercer County, 
Bakersfield, the District of Columbia, and 
Charleston are working toward the end that these 
whit e men shall be punished fo r their 
crimes. Throug h the continued efforts of 
the Pueblo Branch , the death sentence imposed upon a colored man , fo r killin g the 
turnke y of the jai l i n whic h .he wa s confined, wa s changed to lif e imprisonment; 
his wif e was freed of the charge of murde r 
brought against he r for havin g passed the 
weapon wit h whic h he kille d the jailer. 
Dublin , whic h was the scene of four murders i n .several days, distinguished itself by 
bravel y guardin g the house, i n whic h a 
wounded colored ma n lay, from the attacks 
of a threatening mob. Savannah , Rome, 
and Atlant a interested themselves i n savin g 
two colored men who kille d whit e men i n 
self defense. Th e Distric t of Columbi a is 
investigatin g a case i n whic h a whit e policema n kille d a colored ma n unde r the pretence of self-protection. Chattanooga now 
has a case i n whic h a colored ma n is accused of murder, although he can prove 
a n alibi . Omaha , Orange , Petersburg , the 
Distric t of Columbia , an d Nashville , al l ha d 
cases of crimina l assault on colored women 
by whit e men. One of the cases of crimina l 
assault on whit e women, reported durin g 
the riots, wa s investigated by the Distric t 
of Columbia , and proved to be false. Eigh t 
Branches, Fort Wayne, Johnstown, 
Nashville, Austin, Dublin, Milwaukee, Beatrice, 
and Ne w York , worke d on cases of assault 
on colored men by whit e men. Cases of 
manslaughter, whic h the Branche s took) 
up, wer e reported b y Montgomery , the 
Distric t of Columbia , Danville , an d Ne w 
Yor k City . I n Birmingham , a colored soldie r 
who wa s thrown into jai l fo r speakin g to a 
Greek girl , whom he mistook fo r a n acquaintance, wa s abl y assisted by "the 
Branch . 
SOLDIER S 
Man y wer e the complaints of discriminator y treatment of the colored soldiers i n 
camps, on trains, i n their own home towns, 
i n hospitals, and b y the Re d Cross. These 
cases were handled b y Columbus, Gary , 
Wilmington , Nashville , Chicago , Ne w York , 
and Rockford . Th e Bosto n Branc h investigated cases of colored soldiers wh o wer e 
kept at menia l labo r i n Cam p Devens, long 
after they should have been discharged. 
Oklahoma was represented on variou s wa r 
committees. Receptions, picnics, an d banquets were tendered b y the Branche s to 
their returned soldiers. Amon g these 
were Petersburg , Nashville , Providence , 
Rome, Santa Monica Bay, Selma, 
Birmingham, and Marshall. Hartford formed an 
organizatio n amon g he r soldiers. 
SOCIA L SERVIC E 
Realizin g their responsibilit y towards 
their communities, the Branche s have 
busied themselves i n the socia l problems 
around them. Th e Nashvill e Branc h has 
trie d to secure pa y for a socia l worke r wh o 
has been laborin g to correc t evils an d abuses 
among the colored people. Tuscaloos a has 
ha d appointed a colored woma n probation 
officer i n the Juvenil e Court. Lansin g is 
helpin g the newcomers i n he r cit y to become 
adjusted to their environment. Lynchbur g 
has been cleanin g out "re d light " districts, 
and Chicago has been interested i n civi c 
problems. Mar t and Vallej o have attempted 
to elevated the mora l tone of sections i n 
their cities. Charlesto n has been of specia l service to soldiers and widows o f sold N. A . A . C. P. 249 
iers. Survey s and statistics of the colored 
populatio n were taken by Toledo, Stamford , 
an d Lansing . Co-operative business has 
appealed to Montgomer y and Rome . Ne w 
Bedfor d adopted a Frenc h orphan . Severa l 
Branche s now have headquarters and paid 
workers. 
Continued censoring of the press and 
movin g pictures and conferences wit h editors, i n regar d to the wa y i n which they 
featured Negr o news, were undertaken by 
Springfield , Mo. , Cleveland , Springfield, 
Mass., Ne w York , Toledo, For t Smith , 
Adrian , and Charleston . Open letters to 
the press, i n answe r to hurtfu l propaganda an d wit h the purpose of improvin g civi c 
conditions, were writte n by Tacoma and 
Petersburg . Th e Branche s generally have 
trie d to acqaint the whit e people wit h their 
aims, b y sending prominent citizens litera ­
ture, b y securin g them- as members, and by 
co-operating wit h them i n enterprises, as 
Tuscaloosa , Toledo, Bloomington-Normal , 
Parkersburg , and Keoku k have done. 
RIOTS 
I n connection wit h the riots, effective 
wor k has been accomplished. The Austi n 
and Sa n Antoni o Branche s looked after the 
men who were taken prisoners in the 
Longview riots; the District of Columbia and 
Chicago have busied themselves i n seeing 
that their rio t victims secure justice, whil e 
Omah a tried to prevent the riots by purgin g 
her press, and has since attended the courts 
i n the effort to see tha t justic e wa s done 
an d false impressions were cleared away. 
LABOR 
Th e stand taken by the A . F . of L . at 
Atlanti c City , to admit Negroe s to al l 
unions, wa s of grea t importance . No w it 
remains fo r localities to see tha t this decision is carrie d out. Th e Secretary of 
the Bosto n Branc h wa s on the committee 
to secure employment fo r returnin g soldiers. H e wisely used his influence against 
discrimination . Pueblo held a meeting i n regar d to the organizatio n of colored steel 
workers by the A . F . of L . Hartfor d brought 
to the attention of the Centra l Labo r Union , 
the mistreatmen t of colored women b y the 
tobacco growers. Ne w Orleans ha d the 
unique distinctio n of havin g a union of 
colored women workers. Toledo wa s in ­
strumenta l i n the re-instatement of colored 
laborers, who ha d been discharged i n the 
Ne w Yor k Centra l railroa d withou t cause. 
In Wheeling , the president of the Branc h 
pledged 2,000 whit e union me n to wor k 
for the abolition of the color line. Mario n 
investigated a threatened remova l of colored laborers from Huntington ; investiga ­
tions of the steel strik e riots i n Canto n 
proved that the colored workers were not 
causing trouble, but were .staying awa y 
from the mills. One fact noted by the 
Boston Branc h was tha t the field of labor 
is broader for the colored ma n than ever 
before. 
TH E CLEVELAN D CONFERENC E 
The greatest conference ever held by the 
National Association was its Tenth 
Anniversary Conference at Cleveland, Ohio, 
June 22-29. Ther e were present 265 delegates, from 34 states; the South was well 
represented. Mor e than $1,500 was raised, 
$400 of whic h was for the Anti-Lynchin g 
Fund , and the remainde r fo r the Genera l 
Fun d of the Association . 
SPINGARN MEDA L AWARD 
A t the Cleveland Conference, the Fift h 
Spingar n Meda l was awarded to Archibal d 
H . Grimke , of Washington , D . C. 
ATLANT A 
A t the urgent invitatio n of the Atlanta , 
Ga. , Branch , backed by invitation s from 
Governor Dorsey, the Mayor, and the 
Chambe r of Commerce , the Conference recommended tha t the Directors choose Atlant a 
as the 1920 meetin g place. (At its meeting in December the Board voted to hold 
the next annual conference in Atlanta.) 
Th e followin g is a record of office detail 
and of the correspondence received and sent 
out by the Associatio n durin g the yea r 
1919: 
Incoming Mai l 13,566 
Outgoin g Mail * 135481 
Visitors to Headquarters 489 
Incoming Telephone Calls 2,883 
Outgoin g Telephone Calls 3,638 
Incomin g Telegrams 242 
Outgoin g Telegrams 418 
Newspape r Clippings* * 6,530 
Addition s and changes i n the Office Staff 
of the Associatio n were made as follows 
durin g the yea r 1919: 
I n the Executiv e Staff: 
Mar y Whit e Ovingto n became Chairma n 
* Fro m Januar y 28, 1919, only. Includes 
first and second-class mai l and packages. 
** O f the total amount of 6,530 clippings, 
2,874 were received from Burrell's Press 
Clippin g Bureau . Th e remainde r were 
clipped at headquarters. 250 TH E CRISIS 
of the Boar d of Directors, to fill the vacancy 
of J. E . Spingarn . 
J. E . Spingar n became Actin g Treasurer, 
to fill the vacancy of Oswald Garrison 
Villard, who resigned in June. 
Herbert J . Seligman n was made Directo r 
of Publicity . 
Distric t Organizers—actin g on part time : 
Robert W. Bagnall , G . A . Gregg , and George 
A . Towns. 
I n the Office Staff there are at present: 
the Secretary, the Field Secretary, the 
Assistant Secretary, the Director of Publicity, 
the Director of Branches, the Office 
Executive, the Office Secretary, and the 
Bookkeeper, nine stenographers and typists, 1 
file clerk, 1 telephone operator, and 1 office 
boy. 
FINANCE S 
A comparison of the financial condition 
of the Associatio n at the close of the yea r 
1919, wit h tha t obtainin g at the close of 
1918, and of receipts and expenses fo r both 
years, shows the following : 
Receipts for Increase 
the Year 1919 1918 
Genera l 
Fun d ...$43,613.15 $27,862.76 $15,750.39 
Anti-Lynchin g 
Fun d . . . 12,391.12 1,551.73 10,839.39 
Lega l 
Defense . 5,738.27 34.00 5,704.27 
Maclea n 
Memoria l 13.16 5.62 7.54 
Al l Funds. .$61,755.70 $29,454.11 $32,301.59 
(Increased Revenue fo r 1919, 110 per cent.) 
Expenditures for Increase 
the Year 1919 1918 
Genera l 
Fun d ...$42,513.97 $23,422.68 $19,091.29 
Anti-Lynchin g 
Fun d . . . 15,793.26 3,283.23 12,510.03 
Lega l 
Defense . 1,000.00 1,000.00 
Maclea n 
Memoria l 162.00 71.75 90.25 
Al l Funds. .$59,469.23 $26,777.66 $32,691.57 
(Increased Expenditures, 122 pe r cent.) 
Balances - 1919 1918 
Genera l Fun d $4,892.56 $4,328.48 
Anti-Lynchin g Fund . . 2,843.53 6,245.67 
Lega l Fun d 4,814.77 76.50 
Maclea n Memoria l 66.50 215.34 
Ji m Cro w Fun d 8.00 8.00 
Tota l $12,725.36 $11,873.99 
Followin g is a statement of the income 
of the Associatio n by years: 
1911 $ 5,108.90 
1912 11,815.15 
1913 16,841.73 
1914 14,030.70 
1915 13,094.36 
' 1916 23,521.48 * 
1917 14,427.27 
1918 29.454.11 
1919 61,755.70 
* Includes $11,539.64 from specia l antilynchin g campaign . 
ENVO Y 
OF two things, we Negroe s have dreamed 
fo r man y years: an organizatio n so 
effective and so powerfu l tha t whe n discrimination and injustice touched one 
Negro, it would touch 12,000,000. We have 
not got this yet, but we have take n a grea t 
step towar d it. W e have dreamed, too, of 
a n organizatio n whic h woul d wor k ceaselessly to make American s know tha t the 
so-called "Negr o problem" is simpl y one 
phase of the vaste r problem of democracy 
i n America , and tha t those who wis h freedom and justic e fo r their country, must 
wis h i t fo r every blac k citizen. This is 
the grea t and evermore insistent message 
of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
Wil l not the reader immediatel y joi n this 
organizatio n and add his mit e of brain , 
braw n and money to the cause? 
1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 
$75,000 
$50,000 
$25,00 0 
ANNUA L INCOME OF TH E N. A. A. C. P. 251 
Times Wide World Photos. 
PET E J. WHITE, OF MOHAWK A, C , (THIRD RUNNER FROM LEFT) WINNING TH E 100 YAR D DASH ON TH E PERSHING FIEL D EL TISICO* 
ANIT A SCOTT COLEMA N 
"WHAT is patriotism?" shouted 
O'Brady, the Irish engineer, as 
peppery as he wa s good-natured. H e wa s 
showin g signs of his risin g choler faste r 
and faste r as the heated argumen t grew 
i n intensity. 
H e argue d tha t i t wa s a thin g men put 
before their wives, and Ti m held tha t it 
couldn't be compared wit h love-makin g and 
women. 
"Cu t it, boys, and. 
listen to this, " broke 
i n Sam Dicks, a 
grizzle d old train ­
man, who ha d more 
yarn s i n his cran ­
ium, than a yellow 
cur has fleas on a 
zig-za g trai l between 
his left ear and his 
hin d righ t leg. 
"Fir e up, " roared 
the crowd of us. 
Th e debat e on 
patriotism had started between O'Brad y 
and Ti m Brixtne r i n 
the Sant a F e restroom. It was a typical scene,—the long 
paper-strewn table 
occupyin g the center 
space, and sturdy 
sons of America — 
hard-muscled, blue 
chinned, steady -
nerved , rail-roa d 
men — loungin g 
around it. Ove r i n the alcove, upon a raised 
platform, three colored men, who styled 
themselves, "Th e Blac k Trio, " wer e restin g 
after their creditable performance . The y had 
given us some of the best strin g musi c from 
banjo, mandolin , and guitar, I have ever 
heard. 
One of them, a big , strapping , ebony 
fellow, minus an arm, had a baritone voice 
wort h a million , headed unde r different 
color. H e sang "Case y Jones"—not a clas-
* The Consumptive. 
sic—but take i t from me, a grea t one among 
our kind . H e sure san g it. . . . 
A colored youngster, whom they carrie d 
about wit h them, had just finished passin g 
the hat. It ha d been al l both hands could 
do to carr y it back to "Th e Blac k Trio" . 
I, myself, had flung i n five bucks, the pric e 
I'd pay, maybe , to go to a swell opera . 
Th e gu y wh o playe d the banjo wa s a 
glowing-eyed, flat-chested fellow wit h a 
cough, whic h he used 
some frequent. 
I li t m y pipe, and 
O'Brady and 
Brixtner and the rest lit 
theirs. Sa m Dick s 
wa s about to begin 
whe n the "Trio " 
showed signs of departing . H e left us 
with , "Wai t a bit 
boys, " an d went to 
them. H e gave the 
gla d han d to the 
glowing-eyed, coughin g one, wit h a gen 
uine friendshi p gri p 
H e came back ready 
fo r us. 
"I n the earl y nine 
ties I wa s workin g 
wit h Bill y Bartell , 
the greatest daredevil and the squarest tha t ever guided 
a throttle . W e made 
ou r runs throug h 
tha t portio n of the 
countr y whic h is sure God's handiwork , 
i f anythin g is. It alway s strike s me as being 
miraculous to see the tropi c weathe r of old 
Me x and the temperate-weather of ou r U . S., 
tryin g to mi x as it does alon g the border. It 
gives us a climat e you can't beat—but the 
landscape, sun-baked sand, prairie-do g holes, 
and cactus wit h mountain s dumped indiscriminatel y everywhere , all covered by a sky 
that's a dazzle of blue beauty, is wha t I call 
God's handiwork , because it can't be called 1 
anythin g else. 
— A little fluttery thing, all heart and eyes 
252 ATTA R 25a 
"A t one of our stops i n one of Mexico's 
littl e mu d cities, a colored family,—father, 
mother, and baby—boarded the train . 
Th e woma n was lik e one of those little , 
pearly-grey doves we shoot in New 
Mexico, from August to November—a little, 
fluttery thing , al l heart and eyes. 
"Whe n they got on, their baby wa s a 
mere bundle, so no one noticed its illness. 
Eu t it wa s soon al l aboard that a sick ki d 
was on. H e was a sick kid , too: so sick 
tha t every mother's son on that trai n felt 
sorr y and wanted to do something. 
"Th e mother's eyes grew brighte r and 
brighter, and the fathe r kept watchin g his 
ki d and pullin g out his big , gold watch. 
The baby grew worse. 
"I n some way , as the intimat e secrets of 
our heart sometimes do, it crept out that 
the famil y wa s tryin g to get over to the 
U . S. side before the baby died. W e stil l 
had an eight hou r run , and the baby was 
growin g worse, faster than an engine eats 
up coal. 
"Th e mother's eyes scanned the country 
for familia r signs. Ever y time I passed 
through that coach and saw her, I wa s 
minded of the wa y wounded birds beat their 
wing s on the har d eart h i n a n effort to 
fly. To al l our attempted condolence, she 
replied wit h the same words: 
" 'I f he lives unti l we get home—if he 
lives til l we get home.' 
"Bill y Bartel l alway s knew who his passengers were. H e used to say he didn't believe i n haulin g whole lots of unknown 
baggage. So he knew tha t we carried the 
sick kid . W e passed wor d to hi m that 
the ki d wa s worse, and wha t his parents 
were aimin g for. 
"Well , boys, after that, our trai n went 
faster tha n a whirligi g i n a Texa s cyclone. 
The landscape—cactus, prairie-do g holes, 
and mountains, rolled into something compact an d smooth as a khaki-colored canvass, 
and flashed past us lik e sheets of lightning . 
W e steamed into Nogales. The depot was 
on the Mexica n side, but the coach wit h 
the sick ki d landed fair and square upon 
America n sod. 
"Th e littl e colored woman wit h he r baby 
i n her arms, alighted on good old America n 
turf. She turned i n acknowledgment to the 
kindness she had received, to wave her hand 
at the engine and its engineer, a t the 
coaches and all the passengers, a t everything , because she was so glad. 
"I f the ki d died, i t woul d be i n America — 
a t home." 
Ol d Dick s paused a moment before querying , "Boys, did you get it? " 
"Yo u bet," spoke up Brixtner. "That's 
patriotism. Now, Pa t O'Brady ! 'Twasn't 
no ma n and woma n affair either, " he cried, 
eager to resume their interrupted debate. 
"Wai t a minute , fellows, " pleaded Dicks, 
"wait. " 
" I wan t to know, di d the ki d live? " somebody asked. 
"That's wha t I wan t to tell, " said Dicks. 
"Eh , you Tim ! Cu t it, cut it. . . . " 
"Tha t littl e banjo picke r was the ki d 
whose parents did not wan t him to die out 
of sight of the Stars and Stripes. " 
A long-drawn "phew" fairl y split the air, 
—we were so surprised. 
"Yes, " said he, "an d he has never been 
well , always sick. He's wha t the Mexican s 
call, 'e l Tisico'. " 
"Scat . . . . H e isn't muc h of a prize! " 
"What's he done to back up his parents' 
sentiments? " 
"H e sure can't fight." These were the 
words exploded from one to the other. 
"D o you know wha t 'The Blac k Trio ' do 
wit h their money? " asked Dicks, pride modulatin g his voice. 
"Well—I—guess—not, " drawle d someone 
from amon g the bunch. 
"Ever y red cent of it is turned into the 
America n Red Cross—do you get me? " An d 
old Dick s unfolded the evening paper and 
began to read. 
"Be Gad , that's patriotism, too," shouted 
O'Brady . "Ca n any son-of-a-gun define it? " 
ATTA R 
GEORGIA DOUGLAS S JOHNSO N 
F
IRE , tears, and the tortur e chamber, 
An d the last rackin g tur n of the 
screw; 
Onl y thus, lif e attaineth that wonderfu l 
brew,— 
The attar-of-rose of the heart! DARK HEROES OF PEAC E 
IT is not generally known tha t at least 
forty-two colored people have received the 
Carnegi e Meda l fo r heroic conduct. Between 
the date of its founding , on Apri l 15, 1904, 
and Januar y 31, 1918, the Carnegi e Her o 
Fun d Commissio n granted 1,461 medals, 
22.5 pe r cent, of whic h were grante d to colored people,—not a bad showin g fo r a folk 
who form only 10.9 per cent, of the entire 
population. 
O f the forty-two people thus honored, 
fort y wer e men and two were women. Si x 
were unde r twent y years of age; fou r between twenty and twenty-nine ; eighteen 
between thirt y and thirty-nine ; nine between fort y and forty-nine , and five over 
fifty. 
Eigh t of these heroes lost their lives as a 
result of their heroic action. Their deeds 
included ten cases of rescue from suffocation ; nine rescues from drowning ; six 
from runaways; five from railwa y trains; 
fou r from cave-ins; four from burning ; 
two from ma d animals; one from an electric wire , and one from an auto truck. 
Some of the instances of heroism deserve 
special notice : Natha n Duncan , a colored 
farme r an d wel l digge r of West Point , 
Texas, received the highest award , of a 
gold meda l and $2,000 fo r purchasin g a 
farm , fo r rescuin g W . C. Anderson , i n 1907. 
The official report states: "Anderso n 
was workin g i n a well, three feet i n dia ­
meter, fort y feet below the surface , whe n 
sand slid from the sides and burie d hi m to 
his shoulders. Fo r a distance of twent y 
feet above his head, there wa s a n unsupported wal l of sand from whic h othe r slides 
seemed imminent. O f the twelve o r more 
men who gathered, al l wer e afrai d to go to 
the ai d of Anderson . Dunca n wa s summoned, and, fastenin g a rope to himself, 
wa s lowered into the well . H e du g the sand 
from about Anderso n unti l he wa s free to 
the waist, when another slide occurred, 
whic h covered Anderso n to a depth of ten 
inches. Dunca n escaped being burie d by 
jumpin g up and graspin g a rope danglin g 
over his head, the sand comin g onl y to his 
knees. Dunca n . . . after two hours' work , 
du g Anderso n free, and he was hoisted out. 
Dunca n was then draw n up. Afte r the two 
TH E CARNEGIE HERO MEDA L 
254 DAR K HEROES 255 
had reached the surface, Anderson , to test 
the wall , gave the cur b at the top a poke 
wit h a stick, and the curb and a large mass 
of sand fell into the well, filling i t to a 
depth of over twenty feet." 
It should be explained tha t the gold meda l 
is the highest honor awarded, next the silver, an d thirdl y the bronze. Ou t of 18 gold 
medals awarded between the dates mentioned above, one was awarded to a colored 
man ; out of 449 silve r medals, 8 were 
awarded to colored people, and out of 994 
bronze medals, 33 came to colored heroes. 
O f the eight silve r medalists, four lost 
their live s as a result of their heroic efforts. These were George Grant, who, by 
stopping a runawa y horse, succeeded i n 
rescuin g two men of Groton , Connecticut, 
i n 1906; Robert Kenney , who tried to save 
fou r people from drownin g at Troy , Ohio, 
i n 1913; Henr y West of Asbur y Park , N . J. , 
who saved two boys from a trai n i n 1913, 
and Juliu s T. Malone , engineer i n a hotel i n 
Lo s Angeles, Cal . Th e hotel wa s burnin g 
an d the elevator-man deserted, but Malon e 
ra n the elevator and rescued guests, althoug h sustainin g burns whic h two hours 
later, proved fatal. This wa s i n 1912. 
The remainin g silve r medalists are Jame s 
L . Smith , who, after the failur e of two 
other men, saved a littl e child from burnin g 
at Sistersville , W . Va. , i n 1909; Jame s 
Pruitt , wh o tried to save two men from 
suffocation i n a well at Walhalla , S. C , i n 
1911, and did succeed i n savin g one; Arthu r 
Lockett, who rescued a chil d from being ru n 
over b y a trai n at Jefferson, Ga. , i n 1912; 
and W . R. Dyk e of Goode, Va. , who saved a 
chil d from death by burning , i n 1913. 
Mr. Dyke, who is a graduate of the 
Virginia Seminary and College of Lynchburg, 
Va. , and Principa l of the Goode Hig h 
School, says modestly: "I received a 
Carnegie Silver Medal and $1,000 for going into a 
burnin g building , and bringin g out a three 
yea r old child , one minut e before the house 
fell in. " 
A s a rule , a pecuniar y awar d accompanies 
the bestowal of a Carnegi e medal. These 
award s are divide d into the followin g 
classes: Deat h Benefits, Disablement 
Benefits, and Betterment Benefits. Th e 
first two are self*-explanatory, but it ma y 
be added tha t the thir d class is subdivided 
into : Business Establishment, Educationa l 
Expense , Healt h Restoration, Home PurW. R. DYK E 
Carnegie Medallist 
chase, Indebtedness Liquidation , Livin g 
Expense , and Miscellaneous Aids. N o 
beneficiary receives a n awar d to be used 
without restrictions. The money must be 
needed, and a detailed proposition fo r its 
use must receive approval. 
Th e Carnegi e Fun d limits its scope to: 
1. Acts i n whic h conclusive evidence ma y 
be obtained, showin g tha t the person performin g the act, voluntaril y riske d his own 
lif e i n saving, or attempting to save, the life 
of a fellow being, or who voluntaril y has 
sacrificed himself i n an heroic manne r for 
the benefit of others. 
2. Such acts must have been performed by 
persons, the natur e of whose duties i n followin g their regula r vocations does not 
necessarily requir e them to perform such 
acts. 
3. Such acts must have been performed i n 
the Unite d States of America , the Dominio n 
of Canada , the Colon y of Newfoundland , or 
the waters thereof. 
4. Such acts must have been performed on 
or after Apri l 15, 1904, and brought to the 
attention of the Commissio n withi n three 
years of the date of the act. 
Readers of TH E CRISIS are urged to report heroic deeds and names of those who 
perform them, to the Carnegi e Her o Fun d 
Commission, Olive r Building , Pittsburgh , 
Pennsylvania . TH E CRISIS IN NEGRO LEADERSHIP 
HARR Y II. JONE S 
LEADERSHI P among Negroe s after the 
Reconstruction, narrowe d down to 
three types: one type, called the 
Conservatives or Industrialists, who, led by Booker 
T. Washington , believed tha t the basis of 
inter-racia l adjustment was the economic 
efficiency of the Negro . An d tha t unti l the 
Negr o became a n indispensable factor i n 
America n economic life , he should desist 
from pressin g his righ t to equal treatment 
i n politica l representation and socia l legislation . These leaders emphasized vocationa l training , and confined their politica l 
activitie s to dictatin g the appointment of 
Negroe s to office. Ou t of opposition to wha t 
they regarded as Mr . Washington's surrender to the whit e South, men lik e D u 
Bois, Trotter, and Picken s headed a second 
type of leadership, and formed a Libera l 
Wing . This win g adopted a program of 
uncompromisin g agitation fo r equal treatment of their race i n all matters dealing 
wit h the fundamenta l rights of America n 
citizenship. The n there arose a thir d type 
or middle class, led by such men as Kell y 
Miller, who enunciated no distinc t program, 
but merely emphasized particula r ideas 
drawn from the Industrialists and the 
Liberals. 
The problem then wa s how to secure 
to the Negro , chiefly i n the South, equal 
opportunitie s i n education, politics, industry , the courts, and social conveniences. 
Th e masses of Negroe s accepted their burdens philosophically. It was the exception 
rathe r than the rule , fo r them to resent mob 
violence, lynching , injustice i n the courts, 
unequal educationa l facilities, the "Ji m 
Crow " car, disfranchisement, and segregation. 
Today, however, we are facin g a new 
situation between the races. This new situation has been created by the pressin g na ­
tiona l problems of reconstruction, on the 
one hand, and by the manifestation of race 
consciousness by Negroes, on the other. 
Those Negroe s who saw service i n Prance , 
came in contact wit h the different races 
from Europe , Asia , and Africa . B y the 
exchange of viewpoints, they found out how 
the oppressed groups from these continent-; 
H . H. JONES 
Oberlin. '14; teacher of History and Civics, Lincoln 
High School, Wheeling. W. Va.; President Whee
were pressin g their claims to self-determination. The siniste r propagand a and glarin g mistreatmen t to whic h American s subjected them i n France , quickened their determinatio n to contend fo r their rights 
when they returned home. The civilian 
Negro, having met his country's call to save 
food, buy war-stamp s an d bonds, give his 
maximu m strength to produce foods an d 
materials to wi n the war ; havin g ha d his 
nascent consciousness of manhood aroused 
by the eloquent preachments of President 
Wilson , looked fo r a nationa l response to 
his demands for justic e at home. 
H e carrie d his cause and tha t of Afric a 
to the Peace Conference, only to be shunned 
256 NEGRO LEADERSHIP 257 
TH E LAT E BOOKER T. WASHINGTON 
O- put off by unofficial statements, to the 
effect tha t diplomati c usage would not permi t the presentation of his claims, because 
they wer e not presented by properl y accredited representatives. I n the meantime, 
.thousands of Negroe s left the South and 
came Nort h i n search of a "man's chance," 
and man y colored men and women centered 
industrie s hitherto closed to them. Th e 
adjustment of these newcomers to their 
new life , i n man y cases, resulted i n a series 
o f grave race riots. 
Th e problems of inter-racia l relations, 
growin g out of the war, largel y center 
about these questions: Does the Natio n reall y intend to gran t the Negr o his ful l rights 
o f America n citizenship, on the same bas h 
as i t accords them to whit e men, or wil l i t 
continue to evade the issue and trust its 
solution to fortune and time ? Is the Negr o 
to maintai n his newl y wo n economic opportunitie s b y seeking allianc e wit h organized 
labor, o r is he to line up wit h the employin g class, or remai n neutra l i n the struggl e 
between labo r and capital ? Wha t program 
wil l the ran k and file of southern whit e 
men and women agree to, and conscientiousl y wor k for, in conjunction wit h Negr o leaders, to remove the various manifestations of 
injustice from whic h the southern Negr o 
suffers? Wha t steps can be taken to brin g 
about harmon y between the leadin g factions 
of Negr o thought and action? 
Anyon e who attempts to decide these 
questions from the Negro's standpoint, must 
consider three different types of leadership. I n Europea n parlanc e there is the 
Righ t or Conservative Wing , which has as 
its chie f spokesman, Majo r R. R. Moton , 
Principa l of Tuskegee. This class, takin g 
its cue from Booke r Washington , advocates 
industry, thrift, industria l education, and 
the doctrine of "non-resistance. " Its leaders make no claim to serious study of politica l economy, sociology, and politica l 
science. I n politic s they follow Frederic k 
Douglass' axiom, that "the Republica n 
Part y is the ship of State,—all else is the 
sea." The y believe tha t the problem of ra ­
cia l differences should be left to southern 
whites and Negroe s to solve, because they 
understand each other better than the rest 
of the America n people. Their slogans are 
Expedienc y and Opportunity . 
Th e second group is the Centre . The 
majorit y of intelligent and active Negr o 
leaders belong to this class. Its methods 
call fo r agitation, education, legislation, 
and la w enforcement. It has a definite program, and tha t program i n general covers 
these points: 
1. Federa l legislation against lynchin g and 
mob violence 
2. Equa l educationa l facilitie s fo r Negr o 
childre n i n the South 
3 . Abolitio n of the "Ji m Crow " ca r 
4. Economi c opportunity based on merit, 
not color 
5. Equa l chance fo r Negroes to qualif y for 
and fill Federal , State, and Municipa l 
positions 
6. Fai r tria l i n the courts 
7. The extinction of the peonage system i n 
the South 
8. Bette r housing, sanitary , and recreationa l facilitie s fo r Negroe s i n cities 
and towns 
9). The remova l of the color line i n the 
civil , military , and nava l service of the 
Federa l Government 
10. Enactmen t of Civi l Rights legislation 
by all the states, to remove discrimina ­
tion against colored people i n "public " 
theatres and restaurants 
11. Recognition of the Negro's righ t to vote, 
and jur y service on the same basis as 
tha t of whit e men. 258 TH E CRISIS 
I n politics, this win g largel y believes that 
the Negr o should fight out his handicaps 
withi n the Republica n ranks, and seeks to 
commit tha t party , when i n control of the 
government, to enforce the Federa l laws 
designed to guarante e the rac e its rights 
of citizenship. Some of its leaders accept 
certain principle s of Socialism, such as 
Co-operation and Federa l ownership and 
operation of railway s and transportation. 
Al l of its leaders assume an attitude of 
doubt towar d organized labor, because they 
believe that the recent action of the 
American Federation of Labor, in voting to unionize Negr o workers and withdra w the color 
line , amounts to a "scrap of paper. " 
Fo r the first time i n the Negro's history, 
he has a Left Win g or Radica l Group . It 
is socialisti c to the core. It believes that 
the present economic and politica l orde r has 
served its day ; tha t its destruction wil l 
come either peacefully or violently, accordin g to the manne r i n whic h the capitalists, 
politicians, and statesmen accept or oppose 
the change ; that al l modern wars have 
arisen out of the economic exploitation of 
the workin g classes and weak races, by designin g capitalists and profiteers; that the 
safeguard of the workin g class i n the One 
Bi g Union ; that the America n race problem is economic, not politica l and psychologica l ; and tha t its solution is to be had i n 
the substitution of State Socialism for 
Representative Government. 
This group seeks to strengthen its propaganda by emphasizin g wha t it alleges to 
be the weaknesses of Negr o leadership i n 
the affairs of the State, the Church , and 
Industry. Its cause has found man y adherents among radica l whites and Negroes. 
In consequence of the appearance of this 
radica l win g and the fertil e field i n whic h 
it has to wor k among restless Negroes, 
we are face to face wit h a crisis i n Negr o 
leadership. 
Judging from the way the masses of 
Negroes are thinking, they will cease to follow the Conservative Wing , because outside 
of its economic program, it offers them no 
constructive policy of hope. The masses 
of Negroes left the South i n spite of this 
wing's advice ; the Negr o Press, in the face 
of the conservative's admonition, has grown 
bolder in demanding justice ; the Negr o 
church, against his pleadings, is insistin g 
that the whit e church take a Christia n 
stand fo r a rea l brotherhood of man ; and 
the Negr o schoolmaster, despite this wing's 
encouragin g words tha t conditions are becomin g better, is protestin g against discriminatio n i n publi c education. 
Th e struggle , as I see it, is between the 
Centr e an d the Left Wing . An d the issue 
is joine d on the proposition whethe r the 
Negr o is to wage his struggl e i n the belie f 
that he can ultimatel y secure his ful l 
America n rights, accordin g to America n 
standards of justice , industr y and government, or whethe r he is to all y himself wit h 
those who believe tha t his salvatio n is to 
be found i n State Socialism. Th e Centr e 
has these points i n its favor: the spiri t 
of equality, runnin g throug h America n legislation ; the capacity of the Natio n to respond to hig h ideals i n nationa l crises; the 
active support of man y fair-minde d white s 
in their fight to secure justice for the 
Negro; a splendid record of achievements in 
the race's behalf i n securin g lega l nullifica ­
tion of the "Grandfathe r Clause, " residentia l segregation, and peonage. It has successfully opposed segregation of Negroe s i n 
R. R. MOTON, PRINCIPAL OF TUSKEGEE CECILI A ISABE L WARRE N 259 
Federa l employment an d discriminatio n i n 
Civi l Service ; it has contended against legislation by the states and cities, tending to 
discriminat e against Negroes; i t has fought 
against movin g pictur e plays tha t fostered 
race feeling ; it has carrie d on stron g propagand a against lynchin g and mob violence; 
i t has given stron g support to the race i n 
industry, education, religion , politics, and 
culture ; and has built up effective organizations i n al l parts of the country, to promote the welfar e of the race and the na ­
tion . 
Th e Radicals are called upon to consider 
these questions: If the masses of Negroes 
should accept their leadership, wha t adequate substitute can they offer the race for 
the possible alienatio n of the support of 
man y fair-minde d white s who do not accept 
their principles ? Judgin g from the present 
attitude of the whit e workin g class i n 
Americ a towar d the Negro , wha t assurance 
ca n induce hi m to believe tha t the whit e 
workers wil l be willin g to give him a 
"squar e deal" ? Wher e has their idea of 
State Socialism functioned successfully fo r 
an y reasonable period? Di d not Germany , 
the most highl y organized Socia l State i n 
the world , displa y the same weakness and 
injustice which they claim adhere in 
Representative Government? Considering the 
present strength of the Socialist Part y i n 
America , how long must the Negr o wai t before that part y can render hi m any prac ­
tica l assistance? 
The reader wil l note tha t I have not considered either the controversia l points of alleged inherent weaknesses of Socialism or 
the causes of its breakdown i n Europe , because the forme r has not been successfully 
proven, and the latte r remains to be considered by dispassionate historians and 
students of social theories. 
These days are intense. The natio n sits 
on a powder keg. N o set of men has the 
righ t to advocate new principles, unless 
their principle s can stand the test of huma n 
experience and needs. The Negr o needs a 
program. Americ a requires a n inter-racia l 
platform. Racia l cleavage cannot be 
bridged by expediency and delay, fo r there 
are limits to huma n endurance. The time 
has passed when the accusing finger can be 
safely pointed at either race. The two races 
must find a common groun d to wor k out 
their differences i n a friendl y fashion and 
i n mutua l good will . Shal l they wor k accordin g to America n standards, customs, 
and institutions ? O r shall they follow 
European State Socialism? To every 
Negro who prizes his racial inheritance and 
believes i n its possibilities, I suggest i n 
all candor, tha t he thin k seriously whic h 
win g he wil l follow, fo r upon his choice 
wil l hinge the future of his race and, perhaps, the nation's. 
CECILIA ISABEL WARRE N 
BRIA N P . O'SHASNAI N 
J^OR fou r years 
She listened wit h eagerness 
To stories of atrocit y and horro r 
Charge d against the Huns. 
An d she says tha t the German s 
Ar e below the beasts i n cruelty. 
One da y I read to he r 
A story of a lynchin g 
B y Americans, 
Wh o came i n automobiles, 
Wit h their women and children, 
An d loaned gasolene to bur n the Negr o 
woma n 
Wh o was innocent; 
An d Cecili a cried out— 
"Please don't read such things— 
The y are too horrible! " 
An d she wouldn't read the pape r herself, 
No r do anything , 
Althoug h she is now 
A voter and a citizen, 
An d has two hundred years 
O f America n ancestry 
Behin d her. TIT FOR TA T 
How Colored Soldiers Defeated the REAL Enemy at Grandvillars 
WILLIA M PICKEN S 
THI S is one of the true stories of the 
war. An d true stories are reall y the 
more fascinating . 
The colored soldiers i n this case were 
the 370th Regiment, largel y from Chicago 
and the South, and the "rea l enemy" wa s a 
whit e America n regiment tha t was ful l of 
Negro-haters. 
The people of the littl e Frenc h town of 
Grandvillars are of the simple-livin g 
peasant class, wit h hig h ideals of huma n 
life, and free from man y of the petty motives tha t spoil muc h of the rest of the 
world . The y had never seen Americans, 
and it happened tha t the first America n 
soldiers stationed among them were colored, 
the 370th. This regiment was such a good 
sample of its own colored people i n America , 
runnin g through all the possible colors from 
white Negroe s to black. An d yet they were 
of one heart and soul and mind , and when 
they marched down the streets of 
Grandvillars, clothed in khaki, they looked like 
one solid block of animated, invincibl e 
bronze. 
It was perfectly natura l that these 
Frenc h people should take this first sample 
as a type of al l Americans. Tha t first impression of "l'Americain " became fixed. 
The y thought, and not altogether incorrectly, tha t the America n people were of many 
varyin g huma n hues, and they thought that 
color predominated. 
The y also thought, perhaps less correctly, that all American s had the spirit of 
these boys: polite, gentle to women, and 
hearty to al l men. The most ordinar y 
peasant woma n wa s treated by these colored soldiers wit h the same civilit y whic h 
they accorded to the fashionable Frenc h 
women of the town. A colored captain 
says that he would see several Frenc h 
girls wit h wate r buckets on their arms and 
pushin g baby carriage s as they descended 
the hil l to the spring ; but that when those 
girls returned from the spring , each bucket 
would be carried and each baby carriage 
pushed b y some big, stalwart soldier of the 
370th. 
Th e people of Grandvillars though t tha t 
Americ a must be a place of wonderfu l 
democracy! Curiousl y enough, the colored 
soldier was the best ally of Woodrow 
Wilson, and caused the French people to believe 
the words tha t emanated from the Whit e 
House. 
Naturall y the whole town,—men, women, 
and children, took this regimen t righ t into 
its heart; no door wa s closed to them; nothin g was for them too good, or quite good 
enough. A s they anchored the hopes of 
the Frenc h by their soldierl y bearing , so 
also did they gladden the hearthsides wit h 
their tales and songs. Th e girls wer e 
charmed when the colored boys exhibited 
the photographs and extolled the fine points 
of "the browns " they had left behind.— 
Well , as long as ma n is man , 'there wil l 
always arise out of such agreeable society, 
wha t arose here—genuine love. Th e people loved these boys, an d these boys loved 
the people. 
And then it happened. A white 
American regiment came and encamped five miles 
from Grandvillars. These soldiers of one 
monotonous hue, were less attractive to 
strangers than the varicolore d men of the 
370th. Then , too, they were not so polite ; 
they were colder to the men, and mor e assumin g and direc t amon g the wome n and 
girls. The y di d not say so evenly to ric h 
and poor alike , the euphonious Frenc h 
"good-morning " and "good-evening, " bonjour and bonsoir! An d when these whit e 
American s went into the homes of the people, after chattin g awhil e wit h the youn g 
ladies, they migh t notice on the table the 
photograph of a brown or black soldier: 
"Wha t is this? " 
A girl woul d reply : "O , Monsieur, tha t is 
my frien d John, " (or Sam, or Jake , o r 
whateve r happened to be the name of tha t 
particula r membe r of the 370th,) "mon bon 
ami!" 
The n hostilitie s began. 
"You r what? Why , don't yo u kno w tha t 
no white person ever associates wit h them 
in America ? The y are not allowed to ente:-
our homes or to speak to an y whit e woman . 
260 TI T FO R TA T 261 
Whe n a whit e woma n i n the Unite d States 
just speaks to one of those fellows, all 
other whit e people shut her out of their 
homes an d never speak to her again! " 
Th e whit e fellows very naturall y lai d it 
o n a littl e thick, i n their efforts to cause the 
puzzled Frenc h listeners to grasp the sig ­
nificance of this peculia r thing : 
"The y ar e not Americans; they are just 
niggers. W e onl y allow them to live i n our 
countr y because their people were once 
slaves there. Bu t they are not America n 
"Thos e new American s tell me tha t Joh n 
is bad. " The n other girls woul d pipe in : 
"An d they told mamma that Sam is bad. " 
—"An d they tell fathe r tha t Bil l is bad."— 
"An d they say tha t my frien d is bad."— 
"An d mine. " 
An d strange to say, the ver y unanimit y 
of the report raised the first confident doubt 
of it; and more than one would remark : 
"Well , it must be a falsehood, for it is 
impossible that they should all be bad!" 
Such is the trainin g of the Frenc h mind , 
"WHE N THE Y MARCHE D DOWN TH E STREETS . . . THE Y LOOKED LIK E ONE SOLID 
BLOCK OF ANIMATED, INVINCIBLE BRONZE. " 
citizens, and ar e not even allowed to talk 
back to whit e people. An d they are very 
crimina l and dishonest; they wil l steal. 
The y are especially dangerous to women : 
i n ou r countr y no whit e woman dares to 
go nea r them unless a whit e ma n is wit h 
her. " 
An d just like most falsehoods, righ t here 
is where it over-shot the mar k and lai d the 
foundation fo r its own undoing ; for the 
girls of the house migh t be seen to look at 
each other, indicatin g tha t they themselves 
knew this last to be false. Bu t in spite of 
their own experiences wit h these brown 
beys, they were somewhat disturbed by this 
brazen attack. Huma n natur e can hardl y 
trust itself. W e are all , mor e or less, at the 
merc y of wha t we hear,—until we begin 
to confer. So, when the girls of the town 
woul d gathe r i n littl e groups, one would 
break the ice wit h a whisper: 
that it could only thin k of goodness or badness as belonging to individuals, and could 
not attach a mora l idea to a race or color. 
The y could not grasp the idea of a bad 
race, and they thought of wort h o r unwort h 
as an individua l characteristic . 
Afte r getting this encouragement from 
each other, the girls began to confide the 
matte r to their colored friends. 
Th e colored boys then got their heads 
together, and i n stric t complianc e wit h the 
laws of huma n nature, they began to pla n 
for defense and counter-attack. A strategem was conceived by one of their lieutenants, and he proposed to call al l the girls 
and women of Grandvillars to assemble i n 
convention and hea r a speech from him. 
Whe n the summons went forth , the whole 
town came out. .Fo r because of the good 
behavior of their men, the officers of the 
370th Regiment literall y "owned the town. " 262 TH E CRISI S 
Th e lieutenant took the platform. H e 
had grow n up i n Ne w Orleans and could 
speak excellent French . An d this is the 
barrag e whic h he lai d down against the 
attackin g enemy: 
"Wome n and Girls of Grandvillars. We 
regre t to find it necessary to give you fair 
warning . Yo u have seen for yourselves 
tha t the soldiers who are encamped near 
this villag e are not real Americans, although they are enlisted i n the America n 
Army . American s are polite ; they are not. 
American s are cordial ; they are cold. 
American s are gentle ; they are rough. 
American s are democratic ; these men are 
snobbish. American s respect alike the honorable ric h and the honest poor: these men 
worship money, but respect nobody. 
Americans do not like to disparage their fellow 
countrymen or their comrades-at-arms; 
these men have trie d withou t cause to 
slander us. American s are brave ; these 
men are not brave , fo r they do not face us, 
but they attack us i n secret to you. 
"No w it is my painfu l dut y to tell you 
who these me n are. Withou t protest we 
allow them to live i n our country, but they 
hate us. W e are just to them and treat 
them as men,—-as equals before the law ; 
but they are unjust to us and assume an 
attitude of natura l superiority. Man y of 
them are descendants of the Germa n and 
the Austrian , and have much of the old 
arrogance of their forefathers. Because of 
their conduct, we do not associate wit h 
them i n our country, and we do not call 
them Americans; we call them— er— 
'crackers' and 'pecks'! " 
Tha t was a finisher. The soldiers of the 
five-mile camp were chagrine d and "stung, " 
to find the privat e doors of Grandvillars 
tightl y closed to them, whil e the 370th enjoyed greate r hospitalit y than ever before. 
It wa s a pitiabl e sight,—this complete and 
sincere ostracism of the haught y and the 
proud. It was a heavy dose of their own 
medicine,—the most terribl e thin g that 
could be offered them. If any treatment 
could cure a man, it should be that. Tru e 
to their sympatheti c nature , the colored boys 
became reall y sorr y fo r the whit e boys, 
when they saw them i n groups on the street 
corners, lookin g i n vai n for .society and sympathy,—and sometimes tarryin g so late tha t 
the militar y guar d woul d have to order 
them out at the gate. To be sure, they 
could visit the public restaurants and hotels; and the Frenc h waitress, whe n she 
woul d pass a table wher e a colored soldier 
wa s seated, woul d stoop low and whispe r 
(not being able to remembe r the longe r 
epithet) : 
"Ther e ar e a lot of those 'Pecks' here tonight. " 
The proof tha t our race prejudic e is artificial, abnormal, and rathe r contrar y to nature , is the fac t tha t a n uninitiate d mind , 
like tha t of the French , simpl y cannot "un ­
derstand" it. It wa s comica l to see them 
trying to "get it," when the white 
American was trying to explain. Some colored 
soldiers and officers were eatin g i n the mai n 
dining-room of a hotel. Whit e America n 
officers entered, and seeing a smaller, less 
elegant dining-room adjoining , they called 
the proprieto r and asked hi m to pu t the 
colored soldiers i n the smalle r room, explainin g tha t they were "not fit" to eat 
wit h whit e men, etc. Yo u should have seen 
the face of this bewildered Frenchman , as 
he endeavored to be polite, an d trie d at the 
same time to square his commonsense wit h 
this America n puzzle : 
"Zhentlemen, I do not understand. These 
other zhentlemen have pai d their bills, and 
they are polite, and yo u say they are not 
good enough to eat wher e yo u eat,—I do not 
understand. These men are America n soldiers lik e you and have uniforms lik e you,— 
I do not understand,—how can the y be 
good enough to be i n the same uniform, and 
not good enough to eat i n the same room? 
I do not understand. And , my good zhentlemen, I wil l not compel you to eat wit h the 
other zhentlemen,—the littl e dining-room is 
open, there is no one i n it, wh y don't yo u 
go into it ? I cannot ask the others to 
move, fo r they are satisfied. Yo u ar e dissatisfied,—why should I distur b the satisfied one? I do not understand! " 
An d on and on the bewildered Frenchma n 
plead before this inexorabl e America n god. 
Smal l wonde r i t is tha t the average whit e 
America n soldie r should lose some of his 
ardor fo r France , afte r such experiences. 
H e wa s a puzzle to France , and Franc e must 
have been an enigma to him. Perhpp s the 
only way in the world for the white 
American ever to appreciate this demon which 
he worships, is to have a chance to feel 
the ful l weigh t of his rod, as did the whit e 
soldiers at Grandvillars. "NORTHERNERS DON'T UNDERSTAND 
TH E NEGRO" 
SARA H N . CLEGHOR N 
A YANKE E sometimes wonders if a 
Southerner, who knows as many 
Northerners as the average Northerne r 
knows Negroes, woul d accept the dictum 
tha t Southerners know nothin g about 
Northerners, an d probably never will ? 
Ther e are so man y other retorts that they 
migh t make ! Seldom do they whisper, 
"Coatesville " or "Urbana" , "St. Louis " or 
"Chicago " or "Washington. " Bu t it woul d 
be their trump car d to let us i n on some 
of their secret, continuous, affectionate 
kindnesses to their old, sick, foolish, shiftless black neighbors, and to let us uncomfortabl y compare these close personal min ­
istrations wit h the repugnant indifference 
to Negr o needs, so usua l i n the North . 
Havin g reduced us to a prope r degree of 
humility , i n whic h we woul d not be likel y 
to advance ou r opinions unasked, would it 
be, perhaps, a constructive move for them 
to ask for our opinions? Sir Joshua 
Reynolds liked to submit his advancing portraits to " a fresh eye". H e even submitted 
them sometimes to an ignoran t eye, and 
listened wit h care to the cook's or the postboy's comment. 
The Northerner, accustomed to his own 
loca l scale of the subjection of the black 
America n to the white , and often regardin g 
as "normal " and unprejudiced his own local 
sheaf of discriminations, comes South and 
finds some, indeed, of these abrogated, but 
a whole additiona l laye r of which , perhaps, 
he had heard but had not full y realized the 
implications. It is true, tha t it appears 
to give some Northerners a pleasant sense 
of prestige to sit i n a part of the trolley 
ca r forbidden to a colored woman , be she 
ever so wear y and old. Indeed, some of 
us, afte r a littl e residence i n the South, become more royalist than the maste r race i n 
the heart of its own demesne. Bu t to the 
rebellious amon g us, and especially to those 
who before comin g South were acutely 
alive to the race prejudice i n our own locality , (be the same more or less—it greatly 
varies) these experiences are sharpl y humiliating . Wha t we feel impelled to make 
is less a protest against Southern customs 
in particula r than an inquir y into the whole 
provincia l anomaly of our nation-wide 
discrimination . 
Fo r though it is not so heavy a shadow 
over us as it wa s i n the thirtie s and forties 
and fifties, it is stil l the heaviest of our 
shadows. We should perceive this better, 
i f it were not ever the huma n wa y to concentrate attention on those elements among 
the repressed classes whic h manifest their 
unrest. It is true, tha t we have lately succeeded i n creatin g and are stil l perfecting, 
wit h our recent mischievous laws, a proscribed class of whit e workmen , and a set 
of forbidden beliefs. Some of our legisla ­
tion, i n fact, migh t well be entitled "Acts 
to promote bitterness, an d divide the na ­
tion" . Bu t this mischie f is fresh ; fortu ­
nately, the victims are articulate ; and im ­
partia l and influentia l liberals are awake to 
it. It ma y be partl y undone. Whereas, we 
have settled down for a hundred and fifty 
years to the abominable idea of maintainin g 
i n Americ a a subject' race. 
Wha t is the practica l har m of it ? I conceive this to be the immediat e reply, 
whethe r expressed or not, i n the min d of 
the whit e American , born subsequent to 
1860. Wha t il l effects, aside from lynch ­
ing , whic h most of us,—he would add— 
"deplore, " (I believe this is the correct 
term,) do we experience as a nation from 
the divisions,—political, professional, educational, ecclesiastical, and social,—upon 
whic h we, alone amon g civilize d nations, 
insist ? Wher e is the har m of obviously 
meaning, when we say "Americans, " exclusively whit e persons? Whe n we say 
"Southerners," meaning only white 
Southerners? Finding it inconceivable that a 
colored ma n or woma n should be asked to 
dine wit h whites, except i n the houses of 
recognized radicals, educators, or phila -
thropists ? Tha t a whit e patient should call 
in a colored doctor, or tha t a novel should 
have a colored hero or heroine? 
26 * TO TH E NORT H 
Albert A. Smith 
TH E REASON 
26 4 NORTHERNER S DON' T UNDERSTAN D TH E NEGRO " 265 
This tacit query, "Where's the harm? " 
seems to show that we have neve r very 
clearl y envisaged our attitude and the mute 
principl e underlyin g it. I n a word , it is 
not contact we dislike , but the assumption 
of equality. A s an old northern doctor, 
lon g resident i n the South, used to point 
out to his friends there, "Yo u let a colored 
barbe r smea r lathe r all over your mouth 
wit h his hands. " I have myself heard a 
southern lady, whose colored housemaid 
habituall y sits wit h her i n the drawing -
room i n the evening, condemn Roosevelt 
fo r invitin g Booke r Washingto n to lunch. 
Bu t the housemaid sits there with her 
apron on* 
Ou r unspoken query, "Where's the 
harm? " is followed i n our min d by the further reflection that the colored people seem 
fairl y contented, and tha t there's none of 
wha t we call "danger " i n the present situation . B y this, we obviously mean to congratulat e ourselves and themselves, tha t the 
subject race is not an obstinate, aggressive, 
or vindictiv e people, likel y to tr y to obtain 
a riche r share i n America n life by wa y of 
the torch and pike. Bu t let us scrutiniz e 
a littl e more closely wha t we mean, and 
wha t we ought to mean, by "Danger" . 
Live s an d limbs of the maste r race, their 
houses and stores, are probably safe. Bu t 
conceivably, there are other dangers to 
the commonwealth we love, than personal 
injur y to members of the possessing classes. 
Surel y we need only to be reminded of these 
to admit, though perhaps vaguely, tha t they 
have existed amon g other peoples, at other 
periods,—that they undermined the Roma n 
empire , an d undi d the Germans. Such a 
danger, I suppose, we woul d generally 
admit a caste system to be. "Un-American " 
woul d be the least we could postulate of 
an y theoretic inviolabl e divisions between 
classes. Bu t how otherwise can we describe the accustomed situation of the races 
i n this country ? Is i t not caste? Is it not 
a double standard, whic h it is laughabl e 
to tr y to ru n i n a democratic harness? 
*An d this is why I believe the bugbear of intermarriage is really a red herring in such discussions 
as the present. Marriage is superlatively amenable 
to the instincts of Nature, If there is, as most of 
us firmly believe and vividly feel, such a powerful 
instinct in man to mate with his own race, we need 
not fear that the practice of democratic principles 
will kill it. If such an instinct is less powerful 
than we suppose, lit us bulwark it, not by bolstered 
prejudices and multiplied humiliations—but by a 
eugenic law, based on our best science, forbidding 
intermarriage. 
Mora l rheumatism is the penalty na ­
tions have always paid for keeping down 
any considerable element of the population. 
Wha t the Frenc h lost wit h the Huguenots, 
the Spanis h wit h the Moors, an d al l the 
nations of the Middl e Age s by their repression and exploitation of the Jews, we 
stand to lose, and in part have already lost, 
from our fatuous attitude of self-sufficient 
contempt towar d one-tenth of our popula ­
tion. Th e loss we sustain i n art, i n communit y life , i n politics, can only look smal l 
when we compare it wit h our loss i n mora l 
prestige an d democratic sincerity. To be 
content wit h one illustration—we hold conventions on recreation, and writ e books to 
encourage the spirit of play, whil e we have 
the stupidit y not to consult the genius of 
a race as expressive and flexible as ours 
is self-conscious and constrained. We deplore a restless, drivin g spirit i n business, 
when we have at han d a neglected multitude 
of teachers of contentment and relaxation. 
It is an expensive policy. An d wha t is 
to some of us a more damnin g point about 
it, it is an absurd one. To put it very 
bluntly, we are makin g fools of ourselves, 
posing, i n this unutterabl e self-sufficiency, 
as the invariable mentor of our coAmericans—as their amused, indulgent, (and, of 
course, hopeless,) model. 
The first of a series of Acts of 
Citizenship, essentially as religious as any Acts 
of Faith , for us to perform, is surel y to 
acknowledge our ignorance. Northerners, 
it ma y well be conceded, do not understand 
the Negro,—an d neither do Southerners. 
The whit e man , it would be better fo r us 
to realize, at once, does not understand the 
Negro. Indeed, how should he? Ha s he— 
(I speak not of honorable exceptions,) ever 
tried? Ha s not the thing , the only thing , 
tha t he has tried to understand been the 
relation between the races?—and that solely 
from the whit e man's point of view? Shal l 
we continue to talk about "understandin g 
the Negro, " when al l we mean is understandin g merely how to rub along wit h hi m 
as the employe r of his docile labor ? Wha t 
the Negr o thinks of himself, of his histor y 
and his future, his possibilities and our 
curtailment of them, nothin g i n our na ­
tiona l attitude towar d him is likel y to persuade hi m to tell us. He , whom Irvi n Cobb 
calls the most secretive of mankind , is 
under no inducement to confide i n us. To 
lear n anythin g about his ideas an d ideals, 266 TH E CRISI S 
to gras p his Oriental-Occidenta l philosophy 
of life , we shall have to treat him wit h a 
muc h grave r respect. 
Ther e is a model fo r us, i n wha t beginnings have been made withi n the past few 
years i n approachin g the immigran t from 
the South of Europe,, and tryin g to secure 
fo r our nationa l lif e the treasures of tra ­
dition, of taste and thought, whic h he has 
brought. Ver y slow we have been, i n our 
provincia l pride , to take advantage of these, 
and to assume the essential humbl e spirit 
of the learner. Bu t good beginnings have 
been made ; and perhaps some beginnings 
have even been made towar d learnin g wha t 
the Negr o has to teach. I speak of those 
thoughtful few who consult Negr o leaders 
on nationa l subjects i n join t conventions 
and endeavor to interpre t the one rac e to 
the other i n a temper reasonable, disin ­
terested, and soberly constructive . Ther e is 
i n wha t they say, ligh t and leadin g fo r the 
nation, i f the natio n cares to ri d itself of 
its one reall y serious hyphen. 
A NATION'S GREATNESS 
EDWI N GARNET T RILE Y 
WHA T makes a natio n trul y great? 
No t strength of arms, nor men of 
state, 
No r vast domains, b y conquest won, 
Tha t knew not rise no r set of sun ; 
No r sophist's schools, nor learned clan, 
No r laws tha t bin d the wil l of man,— 
Fo r these have proved, i n ages past, 
Bu t futil e dreams tha t could not last; 
An d they tha t boast of such today, 
Ar e fallen , vanquished i n the fray , 
Their glor y mingled wit h the dust, 
Their archive s stained wit h crime and lust; 
An d al l tha t breathed of pomp an d pride , 
Lik e the untimel y fig, has died: 
One thing , alone, restrains, exalts 
A natio n and corrects its faults; 
One thing , alone, its lif e can crown 
An d give its destiny renown. 
Tha t nation, then, is trul y great, 
Tha t lives by love, and not by hate ; 
Tha t bends beneath the chastening rod , 
Tha t owns the truth , and looks to God ! 
AFTERGLOW 
GEORGI A DOUGLAS S JOHNSO N 
THROUG H you, I entered heaven and 
hell, 
Kne w raptur e and despair; 
I vaunted o'er the plains of earth 
An d scaled each shinin g stair, 
Dran k deep the waters of content 
An d drained the cup of gall, 
Wa s rega l and wa s impotent, 
Wa s suzerain and thrall : 
No w by reflection's placi d pool, 
A t evening's tranqui l hour, 
I smile across the backwar d wa y 
An d pledge anew, m y vow : 
Fo r every glancing , golden gleam, 
I offer, gladly , Pain ; 
An d I woul d give a thousand worlds, 
To live it all again . The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
SHAKESPEARE in Antony and 
Cleopatra: 
Chee r you r heart. 
B e yo u not troubled wit h the time whic h 
drive s 
O'e r you r content, these stron g necessities; 
Bu t let determin'd things to destiny, 
Hol d unbewail' d their way . 
* * * 
W e have received The Quill, Praiseworthy 
Muse, Rainbow, Federal Council Bulletin, 
The Review, The Competitor, Taxation, 
Liberian News, and the Gold Coast Leader. 
* * * 
The Reverend Edwar d F . Goi n issues a 
pamphlet, Needs of Connecticut Negroes 
Which Our Churches Can Meet. Jame s L . 
Gregg , Principa l of Hampto n Institute, issues Lynching: A National Menace. 
THE DEADLY HEADLINE 
EVE N the comic papers find it necessary 
to be serious lon g enough to comment 
o n the iniquit y of the modern newspaper 
flare-head. W e read i n Judge: 
"Le t me writ e the scare-heads of a na ­
tion's newspapers and I do not care who 
write s the laws, " some siniste r Machiavell i 
o f a propagand a of unrest migh t chuckle as 
he looks over the dailies and hourlies. Fo r 
newspape r heads, eight columns wide and a 
foot deep, contribute somewhat to mass 
neurosis and displacement of the popula r 
spleen. 
The headline r jumpe d on the hig h horse 
wit h the declaration of wa r and is stil l rid ­
in g hi m hard , thrillin g the galleries wit h 
spasms a t his derring-do. Th e headliner is 
rehearsin g Alice in Wonderland, wit h the 
reader's eyes poppin g out of his head, his 
heart palpitatin g wit h apprehension, and 
wit h ears strained to hear the Republi c 
cras h to atoms wit h every edition. 
Now , the function of a newspape r is educational, and only emotive i n times of public 
peril . W e are a bi g people, wit h bi g editors 
an d bigge r type—each tryin g to raise the 
biggest pumpkin s on the front page. . . . 
Sophisticated folks understand tha t the 
scare-head an d the America n flag are "fine 
to sell papers; " but there are shoals of 
fragil e intellects whose cerebra l tympanums 
ar e shattered by this clangin g of the firealarm, and, as their brain s quive r like crabappl e jell y at the star k crape of the header, 
they see ghosts, liberty shrieking as 
Kusciosko falls, and blood on the moon. 
Ther e is no doubt as to wha t the publi c 
feels when i t reads such a headline as this: 
NEGRO KIDNAPPERS 
OF THE BLAKE'S BOY 
ELUDE THE POLICE 
Two Who Attacked Mother and 
Stole Five-Year-Old Son From 
Her Side in Ventnor, N. J.r 
Baffle All Their Pursuers, 
THEY CHOKED MRS. BLAKE, 
TOOK PURSE AND HANDBAG. 
This was the headline r for December 14. 
It is true, the followin g were published on 
December 15 and 16, respectively: 
MRS. BLAKE WAVERS 
IN KIDNAPPING TALE 
Says Mind Is a Blank on What 
Happened Friday Night When 
Five-Year-Old Son Drowned. 
267 2(58 TH E CRISI S 
SEA GIVES UP BOY'S 
BODY; MRS. BLAKE 
HELD FOR MURDER 
Bu t there is no apology i n large type, 
statin g explicitl y tha t Negroe s were not the 
criminals. An d i n any event, the mischie f 
had been done. 
SOMETHING GOOD OUT OF 
MISSISSIPPI 
A CORRESPONDEN T asks us to publish 
the following , so that our "readers 
ma y have all the facts about Mississippi. " 
We do so gladly , i n the hope that this is not 
the exception whic h proves the rule . 
Th e celebrated white-cappin g case, socalled of July , 1918, was disposed of today 
b y Judge E . L . Brien , of Vicksburg , by a 
sentence of six months i n jai l and a fine of 
$500 each fo r the fou r principals indicted 
for conspiracy. 
Th e case whic h attracted most attention 
among the spectators i n the courtroom, and 
whic h has been a genera l topic of conversation fo r the past day or two, was tha t of the 
so-called "white-cappers"—Messrs. King , 
Ford , Hozie , and Shaw, whit e men who, i n 
July , 1918, took the law into their own 
hands and punished several Negr o women 
for "slacking " durin g the war. I n imposin g 
a sentence of six months i n jai l and a $500 
fine on these men, Judge Brie n said : 
"Mo b law must not prevai l i n this communit y and when thirteen men go out in 
the nigh t to inflict punishment on helpless, 
frightened Negr o women, such an act, whic h 
has no braver y attached to it, wil l never be 
sanctioned by right-thinkin g people. 
"I f thirteen men should go to any one of 
your homes and mete out such treatment to 
you r wif e or daughter, you would call it 
outrageous and openly say that you intended 
to kil l every one of the thirteen, fo r you r 
thoughts would instantl y leap to killin g 
where the law offered no protection. 
"It is a mistake tha t such an act is not a 
penitentiary offense. It is only a misdemeanor, accordin g to our law, but the penalt y should be at least ten years at har d 
labor. Yo u men are fortunat e i n that. If 
the act had been committed by ignorant 
Negroes, it might have a different phase and 
there migh t be some excuse fo r you, but I 
find none. 
"Inasmuc h as the law only makes you r 
offense a misdemeanor and it is not classed 
as a penitentiary offense wit h a penalty of 
ten years, I am goin g to impose the extreme 
penalty whic h is allowed me, and tha t is a 
fine of $500 each an d a sentence of six 
months i n the county jail . I'm not responsible for you r unfortunat e position and the 
law-abidin g people of this communit y look to 
me to enforce the laws as they are, withou t 
favor. Tak e the prisoners back to jail. " 
LYNCH LAW IN PARIS 
EUGEN E DESTE Z write s i n Le Petit 
Bleu of the murder of a black 
American soldier at the hands of a white 
American officer whom he had failed to salute. 
M . Destez concludes: 
In the Unite d States, one drop of black 
blood i n a man's veins constitutes the orig ­
ina l unpardonabl e sin . Negroe s are made to 
be martyrized , to be lynched a t pleasure. 
Tha t is anybody's right. "Colo r prejudice " 
justifies everything , even crime . 
I remembe r hearing , whe n I wa s i n 
Ne w York , i n 1900, tha t a certai n larg e 
hotel had had the temerit y to hir e a colored 
ma n as stewar d and tha t its patrons threatened to get ri d of him by violence. 
Th e sensitiveness of America n aristocrac y 
is to be explained, on the groun d tha t it is so 
genuine, of such ancient date ! An d it ; 
titles—they are pai d fo r dearl y at times! 
Whateve r they ma y thin k of this preju ­
dice, American s wil l have to lessen its manifestations sooner tha n they anticipate . 
Numerou s colored soldiers have been campaignin g i n France . The y have live d i n our 
midst, they have made their own observations and draw n their own conclusions. The y 
have been able to realize tha t here, i n the 
old world , we pa y no attention to the color 
of a man's .skin or the shape of his head. W e 
envisage only the heart and the mind . W e 
extend the same gratefu l admiratio n to our 
Senegalese, our Sudanese, our Kabyles, an d 
our Moroccans. 
Ho w man y of them are about to retur n to 
their native country, decorated eithe r wit h 
the Legio n of Honor, the Militar y Medal , or 
the "Croix de Guerre." 
Furthermore , i n the course of the stay of 
the America n soldiers i n France , man y a 
charmin g idy l has been enacted between 
themselves—and whit e women. 
Those proud citizens of the "lan d of lib ­
erty " have never sought reall y to penetrate 
the heart of the blac k man . The y have always failed to realize wha t it migh t contain 
not only of devotion, of the powe r to sacrifice and to love—but also of the powe r to 
hate. 
Le t them visi t the halls of honor i n ou r 
schools and colleges,—they wil l find there 
the names of all our forme r colored gradu ­
ates who have brough t distinctio n to their 
Alma Mater i n letters, science, art, and i n 
every field of huma n knowledge . 
One of our colleagues, who has just spent 
fifteen years in the Unite d States, told me 
yesterday of the movement whic h is growin g i n the black people of Americ a as a result of their lon g sojourn in France , THE LOOKING CLASS 269 
" A revolution is on foot," he said. . . . 
Lynch law has no place in our codes. 
JUSTIFYING MR. SHAW 
GEORG E BERNAR D SHA W insists 
that Americans are still barbarians 
and justifies his contention by citing the 
expulsion of the five Socialists by the New 
York Legislature. He says: 
I suppose it must be regarded as a challenge to direct action and as the deliberate 
preliminary to a war of political creeds 
which will be far more frightful than the 
wars of religion in the seventeenth century. 
It is high time for the Mayflower to fit 
out for sea again. 
Americans used to laugh at me for refusing to visit their country without a safe conduct. They will hardly deny now that I had 
good reason. 
Is President Wilson still at large? He is 
barely safer than was Louis XVI . I, as an 
avowed and active Socialist of over thirtyfive years' standing, should have no chance 
at all. 
But there is nothing really surprising in 
the incident. Beneath their mask of civilization, the American States have always remained primitive communities, and primitive 
communities naively persecute opinion as a 
matter of course. 
* * * 
What would the great playwright think 
of this attitude of the South as reported by 
a Mississippi paper? 
The Federal Woman Suffrage constitutional amendment was rejected today by the 
lower house of the Mississippi Legislature 
after ten minutes of debate. 
Cheers and laughter marked the announcement of the vote. 
* * * 
It would be refreshing indeed to hear his 
comment on Atlanta's lack of civilization as 
implied in this account: 
Whipping of women at the city stockade, 
was ordered discontinued entirely by the 
Prison Committee of the Atlanta City 
Council today after a police hearing of charges 
brought by the Atlanta Humane Society, 
that women had been strapped to a contrivance resembling a chair, and flogged. 
WHEN THIEVES FALL OUT 
WHY is it that Negroes so often fail to 
support liberal movements? Why is 
it that Negroes are ungrateful to their 
friends? Such questions are often asked. 
And the answer is clear: movements that 
seem "liberal' to most people are often reactionary on the color question; friends, 
too, are often traitors and we know it even 
when proof is hard to adduce. But proof 
comes and hero it is in the editorial columns 
of the leading New Orleans paper which is 
boosting John M . Parker for governor: 
The plain facts of history, which should 
be known to every well-informed 
Louisianian, prove that John M. Parker has perhaps 
rendered more definite service to the perpetuation in the South of white supremacy 
coupled with racial peace, than any man now 
in Louisiana public life. 
His services in this cause constitute one 
of his strongest claims to Louisiana's gratitude, and give ground for the most powerful 
arguments in his behalf. 
Here are a few outstanding episodes: 
1—When Theodore Roosevelt was president of the United States, it was the 
Democrat, John M. Parker, who first effectively 
brought to the chief executive's mind a clear 
conception of the Southern point of view, its 
justice and its soundness, and who persuaded him thereafter not to appoint 
Negroes to office over, or with, white persons in 
the South, where no end could be served save 
to stir antagonism and breed trouble. Thereafter there were NO Negroes appointed in 
the South, save in perhaps a few minor instances in which subordinate officials were 
responsible. 
2—When William Howard Taft succeeded 
Theodore Roosevelt, John M . Parker, the 
Democrat, during the brief period when 
Roosevelt and Taft continued in political 
agreement, utilized that period, through 
Roosevelt, to persuade Taft to the wisdom 
and sound policy of following the same 
course of action. As a result, few, if any, 
Negroes were appointed to such office in the 
South during the four-year term of Taft. 
3—When the Progressive Party was organized and Parker was a member thereof, 
he fought for and obtained a resolution for 
that party's organization, which would have 
made that party a "white man's party" 
throughout the South at the will of the 
Southern Progressives. . . . 
Parker has forcefully summed up his position from the stump, in words that are 
worth repeating. . . . 
"I always have .stood for white supremacy 
and I never took a seat in the Progressive 
convention until that party adopted unanimously a resolution making it absolutely a 
white man's party throughout the South." 
NEGRO VS. FILIPINO SEAMEN 
OUR NAVY, the standard publication of 
the United States Navy, ponders on 
discrimination against the Negro sailor: 
In a recent issue, Our Navy contended 
that the American Negro, in the matter of 
manning ships of his own, similar to having 
regiments of his own, should at least be 
given the same opportunity afforded the 
Filipino. 
Filipinos have recently been assigned to 
the U. S. S. Rizal, a modern destroyer 270 THE CRISIS 
The ship is officered by white men and also 
quite a few white petty officers. The original intention was to gradually withdraw 
these white petty officers as Filipinos became 
proficient enough to replace them. 
We are glad to see the Filipino get a 
chance to man a ship of his own; but we 
would be equally glad to see the American 
Negro get the same chance. 
Your Filipino is an American, since 
1899—or later—when Americans came 
across the sea to his island home and 
Americanized him with a Krag-Jorgensen 
and a gatling gun. In 1919, he is given a 
ship in the U. S. Navy, named after a 
Filipino patriot. And right here, we want to 
say, "More power to 'em!" and "God bless 
'em!" and we hope they sure do make good. 
If the Rizal won all the gunnery and steaming trophies in the navy, we'd be tickled to 
death to acknowledge the efficiency that had 
been wrought among Filipinos under the 
Stars and Stripes. 
But why not give the American Negro a 
chance, along with the newly acquired little 
brown brother from out Bacoor way?. . . . 
Our Navy is not particularly fond of 
the Negro. Our interest is only an interest 
in the name of Americanism and justice. 
Justice not only to the black sailor, but to 
the white one as well. The writer has not 
been thrown in contact with Negroes to any 
great extent, but firmly believes that 
Negroes can make good on their own ships, and 
that the result would be a greater efficiency 
for the navy, greater contentment for the 
white sailor, and greater contentment for 
the black man. 
• The officer of the deck on a Negro ship 
could send a Negro messenger to tell a Negro 
quartermaster to bring up his flag-sewing 
machine, and we doubt very much whether 
the Negro quartermaster would report to 
the officer of the deck that the messenger 
had told him that he (the quartermaster) 
was wanted to "sing a song." That's what 
happened on the Rizal. 
THE NEGRO PRESS SPEAKS 
Unless, comments the New 
O N POLITICS York News, we failed utterly to 
grasp the awakened patriotic 
convictions of the Republican 
party, it is now going to atone and 
redeem itself from its generation of 
sleek indifference and slothful cowardice. 
It is going to write into its new platform, 
unless all signs fail, burning pledges to make 
America safe for democracy. It is going to 
pass the Senator Moses' inquiry into the 
southern franchise, which will expose and 
at the same time banish the political slavery 
which now grips millions of sovereign 
American citizens in the South. . . . We 
are glad, we said to members of the National 
Committee, that the Republican party is 
going to write its policy first, and then select a standard bearer who measures up to 
that high policy. Unless the next man who 
sits in the White House rings true to this 
militant program, unless he crushes political slavery and racial disability, the black 
voter is forever lost to the Republican 
party, the Republican party is forever lost 
to the Republic, and this Republic may bo 
forever lost to the world. The black man, 
the party, the nation, stand at the parting 
of the ways. Unless the Republican party 
mistakes the present temper of the new 
black American, unless it is willing to 
foolishly discount the allurements of the 
Laborites and the siren songs of the 
Socialists, the Republican party will here and now 
give its black wing, renewed pledges of its 
friendship, and thereafter, continuing proofs 
of its justice and its patriotism. 
* * * 
There is a new day, opines the Baltimore 
Afro-American, and a new generation, and 
a new group of young political stalwarts 
who, wise to the past, skeptical of the present and deeply concerned with the future, 
are going to ask for a real, old-fashioned 
show-down in the year of our Lord, 1920. 
They have sentiment, and they, also, have 
sense, and they are saying that the old ancient and honorable talk about the 
"Negroes' debt to the Republican party" doesn't 
mean a tinker's damn to them, and hasn't 
a thing to do with Fourth of July. The 
thing they wish to know, and know indeed 
is: "Where do we come in?" 
* * * 
According to the Portland, Ore., 
Advocate, the Negro is interested in himself and 
his welfare. He is wanting to know what 
political party will rise to the emergency 
and admit the Negro as a citizen of the 
United States, and as such is entitled to a 
just and fair recognition at the hands of 
the governing party. 
If there should arise a new party, headed 
by Mr. Hiram Johnson of California, will 
that party mean anything more of progress, 
of justice, of equitly, of humanity, than the 
other parties have meant in the past? The 
recent action of the Republicans i n the 
House, when the Madden Bil l was sent to 
the scrap heap, has intimated to the Negro 
just where the Republicans of this country 
stand. They evidently reason that the 
Negro has never received anything of importance from the Democrats, and therefore he 
will not vote for the Democratic ticket; they 
reason also that the Republican party is the 
only other party the Negro can look to for 
whatever he may hope to receive in this 
country. 
But there may come a time when the 
party seeking control may see the necessity 
of adding another plank to the platform. 
There may be added the plank of Common 
Justice for Al l Men. Such a plank would 
make interesting reading, and would offer 
an attraction, to say the leasts Let the third 
party come forth, show its colors, and offer 
its policy to the country. The Negro is in a 
receptive mood just now. THE LOOKING GLASS 271 
ON PUBLICITY James Weldon Johnson gives 
the statement in the New York 
Age of the principles of the 
Washington, I). C, 
Correspondents' Club": 
Holding ourselves bound together by a 
common impulse to resent and resist all 
efforts in public or private, by speech or 
writings, to misrepresent, defame, or discredit our race, we have organized "The 
Correspondents' Club," in order the more 
effectively to carry out the purposes above 
stated. 
And it is also our purpose to note with 
equal promptness every favorable comment 
upon the achievements or character of our 
race, every generous defense of our rights, 
and every helpful suggestion for our guidance. 
We propose to accomplish our object 
through letters addressed to individuals, organizations, and publications, protesting 
with firmness against wrongs, and appreciating with gratitude what appears in our 
favor. 
We hold ourselves bound by considerations of a common interest to keep ourselves 
informed on the history of our race, on our 
achievements and besetments, and to read 
what is said of us by others, .so that we 
may thereby be prepared with accurate information to take prompt defense against 
any or all misrepresentations. 
It will be our purpose not only to carry 
on this work ourselves, but to inspire others 
of like mind to do the same thing, with a 
view to bringing ?s many as possible, here 
and elsewhere, within the general plan of 
our operation. 
Finally, it will be our purpose to collect 
accurate statistics of the record made by 
our race in every line of worthy endeavor, 
and to be prepared to furnish these facts 
promptly whenever needed in our defense. 
Mr. Johnson concludes: 
This is the age of propaganda, propaganda through publicity. One of the met 
effective means the Negro can use in his 
fight is propaganda of this sort. He should 
use it to the utmost, to change and form 
public opinion regarding himself. We can 
think of no quicker, simpler, and cheaper 
method of doing this than through Correspondents' Clubs. 
* * * -
The Interchurch Movement, 
O N TH E IN- according to the Montgomery, 
TERCHURCH Ala., Emancipator, is a coMOVEMENT operative organization of Protestant denominations through 
their mission boards, home and foreign 
agencies, and churches, for the purpose of 
effectively meeting the new demands of the 
new day. The plans of the Movement call 
for careful study of the conditions and 
equipment of each church and the needs of 
each community surrounding each church. 
Following such a study, representatives of 
the.churches will meet together and make 
up a practical program of work based upon 
facts which have been found. This practical program will aim to meet discovered 
needs both of the church and community. 
YOU NEVER CAN TELL 
HERE is a good story from the 
Oklahoma City, Okla., Black Dispatch: 
As good cometh out of Nazareth, so also 
it sprang up in the heart of an Oklahoma 
City policeman. 
She got on the street car at Fourth and 
Broadway, the East 4th Street line, on 
which black folk have had so much trouble. 
She looked tired, this little black woman, 
whose face plainly showed that she had done 
many a hard day's labor, and who had quite 
evidently been laboring hard that day. She 
stood in the door of the coach and when she 
saw clearly that the small space, designated 
by the Jim-Crow sign, had reserved for her 
no place to sit, she went directly past the 
sign and sat in the next seat beyond. The 
conductor hurriedly approached. "Get up," 
he said. "Don't you know you are beyond 
the sign?" "You can move your sign, for I 
do not intend to get up," said the lady. "Yo u 
get up," said the ignorant standard bearer 
of prejudice, or I will call an officer." He 
stopped the car and went across to a residence, where he found a 'phone. In a few 
moments, the strong arm of the law was 
marching into the car. A n anxious colored 
woman leaned over and whispered to the 
little black woman who had dared to CROSS 
TH E LINE , "Get up and come back." But 
the disturber of white peace sat silent and 
still. The policeman strode forward; he 
looked at the little black woman, and he 
looked at the almost two-thirds of the car 
that had been reserved for whites and still 
had no one in it. He turned and looked at 
the conductor, and sternly said, "Move your 
sign and start this car." The little black 
woman, who had up to that moment been a 
little bundle of nerve, almost fainted in 
her seat. She had no wild dreams of justice, 
and she could hardly believe that a white 
policeman had actually walked into that 
coach and sustained her in her weak attempt to have what was her just due. Well, 
it all ended in the car starting, but the wilful one rode into the terminal beyond the 
sign, for the conductor refused himself to 
obey the arm of the law he himself had 
called. He was the one who ended breaking 
the law. AN D IT WA S H E WH O START ­
E D OUT BREAKIN G TH E LAW . TH E 
LA W OF FAI R PLAY , OF TH E SQUAR E 
DEA L AN D JUSTICE . 
* * * 
A Smithville, Ga.. mob is first to lynch a 
Negro veteran, who fought bravely in 
France. Wil l the American Legion speak 
out on such an outrage? Silence may be 
golden, but it isn't always wisdom.— 
Brooklyn Eagle. Men of the Month. 
THE late Mary L. Gaines 
was born in Maeon, Ga., 
being the only daughter of 
the late Bishop Wesley John 
Gaines, of the A . M . E. 
Church. After graduating 
from Fisk University, Miss 
Gaines' education was broadened by extensive travel. 
From her birth, she suffered 
from physical disability; yet 
she was full of life, and a 
natural leader. She was connected with civic movements 
of Atlanta, Ga., was one of 
the founders and promoters 
of the free kindergarten, 
and was always foremost in 
the social life of the colored 
city, being prominent in the 
"W. G. M." , "The Twelve", 
and the "Twentieth Century" 
Clubs. 
Miss Gaines leaves an aged mother. 
* * * 
SAMUE L A . T. WATKIN S is a native of 
Memphis, Tenn., and a graduate of Le 
Moyne Institute, June, 1888. In 1891, he 
was admitted to the Bar, and the followingyear, he appeared before the Supreme Court 
of Tennessee. In 1898, at Chicago, he was 
appointed Assistant Prosecuting A
position eight years; in May, 
1911, he was appointed 
Assistant Corporation Counsel, 
and served four years. He 
had the distinction of representing the City of Chicago 
as Counsel, before the 
Supreme Court of the United 
States, and has represented 
the colored people of 
Tennessee and Georgia successfully 
before that court. Mr. Watkins is at present Assistant 
United States Attorney at 
Chicago, and, also, Supreme 
Attorney of Knights of 
Pythias of North America; he 
is serving his second term 
as president of the 
Appomatox Club. 
MR. R. L. BROKENBUR R is Deputy 
Prosecuting Attorney for the 
Nineteenth Judicial Circuit Court of 
Indianapolis. He has charge of all forfeited recognizance bond cases in the courts. His appointment was made by Claris Adams, 
Prosecuting Attorney, and marked the first 
time in the history of Indianapolis, for a 
TH E LATE MISS GAINES 
S. A. T. WATKINS R. L. BROKENBURR TH E LATE MR. SCHMIDLAPP 
272 MEN OF THE MONTH 273 
BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF WASHINGTON TERRACE AND ITS ANNEXES 
colored attorney to be shown such recognition. During his first month's work, Mr. 
Brokenburr handled over 159 cases, aggregating $20,000. 
Mr. Brokenburr, who is a native of 
Virginia, is a graduate of Hampton Institute 
and of the Law Department of Howard 
University. He served as president of the local 
branch of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People for three 
terms and is now chairman of the 
Executive Committee. In spite of the task of reorganization, he has succeeded in winning 
for this branch, the largest membership in 
its history. A t present the branch has a 
membership of 744. 
* * * 
JACO B G. SCHMIDLAP P was born of 
German parents in Ohio, in 1849, and died 
this year. He early went into the cigar and 
whiskey business, becoming a leading distiller in Cincinnati, and afterward organizer 
of the Union Savings Bank and Trust 
Company. Then he branched out into great 
financial enterprises, and finally into philanthropy. The housing of the poor interested him, and he tried several experiments, 
finally building a few houses for Negroes. 
Immediately, there began the education of 
Mr. Schmidlapp in human relationship. He 
found out, to his surprise, that Negroes 
were human, that they had wants and virtues, and he tried to help them, by turning 
an old dump and ravine into "Washington 
Terrace," one of the most beautiful residential developments in the country for working people. The experiment proved a good 
paying investment and led Mr. Schmidlapp 
to help other enterprises, like the McCall 
Colored Industrial School. 
THE late Bishop Alexander Priestly 
Camphor was made Bishop of Africa at 
the Methodist General Conference in May, 
1916. Previously he had served eight years 
as president of Central Alabama College, at 
Birmingham, and in 1896, went to Afric a as 
a missionary, where he remained twelve 
years, as president of the College of West 
Africa, at Monrovia. 
Bishop Camphor was born in New 
Orleans, La., fifty-four years ago. He was 
graduated from New Orleans University, in 
1889; six years later, he was graduated 
from Gammon Theological Seminary, and 
afterward did post-graduate work. He published a volume on Missionary Story 
Sketches and Folklore from Africa. 
A t his death, Bishop Camphor was pastor 
of St. John's M . E. Church, in Orange, N . J. 
He is survived by his widow and his mother. 
* * * 
THROUG H the death of Dr. David N . C. 
Scott, Montgomery, Ala. , loses a successful citizen. For twenty-four years,. Dr. 
Scott practiced the profession of medicine 
in that city. He was a progressive man, 
public spirited and thrifty, owning a modern 
three-story brick store and office building, 
which he had erected on North Lawrence 
and Monroe Streets, one block from the 
Post Office; and it was largely through Dr. 
Scott's efforts, that Hale Infirmary became 
a well equipped institution for colored peo-274 THE CRISIS 
TH E LATE BISHOP CAMPHOR TH E LATE DR. SCOTT TH E LATE MR. ELLIS 
pie in the South. 
Dr. Scott was born in Hollywood, Ala., in 
the year 1870. He studied at the State 
Normal School, at Huntsville; and at 
Meharry Medical College, from which he was 
graduated in 1895, as valedictorian. 
One would think that a man of this type 
would find every encouragement in the 
South, and for many years, Dr. Scott was 
apparently highly esteemed by the whites. 
But when the test came, and the lynching 
mob broke loose last year, one of their first 
deeds was to drive Dr. Scott out of town and 
loot his property. His only crime was that 
of hailing his brother-in-law out of jail, 
where he had been incarcerated on a ridiculous and false charge. The two men left the 
city temporarily, but returned, and Dr. 
Scott died. The blood of the Negro martyrs 
is mounting high. 
AT the early age of forty-four years, 
George Washington Ellis has finished 
his earthly career, but not without much 
work accomplished as an author, a lawyer, 
and a statesman. 
Mr. Ellis' birthplace was Weston, Platte 
County, Mo. After graduating from the 
Atchison High School, he .studied in the law 
and collegiate departments of the University 
of Kansas, from which he was graduated in 
1893. In 1900, he was appointed a clerk in 
the Census Department at Washington; two 
years later, President Roosevelt appointed 
Mr. Ellis, Secretary of the American 
Legation to the Republic of Liberia, where he 
served the United States Government for 
eight years. While in Liberia, Mr. Ellis 
made a most interesting study of the indigenous races and published his studies. 
He was decorated by the Liberian government, and was a member of several learned 
societies. During 1912-16, he was a member 
of the General Financial Board of the 
A . M . E. Church. 
For two and one-half years, Mr. Ellis 
served Chicago, 111., as Assistant 
Corporation Counsel. 
Among several books written by Mr. Ellis, 
is a volume on Negro Culture in West 
Africa, containing "specimen stories, written in the Va i tongue, with translations of 
them. The author was well equipped when 
he undertook this work." 
A t the National Museum in Washington, 
D. C , there is an exhibit of ethnological 
specimens of Africa , collected by Mr. Ellis. 
UNRES T 
O GOD! 
Dip down Thy Hands into the flame 
ways of Thy Heavens; 
Splash back the foaming clouds, 
Strain out Thy Suns, 
And let the .stars drip through, 
Upon the panting blindness of our ears. 
W. E. B. D. 275 
TH E NE W COLORE D WHITELA W APARTMEN T HOTEL , WASHINGTON , D. C. The Horizon 
COMPILE D BY MADELIN E G. ALLISO N . 
INDUSTRY 
THE Fitzgerald Corporation, a syndicate 
of Negroes in Atlantic City, N . J., has 
been incorporated and capitalized at $500,-
000, for the purpose of erecting on Arctic 
Avenue, an eight story modern hotel for 
Negroes; it will contain 200 sleeping-rooms. 
C The' Farmers' Land Development and 
Supply Company has been organized at 
Mappsville, Va., as a $25,000 colored enterprise. 
C The Cooperative Mercantile Company, 
capitalized at $50,000, non-assessable, has 
been started by Negroes in Oklahoma City, 
Okla., to do a business in ready-to-wear 
clothing. 
0 The colored Church of God and Saints of 
Christ, at Baltimore, Md., is operating a 
cash grocery business, presided over by 
Elder William H . Lee. 
C The American Mutual Benefit 
Association, a colored organization at Houston, 
Texas, during 1919, had a net weekly increase of $1,427 over the previous year, or 
a total of $74,207 for the year. The 
Association gives $2,000 annually in prizes to its 
superintendents, and has established three 
scholarships in Texas colleges. Mr. M . G. 
B. Grigby is president. 
C The Shaper Department Store in St. 
Louis, Mo., is employing colored salesmen 
and salesladies, stock girls, and clerks. 
C The Mechanics Savings Bank at 
Richmond, Va., of which John Mitchell is president, has deposits of $540,000; its resources 
include $100,000 in mortgages and $100,000 
in Christmas Club Savings. The bank was 
started ten years ago. 
(I The North Carolina Mutual Life 
Insurance Company, of Durham, collected over a 
million and a quarter dollars last year. It 
recently added to its Medical Department, 
the position of "General Medical Inspector," 
which is being filled by Dr. W. L. Joyner, 
who holds free clinics for policyholders. 
C L. B. Capehart, Jr., has been appointed 
Educational Secretary for the Newport 
News, Va., Industrial Y . M . C. A . This 
shipyard employs 5,000 colored workmen; 
the field for extension work is undeveloped. 
Q In Beckley, W. Va. , there is a colored incorporated Mercantile Company, which is 
capitalized at $4,000. 
(I The Portsmouth, Va., Cotton Oil and 
Refining Company has distributed a bonus of 
$104,000 among its employees, two-thirds of 
whom are Negroes. 
C During last year, nearly one million and 
a half dollars passed through the One Cent 
Savings Bank, a colored bank at Nashville, 
Tenn. A dividend of 69c was unanimously 
declared. Since its organization, Dr. R. H . 
Boyd has been president of the bank. 
(I The Tidewater Bank and Trust Company, 
a colored institution at Norfolk, Va. , in six 
months, has passed the half-million dollar 
mark in deposits. 
C The Hotel Dale Corporation, headed by 
Edward Dale of Cape May, N . J., is operating in Philadelphia, Pa., for the establishment of a hotel for Negroes, to cost $200,000. 
C The assets of the colored Mechanics 
Savings Bank at Savannah, Ga., increased last 
year, from $32,000 to $121,000. Paul E . 
Perry is president. 
C The colored Regal Drug Store in 
Columbia, S. C, has purchased a $50,000 piece of 
property for its business. 
C Colored workers in flour and cerea\ mills 
at Chattanooga, Tenn., have organized a 
union and affiliated with the American 
Federation of Labor. 
C The Norfolk, Va., Home Building and 
Loan Association, Inc., reports resources of 
$63,234, of which $56,433 is first mortgages 
on real estate. Total payments for 1919 
amounted to $48 707, which was an increase 
of $11,446 over the previous year. 
WAR 
LIEUT.-COL . JOH N E . GREEN , form
States at Liberia, has been detailed to take 
charge of the Military Department of 
Wilberforce University. 
( Howard University's School of Medicine 
276 THE HORIZON 277 
has the following war record: 4 members of 
the faculty served on Draft Boards; 4 were 
contract surgeons; 150 students enlisted in 
the Medical Reserve Corps, and 150 of the 
alumni served as officers and enlisted men; 
1 officer was awarded the Distinguished 
Service Cross, while another was recommended for the Croix cle Guerre; one made 
the supreme sacrifice. A member of the 
faculty discovered a reliable gas detector, 
which was used by the Allies. Models, 
charts, specimens, and skeletons of the 
school were used for the instruction of Red 
Cross units. 
(I The John A. Logan Post, American 
Legion of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, has 
been established by colored men at Seattle, 
Washington. It has 135 members, with 
William Vrooman, Commander. 
C Colored total illiterates in the United 
States Draft Army numbered 125,000, or 
25.5 per cent, of the total colored strength, 
while Negroes relatively illiterate numbered 123,000, or 25.1 per cent. The literate class of Negroes numbered 242,000, 
out of a total of 490,000, or 49.4 per cent. 
C White and colored ex-soldiers in 
Chatham County, Ga., have participated in the 
unveiling of a bronze memorial tablet, containing the names of 85 white and 24 colored soldiers killed in France. 
0 Major Walter H . Loving, Philippine 
Constabulary, retired, has reported at 
Manila, on special duty in the Philippines, 
to rehabilitate the Philippine Band, which 
he organized. 
THE GHETTO 
THE Poughkeepsie High School has severed relations with the New York 
Military Academy of Cornwall, because the latter school's football team refused to meet 
the Poughkeepsie team when they found 
that it had a colored player—Abe Crooks. 
d In Alabama, last year, the average salary for male teachers in white schools was 
$470, or less than $10 a week for the year; 
female teachers, $312; teachers in Negro 
schools, $179! 
CRIME 
FEDERA L anti-lynching legislation is being considered by the House Judiciary 
Committee. 
C Harry E. Davis, former United States 
Attorney in the District of Columbia, and 
James" A . Cobb, Chairman of the Legal 
Committee, Washington Branch, N . A . A . 
C. P., will appear before the United States 
Supreme Court on March 1, to argue a writ 
of Habeas Corpus in the case of Edgar C. 
Caldwell, the colored soldier whose sentence 
to death by the Civil Courts has been upheld by the Supreme Court of Alabama. 
G Judge Henisler in the Court of Common 
Pleas, Baltimore, Md., has freed Samuel 
Lewis, a Negro, who has served ten years 
of a seventy year term for housebreaking 
and attempted criminal assault.' Attorney 
O'Dunne declared that the proceedings in 
the case "bore inherent evidence that the 
sentence was the product of individual passion, and not a judicial act." 
C The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Florala, Ala., January 14, Jack Waters, 
shot; alleged attack upon a white woman. 
Pine Bluff, Ark., February 5, unknown 
Negro; murder. 
Osceola, Ark., , W. E. Hansel 
(white), tied to post and burned by unidentified robbers. 
MEETINGS 
THE Circle for Negro Relief, Inc., in 
New York City, is conducting a monthly series of Sunday evening meetings, the 
first of which was held at Plymouth Church, 
in Brooklyn. Dr. Newell Dwight Hillis, the 
pastor, presided; Harrison Rhodes, 
President, and Mrs. Etnah Rochon Boutte, 
Executive Secretary, spoke concerning the 
Circle. Readings from their own works 
were given by Charles Hanson Towne of 
McClure's Magazine, Mrs. Corinne 
Roosevelt Robinson, and Edwin Markham; M
Marie Peake Johnson sang two of Harry T. 
Burleigh's songs, with Mr. Burleigh accompanying her; other music was furnished by 
the Plymouth Quartette, under the direction 
of Bruno Huhn. The second meeting was 
held in the Walker Memorial Baptist Church 
in New York City. The Rev. J. D. Bushell, 
the pastor, presided; Lieut.-Col. Theodore 
Roosevelt and James Weldon Johnson were 
the speakers, and music was furnished by 
Miss Andrades Lindsay, pianist; Fred R. 
Work, tenor; Miss Minnie Brown, soprano; 
Paul Robeson, baritone; Mrs. J. D. Bushell' 
soprano; and Edward McNamara, baritone! 
C The Kentucky Negro Educational 
Association will hold its annual session, April 
20-23, in Louisville Six hundred teachers 
are enrolled in this organization, represent-278 THE CRISIS 
ing 40% of the colored teachers in this state 
and an increase of 200% over the enrollment 
five years ago. The president is Mr. H . C. 
Russell. 
G The first annual session of the Delaware 
State Teachers' Association has been held 
at Wilmington. Professor Isaac W. 
Howard was elected president. 
THE CHURCH 
AN Estey Pipe Organ, costing $2,500, 
has been installed at First 
Congregational Church in Little Rock, Ark. The 
pastor of this church—the Rev. O. H. 
McGowan, organized the local branch of the 
N . A . A . C. P. and is its treasurer. 
C A n $8,000 edifice is to be built for Mt. 
Zion Baptist Church at Guthrie, Okla. The 
Rev. O. R. Short is the pastor. 
G The Committee of Fourteen, selected by 
the Federated Churches of Cleveland, Ohio, 
to take the religious survey for the Interchurch World Movement, included a colored 
man, the Rev. Irving K . Merchant, Pastor 
of Mount Zion Congregational Church. Mr. 
Merchant is a member of four committees 
of the Federated Churches. 
C Varick Memorial A . M . E. Zion Church 
of Hackensack, N . J., under the leadership 
of the Rev. J . D. Virgil, has completed a 
modern brick .stucco church; the property is 
valued at $23,000. 
C The National Baptist Convention and the 
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church 
have set out to raise $1,000,000 for the 
drive of the Interchurch World Movement, 
next Spring. These denominations comprise a membership of 4,000,000. 
POLITICS 
IN Philadelphia, Pa., George W. Chapman, 
a Negro, ha.s been appointed Deputy 
Collector of Delinquent Taxes, at a salary of 
$3,500 per year. He will have supervision 
of real estate assessed at $36,935,502. 
([Colored Republicans in the Twelfth 
Congressional District, St. Louis, Mo., who form 
80% of the Republican vote, are demanding 
that a Negro be nominated to replace 
Congressman Dyer; if this is not done, they will 
refrain from voting the Republican ticket. 
Aaron W. Lloyd, Grand Chancellor of the 
Knights of Pythias, is leading the movement. 
C The Federal Woman Suffrage 
Amendment was rejected by a 106-25 vote in the 
Lower House of the Mississippi Legislature, 
after 10 minutes of debate, because it would 
give colored women the right to vote. 
EDUCATION 
THE Kansas City, Mo., Board of 
Education has awarded service pins to seven 
colored teachers for twenty-five years continuous service; the persons are: R. T. 
Coles, Principal of Garrison School; Maude 
V. Thornton, teacher at Garrison School; 
Sadie L . Thornton, teacher at Yates School; 
India C. Moore, teacher at Douglas School; 
Sallie C. Rogers, Garrison Library; 
Preston Overton, custodian, Lincoln High 
School; Hardy Smith, custodian, Cherry 
Street School. 
C It is announced by the Rev. J. I. 
Bartholomew, Centenary Secretary of the M. E. 
Church, in Boston, that three industrial 
schools for Negroes are to be established in 
Portuguese Africa, at a cost of $225,000. 
C The Automobile and Aeroplane 
Mechanical School in Harrisburg, Pa., is a $50,000 
colored enterprise. A large Curtiss aeroplane, which they own, makes daily trips 
over the city. Both white and colored men 
are studying at this school. 
d Sol Butler, the colored athlete of 
Dubuque University, has been added to 
Frederick Rubiens' All-American Track Team. 
His honors are given in the broad jump. 
C The Institutional Relief Organization of 
Philadelphia, has established a $125 scholarship at Cheyney Institute. 
C The first annual clinic, national in scope, 
is to be held at Meharry Medical College, 
for four days, beginning March 1. The day 
following the closing of the clinic, will be 
"Meharry Re-union Day." 
C. Dr. J. Wright Sullivan, a Negro in 
Philadelphia, who took the examination of the 
Pennsylvania State Dental Board, has 
passed among 49 successful candidates, out 
of a total of 92 applicants. 
C The Dunbar Colored High School at 
Brownsville, Tenn., has been destroyed by 
fire of unknown origin. It had an enrollment of 1,000 pupils. 
C The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People is offering 
three prizes,—$50, $30, and $20, for the 
best essays by students at colored institutions, on "The Economic Element in 
Lynching and Mob Violence." Essays are limited 
to 5,000 words and must reach the office of TH E HORIZON 279 
the N . A . A . C. P. , 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w 
Yor k City , not late r tha n Ma y 1. 
C Th e Tennessee Coal, Iro n and Railroa d 
Compan y at Birmingham , Ala. , has completed a t a cost of over a millio n dollars, a 
300 bed hospita l fo r employees and their 
families. Ther e is i n operation, a trainingschool fo r colored nurses. 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
A APOLLO' S CONVENTIO N WIT H 
ETHIOPIA" , a historica l pla y i n 
two acts, by Carri e L . Shepperson, has been 
presented i n Littl e Rock, Ark. , by the Gir l 
Reserves of the Blu e Triangl e League . 
C Th e DuBois Dramati c Clu b of Omaha , 
Neb., has staged Ouida's novel Under Two 
Flags, unde r the management of Ad a Hil l 
Smith . Seven hundred dollars was netted 
i n receipts. 
G Colored scholars and people of talent i n 
Ne w Yor k Cit y have formed the Players' 
Guild , fo r the purpose of stimulatin g the 
creative arts among its members. 
"Confidence", a playlet written by James H. 
Wilson, has been creditably performed before 
an invite d audience. Th e president of the 
club is Dor a Cole Norman . 
G A new song, " I Wan t to Di e Whil e Yo u 
Lov e Me, " is issued b y the Ricord i musi c 
house of Ne w York . The lyri c is by Georgi a 
Dougla s Johnson and the musi c is by H . T. 
Burleigh . 
G Coleridge Taylor's "Bamboola " was recently rendered b y Hageman's orchestr a i n 
the Metropolita n Oper a House, Ne w Yor k 
City . The rendition took a double encore. 
Th e Capito l Theatr e has featured Taylor's 
"Hiawatha's Weddin g Feast, " wit h singers 
i n costume. 
G J . Edga r Dowell , a colored composer i n 
Baltimore , Md. , has recently produced four 
successful numbers, two of which the 
"Ziegfeld Follies" is featuring: "San Tan" and 
"I' m Comin g Home" ; the thir d song, "Yo u 
Don't Know, " was writte n for Pac e and 
Handy ; the fourth , "Ever y Night, " is being featured at the Amsterdam Roof 
Garden, New York. 
C Aaro n Douglas, the only colored student 
in the Art Department of the State 
University, at Lincoln, Neb., was selected from 
150 students, to make a charcoa l sketch of 
Genera l Pershing . The sketch required 
seventeen hours; every detail wa s copied on 
a scale three times the size of the original. 
Mr . Dougla s is twenty-one years of age. 
TH E NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
LEAGUE S were organized i n Cambridge , 
Boston, and Milwauke e durin g the last 
year, and the St. John's Institutional 
Activities of Springfield, Mass., under the direction of Dr . Willia m N . Deberry, became affiliated. Organizations were effected in 
Atlanta and New Orleans. 
G Thre e executives have been added to the 
Nationa l Staff,—Alexande r L . Jackson , 
Educationa l Secretary, wit h headquarters i n 
the Nationa l Office; T. Arnol d Hill , Wester n 
Field Secretary, with headquarters in 
Chicago; and Jesse 0. Thomas, Southern Field 
Secretary, wit h headquarters i n Atlanta . 
G Mr . Jackson's duties include finding socia l workers to meet immediate demands, 
overseeing an intensive course of trainin g 
for them, becoming acquainted wit h students i n colleges, and recommending courses 
to those wh o are interested i n social wor k 
as a profession. 
G The Fiel d Secretaries are concerned wit h 
meeting calls for organizin g i n cities where 
livin g conditions have become acute, because 
of increase i n the Negr o population ; and i n 
acting i n an advisor y capacity where their 
help is solicited. 
G The Nationa l Urba n League traine d seven men fo r executive wor k durin g last year, 
four of whom are now League Executives: 
Howar d D . Greg g i n Columbus, A . B . Nut t 
in Milwaukee, Matthew W. Bullock in 
Boston, and E. Champ Warrick in East St. 
Louis. 
C Two Fellows are takin g a year's 
trainin g at the Ne w Yor k School of Socia l 
Work , on League Fellowships, after havin g 
finished College courses. These fellowships 
are given to applicants who can meet the 
educational qualifications, includin g an examination i n the School of Socia l Work , and 
who indicat e their intention to follow social 
work as a profession. 
G The League placed forty Industrial 
Service Workers in plants during last year and 
made openings i n thirty-five new places. 
C Specia l trainin g classes for preparin g 
Industria l Service Workers, are conducted 
i n Chicago and St. Louis. The League's 
Executive s supplement the wor k of these 
welfar e men i n the plants b y holdin g group 
meetings wit h workingmen . Pittsburg h has 
an organization of welfare workers; 
Detroit conducts a Domestic Science Training 
School. 280 TH E CRISIS 
(I Durin g last year, placement wor k wa s 
turned over to State Industria l or Federa l 
Employmen t Agencie s and efforts were 
made in several cities to use the 
League's Industrial Departments only for securin g better opportunitie s fo r the industria l worke r and fo r vocationa l guidance fo r 
juveniles. Th e latte r wor k wa s especially 
emphasized by the New York Urban 
League, which secured the establishment of a 
vocationa l guidance bureau i n a public 
school i n Harlem , i n whic h there is a large 
attendance of colored children. I n eight 
cities, 37,184 industria l workers were 
placed,—a large numbe r of them i n skille d 
or clerica l work . 
C One affiliated organization,—the 
Armstrong Association of Philadelphia—through 
its Industria l Department, directed contracts to colored firms, amountin g to 
$117,726. 
G A t the Ne w Yor k League's instance, 
Boys' Wor k was undertaken by the Boys' 
Federation , resultin g i n the establishment 
of a club-house. 
C Cooperation between colored and whit e 
people has been fostered and increased wherever possible. The League work s amicabl y 
wit h all organizations, such as public an d 
privat e employment agencies, charities, socia l service departments of hospitals, juven ­
ile, domestic relations, municipal , and other 
courts, public schools and trade schools, 
Communit y Service , Wa r Ris k Insuranc e 
Service , the Re d Cross, and Association s on 
Commerce . I n Brooklyn , N . Y. , this cooperation has resulted i n the providin g of a 
fund for a woma n worke r who devotes ful l 
time to wor k among women and girls. 
C Th e cost of supporting' this wor k is constantly increasing : $102,000 wa s spent i n 
1918 by the Nationa l Urba n League and its 
branches; $149,000 i n 1919; and a budget 
totalin g $220,000 has been adopted fo r 1920. 
Th e respect i n whic h the wor k is held, is 
evidenced by the heart y manne r i n whic h 
the public responds to the League's appeal 
fo r funds. The headquarters are at 127 
East Twenty-thir d Street, Ne w Yor k City , 
wit h L . Hollingswort h Woo d as Chairma n 
and Eugen e Kinckl e Jones as Executiv e 
Secretary. 
(I A t the League's annua l meeting, held 
Februar y 4, at the Russell Sage Founda ­
tion, Dr . George C. Hal l of Chicago, wa s 
elected vice-chairma n of the League ; W . R. 
Valentine , Principa l of Bordentown Manua l 
Trainin g and Industria l School, Colone l 
Theodore Roosevelt, Mar y McLeo d Bethune , 
Principa l of Dayton a School fo r Girls, Mrs. 
Julius Rosenwald of Chicago, John W. 
Davis, President of West Virginia Collegiate 
Institute, and Mrs. Raymond Robbins, of the 
Woman's Trad e Unio n of Chicago , wer e 
added to the Boar d of Directors. 
d Th e change of name from Nationa l 
League on Urban Conditions among 
Negroes, to National Urban League, voted last 
year, wa s legall y completed at this meeting. 
FRATERNITIE S 
THE Society of the Sons of Virginia , Inc., 
i n Ne w York , ha d a n increase of thirty -
seven members last year, and receipts 
amountin g to $1,128; its tota l funds amoun t 
to $4,756. Mr . J . W . Patterso n is president. 
C The Knights of Pythia s of Tennessee 
have resources of $95,000; there ar e 475 
Lodges and Courts, wit h 11,000 Knights, 
10,000 Calanthes, and 1,200 Juveniles,—a 
tota l of 22,200 members. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
EDWAR D S. JACKSON , a Negro , has 
been appointed a police officer i n Ne w 
Yor k City , whic h makes a tota l of eight 
colored policemen. 
C Th e Supreme Court of Colorado has 
ruled by a 7-5 vote, tha t a boot-black parlo r 
is a "plac e of publi c accommodation" ; tha t 
any places "similar " to any one of those 
named specifically i n the Civi l Rights Bill , 
come withi n the purvie w of the bill . Th e 
local branc h of the N . A . A . C. P . wa s represented b y Attorne y E . P . Blakemore , of 
Denver. 
C Dr. Clement T. Branch, a Negro in 
Camden, N. J., has been appointed a member of 
the Boar d of Education . 
C The Boar d of Educatio n at Lexington , 
Ky. , has named five Negroe s as members of 
the Advisor y Committe e to select a site fo r 
the new colored hig h school. Th e Negroe s 
are Dr. W . H . Ballard , chairman ; W . H . 
Fouse , the Rev. Robert Mitchell , Dr . J . E . 
Hunter, an d Dr . T. T. Wendell . 
G The Societe Francaise of Howard 
University gave a "Soiree de Gala" in honor 
of Monsieur Jusserand, the French 
Ambassador. 
C Princ e Georges County , Md. , has its first 
colored Deput y Sheriff, i n the person of 
Richar d Johnson ; Thoma s Perry , a Negro , TH E HORIZON 281 
ha s been appointed Keepe r of the Count y 
Jai l i n Uppe r Marlboro , a position formerl y 
held by a whit e man . 
C Thirt y colored women at Pittsburgh , Pa. , 
are takin g a course i n recreationa l leadership , unde r the Burea u of Recreation. 
C Mr . W . Justi n Carter, a colored attorney 
in Harrisburg, Pa., has been appointed 
Secretary to Lieutenant-Governor Beidleman. 
C "Billy " Williams, a Negr o i n St. Paul , 
Minn. , is executive messenger to Governor 
Burnquist . Mr . Williams' "handshaking " 
score is 421,200. This score started in 
January, 1905, when the late Governor J. A. 
Johnso n took office; it continued through 
the administration s of Governo r A . O. 
Eberhart and the late Governor W. S. 
Hammond. 
C Lillia n L . Feurtad o is the first colored 
woman clerk to be employed in the 
Collector's office at the City Hall, Boston. 
(I I n the list of jurors drawn by Judge s 
Urne r and Worthingto n for the Februar y 
term of the Frederic k Count y Court, i n 
Maryland , appears the name of Richar d T. 
Bruce , a Negro . This is the first time i n 
twenty-five years tha t a colored ma n has 
been selected fo r jur y service i n this 
county. 
C Tall y Holme s of Washington , D . C , 
heads the list of leadin g colored tennis players; A . F . 
Stephens and C. V . Norma n 
of Ne w Yor k City , respectively , head the second and thir d 
groups of ten best players. 
d Negroe s i n Ne w Orleans, 
La., have opened The 
Providence Hospital and Training 
School fo r Nurses. Th e propert y includes fou r lots, on 
whic h there are three build ­
ings. 
( I Wesle y William s i n his 
physica l examinatio n fo r firema n i n Ne w Yor k City , received 100 pe r cent, the only 
such average i n an examina ­
tio n of 1,700 applicants of 
whom he was the only 
Negro. He has been appointed 
to Engin e Compan y fifty-five, 
Broome Street. Mr . William s 
wa s bor n i n Ne w Yor k City , 
August 26, 1897. H e has 
worke d two years as a postman and as a mai l auto driver. 
G Doctors J . N . Hammon s and Griffith 
Brannon , Negroes, have been added to the 
Cit y Hospital , Louisville , Ky. , as internes. 
C Amon g insuranc e companies plannin g 
better conditions for their employees is the 
Metropolitan , whic h wil l pay its agents commission on policies taken out by Negroes, 
which i n the past, agents have been forced 
to writ e fo r nothing. 
PERSONA L 
A Citizens' Reception has been tendered 
Harr y H . Pace i n Atlanta , Ga . Mr . 
Pace has resigned as secretary of the 
Standard Life Insurance Company, and will become a resident of Ne w Yor k City , where 
he wil l devote himself to the publishin g 
business of Pace and Handy . 
( I Davi d Dooley, a colored blacksmit h at 
Anderson , S. C , is dead, leavin g an estate 
of $100,000, whic h he accumulated durin g 
forty years of labor. 
C Mr. J. D. H. Howard, Editor of the 
Indianapolis Ledger, is dead. 
C. Captai n Edwar d Seabrook, a colored un ­
dertake r at Savannah , Ga. , fo r twenty-five 
years, is dead. H e had built a three story 
bric k structur e fo r his business. 
Mr. and Mrs. Anthony Vandorn in 
Jamaica, L. I., have celebrated 
the fiftieth anniversar y of 
their marriage. Mr. 
Vandorn is said to be worth nearl y $100,000, most of whic h is 
invested i n rea l estate. 
FOREIG N 
IRRIGATIO N wor k fo r the 
purpose of growin g cotton, 
has been started i n Wester n 
Frenc h Africa , through an 
agreement between the government and contractors. 
G. The first direc t steamship 
service between Grea t Britai n 
and Haiti , since 1899, began 
Novembe r 12, when the 
steamer Conway left Londo n 
fo r Haitia n ports. 
C A colored ex-soldier from 
America , it is reported from 
Paris, has mad e 125,000 
franc s throug h buyin g and 
sellin g Arm y and Nav y supWESLE Y WILLIAM S plies at Brest. 282 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PORTRAIT S 
Painted in Oils 
BY OUR FOREMOST 
PORTRAIT PAINTER 
EDWIN A. HARLESTON 
Sprin g tour no w being arranged. 
Fo r terms and dates for sittings 
address the artist at 
121 Calhou n St . 
CHARLESTON , S. C . 
A MONTHL Y FO R THINKER S 
THE SOCIALIST 
REVIEW 
HENR Y BARBUSS E (Autho r of 
"Unde r Fire" ) writes on "The Place 
of the Intellectual in Society" 
WALTE R POLAKO V shows up the 
waste of 'he Steel Trust in "Organized 
Sabotage." 
Important articles on British Labor, 
Russian Cooperation, The German 
General Strike, The Teachers' Union, 
"Captured by the Bolsheviki, " etc. 
25c a Copy $2.50 a Year 
TH E SOCIALIST REVIEW 
Room 914, 70 Fifth Ave. New York, N. Y. 
Send 2$c for February issue containing 
"The Negro in Industry" by 
Herbert J. Seligmann. 
Valuable Books on 
the Negro Problem 
Darkwatc r (W . E . B. DuBois) . $2.00 
Th e Negr o in Literatur e an d 
Art . (B. G. Brawley ) 1.50 
Fift y Years and Othe r Poems. 
(James YVeldon Johnson)... . 1.25 
Th e Heart of a Woma n and 
Othe r Poems. (G. D . John ­
son) 1.25 
Po^ms of Pau l Laurenc e Dun ­
bar 2.25 
Souls of Blac k Folk . (W . E . B. 
DuBois) I.25 
Grann y Maume e and Othe r 
Play s for a Xegr o Theatre . 
(Ridgel y Torrence ) 1.50 
Hazel . (Mar y Whit e Ovington ) 1.00 
A Centur y of Xegr o Migration . 
(Carte r G. W oodson ) 1.10 
Th e Negro . (\Y . E . B. DuBois) .75 
Th e Educatio n of the Negr o 
Prio r to 1861. (C. G. Wood ­
son) 2.00 
Postage Extr a 
SPECIAL OFFER 
A year's subscription to the CRISI S 
will he given free to anyone sending 
in five NE W paid-up vearlv subscriptions to the CRISIS . This offer holds 
good until midnigh t of the 15th of 
April , IQJO . Remembe r that subscription to the CRISI S is now 
$1.50 PE R YEA R 
TH E CRISI S 
70 FIFT H AVENU E 
NE W YORK , N. Y . 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
1227 S. 17th STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
Al l shorthand and bookkeeping: classes are closed. Ne w classes wil l be organized Apri l 1st. 
Durin g the months of Januar y an d Februar y the Advance d Class in Shorthand wrote and 
transcribed "Si r Roge r De Coverle y Papers, " "Th e Visio n of Sir Launfal, " "Autobiograph y of 
Benjami n Franklin " and excerpts fro m Irving's "Sketch Book. " A Specia l Class in Secretaria l 
Bookkeeping organized Februar y 9th. Classes in Typewritin g organized every Monday . 
JO B WORK—I f you have a hundred or 10,000 circula r letter s to send out—don't worr y 
your- stenographer—we can do them in a hurr y and SAV E you TIME , MONE Y and WORRY . 
Mention ribbon and type on your typewrite r and we wil l fix the m so your stenographe r can fill 
in name and address, makin g the m appear as personal letters. Wor k for CHURCHES , SOCIETIE S and BUSINES S ME N a specialty. Attractiv e typewritte n notice-forms on cards an d 
half-sheets. Distanc e make s no difference if you are wher e you can hear the whistl e of a 
steam-car, we can reach your raiload station. 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 283 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational. 
Nurs e Training at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Dsy System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Chads' Building 
1435 Chestnu t Stree t 
PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Only School of its Kind 
in America 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
HAL E INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala . 
Oiler s to High. School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 36, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
WANTE D 
2 Bod y maker s and Woodworkers, Colored 
lne n only. Steady work. Good wages. 
TH E 0. H . PATTERSO N SON S CO. , 
Greenfield, Ohio 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founde d 1879. 
Th o only Institution In tho Stat e havin g for Its object 
Collegiate , Ministerial , Medical , an d Lega l trainin g fo r Col ­
ored citizens In Kentucky . 
Specia l trainin g In Insurance , Socia l Service, Nursin g an d 
Hospita l Work . 
Normal , Commercial , Music , Domesti c Science, Missionar y 
trainin g class. 
Kvenln g classes, correspondenc e course. Degrees offered. 
Presiden t C . H . Parria h 
TEACHER S 
W e hav e ha d calls fo r teachers fro m Alabama , 
Arkansas, Delaware , Distric t o f Columbia , Florida , 
Georgia , Illinois, Indiana , Kansas, Kentucky , Louisi ­
ana , Maryland , Mississippi , Missouri , Ne w York , 
Nort h Carolina , Ohio , Oklahoma , Pennsylvania , 
Rhod e Island , Sout h Carolina , Tennessee , Texas, Vir ­
gini a an d West Virginia . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 New Yor k Avenue Washington , D . C. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , 0. 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR 
b y JULI A L . HENDERSON . Suitabl e fo r use i n pri -
mar y grade s an d a valuabl e additio n to th e child's, 
library . Pric e 26 cents. Addres s 
DUBOI S & DILL , Publishers, 
2 West 13th Stree t New York , N . Y . 
BEREA N MANUA L TRAININ G 
AN D INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
Non-Sectarian 
Winte r Ter m opene d Tuesday , Jan . 6, 1920 
Sprin g Ter m open s Tuesday , Apri l 6, 1920 
Primaril y a Trade s School; Excellen t College 
Preparator y Department, Elementar y Englis h 
Department. New Trades; Electrica l Engi ­
neering, Blu e Prin t Reading , Textil e Work , 
Aut o Repairs. 
Joi n now, or writ e the Principal , 
MATTHE W ANDERSO N 
1926 Sout h Colleg e Ave. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Visitor s Welcom e Alway s 
Efficiency Our Ai m Helpfulness Our Objec t 
A MONEY GETTE R because it is A CROWD G ETTER. 
Churche s an d Club s looking for a pla y tha t wil l afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, shoul d have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment in one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churche s havo cleared fro m 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE, 50c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
Lincoln Heights, Washington. D. C. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 284 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Darkwater By w. e. B. Du Bois 
Author of "Th e Souls of Blac k Folk, " etc. 
Dr . DuBois's new book is a companion volume to "Th e 
Souls of Black Folk. " It deals with the place of the darke r 
races in the moder n world . 
No t a dry contribution to sociology, but a huma n document of extraordinary intensity and insight, describin g the 
awakened conscience and aspirations of the darke r races 
everywhere , how it feels to be a black man in a whit e 
world , and ho w the solution is to be found in considerin g 
the Negr o problem, not apart from the problems of wor k 
and wage, government, domestic service, sex, and education, 
but as an integra l part of them and havin g no reality outside of them. Eve n more than the late Booke r Washington , 
Dr . D u Eois is now the chief spokesman of the two hundred 
millio n men and wome n of Africa n blood. $2.00 net. 
The Shadow By Mary White Ovington 
Author of "Hal f a Man, " etc. 
Th e story of a beautiful southern girl of aristocrati c 
family, who m a strange fate has placed i n childhoo d on the 
doorstep of a Negr o cabin, and who m fate again sends into 
the whit e worl d when she discovers the secret of her birth . 
Th e novel, whic h deals wit h Negroe s in their cabins, wit h 
the master in the great house, and in the Nort h wit h the 
factory and the workshop , is unusua l in its theme, and sane 
and sympatheti c in its treatment of northerne r and southerner, of black and white . $1.75 net. 
The Chicago Race Riots BY Carl Sandburg 
With an introductory note by Walte r Lippman n 
Thes e articles, reprinted from the Chicag o Dail y News, 
describe the Chicago Rac e Riots of July , 1919, and the 
economic and social forces whic h produced them. 60 cents 
net. 
For sale by 
The Crisis 70 Fift h Ave. , Ne w York , N . Y . 
or by the publishers 
Harcourt, Brace and Howe, 1 West 47t h St. , Ne w York ' 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 285 
Scott's official History of the American Negro in the 
GREA T WA R 
Bishop Hartsell of the Methodist Episcopal Church writes as follows: 
"I have read your history of The American Negro in the Wa r and want to congratulate you on having issued so quickly a volume of so much value. The official records will 
have a very wide circulation and be assured a permanent place among the masses. The 
candid and fair spirit which characterizes all your public utterances is manifest." 
A Proud Chapter 
in the History of 
the Negro Race 
The official and authentic 
history of the true part 
played by the Negro i n the 
great Worl d War, written 
by a man whose valuable 
experience, intimate connection wit h every phase of 
the direction of the great 
struggle, makes it possible 
to publish the true facts. 
A great historical volume 
that should be in every 
Negro home. Gives inside 
facts and accurate and official data and pictures 
which will appear in no 
other book. Ever y chapter 
is full of the very informa ­
tion which you have been 
anxiously waiting to know. 
This Grea t Book tells 
all about the Negr o Every ­
where in the Worl d Wa r 
— How He Did His Duty, 
i n every capacity — from 
right up in the front line 
trenches and on the battlefields— clear bac k to 
the wor k of keepin g the 
home fires burning ; on the 
farms; i n the mills and 
munitio n plants; on the 
railroads and steamships; 
in shipyards and factories. 
Me n and wome n wit h the 
Re d Cross, the Y . M . C. 
A. , the Y . W . C. A., the 
Wa r Cam p Communit y 
Service , the Libert y Loa n 
Drives, etc. 
Scott's Official History 
was writte n for the Negr o 
by the Negr o that the 
wonderfu l record of darin g deeds, gallant bravery 
and undyin g heroism of 
our blac k troops migh t 
neve r perish. A great tribute to the patriotism of 
the Negr o Race . 
Emmet t J , Scott, 
A.M. , L.L.D . 
Agents Wanted 
Make $8.00 to $20.00 per 
day — right no w — selling 
Scott's Official Histor y — 
best book, biggest seller, 
quickest money-maker for 
live agents. Ne w from 
cove r to cover. Be first in 
you r territor y and get the 
orders. W e pay yo u high ­
est commissions. 
FREE Writ e toda y 
for free outfit, 
includin g agents' sample 
book and full instructions. 
Send 25 cents to prepay 
postage. 
Copy mailed to any address 
upon receipt of $2.90 for 
cloth binding or $3.75 
for Morocco binding 
Written by 
Emmett J . Scott, A.M. , 
LLD , Special Assistant to 
Secretary of War, Newton 
D. Baker. 
Assiste d b y the followin g notable individuals: 
Dr . Carter G. Woodson, 
Directo r of Research, Th e 
Associatio n for the Study 
of Negr o Lif e and History , 
Inc. Ralph W . Tyler, Ac ­
credited Representative of 
the Committe e o n Publi c 
Information , wh o accompanied the colored troops 
to wa r fronts i n France . 
William Anthony Aery , 
Publicatio n Secretary , 
Hampto n Norma l and Ag ­
ricultura l Institute. Monroe N. Work, Directo r Di ­
vision of Record s and Re ­
search, Tuskege e Norma l 
and Industria l Institute. 
Mrs. Alice Dunbar Nelson (formerly Mrs. Paul 
Laurenc e Dunbar) leader 
in the mobilizatio n of colored wome n of the country for wa r wor k under 
the auspices of the Wo ­
men's Committee , Council of Nationa l Defense. 
Miss Ev a G. Bowles, Ex ­
ecutive Secretary , in 
charge of the colored 
wor k of the Youn g Wo ­
men's Christia n Associa ­
tion. Lieut. T . T . Thompson, Historia n wh o accompanied the famous 92d Di ­
vision, U . S. A . to France . 
Over 600 large pages 
(equal to 800 ordinar y 
pages). 
Profusel y Illustrated 
with nearl y 160 official 
Frenc h and America n 
Negr o Wa r photographs, 
showing al l sides of Wa r 
Activitie s and Negr o soldie r Life , fro m the Cal l 
to the Color s on Throug h 
the Trainin g Camps . 
The n to th e Battl e 
Fronts and back to the 
Happ y Hom e Coming . 
TH E NEGR O HISTORICA L PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
P. O. Drawer I WASHINGTON, D. C . "U " St. Station 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 286 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
26TH ANNUA L STATEMEN T 
of 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
527 N. 2nd Street, 
Richmond, Va . 
RECEIPT S 
Jan. 1, 1919—Cash Balance 
Brought Forward $102,656.72 
Dec. 31, 1919—Annual Income 632,335.15 
Gross Receipts for 
1919 ....$734.99i-87 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec. 31, 1919—Total Disbursed during year (ineludin g investments 
made during year) $589,914.93 
Cash Balance Jan. 1, 
1920 $145,076.94 
Jan. 1, 1920—Total Assets. $452,155.36 
Jan. 1, 1920—Total Liabilities (including Capital 
Stock) 53,024.28 
Jan. 1, 1920—Surplus Fund $339,131.08 
Tota l Amoun t Pai d to 
Policyholders to Dec . 31, 
1919 $1,898,764.19 
Th e splendid achievement shown above is the result of merited confidence 
and libera l support of the people in the Goo d Ol d State c f Virginia : A Superio r 
Polic y of Protectio n issued by the Society: An d a Superior Service efficiently 
rendered by a Loya l and Conscientious set of Officers and Employees. 
W e are prou d of this Record—ou r Policyholders, our Officers and Employees. 
W e extend to each and all our sincere thanks, and pledge our utmost in Pro ­
tection, Service and Co-operation. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
527 NORT H SECOND STREE T 
RICHMOND , VIRGINIA 
OFFICER S AN D DIRECTOR S 
A . D . Price, Pres. 
Edw. Stewart, 1st Vice-Prcs. 
las. T. Carter, 2nd Vice-Pres. and Atty. 
13. A . Cephas, 3rd Vice-Pres. 
W . F. Baker, Treas. 
A . Washington 
W . E. Randolph 
Chas. N . Jackson 
B. L . Jordan, Sec. 
W . A . Jordan, Asst. Sec. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 287 
TWO GREA T BOOKS for $2.50 
NO LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y of the Negr o Rac e and Negro Soldiers In the 
Spanish-America n War , Dating Back to Egyp t and the 
Fharoas—400 pages, 60 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.26.) Wa s adopted as a textbook by North Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2) Th e Pictoria l Histor y of the Negr o in the Grea t Worl d 
War , giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood, of the Fighting Fifteenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyle r and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think , only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESS : E . A . JOHNSON , 17 West 132nd Street, New York , N.Y . 
TH E CRISI S CALENDA R FO R 192 0 
Contains 12 pages of pictures of Negro American heroes of the Great War, with medals and citations. The 
cover is a reproduction of Roscoe C. Jamison's monumental poem, "Negro Soldiers." The whole calendar 
is done in brown—beautiful, artistic, and historically valuable. 
PEIC E 50 CENT S EAC H 
TH E CRISI S 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOKK , N . Y . 
Health? Take Turkish Bath at 
Home—Only 2 Cents 
Physicians are abandoning drugs for this now 
treatment. If your mind or body is lired^ir you 
na.e rheumatism, blood, stomach, liver kidney 
and -kin troubles.open yoiirporee and feel the 
rapid change in your condition at cost of 2c a 
hath The Robinson Bath Cabinet is the only 
scientifically constructed hath cabinet ever 
" S f"r telle™.Great S2 Book Sent FREE 
'°VePhilo..,phy..flle.lth.mdB.-a...y "Write 
lodav Airents wanted ROBINSON MFG. 
CO . 1046 N. Twelfth.St... TOLEDO, OHIO 
FREE 
Real Human Hair 
FASHION BOOK 
MAILED 
UPON REQUEST 
Al l onr wigs are 
band made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS, Tran s 
formations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price J10.50 
W e carry the largest selection of Hai r Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
whic h make s the skin velvetlike , the hai r 
silklike . 
Mme.Baiim'sMail Order House 
P. O . BO X 146, 
Penn . Termina l Station, New York , N . Y . 
Whe n writing, mention this paper. 
A STUD Y IN SERVIC E ! 
First, we furnis h origina l news an d edit your New Yor k 
Cit y Negr o news colum n fur one dolla r weekly. .Second, we 
pla n nationa l campaigns for the smallest advertisers. Third , 
we have never failed a newspaper or an advertiser sinc e we 
have b€£n i n business! 
THE NEWSPAPER SERVICE BUREAU 
Fifteen telephones. 305 Broadway, New York, N. Y. 
Founded Aug. 3, 1918 Sworn Circulation, 63,0m; 
JOIN THE ARMY THAT IS READING 
THE FAVORITE MAGAZINE 
Edite d by FENTO N JOHNSO N 
Th e periodica l that is fighting to make the world safe 
for the Negro. Sixty-eight to eighty-four pages of everything 
concerning the race ; constructive editorials that both destroy 
.Southern tyranny an d advise the rac e i n the various problems, twenty pages of news, plenty of picture s an d Action, 
Inspiring verse, a woman's department, a religious department, book reviews, a children's department, reviews of 
music , art. politics, etc., social gossip from al l par's of the 
world, an d article s by the leading writers of the race. 
Finance d by Negro capita l an d read by the masses of the 
race. Agents Wante d i n Ever y Community . Writ e Now. 
Fiftee n Cents a Copy. One Dolla r a Year . 
Foreign , $1.50. 
Beginning- Apri l 1, 1920, Annua l Subscription Price , 
$1.50 a Year . Foreign . $2.00 a Year . 
POSITIVELY NO STAMPS ACCEPTED. 
OFFICE ; 3518 SOUT H STAT E ST. , CHICAGO , ILL . 
Extraordinar y Specia l Offe r 
DARKWATE R the new boo k by 
Dr . W . E . B . DuBois $2.00 
TH E CRISI S 
one year's subscription 1.50 
Tota l $3.50 
SPECIAL : 
If ordered together $3.00 
Address: 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , N . Y . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 288 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
ROLAN D W. HAYE S 
America's leadin g Negr o tenor who is soon to take his 
leave- for Europ e will give a 
SONG RECITAL at Aeolian Hall 
Thursda y Evening . Marc h 11, 1920, at S:15 
Tickets: 50c. $1.00. $1.50. Bo x seat. $2.00 each 
Ca n he purchased at 
Y . M . C . A. , 1S1 W . 135th SL , Telephone llomingsid e 7040. 
or at Bo x Office, Telephone Yanderbil t 561S 
Cleota J . Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
Recitals, includin g compo ­
sition s b y Negr o composers, 
an d short, snapp y lecture s 
o n Negr o music . You r communit y an d youn g peopl e 
wil l be musicall y inspired . 
Address: 
156 Hamilton Avenue 
COLUMBUS , OHI O 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
Critics are one In their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron Whit e and his Con. 
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." Fo r terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS . 
WILLIAM H. RICHARDSON, - Baritone 
"On e of the agreeable features of his singing was his 
distinc t enunciation. " Phili p Hal e i n Th e Bosto n Herald . 
ADDRESS : 
170 WALNUT AVENU E ROXBURY. MASS. 
E. ALDAlYlA JACKSON 
Graduat e of Institut e of Musica l Ar t 
Organist-Directo r o f Musi c o f St . Mark s M . E . 
Church ; Concer t Accompanist : Piano , Voice , 
Theory , Instruction , Conducting , Coaching . 
Harmon y taugh t from heginnin g to completion . Privat e o r correspondence . 
(Jeothiu s svstem. 
Studio : 185 W . 135th St., New York , N . Y . 
Telephon e Morningsid e 1708. 
Important Notice 
TII P increased cost of advertising 
an d the trebled cost of raw ma ­
terial compe l us to raise the 
pric e of our busts or close our 
studio. 
Busts of Bnoke r T . Washington , 
Fre d Doujrlass, Pau l Laurenc e 
Dunbar . Bisho p Richar d Allen . 
$2.00 each Four busts, $7.00 
Agents a rile tor null) terms at once. 
TH E ISAA C HATHAWA Y 
AR T COMPAN Y 
718 S. Hickory St.. Pine Bluff, Ark. 
The Greater Invincible Concert Cohig h CLASS ENTERTAINERS 
EDMONIA MACKEY , Coloratura Soprano 
CAULYNE MOSELY , Soprano and Reader 
T. W. LANGSTON , Violinist and Baritone Soloist 
Churches Schools Lodges Y. M . C. A.'S 
For dates and terms write: 
1910 E . 24th Street, Kansas City, Mo . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L . JONES, Pre* . 
N . E . Cor . 8th an d Plu m Stt. , Cincinnati , Ohi o 
Telephone, Baring TT94 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Phonograph Records of our Foremost Negro Artists 
Now Ready and on Sale 
No. I. "GO DOWN MOSES. " Baritone Solo, composed and 
sung by HARRY T. BURLEIGH . 
No. 2, "VILLANELLE. " Soprano Solo, sung by FLORENC 7 
COLE-TALBERT . 
No. 3, "CRADL E SONG. " Violin Solo, composed and played 
by CLARENC E CAMERON WHITE. 
Price 51.25 each, and 25c extra for mailing, packing 
and insurance. 
BROOME SPECIAL PHONOGRAP H RECORD S 
23 Clayto n Ave. , Medford , Mass. 
Send name' and address for illustrated catalog. 
Tel . 5437 For t Hil l Cabl e Address , Epbc n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
84 School Street Boston, Mass . 
Telephone Connection 
Patents secure d o n eas y term s 
Write for particular! . 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave.. N. W „ Washington. D. C . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS , TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 289 
TH E BIG DRIVE IS ON! 
ORCHARDVILLE LOTS GOING FAST 
If you want any while you can get them at the introductory price of only 
$49.5 0 
ON VERY EASY TERMS —YOU MUST ACT QUICKLY 
HER E IS YOU R OPPORTUNIT Y T O TAK E 
ADVANTAG E O F TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LO T OFFE R EVE R MADE . PEOPL E FRO M 
AL L OVE R TH E COUNTR Y AR E SECURIN G 
THES E LOT S AN D TH E DEMAN D FO R 
THE M IS INCREASIN G B Y LEAP S AN1 J 
BOUNDS . 
Orchardville is located in a HIG H GRAD E 
FRUI T GROWIN G REGIO N and is to be developed into a BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CITY . 
Each lot will have FIV E HIG H GRAD E FRUI T 
TREE S PLANTE D O N IT. also a BEAUTIFU L 
SHAD E TREE , and will be cultivated and taken 
care of by us for FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T 
EXTR A COS T T O YOU . When the trees come 
into commercial bearing they should earn you 
EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RETURN S O N YOU R 
INVESTMEN T WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N 
YOU R PART . 
The lots are sized 30 x 144 feet and have plenty 
of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, 
etc., besides the room taken up by the fruit trees. 
Each lot is guaranteed to be high and dry under 
a MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , and the cdntract you get gives you the very protection you 
might want. 
The price of the lots is only $49.50 each and the 
terms are only $6.00 down and $3.00 a month. 
Smaller terms on two or more lots. N O INTER ­
ES T A T AN Y TIME . 
TH E TITL E T O TH E PROPERT Y IS AB ­
SOLUTEL Y CLEA R AN D IS CONVEYE D T O 
YO U B Y A WARRANT Y DEE D WITHOU T 
EXTR A COST . 
Our beautiful pamphlet gives you all the details 
of the offer and tells you how to secure your 
lots. Simply write your name and address on 
the coupon below and mail it to us RIGH T 
AWAY . As soon as we receive it we will mail 
you the pamphlet and a booklet containing some 
interesting views and testimonial letters without 
any obligation to you. 
BU T YO U MUS T AC T QUICKL Y BECAUS E 
TH E LOT S AR E GOIN G FAS T TH E SUP ­
PL Y IS VER Y LIMITE D AN D IT IS A CAS E 
O F FIRS T COME—FIRS T SERVED . Mail the 
coupon TODAY . 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
19 SOUT H L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL. 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
Chicago, 111. 
Date 19 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in your Orchardvill e lot offer and would like to secure one of your 
pamphlets and booklets without any obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town State 
C-3-20 
Mention TH E CRISIS, 290 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
What 
Two 
Men Did! 
Nothing so particularly unusual: 
—nothing that hasn't been done before;—nothing YO U can't do it you 
have the same amount of determination and are a hustler. 
Both Mr . Whiteside and Mr . Pasko are 
ministers; with them, as with thousands of 
others, living costs grew faster than their 
salaries. In looking around for some dignified, 
well-paying proposition with which to solve the costof-living problem, each saw that the sale of the Robinson Folding Bath Tub possessed great possibilities. 
Mr. Pasko had used one of the tubs for 15 years and 
knew its worth and durability. 
If you want to know what determination and hustle will 
do when applied to the sale of a meritorious article, just read 
these letters. From all over the United States and Canada, letters like these are coming to us,—letters telling of the success 
of Robinson Representatives. 
$2,000 T O $5,000 YEARL Y 
Carberry. Man. , Canada. 
"I lik e selling your tubs because 
they SELL . Al l you have to do is 
to show them ami if people have 
nothing of that kind they wil l buy 
at once without persuasion. 
My record is fif'een in one day. 
I also like to sell them because 
of the perfect satisfaction they give. 
Have so!d over 300 and have yet to 
bear the first complaint 
Yours sincerely. 
R. II WHITE' S IDE.' -
X o matter where yon live—in 
town or country. In the mountains 
or on the prairie ; whether your 
home he a mansion or a cottage, 
a tent or a cabin, the Robinson 
Foldin g Rath Tub makes home 
bathing easy, convenient, pleasanl 
and comfortable, It provides all 
the comforts ami advantages of a 
modern bath room—gives you a 
refreshing and invigorating bath 
you can enjoy at any time. 
The Robinson Foldin g Rath Tub 
makes ail plumbing and sewer connections unnecessary. Take your 
—is an ordinary record for Rob ­
inson Representatives. Neither 
Mr. Whiteside nor Mr. Tasko 
seem to consider their records out 
of the ordinary, but, rather, easily possible for you to duplicate 
—or even exceed—if you wil l 
apply yourself. Robinson Representatives are really i n business 
for themselves, doing business on 
our capital. 
MAKE S EVER Y 
HOME MODERN 
hath in any room you choose—a 
warm room in winter, a cool room 
i n summer — without damage to 
nigs, carpets or surrounding furniture. The Tub is soft and pliable 
and pleasant to the touch of the 
body. X o cold, clammy iron or 
porcelain to touch the body. Tub 
is non-leakable. cannot tip nor 
spill. Entire weight of water and 
occupant rests on floor. Easil y 
filled." quickl y emptied. Tub 
weighs hut 15 pounds and can be 
folded and placed in a corner, 
under the bed or in a closet. 
REPRESENTA TIVES WANTED 
Representatives say the Robinson Tub is the best selling article thev ever 
handled. The field is unlimited. Full y 70<~( cf homes are without 
bathrooms. The Itobinson Tub meets the requirement at reasonable cost. 
Woodcott made $7CI in three days. Zeipen ?>-.". in two days, Rev. Whiteside 
i?7"> in one day. Hundreds of other representatives are doing as well—• 
and some of them have been doing it for several years. This is your 
cha-ice to get into a business without competition—grasp i t We havo a 
proposition far you—Ask for it 
TODAY . 
Wilson . N . Y . 
"Whe n the "high cost of living* 
made it necessary for me to look 
about for some way whereby I 
might 'piece out' my limite d salary 
as a preacher. I thought of the 
possibilities of this tub. 
I made arrangements to take 
some orders, and my success was 
preater than I had anticipated. 
Those who bought tubs were delighted with them and advised 
friends to purchase. Orders came 
by mail and 'phone and people 
came to my home to see and purchase. I found it worth while to 
ask to have my territory enlarged 
so that I now have five counties 
and act as Distric t Manager. 
Only a few days ago. after 4 
V. Rf., I sold five tubs, and it is a 
frequent occurrence to sell three 
and four tubs per day. whil e I 
have sold as many as seven. 
Tli rough the country districts 
Dearly all farmers feel the need of 
a bath tub in the home, and it 
makes it easy to introduce such a 
one as this. 
The work of selling is very 
pleasant, especially when you feel 
that you have a good reliable Company back of you. Common sense 
wil l tell you I find it profitable. 
Sincerely yours 
W. J. PASKO. " 
Hundreds of user s 
whole- hearted ly recommend the Robinson Tub. 
Write us for name of 
your nearest Robinson 
Representative. 
The Robinson Cabinet Mfg . Co . 
H . S . ROBINSON , President 
5185 Factories Building, Toledo, Ohio 
Th e Robinson 
Tub is positively 
guarantee d 
against defective 
materials an d 
faulty workmanship for a period 
of ten years. 
THIS SHOWS 
TU B FOLDED 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 291 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it tor you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United Stales 
Not an Ordinary Dentljrlce but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "COLD" 
In the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth and Preventing Decay. 
WOMEN. MEN , BOYS, GIRLS 
JOBS-GOO D JOB S 
ARE WAITING FOR YOU 
Phones: Open 
Drexel 98, 194, 1281 Evenings 
4702 S. State St. Chicago, 111. 
THE WHITELAW HOTEL 
JOH N W LEWIS . PRES . 
13th and Tea Streets, N.W. 
Washington, D. C. 
Appointments Unexcelled 
Kates $1.00 and Up per Day. 
WM. D.NIXON, Manager. 
SPECIAL 
The CRISIS one year .. . $1.50 
The BROWNIES' BOO K one year - 1.50 
One year's subscription to each if ordered 
together - - - - - $2.50 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The moB i wonderfully Ideal spot where young *od 
old cast aside for the time all the caree and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives sod 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In al l her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries r 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency T 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do thingur 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- 4 
ments of the time! Surely I * 
Then you will be interested in, and want to 
own e lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan, ir you act at once you can secure a beautiful lot for only ISfi.eO each; 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bidg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, III. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 292 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TWO GREAT NEGRO BOOKS 
Emmett J . Scott's 
War History 
( A Few Interesting Chapters.) 
Colored Officers and How They Were Trained. 
Treatment of Negro Soldiers i n Camp. 
The Negro Combat Division. 
Negro Soldiers Overseas. 
Negro Heroes of the War. 
Negro Soldier as a Fighter. 
The Spirit of the Negro at the Front. 
Negro Musi c That Stirred France. 
When the Boys Came Home. 
German Propaganda Among the Negroes. 
What the Negro Got Out of the War. 
The 38 chapters are interesting and instructive. There are 600 pages, size 7x 9 inches; 
nrice $2.90. 
Emmett J. Seott, Author 
744 Pages—100 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 50 Pages oi 
other appropriate and interesting pictures. 
THE KELLY MILLER HISTORY 
OF THE WORLD WAR 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The 
author takes up the Great Conflict, following 
it step by step through the thirty excellent 
chapters, including the Terms of Peace. 
The Negro's Wa r for Democratization—He 
braces Himself and Claims to be the Champion 
of Democracy—Enters the Arena of Combat! 
The German Indigent—The South Sensitive— 
The North Quizzical—The Whol e Worl d Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau 
Thierry—He Helps Hur l Back the Hordes of 
the Hun—Win s His Place and Right to a 
Voic e i n the Affairs of Mankin d against Prejudice, Ridicule, Race Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstaclesl 
The book is bound1 i n durable cloth, with 
substantial head band, price $2.50. In Ful l 
Kerotol Morocco, $3.50. Copy mailed to any 
address upon receipt of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Author 
AGENTS 
MAKING 
$60.00 
Per Week 
We Want 
You 
To Act In 
Your 
County 
Ask For 
Catalog 
of 
160 Books 
It Is FREE 
Dear Header—We have sold more of these great hooks than have been sold by all other 
publishers and jobbers. If you wish to sell books, send 15 cents in stamps for one prospectus, or send 30 cents and we will mail both of them. Millions of these books are being sold, 
BI G MONE Y is being made by our SALES PEOPLE. Will you join us in the distribution 
of good helpful race books? 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO . 523 9th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . STATE ST. STYLES 
TAILORED - TO - MEASURE 
At Agent's Inside Wholesale Prices 
New Fall and Winter Sample Book Now Ready 
SENT FREE Bigger Samples 
Mor e Fabric s 
Additional Styles With Inside Wholesale Prices to Agents 
Styles and Samples to please every taste, 
to look well on every age and build. 
Greater cash prof its to agents 
Even if you don't want to be our Agent in your spare 
time, be sure to get our new FREE offer and learn how 
we save you one-half on your own clothes. 
TAILORING AGENTS—Be sure to write and 
get our new deal with Bigger Profits, 
Better Attention and Prompt Shipments. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO. 
Oept 290, Chicago, ILL. 
AMAZING 
CASH PROFITS 
are being made in 
the delightful 
AGENCY 
TAILORING 
BUSINESS 
Why Don't YOU 
Get into iheeame? 
YOU BET I WAN T THA T 
New SAMPLE BOOK 
please send it to me FREE 
and PREPAID. Here is my address 
Name 
R.F.D Box Postoffice 
Street & No State 
Fill in name and address plainly—and mail AT ONCE 
If you can't be our Agent In spare time, please hand this to some ambitious fellow 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Co., Dept. 290, Chicago, 111. NIL E QUEE N 
PREPARATIONS 
for Hair and Skin 
TH E WORLD'S BEST 
Special money-making offer for live, hustling 
agents who wish to represent a high class line. 
Kashmir Chemical Co. 
Dept. K. , 312 So. Clark St., Chicago, 111. 