The Easter 
Crisis 
APRIL.19I7 10 CENTS A COPY 
W. M. Farrow President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H . GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYN E HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E . MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executiv e Officers 
DR . J . E . SPINGARN , Chairma n of Boar d 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasure r 
DR . W . E . B. D U BOIS . Directo r of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretar y 
JAME S W ELDO N JOHNSON , Fiel d Secretar y 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicag o 
JANE ADDAMS 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOUD 
BUTLER R. WILSON 
Baltimor e 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
DR. F. N. CARDOZO 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV. G. R. WALLER 
DIRECTOR S 
Washingto n 
PROF. GEO. WILLIAM COOK 
Brookly n 
DR. V. MORTON JONES 
DR. O. M. WALLE R 
Ne w Have n 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD 
Philadelphi a 
DR. WILLIAM A. SINCLAIR 
Ne w Yor k 
REV. HUTCHINS C. BISHOP 
MRS. FLORENCE KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADAY 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 
ARTHU R B. SPINGARN 
CHARLES H. STUDIN 
DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
LILLIAN D . WAL D 
WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLING 
The fight for 1917 is to be against 
DISFRANCHISEMEN T and JI M CRO W CARS . 
If this is your fight, join and support us. 
Date , 1917. 
Membership Blank 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fift h Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
$ City and State 
Mention T1 1 CRISIS THE CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE . A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . 
BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the National Association for th« Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for April, 1917 
PICTURE S 
Page 
COVER . Design by W. M. Farrow. 
TH E MYRTILL A MINER NORMA L SCHOOL, WASHINGTON, D. C 279 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 282 
ARTICLE S 
TH E DAWN'S AWAKE ! Poem. By Otto Leland Bohanan 271 
IN TH E STILL NIGHT. A Poem. By Leslie Pinckney Hill 271 
"THER E WA S ONE TIME. " A Story. By Jessie Fauset. Parts I to III.. . 272 
TH E MYRTILL A MINER NORMA L SCHOOL. By George D. Jenifer 278 
DEPARTMENT S 
EDITORIAL 267 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 281 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 284 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 286 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 287 
TH E HORIZON 293 
THE CRISIS for May 
The Ma y CRISI S will contain the conclusion of Jessie Fauset's striking novelette. 
A southern white man will write of "The Ma n Wh o Never Sold A n Acre. " 
Ther e will be poems by Bohanan and Cotter, and the Queen of Ma y will dance on the cover. 
TEN CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often ,is desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 264 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to he felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M . C. A . and Y . W. C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E 
DEPARTMENT . 
A HIG H STANDAR D COLLEG E DEPARTMEN T has now been established. 
Vie aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School Ter m Opene d Oct. 4, 1916 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL DURHAM , N. C. 
The A. & T. Summer 
School 
Eighteent h Annua l Session begins June 25, 1917, and continues 
five weeks. Tw o weeks Institute also. 
Growin g older, better and 
stronger. Last summe r applica ­
tions greatly exceeded capacity. 
Teachers, therefore, should send 
Registratio n Fee and secure 
lodgin g in advance. 
Fo r terms, catalog or other 
information, address 
President J. B . Dudley , 
Agricultura l & Technica l College, 
Greensboro, N . C. 
TH E CHEYNE Y TRAINING 
SCHOOL FO R TEACHER S 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
Fo r reasonably matur e students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regula r ter m in academi c 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physica l training , elementar y school methods, 
wood and meta l working , and agriculture . 
Boar d and laundr y privilege s for the year 
$100. Fal l term begins Wednesday , Septembe r 19, 1917. 
Th e Summe r School for Teachers, from 
Jul y 5 to August 2 inclusive , wil l this year 
offer primar y methods, English , mathematics, 
history, civic s and geography, plai n sewing 
and dressmaking , raffia work and basketry, 
art needle work, cookery, wood and meta l 
working , physica l training , and gardening . 
Dormitor y space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
Fo r furthe r information writ e to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL . 
Principal . 
Mention TH E Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 2cr. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , CA . 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Began September 21, 1916 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La . 
Situated on the mai n thoroughfar e of the 
largest ci»y of the South. 
Thoroug h trainin g in Hig h School, Teachers' Course and College, with special work 
in. Musi c and Manua l Training . 
Teacher s represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
country. 
Fo r ful l information, address 
J . T. Cater , Registrar . 
TOUGALO O COLLEG E 
MISSISSIPP I 
"Th e best school for Negroe s in the State"— 
Bishop Theodor e It. Bratton . 
COLLEG E 
Regula r Fou r Yea r A . B . Course 
Tw o Yea r Teache r Trainin g Course 
ACADEM Y 
Choice of Seven Courses^—College Preparatory , 
Agricultural , Mechanical, Hom e Economics, 
Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical . 
Out in the country. Expense s low. 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
Tougaloo, Hind s County, Mississippi. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FIS K UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1666 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
.-High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta. Ga. 
Co-Educationa l 
Th e largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training , Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began Sept. 28th, 1916. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHO P J . B. FLIPPER , Chairma n Truste e Board . 
Mention The CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"FIFT Y YEAR S O F MEMORABL E HISTORY " | 
TALLADEG A COLLEG E 
REV. F. A. SUMNER. M . A. , President W 
600 students, 40 teachers, 800 acres of land, 20 buildings, electric |j 
lights, steam heat, hot and cold water, steam laundry, single beds, good 1 
board. | 
Biological, chemical, physical and agricultural laboratories, library of | 
16,000 volumes, athletic field, modern hospital. ; 
Special features: Moderate expense, high standards, high-grade instruction, 
Courses based on Carnegie standards: B.A. degree for courses in 
Conservatory of Music, Preparatory, Domestic Science, Domestic Arts, • 
Agriculture, Bible Institute, Nurse Training, the Industries. == 
Graduates prominent in varied activities, and accepted for p
For catalog and information address 1 
L . T . LARSEN , Dean Room 21, The College Talladega, Alabama | 
I THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE | 
Tallahassee, Florida I 
I Offers long and short courses in 1 
1 Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, | 
j in Agriculture, in Education and in 1 
I Science, I 
For Catalog Address I 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P . O . DRAWE R 524 | 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
609 N . 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Fou r years Academy or High, School. 
Five years Norma l Course. 
Two years Pre-Medical Course. 
Fou r years College (A . B.) Course. 
$75 to $125 pays necessary expenses for a year. 
Harr y Andrews King , President. 
ROLAN D W . HAYES , Teno r 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Opel's 
"A n unusually good voice. Th e natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Haye s sings freely and with good £ 
taste."—Philip Hale , in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address : 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON , MASS . 
Stenography Typewritin g Book-keeping 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A . B . C . 
3. Brie f Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
W e typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circula r Letters cheap. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President 
1227 SO. 17T H STREET , PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
MME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L O F 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailorin g and MillineryBridges System. 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying , Draping, 
Making , Trimming , Finishing , Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or mor e or to one student 
taking two or mor e consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridge s Diploma means 
something to you. 
448 E . 35th St. Chicago, 111. 
TH E COLORE D TEACHE R 
Will appeal to 
PARENT S as well as TEACHER S 
through a forthcoming series of articles on 
Vocational Guidance for Colored Youth 
$1 per year, 1 0 cents per copy. Agents wanted. 
THE COLORED TEACHER, Box 22, Wilberforce, Ohio 
TEACHER S A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Mary ­
land, Mississippi. Missouri, New York . North Carolina, Ohio , Oklahoma , Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina , Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a and West 
Virginia . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1408 New Yor k Avenu e Washington, D . C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 13—No. 6 APRIL, 1917 Whole No. 78 
Editorial 
DAWN 
The mills of the Gods grind 
slowly but they never cease." 
In the words of a wise man, 
"This universe is moral and 
eternally rejects that which is not." 
No matter how strong and wellentrenched an abuse may seem to 
be, it cannot endure. 
We are now witnessing another 
proof of this everlasting truth when 
we read in the Atlanta Constitution 
such words as these: 
"We must be fair to the Negro. 
There is no use in beating about the 
bush. We have not shown that fairness in the past nor are we showing 
it today, either in justice before the 
law, in facilities accorded for education or in other directions. * * * 
In the first place there must be no 
more mobs. Mobs and mob spirit 
must be eliminated completely, so 
completely that there will be no 
danger of recurrence. If a Negro be 
charged with crime, even if it be 
known that he is guilty, he must be 
given the same fair treatment before 
the law that is accorded to the white 
man." 
This and more of the same sort 
from the leading newspaper of 
Georgia is most encouraging, especially as it comes from the state 
which has been perhaps the foremost 
in tolerating lynch law. We have believed always that our southern fellow-citizens have hearts and consciences as tender as our own, and we 
have marvelled all the more at their 
acquiescence in cruelties and lawless 
outrages which have disgraced their 
state. We have wondered where the 
Christianity and the courage of the 
South had gone that the men who 
should be leaders in their communities have permitted the lowest elements of the people to burn and torture their fellow-men and go not only 
unwhipped of justice, but encouraged 
by the acquiescence of their better 
neighbors—that silence which proverbially "gives consent." We have 
been horrified to see the same disease 
breaking out in the North as at 
Springfield, in Illinois, and Coatesville, in 
at Turkish cruelty to Armenians and 
then turn homeward only to hide our 
heads in shame. We have wondered 
why men have tolerated cruelty to a 
human being which they would have 
execrated if it had been visited on 
a dog. 
Let us now take courage. The 
South is waking up, whether raised 
by the appeal to conscience, or as the 
Constitution admits, by the "appeal 
to the pocketbook." Men's motives 
are always mixed and will not bear 
too close scrutiny. Be the cause what 
it may, the opportunity is here and 
it is for the leaders of the South to 
say whether they will seize it and assert their civilization, or whether 
they will sink back into cowardly 
acquiescence in evil and continue to 
let their worst men put their worst 
foot foremost to the injury, primarily, of their own section but hardly less to the disgrace of our common 
country. We appeal to their con-TH E CRISI S 
sciences an d their manhood . It is 
fro m them tha t help must come. 
Fo r us wh o have lon g fought fo r 
this end, we ma y find comfort i n the 
word s o f Joh n Brigh t whe n progress 
seems slow or we gro w despondent. 
"A t the age of fifty we discove r 
tha t no t muc h is done i n a lifetime , 
an d yet, tha t notwithstandin g al l the 
immeasurabl e ignoranc e an d stupid ­
it y o f the majorit y o f the race, ther e 
is a gradua l an d sensible victor y 
bein g gaine d ove r barbaris m an d 
wron g of ever y kin d * * * If 
we can't wi n as fast as w e wish , we 
kno w tha t ou r opponents can't i n the 
lon g ru n wi n a t all. " 
The daw n is breaking . Le t us 
hasten the day. 
MOORFIEL D STOREY . 
THI S WORL D 
WE see an impoten t govern ­
ment : a Presiden t reassuming office to whic h he 
has been elected b y frau d 
an d disfranchisemen t i n the Rotte n 
Borough s o f the South ; dumb as to 
the lawlessness of tha t South , because o f its politica l power; waxin g 
angr y at a Senate whic h represents 
entrenched Privileg e an d concentrate d Wealth , leavened b y a lump 
(Allah , be merciful!) composed of 
Penrose , LaFollette , an d Vardaman ; 
a Congress fighting fo r "pork " an d 
misrepresentin g its ow n decencies; a 
valian t natio n too cowardl y to stop 
lynching , too greedy to stop theft, 
semi-conscious, at crossed purpose s 
wit h itself, a frightfu l joke , choked 
wit h traged y an d bi g wit h pale promises unfulfilled. An d yet, wit h all, 
our countr y an d the lan d of our 
dreams. O n lan d an d sea the 
Devil's dance proceeds wit h eve r nim ­
ble r feet, pilin g up murde r an d hatre d 
an d poverty ; tyin g tighte r about the 
frai l necks o f children's childre n the 
rope o f the good Go d Interest an d 
Dividend . Le t the holocaust so 
scourge Europ e tha t the rest o f the 
worl d ma y get a chanc e to breathe . 
Across the gloom this gleam o f 
light : increase d nationa l ai d to. educatio n ; not onl y agricultura l bu t no w 
vocationa l trainin g receive s meage r 
subvention . I n time , w e ma y get 
sense enoug h to help a fe w o f our ig ­
noran t millions, whit e an d black , to 
lear n to rea d an d write . 
TH E SOUT H 
ONE feels the groun d swel l an d 
the restless, persisten t motio n ; littl e ne w sky-scrapers 
ris e suddenl y lik e warts i n 
ittl e cities; "Suburba n developments " 
crow n bar e hills; me n are beginnin g 
to hurr y around ; an d throug h al l and 
wit h al l ar e nervou s blac k folk,' work ­
ing , saving , migrating , protesting , or 
sullenl y viewin g the lan d wit h great, 
sad eyes, o r swaggerin g bravado . A n 
empir e is buildin g her e bu t the build ­
in g stones ar e ye t as unshape d an d 
bloody as eve r wen t to the makin g of 
an y crue l an d short-live d garde n of 
Babylon . 
ATLANT A 
ATLANT A sits o n Seve n Hills, 
bu t the people wh o have 
mad e blood mone y out of 
Coco-Col a hav e added an 
eighth , Drui d Hill : a moder n subur b 
done modernwise . Th e Atlant a ric h 
have wrun g cit y taxe s out o f poor 
black s an d poo r white s an d then 
squandered wealt h to la y mil e on mil e 
o f beautifu l boulevar d throug h silent 
an d empt y forests wit h mil e on mil e 
o f nine-inc h wate r main s an d sewers 
o f latest design , whil e her e an d ther e 
ris e grudgingl y the spreadin g castles 
o f the Sudde n Rich ; but i n the city's 
heart, i n the ruts o f the Seve n Hills, 
the childre n sicke n an d die, because 
there is no cit y water, an d five thou ­
san d blac k childre n sit i n the streets, 
fo r ther e are no seats i n the schools. 
Onl y a singl e ne w colore d schoolhouse 
fo r thirt y years, no colored library , 
but on the porta l o f the whit e library , 
donated b y a millionaire , this speakin g inscription : EDITORIAL .260 
"Aesop , Homer, Virgil , Carnegie , 
Dante , Milton , Poe. " 
Yet , the youn g me n of Atlant a are 
strong ; the white s ar e stron g an d 
blatant, but the black s are stron g an d 
silent ; college-bred, clean-cut, un ­
flinching ; their college club is no w the 
onl y "universit y club " i n the city , for 
the whit e club die d wit h the crucifixion o f Le o Frank . 
MOREHOUSE 
ATLANT A cannot be lost so 
lon g as on he r Seven Hills sit 
lamp s lik e Atlant a University an d Morehous e College . 
Morehouse , unde r Joh n Hope , celebrates its fiftieth jubilee , wit h 
thoughtfu l conference an d song. 
Hereafter, this college must be counted amon g the majo r colored institu ­
tions: wit h a college of seventy men, 
carefull y selected; wit h the best athleti c recor d o f the colored country ; 
wit h a president an d facult y whose 
silent an d efficient team wor k make s 
a college spiri t unsurpasse d i n the 
South . 
AUGUST A 
THER E is fighting i n Augusta , 
a Littl e Battl e i n the Dark ; 
a lone, littl e blac k woma n 
wagin g war, no t onl y against 
entrenched prejudic e (the kin d tha t 
keeps thre e thousan d colored school 
childre n out o f school), but also wit h 
traitors an d hypocrite s i n he r own 
race ; me n wh o kno w ho w to wor k 
whit e tourists fo r tid y sums, b y 
cringin g an d kowtowing . Yet , Luc y 
Lane y triumphs, even whe n he r 
school is poo r an d half-equipped. It 
is no pretense o f a school, wit h dishwashin g substituted fo r English , but 
a home an d center o f learning . Th e 
founde r an d principa l is brav e an d 
wholehearte d an d has buil t he r wor k 
into the hearts o f thousands o f people. 
CHARLESTO N 
HERE is a subtle flavor of Ol d 
Worl d things, a littl e hus h 
i n the whir l o f America n doing . Betwee n he r guardia n 
rivers an d lookin g across the sea towar d Afric a sits this littl e Ol d Lad y 
(her cheek teasingl y tinge d to every 
tantalizin g shade of the darke r blood) 
wit h he r shoulde r eve r towar d the 
street an d he r littl e laced an d rust y 
fa n beside he r cheek, whil e lon g verandas of he r soul stretch dow n the 
.backyar d into slavery . 
He r whit e aristocrats, perched lik e 
solemn owls about the Dea d Se a o f 
the "Ba—attery, " look too portentous 
to be true , an d mak e the visito r inevitabl y thin k o f the good soli d ware ­
houses whic h they crow d out, an d the 
healthful suburbs whic h they spoil 
wit h phosphates. 
Colore d Charlesto n is altogethe r 
lovabl e wit h he r color tints, he r inde ­
scribabl e "a's, " an d he r perfec t hospilt
beautifu l audience i n the beautifu l 
Centenar y Church ; the two bus y 
youn g merchants wit h their limou ­
sines an d sisters; the grav e of Calhoun, 
seen o f a golden morning ; the suppe r 
i n the artist's Uppe r Room ; an d the 
talkin g o f Tommy . 
Might y ar e the churche s of colored 
Charleston . I di d them i n rythy m on 
a grea t blue day. I n the first, the tal l 
black preache r beat upo n his audience 
wit h skillfu l repetitions, whic h alone 
meant little , bu t his hearers surged 
arid bowed, as swept b y an unseen 
wind , an d one slim black woma n 
whirle d an d screamed, wit h outstretched arms. The n w e turne d to 
old St. Marks, to light, softened wit h 
the souls o f fathers an d grandfather;, 
wh o kne w Cat o of Stono, an d Den ­
mar k Vesey, an d wher e prou d dar k 
freedmen have worshipe d fo r tw o centuries. Th e hesitant priest intoned 
wit h bell an d candle, but behin d him , 
somehow, I could not forge t tha t Go d 
i n the stained-glass windo w wa s al l 
too evidentl y a bearded whit e man . 
Finally , we rested i n the quie t reason 
o f Plymout h Churc h an d saw the 
crowd s streamin g out o f Zion , an d 27 0 TH E CRISIS 
the n agai n looked bac k throug h these 
grea t churche s to the whit e towe r of 
St. Michaels, toppin g a churc h o f an ­
othe r an d seemingl y lesser worl d 
wher e a slave once di d the deed o f a 
man . 
AWAK E 
OF al l the cities i n the South , 
Charlesto n is guilt y o f the 
meanest act towar d colored 
folks. It keeps i n their 
schools whit e teachers, teachers wh o 
do no t wan t to be there ; teachers wh o 
despise their wor k an d wh o wor k 
mainl y fo r the mone y whic h it bring s 
them. Thes e teachers are Souther n 
white s an d they are teachin g littl e 
colored children , doin g the wor k me ­
chanicall y an d wit h a cruelt y o f disciplin e tha t is shameful. Openl y an d 
persistentl y the whit e cit y give s tw o 
an d onl y tw o reasons fo r keepin g up 
this farce : first, tha t they wan t to 
teach blac k fol k their place ; and , secondly, tha t they wan t to suppl y certai n whit e people wit h employment. 
Th e colored people of Charlesto n 
have stood this lon g enough. The y 
should awak e an d stop it. The y 
shoul d tell the whit e people gently, 
but firmly , tha t unde r present conditions to have southern whit e people 
teachin g colored childre n is as incon ­
gruou s as it woul d be to have Turk s 
teachin g Armenians. Colore d Charleston should registe r an d vote an d g
ri d of this abomination . Ther e are 
mor e colored taxpayers i n Charlesto n 
tha n white . Ther e are hundred s o f 
colored voters wh o could register, petition , vote an d then, i f need be, strik e 
an d let ever y colored chil d stay at 
home unti l teachers wer e installe d 
wh o believed them huma n beings. 
TH E PERPETUA L DILEMMA 
WE Negroe s ever face it. 
W e cannot escape it. 
W e must continuall y 
choose between insult an d 
injury : no schools o r separate 
schools; no trave l o r "Ji m Crow " 
travel ; home s wit h disdainfu l neigh ­
bors o r homes i n slums. 
W e continuall y submi t to segregated schools, "Ji m Crow " cars, an d 
isolation , because it woul d be suicide 
to go uneducated, sta y at home , an d 
liv e i n the "tenderloin. " 
Yet , whe n a ne w alternativ e o f such 
choice faces us it comes wit h a shock 
an d almost withou t thinkin g w e rai l 
at the one wh o advise s the lesser of 
tw o evils. 
Thu s it wa s wit h man y hast y editors i n the case o f the trainin g camp 
fo r Negr o officers whic h Dr . J . E . 
Spingar n is seekin g to establish. 
Doe s Dr . Spingar n believe i n a 
"Ji m Crow " trainin g camp ? Certai
to induc e the governmen t to admi t 
Negroe s to al l trainin g camps. 
Th e governmen t ha s so fa r courteously refused. 
Bu t wa r is imminent . 
I f wa r comes to-morro w Negroe s 
wil l be compelled to enlist unde r white 
officers because (save i n a ver y few 
cases) no Negroe s have ha d the requisite training . 
W e must choose the n betwee n the 
insult of a separat e camp an d the irreparabl e injur y o f strengthenin g the 
present custom o f puttin g no blac k 
me n i n positions o f authority . 
Ou r choice is as clea r as noonday . 
Giv e us the camp . 
Le t not 200, bu t 2,000, volunteer. 
W e di d not mak e the damnabl e di ­
lemma . 
Ou r enemies mad e that. 
W e must mak e the choice else we 
pla y int o their ver y claws. 
It is a case o f camp o r no officers. 
Giv e us the officers. 
Giv e us the camp . 
A wor d to those wh o object: 
1. Th e arm y does not wis h this 
camp. It wishe s the projec t to fail . 
Genera l Woo d refuses to name date 
o r place unti l 200 apply . Th e reason 
is obvious. U p to Marc h 8, sixty -
nin e me n have applied . I N TH E STIL L NIGH T 27 1 
2. Th e camp is a temporar y measur e lastin g fou r weeks an d designed 
to FIGHT , no t encourage discrimina ­
tio n i n the army . Th e Ne w Yor k 
Negr o regimen t could no t find enough 
qualified Negroe s fo r its commissions. 
W e wan t traine d colored officers. 
This camp wil l help furnis h them. 
3. Th e Sout h does no t wan t the 
Negr o to receive militar y trainin g of 
an y sort. Fo r tha t reason the genera l 
staff reduced its estimat e from 900,-
000 to 500,000 soldiers—the y expect 
to EXCLUD E Negroes! 
4. If wa r comes, conscriptio n wil l 
follow. Al l prett y tal k about not volunteerin g wil l become entirel y aca ­
demic . This is the mistak e made b y 
the Baltimor e AFRO-AMERICAN , 
the Chicag o DEFENDER , the Ne w 
Yor k NEWS , an d the Clevelan d GA ­
ZETTE . The y assume a choice between volunteerin g an d not volunteering . Th e choice wil l be between conscriptio n an d rebellion . 
Ca n the reade r conceive o f the possibilit y o f choice ? Th e leaders of the 
colored race wh o advis e them to ad d 
treason an d rebellio n to the othe r 
ground s on whic h the Sout h urge s 
discriminatio n against them woul d 
hardl y be doin g a servic e to those 
who m they profess to love. No , ther e 
is only one thin g to do now, an d tha t 
is to organiz e the colored people fo r 
leadership an d service , i f wa r should 
come. A thousan d commissione d 
officers o f colored blood is somethin g 
to wor k for. 
Giv e us the camp ! 
TH E DAWN' S AWAKE ! 
By OTTO LELAN D BOHANA N 
THE Dawn's awake! 
A flash of smouldering flame and fire 
Ignites the East. Then, higher, higher, 
O'er all the sky so gray, forlorn, 
The torch of gold is borne. 
The Dawn's awake! 
The dawn of a thousand dreams and 
thrills. 
An d music singing in the hills 
A paean of eternal spring 
Voices the new awakening. 
The Dawn's awake! 
Whispers of pent-up harmonies, 
With the mingled fragrance of the trees; 
Faint snatches of half-forgotten song— 
Fathers! torn and numb— 
The boon of light we craved, awaited 
long, 
Has come, has come! 
I N TH E STIL L NIGHT . 
By LESLI E PINCKNE Y HIL L 
IN the still night there comes to me 
The blessed boon of liberty. 
From all the cares that chafed and choked, 
The spirit is at last unyoked 
To seek her heaven, as she ought, 
On sturdy wings of fearless thought. 
Then come the dreams which through the 
day 
The moil of living shuts away. 
Then can the soul her fountains fill, 
While all the universe is still, 
From streams of quietness that rise 
Out of the hills of Paradise. 
And I can tell the day was meant 
For some design beneficent, 
For sweet-imagined sounds I hear 
And forms of beauty hover near 
To win me to the perfect trust 
That life is good and God is just 
And permeates His world, whereof 
The essence and the end is love. 272 TH E CRISIS 
THER E 
WAS 
ONE 
TIME! 
A Story OF 
SPRING 
B y 
JeSSIE 
FAUSET 
THERE was one time" began the 
freckled-faced boy. Miss Fetter interrupted him with emphasis—"but that 
is not idiomatic, our expression for il y 
ava.it une fois is 'once upon a time.' The 
value of a translation lies in its adequacy." 
And for the fiftieth time that term she 
launched into an explanation of the translation of idioms. The class listened with 
genial composure—the more she talked, the 
less they could read. She reached her 
peroration. "Do you understand, Master 
Reynolds?" 
The freckled-faced boy, who had been 
surreptitiously consulting his vocabulary, 
turned deftly back to the passage. "Yes'm," 
he nodded. "There was one time"—he began again unabashed. 
Miss Fetter sighed and passed on to 
another pupil. Between them all there was 
evolved in hopelessly unsympathetic English the story of a dainty F
shepherdess who growing tired of her 
ANNA . 
placid sheep left them to shift for themselves one gorgeous spring-day, donned 
her sky-blue dress, traversed the sombre 
forest and came to another country. There 
she met the prince who, struck with her 
charm and naivete, asked her to play with 
him. So she did until sunset when he 
escorted her to the edge of the forest where 
she pursued her way home to her little 
thatched cottage, with a mind much refreshed and "garlanded with pleasant 
memories." 
The pupils read, as pupils will, with 
stolid indifference. The fairy-tale was 
merely so many pages of French to them, 
as indeed it was to Miss Fetter. That she 
must teach foreign languages—always her 
special detestation—seemed to her the 
final irony of an ironic existence. 
"It's all so inadequate," she fumed to 
herself, pinning on her hat before the tin) 
mirror in the little stuffy teachers' room. 
She was old enough to have learned very "THER E WA S ON E TIME " 27 3 
thoroughly all the aphorisms of her day. 
She believed that all service performed 
honestly and thoroughly was helpful, but 
she was still too young to know that such 
was literally true and her helplessness 
irked her. See her, then, as she walked 
home through the ugly streets of Marytown, 
neither white nor black, of medium height, 
slim, nose neither good nor bad, mouth 
beautiful, teeth slightly irregular, but perfect. Altogether, when she graduated at 
eighteen from the Business High School in 
Philadelphia she was as much as any one 
else the typical American girl done over in 
brown, no fears for the future, no regrets 
for the past, rather glad to put her schoolbooks down for good and decidedly glad 
that she was no longer to be a burden on 
her parents. 
Getting a position after all was not so 
easy. Perhaps for the first time she began 
to realize the handicap of color. Her 
grade on graduation had been "meritorious." She had not shone, but neither 
had she been stupid. She had rarely volunteered to answer questions, being mostly 
occupied in dreaming, but she could answer 
when called on. If she had no self-assurance, neither had she a tendency to selfbelittlement. Her English, if not remarkable, was at least correct; her typewriting 
was really irreproachable; her spelling exact; and she had the quota of useless 
French—or German—vocabulary which 
the average pupil brings out of the average High School. Perhaps it was because she had lived all her life in a small 
up-town street in a white neighborhood 
and played with most of the boys and girls 
there, perhaps it was because at eighteen 
one is still idealistic that she answered 
advertisement after advertisement without 
apprehension. The result, of course, was 
always the same; always the faint shock of 
surprise in the would-be employer's voice, 
the faint stare, the faint emphasis—"You! 
Oh no, the position is not open to—er— 
you." A t first she did not understand, but 
even when she did she kept futilely on— 
she could not, she would not teach—and 
why does one graduate from a Business 
High School, if one is not to be employed 
by a business firm? 
That summer her father, a silent, black 
man, died and her decisions against teaching 
fled. She was not a normal school graduate, so she could not teach in Philadelphia. 
The young German drummer next door told 
her of positions to be had in colored schools 
in the South—perhaps she could teach her 
favorite stenography or drawing in which 
she really excelled. Fate at that point took 
on her most menacing aspect. Nothing 
that was not menial came her way, excepting work along lines of which she knew 
nothing. Her mother and she gave up 
the little house and the two of them went 
to service. Those two awful years gave 
Anna her first real taste of the merciless 
indifference of life. Her mother, a woman 
of nerveless and, to Anna, enviable stolidity 
found, as always, a refuge in inapt quotations of Scripture. But Anna lived in a 
fever of revolt. She spent her days as a 
waitress and her evenings in night school 
trying feverishly to learn some of those 
subjects which she might have taught, had 
she been properly prepared. A t the end 
of two years the change came carelessly, 
serenely, just as though it might always 
have happened. The son-in-law of Mrs. 
Walton, for whom she worked, passed 
through town late one night. The family 
had gone out and for want of something 
better he had, as he ate his solitary dinner, asked the rather taciturn waitress 
about her history. She had told him briefly 
and he had promised her, with equal 
brevity, a position as drawing teacher in a 
colored seminary of which he was a trustee. Anna, stunned, went with her mother 
to Maryville. Just as suddenly as it 
started, the struggle for existence was 
over, though, of course, they were still 
poor. Mrs. Fetter found plenty of plain 
sewing to do and Anna was appointed. 
But Fate, with a last malevolence, saw to 
it that she was appointed to teach History 
and French, which were just being introduced into the seminary. She thought of 
this as she opened her mother's gate,— 
the irony of the thing made her sick. 
"Since my luck was going to change, why 
couldn't I have been allowed to teach 
mechanical drawing," she wondered, "or 
given a chance at social work? But teaching French! I suppose the reason that 
little shepherdess neglected her sheep that 
day was because they were French." 
II 
Still one cannot persist in gloom when 
it is April and one is twenty-six and looks, 274 TH E CRISI S 
as only American girls, whether white or 
brown, can look, five years younger. Anna, 
hastening down the street in her best blue 
serge dress, her pretty slim feet in faultless tan shoes, felt her moodiness, which 
had almost become habitual, vanish. 
The wearing of the blue dress was accidental. She had come down to breakfast in her usual well-worn gray skirt and 
immaculate shirt-waist in time to hear her 
small cousin, Theophilus, proclaim his 
latest enterprise. A boy was going to give 
him five white mice for his pen-knife and 
he was going to bring them home right after 
school and put them in a little cage. Pretty 
soon there'd be more of them—"they have 
lots of children, Aunt Emmeline, and I'm 
going to sell them and buy Sidney Williams' 
ukulele, and"— 
"Indeed you are going to do no such 
thing," exclaimed Anna, her high good 
humor vanishing. "Mother, you won't let 
him bring those nasty things here, I know. 
As for keeping them in a cage, they'd 
be all over the house in no time." 
But Mrs. Fetter, who loved Theophilus 
because he was still a little boy and she 
could baby him, opined that foxes and birds 
had their nests. "Let's see the cage, Philly 
dear, maybe they can't get out." 
The rest had followed as the night the 
day. Theophilus, rushing from the table, 
had knocked Anna's cup of cocoa out of her 
hand and the brown liquid had run down the 
front of the immaculate blouse and settled 
in a comfortable pool in her lap. 
"Oh well," her mother had said, unmoved as usual, "run along, Anna, and put 
on your blue serge dress. It won't do 
you any harm to wear it this once and if 
you hurry you'll get to school in time just 
the same. You didn't go to do it, did you, 
Philly?" 
Theophilus, aghast, had fled to the shelter 
of his banjo from which he was extracting 
plaintive strains. He played banjo, 
guitar and piano with equal and indeed 
amazing facility, but as his musical tastes 
were surprisingly eclectic, the results were 
at times distressing. Anna, hastening out, 
a real vision now in her pretty frock, an unwonted color in her smooth bronze cheeks, 
heard him telling his aunt again about the 
ukulele which Sidney Williams owned but 
couldn't play. "It's broke. Some folks 
where his father works gave it to him. 
Betcher I'll fix it and play it, too, when I 
get hold of it," his high voice was proclaiming confidently. 
"I suppose he will,"—thought his cousin, 
"I hope that North street car won't be 
hung up this morning. He ought to make 
a fine musician, but, of course, he won't get 
a chance at it when he grows up." The 
memory of her own ironic calling stung her. 
"He'll probably have to be a farmer just because he'll hate it. I do wish I could 
walk, it's so lovely. I wish I were that 
little shepherdess off on a holiday. She 
was wearing a blue dress, I remember." 
Well, her mind leaped up to the thought. 
Why shouldn't she take a day off? In all 
these six years she had never been out 
once, except the time Theophilus had had 
the measles. The street car came up at 
this point, waited an infinitesimal second 
and clanged angrily off, as if provoked at 
its own politeness. She looked after it with 
mingled dismay and amusement. "I'd be 
late anyway," she told herself, "now that 
I've lost that car. I'll get a magazine and 
explore the Park; no one will know." 
Two hours of leisurely strolling brought 
her to Hertheimer Park, a small green enclosure at the end of the ugly little town. 
Anna picked her way past groups of nursemaids and idlers looking in newspapers for 
occupation which they hoped they would 
never find. She came at last to the little 
grove in the far side of the Park where the 
sun was not quite so high and, seating herself near the fountain, began to feed the 
squirrels with some of the crackers which 
she had bought in one of the corner groceries. 
Being alive was pretty decent after all, 
she reflected. Life was the main thing— 
teaching school, being colored, even being 
poor were only aspects, her mind went on. 
If one were just well and comfortable—not 
even rich or pampered—one could get 
along; the thing to do was to look at life 
in the large and not to gaze too closely at 
the specific interest or activity in hand. Her 
growing philosophy tickled her sense of 
humor. "Yo u didn't feel like that when 
you were at Mrs. Walton's," she told herself bluntly and smiled at her own discomfiture. "THER E WA S ON E TIME " 27 5 
"That's right, smile at me," said an oily 
voice, and she looked up to see one of the 
idlers leaning over the back of her bench. 
"You're a right good lookin' gal. How'd 
you like to take a walk with me?" 
She stared into his evil face, fascinated. 
Where, where, where were all the people? 
The nurse-maids had vanished, the readers 
of newspapers had gone—to buy afternoon 
editions, perhaps. She felt herself growingicy, paralyzed. "You needn't think I mind 
your being a nigger," went on the hateful 
voice, "I ruther like 'em. I hain't what 
you might call prejudiced." 
This was what could happen to you if you 
were a colored girl who felt like playing at 
being a French shepherdess. She looked 
around for help and exactly as though at a 
cue in a play, as though he had been waiting 
for that look a young colored man stepped 
forward, one hand courteously lifting his 
hat, the other resting carelessly in his hippocket. 
"Good afternoon, Miss Walker," he said, 
and his whole bearing exhaled courtesy. "I 
couldn't be sure it was you until you turned 
around. I'm sorry I'm late, I hope I 
haven't kept you waiting. I hope you 
weren't annoying my friend," he addressed 
the tramp pleasantly. 
But the latter, with one fascinated 
glance at that hand still immobile in that 
suggestive hip-pocket, was turning away. 
"I was jus askin' a direction," he muttered. "I'l l be going now." 
Il l 
The two young colored people stared at 
each other in silence. Anna spoke first— 
"Of course, my name isn't Walker," she 
murmured inadequately. 
They both laughed at that, she 
nervously and he weakly. The uncertain 
quality of his laughter made her eye him 
sharply. "Why, you're trembling—all 
over," she exclaimed, and then with the 
faintest curl of her lip, "you'd better sit 
down if you're as much afraid as all that," 
her mind ended. 
He did sit down, still with that noticeable 
deference, and, removing his hat, mopped 
his forehead. His hair was black and 
curly above a very pleasant brown face, 
she noted subconsciously, but her conscious 
self was saying "He was afraid, because 
he's colored." 
He seemed to read her thoughts. "I 
guess you think I'm a fine rescuer," he 
smiled at her ruefully. "You see, I'm 
just beginning to recover from an attack 
of malarial fever. That is why I pretended to have a gun. I'm afraid I 
couldn't have tackled him successfully, this 
plagued fever always leaves me so weak, 
but I'd have held him off till you had got 
away. I didn't want him to touch you, you 
seemed so nice and dainty. I'd been watching you for sometime under the trees, 
thinking how very American you were and 
all that sort of thing, and when you smiled 
it seemed to me such a bit of all right that 
you should be feeling so fit and selfconfident. When I saw the expression on 
your face change I almost wept to think I 
hadn't the strength to bash his head in. 
That was why I waited to catch your eye, 
because I didn't want to startle you and I 
didn't have strength for anything but 
diplomacy." 
She nodded, ashamed of her unkindness 
and interested already in something else. 
"Aren't you foreign?" she ventured, "You 
seem different somehow, something in the 
way you talk made me feel perhaps you 
weren't American." 
"Well I am," he informed her heartily. 
"I was born, of all places, in Camden, New 
Jersey, and if that doesn't make me American I don't know what does. But I've 
been away a long time, I must admit, that's 
why my accent sounds a little odd, I suppose. My father went to British Guiana 
when I was ten; but I got the idea that I 
wanted to see some more foreign countries, 
so when I was fifteen I ran away to England. You couldn't imagine, a girl like you, 
all the things I've seen and done, and the 
kinds of people I've known. I had such 
an insatiable thirst for adventure, a sort 
of compelling curiosity." 
He paused, plainly reminiscent. 
"I've picked up all sorts of trades in 
England and France—I love France and 
it was my stay there that made me long so 
much to get back to America. I kept the 
idea before me for years. It seemed to me 
that to live under a republican form of government, with lots of my own people 
around me, would be the finest existence in 
the world. I remember I used to tell a 
crowd of American chaps I was working 276 TH E CRISI S 
with in France about it, and they used to 
be so amused and seemed to have some sort 
of secret joke." 
Anna thought it highly probable. 
He looked at her meditating. "Yes, I 
suppose they had—from their point of view 
but not from mine. You see," he told her 
with an oddly boyish air of bestowing a 
confidence, "life as life is intensely interesting to me. I wake up every morning— 
except when I have malarial fever"—he interrupted himself whimsically—"wondering what I'll have to overcome during the 
day. An d it's different things in different environments. In this country it's 
color, for instance, in another it might be 
ignorance of the native tongue. 
"When I came back to New York I was 
a little non-plussed, I must confess, at the 
extraordinary complexes of prejudice. I 
went to a nice-looking hotel and they didn't 
want me a bit at first. Well, I pick up the 
idiom of a language very quickly and I suppose at this point my English accent and 
expression out-Englished most Englishmen's. After a bit the clerk asked where 
I hailed from and when I told him Manchester, and displayed my baggage—only 
I called it luggage—all covered with labels, 
he said 'oh, that was different,' and gave 
me a room just as right as you please. Well 
it struck me so peculiarly idiotic to refuse 
your own countryman because he is brown, 
but to take him in, though he hasn't changed 
a particle, because he hails from another 
country. But it gave me a clue." 
"Yes?" she wondered. 
"You see, it made me angry that I had 
allowed myself to take refuge under my 
foreign appearance, when what I really 
wanted to do was to wave my hat and shout, 
'I'm an American and I've come home. 
Aren't you glad to see me? If you only 
knew how proud I am to be here.' The 
disappointment and the sting of it kept me 
awake all night. And next day I went 
out and met up with some colored fellows— 
nice chaps all right—and they got me 
some rooms up in Harlem. Ever see 
Harlem?" he asked her,—"most interesting 
place, America done over in color. Well it 
was just what I wanted after Europe. 
"But it struck me there was a lack of 
self-esteem, a lack of self-appreciation, and 
a tendency to measure ourselves by false 
ideals." He was clearly on his hobby now, 
his deep-set eyes glowed, his wide, pleasant 
mouth grew firmer. 
"Your average British or French man of 
color and every Eastern man of color thinks 
no finer creature than himself ever existed. I wanted to tell our folks that there 
is nothing more supremely American than 
the colored American, nothing more madein-America, so to speak. There is no supreme court which rules absolutely that 
white is the handsomest color, that straight 
hair is the most alluring. If we could just 
realize the warmth and background which 
we supply to America, the mellowness, the 
rhythm, the music. Heavens," he broke 
off, "where does one ever hear such music 
as some of the most ordinary colored people 
can bring out of a piano?" 
Anna, thinking of Theophilus, smiled. 
"An d there's something else too," he resumed. "The cold-bloodedness which enables 
a civilized people to maim and kill in the 
Congo and on the Putumayo, or to lynch in 
Georgia, isn't in it with the simple kindliness which we find in almost any civilized 
colored man. No people has a keener, more 
rollicking humor, and the music— 
"Excuse my ranting," he begged, all 
apology, "but I get so excited about it all. 
Did you ever read any Pater?" he asked 
her abruptly. 
"No, " she told him shamefacedly—Pater 
was not included in her High School English 
since. 
He nodded indifferently. "Well, in 'The 
Child in the House,' the chap says if he 
had his way he wouldn't give very poor 
people 'the things men desire most, but the 
power to realize and taste at will a certain 
desirable, clear light in the new morning.' 
That's me," he concluded, too earnest to 
care about grammar. "I'd give us the 
power to realize how wonderful and beautiful and enduring we are in the world's 
scheme of things. I can't help but feel that 
finally a man is taken at his own estimate." 
They were silent a moment, watching a 
flock of pale, yellow butterflies waver like 
an aura over a bed of deep golden 
crocuses. 
"Have you told your views to many people?" Anna asked him a trifle shyly. His 
mood, his experiences, his whole personality "THER E WA S ON E TIME " 277 
seemed so remote from anything she had 
ever encountered. 
"No, " he told her dryly. "I haven't done 
anything. I came from New York down to 
this town to visit my aunt, my mother's 
youngest sister—she's as young as I am, by 
the way, isn't that funny? And I've had 
the malarial fever ever since. I get it 
every spring, darn it! " He ended in total 
disgust. 
"Yo u might tell me something of yourself. We'll probably never see each other 
again," he suggested lingeringly, with just 
the faintest question-mark in his voice. 
But Anna didn't catch it, she was too 
absorbed in the prospect of having some 
one with whom to discuss her perplexities. 
She launched out without a thought for 
the amazing unconventionality of the whole 
situation. "And so," she finished, "here I 
am painfully teaching French. I don't 
make enough to allow me to go to summer 
school and I don't seem to make much progress by myself." He seemed so terribly 
competent that she hated to let him know 
how stupid she was. Still, it was a relief 
to admit it. 
"I know," he comforted her. "You 
needn't feel so very bad, there are some 
things that just don't come to one. I'm 
a mechanical engineer and I can read any 
kind of plans but it worries me to death to 
have to draw them." 
"Why, I can draw," she told him—"anything." 
Their first constraint fell upon them. 
He tried to break it. "If you teach," 
he asked her, "What are you doing here? 
Wednesday isn't a holiday, is it?" 
She broke out laughing. "No, it's too 
funny! You wouldn't believe how it all 
happened"—and she told him the story of 
the little shepherdess. "An d this morning 
my little cousin spilt cocoa all over my 
school clothes and I had to put on my blue 
dress. It made me think of the little shepherdess and here I am." 
He was watching her intently. How 
charming she was with all that color in 
her face. Comely, that was the word for 
her and—wholesome. He was sure of it. 
"How did the story end?" he wondered. 
She didn't know, she told him, shamefaced 
anew at her stupidity. "You know it is so 
hard for me, every year we read a new 
book and I never get a chance to get used 
to the vocabulary. And so the night before I just get the lessons out for the next 
day. I teach six preparations, you see, 
three in history and three in French. And 
it takes me such a long time I never read 
ahead. I simply cannot get the stuff," she 
explained, much downcast. 
"I've tried awfully hard; but you know 
some people have absolutely no feeling for a 
foreign language. I'm one of them! As 
for composition work"—she shook her head 
miserably, "I have to dig for it so. The 
only thing is that I can feel whether a 
translation is adequate or not, so I don't 
mind that part of the work. But when 
we got that far in this story the head 
language teacher—crazy thing, she's always changing about—said to lay that aside 
and finish up all the grammar and then go 
back and do all the translating. I've never 
looked at the story since. Al l I know," 
she ended thoughtlessly, "is that the shepherdess played and talked with the prince 
all day and he took her to the edge of the 
forest at sunset—what's the matter?" she 
broke off. 
"You didn't tell me," he said a trifle 
breathless, "that she met a prince." 
"Didn't I? Well she did—and it's four 
o'clock and I must go. My mother will be 
wondering where I am." She held out her 
ungloved hand, shapely and sizeable and 
very comely. It took him some time to 
shake hands, but perhaps that was one of 
his foreign ways. 
She had gone and he stood staring after 
her. Then he settled back on the bench 
again, hat over his eyes, hands in his 
pockets, long legs stretched out in front 
of him. 
"Of course," he was thinking, "you can't 
say to a girl like that, 'well, if you're playing shepherdess let me play your prince?' 
Wasn't she nice, though, so fine and wholesom
Tommy was playing last night with that 
little Theophilus somebody? Oh yes,"—he 
hummed it melodiously: 
" 'I'm for you, brown-skin.' " 
(To be concluded in the May CRISIS ) TH E MYRTILLA MINER NORMAL SCHOOL 
By GEORG E D. JENIFE R 
In the Myrtill a Miner Normal School, dedicated on the twelfth of February, 1917, 
by the civil and educational authorities of 
the District of Columbia, the country possesses a unique institution. Unlike the 
average public school, it had its beginning 
in the desire of an individual to work out 
an educational ideal. Moreover, the early 
history of the school renders it distinctive 
in that it grew 
through heroic 
self - sacrifice 
and all-conquering faith in a 
high principle 
on the part of 
the founder. 
Th e ide a 
whic h th e 
Miner Normal 
Schoo l was 
founde d t o 
achieve came to 
a white woman, 
Myrtill a Miner, 
in 1836 as the 
result of a controversy with a 
Mississipp i 
plante r i n 
whose home she 
was employed. 
In her new 
work, the northern girl got her 
first experience 
with slavery at 
close quarters. 
Its brutality 
shocked her sensitive nature 
and aroused her free spirit of deep resentment against a system arrogant enough to 
subjugate a human being, body and soul. 
From a chaos of schemes to remedy the 
dread evil—some of them chimerical 
enough, as only those of the young and 
sincere can be— Miss Miner gradually 
formulated a plan to teach the unfortunate 
bondsmen in the household in which she 
was employed. It was this scheme which 
drew her into the before-mentioned discussion with her employer. 
During the heat of this debate, the girl 
began to realize clearly the futility of her 
former plan and the necessity for a solution 
shape of a project for founding in the national capitol a normal school where colored 
girls might be trained; first, in the art of 
living; next, in the science and art of 
teaching their people how to live. 
After leaving 
the South to accomplish e r 
ne w purpose, 
Miss Mine r 
sought advice 
from noted antislavery workers 
as to methods. 
Most of these, 
knowing the bitter sentim
Washington and 
having regard 
fo r the frail 
health and limited resource
the girl, advised 
her against an 
undertaking too 
great for her 
strength , as 
they supposed. 
Even the fearless and zealou
Frederic k 
Douglass sought 
to shield the 
young woman 
from what he 
knew would be 
th e inevitable 
consequences of her devotion. The young 
reformer, however, was not to be deterred from the purpose to which she 
had devoted her life. In 1851, having collected one hundred dollars, Miss Miner secured rooms for her school in a house on F 
Street, between Eighteenth and Nineteenth, 
Northwest, in the city of Washington, in 
the home of a Mrs. Duncan, a free woman 
of color. 
The first purchase of ground for the institution was made in 1853 by two Quaker 
DR . LUC Y E . MOTEN . 
No eulogy, no biography is necessary for my 
happiness either now or after I have joined the 
loved ones gone before. Give me rest and let me 
find my comfort and joy in a clean conscience and 
amidst a few loyal, congenial friends." 
278 THE MYRTILLA MINER NORMAL SCHOOL, WASHINGTON, D. C. Photo by Scurlock. 
279 280 TH E CRISI S 
gentlemen of Philadelphia, Thomas Williamson and Samuel Rhoads, who held 
estate in trust for the school. A plot of 
about three acres situated between New 
Hampshire Avenue and N Street, Nineteenth and Twentieth Streets, was secured 
for $4,300. By 1856 the estate was clear 
from debt, through the liberality of friends. 
Harriett Beecher Stowe gave $1,000 from 
the sale of Uncle Tom's Cabin; the Society 
of Friends generously contributed to the 
purchase fund and many others gave liberally. 
In 1857 the trustees decided to enlarge 
the work of the Miner Normal School, and 
a subscription to raise $20,000 for a new 
building was started. The school was now 
to educate free colored people from the 
District of Columbia and the adjoining 
states. The capacity was to be 150. The 
curriculum was to include the higher 
branches of study. Several New York 
clergymen, under the leadership of Henry 
Ward Beecher, and some clergymen of Boston, inspired by Edward Everett Hale, 
pledged their congregations to contribute 
$1,000 apiece. 
In 1860, Miss Miner, utterly prostrated 
by the bitterness of feeling aroused by her 
work just before the outbreak of the Civil 
War, closed the school and went to California for a well-earned rest. The institution did not open again until several years 
later. 
Miss Miner returned to her work after 
the war, but soon died. Her school, after 
temporary union with Howard University, 
was removed to a new building at P and Q 
streets where eventually Miss Martha 
Briggs, the first colore! principal, served 
from 1879 to 1883, and the institution was 
incorporated into the public school system. 
In 1883 Miss Lucy E . Moten, the present Principal of Miner Normal School, was 
appointed to succeed Miss Briggs. 
Carefully raised in one of the most conservative homes in Washington, Miss Moten 
received ideals of culture in the social chaos 
of the Reconstruction Period. She was 
tutored for college by the late Professor 
James Gregory of Howard University. Acting upon the advice of Charles Sumner, 
Miss Moten's father sent her to the normal 
school at Salem, Mass., for education as a 
teacher. In addition to the excellent professional training given her Miss Moten 
enjoyed, through the influence of Charlotte 
Forten Grimke, close contact with a family 
high in New England scholastic and social 
life. 
After her graduation from the Salem 
Normal School, in 1875, Miss Moten was 
offered a position by Dr. Miner, the President 
who were then members of the Board of 
Education in Boston. Miss Moten decided, 
however, to work in the more socially significant field of Washington. Her first service was in the graded schools of the Distric
until her appointment to the principalship 
of Miner Normal School. 
With the vision and practical experience 
gained in her alma mater, Miss Moten began the development of the plant entrusted 
to her care. Her superiors on the Miner 
Board and in the public school system 
heartily approved of her work and adopted 
the recommendation for its increased efficiency, submitted in the Principal's Annual 
Reports. 
Since the appointment of Miss Moten the 
length of the school course has increased 
from one to two years. The faculty, which 
in 1883 consisted of two teachers, has 
grown to a corps of twelve full-time and 
three part-time instructors. The requirement for entrance—graduation from the 
city high school—has never been lowered 
but has rather grown as the secondary and 
elementary schools have increased in efficiency. The enrollment in 1883 was thirteen. It is now 160. 
The course of study has expanded from 
a course in primary methods to include the 
following method courses for teachers: 
primary, graded, domestic arts, domestic 
science, kindergarten training, and manual 
training courses. 
Up to June, 1884, there were eighty-two 
graduates. Since that time the graduates 
of the school number hundreds, the average 
class numbering forty to fifty per annum, 
since the change to a two-year curriculum, 
in 1890. 
Forty-five per cent of the Miner alumni 
is now teaching in the District of Columbia. Other graduates are serving in states 
from New York through the Atlantic and 
Southern States to Texas. A large per ME N 28 1 O F TH E MONT H 
cent have continued their studies, after 
graduation from the school, in higher institutions of learning. 
The purpose of Miss Miner to train her 
pupils in the art of living, as well as of 
teaching, is still a vital thing in Miner 
Normal School. The institution is contributing powerfully to the efficiency of family 
and school life, not only in the District of 
Columbia, but in many parts of the United 
States. 
Men of the Month 
A MASTE R EDUCATO R 
MISS MARI A F . BALDWI N was born 
in Cambridge, Mass., and trained in 
the public schools and the Normal School 
of that city. Her father was of West 
Indian descent 
and, during his 
early life, was a 
seaman; afterward he was for 
a long time employed in the 
city post office. 
Finding no employment a t 
home Miss Baldwin first aught 
in Maryland but 
agitation of the 
colored leaders, 
during the time 
of Mayor Fox, 
led to her being 
appointed as 
teacher of primary grades in 
th e publi c 
schools of Cambridge, in 1882. 
In 1889, after 
teaching in all 
the grades, from 
the first to the 
seventh, Miss 
Baldwin was made Principal of the Agassiz 
School and retained that position for twentyfour years. In April, 1915, this school was 
torn down and a new building erected at a 
cost of $60,000, not including furniture. 
October, 1916, Miss Baldwin was made 
Master of the new Agassiz School, a pos
two women masters in the city of Cambridge. 
The school, composed of kindergarten and 
eight grades, is 
one of the best 
in the city and 
is attended by 
children of Harvard professor
and many of the 
old Cambridge 
families. The 
teachers under 
Miss Baldwin, 
numberin g 
twelve, and the 
410 pupils, are 
all white. 
Miss Baldwin 
thus , without 
doubt, occupies 
the most distinguished position 
achieved by a 
person of Negro 
descent in the 
teaching world 
of America, outside citie s 
where there are 
segregate d 
schools. 
A N HONORE D TEACHER . 
DR. R- S. LOVINGGOOD, the president 
of Samuel Huston College in Austin, 
Tex., has passed on. He was born fiftythree years ago and his end came quietly 
MIS S MARI A F . BALDWIN . DR . WILSO N BALLAR D SERGT . D. H , BURN S DR . D . A . FERGUSO N 
TH E JONE S MEMORIA L FOUNTAI N 
TH E LAT E S. H . HOLLOWA Y J . E . J ONE S TH E LAT E DR . R, S. LOVINGGOO D 
383 MEN OF THE MONTH 283 
and peacefully after a long and hard-fought 
battle against ill health. 
The Mayor and City Council attended his 
funeral in a body and Colonel House, the 
confidante of President Wilson, and formerly of Austin, expressed his sorrow that 
the race, the state, and the nation had lost 
such a helpful leader. 
A SUCCESSFUL DENTIST. 
DR. DAVI D ARTHU R FERGUSO N is 
one of the most successful dentists in 
Richmond, Va . He was born in Portsmouth, 
Ohio, in 1875, and was graduated from the 
Dental Department of Howard University 
in 1899. He began his practise of dentistry 
in Richmond that year and was the first 
colored applicant to appear before the Virginia State Board of Dental Examiners. 
Dr. Ferguson is a loyal member of his 
race. He took the initiative, by filing a 
protest with the State Corporation Commission, against the railroads of Virginia, especially the Norfolk and Western, the result 
of which compelled that system to alter 
its new steel coaches for the comfort and 
convenience of its colored passengers. 
A REMEMBERED CITIZEN. 
AFTER the death of Dr. William H . 
Jones, in Harrisburg, Pa., a fund was 
raised for the purpose of giving a gold 
medal each year to the colored graduate 
of the high school who wrote the best 
essay on some given subject. This, however, 
was not successful and when the Park Commission erected the new Twelfth St
Playground it was proposed to use this 
fund, with other monies, to build a fountain to the memory of Dr. Jones at the 
entrance of the park. 
Dr. Jones was born in Snow Hill , Md., 
in 1860. He graduated from the Medical 
Department of Howard University and took 
a post-graduate course at the Polyclinic 
Institute in New York City. He practised 
for a while in Knoxville, Tenn., and from 
there he went to Harrisburg, where he died 
in 1905. 
A N ARM Y OFFICER. ' 
DR.. WILSO N BALLAR D was born in 
Gibson, Concordia Parish, La., in 1878. 
He was educated at Wilberforce University and joined the Ohio Separate 
was graduated in dentistry at the Ohio 
State University. 
The Wa r Department designated Dr. Ballard to assist Lieutenant-Colonel Charles 
Young in re-organizing and training the 
Liberian Frontier Force and President D. 
E. Howard, of Liberia, commissioned him 
Major commanding the Liberian Frontier 
Force. He was presented a medal by President H
against the Krus, a tribe that had never 
before been subjugated by the Liberians. 
Dr. Ballard resigned from the Liberian 
Frontier Force in April, 1915, but the 
President would not accept his resignation 
until June of that year. He has since resumed his practice of dentistry in Louisville. 
A CRAC K SHOT 
SERGEAN T DAC E H . BURNS , is one 
of the best shots in the whole Ame
ing at a target 500 yards away, he made 
283 points out of a possible 300. 
A N ERECTING ENGINEER. 
AMON G men worth while Mr. Jesse E . 
Jones stands preeminent in his line of 
work, erecting engineering. With a natural liking for machinery he began his work 
as a machinist at the age of twenty in his 
native state, Alabama. Later he went to 
Ohio where he was the first colored man 
to receive and hold a state license as a stationary engineer. He is now in the employ 
of the Larrowe Construction Company, De
beet sugar refinery at Twin Falls, Idaho. 
In this immense fireproof plant he handles 
the crane which sets the steel and machinery 
and is the responsible party to see that 
everything is in its exact place. 
A PUBLIC SERVANT. 
THE the late Samuel H . Holloway was 
* a descendant of Richard Holloway, one 
of the first colored settlers of Charleston, 
S. C. He graduated from Avery Institute 
and taught school at Florence, S. C. He 
married and, after the death of his wife, 
returned to Charleston and entered the 
Police Department where he served for 
several years. He went into the Pullman 
Service and soon became foreman over his 
co-workers. After fourteen years' service 
he retired and went to live on his farm at 
Lincolnville, S. C. Here he was made 
Postmaster of the town. 
Mr. Holloway was one of the oldest members of St. Mark's Episcopal Church, in 
Charleston, where he held several official 
positions for many years. National Association for the Advanc
A MEETIN G O F TH E WASHINGTO N BRANCH . 
\Y . Cook, Hon . A . H . Grimke , PresiIn the Foreground: Neval II. Thomas, Dr . C. W . Childs, G. W. Cook, Hon. A. H. Grimke, Presiden
A Letter to the President. 
TO His Excellency, Woodrow Wilson, 
President of the United States, 
Washington, D. C. 
Dear Mr. President: 
The officers and members of this Association respectfully request that in your coming inaugural address you say something 
against the barbaric system of lynching 
which prevails in various parts of this 
country. 
Public sentiment on the question is rapidly becoming aroused, as is shown by the 
editorials in the leading newspapers of 
South Carolina and Georgia, by the action 
taken by the Governors of Kentucky and 
South Carolina and by letters from leading 
southern men. While it is true that this 
crime, under our system of government, can 
be punished only by the local authorities, 
the disgrace falls upon the nation as a 
whole and we can never effectively address 
the world on great moral questions so long 
as this stain upon our civilization is permitted to continue. 
We feel that you can do a great deal to 
help the cause of civilization and good government and to hold up the hands of those 
who are trying to prevent mob violence in 
the United States by some strong expressions in your inaugural and we respectfully 
request that you will take this matter into 
serious consideration. 
Very truly yours, 
(Signed) 
MOORFIEL D STOREY , President. 
JOH N HURST , Vice-President. 
J . E . SPINGARN , 
Chairman of the Board. 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , 
Treasurer. 
W. E . B. DuBoiS, Director of 
Publications and Research. 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMKE , President 
of District of Columbia Branch. 
284 N . A . A . C. P. 
28 5 
INTER-MARRIAGE BILLS. 
It is a pleasure to report that the Wisconsin anti-intermarriage bill, ment
the February Bulletin, was killed on February 15. Attorney George H . DeReef 
writes from Milwaukee: 
"Enclosed please find newspaper clippings 
on the end of the so-called Bennett Bill . 
As I am advised, the committee of seven 
members voted 5 to 2 to report the bill for 
indefinite postponement and on that question Senator Bennett, on the floor, insisted 
on being heard. He spoke in favor of the 
bill and against postponement. The vote 
of the Senate, by 19 to 11, endorsed the 
Committee's report and indefinitely postponed the bill. The effect of this is to kill 
the bill for this session. 
" I want to thank the N . A . A . C. P. for 
its support. It just acted as I knew it 
would when I sent the copy of the bill. We 
have determined to revive our Local at an 
early date and I hope to take an active part 
in so doing, as I desire to see it placed 
upon a firm footing with the means to do 
effective work." 
The following bill, S. 426, has been introduced in Colorado by Senator Eaton as an 
amendment to Section 4163 of the Statutes 
of Colorado, 1908: 
"Al l marriages between parents and children, including grandparents and grandchildren, of every degree, between brothers 
and sisters of the one-half, as well as of 
the whole blood, and between uncles and 
nieces, aunts and nephews, and cousins in 
the first degree, are hereby declared to be 
incestuous and absolutely void; and all marriages between Negroes or mulattoes, of 
either sex, and white persons, are also declared to be absolutely void. This section 
shall extend to illegitimate, as well as legitimate children." 
A MESSAG E FRO M OUR FIELD SECRETARY . 
I left New York on January 16 to organize branches in the principal cities of 
the South. I stopped at Baltimore and 
spoke at a meeting held by the branch in 
that city and then went to Richmond. Up 
to the present date branches have been organized in Richmond and Norfolk, Va. ; 
Raleigh, Durham, and Greensboro, N . C.; 
Atlanta, Athens, Savannah and Augusta, 
Ga ; Columbia and Charleston, S. C ; and 
Jacksonville, Fla . 
The response of the colored people in the 
South to this call shows the wisdom of the 
Association in taking this step to organize 
south of Washington. In every city that I 
have visited I have found the thinking men 
and women of our race alive to the situation and ready to take part in the work that 
must be done. They also realize that the 
condition which has been brought about by 
the movement of colored people from the 
South to the North gives the great opportunity that has come in the last forty 
years for a demand to be made for those 
things to which the Negro is rightly entitled. 
The branch of the Association which was 
formed in Atlanta has already taken action 
on the public school question in that city. 
A while ago the Board of Education cut 
off the eighth grade from all the colored 
public schools. It now proposes to cut off 
the seventh grade. This proposal is simultaneous with one to build a Junior High 
School for white children; so it looks as 
though the means to provide for this new 
High School for white children are to be 
secured by the further cutting down of the 
colored schools. The new Atlanta Branch 
intends to make a fight not only to retain 
the seventh grade for the colored schools 
but to have the eighth grade restored. The 
branch formed in Savannah has suggested 
united effort to all the newly organized 
branches in Georgia to fight the present 
Jim-Crow condition. There is no doubt that 
these new organizations will soon be actively engaged in work to change and better 
conditions in the communities which they 
represent. 
It is wonderful to note how in the very 
heart of the South the New Spirit is seizing 
the colored people, that Spirit which makes 
them feel and know that they must not only 
strive to perform the duties of citizenship 
but must also claim and secure the rights 
of citizenship. The time is now ripe for 
spreading the Association through the 
South. 
The turning point of my trip will be 
Tampa, Fla . After visiting Tampa I shall 
revisit all of the cities where branches have 
been formed and do all that I can to further 
perfect those organizations. When I have 
finished this southern campaigning I shall 
give the readers of the Bulletin a full account of the work accomplished. 
JAME S W . J OHNSON . 2SG TH E CRISIS 
A JIM CRO W RESOLUTION. 
The necessity of taking action in the matter of Jim Crow cars is driven home anew 
by the following resolution passed by the 
Railroad Commission of South Carolina on 
February 17 to prevent "the commingling 
of the races when boarding or leaving passenger trains at stations: 
"Be it resolved, that all railroads operating in South Carolina be required, when 
stopping passenger trains at stations, in 
order to prevent the congestion of white and 
colored passengers, not to load or unload 
white and colored passengers at the adjoining ends of their respective coaches." 
OUR ANTI-LYNCHING COMMITTEE. 
There was fresh evidence during February of the work which the Anti-Lynching 
Committee is quietly carrying on by the 
appearance in the Independent of an article 
entitled "The Governor and the Mob," by 
Thomas Randolph. Immediately upon hearing of the gallant stand of Governor Stanley when he faced the mob at Murray, Ky. , 
the Anti-Lynching Committee secured the 
services of an able Kentucky newspaper 
man who went to Murray at the instance of 
the Committee and obtained a complete 
story of the facts as published in the Independent. 
Members will be horrified after reading 
Mr. Randolph's account to learn that the 
Negro was saved from the mob only to be 
condemned to death at the hands of the 
State. The trial was held on February 22, 
and a company of militia was on hand to 
insure against further rioting. 
The Outer Pocket 
MAY I congratulate you on the great success of THE CRISIS, as reported in the 
current issue. I want to be one to send 
you a new subscriber so that you may reach 
that coveted total of 50,000! Enclosed please 
find my check for one dollar. 
New York City. J OH N HAYNE S HOLMES . 
I do not renew my subscription to TH E 
CRISIS because of serious dissatisfaction 
with two of its recent numbers. 
In one there was a reflection upon the action of the General Education Board, to 
which a very uncomplimentary reference 
was made; and I have since seen this reference quoted approvingly as "sneering" in a 
southern Negro school paper, the Black Belt. 
I think. 
I am not personally familiar with the 
work of the General Education Board, but 
from all that I have heard of it, it does not 
merit such opinion, and I am particularly 
sorry to see TH E CRISIS credited in the 
southern paper with such utterances. 
In another number, the one with an excellent portrait of Mr. Greener on the first 
page, there were two articles, apparently 
stories, and yet they told as if true, both 
with lynching for their main topic, and both 
to my mind extremely ill-advised material 
for colored readers. 
Boston, Mass. W ILLIA M DAVIS . 
I want to commend you on THE CRISIS . 
I have read it, and so do my girls, and many 
of the students of Philander Smith College. 
Many teachers read it, too. Some think you 
are too radical, but you cannot be too radical when your child is suffering with smallpox, or your house is on fire. It is only 
through the most positive and daring efforts 
and complaints, couched in intelligent language and pointed, and sent out, that right 
will be heard. It has always been so and, 
therefore, I commend your paper. 
( MRS.) H . M. NASMYTH . 
Little Rock, Ark . 
For the second time I have read your editorial on the lynching in Georgia of Sam 
Conley's mother. 
It seems to me most strange that in places 
where the colored people are so great in 
numbers that none of them seem to offer any 
practical protest, while men and women of 
our own flesh and blood are being lynched 
by mobs of white barbarians. 
May I ask, sir, what do the colored population do in an hour of such great stress? 
Do they stand around with folded arms? Or 
do they betake themselves to their homes 
until the murder is over? What is the matter with the colored South? Ar e they afraid 
of the lynchers? Haven't they enough race 
pride to defend their unfortunate brethren? 
Or are they "too proud to fight"? 
Halifax, N. S. D ONAL D W. MOORE. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
THE Mythology of Al l Races," which 
is being published by the Marshall 
Jones Company of Boston, in thirteen volumes, is to have a volume on "African 
Mythology" written by George Foucart of 
the French Institute of Oriental Achaeology 
at Cairo, Egypt. 
A "Lif e and Works of Phillis Wheatley," 
by the late G. H . Renfro, has been issued 
by R. L. Pendleton of Washington, D. C. It 
is well printed and costs $1.50 postpaid. 
The "History of Morehouse College," by 
Benjamin Brawley, is done with the taste 
and scholarship displayed in all of Mr. 
Brawley's work. It is an interesting story 
and sells for $1.25. 
The death of James D. Corrothers, the 
poet, who died on Lincoln's Birthday, is a 
serious loss to the race and to literature. 
He was a man whom not only white people 
but the colored people themselves did much 
to deprive of a real chance; yet he made 
his rugged way "In Spite of the Handicap," 
as his recent biography tells us. 
TH E LAT E JAME S DAVI D CORROTHER S 
Poet, Autho r and Clergyma n 
We deeply regret that through an inexcusable fault of our printer the last two 
lines of Miss Grimke's sonnet in the March 
CRISIS were omitted. 
DOUGLASS 
THE Springfield, Mass., Republican says: 
Boston honored itself last week Wednesday, which was the 100th anniversary of 
the birth of Frederick Douglass, the abolitionist and remarkable representative of 
the Negro race, by dedicating in his honor 
a public square in the Roxbury district. In 
response to a proclamation by Mayor 
Curley, exercises were held in some of the 
public schools and in Fanueil Hall. His intellectual ability, moral quality, and gentlemanly bearing made Mr. Douglass a national figure, and it is well that all he was 
and did should be recalled for the inspiration 
of the youth of to-day. Mr. Douglass 
taught himself to read and write, and as 
a journalist and lecturer made his mark in 
this country and England. He died in 
Washington in 1895, after having been for 
many years Marshal and Commissioner of 
Deeds for the District of Columbia, and 
then United States Minister to Haiti. His 
father was a white man and his mother a 
slave, and Mr. Douglass was in bondage 
until his escape when twenty-one years old. 
That such a man could have been made the 
victim of slavery in this country shows how 
far the nation was advanced by the Civil 
War. Those who become discouraged over 
existing conditions will get a better perspective by remembering what once was. 
CHRIST AND ANTI-CHRIST 
THE Methodist church faces its greatest crisis since slavery. The case is 
thus aptly stated editorially in the Epworth 
Herald, Chicago: 
"Won't it be fine when the southern Metho
big church again ?" 
"Why, yes; I suppose it will. But you 
speak as though it were likely to happen 
almost any day. Is anything stirring?" 
"Haven't you heard? The church papers 
have been full of Methodist union for nearly 
a year. A few weeks ago there was an important meeting in Baltimore to work out a 
scheme." . . . 
"But there's one rather important difficulty." 
"What's that?" 
"Why, our colored members." 
"How are they a difficulty in the way of 
union? You'd think they would be for it, 
to a man." 
"O, they are. The question is not what 
they will do about union, but what to do 
with them in getting the union set up." 
"I don't quite follow you. What do you 
mean, 'do with them'?" 
287 288 TH E CRISIS 
"I'l l have to go back a little to get the 
connection. It seems that though we are 
all to be in one church, it will be so large 
that it must be divided up into sections for 
what they call administrative purposes, if 
you get what that means." 
"I think I do. Go on." 
"There will be, say, four, five or even 
six, geographical districts, governed by conferences with a new name; regional conferences, someone has called them. And 
then there will be another regional conference, not for a section of the country, but 
for all our Negro members. We have about 
three hundred thousand of them." 
"That's fair; and sensible, too. Where's 
the hindrance in it?" 
"Just here. These conferences will have 
over them a sort of supreme conference, like 
Congress over the states. Now, the question is, should the Negro representatives 
stand in that body on the same level as the 
others? Should they share in making laws 
for the great white conferences?" 
"Won't the white representatives share in 
making laws for the great Negro conference?" 
"Of course they will. But that's different. The Negro is poor, and most of his 
churches are part'" supported by missionary money, given by the white Methodists. 
Then, he doesn't always know what is best 
for his own religious training, and certainly he couldn't be expected to know what is 
best for his white brethren. And—well, he's 
a Negro, and lots of Methodists don't quite 
like the idea of having him sit with their 
representatives and legislate for five and a 
half million white folks." 
"How are they going to get around it? 
He can't be put out of his membership, can 
he?" 
"No, no. Nobody wants to do that. We 
can't deny that he is in good and regular 
standing, and if he wants to stay there's no 
way to make him go. Beside, we should 
have to give him his share of the church 
property, even if he consented to be set off 
by himself; and he might not use it wisely." 
"We are in a fix, then; aren't we?" 
"Ye-es; but I've heard of a way out. It 
has been proposed that our Negro members 
should yield to what they and we know is a 
very strong sentiment. Suppose they should 
say, 'Set us off in our regional conference 
Count us as a part of the church. Put us 
into all the statistics and things. Then let 
us send messengers to the supreme conference, to tell you how we are getting along, 
and maybe to ask for a little more help for 
our work; and we won't insist on our messengers helping to make the laws for your 
church.' " 
"Do the Negro Methodists say that?" 
"No ; they're just invited to say it. It's 
a suggestion to them." 
"I see. I read once that Artemus Ward 
told President Lincoln that he would gladly 
give his wife's poor relations to help put 
down the rebellion. But I never read what 
the relations thought about the plan." 
"Anyway, it would be a great thing for 
the Negro to do." 
"It would, my boy. And a pretty small 
thing for the white man to accept." . . . 
"But don't you see that unless something 
of this sort is done, union is likely to fail, 
and it will be all the Negro's fault?" 
"That isn't a very brave remark and it 
isn't true. But suppose union should come 
the way you say, wouldn't the story of it be 
fine reading for our young folks in the 
Epworth League's Revised History of Methodism? 
our Negro brothers a place of permanent 
ecclesiastical inferiority, so that we could 
operate Christ's doctrine of brotherhood on 
a sort of sliding scale, in one place with 
them, and in another place without them. 
And that we threatened to blame them for 
the failure of the plan to extend the 
brotherhood if they refused our offer! The 
scoffers would say—and who could silence 
them?—that we had gone the civil powers 
one better, and had made a 'Jim Crow' 
Church!" 
"I'm surprised at you, and ashamed of 
you! 'Jim Crow Church,' indeed. Nobody 
proposes anything except what is for the 
best interests of both races. Our Negro 
members will have all the rights in their 
regional conference that the white members 
have in theirs." 
"Yes; all the rights, but no right. What 
is the hatefulness of the 'Jim Crow Church' 
idea, that you dislike even to have it mentioned? I'll tell you. Not that it takes 
away privileges, though there is enough of 
that in it to drive the insult home. But 
the bitter part is that it leaves us nothing 
to answer when the world, the flesh, and the 
devil say they can see no difference between us and them when a real test of 
brotherhood arises. What do we more than 
others? Do not even the labor unions so?" 
•'THE COUPLE AT LYNCHER" 
SAYS the Atlanta 'Constitution, anent a 
mob murder pictured in the 1916 
Easter CRISIS : 
Jim Keith is a Negro who, more than 
a year ago, narrowly escaped lynching by 
a Georgia mob under the impression that 
he had murdered a sheriff. 
He was saved by Worth County officials, 
but the lawless band did succeed in lynching five other Negroes thought to have been 
implicated in the murder of which Keith 
was accused. 
Jim Keith subsequently was tried, found 
guilty, and sentenced to a life term in the 
penitentiary. 
In the meantime, while Jim Keith lay in 
prison, new light was shed upon the original 
crime, and the life convict was given another trial. 
Now, the new evidence proves Jim Keith 
and the five dead Negroes innocent; and he THE LOOKING GLASS 289 
was acquitted and his freedom restored by 
a white jury! 
What a commentary upon the accursed 
institution of lynching! 
A murder is committed; a mob forms; 
five innocent Negroes are lynched; the life 
of a sixth barely saved by the authorities 
from the mob. Then, more than a year later 
"further evidence has led to the general 
belief that Mozzle Lake, who escaped, is 
the murderer!" 
A white jury and the law, soberly and 
with deliberation, could restore to the one 
living victim of a premature, mad impulse 
his liberty, but not to the five others, who 
are dead. 
How long are the decent, law-abiding 
citizens of Georgia going to tolerate this 
disgraceful, barbaric practice—which is the 
foulest blot upon the name of the state today! 
It is as Henry Watterson says in the 
Louisville, Ky., Courier-Journal: 
Lynching should not be misconstrued. It 
is not an effort to punish crime. It is a sport 
which has as its excuse the fact that a 
crime, of greater or less gravity, has been 
committed, or is alleged. A lynching party 
rarely is made up of citizens indignant at 
the law's delays or failures. It often is 
made up of a mob bent upon diversion, and 
proceeding in a mood of rather frolicsome 
ferocity, to have a thoroughly good time. 
Lynchers are not persons who strive from 
day to day toward social betterment. 
Neither are they always drunken ruffians. 
Oftentimes they are ruffians wholly sober 
in so far as alcoholic indulgence is concerned, but highly stimulated by an opportunity to indulge in spectacular murder 
when there is no fear that the next grand 
jury will return murder indictments against 
them. 
PURELY AMERICAN 
THE Macon, Ga., Telegraph can so seldom mention the Negro decently that 
we quote this editorial with unusual 
pleasure: 
The only distinctive, indigenous music 
America has given to the world has come 
from the Negro race our old-time planters 
bought from slave ships and set to work on 
our plantations from Baltimore to Brunswick. We interpret through the artists we 
have developed in the last generation or 
two the music, the conceptions, and creations of the world's greatest composers with 
a verve and character that is all our own, 
but outside Sousa's stirring marches and 
some of the minor innovations of Victor 
Herbert America has given the world but 
one real, rich and enduring division in music—and that is the plaintive, delicious, and 
unapproachable quality in the basic strains 
of the songs of the American Negro. "Suwa
that beloved generation are sung preciously 
the world over, wherever there is music by 
the hearthside, while "Swing Low, Sweet 
Chariot," sung by singers such as Miss 
Mary Wesley Craig, of Macon, who knew 
the Negro and can really interpret that 
wonderful old human benediction, and by 
the properly trained choruses is so distinct 
in its way, so full of character and real 
expression of the basic human emotion that 
there is nothing in all the world like it. 
Those who heard the great Tuskegee chorus 
sing it at the funeral of Booker T. Washington tell us that the effect was indescribable. White people on the stage that day 
who heard the world's greatest artists, who 
have been moved and stirred by the world's 
most sublime and beautiful choristers' triumphs simply crumpled up with sensation 
and emotion as the great croon came welling 
up from the hundreds upon hundreds of 
Negroes who were singing. 
It has been said that a white man with 
burnt cork on his face can be more typical 
of the Negro than the Negro himself, but 
that is not true. The trained Negro can do 
the Negro's things better than the white 
man, can interpret the Negro's atmosphere 
and traditions such as no Caucasian can 
ever do. 
THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS 
THE new branch of the N . A . A . C. P., 
at Atlanta, Ga., has signalized its 
birth by a splendid petition to the local 
Board of Education. It says in part: 
The city of Atlanta owes the black child 
the same opportunity to fit himself for usefulness and helpful citizenship that it owes 
the white child, and it cannot do less and 
serve the interest of humanity and good 
government; and we feel quite certain 
that you, gentlemen, realizing these principles of humanity, cannot in good conscience spend all the money in the interest 
of your children and see our children 
groping in ignorance and neglect not only 
to the detriment of the Negro immediately, 
but to the detriment of the white man in 
common. 
You, with fifty schools, most of them ample, efficient, and comfortable, for the education of your children in English, industries and preparation for high schools, and 
in the high schools, can square neither your 
conscience with your God nor your conduct 
with your oaths, and behold Negro children 
in fourteen unsanitary, dilapidated, unventi
half of the grades, no industrial facilities, 
no preparation for high schools and no high 
schools for the blacks. 
We are moved to come before you now, 
for information comes to us that you are :iOO TH E CRISIS 
preparing to displace the seventh grade in 
the Negro schools to find money to provide 
a junior high school for the white children. 
If our information is correct, then this use 
of the public funds is unfair and unjust. 
If the department of whites is in need of 
a junior high school, they ought to have it, 
and we ask that you provide it; and as a 
matter of justice and as a crying need, we 
ask in the same breath that you not only 
do not take out the seventh grade of the 
Negro department, but that you provide facilities and teachers that Negro children 
may be able to do the eight years' work in 
seven years as the white children are able, 
to do, by eliminating double sessions from 
the Negro department. Therefore, we ask 
that the seventh grade be retained and that 
double sessions be eliminated from the Negro department, and that am
be provided that Negro children may do 
the eight grades in seven years. 
Again, we protest against the displacement of the seventh grade with the vocational idea. We are entitled to the seventh 
grade and the vocational idea, in common 
with your children. 
Second, we submit that you provide ample industrial features, including the vocational ideas for the Negro schools, providing 
them with practical work shops: We mean 
practical industries. We do not mean simply making baskets, toys, paper boxes and 
needle work. We mean the allied trades 
that our boys may become shoemakers, carpenters, brick layers, tinsmiths, etc., and 
that our girls may become stenographers, 
bookkeepers, trained cooks and laundresses 
and that they may have opportunity to acquire such other industrial training as is 
fitted to their sex. 
Third, we submit that there should be 
some provision to prepare our children to 
enter high schools. If our children are to 
be cut off at the sixth grade, what is to 
cover the gap between the sixth grade and 
the high schools? Where will they prepare 
themselves to enter private high schools or 
colleges? We submit that the system is deficient in this respect, as it affects Negro 
children. 
Fourth, we submit that you provide a high 
school to prepare our boys and girls to 
enter the colleges of the city, state and country, in like manner as you provide high 
schools for your boys and girls to enter colleges of the country. 
These betterments we ask because they 
are justly ours; because they are right. 
They are fully ours, because we are citizens 
and taxpayers, and because the state instituted this system for our benefit in common 
with yours. 
Incidentally the petition has this neat 
turning of the tables on Georgia's two 
demagog's in the U . S. Senate: 
It has sometimes been claimed that the 
Negro gets in school facilities more money 
already than he pays taxes. To such a 
statement, we quote our Senators, Hardwick 
and Smith, in reply to Senators Smoot and 
Penrose in discussing the pork barrel bill 
before Congress. Senator Penrose alleged 
that the state of Pennsylvania paid more 
internal revenue to the Union than the 
eleven Southern States and Missouri included, and Georgia received more considside
than did the states of Pennsylvania, New 
York, and all New England. Senator Hardwick for 
plied that when the eleven Southern States 
and Missouri contributed their mite to the 
Federal Exchequer, they paid in proportion 
to the protection they received, by reason 
of property holdings, and that when the 
Southern States paid their money to the 
government, it became a public fund—a 
trust fund—belonging to all of the people, 
and that the Southern States lost their 
identity as taxpayers; and in like manner, 
when Pennsylvania paid her millions into 
the public trust, she paid in proportion to 
the protection she received by reason of her 
property holdings, and that she lost her 
identity, and her millions, in common with 
the Southern States' mite, became public 
funds, trust funds to be administered for 
the best interest of a common government 
in the interest of all of the people; and that 
is our answer to the charge that we are receiving more money than we contribute as 
taxpayers. 
THE EXODUS 
THRE E quotations illustrate public opinion 
of the South. The New York Nation declares that: 
For years the South has been working up 
a situation ready for a match. That match, 
a two-headed one, has been applied and the 
wail from the southern press—with a few 
notable exceptions, like the Atlanta Constitution—s
scorched whole districts. One head of the 
match consists of the increasing ravages of 
the boll-weevil and the disastrous floods of 
last summer; the other head is the desire 
of northern employers to find a substitute 
for the immigrant labor cut off by the war. 
No irresponsible lumberman leaving behind 
him a waste fallen timber is more to blame 
for a conflagration than the southern press 
which has winked at lynchings, mob violence, and Jim-Crowism in transportation 
and schools, yet which, when Negroes avail 
themselves by the hundred thousand of the 
chance to better their condition in the North 
has the effrontery to wave the doctrine that 
the southern white man is the Negro's 
best friend." That the motive for the rush 
northward has not been merely economic, 
but has been made acute by constant dread 
of mob violence, is proved by the exodus 
from those counties which aided Georgia to 
lead all other states in the lynching record TH E LOOKING GLASS 291 
of last year, and by the fact that emigration 
from South Carolina became significant only 
after the Abbeville outrage. 
The dominant Negro-hating white South 
speaks through the Columbia, S. C , Record: 
The object of the federal land loan bank 
is to permit tenant farmers to acquire their 
homes. While this may be made the greatest possible boon for the South, yet to the 
white tenant farmer it might become a real 
danger. The Negro is acquiring more land 
than the poorer white man, and the Negro 
will take advantage of the opportunity to 
buy land under the operation of the federal 
bank with its long term loans upon low rate 
of interest. What will the white tenant 
farmer do? . . . 
We must find a remedy. There must be 
some remedy for we must reclaim the rural 
South for the white man. . . . 
We think there are three things necessary to improve conditions. We must lift 
up the tenant class of white men. In some 
counties there are white tenants whose condition is little better, if at all, than that of 
the Negroes. We must not permit Negroes 
and whites to work in the same field. The 
white tenant should be encouraged to buy 
his own land and should be helped to pay 
for it. There are no "poor whites." We 
are all from the same settlers. The condidition of some may be poorer than that of 
others, but the responsibility is upon all 
to help them. The Negro is crowding the 
white man off the farm, and this means ruin 
to the country. We should have a rural 
"building and loan" system to help white 
tenants buy and pay for homes. 
Another step is also a responsibility upon 
the white man. Land owners must stand 
together against farm labor contract jumpers. Any white man who will entice a laborer is an enemy to his race and to his 
community. Farm laborers must know 
their place and must be kept there. 
As to the Negro himself, we believe in 
segregation. Elevate the white tenant's 
condition and remove him entirely from association with the Negro except on a plane 
of superiority. Keep the Negroes to themselves, just as they were kept in their 
"Quarters" on the old plantations. 
The Birmingham, Ala., News represents 
the new forward-looking South: 
Barbour County has launched a campaign 
designed to awaken the rural Negro to the 
opportunities that lie about him, to the results that may be achieved by intense cultivation of the soil, to the latest methods 
adopted for fighting the weevil, and, altogether, to make him more prosperous and 
contented. In order that the Negro may 
not misunderstand the purpose of this 
campaign, or be led to believe that his white 
neighbors have a purely selfish reason for 
wishing him to stay in his native South, the 
work of enlightenment is to be carried forward by Negro leaders under the auspices 
of the Tuskegee Institute. 
AMERICA AND THE WORLD 
THIS from the Rio Janeiro, Brazil, 
Times: 
The tram to Botafogo was packed. The 
little colored laundress had difficulty in 
squeezing in beyond two well-dressed, wellfed individuals, an American, and an Englishman, who kept up a running stream of 
self-complacent talk on a single subject of 
all-absorbing interest. 
—" 'twas a clear cinch of twenty thousand dollars." 
—"and Joe Smith made twenty-five thousand dollars over that contract"— 
—"Yes, and I gave my wife a five thousand dollar necklace day before yesterday 
out of".— 
The tram stopped with a jerk to set down 
a passenger. A pitiful waif of humanity, a 
ragged, white-haired, consumptive woman 
clung on the step and stretched out a transparent claw for charity. 
"I starve, senhores, alms, for the love 
of God!" 
There was an embarrassed pause. The 
dollarmen stared straight in front of them, 
apparently deaf. 
Then, "Excuse me," said a soft voice. 
The little colored laundress leant across 
them and dropped 200 reis into the quivering palm. 
And the tram sped off again to the fullthroated duet of dollars, Dollars, DOLLARS . 
The Westerly, R. I., Sun says: 
The United States has departed in practice from cherished theory. When Thomas 
Jefferson announced the "consent of the 
governed" principle we were committed by 
the constitution itself to the slavery of the 
black man, and even now there is a point in 
the proposition of the "colored brother" who 
has risen to remark that with the principle 
of "peace without victory" ought to be 
coupled the principle of "justice without 
lynching." When the world is reformed the 
nations will respect the rights of even their 
weakest neighbors, but meanwhile it is 
hazardous to put the United States forward 
as a shining example in every particular. 
John D. Barry writes in the Boston 
Herald, and other papers: 
The truth is that prejudice of color is a 
convention. Like most other prejudices, it 
carries the illusion of advantage, and advantage, imaginary or real, human beings 
hate to give up. No matter how foolish a 
prejudice may be, once identified with advantage, it quickly gathers around it justification and excuses. It can resist the deepest 
teaching of religion. It will even meet with-292 TH E CRISIS 
out flinching the most terrible penalties. As 
a result of color prejudice humanity has 
already inflicted fearful suffering on itself. 
But it is determined to keep on. There are 
those who the instant a word is said against 
it will fly into a rage, among them ardent 
democrats who profess to believe in the 
equality of man. 
The adage that pride goeth before destruction may apply with terrible force to 
the pride of the white people. Already 
there are prophecies of a conflict between 
the Western world and the East, mingled 
with the prophecies of the disappearance of 
war from the earth. Which is the more probable? Can war be kept out so long as a large 
part of humanity thinks it has a right to 
look down on the rest of humanity? Out of 
our prejudices come some of our deadliest 
woes, and there is no prejudice so ruthless 
as the kind associated with color of the skin. 
APPOINTING NEGROES 
DUNCAN C. MILNE R has this letter in 
the Chicago Inter-Ocean: 
There has been discussion recently as to 
the admission of a well qualified young physician to a public institution as an interne 
because he is a Negro. This illustrates the 
power of race prejudice. 
The best colored people of Chicago are 
asking no favors as to social recognition, 
but they do ask equal opportunities as 
citizens, to do work for which they are 
qualified. 
A distressing feature is the fact that 
white men and women who themselves 
are in the struggle of life are so intolerant and even cruel in their treatment 
of their fellows if they belong to another 
race. A young woman well educated, of 
real refinement, and most attractive in appearance and manners was a skilled stenographer and administrator. She had won 
her way till she was at the head of a large 
number of employees in a Chicago office. 
One day a boy, evidently of Negro blood, 
asked for her and said she was his cousin. 
The next morning the head of the firm told 
her that, while they were satisfied in every 
way with her work, respected her character 
and would part with her with great regret, 
she would have to go, because all the other 
employees threatened to quit if a person 
with a trace of Negro blood in her veins 
held her position. 
The Provident Hospital and Training 
School for Colored Nurses has on its staff 
of physicians both white and colored men, 
but all nurses are colored. Some time ago 
a man was seriously injured in an accident 
at the stockyards. He was hastily taken to 
Provident Hospital and it was found that 
he was a citizen of North Carolina, of wealth 
and high social position. His wife and 
daughters were sent for at a hotel. When 
they arrived at the hospital they were horrified to find it a colored institution and demanded that he be removed. The doctor 
said it would be at risk of his life to make 
a change. He remained there for weeks. 
When he was taken home both he and his 
family expressed perfect satisfaction with 
his treatment and care. 
Some years ago an institution of Chicago 
that employs nurses told some graduates of 
Provident Hospital that they would no longer employ colored nurses. Philip D. 
Armour was a liberal supporter of this 
charitable society. He called up its manager and said if they declined to use capable 
nurses because they were colored they would 
cease to receive his annual check for $1,-
000. This ended the exclusion of nurses because of their race. 
Prominent white people of Chicago and 
other cities are patrons of colored physicians, dentists, and nurses. 
Attorney-General Brundage deserves 
credit for ignoring race prejudice and appointing the capable Colonel Denison as one 
of his assistants. 
American people are very free in denouncing the cruel persecutions of the Jews 
in Russia. They should be ashamed of the 
petty, contemptible, and cruel persecution of 
Negroes in this presumable free land. 
THE COLORED BAPTISTS 
AN unusually fair presentation of the 
questions at issue between the two 
wings of the colored Baptist denomination 
is made by the American baptist, Louisville, 
Ky. : 
The contest is by the National Baptist 
Convention for the control of the National 
Baptist Publishing Board. It is not a question of deeds, but a question as to whether 
the Convention has a right to control its 
own Boards. . . . It is admitted by 
every well informed Baptist that the Publishing House was established in 1896 under 
a specific instruction of the National Baptist 
Convention, held in September of that year 
in St. Louis, and the Home Mission Board 
carried out that instruction. In Boston, in 
1897, the Home Mission Board reported that 
it had carried out the instructions of the 
Convention and gave details of the progress 
made by the Publishing House. The Charter 
was obtained in August, 1898, and approved 
by the Convention the next month in Kansas 
City. These are matters of record that cannot be questioned. If the Convention established the Publishing House, how did it get 
from under the control of the Convention? 
Every year from 1897 to 1915 reports of the 
Publishing Board were made to the Convention and the authority of the Convention 
was recognized. In 1913 at the Nashville 
session, the report of a special committee 
was submitted and adopted, claiming that 
the Convention had full authority to control 
the Publishing Board and all the other 
Boards under the constitution and rules of 
the Convention. But in 1915 this authority 
is challenged by the Publishing Board and 
to settle this question the matter is being 
judicially determined. The Horizon 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
THE one hundredth anniversary of the 
* birth of Frederick Douglass was widely celebrated among colored people and to 
some extent among whites. In Boston the 
event was celebrated by the public schools, 
a meeting in Faneuil Hall, and the dedication of a public square at Tremont, Cabot 
and Hammond streets in honor of the great 
abolitionist. In New Bedford flags were 
raised on public buildings. The Governor of 
New York attended the Douglass memorial 
service held in Rochester at the University 
Club. In Brooklyn, N . Y. , the flag on Borough Hall was at half-mast all day. 
C A number of civil rights bills to prevent discrimination on account of color have 
been introduced: one in the Legislature of 
Pennsylvania which has a good chance of 
passing; another has -already passed the 
Lower House of the New Jersey Legislature; a third has been introduced into the 
Illinois Legislature; a fourth is being considered by the General Assembly of Rhode 
Island; and a fifth by the General Assembly 
of Colorado. 
C The Savannah, Ga., Home Association 
is erecting a three-story club house to cost 
$15,000. The architects and builders are 
colored men. 
C A state federation of colored women's 
clubs has been formed in Oregon. 
C The city of Savannah, Ga., has decided 
to support and maintain a playground for 
colored children. 
C The Economy Commission of Kansas is 
said to be about to report a bill abolishing 
the colored Western University in Quindaro, 
on the ground that colored students are received at the State University. 
C The first anniversary of the colored 
Carnegie Library at Nashville, Tenn., has 
been celebrated by a public meeting. It was 
reported that 26,999 persons had employed 
the library during the year. 
CT Frank Riley Turner, coal miner of Des 
Mines, Iowa, and his wife, who were married in 1893, have fifteen living children, 
ranging from three to twenty-two years of 
age, besides six dead. Mr. Turner is buying 
a $700 home. 
C National Negro Health Week, first advocated by the late Booker T. Washington, 
will be celebrated Apri l 22 to 28 by meetings 
and exercises in schools. 
G The Colored San Francisco Women's 
Club regularly visits six hospitals, helps the 
Home for the Aged, and the colored orphans, 
has a story hour for children, improvement 
meetings, a committee to visit the juvenile 
courts, and is a member of the State Federation 
C Welcome Hall, an institution devoted 
to the education and social betterment of 
the colored people of St. Paul, Minn., was 
dedicated on Lincoln's birthday. It will be 
managed in connection with the Zion Presby
C A n industrial and reform school for 
Negro children is to be built in Ladston, 
S. C. The site contains 240 acres. 
(I Three colored men successfully passed 
the Bar examination at Raleigh, N . C.: J. 
N . Jones, G. S. McBrayer, and T. F . Saunders. 
C Dr. W. E . B. DuBois was one of the 
speakers at the Morehouse College jubilee, 
Atlanta, Ga., and also spoke at Atlanta University, at 
and at Centenary Church, Charleston, S. C. 
He was the recipient of many pleasant attentions. 
C Mrs. Carrie K . Bowles, secretary of the 
Mound City Social Settlement, St. Louis, 
Mo., has secured training for a class of selected young colored people in social service 
by the St. Louis Provident Association. 
Some of these are assured of salaried positions as workers for the Association when 
they shall have obtained proficiency. 
CT It is reported that several hundred 
American Negroes are joining the Canadian 
armies. A colored infantry company has 
been formed in Western Pennsylvania, and 
a bill is before the New Jersey Legislature 
to establish a Negro regiment in the Na ­
tional Guard of the state. 
C At an examination for the railway mail 
service at Houston, Texas, there were thirtyfive colored and thirty white candidates. 
C In Kansas City, Mo., H . P. Ewing, the 
colored "potato king," has succeeded in getting the authorities to close a notorious dive 
which was ruining colored youth. 
29 3 294 TH E CRISIS 
(I A colored American named Coffey was 
among those killed in the sinking of the 
S. S. Laconia. 
C Attorney George H . Woodson, of Iowa, 
declares that he was offered $1,000 a month 
to work among the Negro employees of the 
Government Arsenal at Rock Island with 
the object of eventually blowing it up. The 
''stranger of military appearance" reminded 
Mr. Woodson of the treatment of his race by 
the United States. Mr. Woodson refused the 
offer. 
C The colored people of New Orleans, La., 
gave a "Carnival of Nations" at Temple 
Theatre for the benefit of a new Catholic 
church. 
(I Many new Negro hospitals are being 
opened. The Frisco Railroad may build a 
hospital costing $25,000 at Springfield, Mo. 
A new hospital for the colored insane in 
Tennessee may be organized by turning over 
entirely to Negroes the present institution at 
Bolivar and building a new one entirely for 
whites. A t Birmingham, Ala., the North 
Side Infirmary has been opened. A n Out- Patient Department has bee
at the Good Samaritan Hospital, Columbia, 
S. C. The Douglass Hospital of Philadelphia has been cut off without appropriation 
by the Pennsylvania Legislature and is protesting. A $50,000 hospital, said to be the 
largest in the South, will be erected at Durham, N . C. It is promoted by influe
Negroes and has been helped by wealthy 
whites. 
C Congress has authorized the payment 
of $25,000,000 for the Danish West Indies 
and empowered the President to set up a 
temporary government on the Island pending investigation of the needs of the people. 
Negro Americans ought certainly to be represented on the Board of Investigation. 
(I The Negro auxiliary of the Associated 
Charities at Columbia, S. C , is raising $800 
to help in the work. 
MUSIC AND AR T 
THE annual mid-winter concert given 
at Talladega, Ala., by the ColeridgeTaylor Choral Society of Talladega College, was held February 9. 
were drawn from modern composers with 
an interspersing of solo and ensemble 
nieces by classic and modern composers. 
The chorus was conducted by C. R. Diton, 
Director of the College Conservatory of 
Music. 
C. A lengthy and interesting article, "From 
Vaudeville Turn to Composer's Desk— 
The Rise and Progress of James Rosamond Johnson Into Writer and Apostle of 
Negro Music Taken Seriously," is published in the Boston Transcript of February 17. A group of Negro melodies, freely 
developed for concert use by Mr. Johnson, 
is soon to be published by the Oliver D
(I Professor Carl Diton's "Swing Low, 
Sweet Chariot," a transcription for the organ, is among the new publications issued 
by the G. Schirmer Company. The piece 
is said by the reviewers to be a church or 
concert voluntary of unusual beauty and 
makes use of all the resources of the instrument. 
C Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, lecturer-pianist, and William H . Richardson, of Boston, 
Mass., are filling engagements in Loui
were given in the Middle West during January and February. A t Kansas City, Mo., 
on February 8, at the Second Baptist 
Church, they were greeted by a notable 
audience of nearly one thousand persons, 
a repetition of inspiring and attentive 
audiences in St. Louis, Mo., and other Kansas 
School the pupils and faculty comprised an 
audience of about eleven hundred people. 
The Galveston, Texas, recital was attended 
by a good number of white music-lovers. 
C Mr . Henry T. Burleigh's magnificent 
song of the war, "One Year, 1914-1915," 
has become deservedly popular. It was 
sung by Penelope Davies at the annual 
ladies' night of the Canadian Club of New 
York, at the Hotel Biltmore on February 
12, and for his reintroduction of the song 
at his recital on February 11 at Carnegie 
Hall, John McCormack, the Irish tenor, 
was thanked by the reviewers. 
C Miss Mary Jordan, an American contralto, introduced Mr. Burleigh's setting of 
Arthur Symon's "In the Wood of Finvara," 
as well as repeating "Deep River " (dedicated to the contralto), at her recital at 
Aeolian Hall, New York, during February. 
Musical America says of "In the Wood of 
Finvara" : "It is a remarkable song, one 
that will be highly prized, and it was 
given impressively. The audience re-demanded it." TH E HORIZON 295 
C. Miss Helen Hagan, pianist, is on concert 
tour in the Middle West. Among her recent appearances were those of February 6 
at Fort Smith, Ark., where she was presented by the Phyllis Wheatley Club, and 
a most successful engagement at Tulsa, 
Okla. Miss Hagan had also the honor of 
giving a recital at the Kidd-Key College 
Conservatory of Music at Sherman, Texas. 
(I A Mid-Winter Folk-Song Festival -was 
held February 12-16 by the National 
Training School for Women and Girls, Miss 
Nannie H . Burroughs, President, at Metropolitan A . M . E . Church, Washington, 
D. C. The soloists were Anit a Patti Brown, 
soprano, and Clarence Cameron White, violinist. A n address was given on "Lincoln 
and Douglass" by Roscoe Conkling 
Simmons. 
C On February 13, at Buffalo, N . Y. , the 
Symphony Society of New York, Walter 
Damrosch, conductor, played the March 
from Rimsky-Korsakoff's last opera, "The 
Golden Cock," the libretto founded on a 
tale by Pushkin. 
C A lecture recital on Indian and Negro 
music was given at the Ithaca, N . Y. , Conservatory of Music. Burleigh, Cook, Dett, 
and Coleridge-Taylor were represented on 
the program. 
C Miss Freita Shaw, a young colored girl, 
was presented in recital at Portland, Oregon, by Mme. Lucie Valair, her teacher. 
The audience of one hundred colored people 
and two hundred and fifty whites was enthusiastic. The program contained Irish, 
German, and French songs, and the aria 
from the second act of Meyerbeer's "L'Africaine." 
C Mr. Ridgeley Torrence, a white playwright, backed by Emily Hapgood, and assisted by the decorator, R. E . Jones, is planning to stage on Broadway, New York, a 
series of plays depicting Negro life. Negro 
actors will be used. Among the plays will 
be "Granny Maumee," which has already 
been given once, and a new play, "Simon, 
the Cyrenian." 
C Mrs. Alice Dunbar-Nelson and Roland 
W. Hayes gave a recital before the New 
Century Club, Wilmington, Del., on "Quaint 
Phases of the Life of the Negro." The entertainment was for the benefit of the colored tuberculosis hospital and was very successful. Of the singing of Mr. Hayes in 
Kansas City, Mo., the Times says: "He has 
the qualities that go to the making of a successful artist. His voice is a dramatic tenor 
of wide range and great beauty. The high 
tones are brilliant, and he commands an exquisite pianissimo, pure and limpid. Best 
of all, he has taste, imagination, and a sense 
of poetry. Sentiment was always delicately 
expressed, but in the large dramatic requirements of 'Celeste Aida ' the youth of 
the singer was apparent in a certain lack 
of fire. Phrasing and style left little to be 
desired, and his distinct enunciation added 
much to the pleasure of listeners. The delicate, impalpable beauty of Katherine 
Glenn's 'Twilight' won instant response, and 
it is proof of the poetic temperament of the 
race that some of the finest songs found, 
readiest appreciation. The artist responded 
with several old southern songs. His program closed with 'Onaway, Awake Beloved,' 
by a composer of his own race—Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor." Mr. Hayes, assisted by 
R. Augustus Lawson, gave a concert in 
Hartford, Conn., at St. Monica's Episcopal 
Church, under the patronage of two white 
bishops and many people of distinction, both 
white and colored. 
(I The Coleridge-Taylor Society with fifty 
student voices, gave their second concert to 
white and colored auditors at the Florida 
Baptist College, Jacksonville. The singing 
of Josephine Junius, a contralto soloist, was 
especially remarked. 
C The Glee Club of the Central High 
School, Louisville, Ky., gave a concert largely of Negro compositions. 
(I Mrs. Anna Burckhardt, of Lincoln, 
Neb., is a colored artist with a large number 
of white pupils. Her portrait of the late 
Booker T. Washington has been hung by the 
Board of Education in the Lincoln High 
School. 
C The Washington, D. C , Star says: " A 
head of a child modeled by Mrs. May Howard Jackson
placed on exhibition in the lower loan room 
of the Corcoran Gallery of Art. It is an 
admirable piece of work, well constructed, 
nicely modeled, and expressive, and it takes 
its place well among the works in this gallery by sculptors of more experience and 
greater reputation." 
d In memory of the late Professor John 
T. Layton, a Washington, D. C , chorus of 
one hundred voices is preparing to render 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha." Dr. C. S. 
Wormley heads the movement and Josephine 
Wormley will direct the chorus. TH E CRISIS 
INDUSTRY 
TEN THOUSAN D DOLLAR S was paid 
* to stockholders of the colored Berean 
Loan Association of Philadelphia, Pa., on 
Washington's birthday. The association has 
assets of over $200,000. 
(I The New York Central Railroad is asking for colored laborers. Another large factory calling for one hundred colored girls is 
reported to have been opened in Detroit, 
Mich. In Western Massachusetts the 
Hampden County Improvement League is 
seeking good colored farmers for the tobacco 
farms. A t Dover, N. J., there are openings 
for colored men in the factories, foundries, 
and stove works. Colored men are being 
employed as engineers, firemen, and brakemen at the Scullin-Gallagher's Steel Plant 
at St. Louis, Mo. They have replaced striking white men. 
d Movements to take proper care of 
Negro immigrants from the South have been 
started in Baltimore, Md., and Philadelphia, 
Pa. In Baltimore better hospital accommodations, better housing, and parks are suggested. In Philadelphia Negroes have been 
especially active in matters of health and 
housing. 
C It is reported that a colored man of 
Lincoln, Neb., received copper stock from a 
penniless salesman in return for his board. 
These two thousand shares of the United 
Verde Extension are now worth over thirty 
dollars a share. 
C A $10,000 laundry is proposed by colored people of Nashville, Tenn. 
C A t Rocky Mount, N. C , the white floor 
manager of a knitting mill employing colored girls has been discharged for cursing 
one of the girls. The girls struck until the 
manager was sent away. 
C The Colored Richmond, Va., Medical 
Society will erect a well-equipped professional building soon. 
O The cotton crop of Louisiana was unusually good last season and sold at high 
prices. It is reported that many Negro 
planters have bought automobiles costing 
$3,000 or more. 
d The National Benefit Association of 
Washington, D. C , reports an income of 
$376,816 last year. It owns in stocks and 
bonds $181,426. 
(I Marlborough, Mich., is the latest "Negro 
city." It is incorporated with a hotel, 
school, theatre, houses, and a factory. 
(T A study of the Negro in Chicago by 
the Chicago Daily News is sympathetically 
done and brings out facts of great interest. 
Among these it shows that Jean Baptiste 
Point de Saible, a free colored man of San 
Domingo, was the first settler of Chicago 
and the first property owner, 137 years ago. 
The largest employers of colored labor are 
the Pullman Company with 7,500 porters, 
and the stock yards with 5,000 colored workers. 
C The Three States Better Farming Association has been organized in Memphis, 
Tenn. B. M . Roddy is the president. 
(I Despite the advice of the Tuskegee Conference fifteen mechanics have come from 
Tuskegee to Akron, Ohio. They will work 
in the building trades. 
C Depositors of the defunct Alabama 
Penny Prudential Savings Bank, Birmin
C The Mechanics Savings Bank of Richmond, Va., has purchased a whole block in 
the west end, where it will make improvements. 
C Brown's Savings and Banking Company of 
through its Christmas clubs last year; the 
Mechanics Savings Bank of Richmond, Va., 
$60,000; and the Wage Earners Savings 
Bank of Savannah, Ga., $14,000. 
(I The Henry Mears Feed Company of Savannah, Ga., has added a motor truck to 
its equipment. A new drug store has been 
opened by Dr. George Pate. 
C Mr. George W. Turner, of Little Rock, 
Ark., has invented a spring fan which will 
run continuously for twenty-four hours. 
The patent has been granted. • 
C The Mutual Savings Bank of Portsmouth
has paid all expenses and has net earnings 
of $3,000 for last year. 
(I A colored farm demonstrator has been 
hired by the white business men of Yazoo 
City, Miss., to make the Negroes better satisfied and stop their migration North. 
C The Barbers Union of Omaha, Neb., 
will not admit Negroes. Recently the union 
raised prices. The Negroes did not. The 
result is a very large transfer of patronage. 
C The Washington Sanitarium and Hotel 
Company is being operated at Mount Clemens, M
C The Rev. H . H . Johnson, a retired colored minister and real estate dealer of New 
Haven, Conn., was found at his death to be 
worth over $100,000. THE HORIZON 29 7 
C Boynton, Okla., is a colored town in the 
oil and farming region. Many of its inhabitants are wealthy. One of them, George 
W. Davis, sold his oil interests last year for 
$75,000. 
C Colored undertakers and business men 
of North Carolina have incorporated a $50,-
000 casket factory. It will be located at 
Fayetteville and will employ from fifty to 
one hundred colored people. 
EDUCATION 
TWO colored institutions have celebrated their fiftieth anniversaries, 
Howard University at Washington, D. C , 
and Morehouse College at Atlanta, Ga. 
The celebration at Howard consisted of a 
reunion of the alumni, a conference of social workers, and an address by Secretary 
Lane, of the U . S. Interior Department. 
Many visitors were in attendance. The 
charter of Howard University is dated 
March 2, 1867. The university has graduated 4,591 students since 1867, including 
1,000 doctors, 844 bachelors of arts and 
normal graduates, 771 lawyers, 423 ministers, 324 dentists, 264 pharmacists, 703 
from the Academy, and 362 from other 
departments. Morehouse College was established as Augusta Institute in Augusta, 
Ga., in 1867. It was then moved to Atlanta 
and became the Atlanta Baptist Seminary. 
Recently its name has been changed to 
Morehouse College. The fiftieth anniverPRESIDEN T AN D MBS . JOH N HOP E O F MORE ­
HOUS E COLLEGE . 
sary was celebrated by a three days' conference. Among those who took part were 
the president of Brown University, the 
secretary of the General Education Board, 
Dr. D. W. Abercrombie of Worcester Acad
C The fiftieth anniversary of the Howard 
Orphanage and Industrial School at King's 
Park, L. I., is being celebrated by a campaign to raise $100,000 as an endowment. 
George Foster Peabody is chairman of the 
Campaign Committee. The institution has 
a 572-acre farm and takes care of 250 colored boys and girls. Dr. J. H . N . Waring, 
formerly principal of the Colored High 
School, Baltimore, Md., and more recently 
a practising physician in Washington, 
D. C , will succeed Mrs. James H . Gordon 
as superintendent. 
C The Virginia Association and School 
Improvement League met in Roanoke. 
Among the speakers were G. P. Phoenix 
of Hampton, Archdeacon Russell, and W. 
T. B. Williams. 
G Colored scholars are already beginning 
to gain distinction. A t Radcliffe College, 
Cambridge, Mass., Frances Grant, eldest 
daughter of the late Boston dentist, has 
been elected to the Phi Beta Kappa. A t 
Williams' College, Williamstown, Mass., 
Rayford W. Logan of the Dunbar High 
School, Washington, D. C , has been elected 
to the same society. A t the Harrisburg, 
Pa., High School, Harlan Allen Carter, son 
of W. Justin Carter, the well-known lawyer, won the Lamberton Oratorical Prize. 
He has been prominent in school athletics 
and will enter Howard University. In 
Philadelphia, Pa., there were eleven graduates from the Normal School for Girls and 
eleven from the Girls' High Schools. 
There were two graduates from the Central 
who won distinction were Helen C. Underbill, 
Raymond P. Alexander, who was treasurer 
of his class and one of the editors of the 
school paper. He spoke at commencement 
on the "Future of the Negro" and was 
listed among the ten most distinguished 
students. Ernest Brown, who won the 
Columbia University speaking contest for 
Westchester County, N . Y. , at Winyah 
School, has won the state contest under the 
same auspices, in Earl Hall, Columbia 29S TH E CRISIS 
HARLA N ALLE N CARTE R 
(See page 297) 
University, which entitles him to fifty dollars cash or a scholarship in Columbia 
College. 
C. New school buildings are going up here 
and there in the South. At Beaumont, 
Texas, the cornerstone of a new modern 
school was laid in the presence of 3,000 colored people and a few whites. The building will cost $77,000 and occupy a whole 
city block. It will be fireproof, with 
twenty rooms and an assembly room seating 300 children. A t Jacksonville, Fla., 
steps are being taken to give the Stanton 
School, which is the largest public school in 
the state, a new building. 
d The industrial building of the Alcorn A . 
and M . College, Alcorn, Miss., has been 
destroyed by fire. The loss is $12,000. 
C Mr. D. C. Suggs of Greensboro has been 
elected President of Livingstone College, 
Salisbury, N . C. He is a graduate of Lincoln University and for a long time has 
been Professor of Natural Science in the 
Georgia State Industrial College at Savannah. He has considerable property and is 
the third president of Livingstone, his predecessors being the late J. C. Price, and Dr. 
W. H . Goler. Dr. Goler is now Financial 
Secretary of the A . M . E. Church. 
C The Negro Organization Society of Virginia has conducted a state-wide tag day 
for the benefit of the Industrial Home for 
Wayward Colored Girls in Hanover County. 
C. A summer school for teachers will be 
held at Cheyney, Pa., July 5 to August 2. 
The cost of board and tuition for the 
month will be fifteen dollars, and applications accompanied by check should be made 
as soon as possible. Teachers of rural 
schools will be given preference. Courses 
will be offered in the special methods used 
in the teaching of the elementary subjects, 
school management, English, history and 
civics, nature study, physiology and hygiene, drawing and designing, physical 
training, cooking, sewing, wood-working 
and gardening. 
C A dinner was given at the Hermitage 
Hotel, Nashville, Tenn., to Dr. Hanus of 
Harvard University, the presidents of Vand
Butler, Abraham Flexner, and other local 
white men. Negro education was discussed. 
C A t the South Florida Fair the Negro 
exhibit was excellent and there was a large 
attendance on Negro Day. 
C Senator W. E . English has introduced a 
bill to establish an industrial school for 
Negroes in Indiana. A similar bill was 
passed through the last Legislature, but 
the money was never spent. 
(I In Portsmouth, Va., new salary increases 
have been made for teachers, but with 
great discrimination against colored teachers. White, teachers begin with $400 a 
year in the elementary schools and are increased $50 a year until they receive $750. 
Colored teachers start at $250 and are increased $25 a year until they reach $450. 
C Leland College, in New Orleans, a school 
which recently sold its property and has 
about $300,000 in funds, is seeking a site 
in Louisiana. Dr. John Ford of Jacksonville is to be the new president. 
RAYMON D P . ALEXANDE R 
(See page 297) TH E HORIZON 299 
G The colored people of Chicago are asking for a member on the school board. E . 
H . Morris, Esq., may be appointed. 
C Charges have been .preferred against 
J. N . Marquiss, the President of the Colored A . and M . School at Langston, Okla
MEETINGS 
THE eighteenth annual meeting of the 
National Negro Business League will 
be held next August at Chattanooga, Tenn. 
C The nineteenth biennial session of the 
Supreme Lodge of the Colored Knights of 
Pythias will meet in St. Louis, Mo., August 19. A t least 20,000 visitors are expected. 
C Race conferences have been held as follows: A t Payne College, Cuthbert, Ga.; 
Columbia, S. C ; Southern University, New 
Orleans, La. ; Georgia State Industrial College, Savannah; Piney Woods S
Most of these conferences were especially 
for farmers and all of them were well 
attended. 
C A community conference was held in 
Baltimore, Md., by the Women's Co-operative Civic League. Mrs. A . D. Hunton an
Mrs. Harris Barrett were among the 
speakers. 
C. A conference of employed and volunteer 
workers among colored women in city Y . 
W. C. A.'s was held at Indianapolis, Ind. 
Among the speakers were Miss M . B. Belcher, of St. Louis, and Miss H . Roelofs. 
Ev a D. Bowles was in charge. 
C The colored dentists of Virgini a met in 
Roanoke. 
C The Negroes of Mississippi are actively 
organized and working under a colored 
commission in order to make a success of 
their part in the Mississippi Centennial 
Exposition at Gulfport next December. 
TH E CHURC H 
THE Bishops' Council of the A . M . E . 
Church held its mid-winter session at 
Hot Springs, Ark . 
G A state-wide meeting of 160 Negro ministers and laymen was held at St. John A . 
M . E. Church, Montgomery, Ala . Resolutions were adopted "requesting fairer 
treatment in the courts, protection at the 
hands of those in authority, more consideration from the white people of communities, higher wages for their work, the right 
not to be judged by the low and vicious 
members of the race, and pledging their 
support in making America a saloonless 
country. The meeting urged the Negroes 
lo stay in those communities granting 
these requests." This is the best yet. 
G The Colored Laymen's Missionary Move
meeting in Richmond, Va., has enrolled 300 
men for its work. 
C A campaign to raise $86,000 for the 
various Negro Baptist institutions in Texas 
has been started by the Baptists at Fort 
Worth. 
C The First Baptist Church of Little Rock, 
Ark., has installed a $3,000 pipe organ. 
C Bishop W. W. Beckett of the A . M . E. 
Church has been cordially received in South 
Africa. Among the speakers at the reception was the well-known Dr. Abdurahman. 
C A t the Federal Council of the Churches 
of Christ in America, meeting in St. Louis, 
Mo., colored speakers voiced complaints 
against the South. Rev. J. W. Gilbert, of 
Augusta, Ga., said: "In almost any community the Negro is given the most unhealthy part in which to live, where there 
is no sanitation. Why do the Negroes die 
at such a rapid rate? They are being 
killed; they live in such miasmatic conditions." Dr. John R. Hawkins, of Washington, D. C , said that Negroes were leaving 
the South by hundreds of thousands. "Condi
whole problem rests with the white men 
who have control of the government and 
the railroads and the municipalities. If 
you want to settle it right, go back to your 
homes and confer with a few Negroes, who 
will tell you the truth, if it be guaranteed 
that they won't be run away from their 
homes. They love their homes, but life is 
not worth living there." 
POLITICS 
SENATO R MOSES E. CLAP P of Minnesota 
tion in Washington, D. C , on his retirement from the Senate. The Honorable A . 
H . Grimke presided. 
C Alderman Oscar DePriest, of Chicago, 
111., has withdrawn from the race and Louis 
B. Anderson has been nominated for his 
place by the Republicans. 
C Mr. C. P. Russell acted as a member of 
the Grand Jury of the Third Session of the 
Superior Court at Boston. 300 TH E CRISIS 
G Mr. Elijah J. Graham, Jr., of Wheeling, 
has been made law librarian for Ohio County, W. Va . 
C Mound Bayou, the Negro town of Mississippi, is in a political turmoil, the G
whom the town refuses to receive. 
C The Supreme Court of Missouri has 
decided that Charles H . Turpin, a colored 
man for a long time Constable of the Fourth 
District, has been defeated for re-election 
by eleven votes. Thirty-eight of his votes 
were thrown out because the voters had 
written their names at the bottom! 
C The Honorable J. C. Roberts is the 
colored member of a commission of three, 
appointed by the Colonial Council of the 
Danish West India Islands to confer with 
the U . S. Government. 
PERSONAL 
MISS PEAR L MITCHELL , daughter of 
the late president of Wilberforce University, has done the work of the su
or's course in music at Oberlin College in 
one year. She was selected as one of the 
five students to teach the conducting class 
of eighty during the instructor's absence on 
vacation. She will be graduated in June. 
C Mr. Hannibal, a colored man, was the 
chef of the famous Diet Squad of New York 
policemen. 
G Mr. Howard P. Drew is on the debating 
team of Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa. 
C Mr. James T. Ferrell is foreman of the 
Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railway 
Wheelhouse at Sedalia, Mo. He has been in 
charge for sixteen years and during the last 
five years has employed colored workmen entirely. The shop has an output of 600 wheels 
a month. 
C Mr. William W. Cook at La Salle, 111., and 
Lowell W. Baker at Albion, Mich., are two 
colored superintendents of construction employed on the staff of the supervising architect of the U . S. Treasury. Their records 
are among the best. 
C Mr. Robert Welborn, of Jacksonville, Fla., 
a white man, willed $125,000 to a colored 
woman, Sarah P. Thompson, who nursed him 
through a severe illness without pay. 
C The song "Pretty Baby," which was so 
popular in Ziegfeld's "Follies," was composed by Tony Jackson, a colored piano 
player of Chicago, 111., and sold to the publishers for forty-five dollars. 
C Mr. John C. Jordan, after serving thirty 
years in the U . S. Navy, has been recently 
retired as Chief Petty Officer. He has received six medals, one of which, the Dewey 
Medal, is for his bravery at Manila Bay. 
C Mr. Cleveland Buchanan has been appointed Criminal Investigator in the District 
Attorney's office at Los Angeles, Cal. 
G Miss Grace P. Campbell has been appointed an officer on the Parole Commission of 
the State of New York after competitive 
examination. 
C Ashby Jackson, the only colored man on 
the Fire Department at Wheeling, W. Va., 
has served twenty years. 
G The late Mrs. Laura B. Winslow, of New 
York City, bequeathed $12,000 to Louise 
Pache, her colored servant. 
C The necrology for the month includes 
Arthur S. Gray, a well-known and widelyliked druggist and stenographer of Washingto
colored letter carrier of Baltimore, Md.; 
Alexander Henson, a pioneer undertaker of 
Washington, D. C.; John J. Taylor, a law 
stenographer of Cincinnati, Ohio; the Rev. 
Dr. M . W. Gilbert of Nashville, and the 
Rev. Joseph Smith of Chattanooga, Tenn. 
FOREIGN 
LEO N WELCHIN , a colored soldier in the 
Austrian Army, has been decorated 
with the Iron Cross for bravery under fire. 
He is a West Indian by birth. 
C The Paramount Chief of the Bechuana-L
tributed $1,780 to the British Red Cross Society. 
C The forty-fourth anniversary of the 
emancipation of slaves in Porto Rico was 
celebrated March 22 under the auspices of 
the Laborers' Institute of Social Reforms, 
with the co-operation of the authorities of 
the Island. 
G The Native Labor Brigade of South 
Africa has furnished over 10,000 volunteers 
for work in Europe. They have uniformed, 
drilled, and organized. The Cape Colored 
Corps has been serving with the English 
troops in East Africa . The Swazi chiefs 
have sent their young Paramount Chief and 
a number of his companions to be educated 
at Lovedale. Khama, the aged Chief of the 
BaMangwato, being seriously ill , has become reconciled to his son. Chief Lewanika, 
of the Barotse Nation, has been succeeded 
by Chief Leita. 
G Mr. Jesse Mohabuke Makhothe, a Basuto, TH E HORIZO N 30 1 
has been appointed one of the five members 
of the Alexander Health Committee in the 
Transvaal, South Africa. This is the first 
time a native has had any political recognition in the Transvaal. 
GHETT O 
IN St. Louis, Mo., the Circuit Court is trying to decide whether Elizabeth M . 
Simpson, who died sixteen years ago with 
an estate of $40,000, was colored or a "Creole." Colored heirs have appeared but her 
white employers' family would like to keep 
the property. 
C The Tennessee courts have upheld the validity of the Jennings' will by which Betty 
Hicks, the colored mother of his children, inherits his estate worth $100,000. 
C Mr. John Donaldson, a colored pitcher, is 
said to have refused an offer of $10,000 to 
pose as a Cuban instead of as an American 
Negro. 
C Mr. John Aguila has been awarded $100 
because he was refused service in a New 
York cafe on account of color. 
C The Supreme Court of Georgia has affirmed the action of the Superior Court in 
appointing a receiver for the property of the 
colored Odd Fellows. 
(I The city segregation case will be heard by 
the Supreme Court this month in Washington, D. C. 
C Six white men at Dallas, Texas, have been 
fined for holding Negroes in peonage. Their 
fines range from $200 to $1,000. 
CMr . and Mrs. S. A . Adams, of Boston, 
were refused service at a Nahant, Mass., 
hotel. They entered suit for $500, but the 
proprietor settled the case without coming 
to trial. 
C New Orleans, La., has decided to segregate white and colored prostitutes in separate blocks of the city. 
C Twenty Negroes who attended the Tuskegee Conference are suing the Sou
Railway at Memphis, Tenn., for sickness 
contracted in an antiquated railway coach. 
C Dr. Roscoe Giles, who was discharged 
after holding a position for a day in the 
Municipal Hospital in Chicago, 111., is bringing suit against the management. 
C. It is said that a group of daily papers in 
the Western States have given written instruction to their reporters to designate all 
persons of color in their stories as Negroes 
but to refrain from mentioning nationality 
in the case of other races. 
G Mr. Levi Pruitt, a colored man of Detroit, 
Mich., killed a white man who had pursued 
and attacked him. He was first convicted 
of manslaughter but at a second trial was 
acquitted. The judge congratulated the 
jury and said that if Pruitt had been a white 
man he would never have been even brought 
to trial. He was defended by Francis H . 
Warren, a colored attorney. 
([ A t Gainesville, Fla., the Colored Young 
Men's Club objected to a comic lynching 
which was to be one of the acts of a company of white players. The scene was accordingly withdrawn and the lithographs 
destroyed. 
C Mr. George Fryar, husband of the woman 
who was killed by the victim of the mob at 
Waco, Texas, has sued the colored Paul 
Quinn College for $50,000. He alleges that 
the college paper published a story saying 
that Frya r himself was suspected of the 
murder. 
C The white women of Georgia have passed 
the following resolutions: 
"WHEREAS , for the second consecutive year Georgia stands pre-eminent 
among the states within which lynchings 
occur, and within which lynchers habitually go unpunished; Resolved: 
"1. That this body, representing sixteen thousand North Georgia women, urge 
upon the next Legislature the passage of 
a law to remove from office all officials who 
fail to protect prisoners and to uphold the 
law. 
"2. That we believe a concerted effort 
should be made by the law-abiding majority of the South to arouse the public conscience in regard to the evils of lawlessness 
among us; and that some way should be 
found by which churches of all denominations may unite with social and educational 
forces, and with laymen in every walk of 
life, to put a stop to mob violence and murder, and to the moral degeneration which 
they inevitably propagate among our 
people." 
C The state of North Carolina has recently secured $3,000,000 from a bond issue 
for state improvements. Of this sum colored schools get only $35,000 and the only 
considerable sum given to the colored people 
is $125,000 to an insane hospital. 
(I The Loranger Public School at Amite 
City, La., is in turmoil because twenty 
pupils suspected of having colored blood 
(Continued on page 303) 302 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Announcing the Winners 
Several hundred replies were received to our advertisement in the January 
CRISIS for suggestions of advertising with our newly adopted emblem. The task 
of going over these carefully and giving proper consideration to every idea submitted was no small one. Out of the number submitted the judges felt that the 
following suggestions were entitled to the awards made below: 
Mrs. J. B. Osborn, 17 Keswick St., Boston, Mass $10.00 
"Completes Your Life Line." 
Mrs. Josephine Turpin Washington, Wilberforce University, Ohio... . 5.00 
"The Strength of Two." 
The following awards were also made for ideas of possible use: 
H . A. Leatherman, 1220 E. S6th St., Cleveland, O $1.00 
Orlando Jordan, 629 W. St. Clair St., Indianapolis, Indiana 1.00 
Lemuel D. Bolton, 514 W. Orange St., Jacksonville, Florida 1.00 
Ernest Hutchinson, 1000 3 d St., Louisville, Ky 1.00 
The Company desires to thank the public for the interest which it took in 
the contest, and for the enthusiasm and solid support with which its work has 
been received. During 1916, it wrote over TW O MILLIO N DOLLARS ' worth 
of new business. In the first quarter of this year it has written nearly a 
MILLION , and the year's business will total over FIV E MILLION . Its policies 
are clear, concise and devoid of technicalities. Its claims are paid without any 
delay or deductions. No matter where you live you can secure a policy and your 
protection will be as secure as it would be at the Company's Home Office. We 
\ will send you particulars for the asking. Write today. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE 
COMPANY 
HE M A N E . PERRY , President 
HARR Y H . PACE , Secretary-Treasurer 
HOME OFFICE : 
200 AUBURN AVENUE 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Please send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount $. . 
Sex 
Age 
Weight . . . 
Height 
Occupation 
Name 
Address . . 
(C . April , 1917) 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 303 
Mrs . M . Watso n Rud d 
of the 
Idea l Exclusiv e Parlor s 
announce a Special Course in the 
Ar t o f Beaut y Cultur e 
during the summer months. 
This course is planned with special reference 
to teachers and students contemplating a summer in New York City. As the size of the 
class is limited prospective students should 
apply early. 
Address Mrs. M . Watso n Rudd . 47 West 42d 
Street, New Yor k City , 
Red Rose Face Powder 
as smooth as swansdown. Tones your' complexion to the highest point of beauty. Pric e 
sample box 20c. 
Red Rose Cream of Sulphur 
for dandruff, blackheads and all skin affections, Pric e 50c. 
FLORESSENCE MFG . CO. 
239 W. 63d St., New York City 
have been dismissed and then ordered reinstated. 
C The bill to segregate colored children 
in cities of the second class has been killed 
in the Kansas Legislature. 
C. Bert Meyers, one of the leaders of the 
mob in the attempted lynching at Lima, 
Ohio, has been sentenced to ten years in 
the penitentiary. 
C The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
February 9, Proctor, Ark., James Smith, 
alias Coy Anderson—hanged for resisting 
arrest and killing a deputy sheriff. He 
was also suspected of killing a manager. 
February 28, Hammond, La., Emma 
Hooper—hanged for wounding a constable. 
He was seeking to arrest her on the charge 
of slightly wounding a colored boy. 
March 2, Meigs, Ga., Linton Clinton— 
shot to death for assault upon a girl. 
MISCELLANEOU S 
F
RANC E has no discontented black or 
brown -or yellow subjects. She did have 
to fight bitterly for Algiers, but she fought 
mercifully and in her attitude toward Abdel-Kadir and his gallant patriots, she est
lished the admission of equality. This has 
been France's valuable secret. It is an 
open secret, but one that the other nations 
have not cared to appropriate. France's 
dusky subjects are regarded and treated as 
free and worthy men. 
The Senegalese (jet-black Negroes) have 
fought for France in the great war as heroically as they could have fought for any 
ancestral chieftain; for they have been 
fighting for their friend rather than for 
their master and despot. . . . 
Judged solely by results, rather than by 
the meticulous criticism of professional 
fault-finders, France stands at the head of 
the empire builders of today. For France 
alone has put into practice her own irrefutable republican doctrine of fraternity. 
England and the rest scorn the brown or 
black man. France acknowledges him a 
human being, and measures him by his merit 
and not by his shade of complexion. —Cleveland Plain Dealer. 
Practically the West Indians should have 
nothing to fear from our dominance. Our 
colonial policy in the Philippines has been 
a great success and the traditions of the 
American people are all for giving the possession as large a degree of self-government 
as possible. But the spectacle of the 
administration buying a Negro community 
while the South is in the saddle and paying 
a strikingly high price for it, is curious, nevertheless. —Saginaw, Mich., CourierHerald. 
Is it a token of Spring's Joy to your friend? 
Then make it a year's subscription 
to the CRISIS. 
Correct Calling Cards 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEME N 
IO O FO R S O CENT S O R S O FO R 3 0 CENTS . N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FO R SAMPLE S AN D TERM 3 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWN1NG 
INDIANAPOLIS . INDIAN A 
LOO K HERE ! 
A real substitute for cedar chests. Positively prevents moths, etc., from infesting receptacles of clothing, furs, etc., at a moderate cost. The housewife 
can store away her winter wear safely from the 
ravages of all vermin. Circular free. 
EDWARD S SALE S CO . 
BO X 14S-X LIMA , O . 
Th e Poem s o f Philli s Wheatle y 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R WRICHT . JR. , and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
an d arranged i n a n attractive volum e suitabl e for 
a birthda y gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenu e : : : : New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS 304 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEM S 
Professor Raymond Weeks, Department of Romance Languages, Columbia University: "Since about the time I received 
your catalog (the most fascinating American catalog I have 
seen) I have intended writing to express my appreciation of 
what you have accomplished for letters in this country." 
This fascinating" catalog is yours for the asking. 
Th e Facts of Reconstruction By JOH N R. LYNC H 
Majo r Lynch , colored, now an officer of the United 
States Army , lived through Reconstruction, and took 
a lively part therein. H e served as a Membe r of 
Congress, later became Fourth Audito r of the Treasury, and by far the greater part of his adult life 
has been passed in public service. The late Sen. 
Hoa r in his "Autobiography" referred to Majo r 
Lync h in high terms. Illustrated. Fourth thousand. 
$1.65 by mail. 
The Negr o Race9 By JEROM E DOW D 
Prof. Dowd, white, who holds the Chai r of Sociology 
and Economics in the University of Oklahoma, has 
in preparation a series of volumes that relate to the 
Negro races, of which this is the second." The first 
volume, "West Africans," was published several 
years ago. The title of this volume, the second, is 
"East and South Africans, Wit h a Ful l Account of 
the Slave Trade. " Th e title of the third volume, 
now in preparation, is "The Negroes of America." 
$2.65 a volume by mail. 
Haiti : He r Histor y and He r Detractor s 
By J . N . LEGE R 
M . Leger, colored, formerly represented Haiti as 
Minister to the United States, and later represented 
Haiti as a member of the Peace Conference, at The 
Hague. In Europe as well as in Americ a he is regarded as one of the ablest men of his race. Two 
editions: one in English and one in French. Illustrated. Each edition $3.20 by mail. 
Th e Politica l Histor y of Slavery in the United 
States By JAME S Z. GEORG E 
Gen. George, white, served in the Confederate Army , 
became Chief Justice of Mississippi, and later represented his state in the United States Senate. This 
large octavo volume is the capstone of his long and 
illustrious life. He passed many years in its preparation. Edited by William Hayne Leavell, United 
States Ministe r to Guatemala. Introductions by John 
Bassett Moore , Professor of International Law and 
Diplomacy, Columbia University, and by the editor. 
Illustrated. $3.25 by mail. 
Negr o Tale s B y JOSEP H S. COTTE R 
Prof. Cotter, colored, is the principal of one of the 
largest schools for Negroes in the South. Like Prof. 
Ashby and Mr . Adams, Prof. Cotter reveals Negro 
life in imaginative prose fiction,—a branch of literature to which Negro authors should give 
tention. $1.00 by mail. 
Th e Monroe Doctrine in Its Relatio n to Haft i 
B y WILLIA M A . MACCORKL E 
Mr . MacCorkle , white, formerly governor of West 
Virginia , who is one of the most distinguished lawyers in Americ a as well as an author of distinction, 
in this volume particularly studies the operation of 
the Monro e Doctrine in its relation to the Republic 
of Haiti. Th e volume has attracted widespread attention. It is particularly timely now. $1.00 by mail. 
Lif e of Japa n B y MASUJ I MIYAKAW A 
Dr . Miyakawa , an eminent Japanese lawyer, student, 
and diplomat, in this volume writes intimately of 
the Japanese people. H e represented Japan diplomatically in this country. Prefaces by the Prince 
of Nijo, Chairman in Chie f Imperial Hous e of Peers, 
and by Viscount Kaneko , His Japanese Majesty's 
Priv y Councilor . Second edition, revised and enlarged, now ready. $1.65 by mail. 
Rac e Adjustmen t B y KELL Y MILLE R 
Prof. Miller , colored, Dean of the College of Arts 
and Sciences, Howar d University, is easily in the 
first rank of Negro teachers, writers, orators, and 
leaders, and is so recognized on both sides of the 
Atlantic. This volume comprises his essays on the 
Negro in Americ a that won for him fame as a man 
of letters when they were first published periodically. 
Third edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Out of the Hous e of Bondag e B y KELL Y MILLE R 
This volume by Dean Mille r contains the essays that 
he had written up to the time of its publication that 
were not included in his earlier volume, "Race Ad ­
justment," and have been written since the earlier 
volume was published. Already the sale of this new 
volume has been large. $1.65 by mail. 
Th e K u Klu x Kla n By LESTE R AN D WILSO N 
Prof. Walte r L . Fleming , Ph.D. , white, who occupies 
the Chai r of Histor y in the Universit y of Louisiana, 
has taken the original work by J . B. Lester and D. 
L . Wilson, the most authoritative work on the K u 
Klu x Kla n that has been published, edited it, added 
to it notes of his own, and has made of it a highly I 
valuable work indeed. Illustrated. $1.65 by mail. 
Ethiopi a B y CLAYTO N ADAM S 
Mr . Adams, colored, writes of the Lan d of Promise 
in this powerful novel,—the adjective is used deliberately. Th e ancient kingdom of Ethiopia has 
passed away, but its name still lives, not only as the 
proper appellation of the Negro race, but also figuratively, principally to designate the invisible kingdom 
of native Africans and their descendants. $1.00 by 
mail. 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHING CO. , 
440 Fourt h Avenu e 
New Yor k Cit y or TH E CRISIS, 
70 Fift h Avenu e 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E Caisis TH E 305 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E NEGR O AN D HIS PROBLEMS 
A prominent Southern white educator in a letter to the publishers says: "Your policy}' of absolute fairness with regard to 
the Negro question, along with your sympathy for the South, 
make me wish to cooperate with you as far as possible." Says 
a prominent Western colored educator to the publishers: "I 
am deeply impressed with the justice of your house. I see 
often, and he never tires of speaking of your great work in 
behalf of the Negro in literature." 
Rac e Orthodoxy i n the South 
By THOMAS PEARCE BAILEY 
Prof. Bailey, white, has held professorships in the 
Universities of California, Chicago, and Mississippi, 
and is now a professor in the University of the South. 
He has studied the Negro and his problems in every 
section of the United States. T o the problems that 
confront the two races in America he has brought 
a trained mind and scientific methods. $2.15 by mail. 
Th e Blac k Man's Burde n 
B y WILLIAM II. HOLTZCLAW 
Prof. Holtzclaw, colored, is the founder and the 
principal of the Utica Norma l and Industrial Institute for the Trainin g of Colored Youn g Me n and 
Youn g Women, already one of the largest educational 
institutions in the South. Introduction by the late 
Booker T. Washington. Thir d thousand. $1.60 by 
mail. 
Th e Strange r B y J . F . J . CALDWELL 
Mr . Caldwell, white, has written in "The Stranger" 
perhaps the greatest novel of Reconstruction yet 
penned. So, at least, able literary critics have said, 
and are saying. Ther e are no leopard spots on this 
story. $1.50 by mail 
Th e Voic e of Mizriam, B y JOHN WALTER PAISLEY 
Prof. Paisley, colored, for many years a professor 
of English Literatue, has assembled in this volume 
his own poems. Th e book deserves a place on the 
library shelf where Dunbar's fine poems are to be 
found. $1.25 by mail. 
Th e Ke y B y JAMES S. STEMONS 
Mr . Stemons, colored, is the Field Secretary of the 
Joint Organization for Equalizing Industrial Opportunities and the League of Civi c and Political Reform. H e holds this work to be what its full title 
implies: "Th e Key ; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem." Undoubtedly the work is a powerful study of the Negro and his problems. $1.00 by 
mail. 
M y Ogowe B y ROBERT HAMIL L NASSAU 
The Rev. Dr . Nassau, M.D. , S.T.D. , white, pioneer 
and explorer, was a resident of Afric a for forty-five 
years, as a missionary. A scholar of high attainments, in literature and in science, for more than 
half a century, now, he has contributed to the best 
modern thought. His many books take high rank 
without exception. But "M y Ogowe" is the culmination of his life as an ornithologist, an explorer, 
and a missionary. Th e work, which is a large octavo 
volume, contains 708 pages besides 50 full-page illustrations. $3 25 by mail. 
Kedde r Blood By WILLIA M M . ASHB Y 
Prof. Ashby, colored, was recently graduated from 
Yale. This novel, his first book, is a valuable contribution to the literature of his race. $1.00 by mail. 
Chie f Characteristic s of the Southern Negro 
By E . II. RANDLE 
Dr . Randle , white, formerly president of a Southern 
college, is well known as a student of the subject 
on which he writes. $1,00 by mail. 
The Ne w Negr o B y WILLIA M PICKENS 
Dean Pickens, colored, Dean of Morgan College, 
was graduated from Yale in the highest grade of 
his class. Ther e he won the Phi Beta Kappa Ke y 
and the Te n Eyck Oration. In this book, the full 
title of which is "The New Negro; His Political, 
Civil, and Mental Status," he discusses with great 
force and clarity nearly all the pressing political 
problems that now confront his race. $1.60 by mail. 
Th e Seed Tha t Wa s Sown in the Colony of Georgia 
By CHARLES SPALDING WYLL Y 
Col. Wylly , white, "has written an important book," 
says the Knoxvill e Sentinel. "The politician who is 
anything of a philosopher should profit by it, as 
should the student of history, and the lover of good 
literature. No one has better understood the institution of slavery, its mission and its defects." $1.35 
by mail. 
Negro Cultur e in West Afric a B y GEORGE W . ELLIS 
Mr . Ellis, colored, was for eight years Secretary of 
the United States Legation in Liberia. Since his 
return to America, he has written extensively on the 
Negro and his problems, and has taken a prominent 
[dace among the leaders of his race. In many respects this latest book of his is the most important 
work on the Negro yet published,—the Negro in 
Africa . Illustrated. $2.15 by mail. 
Whe n the E n Klu x Rode B y EYR E DAME K 
Mr . Damer, white, for many years a writer on 
the staff of an important Southern newspaper, relates briefly the history of the K u Klu x Kla n and 
the circumstances that brought that organization into 
existence. $1.00 by mail. 
Racia l Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopa l 
Churc h By JOHN H . REED 
The Rev. Dr . Reed, D.D. , K.C- , colored, writes authoritatively on the subject matter of his book. Introduction by Adn a B. Leonard, D.D. , LL.D . $1.60 
by mail. 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHING CO. , 
440 Fourt h Avenu e 
New Yor k Cit y or TH E CRISIS, 
70 Fift h Avenu e 
New Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CRISI S 306 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Books of Special Interest 
Lif e and Times of Frederick 
Douglass (Autobiography), 1892.$2.50 
The Douglass Memoriam, 1897, 
only edition (out of print) 5.00 
Black Phalanx, Joseph T. Wilson , 
1897 (out of print) 300 
From a Virgini a Plantation to the 
National Capitol, by John M . 
Langston, 1894 (out of print).. . 3.00 
Booker T. Washington, Builder of 
Civilization, Scott & Stowe 2.00 
Harrie t Tubman, Conductor of the 
Underground Railroad, the Moses 
of He r People, Sarah Bradford, 
1869 (out of print) 3.00 
Sojourner Truth, Ant i - Slavery 
Lecturer and early advocate of 
Woman's Suffrage (out of print) 2.50 
A Fool's Erran d and the Invisible 
Empire, Tourgee 1.50 
Underground Railroad, William 
Still, 1872 (out of print and very 
rare) 5.00 
The Future of the American 
Negro, Booker T. Washington, 
1907 (out of print) 1.50 
Autographs for Freedom, edited 
by Julia Griffiths, 1853, '854 (out 
of print), very scarce 2.50 
Th e Lif e of Toussaint L'O'uverture, Rev. John Beard, 1853 (out 
of print and very scarce) 2.00 
Negro Troops in the Wa r of the • 
Rebellion, George Williams (out 
of print) 1.50 
Capture and Execution of John 
Brown, Elijah Avey, an eye witness (out of print) 1.00 
Send for Catalog 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
135 West 135th Street, New York City 
Booker T.Washington's 
COMPLETE LIFE IN BOOK FORM NOW READY 
It is well illustrated, showing him 
leaving home, a rugged boy, for Hamp ­
ton Institute. A history from the cradle 
to the grave. This is the best book on 
Dr. Washington. The publishers, Austin Jenkins Co., Warde r Bldg.. Wash ­
ington, D. C , pay the express and give 
the best life-size photograph to each 
subscriber. Anyone wishing an agency 
can get prospectus and photo for 15 cts. 
$1.95 LOOK 
TAILORED 
^TO MEASURE 
Express 
Paid 
Pants 
To get you for a steady customer, 
this Swell Dress or Business pants, tailored -to- measure, choice 
of 17 styles.Guaranteedforl8month9V 
Solid wear, or Money Back—Quick . 
Genuine$5 value. Only 1 to a customer. 
Not l c For Extras 
Al l novelty features ar e free—no 
charge for big Peg Tops, fancy caffs, I 
fancy belt loops and pocket flaps. J 
Pick your choice from our FRE E ordering outfit conta
cloth and style combinations. I 
THIS PIN—GOLD 
Finished 
FRE E to YOU I 
Classy,lapel pin with 
pour first order onl y 850 
D band. get yours quick. 
Cash Profits to you for taking measures of 
relatives and neighbors, young Nat. . 
Spriggs made $139 in 30 days. Buy 
at lowest wholesale prices 
for yourself. Write for 
FRE E samples today. Dept 364 
CHICAGO TAILORS ASS'N. 
615 8B, FRANKLIN St;, Cbicigo 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M introducin g 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guarantee d to Gro w flai r In SI X TREATMENT S 
o r Mone y Refunded . Pric e S O cents pe r box . 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E . Slaughter Gambl e 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS , MO . 
COLORE D HEL P 
W e shall require a large number of competent persons, women 
and men, to fill positions in private families, hotels, etc., during 
coming spring and summer. 
Wages up to $100 per month. 
Send stamp for reply. 
NE W YOR K AN D NE W JERSE Y 
INDUSTRIA L EXCHANG E 
Bloomfield & N . Fullerton Aves., 
Montclair , N . J . 
Langfor d & Lake Aves., 
Asbur y Park, N . J . 
1931 Broadway Cor . 65th St., 
New Yor k City. 
See the Selected List on 
BOOKS : the Back Cover 
A "Womanly" Way 
To Remove Hair 
El-Rado Sanitary 
Liquid 
Washes the hair off by dissolving it. 
Women fairly revel in the comfort and 
cleanliness of hair-free underarms. 
After using El-Rado chiffon sleeves 
can be worn without any dress shields. 
Entirely harmless. Money-bac k guarantee . 
A t all toilet counters. 50c and $1.00 
If you prefer, we will fill your order by 
mail if you write enclosing stamps or coin. 
MM I LELIA W. ROBINSON 110 W. 196th Street. NEW YORK 
Mention T H E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 307 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y u ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Sen d order to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York N. Y. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made 10 commissions by parties'* handling 
"History of Negr o Soldiers in Spanish* American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
Th e Trut h abou t the Bible—introductor y pric e $2.00 
Wh y Jesus was a Ma n an d no t a Women—$1.50 
Sexology of th e Bible—$1.25 
Th e Dualit y of th e Bible—$1.50 
'' The sex Idea of these books make them the world's 
greatest books." E. B. Ramsey. M. D. 
"Will empty our Insane asylums, hospitals, and Jails." 
J. H. Powell, M. D. 
"The world's most revolutionary books." 
W. A- Swann, M. D. 
You should read the sex Idea of these books. 
Address the Author 
SIDNEY C. TAPF . Ph.B., P. 0. Box 710, Kansas City, Mo. 
Praiseworthy Muse 
A Magazine of Negro Poetry 
Published Quarterly. 
Edited and Published by 
J . HARVE Y L . BAXTER . 
A quarterly prize of ten dollars 
in gold is offered for the best poem 
on a given subject. 
For particulars address 
PRAISEWORTH Y MUS E 
711 Highlan d Ave . Norfolk , Va . 
Subscription prices: yearl y $1.00: foreign 
$1.25. 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-class service for First-class people 
3428 Sout h Par k Avenue , Chicago , III. 
The Journal of 
Negro History 
Published Quarterly 
100 Pages 
Edited by CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
TH E JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y is 
the official organ of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1,00 per year . Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Singl e numbers, 26 cents; 30 cents by mail . 
Checks should be made payable to TH E 
JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y and 
addressed to 
CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
1216 You St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscrip t Criticized 
an d Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
Mail Order Dealers 
Sell valuabl e instruction 
systems by cut pric e coupo n unde r Mone y Bac k 
Guarantee . Big- MARGIN. 
Smal l Sellin g Expense . 
Complet e Plan , Sampl e 
Coupon s an d BARGIN 
Bulletin sent on request. 
Mail Dealer's Coupon System 
621 So. Dearborn Street, ChJeaeo 
Let the 
- 4 in 1 -
Coupon Plan 
Increase 
Your Profits 
TEACHER S (all sub|ects) 
and Interpreters 
STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Established 1897 
1011 New York Avenue Washington. D. C . 
Mention Th e Crisis 30S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
EXCELLEN T OPPORTUNIT Y for Men and Women 
School of Mechanical Dentistry 
Complet e i n Eight h Months. Nigh t or Day . Writ e for Booklet, etc . 
A . O. BRANSO N & CO. , 52 W. 135th St.. New York City 
Kashmir Preparations 
"Better than the Best" 
The KASHMI R Institute teaches modern scientific methods of beauty and health 
by correspondence. Writ e for Catalog. Ou r 
"Deluxe Booklet on Beauty, Healt h and 
Success" is free for the asking. The 
Kashmir Preparations are imported from 
India. Bi g opportunity for agents. 
The Kashmir Chemical Co. 
K ASHMI R BLDG 
4709 State Street, Chicago, 111., U . S. A. 
Foreign Offices 
PARIS — T OKI O — C ALCUTT A 'The Kashmir Girl " 
Hand Made Natural Human Hair Wigs 
Transformations. 
Switches. Puffs, Plaits. 
Bangs, Corone t Braids, that 
can he combe d the same as 
you r ow n hair. Huma n 
hair for sale by ounce or 
pound . Hai r NETS . 
Mai l Orders sent to any rar t of the U . S. or B . W . I Send 2c for catalog. 
W E CARR Y TH E 
LARGES T STOC K I N 
ELECTRI C 
COMB S 
Mme . Baum' s Hair Emporium , Inc. , 486 Eighth Avenue, New York City 
Between 34th and 35th Streets 
.Mention 1 he Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 309 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pre*, 
N . E. Cor . 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati, Ohi o 
Ope n Jul y 1st Close d Septembe r lO th 
TH E OCEA N HOUS E 
SE A ISLE CITY , N . J . 
This hotel is right on the ocean front. It has 
wide porches, large conservatory dining room where 
one has a beautiful view of the sea while dining, 
and every room opens on the ocean. Special rates 
for July ; room and board, $8.00 per week. Personally managed by Mrs. Luc y Lee, 5 Plain St., 
Elmhurst, L . I. Address after June 22nd, Ocean 
House, Sea Isle City, N . J. 
ALLIANCE SKlN 
PANTS ONLY, 
•mnHttidD " BSSSSTL ALI,|"'SSI'
I
° 
W« Pay Ejtpro** or Parcel Post Charga* 
Made as you like them. No extra 
charge for tunnel belt loops, cuffs on 
pants, etc. Yeurown initials embroidered in colors on the left tunnel pocket. 
See our*'Alligator'* trimmings on panta. 
See all our latest original 
Agents 
Wanted 
At Once 
novelties. Get acquainted 
with this Alliance—order 
you r own clothes at Jess 
than wholesale price. We 
make suits t o measure from $7.50 up. 
Joat mail UH voor nam© and nHHr»>n« and rereive FREE our agency outfit am] all anmples . 
Yoo will want to be oar airent. Mak e bi 
money. Satisfaction xuarauLecd. Our, re, 
ereocea will convince you. 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE 
Oopt. 32 7 Wholeaala Tallora, Chicago 
isi? FREE 
To Introduce Our Nobby 
Clothes in Your Town 
It's the very finest suit 
sou ever saw. $50 couldn't 
buy a better one, but you 
can get it free. It's made 
to your measure from the 
'u • . beautiful cloth. Don't 
fail to get one of these 
suits. You can earn itwbile 
yuu wear it and maka 
$50 a Week 
by taking" orders. Drop 
us a po3tal for latest sample outfit, select the style 
you want and the cloth. 
Let us prove our amazing 
offer. We send everything 
free the same day your request is received. Address 
Parago n Tailorin g Co . Depi 351 Chic a g o 
FEET 
LOO K 
Member NOW 
My Dandy Tailored 
Suit cost me Nothing 
Also got elegant Emblem 
button free, showing my Rank 
Degree. Am swellest dressed 
uwD in town, making big money. 
I introduce the Society to friends, 
get them to join. It's grand work 
for my spare time. 
Made$21.88 Profit One Evening 
Go t m y ow n beautifu l suit , became Gen ­
era l Affent. Cot promoted. No w I' m a 
leader pronto look opt o me . Bent thin e 
I ever nad . Go t appointed i n your territor y 
-Writ o quick, fect-ivo HcoV „t Samplne 
FREE, how to join ur>d gel fcuibkm FREE . 
LIBERTY TAILORING SOCIETY 
Dept . ££ J Chicago , Ills. INSIGNIA EMBLEM 
LADIES MAKIN G MONE Y WIT H QUIN 0 COURSE 
littl e time . Be ou r agent. Sell our goods an d mak e money . Quin o Hai r Grower , 50c , Templ e Oil , 
75c. Try a box. Writ e QUINO , 636 Fog g Street, NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Mention T h e Crisis 
I PAINLESS treatment for 
I CORNS. BUNIONS. INGROWN NAILS, m l AL L
 1 
other AILMENTS of the FEET . 
DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
CH I R O PO D 1S T 
Registered In the States of New York and New Jersey 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 Weat 136th St.. New York City. 31 0 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Send postal today for full information 
how to get your new 
suit, made to measure, without a 
penny's cost. $30 to $40 would not 
buy a better one. Simply wear it. 
tell your friends where you got it -
take their orders - and make 
$10 to $15 a Day 
in your spare time. It is dead 
easy - you never saw a nobbier 
suit or a more stunning pattern, 
cut in very latest style. Your choice 
of 60 fabrics and 32 styles. Drop us 
a postal card for heavy pattern book, 
inside information about styles, self-measuring blanks, etc. DON'T 
WAIT. We prepay Delivery Charges 
Mail Postal Now 
American Woolen Mills Co. 
Dept. 861 Chicago 
Every Agent can 
Get an Auto free 
No Contest 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
Too—yourself—can positively mate $60 a week and get a Fre e 
Auto . 1 want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Hot 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise. Bell, end appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller i n 60 years—the ROBINSON FOLDIN G 
BAT H TUB . Demonstrating- Tu b Furnished . Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom In any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. 8elfemptylng.posltlvely unleakable. Absolutely Guaranteed for 
10 years, Bemember, fully 70$ of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensationa l Sale s Successe s 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
1400 profit In80days, Bev. Otto Rchulze, Mo., got S1600 to date. 
Bufkholder, Mont., orders 8107? In 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that, pleasant, 
permanent, fasoinating work. Write a postcard. Le t me 
write yon a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your oredlt is good If you mean bushiess. But you moet be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That sail . Write 
a postoard now. I want to pay yon $60.00 every week. 
H . S. ROBINSON, PRES . TH E ROBINSON CABINET MFQ . CO, ' 
4290 Factories Building TOLEDO. OHIO 
FREE 
CLOTH 
SAMPLES 
Biff selection of cloth samplesGuaranteed all-wool Serges.new fancy 
Worsteds, stylish Cassimeres. all latest 
shades and patterns —everything Roo d 
dressers wear - Free. Postal will bring it. 
We make tine clothes tor men to 
individual measure, absolutely (ruaranteed 
to fit and please at prices that will astomF h 
you Don't buy suit or overcoat anywhere 
at anv price—unti l you have no t ou r selection o f 
"ot h .ample , (aah'lon mood. , tape line, ejeryIhinit Fr.. . Sto p payin e hixh price , fo r clotb.B . 
Writ e quick fo r our umaiinK .ultoflo c 
TH E CtPITO L T*IL0RS.Depl . 121 . Chicago,!! ! 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon DENTIST 
18 * W. 135th Street New York City 
Telephones:
 = 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Buildin g Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
COUNSELLOR -AT - LA W 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Buildin g 
113 Marke t St , Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practic e Notar y Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR -AT -LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Office*: Suite 802 Syke s Block 
Nea r Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Te l 5437 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR -AT -LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Aihbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNE Y -AT -LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARRY M . COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write jor Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
DR. KAPLAN , Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Leno x Ave. , Ne w Yor k 
55 
Valuabl e Formulas, Tricks, 
Illusions and Household hints, 
in our interesting magazine for 
two issues. SENT COMPLET E FOR 10c 
CRAWFORD'S SPECIALTY HOUSE 
127 West 134th 8t., Dept. C 
NE W YOR E CITT 
LEAR N TH E S, T. TAYLO R SYSTE M 
of Garment Cutting, Fitting, Designing, Drap ­
ing, Embroidery, Han d Decoration of Garments, Dressmaking and Ladies' Tailoring . 
Terms reasonable. Writ e for Catalog. 
S. T. TAYLO R SCHOO L AN D PATTER N PARLOR S 
Mrs. Maybe l B . Evans, Prin. 
34 N . Garfiel d Avenu e Columbus, O. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
60 A WEEK AND THIS FREE 
AUTOMOBILE 
Your Next Suit Free A Ne w Boo k b y Dr . D u Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
By W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , author of "Souls of Black 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa , America , and wherever 
else it has appeared. T o look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
Dr. D u Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
94 volume * now ready 
Published by HENRY HOL T & COMPANY , 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A . L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per /60c. net 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - -
Postag e extra 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 60 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOM E SELECTE D EARLIER VOLUMES : 
EVOLUTIO N By J . A . Thomson LATIN AMERIC A By W. R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENC H REVOLUTIO N VICTORIAN LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROM E By W. Warde Fowler GERMAN Y OF TODA Y 
PROBLEMS O F PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H . A . L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A. C. Pigou 
Orde r throug h th e publisher s or throug h 
Th e CRISIS , 7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS Book Mar
Yo u can order through the CRISI S any book printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle 
A Selected Cist of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIV E LIF E I N SOUT H AFRICA . (Sol. J . Plaatje) $1 .5 0 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) . 1.20 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S OF BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley). 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B. Du Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK , (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O IN AMERICA N HISTORY . (J.W.Cromwell). 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford) . . . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T . G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B . D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE - TAYLOR . (W. C. BerwickSay ers) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2 .0 0 
MASTERPIECE S O F NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New Ycik 