ATLANT A NUMBER—EDITION , 37,00 0 COPIE S 
THE CRISIS 
Vol. 8—No. 1 MAY , 1914 Whole No. 43 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENTS A COP Y 726671 5 isr^s 
v . * 
W PURCHASIN G A N ~ W 
Underwood 
Typewriter 
= MEAN S — 
A Satisfied Operator A Pleased Employer 
Distinctive Work And a Short Day 
Speed, Accuracy 
Stability 
Exclusive features, proved by winning every 
International Contest, stamp the UNDERWOO D 
as the leading typewriter in the world to-day 
UNDERWOOD 
"The Machine You Will Eventually Buy" 
Mention TH I CBISI S TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manager 
Content s fo r May , igi 4 
PICTURE S 
COVER. Colored Odd Fellows Building, Atlanta, Ga. 
Page 
SIDE VIE W OF OD D FELLOW S BUILDING 28 
ARTICLE S 
ATLANT A STRIVING. By Benjamin Griffith Brawley 27 
TH E $500 HABIT 32 
OUR LEGA L BUREAU. By Chapin Brinsmade 34 
TH E "CRISIS." A Poem. By William Pickens 36 
TH E NATIONA L BENEFIT ASSOCIATION 37 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLOR LINE 7 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 13 
OPINION 16 
TW O LETTERS 22 
EDITORIA L 23 
SOME FRANK FACTS 40 
TH E BURDEN 42 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 
Contents copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlant a Universit y 
Ii beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and 
Wellesley. Forty-four years of successful work 
have been completed. Students come from all 
parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Th e Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W . McC-RANAHA N 
KNOXvTLLE , TENN . 
The fifteenth annual session of the State 
Summer School for Colored Teachers of 
both sexes at the 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
will begin June 29, 1914, and continue five 
weeks. 
In addition to the regular work, an attractive 
lecture course has been arranged, in which 
will appear some of the most distinguished 
white and colored educators in the country. 
Board and lodging for the entire session, 
$12; tuition 25 cents per subject, unless 
other arrangements have been made. 
Limited accommodations. Send SI and have 
room reserved in advance. 
For further information write at once to 
JAME S B. DUDLEY . President, or 
D . J. JORDAN , Director . 
A . & M . College. Greensboro. N . C . 
LINCOL N INSTITUT E 
Jefferson City, Missouri 
Founded by the Negr o soldiers of 
the 64th and 65th Regiments. Supported by the State of Missouri. 
One of the best-equipped schools 
in the country for the education of 
Negro boys and girls. Normal, 
Collegiate, Agricultural and Industrial Courses. Normal diplomas 
carrying with them the degree B. Pd. 
are life certificates to teach in the 
public schools of Missouri. The 
degree A. B. conferred upon those 
who complete the collegiate course. 
Four teachers of Music: Voic e Culture, Piano, Violin, Band and 
Orchestr a Practice. Elocution, 
Athletics, Drawing and Art. 
Board $9.5 0 a month. Tuition $3.0 0 the 
year to Missouri students. Al l others pay 
$13.0 0 a year. Catalog free. 
B. F. ALLEN , A. M., LL . D. 
President. 
Morehouse College 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College ) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly 
development—the only institution in the far 
South devoted solely to the education of 
Negro young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by 
greatest Northern universities. Debating, 
Y. M. C. A., athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fis k Universit y 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 C. W . Morrow, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 5 
Ike National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, 
moral and religious uplift." 
—RF.V. DR. CHARLE S H. PARKHURST , New York City. 
I T IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
I T IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M . C. A. and Y. W . C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced 
co-workers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIA L 
SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAMES E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance 
fund of $15,000 for running expenses. Won' t you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully 
located, healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great 
variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from 
West Chester to Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a 
reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire 
to become teachers, carefully graded courses in academic work, 
domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and agriculture. For 
teachers of experience and intending teachers it offers also a six 
weeks' summer-school course, extending from July 1 to August 12. 
Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges 
are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for the same 
during the summer-school course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINGKNE Y HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
in Singing, Trying the Voice t the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position Whe n 
Practising, Position Whe n Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Kules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the PauliBt Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at .the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25 , 1912 : 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure In commending your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placlno and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you hare cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. 8. P.. 
Director PauliBt Choristers of Chicago.'' 
Prom "Musical Courier," N. T.: "A very practical little 
book Is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' by Pedro T. 
Tinsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be In the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music NewB," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly his 
'Practical Method of Singing' Is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
•annot fall to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
''Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Lay ton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 172 2 10th 
St., N. W. , Washington, D. C. 
PRIC E $1.0 0 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 644 8 
Drexel Ave., Chicago, 111.; or Clayton F. Summy, 
6 4 E. Ta n Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams 
and Wabash Ave., Chicago, 111. 
Agents Are Making $10.00 Per Day 
and more selling our famous Negro picture, '' A 
Joyful Welcome Into Heaven," the finest painting 
ever produced with the Negro as a subject. Semireliginus. Sells at sight. Send 15 cents in stamps 
or coin for 50-cent sample and agent's terms. 
TH E DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S COMPAN Y 
354 8 Vernon Ave . Dept. K Chicago, 111. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBLE MEN 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PER MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming count y where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee. Okla. 
Only 4-45 
The wonderful Stay-Tyde patent process, owned by us 
prevents the delicate flues from breaking. Yet they coat 
you leas than you pay elsewhere for ordinary willows. 
Stay-Tyde Willow Flume s 
23in. wide 22 in. long 5.9 0 26in. wide 25 in. long 7.9 0 
25in. wide 24 in. long 6.9 0 29 in. wide 27 in. long 9.9 0 
30 in. wide 27 in. long $11.9 0 
Freneh Cnrl Flames 
17 in., Special, $1.9 5 
18 " " 2 .4 8 
19 " Ex.wide, 5.0 0 
20 " *' 7.S O 
22 " '* IQ.O O 
We have established a worldwide reputation on our No.401 magnificent 19-mch French Curl Plume, 
made of rich, glossy, best male 
stock, with wide, broad fibres and 
heavy French head. £ 5 OO 
B lacn, white and colors * 
Send 25c to cover express charges and we will ship 
any of above C.O.D. for free examination. Or, send 
full purchase price and we will send all charges prepaid. Money promptly refunded if for any reason yon 
are not satisfied. 
Send for free catalog of French or "Willow Plumes, 
Ostrich Bands and Aigrettes, and get a complete $25 
Course in Millinery, Dyeing, Cleaning, Curling, etc 
SOUTH AFRICAN IMPORTING CO. 
1841 Wabash Ave. Dept. 150 CHICAGO 
a.cjcnt^ .\0anfed cOcxuvjiiexc to duppfij 
tne ()ia demand. |ax QUA fujjri axaxlc Caflina 
(^avuis Jlo.{*?OJ &tujPeA and 6/uxjhA %an ladUco ai 
([cnifcmcn, vltflr aft Witliout tiddxcoo, 400 |Q T 50 
cento cn 50 jot 25 cento Outfit |xcc JSatae 
commuU w 
jifted paamptlu IjOtite |G T oampico an d teftma 
tJ^cS^CouAt a^ CJiaWmna, ^ndiatixiaaits, 3nti 
D O YO U ADVERTISE ? 
If you want to bring your business to the 
attention of 150,000 discriminating readers 
advertise in TH E CRISIS. Advertising 
rate cards will be sent on application. 
Th e Crisis 
70 Fifth Avenue - - New York 
Thi s 
Beautifu l THE CRISIS 
Vol. 8-No . 1 MAY , 1914 WW e No. 43 
MUSIC AND ART. 
/"•OLERIDG E - TAYLOR' S "Eleanore" 
was one o f the interesting songs presented by Gall Gardner at a matinee musicale 
given at Claridge's Hotel, London, early in 
February. 
<I Victor Herbert's four-part arrangement 
of: J. Rosamond Johnson's dialect song, 
"Since Yo u Went Away, " which is beingused by the choral classes of colleges in the 
South, is both effective and beautiful. 
<J Mr. J. Rosamond Johnson, song writer 
and pianist, has returned from England, 
where he appeared lately in a new musical 
comedy act at the London Pavilion. Mr. 
Johnson's first appearance since his return 
was at the New Standard Theatre, Philadelphia, Pa., during the week of March 16. 
He was assisted by Mr. Thomas Brown. 
^ Mr. Charles A. Marshall, baritone, is 
appearing on the normal school entertaining 
list of artists at Philadelphia, Pa. Mr. 
Marshall, assisted by Miss Elizabeth Benson, 
pianist, sang on March 14 at the meeting 
of the Alumni Association of the high school 
for girls. 
<I A series of lecture recitals on Afro -
American folk songs was given in March 
at the Little Theatre, Chicago, III., by Mrs. 
Collingwood Tucker, an American singer. 
The Chicago Inter-Ocean notes that: "Her 
material is exceedingly interesting from the 
musical point of view." 
<I Of Henry Hadley's new symphony, 
"Xorth, East, South and West, " which was 
a conspicuous feature on the program of 
the ninth concert by the Minneapolis 
Symphony Orchestra, Musical America 
says: "In a wealth of thematic material 
there was brought out much that was familiar 
to the American ear, such as Xegro ragtime 
rhythms and Indian themes. There were 
many lovely passages and the work was 
accepted as true to its comprehensive title 
and national birthright." The symphony 
was also a feature of the Kansas City 
orchestral concert in February, of which the 
Kansas City Journal stated: "The wonderful 'South' in particular aroused the enthusiasm of the audience." 
Madam Anita Patti Brown, of Chicago, 
111., assisted by Mrs. Mary L. Smith, 
accompanist and reader, gave a wellexecuted program at the A. M. E. Zion 
Church, Birmingham, Ala., on March 9. An 
additional feature of interest on the program 
was Mrs. Smith's travel talk of the British 
West Indies. 
«J On February 17 Roland W. Hayes, 
tenor, and Charles J. Harris, pianist, gave 
a joint recital at the State A. and M. College of South Carolina, at Orangeburg. 
The musical department of the college is 
under the directorship of C. Delpha Boger, 
a graduate of the teachers' class of the 
Chicago Musical College. 
*! On the evening of February 24, 
at Minneapolis, Minn., the Minneapolis 
Musicians and Music Lovers gave their 
fourth annual banquet. The program, 
under the direction of the chairman, Willard 8 TH E CRISIS 
Patten, comprised witty burlesques, serious 
readings and clever skits in the form of light 
opera. An exceptionally clever burlesque 
was that of "Low Jinks"—the king commands his aide to bring in the shades of ten 
famous composers and Shakespeare. The 
interlocutor questions the shades of Pythagoras, Palestrina, Bach, Handel, Haydn, 
Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Liszt, "Wagner 
and Coleridge-Taylor regarding some of 
their alleged feats which bring out important facts in musical history. A disturbance is caused by a well-known local singer 
who insists on drawing the color line against 
Coleridge-Taylor until the shad e o f 
Hiawatha stops the quarrel. 
*J Announcement has been made of plans 
to erect a theatre, with seating capacity of 
1,000, for the use of colored people of Norfolk, Va. The theatre is to cost $50,000 
and will be used for vaudeville and movingpicture attractions. 
*J Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare and Mr. W . R. 
Richardson are engaged in joint recitals 
and lecture recitals at colleges and in the 
principal cities of the Southwest. 
^ The second concert of the Schola Cantorum, held at Carnegie Hall, under the 
direction of Mr. Kurt Schindler, on April 1, 
was devoted to Russian, Negro and British 
folk songs. Coleridge-Taylor's "Slave 
Singing at Midnight" was presented, and 
Mr. Burleigh arranged the two Negro 
spirituals, "Deep River" and "Dig My 
Grave," for four-part singing, especially for 
the Schola Cantorum. 
^ George W . Castone, a colored waiter in 
St. Paul, Minn., is attracting attention to 
his painting, which he does in spare time. 
While he does some creditable work in water 
colors, his oil paintings are his best efforts. 
Castone has had only three or four lessons 
and at present is unable to study further 
because of lack of means. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
OLORED women in different sections 
of the country are doing much for 
social uplift. In Baltimore women raised 
more than $10,000 for a Young Women's 
Christian Association; at a recent meeting 
of the City Federation of Women's Clubs 
in Birmingham, Ala., $750 was raised to 
assist in paying a debt on the old folks' 
home; in the same place 300 women have 
organized to work in interest of the citybeautiful idea among colored people ; the 
Charleston (W . Va.) Women's Improvement League has contributed $318 for the 
support of a bed in the general hospital; 
colored women of Leavenworth, Kan., have 
organized a civic-improvement league and 
the colored W . C. T. U. in Indianapolis, 
Ind., is assisting by contributions and in 
other ways to abolish saloons in the vicinity 
of schools. 
*I Wor k is proceeding on the public library 
in Savannah, Ga., for colored people, made 
possible by a gift of $12,000 from Carnegie. 
The city will appropriate $1,200 a year fo r 
the maintenance of the library. 
*I Colored men and women of Nashville, 
Tenn., have been enthusiastically carrying 
on a campaign, under the direction of the 
international secretary, Mr. J. E. Moorland, for $25,000 to be used for a Youn g 
Men's Christian Association. The Nashville 
Globe, a colored weekly, was published daily 
for the ten days of the campaign in the 
interest of the movement. The final reports 
show that $33,160.30 was raised. 
1 A great deal of interest has been shown 
during the past season in athletics among 
colored people. James Burwell, a colored 
student of the University of Pittsburgh, 
ran a close second to Carroll, of Indiana State 
Normal School, at a recent meet in which 
Carroll equaled the indoor record for the 
60-yard dash. In the same meet Burrell 
won the 220-yard dash, running in excellent 
form. At the sixth annual regimental meet, 
held in the South Armory, Boston, Mass., 
John A. Shelburne, of the English High 
School, broke the record in the semi-final 
heat of the 60-yard dash, making it in 6 4-5 
seconds, 1-5 second less than the record, and 
won in the final heat. Edward Niles, a 
colored senior in the English High, won the 
1.000-yard dash. 
*I In order to instruct and secure the interest 
of the white people of Asheville, N. C , in 
colored schools, an educational fair, exhibiting the work of ten county and city schools, 
was recently held in that place. The fair 
closed with a mass meeting in the interest 
of the work. 
^ A resolution has been adopted by the 
bath commission of Baltimore providing for 
more public baths and laundry facilities for 
colored people. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
It is reported that a colored baby won the 
first prize in the "perfect baby" show held 
in New York City in which 700 babies were 
entered. 
*I An aid and social club in Algiers, La., 
composed o f 235 young colored men, does 
much charitable work. 
^ The Colored Taxpayers' Protective Association, of Long Island, N. Y., has opened 
a spacious clubhouse in Jamaica. 
<I J. H. Cobb, a salesman for the St. Louis 
(Mo.) Seed Company, and many other employees, when pinioned under a wall which 
collapsed and took down a part of the seed 
building, were rescued with great difficulty 
by a Negro whosi name is not known. 
<I A system of examination of the employees 
in the dining car has been installed on the 
Cotton Belt Railroad route. No one of the 
sixty already examined have had a communicable disease. 
There is a large demand for day nurseries for colored children in New York because in most of the white nurseries, and 
particularly in those situated in colored 
neighborhoods, Negroes are not provided for. 
At present there are only four nurseries in 
Manhattan and Brooklyn conducted for 
colored children. Miss H. T. Emerson, of 
the West End Workers' Association, is 
planning a social center for Negroes in 
Harlem, New York City. A settlement 
house will be conducted, with a day and 
night nursery attached. 
EDUCATION. 
'T 'H E supervisor of manual training in 
the colored schools of Nashville, Tenn., 
has reported that 138 boys attending one of 
the ' manual-training centers earn $192.25 
weekly by working before and after school 
hours. 
*J Robert Hardon, a colored student of the 
Saginaw (Mich.) high school, was the winner 
in the preliminary contest for the Michigan 
Interscholastic Oratorical Association. There 
were two other students contesting for a 
place in the contest. 
<I Through the efforts of the educational 
committee of the Y. M. C. A. of North 
Carolina University, a night school for 
colored people was conducted in Raleigh 
during the past winter. The school board 
and also many colored citizens contributed to 
the work. Three colored teachers were 
employed and there was an average attendance of ninety-two each night. 
Of the 17,000 persons composing the 
population of Ironton, 0., 1,500 are colored 
people, and colored children rank first in 
four of the grades of the schools. Miss 
Garnett Wilson, a colored student taking a 
commercial course, received the Remington 
pennant for writing the greatest number of 
perfect words in a minute. 
*I The John Morrow Normal and Industrial 
College was opened in San Antonio on March 
1. The buildings already on the thirteenacre plot, purchased for this purpose, will 
be used until new buildings can be erected. 
*J Miss Teresa G. Lew graduated from the 
classical course of the Lowell (Mass.) high 
school two years ago at the head of a class 
of 282. She was the winner of a Carney 
medal for excellence of character and 
scholarship, and received honorary mention 
for punctuality in attendance. Miss Lew 
is now a member of the senior class of the 
Lowell normal school and is there, as she 
was in the high school, a member of the 
glee club. 
^ Colored people of Trenton, N. J., have 
already pledged $21,000 o f the desired 
$50,000 for the erection of a girls' dormitory 
at Livingston College, Salisbury, N. C. 
*i Eleven students and three alumnas of the 
University of Michigan have organized a 
Delta chapter of the Kappa Alpha Nu, a 
Negro men's college fraternity. 
*I The Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament, of 
Cornell, Bucks County, Pa., have filed 
plans for a four-story school for Negro 
children and dwelling for nuns in the Harlem 
section of New York City. 
f& The regular session of the summer school 
at Hampton Institute, Hampton, Va., will 
be conducted by some of the members of 
the regular staff and other well-known 
teachers from various parts of the country. 
Twenty-five courses will be offered. 
*J It is said that a wealthy white woman o f 
Cincinnati, becoming interested in Negroes 
through the efforts of her colored laundress, 
has bequeathed a large sum to Negro education, and it is expected that the Industrial 
School for Negro Youth will be opened next 
fall at Wyoming, O., with W . L. Ricks as 
president. 10 TH E CRISIS 
<1 The New Jersey State board of education 
has adopted a resolution providing for the 
selection of two students to be recipients of 
a scholarship at the Manual Training and 
Industrial School for Colored Youth at 
Bordentown. 
«I The Philadelphia Round Table for the 
Welfare of Colored Persons is making plans 
for a vocational school for boys between the 
ages of 10 and 16 years. 
ECONOMICS. 
A MODE L silk mill of Kingston, N. O , 
is being successfully operated by 
colored people, although before it went into 
the hands of the colored management it met 
with little success. The manager of the mill, 
a colored minister, is a silk expert. 
*I The Chicago College of Hair Culture is 
supposed to be the largest concern of its 
kind established. The establishment contains beauty parlors, lecture, dining and rest 
rooms, a shipping department and a printing 
office. 
^ The colored business block of Durham, 
N. C., was almost entirely destroyed by a 
large fire recently. A colored bank and a 
colored newspaper plant were entirely destroyed and two of the building's in the 
block owned by the North Carolina Mutual 
and Provident Association went down. It 
seems that most of the loss is covered by 
insurance. 
•I Dr. Nelson, a colored pharmacist, has 
just opened a first-class drug store in St. 
Paul, Minn. 
<I Negroes in Toledo, 0., have incorporated 
the Star Building and Loan Association 
under the laws of the State of Ohio; its 
officers are bonded and business began on 
April 1. 
PERSONAL. 
•V /TRS . MAR Y CATHERIN E WINDSO R 
•*•
 A is dead. For the past six years, 
since the death of her husband, she had lived 
in Wilberforee with her sister, and it was 
there that she died. During the Civil Wa r 
she was going with her brother to New 
Orleans on a boat which later became a war 
transport for the Union army. As the boat 
was about to weigh anchor cautiously in the 
Mississippi River late one afternoon, she 
discovered rebel forces crawling underbrush 
and about to open fire. She gave the alarm 
and the enemy was put to rout. Soon afterward she was made a spy and rendered 
valuable aid to the Union forces. 
<I C. H. Watson, a colored man, has been 
appointed notary public for the county of 
Mecklenburg, N. C. 
MEETINGS. 
T N March girls representing the Youn g 
•*• Women's Christian Association in many 
of the schools of Mississippi, Tennessee and 
Alabama met with Miss Josephine V. Pinyon, 
the international students' secretary, in a 
three-day conference at Jackson College, 
Jackson, Miss. There were several interesting speakers and a great deal of interest 
was shown in the work by the citizens o f 
Jackson. 
*I Founder's day and the semi-centennial 
of Wilberforee University, Wilberforee, 0., 
was celebrated on February 25. 
<I The Empire State Federation of Women's 
Clubs will hold its sixth annual meeting in 
Brooklyn during the early part of July. 
The membership of the federation is about 
4,000. 
^ A national convention of colored men was 
called in Washington, D. O , on February 
25, to protest against political discrimination. 
^ Farmers' conferences have been held in 
Utica Institute, Miss., and in the Bartlett 
Agricultural and Industrial School in Dalton, Mo., recently. 
*J On April 24 a conference of societies 
and individuals interested in sanitary living 
among colored people was held in New 
Orleans under the direction of the State 
board of health. 
*I The third annual meeting o f the Middle 
Tennessee Teachers' Association convened in 
Nashville on April 9. 
«J Colored Knights of Pythias of the State 
of Virginia and the Court of Calanthe celebrated their thirty-fourth anniversary in 
Richmond on March 29. 
n Mrs. Mary Church Terrell spoke of the 
discrimination practised against the Negro 
North as well as South in a lecture at Boston 
on March 8. 
<J Many colored educational and religious 
leaders have called a Negro Christian student 
convention to meet at Clark University and 
Gammon Theological Seminary in Atlanta, 
Ga., from May 14 to 18. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
POLITICAL. 
' I ' H E Senate committee has reported 
•*• favorably on the nomination of Judge 
Terrell. 
Senator Williams, of Mississippi, offered 
an amendment restricting woman suffrage 
to white women, which was defeated by 44 
votes to 21. 
*I The committee on the District of Columbia 
has reported favorably to the House on the 
bill preventing intermarriage of white and 
colored races. 
*I The committee on Federal relations of the 
Massachusetts legislature has reported favorably on the resolution protesting against 
segregation in the Federal departments at 
Washington. 
<J It is said that the United States Treasury 
officials are looking about for a white successor to Charles A. Cottrill, collector of 
internal revenue for the territory of Hawaii, 
as, to quote a Hawaiian paper: "Senator 
Vardaman and other Southerners have declared open war on all Negro appointees and 
there is no disposition manifested by the 
President and his advisers to encounter their 
opposition in the matter of confirmation." 
COURTS. 
' | ' H E following verdicts have been 
awarded colored men and women suing 
for damages recently: $25,000 to Richard 
Thorne, of Seattle, Wash., who was paralyzed by being crushed in an elevator pit; 
$15,000 to Mrs. E. F. Sport, who was thrown 
from a Boston elevated train and severely 
injured; $1,693 to Mrs. Maggie Robinson, 
o f Chicago, for injuries received when 
thrown from a street car two years ago; 
$2,000 to George T. Williams, a former 
Pullman porter, for malicious prosecution 
by the Pullman Company; $9,000 for the 
death of Albert Foster, resulting from an 
accident which occurred on the steamship 
"Amatonga, " at the Jersey City Central 
Railroad docks in 1909. The case was taken 
up by attorney A . C. Cowan, and since his 
death has been finished by Mrs. Cowan, who 
is also a lawyer. 
•3 The settlement of two cases which 'came 
up recently in the Topeka (Kan.) courts 
are striking contrasts. A white man, Mark 
Williams, was sentenced to a few months in 
the State reformatory, on direct evidence, 
for the murder of a colored man. A colored 
man, Bryant, was given life imprisonment 
in the penitentiary, on circumstantial evidence, for the murder of a white man. The 
two convicted men are considered equally 
bad characters. 
<I Indictments were returned in the circuit 
court of Hopkinsville, Ky., against the 
Louisville and Nashville, Illinois Central 
and Tennessee Central Railroads, for unequal accommodations for white and colored 
passengers. Under the State separate-coach 
law such discrimination is a misdemeanor, to 
be punished by a fine of not less than $500 
and not more than $1,500 for each offense. 
The return of the indictments was secured 
by two colored lawyers, a white newspaper 
editor and a white ex-judge. 
FOREIGN. 
"V /TR. A. A. KENNEDY , a colored man, 
has been appointed by the governor 
inspector in the public schools of Jamaica. 
<I Britons are fearing that serious trouble 
in Abyssinia will result from the death of 
Emperor Menelik. Bandit tribes are 
threatening the central government and war 
over succession to the throne is feared. 
Prince Lidj Yassu is said to be preparing 
to crown himself emperor. 
*I Sir Frederick Lugard was appointed 
governor of the United Nigeria at the beginning of the year. This section of the country 
has a population of 17,000,000 and is a 
consolidation of Lagos, Southern and 
Northern Nigeria and the Niger coast 
protectorate. 
*I Dr. Schnee, the governor of German East 
Africa, has sent in a brief defending slavery 
for the colonies, so that German planters 
may be sure of laborers. The population is 
said to be decreasing alarmingly under the 
slave regime. 
CI A man was hanged in Bermuda recently 
and this was the first hanging in thirtythree years. The colony is singularly free 
from crime; there are scarcely more than a 
score of cases yearly and a speedy trial is 
always given. Bermuda has a population 
of 20,000, two-thirds of which is colored. 
<I An African trading company—the African 
Union Company—has been incorporated 
under the laws of the State of New York 
for the purpose of shipping mahogany to 
American, English and German markets. 12 TH E CRISIS 
tj The Japanese and Chinese people in Vancouver. B. C are making great progress 
economically. The Japanese have just 
opened a $100,000 four-story building. The 
main floor is occupied by a Japanese bank. 
•1 Dr. J. E. Barnes, recently minister of 
public vrorks in Liberia, is in this country 
for the purpose of raising $250,000 for a 
school. He says that the educational facilities in Liberia are very poor. 
THE GHETTO. 
A DISTURBANCE in a London club 
recently resulted from objections 
made by American women to the presence of 
Negroes in the club. The women threw 
glasses and bottles around and had to be 
put out of the club. 
C Residents of a certain block in St. Louis 
are protesting and attempting to compel 
colored families to move out of the neighborhood. The house is owned by B. F. Yoakum, 
who occupies one part of it and rents the 
other to Arthur Freeman, principal of the 
Wheatley School for Negroes. The owner 
refuses to sell below a price which the white 
neighbors say is too high. 
•1 The home of Prof. TV. C. Chance, president of Parmele Industrial Institute, at 
Parmele, N. C . was dynamited. He escaped 
injury, but considerable damage was done 
to the house. The offenders are not known. 
*5 After much difficulty and opposition 
from white residents. Baton Rouge. La., was 
finally decided upon for the location of 
Southern University, formerly situated in 
New Orleans. Thirty-six white men protested to the governor and requested that 
the board rescind its action. The governor 
refused to allow this, however, stating that 
the government appropriations were already 
in jeopardy because of the delay in-choosing 
a site for the school. 
^ A well-known colored citizen of Sacramento. Cal.. Mr. B. A. Johnson, when 
solicited to aid in the erection of a Y. M. 
C. A. building, contributed $25. Later his 
grandson attempted to join the association 
and was informed that the Negro race would 
not be admitted to membership. This 
ruling has been indorsed by the superior 
officers of the association. 
*J $25,000 has been appropriated by the 
municipal authorities of Lexington. Ky. . £or 
a public park for colored people. 
0 Miss Madeline Davis, a young colored 
woman of Philadelphia, went into a movingpicture theatre and refused to sit in the rear 
where the usher ordered her. He attempted 
to force her into a rear seat, although there 
were vacant seats in front and the prices 
were a\\ the. same, and when she resisted she 
was arrested. The next morning she was dismissed by the magistrate who ruled that 
managers had no right to say where patrons 
would sit in unreserved sections. A ease 
against the management for assault and 
battery is being prepared. 
1 The colored maids who were formerly 
employed at diplomatic White House receptions have been replaced by white gills. 
Trinity Vestry, in New York City, is 
making arrangements to provide a separate 
place of worship for the colored members. 
At present all worship at the same place. 
CRIME. 
H E following Negroes have been 
lynched since the last report: 
At Alpine. Tex., a man giving the name 
Morgan was riddled with bullets by a posse 
for assault upon a sheriff with intent to 
kill. At Fayette. Mo.. Dallas Shields was 
lynched by a mob of 250 in the courthouse yard, charged with the murder of a 
constable. Near Franklin, Tex.. William 
Williams, charged with wounding a white 
man, was lynched by neighbors of the 
wounded man: the white man is not thought 
to be fatally wounded. At Clinton. Ala.. 
Charles Young was lynched on the charge 
of assaulting a white woman. At Inverness, 
Miss., an unidentified man, charged with 
murdering Sam Lusco, an Italian, was 
lynched. At Wagoner. Okla.. Marie Scott, 
charged with the murder of a white man, 
was lynched. At Hastings, Col.. James 
Johnson was killed by a posse for wounding a white officer. 
1 Charles Fisher, a Negro youth, accused o f 
kissing a white girl, was badly mutilated by 
a mob of white ruffians. His ears were cut 
off and his lips slit. It is said that he will 
live. 
<5 Ora Griffin, a colored girl, was shot and 
seriously wounded by Charles Kullock. a 
white man. at Cincinnati. O. AN ADMINISTRATOR. 
J
OHN HOP E was born in Augusta, Ga., 
June 2, 1868. He was a member of a 
large family, and in his earlier years was 
forced to exemplify the principle of selfhelp. Inspired to seek the best educational 
opportunities, however, he went to New 
England for a season of study. He finished 
the course at Worcester Academy in 1890, 
and in 1894 was graduated from Brown, 
with the distinction of being class orator. 
Returning to the South, Mr. Hope taught 
at Roger Williams University until 1898, 
when he was called to Atlanta Baptist College, now Morehouse College, the institution 
with which his name has become inseparably 
connected. Until 1906 he served as professor of Latin and Greek; since that time he 
PRESIDEN T JOH N HOPE . 
HON . HENR Y A. RUCKER . 
has been president. Mr. Hope's most signal 
achievement as 'president of Morehouse has 
been to bring the college into close touch 
with the life of Atlanta. He himself is 
identified with almost every movement in 
the city for the advancement of the Negro; 
and educators throughout (he country point 
with pride to his successful administration 
as a distinct achievement of the race in me 
handling of important enterprises. 
m 
A FEDERAL OFFICEHOLDER. 
"T-T ENR Y A. RUCKE R was born in Washingto-n, Ga., November 14, 1852. His 
early education was very irregular, as he 
was dependent very largely on his own efforts 
for support. He spent some time in the 
public schools of Atlanta, however, and 
MEN OF THE Month 14 TH E CRISIS 
managed to make his way through the 
sophomore year at Atlanta University. He 
soon became interested in politics and in 
civic betterment. He was especially active 
in Atlanta in 1890, when the municipal 
offices of the city were confused, when taxes 
were exorbitant, and when an effort was 
being made to nominate a reform ticket. 
Mr. Rucker led in the introduction of a 
measure for the reduction of the rate of 
taxation from one and one-half to one and 
one-fourth per cent.; and this change has 
worked greatly for the' advancement of the 
city's credit. Mr. Rucker has several times 
bee n a delegate to 
national Republican 
conventions. At the 
St. Louis convention 
of 1896, as a delegate-at-large fro m 
the State of Georgia, 
he introduced a reso1 u t i o n condemning 
lynching and mo b 
violence, which became a plank in the 
platform on which 
McKinley was elected. 
After the inauguratio n of President 
McKinley, Mr. Rucker 
was appointed collecto r of internal 
revenue for the State 
of Georgia . He 
served under three 
different Presidents 
for a total of thirteen 
years, and his office 
was always rated Al . 
He is now engaged in 
handling real estate. MR . ALONZ O F. HERNDON . 
A BUSINESS MAN. 
ALONZO F. HERNDO N was born, of 
slave parentage, on a Walton County 
(Ga.) farm, June 26, 1858. In his earlier 
years he was able to spend in school only a 
total of twelve months, scattered over a 
period of ten years. For several years he 
was hired out, with his mother, as a farm 
hand. In 1877, at the age of 21, he left farm 
life and became a journeyman barber. He 
worked at Jonesboro, Ga.. Rome, Ga., and 
at Chattanooga, Tenn., and finally came to 
Atlanta. To-day he owns and controls three 
modern sanitary establishments, one of these 
places being one of the finest shops in the 
world, being located on Peachtree Street, in 
the heart of the business district of Atlanta. 
Mr. Herndon also owns and rents a hundred 
different houses. He is Atlanta's leading 
business man of the race. He is a stockholder in the Southview Cemetery, the 
Atlanta Loan and Trust Co., the Gate City 
Drug Store, the savings bank, the Majestic 
Theatre, in most of which enterprises he is 
the majority holder; he is the founder and 
president of the Atlanta Mutual Insurance 
Association, the treasurer of the Standard 
Life Insurance Co., a 
trustee o f the First 
Congregati o nal 
Church, a trustee of 
the Leonard Street 
Orphanage an d a 
member o f the Mond a y Club . Mr. 
Herndon's magnificent $40,000 resi ­
dence is one of the 
most noteworthy objects in Atlanta. 
THE GRAND OLD 
MAN. 
\\7ILLIA M H. 
™ CROGMA N 
was born in the West 
Indies, May 15, 1841, 
and when still a boy 
he went to sea. For 
eleven years he followed this life. At 
length, impelled to 
get an education, at 
the age of 25 he began to save money 
for this purpose, and two years later he 
entered Pierce Academy in Middleboro, Mass. 
In two years he completed his work in the 
academy, and he then taught for three years 
in South Carolina. In the fall of 1873 he 
entered Atlanta University, from which 
institution he was graduated in 1876. About 
the time of his graduation in 1876 there 
was established in South Atlanta Clark 
University, and Mr. Crogman was called to 
a position on the faculty o f this institution. 
He became professor of Latin and Greek, 
and later, for seven years (1903-1910), 
served as president. His record of thirty-ME N O F TH E MONT H 15 
eight years of continuous service at Clark 
is, perhaps, without a parallel in the history 
of Negro education. Professor Crogman 
is the author of several works, notably "The 
Colored American," "The Progress o f a 
Race " and "Talks for the Times." With 
his scholarship, his earnestness and his quiet 
dignity , he is an 
honor not only to his 
college, but to the entire race as well. 
m 
AN INTERNAL 
REVENUE 
COLLECTOR. 
I
T is fortunate that 
Mr. Charles W . 
Anderson, the colored 
internal revenue collector, who was appointed by President 
Roosevelt and continued through the 
Taft administration, 
is still holding office 
in the trying first 
mouths of the income 
tax. Mr. Anderson 
i s considered th e 
best-informed ma n 
on the income tax in 
the government's employ. As soon as 
Congress began to 
discuss the subject, 
and long before it was passed, he began to 
read everything obtainable on this form of 
taxation and he also read every congressional 
discussion of it. 
It was through Mr. Anderson's thorough 
knowledge o f the law that he has been able 
to carry on the intricate work of collecting 
the tax with no serious and expensive 
HON . CHARLE S W . ANDERSON . 
errors. The added expense in salaries did 
not exceed $200 a month. Chiefly women 
were employed because of their tact and 
patience in answering the thousands of 
questions asked. Secretary McAdoo suggested the employment of a $2."),000-a-year 
lawyer to deal with the income tax, but this 
proved unnecessary, 
a s Mr . Anderson 
himself is entirely 
familiar with the 
law. A large number of the letters 
which he received 
containing questions 
came from lawyers. 
More than sixty of 
the article s in 
Regulations No. 33, 
issue d b y th e 
Treasury Depart ­
ment, are suggestions 
submitted to the department b y M r. 
Anderson. 
Through his efforts the first collection of income tax in 
New York was earrie d o n mos t 
efficiently and without the usual expense and confusion 
in such a case. 
Mr. Anderson was 
born in Ohio in 1866. The first public office 
which he held was that of United States 
gauger. Later he was appointed as private 
secretary to the State treasurer of New 
York, and after two years was promoted to 
the position of chief clerk in the State 
treasury. Following this Mr. Anderson held 
office of supervisor of racing accounts. 
(Photo by Underwood & Underwood, N. Y.) 
I N COLLECTO R ANDERSON' S OFFIC E NEGRO ART. 
" ' I 'EE time has passed," says the Boston 
Transcript, "when learned critics cry 
out upon ragtime. The time is here when 
they 'study' it, and seriously announce that 
it demands consideration as a genuine art 
form. The rag-tag rabble knew that long 
ago, though they didn't necessarily say so 
in. print. Helmholtz (or was it Professor 
James?) said that every truth passes through 
three stages. First, people say it is absurd. 
Then they say it is contrary to religion. 
Then they say that everybody knew it all 
along. Ethically, ragtime is now in the 
second stage. Musically it has almost reached 
the third. When critics cease to 'study' it, 
and accept it naturally, as the rag-tag 
rabble did long ago, it will have attained 
its majority.'' 
The truth of this has been illustrated by 
the third annual concert of the Colored 
Music School Settlement of New York. The 
Outlook says: • 
"It is doubtful whether during the whole 
year any other concert is given in New York 
City which would appeal to so wide a variety 
of musical taste as this did—and appeal 
strongly, too—from the taste that is wholly 
pleased and satisfied by ragtime to the taste 
that finds delight in the artistic use of 
musical material. * * * 
"In the history of musical art this concert 
was highly significant. It not only marked 
the emergence of the Negro race into a land 
of musical freedom; but, what is most significant, it proved that this race could bring 
into this free domain its rich racial 
treasures. * * * 
"Most significant of all, however, was the 
work of Will Marion Cook. This accomplished Negro composer, who has studied in 
Germany as well as in this country, has done 
a very great service to the art of music. No 
one who has heard the real untutored singing of Negroes in the heart of the South— 
whether by congregations in the churches or 
by groups of laborers in the open air—can 
ever again be satisfied with the Negro singing that one commonly hears from Negro 
choruses performing in public, in which all 
the Negro characteristics of rhythm and tone 
have been conventionalized. It seemed as if 
all that would survive in art of Negro music 
would be this pale reflection. Dvorak used 
Negro, or negroid, themes; but all the jump 
had gone out. of them. Coleridge-Taylor, the 
Negro composer o f England, used Negro 
themes somewhat; but he used them as a 
white man might have done. Will Marion 
Cook uses them, and he uses them as only a 
Negro uses. them. And, what is more, he 
has instructed the Afro-American Folksong Singers to sing with that indefinable 
manner in rhythm and tone that takes one 
right into the midst of the black belt. It is 
a great artistic triumph. 
"All honor to these Negro musicians who 
are proud of their race; all honor to David 
Mamies, the white musician who has repaid 
his debt to his colored teacher by giving 
Negroes a chance to be musicians through 
the establishment of the Music School Settlement for Colored People. " 
The musical critic of the New Yor k Times 
says: 
"The subject of Negro music is receiving 
a good deal of attention nowadays in various 
directions among people not of the race, for 
which reason the music presented last night 
was all the more interesting. All that part 
of it which related to singing was well 
performed and forced serious consideration. 
The orchestral work was perhaps a step far 
outside the natural genius of the race for as 
fortunate results, but at least it demonstrated 
that painstaking attention is being given to 
this branch of musical development." OPINIO N 17 
The Evening Post declares that: 
'"The contribution of Negro singers and 
writers to American music has been a not able 
one, and every effort made to develop this 
great talent of the race deserves the widest 
support from all interested in musical art. 
There are few as musically interesting entertainments in the course of a New York 
season." 
The New York Evening Journal, in an 
editorial on the evening of the concert, said: 
"Concerning the Negro and the problem 
that he represents for himself and for others 
in this country, there are probably as many 
opinions as there are colored men, women 
and children. 
"But nobody, surely, questions the advisability of helping the Negro race to develop 
and use its very great and natural talent for 
music. 
"O f all the races in this country, the Negro 
alone has developed an actual school of 
American music. All that we have, except 
Negro melody, is imitation. 
"The Negroes have given us the only music 
of our own that is American—national, 
original and real." 
Musical America, while commending the 
concert, has this criticism: 
"If the Negro Symphony Orchestra wfll 
give its attention during the coming year 
to a movement or two of a Haydn symphony and play it at its next concert, and if 
the composers, who this year took obvious 
pleasure in conducting their marches, tangos 
and waltzes, will write short movements for 
orchestra, basing them on classic models, 
next year's concert will inaugurate a new 
era for the Negro musician in New York 
and will aid him in being appraised at his 
full value and in being taken seriously. It 
is impossible to applaud in Carnegie Hall 
his imitations of the vulgar dance music of 
Broadway originated by the tone poets of 
Tin Pan Alley. " 
Mr. James Reese Europe, who led the 
orchestra, said in an interview: 
"No , the great improvements in higher 
education for the Negro have not developed 
music as you might think. The schools and 
colleges for the Negro are all of an industrial 
character. The artistic side has naturally 
been neglected as of less importance. That 
is our great difficulty. The people of my 
, race who love music must train themselves. 
Strictly speaking, I had no musical education myself." 
"The Amorica'n Art Association of Paris," 
says the Paris Herald, "held a large reception in the cluhroorns, 4 Rue Joseph 
Bara, to open its annual exhibition of members' work. The principal interest, perhaps, 
centers in a canvas called 'Fishermen,' by 
H. O. Tanner." 
Paul Reboux, poet, novelist, dramatist, 
lecturer, president of the Association des 
Critiques Litteraires, and successor of 
Catulle Mendes as literary critic of Le 
Journal; and Madame Leone Georges 
Reboux, his wife, pander and decorative 
artist, exhibitor at the annual salon of La 
Comedie Humaine, and exhibitor and member of the jury of the Salon des Dessinateurs Humoristes, are coming to America. 
The Boston Transcript says that: 
"The objective point of his trip is New 
Orleans, where he counts upon getting local 
color for a novel of Negro life, to be 
entitled 'Romulus Coueou.' 'I want,' he said, 
'to describe the sufferings of a poor creature, 
despised, on the one hand, by the whites, to 
whom he is inferior, and envied, on the other 
hand, by his fellow blacks, to whom he possesses certain points of superiority. This 
atrocious social dilemma, which I have 
reason to believe frequent, is familiar to 
Americans. But for us French it is a new 
psychological situation. My Negro will be 
in love with a French girl. I shall describe 
several types of the old French families that 
persist in Louisiana and also a family of 
black launderers, the family of the unlucky 
Romulus. I hope to discover the elements 
of a documentation highly picturesque and 
alternately ludicrous and moving.' " 
A TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT. 
' I ' HE criticism of some colored papers in 
the March CRISI S has had a characteristic aftermath. A large number of colored 
editors have insisted upon being personally 
insulted and have ascribed the lowest and 
meanest motives for this "attack." As a 
matter of fact, here as in so many other 
cases TH E C RISI S has but frankly voiced 
current criticism and the personality of the 
editor has little to do with it. Leaving out 
the papers which are merely hysterical or 
abusive, we note the reply of the Richmond 
Planel, which has for years been character-18 TH E CRISIS 
ized by thoughtful editorials. The Planet 
says: 
"The editor of a weekly, journal seldom 
has time to read his manuscript over before 
it goes to the compositor. He is editor, 
manager, collector and the 'much sought 
after man' at entertainments. Last, but not 
least, he is the paymaster or treasurer of the 
business enterprise, with no money in hand 
to pay and himself the last employee on the 
payroll." 
St. Luke's Herald says: 
"O f course Dr. Du Bois knows there are 
some 300 or more Negro publications in 
this country, and when he charges that 
all save 'the Guardian, the Cleveland Gazette 
and one or two colored papers' are purchasable and do not stand up for freedom and 
justice, we fear that the doctor has made 
a statement that is by far too sweeping and 
too exaggerated. 
"It may be that many of us do not present the facts, save in a partial and incomplete way; it may be that some of us neither 
think, speak nor write English; we pass 
these by as neither grave nor very serious 
when all things are considered. But to 
charge that the Negro press, save three or 
four papers, is venal, purchasable, unreliable, failing in strong, staunch advocacy 
of freedom and justice for the Negro, is 
monstrous." 
It is monstrous so far as St. Luke's Herald 
is concerned, which is one of the few delightfully outspoken colored papers and which 
if it voiced its own criticism of the colored 
press would probably have been much more 
severe than THE CRISIS has been. W e have 
much sympathy with the letter of T. Thomas 
Fortune. With all Mr. Fortune's faults, he 
is practically the founder of present-day 
journalism: 
"The Afro-American editors have made 
more sacrifices for principle during the past 
thirty-five years than any other professional 
group of the race. They have done more to 
help our leaders, from Douglass and Langston to Washington and Du Bois, than they 
have clone to help them; and when leaders 
have been ungrateful to them and got in a 
false position with regard to the best interests of the race, the editors have been 
patient with them and covered them up with 
the garment of charity for the race's sake. 
When the leaders have themselves become 
editors they have frequently forgotten the 
bridges that helped them over when they 
came into a good inheritance in the kingdom, 
as Dr. Du Bois has done, and others." 
Outside of these few comments there has 
been little real argument, and the Charleston 
(W . Va.) Advocate says: 
"The Advocate holds no brief for T H E 
CRISIS, still it cannot refrain from calling 
the attention o f those editors who are resenting a statement which appeared in that 
magazine to the fact that much of their 
argument is illogical in the extreme. 
"T H E CRISIS stated that a very limited 
number of Negro newspapers have any 
principle, and but few of their editors know 
how to use the king's English. * * * 
"Our indignant contemporaries would 
appear in a better light if, feeling themselves maligned, they would either keep their 
mouths shut or else speak to the question 
at issue. There is danger of their protesting 
o'er much, which would create the suspicion 
that maybe the doctor was right after all." 
The Denver Star says: 
"While we know the criticism which has 
been so generally noticed by all the leading 
journals of color stings, we think that its 
wholesome effect toward the improvement of 
journalism will follow, yet the Star believes 
that papers in his list are exceptions. That 
is our opinion. If the cause which Dr. Du 
Bois represents is so just, humane and attractive, that the Jew, Jap, beggar, millionaire, young and old are interested deeply 
enough to give their hard-earned cash to 
perpetuate and develop such ennobling 
principles, why blame Dr. Du Bois for the 
assistance he receives? It is not he (personally) that attracts, but it is the just cause 
he represents. Then why fight the man personally and not his cause? W e know, as well 
as our fellow journalists, what it means to 
get out a publication regularly and punctually and that it is no child's play. Dr. 
Du Bois knows this and because of this 
knowledge he suggests and sets a high 
standard, and by so doing he has raised a 
'tempest' among our editors of color. " 
This echoed by a white paper, the Utica 
Press : 
"The New York Age, a newspaper for 
the Negro, is concerned over the charge 
made by Dr. Du Bois, himself a Negro, that 
the newspapers published by his race are 
careless in the use of the English language, 
unreliable in presenting facts about the OPINIO N 19 
Negro, and that some have betrayed the race 
to the enemy for cash. Other editors of 
Negro papers are up in arms over the allegations of Dr. Du Bois, who is referred to as 
an Ishmael and traitor to his race. Perhaps 
the statement made by Dr. Du Bois will turn 
out a blessing in disguise, for it may be 
the means of improving the Negro papers 
and inciting their editors to better attempts." 
m 
EOTTEN BOROUGHS. 
C ! H. GIES Y has written a long letter to 
the chairman of the Republican 
national committee: 
"In the House and Electoral College the 
votes which represent the suppressed voters 
of the South count in the choice of President and the making of laws; a reorganization of the Republican party which would 
condone the iniquity of 1,000 men in the 
South baring 'as much voice in Congress 
and the Electoral College as 11,000 men in 
the North, by denying the suppressed 
Southern voters even representation in a 
Republican convention, would be tearingdown the standard raised by Lincoln of a 
government 'o f the people, by the people, 
for the people.' 
"If Senator Cummins desires to remedy 
the inequality of which he complains, he 
better start at its source and enforce section 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Constitution and reduce the representation 
o f the South in the House and Electoral 
College. 
"By common consent the question of 
Southern representation in the Republican 
convention of 1916 is the only question to 
be referred to the Republican convention of 
1914. But will the settlement of this question one way or the other close the breach 
between the Progressives and the Republicans'? In the Progressive convention at 
Chicago they had one delegate for each 
Representative and Senator in Congress. The 
reduction of Southern representation was no 
part of their program. * * * 
"Former Senator Beveridge, in a speech at 
New Orleans before the Southern Progressive conference, in urging the South to 
affiliate with the Progressive party, made no 
suggestion of reduction of Southern representation as a tenet o f Progressive faith. 
Possibly he knew he would not get any recruits for the Progressive party in the South 
by any such suggestion, as the South never 
has objected to voting for the Negro, but 
only to having the Negro vote for himself." 
Meantime the double disfranchisement of 
the white primary proceeds in the South. 
Every Evening, of Wilmington (Del.), says: 
"In response to the somewhat surprising 
contention of the Morning News that the 
restriction, by the rules of the Democratic 
party of Kent County, of voting at Democratic primaries to 'white male citizens' is 
something new in this State, the Dover Index 
points to the rules of the Democratic party 
of New Castle County, which contain the 
same restriction. These rules were adopted 
May 10, 1910, but are a substitute for rules 
previously operative which had contained 
the same provision. In fact, the written rules 
of the Democratic party of New Castle 
County, originally adopted in 1876 and subsequently amended to accord with the 
primary election law following its enactment in 1889, declared from the first that 
only white male citizens should vote at Democratic primaries, and no popular primary 
in New Castle County—established for the 
nomination of candidates for sheriff and 
coroner nearly three-quarters of a century 
ago—was open to Negroes, even after the 
latter were clothed with the privilege of 
franchise." 
The Charlotte Observer declares that: 
"The insertion of the words 'white Democrats' in the requirements to participate in 
the coming county Democratic primary is 
simply a public expression of the unwritten 
law in Southern Democratic circles. Heretofore the colored members of the party have 
had the privilege of taking part in the party 
primaries, but they have, as a rule, declined 
do do so, realizing that they were not 
wanted." 
m 
THE "DECLINE" OF LYNCHING. 
'T'H E season of rejoicing at the decline of 
A
 lynching in the United States has been 
rather long drawn out this year and quite 
vociferous. Naturally it has been led by the 
Bourbon Outlook. The Outlook admits to 
having heard that the editor of TH E CRISIS 
"claims that seventy-five of his people were' 
hanged by mobs in 1913," but the Outlook 
waves this little discrepancy aside with 
slight attention because, "as Dr. Du Bois 
has accepted as authoritative the Chicago 20 TH E CRISIS 
Tribune's figures for the years prior to 1913, 
his statistics for that year can hardly be 
admitted for purposes of comparison." 
This naturally settles the matter and we 
are simply appending two personal communications; one from a minister in the South 
who bears a name known with honor, through- _ 
out the world. He says: 
" A Negro 'assaulted' a white man Saturday, January 3, at Monticello, Jasper 
County, Ga. In other words, the black and 
the white man had a fight and the white 
individual got the worst of it. In retaliation the friends of the white man carried 
the Negro about a mile out of town and 
brutally beat and kicked him. The affair 
was ended by hanging him. But, strange to 
say, not one word of this happening has 
appeared in any paper. The Atlanta papers 
failed to publish any reference to it." 
To this we add some details of the little 
affair in Leland, Miss.: 
"The news spread like wildfire and in 
twenty minutes the entire white population 
was armed and headed for the cabin which 
was situated about a half mile from the 
depot, which is in the center of the town. 
I looked in every direction and could see 
men and mere boys, some not over 12 
years old, carrying rifles, shotguns, pistols 
and, in fact, every imaginable thing that 
would shoot. They were acting as though 
there was an entire army of Negroes to be 
taken. The man who had killed the officer 
submitted to arrest by the mob, which by 
this time numbered about 400. Placing a 
rope around his neck he was led to the 
center of the town and in the presence of 
women and children they proceeded to hold 
a conference as to the kind of death that 
should be meted out to him. Some yelled 
to hang him; some to burn him alive. It 
was decided in a few minutes. Willing hands 
brought a large dry-goods box, placed it in 
the center of the street; in it was straw on 
which was poured a tub of oil; then the 
man was lifted with a rope around his neck 
and placed in this box head down, and then 
another tub of oil was poured over him. A 
man from the crowd deliberately lit a match 
and set fire to the living man. While in 
this position the flames shot up at great 
height. The crowd began to yell as the 
flames shot upward. In an instant the poor 
creature managed to lift himself out of the 
box, a mass of flames. He was fighting the 
flames with his hands in an effort to shield 
his face and eyes, and in this condition 
attempted to run. The crowd allowed him 
to run to the length of the rope, which was 
held by willing hands, until he reached a 
distance o f about twenty feet; then a yell 
went up from the crowd to shoot. In an 
instant there were several hundred shots and 
the creature fell in his tracks. The crowd 
deliberately walked up to the prostrate form 
and shot the remainder of their guns into 
his lifeless body. With the flames still 
leaping into the air, he was pulled back into 
the fire that was now roaring with boxes and 
oil brought out of the different stores by 
men and boys. Every time they would throw 
on more oil and boxes the crowd would yell 
as though they were at a bull fight. Standing about fifty or seventy-five feet from the 
scene I could - actually smell the flesh of 
the poor man as it was being burned. Not 
a voice was raised in the defense of the 
man. No one attempted to hide their 
identity. I looked into the faces of men 
whom I knew to be officers of the town' 
lending a willing hand in the burning of this -
man. No wonder the coroner who held the 
inquest returned a verdict that the Negro 
came to his death "at the hands of an 
enraged mob unknown to the jury, " because 
to get a jury in that town they had to get 
some who participated in the burning. I 
can never feel toward the white man as I 
have felt after seeing what I have attempted 
to describe. After burning the body into 
ashes the burned bones and ashes were 
buried in the edge of the street in front of 
a colored barber shop. 
"May God forbid that any other living 
man will ever see a sight as I witnessed; 
this is the third Negro who has been killed 
in this vicinity in the last three weeks. The 
man burned was named Sam Pettie, known 
by everybody to be quiet and inoffensive. I 
write this hoping you may get enough out 
of what I have tried to describe to tell your 
great number of readers what we are up 
against. To mention my name in connection 
with this would he equivalent to committing 
suicide." 
The New York Sun said of the most 
recent diversion in Oklahoma, when the 
chivalry of the white South lynched a 
woman: 
"She made no disturbance. She died 
quietly. Quietly the executioners dispersed. OPINIO N 
The whole affair 'went off' with a tranquil 
propriety that must be a source of pride to 
the posse of hangmen, the town, the county, 
the State—a State which rejoices in all the 
most modern constitutional improvements. 
" 'No warrants have been issued,' says a 
dispatch; 'and public sentiment is with the 
mob.' It seems that the sentences of certain 
Negroes of the county convicted of murder 
were commuted by the governor. Therefore 
public opinion approves the murder of this 
Negress. She is punished illegally because 
some men of her color have not been punished 
to the extent of the law. 
'' A noble, pure Caucasian sentiment is 
strong in Oklahoma. This execution by mob 
initiative and referendum should be a warning to the blacks." 
Life is afraid that if it is true that 
lynchings have decreased, it is a bad sign 
and asks: "Can it be possible that we are 
growing sentimental"?" 
SIX WOMEN. 
O PEAKIN G of lynching and the like, 
^ these little bits come to us this month, 
all worth noting. In California our attention is drawn to Los Angeles and Marysville. A young colored man kissed a white 
girl in Los Angeles, apparently against her 
will, and also robbed her of 10 cents. Judge 
Willis, of the Supreme Court, sentenced him 
to thirty years in jail. Just about a month 
before that two of the Marysville rioters 
had been sentenced to prison. In that riot 
which occurred August 3, 1913, the deputy 
sheriff started to shoot a Swedish working 
girl. Inez Haynes Gilmore tells the rest of 
the story in Harper's Weekly: 
"Then occurred the splendid episode of 
the Porto Kican. 
"This nameless hero of the hop pickers 
was a gigantic brown Negro. Nobody 
knows anything about him. It is likely 
that all we shall ever know is the magnificent revolt of the last fifteen seconds of his 
life. In that quarter of a minute, however, he flared to - blood-red prominence. 
When Reardon pointed his gun at the 
Swedish girl's head the Porto Rican became 
a whirlwind. He grappled with Reardon, 
tore the club from his hand, cracked him 
over the head, seized Reardon's gun, shot 
him dead, swung about, shot District 
Attorney Manwell dead, and the next instant 
himself dropped dead from a charge of 
buckshot from Deputy Sheriff Daken's gun." 
21 
La Follette's publishes this little story: 
"My, but the clay was warm! and the 
flight of stairs leading to the elevated 
station was long. 
"I was going down, which was easy. I 
met her, coming up. 
"She was a -young colored woman, of 
thirty or thereabout. She had a year-old 
baby in her arms, and a child of two or two 
and a half was bravely trying to climb the 
stairs alone. And finding it very hard. 
"It was one of those warm days in early 
spring, when one still wore his winter clothes. 
The little child wore a heavy coat and cap. 
"The mother tried to help her, but was 
herself already overburdened. She carried 
not only the babe in her arms, but one yet 
unborn. 
" I met them about half way up. 
"My babies had always resented the 
assistance of strangers, and I felt that the 
little girl might resent my help. I, however, took the chance of it and, picking her 
up, carried her to the top of the stairs. 
Fortunately she did not protest, but accepted the help, quite as a matter of course. 
"But the mother nearly broke my heart— 
for with' tears in her eyes she thanked and 
blessed me. 
"It was not simply that I had carried her 
baby up a flight of stairs. It 'was that I, a 
white woman, had carried her black baby 
girl! 
"I knew it was that which brought the 
tears and the overwhelming gratitude. 
"The pity of it! 
"Neither of us responsible for our color! " 
And in the same paper Mary Autin, the 
wonderful immigrant girl, is quoted as 
saying: 
"When my little girl sits next to the little 
boy whose mother works in a factory all 
day and her lad uses language he learns on 
the street and my little girl asks me why he 
uses such language, it offers me the opportunity to give her the first insight into wrong 
social conditions, which can only be learned 
by real contact and experience. When she 
comes home and tells me of the gibes aimed 
at a little colored girl in the school, I seize 
the.chance to teach her the inhumanity of 
such discrimination." 
" A good Negro is never a problem," says 
the Rev. Frederick E. Taylor, of Indian-22 TH E CRISIS 
woman stepped out and threatened to kill 
Peace. The men thought she was drunk or 
full of 'dope' and laughed at her. Suddenly 
she sprang upon Peace and with one swift 
stroke drove the keen blade o f a knife into 
his heart. With a scream he sank to the 
ground and expired. 
"Just a short while before, Peace's father, 
who is a farmer living near Wagoner, had 
seen his son and told him that it was about 
time to go home. He had not gone far 
enough after that warning to be out o f hearing when the murder occurred and he heard 
his son's death cry. 
"While it was not generally known, it has 
developed since the murder that Peace had 
a young wife here in Wagone r and that they 
had been married several months. 
"The mob is supposed to have been organized in the country near Wagone r where 
Peace's father lives, and was joined by men 
in Wagoner when it arrived. The Negro 
woman did not utter a cry when the mob 
reached her or any other time, the jailer 
says; but she fought the mob viciously after 
she had been taken out of the jail. There 
is a deep dent in her skull where, apparently, 
some member of the mob struck her over the 
head with a six-shooter, but this was the 
only mark of violence on her body aside from 
that made by ropes." 
A local white paper is forced to remark 
editorially: 
"W e shall not say or intimate anything 
ill of the dead, in the absence of knowledge, 
especially, but it is significant that the press 
reports are silent as to the provocation, if 
any, the Negress received from her victim. 
If she thus resented an attempt upon her 
chastity she but exercised her right." 
TW O LETTER S 
FROM A NORTHERN WHITE WOMAN. 
TyfRS . EDWAR D L . BUCKLEY' S subA
 scription to TH E CRISIS expires 
in . Will you kindly discontinue 
sending it after this date? To ' my 
understanding its influence is inflammatory 
and in that way far from beneficial to the 
race. 
FROM A SOUTHERN WHITE MAN. 
THA D TH E CRISIS for a little and may 
take it again. I think your side of the 
problem ought to be heard even by 
Southern white men. I believe you will get 
a lot of subscribers if you try among them. 
Thank you for the opportunity. 
East Lake, Tenn. H. E. PARTRIDGE. 
apolis, wagging his head wisely. W e commend him on this communication which we 
have just received: 
"On February 15, at Cape May, N. J., an 
intoxicated white man named Charles 
Simons broke into the home of Mrs. Mark 
Cheek about 12 m. The frightened woman 
seized her sleeping child and ran to the 
neighbors, who came and, finding the man 
still in the house, drove him away. 
"The next day she applied to the nearest 
magistrate for a warrant. He refused and 
she had to apply to the mayor of the 
neighboring city to have the arrest made. 
Simons was given a hearing and bound over 
for trial at the April term of court. He 
waived indictment and the case was tried at 
a special court on March 11. The evidence 
was incontrovertible and the judge pronounced him guilty, but stated that as a 
number of prominent white men had asked 
him for leniency, he would suspend sentence 
on condition that Simons take the pledge to 
abstain from intoxicants. He took no note 
of the fact that Simons is a paroled prisoner 
on a charge of rape for which he was convicted and served part of a sentence." 
Finally, from Wagoner, Okla., comes the 
month's special news in the lynching of a 
woman, which sums up in itself the deviltry 
and moral bankruptcy of the South: 
"The murder of Peace occurred Saturday 
night in what is known as the 'Bottoms,' a 
Negro section of the town. The woman was 
in jail. 
"Peace and a number of young men and 
boys had gone to the 'Bottoms' and had a 
more or less hilarious time, it appears. Peace 
and one companion were separated from the 
rest, and as they left a house the Scott EDITORIAL 
QUESTION OF POLICY. 
HE Editor of TH E CRISIS : 
1 wish the best success 
of your cause. May I 
therefore call your attention and that of your 
readers to certain rather 
characteristic points in your interesting Easter number of the magazine, in 
which I suspect that you tend, to defeat your main purpose ? First, I 
doubt whether your judgment of the 
late Mr. Robert C . Ogden was fair. If 
he did not admire " a self-conscious" 
Negro, he did not like self-consciousness 
in anyone. The ideal type of man, black 
or white, is not thinking about himself. Granting, however, that you put 
your finger on a certain limitation in 
Mr. Ogden's democracy, my point is 
that we ought to give "the benefit of 
the doubt " to the men of Mr. Ogden's 
type. If they are not the best friends 
of the most progressive movement, still 
let us claim them heartily as friends. 
Otherwise we tend to halt the procession. To claim them as friends tends 
to move such men our way. For what 
end do we talk if not to persuade? To 
persuade those who agree with us ? That 
is cheap work. We want to persuade 
those who are on the fence, hesitating 
whether to come further. 
Secondly, what you say of capitalizing 
the word Negro strikes me again as 
characteristic of the same attitude (shall 
I say it?) of carrying a chip on the 
shoulder. For I must .confess that, 
though brought up in the sturdiest old 
anti-slavery traditions, I was never 
taught to spell either Negro or white 
with a capital. I still object to spell 
"white " after this new convention, and 
yet I wish to treat my colored friends 
as well as I treat white people. I 
suspect that most people do not know 
this new style of capitalization, and are 
quite innocent of the intent to give 
offense. 
Thirdly, I think you go off the line of 
useful persuasion and create needless 
antagonism in what you say on page 286 
of Mr. Roosevelt's remark that "the 
best men in the United States believe 
in treating each man, of whatever color, 
absolutely on his worth," etc. You and 
I wish this to become true. Do you 
imagine that it is the slightest help 
to our purpose to denounce Mr. Roosevelt 's statement as a " falsehood'' ? Wh y 
not better keep the fine sentence in print 
in every issue of TH E CRISIS , till the 
colonel comes back from South America? The more people who are made to 
see this sentence the sooner the world 
will come to believe it, and act up to 
it. The oftener you call such a word 
false the slower you inevitably make 
human progress toward our ideal. 
We wonder sometimes at educated 
people who seem never to have grappled 
with the philosophy of evolution! Is it 
possible that the management of TH E 
CRISIS , a progressive paper, is still 
living in the period of dualism, and 
thinks that we civilize the world in proportion to the number of people whom 
we can stir up to feel ugly? 
Finally, why do you hurt and spoil 
the touching effect of the story of lynch-24 TH E CRISIS 
ing at Leland . Miss., by what seems a 
clear slur at President Wilso n an d 
President Eliot ? Ha s either of them 
ever given encouragement to lynchin g ? 
Her e are ninety millions of people 
emerging from the barbarism of only a 
few generations ago. The wonder is that 
there is so little killing : the fact is that 
society is steadily setting its face against 
it. Please say every positive word you 
like to establish the manliness, the 
patience and the courage of your 
leaders. Please do the least possible to 
arouse resentment of bitterness, which is 
sure to react upon those who stir it. 
Please do more of what you are doing 
every month, to show the growth of a 
kindl y good wil l among all kinds of 
people. Fo r good wil l is the only irresistible power i n the universe. 
Respectfully your friend. 
CHARLE S F . DOLE . 
TH E PHILOSOPHY OF ME . DOLE. 
WE publish very gladly Mr . 
Dole's criticism of TH E 
CRISIS , because of our 
deep respect for the 
writer and because he 
voices a real and vita l 
disagreement with our policy which is 
continually, i n one way or another, 
coming to expression. It is briefly this 
thesis: "Don' t antagonize, don't be 
bitter: say the conciliatory thing : make 
friends and do not repel them: insist on 
and emphasize the cheerful and good 
and dwell as little as possible on wrong 
and evil. 
TH E CRISI S does not believe i n this 
policy so far as the present status of 
the America n Negro problem is concerned. W e could imagine many social 
problems, and many phases i n a particula r problem, when the watchful waiting, the tactfully conciliatory attitude 
would be commendable and worth while. 
A t other times it would be suicida l and 
this, i n our opinion, is one of the times. 
It was ever so. Whe n the Hebrew 
prophets cried aloud there were respectable persons by the score who said : 
" Unfortunat e exaggeration !' ' 
' ' Unnecessary feeling!' ' 
'" Ungodl y bitterness!' ' 
Ye t the jeremiads were needed to 
redeem a people. Whe n the abolitionists began, not simpl y to say. but to act 
as if slavery were a ""covenant wit h 
hell. " there were plenty of timi d souls 
""on the fence, hesitating. " who 
scrambled down hastily on the popular 
side and were willin g to lync h Garrison 
and ostracize Phillips. 
Al l this might be beside the mark if we 
had not already tried Mr . Dole's prescriptions. Fo r now nearly twenty years 
we have made of ourselves mudsills for 
the feet of this Western world. W e have 
echoed and applauded every shameful 
accusation made against 10.000.000 victims of slavery. Di d they call us in ­
ferior half-beasts! W e nodded our 
simple heads and whispered: '"We is. " 
Di d they call our women prostitutes and 
our children bastards? W e smiled and 
cast a stone at the bruised breasts of 
our wives and daughters. Di d they 
accuse of laziness 4.000.000 sweating, 
struggling laborers, half pai d and 
cheated out of much of that ? We 
shrieked: "Ain' t it so? " W e laughed 
with them at our color, we joked at our 
sad past, and we told chicken stories 
to get alms. 
An d what was the result? W e got 
""friends. " I do not believe any people 
ever had so many ""friends " as the 
America n Negro to-day'. H e has nothing 
but ""friends " and may the good God 
deliver him from most of them, for they 
are like to lync h his soul. 
Wha t is it to be a friend of the Negro? 
It is to believe i n anythin g for him 
except, perhaps, total and immediate 
annihilation. Short of that, good and 
kin d friends of colored folk believe that 
he is. i n Mr . Dooley s charmin g phrase, 
""aisily lynched. " and ought to be occasionally. Eve n if 2.662 accused black 
people have been publicl y lynched EDITORIA L 25 
burned' and mutilated in twenty-eight 
years (not to mention the murder of 
perhaps 10,000 other black folk), our 
frie*nds think we ought not to disturb 
the good President of these United 
States because "the wonder is that there 
is so little killing!" 
It is the old battle of the better and 
the best. The worst foes of Xegro manhood to-day are those compromising 
friends who are willingly satisfied with 
even less than half a loaf. They want 
the Negro educated; but the South 
objects to Xegro colleges. Oh, very well, 
then, high schools; hut the South objects 
to "literary' ' training for "niggers! " 
Dear, dear! Then ' ' industrial'' training; but the South objects to training 
any considerable number of Negroes for 
industry; it wants them for menial 
service. Very well, train them as 
servants and field hands—anything as 
long as it is ' ' education!' ' Then we and 
TH E CRISI S rise and say: "But " 
Our friends raise deprecating hands; 
they adjust the sofa pillows, shade the 
light, and say: "Now, now! Give 
them the benefit of the doubt!" 
Or we clamor for the right to vote. 
"O f course you should vote, " say our 
friends. "But, " says the South, "they 
are too ignorant and inexperienced; we 
will vote for them." "Excellent, " cry 
our friends, "vot e for them and guard 
them in their civil rights." "What's 
this? " asks the South. "W e mean their 
economic rights," say our friends 
glibly, "their right to work and get 
property. " "Yes, " answers the South 
calmly, "the right to work, and we'll 
work them. " "Bu t " cries TH E 
CRISI S and the black man who has been 
worked long enough. " Sh ! " answer 
our friends. "You'll halt the 
procession!" 
That's precisely what we intend to 
do. For twenty-five years we have let 
the procession go by until the systematic denial of manhood rights to black 
men in America is the crying disgrace of 
the century. We have wrongs, deep 
and bitter wrongs. There are local and 
individual exceptions; there are some 
mitigating circumstances; there is much 
to be excused; there is much to be said; 
and yet for the great mass of 10,000,000 
Americans of Negro descent these 
things are true: 
We are denied education. 
We are driven out of the Church of 
Christ. 
We are forced out of hotels, theatres 
and public places. 
We are publicly labeled like dogs when 
we travel. 
We can seldom get decent employment. 
We are forced down to the lowest 
wage scale. 
We pay the highest rent for the 
poorest homes. 
We cannot buy property in decent 
neighborhoods. 
We are held up to ridicule in the press 
and on the platform and stage. 
We are disfranchised. 
We are taxed without representation. 
We are denied the right to choose our 
friends or to be chosen by them, but 
must publicly announce ourselves as 
social pariahs or be suggestively kicked 
by the Survey. 
In law and custom our women have 
no rights which a white man is bound 
to respect. 
We cannot get justice in the courts. 
We are lynched with impunity. 
We are publicly,' continuously and 
shamefully insulted from the day of our 
birth -to the day of our death. 
And yet we are told not to be "selfconscious ; " to lie about the truth in 
order to make it ' ' come true; " to 
grapple with the "philosophy of evolution; " and not to make people "feel 
ugly " by telling them "ugly facts." 
Few admire Mr. Dole, personally, 
more than the editor of TH E CRISIS . Mr. 
Dole is the type of what the American 
of the future may be: fine in feeling, 
delicate in touch, sensitive to the subtle 
beauties of the world. But Mr. Dole's 26 TH E CRISIS 
feet never walked the way we tread. He 
does not know—he cannot conceive this 
darker world of insult, repression, 
hunger and murder. He and Charles 
William Eliot and Woodrow Wilson and 
millions of others have given no encouragement to lynching, except by silence! 
Except by silence! 
EXCEP T B Y SILENCE! 
Who ever tried harder than the Negro 
and his "friends' ' to use the lie for 
social betterment? We have lied about 
the South so strenuously that this may 
account for the persistent blackness of 
our faces. Oh. yes: the South is the 
true, tried friend of Negroes; the South 
wants them educated; the South detests 
lynching; the South loves black mammies and buries them handsomely; the 
little playful antics of mobs are but 
ebullitions of Anglo-Saxon energy or at 
worst the faults of "poo r white trash," 
who do not count. Moreover, those who 
dispute these statements are either meddling white Northerners or impudent 
Negroes who want to marry white 
women. 
All of this we black folk and our 
"friends " have been saying glibly and 
•frequently. We were lying, and we 
knew we were lying, to make the ''falsehood come true;" but did the world 
know this? Did we not lull this nation 
to false security and fatuous insensibility ? And is the uneasiness of our 
friends at the plain talk of TH E CRISI S 
the cause of ugly feeling or the necessary result of ridiculous lies ? How far 
may we indeed meddle with the truth? 
Where is the boundary line between 
getting people "t o come and believe" 
what is untrue and telling them on your 
honor that black is white? We have a 
sincere desire to see a little brochure by 
Mr. Dole—with hand-made paper, deckle 
edged and privately printed—on "Th e 
Uses of the Lie as a Means of Social 
Salvation." We would like to distribute 
a few copies in Heaven among Mr. Dole's 
Puritan ancestors and listen to the 
ensuing profanity. 
It is the palpable evasions of jour 
friends, and our earnest friends like 
Mr. Dole, that are most discouraging. 
When we protest at the plain insult of 
'"negro, " Mr. Dole answers that we do 
not capitalize "white. " But white is 
not the correlative of Negro, as Mr. 
Dole knows right well. "Black " and 
"colored " are the correlatives to 
"white, " while Negro is used exactly 
as the words Malay or German or* Jew 
or Indian are used. To refuse a word 
so used capitalization is a petty and 
usually a deliberate insult. 
Humanity is progressing toward an 
ideal; but not, please God. solely by 
help of men who sit in cloistered ease, 
hesitate from action and seek sweetness and light; rather we progress today, as in the past, by the soul-torn 
strength of those who can never sit still 
and silent while the disinherited and the 
damned clog our gutters and gasp their 
lives out on our front porches. These 
are the men who go down in the blood 
and dust of battle. They say ugly things 
to an ugly world. They spew the lukewarm fence straddlers out of their 
mouths, like God of old; they cry aloud 
and spare not; they shout from the 
housetops, and they make this world 
so damned uncomfortable with its nasty 
burden of evil that it tries to get good 
and does get better. 
Evolution is evolving the millennium, 
but one of the unescapable factors in 
evolution are the men who hate wickedness and oppression with perfect hatred, 
who will not equivocate, will not excuse, 
and will be heard. With the sainted 
spirits of such as these TH E CRISI S 
would veakly but earnestly stand and 
cry in the world's four corners of the 
way; and it claims no man as friend who 
dare not stand and cry with it. ATLANTA 
STRIVING 
By 
BENJ. GRIFFITH BRAWLE Y 
WITHI N the last two years 
Atlanta has offered a peculiar field for study by 
those who are interested in 
the situation and the problems of the Negro in this 
country. Social conditions 
have been discussed as never before. Education, housing conditions, religious and 
moral questions have all been subjected to 
searching investigation; and from it all has 
resulted a healthier and saner spirit than 
the city has known in years. 
We begin our review, however, with a 
distinct liability. A segregation ordinance 
was passed last summer. It is decidedly unpopular; nobody is inclined to press it very 
strongly; and, as has been the case with 
many similar measures, in course of time it 
will doubtless become less rather than more 
effective. At the same time the ordinance 
was passed, with all the hideousness of its 
"white blocks" and "colored blocks." However we may have advanced within the last 
year in Atlanta, we must remember that in 
this instance we lost. 
The chief monument to the material advance of the Negro in Atlanta within the 
last year is the new Odd Fellows Building 
on Auburn Avenue. This sturdy structure, 
erected by the Odd Fellows of the State of 
Georgia, is on a $10,000 site. The building 
itself cost $115,000, and is elegantly appointed throughout. On the first floor there 
is space for six stores; the second and third 
floors hold three large rooms each; and the 
fourth, fifth and sixth stories are adapted 
for office use, each holding fourteen rooms. 
Merely to walk through this excellent building is to receive a new respect for Negro 
TH E GRAND OLD MAN. 
(See Me n of the Month ) 
enterprise. But the Odd Fellows have gone 
further. Adjoining the office building, on 
a plot of ground 139x100 feet, and costing $53,000, is now in course of erection 
another building designed as an auditorium. 
In addition to the main auditorium, the 
building, which will cost $80,000, will contain eight stores and eighteen offices. Al l 
of this work of the Odd Fellows marks a 
new era in the material progress of the 
Negro in Atlanta. 
The largest single enterprise that has 
worked for the bringing together of the 
Negroes of the city within the last two years 
is the effort for a new Y . M . C. A . building. The campaign for a $100,000 building 
for Negro young men was begun in February, 1911. Soon the Negro people of the 
city had subscribed as much as $53,000. The 
real work of the campaign came, of course, 
when the pledges began to be collected. 
Nothing could be finer than the undaunted 
faith with which a few stalwart souls have 
stood by their task in the face of all possible 
discouragement until gradually all classes 
have been infused with something of their 
spirit. On the night of Sunday, December 
14, a magnificent audience of about 7,000 
people of all denominations gathered in the COLORE D OD D FELLOW S BUILDING , ATLANTA , GA. 
(Side viow with auditorium and stores ; for front view, sen cover.) ATLANT A STRIVIN G 29 
Conditions Among the Negroes," by Dr. 
W. D. Weatherford, well known for his books 
dealing with the South and the Negro; and 
"The Social Program of the Church," by 
Prof. Walter Rauschenbusch, of Rochester 
Theological Seminary. The spirit of the 
whole congress was fairly summed up in the 
words of Mrs. J. D. Hammond, a white 
woman of Augusta, Ga.: "All the old 
foundations of human life are being tested, 
that only the unshakable may remain. 
Justice and opportunity for all—that is 
the new world cry. * * * As part of all 
humanity we share the race task, to widen 
the bounds of justice, to open the doors of 
opportunity for all, to blend our small lives 
with that great Power which makes for 
righteousness for all the races of men." 
Another definite mark of progress is the 
probation officer for juvenile delinquents 
recently appointed. Fo r two years there 
has been in Atlanta a special court for 
juvenile delinquents, evolved from the larger 
police system. Until very recently, however, there was no special provision for 
Negro boys and girls who may have become 
subject to the findings of the court. The 
matter has now been taken in hand by a 
committee composed of President Ware, of 
Atlanta University, chairman; President 
Hope , of Morehouse College; Mr. Philip 
Weltner, secretary of the prison commission and probation officer of the city of 
Atlanta; Mr. J. A. Bigham, associate professor of history and economics at Atlanta 
University, and Judge Tindall, of the juvenile court. On the basis of the PhelpsStokes Foundation, the committee has appointed as special probation officer for 
Negro juvenile delinquents Mr. G. W . 
Moore, a young man who was graduated at 
Morehouse - College in. 1912, who has since 
continued his studies in New York at 
Columbia, and who at the time of his appointment was teaching at Morehouse. Mr. 
Moore's duties are to investigate the home 
conditions of the boy or girl summoned to 
court; to make to the judge a recommendation that might either send the boy to a 
reformatory or place him on probation; to 
watch very carefully those delinquents who 
are on probation; and as far as possible to 
find in the neighborhood of the individual 
case some man who might in q, general way 
act as "big brother" to the boy under consideration. Naturally enough one of the 
large auditorium-armory for a great demonstration. Amon g others the governor of the 
State spoke, and more and more the meeting 
took on the character of a* great forum for 
the races. But not only on this occasion 
have men of prominence worked in behalf 
o f the movement. From Sunday to Sunday, 
in mass meetings only less large, some of 
the foremost ministers and business men of 
the city have worked for the cause. One 
very busy man, Mr. W . Wood s White, a 
white man o f large insurance interests, has 
week after week done some of the hardest 
work of the campaign in the arduous tasks 
of long committee meetings. To-day the 
building seems assured. So far $1.5,000 has 
been collected from Negro people, one man, 
Mr. David T. Howard, an undertaker, contributing $1,000; and the campaign is still on. 
Especially noteworthy was the Southern 
Sociological Congress, which assembled in 
Atlanta April 25 to 29, 1913. The congress, 
of which the session held in Atlanta was the 
second, conducted its first convention in 
Nashville in 1912. It is hardly too much to 
say that the whole movement which it represents means the inauguration of a new era 
in the history of the South. The thinking 
class of the South, represented by the 
teachers, the preachers and the social 
workers, is beginning to make itself heard. 
The whole emphasis of the conference was 
upon freedom of thought and speech, and 
the tone throughout was one of utmost 
fairness. Different sessions and committee 
meetings were held in different representative 
churches of the city, and the Negro was not 
only represented on the program, but also 
took a very active part in the discussions. 
Such large topics as public health, courts 
and prisons, child welfare, organized 
charities, race problems and the church 
were among those considered. Nearly a 
hundred men and women, drawn from the 
ranks of those who are to-day actively engaged in the solution of national problems, 
delivered principal addresses. Representative addresses that showed the scope and 
spirit of the conference were: "The Challenge of the South for a Better Nation," by 
President S. C. Mitchell, of the University 
of South Carolina; "The Convict Lease and 
the System of Contract Labor," by Mr. 
Hoope r Alexander, a prominent Atlanta 
lawyer; "Ho w to Enlist the Welfare Agencies of the South for the Improvement of 30 TH E CRISIS 
first things that Mr. Moore found on taking 
up his work was that facilities for taking 
care of delinquents were altogether inadequate : there was not even a reformatory 
for Negro boys. It is pleasant to record, 
however, that a movement was already on 
foot for the alleviation of this situation, 
land for such a reformatory having been 
purchased not far from Atlanta; and there 
is hope that before very long Negro boys 
and girls who need correction will receive 
better care. In this general connection it 
may also be remarked that at the police 
station a matron for colored women, Mrs. 
Elizabeth Baldwin, has recently entered upon 
her duties. It is hard for one unfamiliar 
with conditions in Atlanta to believe that 
for so many years there has been at the 
police station no such officer as this. Even 
now the salary of one who should be 
officially employed by the city is paid by 
the joint effort of the Methodist Ministers' 
Union (colored), the Baptist Ministers' 
Union (colored) and the First Congregational Church. It may also be here remarked that the study of Negro crime to be 
conducted this year by the Atlanta conference 
under the auspices of Atlanta University 
will very largely be pursued in connection with the work of the committee 
mentioned above, Mr. Moore and Mr. Bigham together doing a good deal of the heavy 
work of the investigation. 
Among the efforts of the Negroes of 
Atlanta within the last year along the line 
of co-operative work must be mentioned 
the public-school agitation of last summer. 
This came about very largely as a development of the work of the Neighborhood 
Union, of which Mrs. John Hope is the 
general head. This organization, begun in 
1908, has developed until it now includes 
not only the parent branch, but also five 
other branches. The large purpose of the 
Neighborhood Union is to improve the social 
conditions of the city. Since it began its 
work it has provided a playground for 
children: has placed several children in 
homes; has obtained the use of public-school 
buildings for recreation schools during the 
summer vacation; has secured the services 
of four trained nurses for those who are not 
able to pay for treatment: has aided many 
needy families; has purchased on Lee Street 
a settlement house; and generally has improved the lighting and sanitary conditions 
in many localities. From this organization, which took the initiative, developed the 
social-improvement committee, which wa s 
intended to be of somewhat larger scope and 
which started the agitation for more and 
better schools. Fo r years the conditions in 
the public schools of Atlanta have been 
deplorable. The Roach Street school has 
used regularly for first and second grade 
work a basement which necessitates artificial 
light on dark days and which is so damp as 
to injure the health o f the children. In 
several schools the walls are in very bad 
condition. In some schools, notably the 
Houston Street school, the Mitchell Street 
school and the Pittsburg school, the sanitary appointments are so poor that not only 
is the health of students and teachers endangered, but every invitation is given 
to immorality. In South Atlanta there has 
been no school at all for Negro children, 
although in this section of the city there are 
hundreds of children whose fathers are taxpayers; and a fact that people in some 
parts of the country find difficult to comprehend is that in the whole State o f 
Georgia there is no high school for Negro 
boys and girls. As a matter of fact, however, the greatest grievance has been that 
throughout the city, through the sixth 
grade, so-called "double sessions" have been 
in operation. A teacher handles one group 
of students in the morning hours and receives at noon another group. She thus 
frequently handles in the course o f the day 
over a hundred students. The agitation over 
the public schools came late last summer 
when it was proposed in some quarters to 
do away with the seventh and eighth grades 
in the schools, and to substitute for these 
grades some industrial features. As a result 
of the agitation of the whole school situation, not only will the present grades be 
kept, with the real addition of the industrial 
features, but there is also promise of another 
school in the near future. 
One of the results of the agitation of the 
sanitary conditions surrounding the life of 
the Negro in Atlanta has been the movement for a hospital for the treatment of the 
contagious diseases of Negro patients. The 
movement has not been prompted throughout by the highest motives of altruism, as 
the plea has been made largely on the basis 
of the protection of white people from infection from Negroes. Whatever the motive, ATLANT A STRIVING 31 
however, the result is a good one. Already a 
temporary hospital is in operation; and the 
movement for a permanent hospital at an 
early date continues to gather force. Just 
a few hours before these lines were written 
the Rotary Club, composed of representative business men of Atlanta, appointed a 
committee to urge upon the mayor and the 
council the necessity of providing a permanent hospital in Atlanta for the care of 
colored people suffering with contagious 
diseases. 
Such are but some of the things which 
have interested the people of Atlanta within 
the last year. There are other things, of 
course. The Standard Life Insurance Company has been placed on a firm basis; and 
the readers of TH E CRISIS will remember 
the full account of the organization given 
by Mr. Pace in the January number. The 
Gate City Free Kindergarten has also continued its beneficent work. Here and there, 
too, one may observe a change of sentiment. 
Said Miss Isma Dooly, a member of the 
regular staff of the Atlanta Constitution, in 
the issue for February 1: "I have often 
noticed, with chagrin, that there is a large 
element o f so-called Christian people in the 
community who cry down any practical 
effort to help the poorer, more needy element 
of the colored population. Though the issue 
may be along the line of better housing, 
somebody will refer to the seven institutions 
around the city for the higher education of 
the Negro. Atlanta is not called upon to 
support any of these institutions. It is done 
by the Negroes themselves and by outside 
people, and both these have a right to 
build any kind of institution they choose. 
If we do not like that education, we have a 
chance to put in the education we do prefer in the public schools for the Negro 
which we maintain—and that inadequately 
and badly, as pictures taken of actual conditions can prove." 
Anyone reviewing the movements that 
have been enumerated is impressed by two 
facts. The first is that almost all of the 
movements touched upon are closely related. It has seemed impossible for one to 
be interested in any one of the things commented upon without being interested in all. 
The Y. M. C. A. committee turned aside in 
its meetings to the consideration of the 
Sociological Congress; the Neighborhood 
Union fostered the public-school agitation; 
and the Y. M. C. A. campaign has tended 
more than once to become a focus for a 
consideration of the whole Negro problem. 
The other thing to be noticed is the development of the spirit of co-operation among all 
those in the city, of any class or race whatsoever, who were interested in social progress. People who in most ways are as far 
apart as the poles have still found that there 
are some things on which they can meet 
their fellow men on common ground. The 
result of it all is that the Negro in Atlanta 
is having an intelligent and sympathetic 
study of his problems such as he has never 
had before. 
NE W NEGR O HOME S I N ATLANTA . THE FIVE-HUNDRED-DOLLAR HABIT 
How One Branch Reaches the People f§] ^ 
TH E sixth check for $500 received on 
March 10 from the committee of 
fifty and more, of the District of Columbia 
branch, set this office in a reminiscent mood. 
It was recalled that during the past year we 
had been advised many times that a strong 
branch in the District of Columbia was an 
impossibility, as very few of the colored 
people were interested, and those who were 
would be unable to take an active part in a 
movement so radical because all held positions with the government or in the schools. 
In March, 1013, the District of Columbia 
branch was permanently organized. Since 
then its membership has increased by more 
than 500 and the branch has sent to headquarters, in addition to six $500 checks, 
about $700 in membership fees and special 
contributions. This was the first branch to 
contribute $100 to the salary of the attorney. 
These results were largely due to the efforts 
of the committee of fifty and more, which 
is really the finance committee of the District of Columbia branch. This committee 
was organized as a result of the wonderful 
protest meeting against segregation held in 
Washington October 27, 1013. Immediately 
after the meeting a few of the leadingcolored citizens met and pledged themselves 
to raise or donate $25 each to a fund of 
$1,000 to be raised by January 1, 1014. for 
the National Association. This group soon 
developed into a committee known as the 
committee of fifty and more, working under 
the direction of the District of Columbia 
branch. 
The committee began a campaign which 
literally combed the city and suburbs. 
Churches were' asked to make their pastors 
members. The campaign document which 
the committee used with the- greatest effect 
was a circular letter written by Mr. Neval 
H. Thomas, who is known to his friends in 
Washington as the "crusader." 
This was widely distributed throughout fhe 
community. The Bee published it in full 
without charge. It was reinforced by letters 
from the chairman of the committee and sent 
to the pastors of the churches with a confirmatory letter from a group of .ministers. 
In the .churches^ in the lodges of Masons, of 
the Eastern' Sftlr, of' Odd Fellows, in civic 
associations and social clubs, in schools, sewing circles—everywhere—contributions were 
solicited. In addition to mass meetings, all 
of which have been mentioned in previous 
numbers of TH E CRISIS, a number of members of the branch held a series of smaller 
meetings to spread the propaganda of the 
association. Some of the speakers addressed 
as many as three meetings in one day. One 
young man made twenty-five talks in a 
whirlwind campaign. Another organized a 
little club of night-school students. Each of 
these contributed 10 cents a week until they 
raised $35, to make them members of the 
local branch. The women worked as hard 
as the men. They not only gave from their 
own purses with the greatest liberality, but ' 
they aroused their fathers, husbands, brothers 
and friends to the vital importance of the 
cause of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. The 
results have been remarkable. From rich and 
poor contributions have steadily come in. 
The branch has reached the people. 
The District of Columbia branch is also 
achieving success in fighting hostile 
legislation. 
Lack of space prevents our publishing 
Mr. Archibald Grimke's effective remarks at 
the recent hearing on the segregation bills 
before the committee on reform of the civil 
service. These have been printed in a government publication and may be secured free 
from national headquarters on application. 
White friends of the association who were 
present at the hearing write us that Mr. 
Grimke's address and personality made such 
a favorable impression on the committee that 
largely as a result action on the bills was 
postponed. 
Mr. Grimke also made a protest to the 
commissioners of the District of Columbia in 
regard to the delay in the construction of 
the new colored high school and the congested condition in the present structure. As 
a result work on the new school has been 
hastened. 
W e regret that some of the most enthusiastic members of the committee of fifty 
and more will not permit us to make pert 
sonal acknowledgment of their magnificent 
work for the association. ' At some future" TH E N. A. A. C. P. 33 
MR . ARCHIBAL D GRIMKE . 
date we hope to be permitted to publish a 
list of this committee in full. 
As this goes to press word comes from 
"Washington that the very able secretary of 
the branch, Mr. W . B . HartgTove, who has 
recently undergone a major operation, is 
rapidly improving. Mr. Hartgrove's quiet 
and effective work and his executive ability 
have contributed greatly to the success of 
the branch. 
BALTIMORE. 
The Baltimore branch has another hard 
fight on its hands. The Frick bill, a "Jim 
Crow" bill, applying to passengers on the 
street cars and other electric railway lines 
in the State, was recently introduced into 
the legislature and favorably reported by the 
judiciary committee. This report was 
accepted by the house without a dissenting 
vote. Wor d has just come that the bill has 
been killed and that the branch was conspicuous at the obsequies. 
The branch has been busily engaged in 
preparing for the sixth annual conference 
of the association. The concert given by the 
Williams Colored Singers, of Chicago, at 
Albaugh's Theatre, to raise funds for this, 
was a success, clearing $170. 
At the February meeting held in the 
Sharon Baptist Church many new members 
joined the association. 
m 
MEETINGS. 
"V/TK. V1LLAR D goes west this month to 
A
 attend the American Newspaper 
Congress in Lawrence, Kan. His limited 
time and many engagemenls make it impossible for him to accept the numerous invitations that have poured in from branches 
requesting him to make addresses. He has 
arranged to speak before the following 
branches: Topeka, May 14; Kansas City, 
May 15; Indianapolis, May 16; Cleveland, 
May 17. 
On March 3 Mr. Villard addressed the 
Garrison Association at the home of Mrs. 
Henry Villard. On March 31 he spoke at 
the mass meeting held at the Concord Baptist 
Church in Brooklyn. Other speakers were 
Senator Moses E. Clapp, Dr. W . E. B. Du 
Bois and the Rev. Charles S. Morris. Dr. 
George Frazier Miller presided. The committee of arrangements for the meeting were 
as follows: Mrs. Alice Wiley Seay, chairman; Mr. George E. Wibecan, secretary; 
Mr. E. H. Wilson, treasurer; Mr. N. B. 
Dodson, chairman of committee on resolutions. Resolutions were passed appointing 
a committee to take immediate steps to 
organize a Brooklyn branch of the National 
Association. 
CONFERENCE. 
As announced in the last number of TH E 
CRISIS, the sixth annual conference will be 
held in Baltimore May 3, 4 and 5, with a 
post-conference meeting in Washington May 
6, and a meeting with the National Conference of Charities and Corrections at 
Memphis, Tenn., during the week of May 8. 
In addition to the speakers mentioned in 
the last number of TH E CRISIS, the following will be on the program: Mr. Jacques 
Loeb, who is well known in this country and 
in Europe as a scientist, will speak on 
"The Theory of Racial Inferiority in the 
Line of Recent Biological Development;" 
Dr. Howard Kelly will speak on the "Color 
Problems of Baltimore;" the Rev. S. L. 
Theobald, on "The Catholic Church and the 
Negro; " Mrs. Havelock Ellis, on "Democracy 
and Culture." Mr. W . Justin Carter, a wellknown attorney of Harrisburg, Pa., will 
speak on "Discrimination in the Professions" 34 TH E CRISIS 
and Prof. T. S. Inborden will speak on "The Moffat and Dr. Joel E. Spingarn. Mr. 
Xegro and the Land." Other speakers are Moorfield Storey will preside at the opening 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Dr. G. R. Waller, session of the conference on Sunday afterMr. W . Ashbie Hawkins, Miss Adelene noon, May 3. 
| OUR LEGAL BUREAU $ 
<£> B y CHAPI N BRINSMAD E A 
Jfu Attorney-in-charge jjfc. 
IURING the past month the 
attorney has investigated 
reports of racial discrimination against civil-service 
employees of the Atlanta 
postoffice. 
The present administration at Washington has been charged with 
sacrificing the civil service on the altar of 
political expediency. It has been pointed 
out that under the income-tax law appointments to the force of agents, collectors, 
deputy collectors, inspectors and other employees having charge of its execution are 
made by the Commissioner of Internal 
Revenue, with the approval of the Secretary 
o f the Treasury, and not from the classified 
service; that the banking and currency bill 
provides that attorneys, experts, assistant 
clerks and other employees provided for by 
it shall be appointed without regard to the 
provisions of the act of January 16, 1883 
(the act establishing the civil service) ; and 
that a rider to the urgent deficiency bill 
revoked all the executive orders which had 
theretofore placed the positions of deputy 
marshal and deputy internal revenue collector in the classified service. The author 
of this rider had stated in offering it: 
"I know that there is no office in my 
judgment under the Democratic administration that could not be better filled by a 
Democrat than by a Republican. If you 
call that the spoils system you are welcome 
to so denominate it." 
The discharges at the Atlanta postoffice 
furnish another illustration. In Atlanta, 
however, it is a case of violation, at least 
in spirit, of civil-service regulations instead 
of a mere elimination of certain cases from 
their application. On the other hand, in 
Atlanta the authorities run less chance of 
serious opposition, because it is the colored 
employees who suffer, and their removal 
from the service is popular. They have no 
votes and no political influence, and they 
are not represented in Congress. The postoffice authorities know that as to them the 
law can be violated at will, without danger 
of retaliation. It is therefore not surprising 
that, since the change in administrations, approximately thirty clerks and carriers, 
supposed to be protected by civil-service 
regulations, have been discharged. 
The postmaster claims that the men removed were dishonest or inefficient, that they 
came in when the civil service meant little. 
This claim may have some basis in fact, 
but it is proposed here to tell o f a few cases 
personally investigated by the attorney 
where such was not the case. 
A carrier who had given excellent service 
for ten years was charged with telling a 
patron, in reply to her inquiry about her 
Collier's Weekly, that newspapers were not 
being delivered during the holidays, but were 
being destroyed and sold for waste paper. 
There is a slight conflict between the carrier's version of the facts and that of the 
patron. The carrier states that he gave the 
stereotyped answer—that the paper had not 
come yet. She says he told her that her 
magazine case had been swept out. She 
denies, however, that she ever said he told 
her her paper was destroyed. She states 
that after she had inquired at the office an 
inspector called at her house with a prepared statement, which she declined to sign 
until he had drawn his pencil through the 
statement that the carrier said newspapers 
were being destroyed. The patron, therefore, 
bears out the carrier in his denial o f the 
serious part of the charges against him. In 
spite of this fact, however, the carrier received his discharge. OUR LEGAL BUREAU 35 
Another carrier was charged with not 
delivering a letter, although informed by 
the addressee personally on the day before 
that she intended to move into the house to 
which the letter was addressed. The facts 
were that the carrier had not been so informed by the addressee and since the 
house was barred up when he passed it, 
and there was a "to rent" sign on it, he 
thought it was unoccupied. He returned 
the letter to the office and marked it "not 
at." On the next trip he noticed that the 
house was occupied, but by this time the 
letter had been returned to the sender, who 
had delivered it in person. On complaint 
made, the carrier succeeded in getting all 
the patrons involved to make statements 
completely exonerating him. In spite of 
this, however, because he had incurred the 
enmity o f the superintendent, he was 
discharged. 
Another carrier, one who had served two 
years and had always had an excellent rating, 
was charged with misdelivering a letter. It 
appears that there were two firms within two 
doors o f each other on the same street, of 
the same surname, and in the same line of 
business. The charge was that he had delivered a letter intended for one of these 
firms to the other. The carrier went to both 
firms, ascertained that the delivery had been 
made by a substitute and not by him, and 
obtained from the proper addressee a letter 
to the postmaster stating the facts. The 
charges had stated that such misdelivery had 
been a common occurrence. The letter he 
obtained denied this explicitly, and otherwise completely exonerated him. He was 
discharged. 
Another man had for years served a difficult four-trip business route. He was transferred to a two-trip residential route. 
Shortly after taking up his new duties he 
received a letter charging him with omitting 
to pull his magazine case. The letter further 
stated that he had been reminded of the 
magazine case just before starting out on 
several occasions. In his answer the carrier 
explained that it was because on his former 
route he had had no special magazine ease 
to pull that he had found difficulty in getting 
accustomed to pulling it on the new route. 
The statement that he had been reminded of 
it he denied, except that he admitted that 
the customary bell to warn the carriers to 
start was rung. This answer was seen by 
the attorney for the association before it 
was sent. The superintendent of mails 
stated to the attorney that this carrier had 
made no explanation of his omission except 
that he "had forgot; " and that he had not 
denied being reminded. 
The feeling among the remaining carriers 
is that they are likely to go at any time. 
Despairing of being able to hold their positions, many resign as soon as charges are 
preferred against them. 
Three carriers found in their mail one 
morning letters addressed to numbers which 
did not represent houses. One letter was 
addressed to No. 225 Street. There 
was no No. 225, but as No. 223 was a boarding house, the carrier resolved to try it there. 
He left it in his case. Another letter was 
addressed to No. 280 Street. There 
was no No. 280, but as a person of the 
same name as the addressee lived at No. 
221, the carrier felt justified in casing the 
letter with the object of getting permission 
to try it at No. 221. On their return from 
their trip the three were searched by postoffice inspectors, under the direction of the 
superintendent. It appeared that the letters 
had been decoy letters. The men's statements were taken down by a stenographer 
and they were charged with putting the letters in their cases with the object of later 
converting them to their own use. They 
were reminded of an order which required 
carriers to mark up all mail intended for 
other routes and return it to the distributors 
before leaving the office. They pointed out 
that these letters had been addressed to 
streets on their routes and were obviously 
not intended for points on any other routes. 
One of the carriers on being told that he 
was suspended gave up and resigned. 
Another did not do so. Later he received 
charges, as a result of which he will doubtless be discharged. 
Another case involved a square conflict 
of testimony between a clerk and the assistant superintendent as to verbal instructions given by the latter to the former. The 
charge was that the clerk refused to obey 
the assistant superintendent's order to put 
some official mail, which was undelivered, on 
the parcels-post table to be taken out. His 
answer stated that his instructions were to 
tie the mail up and leave it on his desk, 
which he had done. He further stated that 
when some days later he noticed that it 
was still on his desk, he asked the assistant 
superintendent about it and that he said he 36 TH E CRISIS 
would attend to it. No other charges were 
made against this' clerk. He resigned, convinced that he was d'oomed. 
The postoffice officials are frank to say 
that it won't do in the youth for colored 
and white clerks to work side by side. No 
pretense is being made of denying that, so 
far as the clerks are concerned; the colored 
employees are being eliminated as fast as 
possible. 
Two clerks were so efficient in their work 
that no charges could be made against them. 
One of these men stated to the attorney that 
on several nights the labels on his mail sacks 
had been changed in an effort to cause him 
to make mistakes; that he learned of this 
in time to get used to the new order. He 
further stated that a few days later the 
superintendent of mails ordered him to make 
out an application for a transfer to a carrier's position, that he had made no request 
for such transfer, but complied; that he was 
put on a heavy business and residence route; 
that the former carrier went with him only 
one day; that on the second day there was 
a blinding snowstorm, as a result of which 
he was unable to make more than one delivery; and that, since the superintendent of 
carriers refused to give him help unless he 
paid for it, and he declined to accept help 
under such terms: he resigned in three clays. 
The story of the other clerk .referred to 
is to the following effect: He was the onlv 
surviving colored clerk in the mailing department, with the exception of one who 
worked all night, when one morning the 
superintendent ordered him to make out an 
application for transfer. He protested, but 
to no avail. Thereafter his experience was 
similar to that of the other man. His 
resignation, however, was caused largely by 
his becoming sick as a result of the unaccustomed work during the snowstorm. A 
statement made by the superintendent of 
mails to the attorney that these two men 
voluntarily made application for transfer 
requires no further comment. 
Those having the appointment and dismissal of employees in the classified service 
can exercise a wide discretion. They may 
not appoint or discharge for political or 
religious reasons and all discharges must 
be for cause to promote the efficiency of the 
service. Beyond this the law does little more 
than govern the procedure. In form the 
Atlanta dismissals have apparently complied with the regulations. 
No relief may be looked for from the 
department at Washington, which is entirely 
Southern in its makeup. The same may be 
said of the civil-service commission. The 
work of ridding the classified service of its 
colored members goes on and apparently will 
not be checked till public opinion can be 
brought to bear and a complete investigation had by persons who are unprejudiced 
and whose only object shall be to see that 
justice is done. 
THE "CRISIS" 
Bv WILLIA M PICKENS . 
' | ' HO C quiv'ring tongue of fire! 
Bring to our land a Pentecost, 
The hearts of men inspire 
To gain once more the freedom they have 
lost. 
And fire with pristine courage sire and son, 
Burn on. 
Thou flaring sheet of flame! 
Burn like a startling comet high, 
Forewarning in God's name 
And writing truth on our deceptive sky 
Whose quiet aspect has another mien 
Unseen. 
Thou whetted sword of truth! 
Thou brandished sword makes tyrants 
shake, 
But stalwart men and youth 
From the oppressed are rising up to 
break 
The bonds of bondage and the bars of caste. 
At last. 
Thou freedom's clarion call! 
Wake the oppressed, ring in their ears, 
Call them to rally all 
As one, unite their strength, shake off 
their fears. 
And fight till freedom's battles all are won— 
Call on! 
Thou mighty "still, small voice! " 
Speak on till thou art clearly heard! 
Let the oppressed rejoice 
And the oppressor tremble at thy word, 
Until the truth is known and justice done 
Speak on ! F 
E. H. RUTHERFOR D R. W . BROW N S. W . RUTHERFOR D 
Treasurer President Secretary 
THE NATIONAL BENEFIT ASSOCIATION 
persons from one to sixty years are insurable. Last year $45,504.41 was paid in 
health and accident policies There is a 
clause in the health and accident policies 
providing for permanent disability, for the 
benefit of consumptives, paralytics, etc. In 
case of total disability the insured is released 
from further premium payments and is 
allowed a lump sum equivalent to the face 
value of (he policy. 
In 1902 a difficulty arose with the establishment of an insurance department at 
Washington. The association was compelled 
to make out a sworn report before securing 
license to do business, and this was difficult 
because it had not been customary and the 
officers knew very little about insurance 
departmental rules and regulations. However, the license was secured and in 1904 
the first payment was made upon a fivestory office building. But again the company suffered through the failure of a 
colored bank. This hank occupied offices in 
the same building with the association and 
had contracted to buy the building. The 
failure to do this was, of course, a great 
loss and, in addition, $5,000 had been deposited in the bank by the association. 
Greater still, perhaps, was the psychological 
effect the failure had upon the people who 
seemed to feel that the bank and the assoH E National Benefit Association was incorporated at 
Washington, D. C , in 1898, 
for the purpose of insuring 
its policy holders for benefits in cases of disability, 
accident or death. The 
organization was established with a capital 
o f $5 in a small office, cheaply furnished, 
with certain of the officers serving also as 
agents, clerks and janitor. The success of 
the association is even more remarkable for 
being established at a time when financial 
depression in this country was great on 
account of the Spanish-American War, just 
closing. For several years a war tax was 
exacted of the association and business suffered greatly. In spite of this, during the 
next year, 1899, 995 members were written 
for the amount of $33,000. 
Because of the failure to find a reputable 
bonding company that would bond the 
colored agents, each agent is required to pay 
his own bond. Four per cent, interest is 
paid on the bonds by the company and 
agents may draw the entire amount when 
they cease to work for the association. These 
agents have written policies in 215,000 
homes.. 
Three, forms of policies are issued: Sick 
and accident, straight life and endowment; 38 TH E CRISIS 
ciation must have been connected, since the 
two offices were so near together. One 
thousand policy holders withdrew their support, but by good management the final 
payment on the home office of more than 
$10,000 was soon made. The company now 
occupies three floors of this building, which 
is illustrated here, and rents two. 
Al l modern sanitary conveniences are 
afforded: clerks are furnished lockers for 
their clothing. The offices are kept well 
ventilated and clean. Office hours are 
from 8:30 a. m. to 5 p. m., and extra pay 
is allowed for overtime. Vacations, with 
salary in advance, are granted all clerks 
and managers and each clerk is allowed an 
hour off twice a month for shopping. A 
rest room is provided. The clerks all work 
harmoniously and loyally. 
During the fifteen years of its life the 
National Benefit Association has paid 
dividends at 6 per cent, for nine years and at 
1.5 per cent, for six years. Thirty clerks 
are employed in the eight departments: 
Executive, bookkeeping, correspondence with 
its bureau of claims, city record, stock, policy 
and supply. There are 700 agents giving 
full or partial time to the work. More than TH E NATIONAL BENEFIT ASSOCIATION 39 
$300,000 has been paid in benefits and there 
is $4,000,000 worth of insurance in force. 
The receipts last year were $191,499.24, the 
surplu s earning of 
$30,730.24 bein g an 
increase of more than 
$5,000 over last year's 
profits, and 22,052 
members were written 
for the amoun t of 
$1,268,428. There ­
sources of the company 
amount to $2.50,000, of 
which $114,000 is invested in railroad , 
municipal , United 
State s and publicservice corporatio n 
bonds: $50,000 is on 
deposit jointly with the 
District of Columbia 
and the State of Maryland for the protection 
of property holders. 
Sick and benefit claims 
are paid promptly. The 
record for last year was 
no litigation over a 
single claim. This year 
a new scheme has been 
adopted which will undoubtedly stimulate the 
interest and efforts of 
the employees. This is profit sharing, by 
which each employee, according to his 
length of service, receives a certain per 
cent. of the earnings of the company. 
The National Benefit Association owns, 
besides the Washington building, which has 
been remodeled at a cost of $12,000, a large 
three-story building in 
Philadelphia . The 
spacious ground floor of 
this building is used for 
the offices of the association and the two upper 
floors are fitted up as 
modern flats and rented. 
The business of this 
company is carried on 
in Maryland, Delaware, 
Pennsylvania, Ne w 
Jersey, Rhode Island 
and the Distric t of 
Columbia. The directors and officers, who 
are electe d directly 
by the stockholders, are 
now striving to make 
the company an old line 
legal reserve insurance 
company with a paid-up 
capital "of $200,000 and 
qualified to operate in 
all the States, issuing 
al l form s o f life -
insurance policies for 
any amount desired. At 
present this company 
is operated in more 
States than any other Negro insurance company, and in each State it is examined and 
its agents are licensed by the insurance 
departments. SOME FRANK FACTS 
papers 
phlet 
have 
•ailed 
"The Human Way. " Address on race problems at the" Southern Sociological Congress, 
Atlanta. 1913 . Edited by James E. McCulloch. 
146 pages. 
'H E CRISIS has befor e 
c aile d attention to the 
extraordinary frankness of 
Southern white men in the 
Soutb e r n Sociological 
Congress held in Atlanta 
in 1913. Many of these 
been published in a pam-
"The Human Way, " and 
with the sure American instinct for going 
wrong on the race problem this book has 
been systematically ignored by the nation; 
yet it is in its way epochmaking; its message is tremendous. Here are men and 
young men. Southern whites, saying precisely 
what TH E CRISIS has been trying to say. 
How about the church and the Negro? 
Charles Brough, of Arkansas, says: 
"With reference to the religious contributions to the betterment of the Negro, 
it may be said that our churches have been 
pursuing a penny wise and pound foolish 
economy. The Presbyterians last year gave 
an average of three postage stamps per member to the work. The Methodists averaged 
less than the price of a cheap soda water." 
How about the Negro common school in the 
South.' W. 0. Scroggs, of Louisiana, says: 
"It is a matter of common knowledge that 
in the division of the school fund the Negro 
is not fairly treated." 
What about parks and libraries'? The 
same Mr. Scroggs says: 
"Inequalities like those in the administration of the school fund are even more noticeable in the case of such municipal improvements ns parks, driveways and public 
libraries." 
Does the South want intelligent colored 
farmers? J. H. De Loach, of Georgia, says: 
"In most of the Southern States farmers' 
institutes are authorized and held in different parts of the several States for the discussion of experts of local farm problems, 
such as fertilizers, field crops, crop rotation, 
farm management and the like. These 
institutes are intended mostly, if not altogether, for white fanners. The Negroes, as 
a general thing, are not considered." 
Is the "Jim Crow" ear a decent place of 
accommodation ? W . O. Scroggs, o f Louisiana, says: 
"The Negro dues not get equal accommodations with the whites on railway passenger trains, although he pays .the same 
fare." 
Is the reason of all this discrimination 
because the Negro does not share the public 
tax burden? Mr. Scroggs adds: 
"The taxpayer is not always the taxbearer. The white man pays many taxes 
whose burdens rest upon the black man's 
shoulders either wholly or in part. Whether 
the man who hands the money to the tax 
collector is white or black is of minor importance. That our taxes as at present 
administered fall most heavily on those 
least able to pay is everywhere recognized, 
and from this it must follow that the Negro, 
in proportion to his ability, bears a greater 
burden from taxation than does the white 
man." 
Does the South disfranchise simply the 
ignorant and unfit ? Listen to testimony 
from Louisiana: 
"Intelligent and highly respectable 
Negroes are sometimes disfranchised for no 
other reason than that of color. * * * 
There are those who would disfranchise 
every Negro, regardless of his fitness for 
(lie ballot, and their name is legion. Supported by such sentiment in their community, registration officers have even gone 
to the extreme of rejecting Negro college 
graduates while registering the most degraded of white men." 
Does the Negro get justice in the courts? 
Charles Brough, of Arkansas, savs: 
"It is, indeed, a travesty on AngloSaxon jurisprudence to send a Negro to 
the penitentiary for a term of eighteen years 
for selling a gallon of whiskey in violation of law and at the same time allow 
scores of white murderers to go unpunished, 
as was recently stated to be a fact by the 
governor of a Southern State." 
J. H. De Loach, of Georgia, adds: 
"Only a few days ago I was discussing 
the Negro problem with a distinguished 
physician of one of our larger cities in SOME FRANK FACTS 41 , 
Georgia, and I could not but take careful 
note of his remark that 'in our courts the 
Negro population never gets justice.' 
Whether this is literally true or not, it is 
generally true." 
W . O. Scroggs, of Louisiana, adds: 
"That the proportion o f convictions is 
greater and the terms of sentence longer for 
Negroes than for whites has been urged by 
Southern governors in justification of their 
extensive use of the pardoning power." 
Is Negro crime worse than white crime"? 
This is the testimony of a Southern white 
woman, Mrs. J. D. Hammond, of Georgia: 
"Let it be said also that the conditions of 
vice and crime found among any part of 
the Negro race may be immediately matched 
among the criminal element of the white 
race." 
Is lynching always or usually for the 
"usual crime"? W . 0 . Scroggs, of Louisiana, thinks not: 
"The only ground upon which they defend 
lynching is that it furnishes protection to 
Southern women, but our statistics show that 
75 per cent, of our lynehings are for crimes 
other than the one they are supposed to 
avenge." 
Is mob law defensible? W . D. Weatherford, of Tennessee, says: 
"W e need a new crusade of a 'Peter the 
Hermit,' not to rescue an empty tomb from 
the hands of an infidel power, but a crusade 
to wrench the helpless and belated from the 
hands of a maddened mob which puts money 
above man, which puts prejudice above persons, which puts license instead of law, 
which uses immoral mobs to uphold morality, 
which despises and degrades all personality 
in a so-called attempt to vindicate the 
wrong of a single person." 
Does the Southern white man know the 
Negro? Mrs. Hammond, of Georgia, says: 
"One o f the unfortunate things about the 
relation of the two races is that since 
emancipation, for the last fifty years, the 
better element of our white people have had 
no point of contact with the better element 
of the Negroes." 
What are we going to do about this? 
W . D. Weatherford, of Tennessee, suggests: 
"The same type of agency which can improve the conditions for the white people can 
improve the conditions of life for the Negro. 
Humanity is humanity, whether the color be 
black or white, and I know no fiat of God 
that makes white any more valuable as a color 
or any easier to deal with than black." 
Is the new relationship simply to be that 
of master and servant? James H. Dillard, 
of Virginia, says not: 
"W e Southern while people now realize 
two facts in regard to the relationship of 
the races. First, we realize that the ojd 
relationship, so frequently typified in the 
affection of the black mammy, is one that 
must pass. Second, we realize that the spirit 
of no relationship, no responsibility, no cooperation, is impossible. W e see that our 
whole public welfare requires the education 
and improvement of the colored people in our 
midst." 
Has religion anything to do with the race 
problem? E. C. Branson, of Georgia, says: 
"The Negro problem will be settled on no 
plane lower than the Ten Commandments and 
the Sermon on the Mount." 
Here is the testimony. If it does not 
sound like the usual sweet and pleasant talk 
on Southern conditions that is handed the 
average philanthropist, who is wrong about 
the South, the authors of "The Human Way " 
or other folks? Moreover, what does the 
Southern colored man think about the 
situation? 
This is what one colored man, Dr. C. V. 
Roman, of Tennessee, said to the Sociological 
Congress: 
"Justice and liberty are for all or for 
none. * * * 
"There has arisen in the South a type of 
politician that proposes to make the white 
people happy by making the Negroes 
unhappy. * * * 
"The races know and believe in the vices 
of each other, but do not know or believe in 
the virtues of each other. * * * 
" A belief that the Negro is unable to 
defend himself often makes white people 
tyrannical. * * * 
"The doctrinaire ebullitions of the student 
often become slogans of war among the 
ignorant. * * * 
"Business intercourse is hampered and 
friction needlessly engendered by a racial 
chauvinism that leads many white people to 
disregard the ordinary amenities of civilization in their dealings with Negroes. * * * 
"Interstate travel is a veritable nightmare—nothing to eat, nowhere to sleep, imperfect toilet accommodations and a change 
of cars every few hours." Miss Prances Blascoer has published the 
result of her investigation o f the women and 
girls in Honolulu, in a pamphlet o f one 
hundred pages. 
Frankfort, Ky.. has published a bulletin The annual number of immigrants to the 
of household ethics and industrial training United States from Africa is said to exceed 
in the colored schools by C. L. Timberlake. 6.000. 
42 TH E BURDE N 
The seventh annual report 6f the Church 
Institute for Negroes is a thoughtful document well worth reading. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 43 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLING GOOD HOMES IN CORONA, with all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to New York. Corona is in the 
very center of Greater New York, and in a few months will be reached 
by the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand 
Central Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home with all improvements at a moderate 
cost. W e would be glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New York City, has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all New York for children. For full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L. S. REED & COMPANY 
142 Hunter Avenue - - - - - - - - Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 
$60 A WEEK and EXPENSES 
That's the money you can get this year. I mean It. I want County Sales Managers 
quick, men or women who believe In the square deal, who will go Into partnership with 
me. No capital or experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Full length 
bath In any room. P'olda In small roll, handy as an umbrella. I tell you it's great I 
GREAT I Rivals $100 bath room. Now listen! I want TOO to handle your county. 
I'll furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger 
money in a week with me than you ever made in a month before—I KNOW IT I 
TW O SALES A DAY—$30 0 A MONTH 
That's what you get—every month. Needed in every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities for all the people. Take the orders right and left. Quick 
sales, immense profits. Look at these men. Kunkle. Ohio, received $240 first week; 
I Mathlas. Florida. $120 In two days; Corrigan, New York, $114 In 60 hours; Newton, 
California, $K0 In three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. The work is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It means a business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You cannot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, so 
can you. Act. then, quick. SEND NO MONEY. Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustle I 
YOU! 
YESY0U 
CAN GET IT 
DEMONSTRATING 
TUB FREE 
Canadian Address: Walkcrville, Ont., Canada. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
H. S. Robinson, Pres. 
2 2 Factories Building 
Toledo, O. 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Cartoons 
You have seen many 
of other people, but 
did you ever see one 
of yourself or friend? 
Send photo and 25 
cents in coin 
Photo returned. 
CHAS . W . ASKE W 
Sheridan, Wyoming 
$90 A WEEK-COL D CASH ! 
That's what I want to pay you every week this year. I want hustlers everywhere to act 
as my Special Sales Representatives, advertising, selling and appointing agents for the far-famed 
mechanical marvel—the R-B COMBINATIO N VACUU M SWEEPER . It's the one big 191 4 
selling success. An amazing, new invention. Different in construction. Revolutionizes housecleaning. Just what the housewife has been waiting for. Positively astounding the way this 
Combination Cleaner takes the dirt from beneath and right through the carpet. Sweeps up 
thread, lint, dust, etc. Three bellows; rubber-tired wheels; friction rollers; adjustable brush. 
Lightens work; kills worry; conquers dirt. Make s carpet look like new. No need to take off 
floor; no need to beat on line. Child can operate to perfection. Saves carpet wear and tear; 
saves tired, aching backs and arms. No labor, no effort, no drudgery. Push back and forth 
across floor like old-style carpet sweeper. Combines the work of high-priced $10 0 electric 
vacuum cleaner and highest-grade carpet sweeper-—all in one. Twenty million homes are just 
waiting for this absolutely new, money-back guaranteed invention. 
Combinatio n Vacuu m Cleane r an d Carpe t Sweepe r 
Look! Tremendous Profits—100 per cent.! A Monste r 
Money Maker ! G-ainer, W . Va. , made $1 2 first hour. Kirch, 
Pa., "Rus h 12. Can sell 2 0 a day. " So it 
goes. Sensational Sales Success. Do you 
wonder'? Think what a blessing to every 
home; think of the big, tremendous neverending volume of business you should get. 
Think of the profits! W e give you valuable territory FREE . W e protect you. 
W e back you up, assist you, show you 
how to win. W e simply make you succeed. 
Just two sales daily means $5 4 a week 
clean profit. ' 'Dead easy,'' our agents 
say. You can do it sure. 
Spend One Cent—That's All! 
Just spend a penny for a postcard. 
Writ e me. Tell me you want the job. 
Don't let anything—lack of capital or inexperience—hold you back. Get these big, 
bountiful profits. Start now. "Write me. 
C . A . BUTLE R 
Sales Manager. 190 Factories Bldg., Toledo. O 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 45 
The Art of Printing 
A S EXEMPLIFIE D I N OU R WOR K EMBODIES TH E FOLLOWIN G POINTS O F MERIT : 
| (a) Neat 
1. Stationery -< (b ) Attractive 
( (c) Quality 
f (a) Polite 
2 . Form •< (b ) Business 
( (c) Social 
( (a) Artistic 
3 . Workmanships (b ) Correct 
[(c) Prompt 
W e Prin t TH E CRISI S 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
20 2 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6667 NE W YOR K 
A Life of 
NORRIS WRIGHT GUNE Y 
B y 
MAU D GUNE Y HAR E 
(His daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was 
one of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like 
to inspire your children with the life of this "Tribune of the 
Black People"? 
8vo; 250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
TH E CRISIS PUBLISHING COMPAN Y 
7 0 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISI S 46 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
B y James F. Morton, Jr., A . M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crush 
ing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 2 5 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
24 4 West 143d Street - - - New York, N. T. 
"HEAVE N AN D HELL " 
Swedenborg's great work; 40 0 pages; 15 cents, 
postpaid. Pastor Landenberger, Windsor Place, 
St. Louis, Mo . 
HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
By MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Author of "Half a Man" 
Price $1.00 net. Postage prepaid, $1.08. For 
sale through our agents and at Th e Crisis 
office, as well as at leading book stores. 
CRISI S PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
7 0 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
BIG OFFER 
Y : 
VERY SPECIAL ! 
fOU'LLb e surprised 
when you get our 
offer of a suit of 
swellest style and wonder—"Ho w can 
they do it!" It 
is all explained 
i n a personal 
lette r to you. 
New, libera l 
plan. N o trouble 
— n o expense. 
Every garment 
! made to meas» 
ure. Yo u pick 
| the styl e and 
'fabric. Express 
prepaid —on everything-
 — not a cent 
to pay. Agents coining money. Send no 
money but writ e 
quick while special 
offer lasts, for Bic 
Wonderful Offe r 
• and heavy sample 
* outfit-all FKEE l 
America n Woole n M i 
Dept. 551 - CHICAGO. 
II S 
ILL. 
SPLENDI D BUSINES S OPPORTUNIT Y 
FO R SALE—Smal l job printing plant: Two 
presses, motor cutter and other equipment complete. Splendid location, good business. Established 
six years. Sell for about half inventory price. 
Good will to go with sale. Snap for practical 
printer. Owner has other interests. Address 
TH E HUL L COMPAN Y 
14 7 E. 84th Street - - - New Yor k City 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studie s o f th e 
Negr o Problem s 
17 Monograph s Sold Separately 
Address: 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 47 
Masterpieces of 
Negro Eloquence 
Edited by ALICE MOORE DUNBAR. 
The one volume that contains the best 
speeches of fifty-one of the ablest Negroes of 
the United States, England, Africa and France, 
from 181 8 to 1913. The wonderful eloquence 
of the most powerful Negro men and women 
of the world is contained in this book. Nothing 
more interesting and inspiring has ever been 
written. 
If you would know of the history of the 
race, appreciate the sacrifice for principle, 
understand the struggle for liberty, and properly value the oratorical achievement of the 
Negro, you should place this book in your 
library. 
The "Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence" will take you back to 1818, when 
Prince Saunders in his fascinating style eloquently pleaded for the abolition of 
slavery. It will give you the speech of Henry Highland Garnett, the first Negro 
ever asked to deliver a sermon in the United States House of Representatives; 
the speech of Frederick Douglass, who in 185 2 with unexcelled eloquence 
demanded at Rochester to know, "What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?" ; 
the speech that made Booke r Washington famous; an estimate of Toussaint 
L'Ouverture, by James Mc,Cune Smith, that ranks with Wendell Phillips's famous 
eulogy; Charles M. Langston's defiance of the Fugitive Slave Law, delivered in 
18S9 ; Judge Ruffin's famous eulogy of Crispus Attucks, a speech that should be 
read by every Negro boy and girl. 
These are but a few of the gems culled at random from this great book. 
The best of our present generation is well represented. 
This is a boo k that is a library, a reference book and an historical work, 
an indispensable addition to the library of every intelligent Negro. A book that 
shows in the best manner the best that the Negro has done. 
It is carefully edited, well printed and thoroughly indexed, bound 
in red and green silk cloth binding, 51 2 pages, gold top, uncut pages. / crisis Coupon 
W e want every reader of TH E CRISIS to have a copy of this / 
book. W e have set aside 50,00 0 copies which we are going to sell / CU T OUT AN D 
to TH E CRISIS readers by allowing them to pay 50 cents down ' MAI L NOW. 
and 5 0 cents monthly for four months. ' The Douglass Pub. 
Do not delay; sit down immediately, clip this coupon 
and send it to us with 5 0 cents, and a copy will be sent ( 
you by return mail. 
Th e Douglas s Publishin g Compan y 
HARRISBURG, PA. 
' Co., 509 No. 4th St., 
Harrisburg, Pa. 
Enclosed find 50c . for 
which send me a copy of 
/ The Masterpieces of Negro 
j Eloquence." I promise to pay 
I 50c. each month until $2.5 0 is 
, paid. Title of the book to 
/ remain with you until the sum 
of $2.5 0 is paid. 
Name 
• / Address 
Mention TH E CRISI S 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Telephone, Morningside 816 2 
14 3 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
Price, 50 c each. 
Guaranteed under rood and Drug 
Manicuring,' Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l WaTlng, Facial and Body Massage , Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, S7.6 0 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr . Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager . 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing, Hai r Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30 , 1906 . 
KELSEY'S 
TFAmii'll^ l
 Tn e
 nevr
 efficiency era calls 
J. Ij ^iVnijIii 3 f o r t h e modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that 
furnishes the connecting medium in a business way, 
saves time of school officials, relieves teachers of 
the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the 
whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, 
Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, 
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, 
Virginia and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
133 5 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
Onl y 
$65.0 0 
Largest Negro Carriage 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold onfi.oo 
Profit Margin p r() m 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogue. 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS. 
Greenfield, Ohio 
rn in the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $2 0 to 
$50 0 a week. Wh y can't you ? By our method 
you can start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty 
live, money-making mail order plans. You can 
make 9 5 cents profit on every dollar order. W e 
furnish circulars, printed matter and place your 
advertising at lowest rates. Send 10 centB for 
complete outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
51 7 Dearborn Street Chicago, IU. 
Buy Real Estate in "Twin Cities." 
You can double your money by an investment of 
city and suburban property in and around 
Minneapolis. I have some good investments in new 
towns in Western Canada. Communicate with 
me. 
B. MAXE Y McDE W 
80 2 Sykes Block Minneapolis, Minn. 
FRE E T O EVER Y WOMA N 
who writes, one copy of ' 'Ladies' Cyclopedia of 
Health and Beauty." This book contains information indispensable to every woman; on every subject 
women are most interested in. Tells how to 
cultivate health and beauty; what to use and how to 
use it. 
ALEXANDE R SPECIALT Y CO. 
49 4 Highland Avenue Passaic, N. J. 
WANTED 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) 
to settle on FREE Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom New Mexico 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"Histor y of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "Histor y of the Negro Race." 
40 0 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.2 5 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
15 4 Nassau Street New Tor t 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sti. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
If You Plan to Visit 
New York This Summer 
For study, sightseeing or pleasure 
and desire quiet, respectable accommodations with the best private 
families, write the Housing Bureau 
of the National League on Urban 
Conditions Among Negroes, at 127 
W . 135th Street, New York. 
Our Service Is Absolutely FREE 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 49 
MILE S M . WEB B 
School of Practical Photography 
All branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. Three 
courses: Amateur, intermediate, professional. Register now. 
3519 So. State Street Chicago, 111. 
Telephone Douglass 6688 
TheLoya l Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
is incorporated under the 
laws of the District of Columbia. Its object is tocombine the Negroes of the 
world for their mutual advancement along industrial and commerciallines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment b y the Negro of! 
c.._. aM A his civil and political rights. 
Grand Supreme Thi s movement is internaGovernor tional in its scope; we have 
lodge s not onl y in the United States but in 
Jamaica, B.W.I. ; Colon, Bocas delToro , Panama I Canal Zone) and Costa Rica. It is a dark 
day for the Negr o and he must come together. 
Rac e movements have failed because our people were told th at b y contributing thereto the 
rac e only would be benefited, but no tangible 
indhridaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the membe r pays 35c . per month in the Associa tion and receives $4.00 pe r week sick benefits and $100 at death. W e not only look 
after the race but each individual membe r as 
well. A big convention is soon tobeheld here. 
"We want a lodge in every village, hamlet and 
town and a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizers wanted everywhere. For 
full particulars, write 
KNIGHTS O F MALACHITES _ 
1111 You St. N. W . Washington, D. C.J 
AGENT S WANTED—Bi g seller. $3 to $ 5 per 
day. Costs you from 10 to 2 0 cents; sells for 
3 5 cents and up. Sample free for the asking. 
G. A. ALBUR Y & CO., P. O. Box 414 , Bristol, Pa. 
BOY AND GIRL SUIT FREE 
SPRING and SUMMER 
For styles and service these 
becoming suits can hardly be 
equalled, and for value they 
are unapproaohed. Made of 
best material in the latest 
colors and newest designs, 
they are free for selling one 
package of Artistic Negro 
Post Cards in colors. Large 
assortment of real art and 
other beautiful cards. Send us 1C cents in stamps 
to help pay postage, we will send you a package 
of post cards to sell. Here is what one agent says: 
"I got your cards this morning, and I sold them 
out before 5 P. M. Everybody I sold to says they were 
beautiful. 1 could have sold 
more." Another agent says: 
"I received my suit you sent 
me and it is line. I am well 
pleased. JIama says she 
likes it too." 
J. GRIFFIT H AR T CO . 
36-38 Beekman Street 
NE W YOR K 
Again Ahead 
As usual we are ahead of the rest. Ahead In style 
—ahead In quality—ahead In designs—ahead In price 
and ahead in terms. Sofarahead 
that you will be behind the times 
If you <? - not wear ODe of our 
new, noboy suits this spring. 
Get One for Nothing 
Our new Bcheme is a dandy. 
You get your suit without one / 
cent of coat. The nobbiest, most 
up-to-date suit a man ever put 
on his back. Cut right up to the 
minute with style sticking out 
all over it. Mak e 
$
lOtO$15Day 
Our plan makes this easy. 
Simply send us a postal and wc 
will exrlaln It all andsendyou 
the FREE Sfclf-measurlngblanks, 
eampl s, fashion chart, etc. We 
prepay express on everything. 
Write us now. 
PARAGON TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 55 | Chicago 
AIITAUATI O BAYARDS, best in the world,$14.00 I 
AU I UWIA li b and up. Revolvers, $1.75 and up. I 
PISTOL S 
Ask your dealer or send for particulars. FRED BIFFAA & C0..180 N. 
Dearborn St., Chicago, Dept. 102 
WANTED—Colore d carriage smiths, 
woodworkers, trimmers and painters. Sober, experienced men only. 
Address: TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth 
Avenue, New York City. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Residence 254 6 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-216 1 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
11 7 W . 6th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
Telephones: { ™ ^ 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
160 7 Williamson Building - - - Cleveland, O. 
Office L. D. Telephone 329 7 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614 , Metropolitan Building 
11 3 Marke t St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
102 0 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMITH 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W . MITCHELL 
Attorney-at-Law 
90 8 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia 
Tel. 543 7 Fort Hill Cable Address. Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W . P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street - - - Baltimore, Md. 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059 ; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS. E. GREENE, JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block ... . Youngstown, Ohio 
William H. Austin Edmund O. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTI N & AUSTI N 
St. Paul Building, 22 0 Broadway, New Yor k 
Suite 7—H , I, J. K 
Telephones: 7400 . 5365 . 536 6 Cortlandt 
B. F. BOOT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
57 N. Second Street 
Memphis Tenn 
THOMA S W . HOLMES 
Attorney-at-Law 
43>/ 2 Decatur Street Atlanta, Georgia 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 527 7 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 W . 135th Street - New York City 
Telephone Connection 
R. W . FEARING 
Electrician 
Contracting, Repairing, Motors, Electric and 
Gas Fixtures 
Electrician recent Emancipation Exposition in 
New Yor k 
85 Marion Street .. . - Brooklyn, N. Y. 
MME. FANNIE BELL E D E KNIGHT 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements so 
licited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 904 5 
Studio: 23 1 W . 134th St. Ne w Yor k City 
H. HENR Y HARRI S 
. Architect 
Corner 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington ----- - N. C. 
WILLIA M L. BELL 
Architect 
13854 Auburn Avenue - - Atlanta, Ga. 
J . E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25 , Wilberforc e University 
Wilberforce , O. 
WANTED—Positio n as teacher by young 
man of college training and teaching 
experience.. Position in high school or 
college preferred. 
Address: EDUCATIO N 9, % The Crisis 
M r . A lfre d E lis Du Bois. commercial 
agent at Jeremie, Haiti, offers his services for 
all kinds of business and exportation and 
importation between Haiti and the United 
States. 
What Are Colored Men Doing in Business? 
Read the COMMERCIA L COLLEGE 
OUTLOOK—a Monthly Magazine 
Published by Commercial College students 
of Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Fifty Cents for School Year 
Michael Jones, Editor-in-Chief 
Mention THE CRISIS A Selected List of Books 
S3 I PRIC E INCLUDE S POSTAG E £JJ |JJ 
T h e Ques t o f th e Silve r Fleece . W . E. B. D U Bois $1.50 
Hous e Behin d th e Cedars. Charle s W . Chcsnutt 1.65 
Hazel . Mar y Whit e Ovington 1.08 
A utobiograph y o f a n ex - C olore d Man . Anonymou s 1.40 
Th e Testin g Fire . Alexande r Corke y 1.35 
Lyric s o f Lowl y Life . Paul Laurenc e Dunba r 1.40 
Marro w o f Tradition . Charle s W . Chesnutt 1.65 
Th e Spor t o f th e Gods. Paul Laurenc e Dunba r 1.65 
Norri s Wrigh t Cuney . Mau d Cune y Har e 1.50 
A Narrativ e o f th e Negro . Lelia Amo s Pendleton 1.65 
Soul s o f Blac k Folk . W . E. B. D U Bois 1.35 
R ac e A dj ustment . Kelly Mille r 2.15 
Histor y o f th e Negro . B. G. Brawley 1.35 
Hal f a Man . Mar y Whit e Ovington 1.12 
Min d o f Primitiv e Man . Fran z Boas 1.65 
Aftermat h o f Slavery . Willia m Sinclair 1.65 
Joh n Brown . W . E. B. D U Bois 1.45 
Fact s o f Reconstruction . John R . Lynch 1.65 
Stor y o f th e N egro . Booke r T . Washington 3.25 
Masterpiece s o f Negr o Eloquence . 
Edited by Alic e Moor e Dunba r 2.70 
Flowe r o' th e Peach . Pcrcival Gibbon 1.45 
Th e Colore d Inventor . Henr y E. Bake r 15 
A Child' s Stor y o f Dunbar . Julia L. Henderson 25 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e Ne w Yor k City CAP E MAY , N. J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E. W . DALE , Owner. 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000 ; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000 , contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional 
endowment needed, $50,000 . 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 36th and Dearborn Sts. , Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 