ONE DOLLAR A YEAR cgji§p^ TEN CENTS A COPY 
The CRISIS 
Vol. 12—No. 2 JUNE, 1916 Whole No. 68 Publisher's Chat 
The July Number of the CRISIS will be 
our annual 
EDUCATION NUMBER 
All news of Negro Colleges and of 
Negro students winning distinction anywhere will be welcome. All such material should reach us on or before 
June 3d. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A N EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous). 1.2 0 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.5 0 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.0 0 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.0 0 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY. (J . W . Cromwell) 1.2 5 
PRINCE HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford).. . 1.0 0 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WES T AFRICA. (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. D U Bois) 5 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.5 0 
LIFE AN D LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C . Berwick 
Sayers) 2.2 5 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
Address, THE CRISIS, : ::: : 70 Fifth Avenue, NEW YORK 
Mention TH E CRISIS EDITIO N 40,00 0 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for June, J 916 
PICTURE S Page 
COVER. "The Bride." Photograph From Life. 
CHAMPION BASKETBALL TEAMS 66 
MEN OF THE MONTH 68 
CARTOON. Our Brave Policemen. By Lorenzo Harris 96 
ARTICLE S 
POLLY'S HACK RIDE. A Story. By Mrs. Emma E. Butler 84 
SONG OF THE AMERICAN DOVE. A Poem. By Lucian B. Watkins 86 
AN APOSTROPHE TO THE LYNCHED. By Leila Amos Pendleton 86 
THE WASHER-WOMAN. A Poem. By Otto L. Bohanan 90 
THE GEORGIA ODD FELLOWS. 1. A Statement From Benjamin J. Davis. 
2. A Statement From the Grand Master 91 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 59 
MEN OF THE MONTH 67 
THE LOOKING GLASS 69 
EDITORIAL 79 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 87 
CURTAINS OF GLOOM 93 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this pace a renewal of your subscriptio n is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired, 
in ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. , 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 56 SI THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-six years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College. Normal. High School. 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
goo d drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 21, 1916 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE . TENN . 
The NEGRO AGRICULTURAL 
AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of NORTH CAROLINA 
(Formerly the Agricultural and Mechanical College for the Colored Race) 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
for progressive teachers. 
SEVENTEENT H ANNUA L 
SESSION 
June 26TH—July 29TH, 1916. 
Easy terms, practical courses, pleasant 
surroundings. For terms or catalog, 
address Dr. S. B. Jones, Director. Send 
$1.0 0 and secure lodging in advance. 
Jas. B. Dudley, President 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Mention 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
-. High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
STORER COLLEGE 
FOUNDE D 1867 
A co-educational institution. State 
Normal, College Preparatory, Musical and Manual Training Courses. 
Magnificent location; modern, well 
equipped buildings, laboratories, 
fine library; inter-school debates, 
declamatory contests, athletics, 
literary societies, Christian atmosphere. Educational ideals high. 
Address 
HENRY T. McDONALD, President 
HARPERS FERRY, W. VA. 
THE Crisis THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 57 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Next School Term Opens Oct. 4, 1916. 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, healthful, well appointed. 
This school offers to young colored 
men and women who have a reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to 
become teachers, courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and 
agriculture. Tuition is free. Board, 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The entrance 
fee is $7. Fall term opens September 16, 1916. 
There will be no summer school 
during 1916. 
For full information, write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal. 
TEACHERS AND PARENTS 
Only the Best is Good Enough 
FOR YOU R BEST PUPILS . 
THAT IS WHY you should send them, 
when you have them prepared, to 
Talladega College 
40 teachers, 600 students. 815 acres of 
land, 20 buildings, electric light, steam 
heat, laboratories, library of 15,000 volumes. 
COURSES : 
Colleg e Theologica l 
Teachers' Domesti c Scienc e 
Scientific Domesti c Arts 
Classical Agricultur e 
Preparatory Industrie s 
Musi c (with diploma t 
All the best student activities and associations. 
For Information Address 
DEAN LARSEN 
Roo m 21 Talladega , Ala . 
, l,iiiii!(i.iiNiiillii!lii:i[[inii;:il!.iilii! u r, J J... t i... l , i j: : k , i... l 15: m l 11J; i r , :;;;;;:,; ; . ;,i :. .;; ;., .,MU,II, ;i;.,I;liiNiiiiii!iiiiiiimnilllllli;i:iNli;ilii.:lih..iiu.,li:;i;;iiNiiiiiii;iiiiii;n 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of ST. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention Th e Crisis 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 58 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MORGA N COLLEG E 
AN D BRANCHE S 
JOHN O. SPENCER, PhD., President. 
MORGAN COLLEGE, Baltimore, Md. 
Location: Central college town between North and South. 
Courses: Preparatory. Normal, Music, Advanced Education, 
Collegiate, Appropriate degrees. 
Instructors: College and University trained. Seven Colleges 
and Universities represented in Faculty. 
Dormitories: For a limited number, furnished. 
Terms: Very reasonable. 
Dean: William Pickens, Lit.D. 
PRINCESS ANNE ACADEMY, Princess Anne, Md. 
(Eastern Branch Maryland State College of Agriculture) 
Location: The famous Eastern Shore of Md., Somerset Co. 
Courses preparatory. Normal, Industrial. Dom. Science Music. 
Instructors: College and Technically trained. 
Now Dormitories: Furnished, steam heated, supervised. 
Terms: Tuition free: other expenses moderate. 
SUMMER SESSION June 26th-August 4th. 
Special training in Domestic Science, Rural Education, Nature Study, School Organization, School Management, etc. 
Terms: Ent.. $1.00; Board, $3.00 per wk. ; no tuition fee. 
Principal: Rev. Thomas H. Kiah, A.B. 
VIRGINIA COLLEGIATE and INDUSTRIAL INSTITUTE 
Lynchburg, Va. 
Location: On beautiful hill in suburbs of growing city. 
Courses: Preparatory, Normal. Dom. Sci, Gardening. Music. 
Instructors: College trained; carefully selected. 
Dormitories: Furnished; for fifty girls; steam heat, electric 
light: carefully supervised. 
Terms: Within the reach of all. 
Principal: Frank Trigg, A.M. 
OF INTEREST TO VOCALISTS 
Tone-Placing and Voic e Development, Wit h Supplement Co-ordinating with Original Chapters 
Highl y recommende d and endorse d 
by well know n Chora l and Musica l 
Societies, Directors, Voca l Teachers 
and Musica l Publications, as evidence d by the followin g extracts 
selected at random from those who 
know: 
Pedr o T. Tinsle y of Chicag o is 
the first of the voca l teachers to 
realize the possibilities o f Tone -
Placin g and Vowe l Value s (Study ) 
as applied to music , and wil soo n 
be reaping his reward in the knowledg e that he is helping thousands 
to a thoroug h musical educatio n wher e he previousl y 
helped but hundreds. 
TH E MUSI C TRADES . 
I highly endors e you r Boo k Tone-Placin g and 
Voice-Developmen t as "being in a class by itself. This 
is my fourth orde r and wil be able to use quite a 
numbe r o f additiona l copie s ver y soon . 
G. W . WILLIAMS , B.M.A. , 
1214 Peas e Ave. , Houston , Texas. 
"Dea r Mr. Tinsley : 
" I take great pleasur e in commendin g you r ver y 
useful and succinctl y written boo k on 'Tone-Placin g 
and Voice-Development. ' You r ow n appreciation of 
the psycholog y o f singing an d the fundamenta l principles o f the art yo u have cleverl y reduce d to a 
simple system. Cordiall y yours, 
"Fathe r WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Directo r Paulist Choristers of Chicago. " 
From "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : " A ver y practicaL 
little boo k is 'Tone-Placin g and Voice-Development, ' 
by Pedr o T , Tinsley . It contain s some ver y excellen t 
material and voca l exercises, an d shoul d be in the 
hands o f all voca l students, " 
From "Musi c News, " Chicago , Ill.: "Accordingl y 
this 'Practica l Metho d o f Singing ' is a most concis e 
and practical little manual, containin g man y valuable 
voca l exercises. It canno t fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious voca l students. " 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedr o T. Tinsley , 6448 Drexe l 
Ave. , Chicago , Ill., or Clayton F. Summy , 64 E. Va n 
Bu r en St., or Lyo n & Healy , Adam s and Wabas h 
Ave. , Chicago , Ill. 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
Richmond, Virginia 
A superior school for the separate, higher education of young women. Provides a pleasant home, careful culture, and thorough training. Expenses very moderate. Send for catalog to the President. 
MME. BRIDGES' SCHOOL 
Frenc h Dressmaking , Ladies' Tailorin g an d Millinery . 
Bridges System. 
Specia l Course s in Designing , Copying , Draping , 
Making , Trimming , Finishing , Cutting an d Fitting. 
Individua l Instruction . A Bridge s Diplom a mean s 
somethin g to you . 
Special reductio n in tuition given to students enterin g in group s o f thre e o r mor e o r t o on e studen t 
taking two or mor e consecutiv e courses. 
507 E, 34t h Place Chicago, Ill. 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratorio Opera 
"A n unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. Address: 3 WARWICK ST. BOSTON, MASS. 
Concer t Solois t 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
For terms write 126 West 134th Street, N. Y. C. 
Statemen t o f the Ownership , Management , Etc., 
require d b y the Ac t o f August 24, 1912, of 
TH E CRISI S 
Publishe d monthl y at 70 Fifth Avenue , NewYork , N . Y. , fo r April 1, 1916. 
State o f Ne w Yor k J 
Count y o f Ne w Yor k j ss-
Befor e me , a Notar y Publi c in and fo r the 
State and count y aforesaid, personall y appeared 
A. G. Dill, who , havin g bee n duly swor n accord ­
ing to law. depose s an d says that he is the 
Business Manage r o f The Crisis, and that the 
followin g is, to the best o f his knowledg e and 
belief, a true statement o f the ownership , management, etc., o f the aforesai d publicatio n for 
the date shown in the abov e caption , require d 
by the act o f August 24 . 1912, embodie d in Sec ­
tion 443 , Posta l Law s and Regulations: 
Publisher: Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the 
Advancemen t o f Colore d People , 70 Fifth avenue , 
Ne w Yor k City. 
Editor: W. E. Burghard t DuBois, 70 Fifth 
avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Managin g Editor: W . E . Burghard t DuBois, 
70 Fifth avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Business Manager: Augustu s Granvill e Dill, 70 
Fifth avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Owners: Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the' 
Advancemen t o f Colore d People , a corporatio n 
with no stock. 
Moorfiel d Story , President. 
Ro y Nash, Actin g Secretary . 
Joel E. Spingarn , Chairma n Boar d o f Directors. 
Oswal d Garriso n Villard, Treasurer. 
Know n bondholders, mortgagee s and othe r security holders, holdin g 1 per cent or mor e o f 
total amoun t o f bonds, mortgage s or othe r securities : None . 
A . G. Dill, Business Manager. 
Swor n to and subscribe d befor e me this 
day o f March , 1916. Edward J. BREDE N NOtary Public. 
(M y commissio n expire s Marc h 30, 1918.) 
Kings Count y No . 81. Ne w Yor k Count v No . 
176. Ne w Yor k Registe r No . 8180. 
Mentio n The Crisis THE CRISIS 
Vol. 12—No. 2 JUNE, 1916 Whole No. 68 
Along the Color Line 
MUSIC AND ART 
THE Royal Choral Society, under the 
direction of Sir Frederick Bridge, gave 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha" in London, 
Eng., April 1. On the same date the cantata was performed by the Birmingham 
Choral Union in Birmingham, Eng. 
The Washington Concert Orchestra, Mr. 
Roy W. Tibbs, conductor, gave its third 
annual concert at the Howard Theatre, 
Washington, D. C , April 28. The soloists 
assisting were Miss Maude J. Roberts, soprano, and Miss Revella Hughes, pianist. 
The Howard University Glee Club added 
numbers to the program. 
A concert was given by the Thomas 
Howard Quintette at the Athletic Club in 
Columbus, O., April 9. The program included pieces by Leoncavello, Mendelssohn, 
Tschaikovsky, Nicolai, Thomas and Grieg. 
Miss Martha Steward, pianist, played the 
Paganini - Liszt "Campanella," and Mr. 
George Smith, violinist, gave the Maud 
Powell arrangement of Coleridge-Taylor's 
"Deep River." 
Mr. Thomas Howard is the manager of 
the Ninth Ohio National Guard Band of 
Columbus, an organization which numbers 
thirty musicians. This is a band of unusual excellence and is active in the musiclife of the state. 
The piano music for the comic opera, 
"On with the Dance," recently given at the 
Majestic Theatre, Buffalo, N. Y., under the 
auspices of the Jewish Young Men's Christian Association, was arranged by Miss 
Sarah May Talbert, graduate of the New 
England Conservatory of Music, class of 1915. 
The choral society of Seldon Institute, 
Brunswick, Ga., presented the cantata, 
"Jeptha and His Daughter," at the Grand 
Opera House, April 11. 
Mr. James Weldon Johnson, one of the 
two colored members of the Society of Composers, Authors and Songwriters, was numbered among the speakers at a dinner recently given by the society in New York. 
The guest of honor was Irvin Cobb, novelist 
and war correspondent. Mr. J. Rosamond 
Johnson is the other Negro member. 
Five songs from Laurence Hope's "Indian Love Lyrics," set to music by Harry T. 
Burleigh, were the novelties on a program 
lately presented by the popular Irish tenor, 
John McCormack, at Carnegie Hall, New 
York. Musical America says of the songs: 
"The setting for the Laurence Hope lyrics 
has been admirably done. Mr. Burleigh 
has handled cleverly the exotic Eastern 
themes used in the five songs, and his gift 
of melody is strikingly apparent in the 'Jungle Flower.' " 
The Music Lovers Club of Fort Smith, 
Ark., gave a recital April 3 for the benefit 
of the Hospital Guild. 
"The Spy of Gettysburg," a war drama, 
was given in the chapel of Virginia Union 
University, Richmond, Va., March 24. A 
large audience witnessed the play. 
The Suburban Choral Class of Woburn, 
Mass., under the direction of Miss Daisy 
Allen, gave an interesting musicale at St. 
John's Baptist Church. 
At Metropolitan A. M. E. Church, Washington, D. C. Mme. E. Azalia Hackley conducted a very successful folk song festival 
under the general supervision of the Bethel 
Literary and Historical Association of that 
city. Beside the chorus of two hundred, 
Mr. J. Rosamond Johnson sang, and selections were rendered by a chorus of students 
from M Street High School under the direction of Miss Mary L. Europe. 
The Colored Women's Quilting Club of 
Marked Tree, Ark., held its first annual ex-60 THE CRISIS 
hibition in March. More than one hundred 
quilts were exhibited. 
The first issue of the Poetry Review, under the editorship of William Stanley 
Braithwaite, has made its appearance in 
Boston, Mass. 
Mr. William Stanley Braithwaite has 
been lecturing and reading in Washington, 
D. C. 
At the Kraushaar gallery in New York 
City, George Luks, the artist, has been exhibiting pictures. The New York Evening 
Post said: "In the outer room is one of 
the paintings, perhaps the best one, 'The 
Tango Artist.' It is a Negro's portrait, the 
very black head shown against a light but 
warm background. This is one of the finest things Mr. Luks has even shown." 
GENERAL 
A MOVEMEN T to organize a National 
Association of Colored Music Teachers 
in the United States has been started by 
Clarence Cameron White, the violinist. 
The "Whirl of Life, " a motion picture 
written by Vernon Castle depicting the romantic life of himself and Mrs. Castle, has 
many colored characters in it. It is pleasing to note that these characters are not 
caricatures. 
The part of the memorial fund for 
Booker T. Washington which is being raised 
among colored people has enlisted the services of many prominent persons all over the 
country. 
Six hundred white employees of the New 
York Central Railroad, in New York City, 
who went on strike, have been replaced by 
Negroes, as baggage handlers, car cleaners 
and elevator men. The positions have been 
made permanent and some promotions have 
been promised. 
The Canadian Pacific Railroad has decided to use Negroes as cooks and waiters. 
They have two crews in operation on a run 
between Montreal and Quebec. 
Miss Ida Vera Simonton, a Suffrage 
worker and African explorer, is organizing 
women of America into Defense Leagues. 
There will be no discrimination on account 
of color, race or creed in this movement, 
and a campaign among Negro women of 
the country is soon to be conducted. 
The General Alumni Association of Howard University, Washington, D. C , has just 
published the Alumni Number of the University Record. The Alumni Reunion will 
take place June 7 of this year, and the 
Semi-Centennial Celebration March 2, 1917. 
A t the first session of the Garage Owners' Association of Michigan a request for 
attendance was proffered by Mr. Powell, a 
Negro, of the Standard Repair Shop at 
Bay City. Permission to attend was given 
and it was suggested that if the visitor 
desired to put in an application for membership that it be considered on the same 
basis as any other application, decision to 
be made on the value of the man, not the 
color of the applicant. By self denial 
girls of the Reiss family, now in Canada, 
announce that they will each adopt a Negro 
child in Africa. Each child will receive a 
baptismal offering of five dollars. 
The fund left by Mrs. Caroline Donovan 
in favor of the American Colonization Sociery for the transportation to Liberia of 
Negroes in the United States is being disputed by the heirs-at-law of Mrs. Donovan. 
Methodists who sought to have Negro 
bishops provided for work among Negroes 
failed to receive the sanction of the annual 
conferences of the Methodist Episcopal 
church by a 4,921 to 3,461 vote. 
Dr. R. R. Wright, Jr., has offered two 
gold medal prizes; the first to the person 
who composes the best centennial ode of 
African Methodism, and the second to the 
Sunday School or Allen League member 
who writes the best essay on Richard Allen. 
The judges will consist of one bishop, one 
literary critic or magazine editor, and two 
teachers of English. 
PERSONAL 
MRS. ALICE MOORE DUNBAR, of 
Wilmington, Del., widow of the late 
Paul Lawrence Dunbar, and Mr. Robert J. 
Nelson, of Harrisburg, Pa., were married in 
Wilmington, April 20. The Rev. Dr. Solomon Porter Hood officiated. 
The Honorable John R. Lynch has been 
speaking in Cleveland, 0 . 
C Mrs. Celia M. Stuart, of Indianapolis, 
Ind., has been appointed a stenographer in 
the Marion County Court House. 
Wayne W. Cox, cashier and manager of 
the only Negro bank in Mississippi that 
could be admitted under the Guarantee 
Law, died at Vossburg, Stafford Wells, 
April 10, at the age of fifty-two. His 
estate is valued at $80,000. A wife and 
one child survive him. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 61 
Louis Merriam, a Negro born when 
George Washington was president of the 
United States, died in Kansas City, March 
12. He was the oldest man on the United 
States pension rolls, and claimed to have 
substantiated the fact that he was born 
one hundred and twenty-one years ago at 
Sopher plantation in Virginia. 
St. Luke's Hospital, Columbia, S. C , is 
doubtless the only institution of its kind in 
the United States owned by a colored woman physician. Dr. Matilda Evans employs twelve men and women regularly, 
and has recently secured and moved into 
larger quarters. 
Benjamin Carter, eighty-four years old, 
died at Elgin, 111., April 21. He established the first blacksmith shop in the 
county and made a name for himself by 
manufacturing the Ben Carter bridle bits 
which became famous all over the country 
and were shipped to Europe. 
Lincoln Washington, ninety-four years 
old, extinguished a burning bridge near 
Lufkin, Tex., April 21, and then flagged a 
passenger train, averting a wreck. A 
purse was made up by the passengers and 
given him, and the railroad officials have 
reported his act of bravery to the Carnegie 
Hero Fund. 
Mr. Daniel Lucas, aged sixty-seven, proprietor of the Lucas Barber Shop and 
Turkish Bath House in Sedalia, Mo., is 
dead. He was the only colored man in 
business on Main street, and his establishment is valued at §50,000. 
S. B. Wheat has been elected alderman 
from the Second Ward in East St. Louis, 
Ill., defeating a white candidate by a 300 
to 94 vote. 
The Honorable W. H. Hunt, consul at St. 
Etienne, France, was made president of 
the Day of Sports for the benefit of the 
soldiers, which occurred at St. Etienne, 
March 26. The prefect, the mayor and the 
general commanding there were "Presidents d'Honneur." 
Major Allen won the presidency of his 
class in a New Haven, Conn., high school, 
defeating a white classmate by a 108 to 100 
ballot. 
Mrs. C J. Bolden has been appointed 
health inspector for the colored schools of 
Newport News, Va . 
Joe Hunter, of Gulfport, Miss., a former 
employee of the Ingram Day Lumber Company, has been awarded $1,500 damages. 
His leg was mashed by a falling log. 
The will of the late Saunders P. Jones 
bequeathed five hundred dollars each to 
Mrs. Julia Jackson and Albert Douglass, 
old family servants. 
([ Mr. J. H. Battles, a widely known railroad man, died recently in New York. He 
was on the Twentieth Century Limited since 
the train was first put in service. 
Miss Lillian Dodson, of the Girls' High 
School in Brooklyn, N. Y., was one of 
eighty-five pupils, and the only colored one, 
to go on an educational tour to Washington, 
D. C , recently. 
R. D. Taborn, of Kalamazoo, Mich., has 
been made collector of customs for that 
port. Three white Democratic candidates 
were seeking the position, but Taborn won 
through civil service examination. 
Peter W. Downing, born in New York 
City in 1832, died April 1, in Brooklyn, 
N. Y. He was proprietor, of a restaurant in 
the old Custom House on Wall street for 
about twenty years. 
Secretary Bundy, of the American Legation at Monrovia, Liberia, has been granted 
a leave of absence by the State Department. 
Miss Mary V. R. Dickerson, a teacher in 
the public schools of Washington, D. C , for 
more than twenty years, died recently a t 
Xenia, 0 . 
Mrs. Ella Ernest, a teacher in the Primary Department of the Frederick Douglass 
School in Indianapolis, Ind., has been granted a scholarship by the Indianapolis school 
commissioners for study in the Indiana 
Normal School at Terre Haute. 
Miss Johanna P. Moore, founder of Fireside Schools and Hope, and a loyal friend of 
the Negro, died recently in Nashville, Tenn. 
She was born in Clarion county, Pa., in 
1833. 
A. J. Drexel, a banker, of Philadelphia, 
Pa., has provided Miss Marion Price, a cook 
in his employ for more than fifty years, 
with a home to live in for the rest of her 
life, two servants and a monthly allowance. 
Thomas P. Williams, the only 33° Mason 
in Atlantic City, and probably the oldest in 
New Jersey, is dead in his seventy-first 
year. 
Miss Susie M Taylor has returned to 
the States from Liberia, where she has 
worked as a missionary for four year=; 62 TH E CRISIS 
under the Foreign Mission Board of the 
National Baptist Convention. 
Harry Williams, the only colored member of the Boy Scouts in Homestead, Pa., 
won five medals in the round-up of the Boy 
Scouts of America. He was first in boxing and wrestling, second in the fifty-yard 
dash and third in first aid and basketball 
relay. 
Mr. and Mrs. Malone, of St. Louis, Mo., 
donated $5,000 to the Y. M. C. A. campaign 
in that city. 
Miss Julia S. Tutwiler, active in educational work throughout Alabama for many 
years, died at Birmingham, March 24. She 
was born in 1841 at Greene Spring, Ala. 
Thirty women and children were carried 
to safety by Peter Goodwin, a Negro elevator operator in an apartment house in 
Dobbs Ferry, N. Y., when fire broke out in 
a dumbwaiter shaft. 
J. T. Edward, a, Pullman porter, is reported by the hospital head at Elyria, O., 
as having saved nine lives in a recent wreck 
of the New York Central trains, by giving 
his services as a doctor. His act of heroism 
is under advisement by the company. 
Colored employees of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, at Washington, D. C , 
presented Captain William T. Meredith, 
chief of the bureau for two terms, with a 
gold-headed cane on his eighty-first birthday. 
Rev. J. H. Knowles, pastor of Mount 
Moriah Baptist church in Cairo, Ill., for 
twenty-two years, is dead. He was born 
seventy years ago at Paris, Tenn. 
The famous American poet, James Whitcomb Riley, became interested in the poems 
written by Lieutenant R. E. S. Toomey, a 
Negro lawyer of Miami, Fla., and invited 
him to read them before a few of his select 
friends. 
First-Lieutenant John A. Green, who has 
been on duty with the 25th United States 
Infantry on the Mexican border, has been 
appointed military attache to the American 
Legation at Monrovia, Liberia, which post 
had been held until recently by Major 
NEGR O TROOPS I N MEXIC O ALONG THE COLOR LINE 63 
Charles Young who is now in Mexico with 
the famous Tenth Cavalry. 
A. W. Ricks, who for six years has been 
general field agent for the Manassas Industrial School at Manassas, Va., has resigned. 
Captain Allen W. Washington will succeed Major R. R. Moton as commandant of 
cadets at Hampton Institute in Virginia. 
J. C. Evans, a prominent Negro attorney 
of Okmulgee, Okla., won a sensational divorce suit involving more than $50,000 for 
a wealthy white client. 
Arthur F. Whitin, of Whitinsville, Mass., 
has sent to the Booker T. Washington Memorial Fund a contribution of five hundred 
dollars from the savings of the late Mary 
Strater, a former slave, who wished her 
savings to be given to aid in improving the 
condition of her race in the South. 
James Duncan, of Gary, Ind., and a porter at the Union Station, has been awarded 
a Carnegie Hero Medal. He rescued a 
white man from the bottom of a metal pit 
in the Carbon Steel Company at Pittsburgh, 
Pa., three years ago. 
The address delivered by Dr. J. E. Mason 
on Harriett Tubman has been published for 
the benefit of the Tubman Home at Auburn, 
N. Y. 
INDUSTRY 
THE Atlanta Mutual Insurance Company 
of Atlanta, Ga., has opened business in 
Arkansas. 
Forty race men from Louisville, Ky., 
have gone to Barberton, O., to work in the 
Columbia Chemical Company, and one hundred more will go to work for the Pittsburgh Valve Company. The Chemical Company has erected houses for these employees, and they are the first Negroes to 
live in Barberton. 
The stockholders of the Standard Loan 
and Realty Company have held a meeting 
for the purpose of receiving a charter of 
incorporation granted by the state of Georgia. 
The Courier, a Negro weekly, of Pittsburgh, Pa., has passed its seventh birthday. 
It is an eight-page paper and employs seven 
workers. 
The Insurance Critic issue for February 
10th carried an article on "Insurance, a 
Vocation, " by George W. Blount, a colored 
man. 
The Palatine Waiters Association, a colored organization of Newburgh, N. Y., has 
purchased No. 193 Chambers street of that 
city to accommodate Negro tenants. John 
H. Hicks is president. 
The North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association, of Durham, has started 
business in the District of Columbia. The 
gross assets of this company are nearly 
$200,000 with $5,000,000 worth of insurance 
in force. 
The West Kentucky Coal Company cmploys seven hundred Negro men in its 
mines. 
NORTH ATLANTIC 
THE Smart Set Athletic Club, of Brooklyn, N. Y., held one of the largest athletic meets in Greater New York. Howard 
P. Drew broke the world's record for ninety 
yards. Twenty events were listed on the 
program, and fully six thousand people attended. 
A colored regiment has been organized 
in Philadelphia, Pa., and more than five 
hundred young colored men have enlisted. 
An ordinance has been passed giving Atlantic City, N. J., its first Negro manned 
fire station. 
Downingtown School, at Downingtown, 
Pa., which suffered recently by fire, has received financial aid so as to enable it to 
restore Pennsylvania Hall and begin two 
other halls. The governor of the state will 
deliver the commencement address. Dr. 
William A. Creditt is principal. 
A large building named Gregory Hall, 
after its late principal, has been dedicated 
at Bordentown, N. J. 
SOUTH ATLANTIC 
EIGHT Negro citizens, representing the 
Macon, Ga., Business and Civic League, 
appeared recently before the Board of Education presenting a petition whereby congestion in Negro schools might be relieved, 
and colored children provided with an industrial education. 
A second Atlanta segregation ordinance, 
making it unlawful for Negroes to move 
into city blocks in which the majority of 
residents are white, and carrying a like 
provision against whites, was signed by 
Mayor Woodward April 12. 
A playground for colored children has 
been opened in Wilmington, N. C. 
The colored people of Hanover county, 
Va., are raising money to extend the school 64 THE CRISIS 
tions worked in cordial co-operation with 
the white staff. Printed blanks and records 
were used and excellent results obtained. 
The State Medical Association of Oklahoma and the Tri-State Medical Associations of Missouri, Kansas and Oklahoma, 
convened in joint session at Muskogee, 
Okla., May 10, 11, 12. 
More than twelve hundred volumes have 
been donated to the Gibbons High School 
at Paris, Tex., which was recently burned. 
A new brick school for colored children, 
named for the late Joseph H. Crawford, 
has been dedicated at Houston, Tex. 
Negroes of Bessemer, Ala., are making 
an effort to raise $1,000 toward a community hall. The Bessemer Soil Pipe Company will give the land and one dollar for 
every two dollars raised. 
Leading colored people of Mobile, Ala., 
nave shown much public spirit in providing 
at their own expense night school facilities 
where over four hundred illiterates have 
been taught to read. 
The colored people of Dallas, Tex., are 
energetically opposing the race segregation 
ordinance recently passed. 
Serious accusations have been brought 
against Mr. John Marquess, recently elected to the presidency of Langston University in Oklahoma. His moral conduct as 
principal of the Sumner High School in 
Kansas City was the subject of energetic 
attack on the part of numbers of citizens, 
who alleged that he was not fit to be principal of the school. 
Nearly one thousand Negroes gathered 
at Victoria, Tex., for the meeting of the 
colored farmers of Victoria and the Southwest Colored School Teachers' Association. 
S. W. Green, of East Carroll Parish, and 
J. W. Cooke have been elected alternates 
from Louisiana to the National Republican 
Convention in Chicago in June. The delegation goes uninstructed. 
Two companies of the 24th Infantry have 
been removed from Del Rio, Tex., where 
they refused to be "Jim Crowed" in the uniforms of Uncle Sam, and stationed at Fort 
Bliss. These are the first colored soldiers 
to be stationed at this fort. 
The first honor camp for Negro prisoners has been established in Tennessee. 
The City Board of Health in Shreveport, La., has offered prizes of fifty dollars 
in cash to the Negro church or other organterm two months. They are given only five 
months by the County School Board. The 
white schools have a term of nine months. 
Fire destroyed the Missionary Baptist 
church in Milton, one of the oldest church 
buildings in Florida. The church was not 
insured and the loss is estimated at between $2,000 and $2,500. 
A t Washington, D. C , several citizens 
have started a movement to secure the appointment of at least one colored person to 
the examining boards of medicine, pharmacy, law, dentistry, embalming and trained 
nursing. 
The English Department of Howard 
University is presenting a series of talks on 
Negro literature at Library Hall. 
Seven hundred students of Howard University went on strike recently because they 
were suspended for using the gymnasium 
for dancing on "Frivolity Day." Students 
and deans have since come to an understanding and the work of the university has 
been resumed. 
Colored teachers of Raleigh, N. C , raised 
during February $1,056.33 for school improvements, and organized twenty-nine 
moonlight schools. 
Condemnation proceedings have been 
started to acquire land for a park for Negroes in Jackson Ward, Richmond, Va . 
NORTH CENTRAL 
THE International Conference of Knights 
Templar of the United States and Canada, and Shriners, will meet in Chicago, 
August 21 to 25. 
Dr. C. H. Phillips and Hutchins Inge, 
Negroes, of St. Louis, Mo., have been elected 
alternates to the National Republican convention in Chicago in June. They will go 
uninstructed. 
SOUTH CENTRAL 
THE Association of Southern Church 
Colleges has been formed in Birmingham, Ala., with the purpose of trying to 
reduce the number of lynchings in the 
South. 
The recent fire in Nashville, Tenn., 
brought out an extraordinary and excellent 
case of co-operation between white and colored people. Three hundred and twentyone white families and three hundred and 
twenty-four Negro families were helped. 
The Department of Social Science of Fisk 
University and students of other institu-ALONG THE COLOR LINE 65 
ization having the largest percentage of 
members whose homes are screened against 
flies and mosquitoes, and to the one having 
the, largest number of screens installed in 
1916. Prizes are offered also to members 
of such organizations who have their homes 
in the most sanitary condition and the bestkept front and back yards. 
Williams and Piron, colored composers, 
of New Orleans, La., have had some of their 
work recorded by the Columbia Phonograph 
Company, and a special concert of the records was given in one of the largest stores 
in New Orleans. 
FOREIGN 
NATIV E Africans have curiously poetical figures of speech. The Mpongwes 
call thunder the "sky gun" ; morning they 
call "day's child". The Zulus call twilight 
the "eye lashes of the sun". An African 
who came to America was shown some ice, 
which he had not seen before, and he called 
it "water fast asleep". When asked to give 
a name to a railroad car, he said: "Him be 
one thunder mill". 
Rev. Francis O'Rourke, of the Irish 
province of the Lyons African Missions Society, will give a series of illustrated lectures in the archdiocese of New Yor k in 
aid of the West African missions. 
A crisis has been developed in Haiti by 
the action of President Dartiguenave in dissolving the senate and creating a council of 
the government to draft a new constitution 
in conformity with the latest treaty between 
the United States and Haiti. 
GHETTO 
MRS. V. BOONE, who went as a delegate from the Colored Parent and 
Teachers' Association of Sparta, Ga., to attend the State Parent Teachers' Association 
was refused admission on account of her 
race. 
George Hardy, a Negro, thirty-nine 
years old, who has served twenty-three 
years in the Atlanta, Ga., penitentiary for 
beating a white man who died as a result, 
has been ordered released by President Wilson. 
American citizenship was denied Takao 
Ozawa, a Japanese, in a test case in Honolulu. The court ruled that Japanese are 
Mongolians, and that the word "white" does 
not include the Mongolian race. 
Miss Jane R. Bosfield, the colored stenographer who was dismissed from the Medfield State Hospital in Massachusetts because of her race, has been ordered reinstated at once by Governor McCall and 
members of the Executive Council. 
The appearance of the Ziegfield Follies at 
the Academy Theatre in Richmond, Va., 
was cancelled because it was not thought 
wise to have Bert Williams, the colored 
comedian, appear with a company otherwise made up of white actors and actresses. 
Three nuns from St. Joseph's Convent in 
St. Augustine, Fla., have been placed under 
technical arrest because of the new state 
law making it illegal for white persons to 
teach Negroes. 
A Negro priest was celebrant of the 
mass, while the deacon and sub-deacon were 
white priests, at the funeral, in New Orleans, of a priest who had belonged to an 
old Louisiana family and who had devoted 
his life to work among colored Catholics. 
The sign "N o colored people served at 
the tables" in the Bungalow confectionery, 
in Portland, Ore., has been ordered removed 
by Mayor Albee. 
Henry Young, a colored minister in Carlisle, Pa., claims that the superintendent of 
schools and the School Board "drew the 
color line," and would not let his son attend school at the Lamberton Building. The 
board has denied the charge. 
George Wells Parker reports from 
Omaha, Neb., that Collier's Weekly wants 
neither colored solicitors nor subscribers. 
William Carter, a colored boy in Richmond, Va., seeing his brother chased by fifteen white sailors who threatened to lynch 
him, snatched a pistol and killed two of 
the mob. 
Lynchings since our last record: 
March 31—Cedar Bluffs, Miss., Jeff 
Brown, hanged by mob. He was running 
to catch a freight train and accidentally 
brushed against a white girl. 
April 5—St. Charles, Mo., Lafayette 
Chandler, shot and burned for killing a 
sheriff and wounding another. 
April 10—Del Rio, Tex., Private John 
Wade, 24th Infantry, shot by state ranger. 
April 10—Lawton, Okla., Carl Dudley, 
wounding a policeman. Shot to death and 
body dragged through street. 66 THE CRISIS 
THE SEASON'S BASKET BALL 
By EDWI N B. HENDERSO N 
HAMPTO N INSTITUT E basket ball 
-*• team can, without successful contradiction, claim the National Championship. 
The lads of the Virginia school have applied 
brains to brawn in so telling a fashion 
that the city and college teams with whom 
they played could at no time quell the 
Hampton spirit, nor outwit the athletes on 
the court. To Coach Charles Williams 
must go the credit for the victory, for his 
quiet, gentlemanly, masterful methods of 
coaching have produced good results. His 
was a task of creating a championship 
machine out of a group of candidates, many 
of whom knew only baseball in the realm of 
sports, and in a field where good basket ball 
was not to be seen. Hampton's claim to 
championship lies in the record for the 
season, one without a defeat. Hampton defeated Armstrong Manual Training School 
51 to 14, Howard University 46 to 12, St. 
Christopher 24 to 15, and 37 to 28, Carlisle 
37 to 23, Lincoln University 44 to 20. By 
comparison it can be easily figured out that 
the Hampton team was best. The crack 
Monticello team was outplayed by Lincoln 
University, and Hampton doubled on Lincoln, which gives Hampton superiority over 
the Western group of teams. 
The Alpha Physical Culture Club, the Incorporators, and the St. Christopher teams 
of New York, the Vandals of Atlantic City, 
the Y. M. C. A. team of Philadelphia, and 
TH E ARMSTRON G M. T. S. TEA M 
the Armstrong team of Washington, which 
won the High School Championship of the 
P. S. A. L., were good in their localities, 
and Lincoln University made an excellent 
showing in post-season games. 
Basket ball, played under regulations 
that govern the best amateur sport, is wielding a tremendous influence for strong, virile 
manhood. 
TH E HAMPTO N INSTITUT E CHAMPION S Men of the Month 
A PHYSICIAN Edward J. Davis was born 
in Charleston, S. C , and 
educated at Fisk University and the Harvard Medical School. He began practice 
in St. Louis in 1900 and soon became superintendent of the Provident Hospital. After 
two years he entered the service of the 
United States government as physician to 
the Zuni Indians, where he has served for 
twelve and one-half years. He met at first 
the opposition of superstition and ignorance, 
and some of the whites considered his presence an outrage, but all this has been 
gradually overcome. Dr. Davis is a fellow 
of the American Geographical Society. 
A CITY Thomas W. Fleming was 
COUNCILMAN born in Pennsylvania in 
1874. He was educated at 
Meadville, Pa., and Baldwin College. He 
has been a barber and a lawyer, and is now 
city councilman from Ward Eleven, Cleveland, O., which has four-fifths of its voters 
white. He is a member of the Republican 
State Executive Committee of Ohio. 
A MINISTER Edward H. Hunter was 
born in North Carolina in 
1865. He was educated at Lincoln and 
Howard, taught public school for five years 
and then became a clerk in the Wa r Department at Washington. He was afterward 
transferred to the General Land Office 
where he served fifteen years, becoming 
finally law examiner at $1,600 per year. 
Mr. Hunter entered the ministry in 1903 
and has served as pastor in Washington 
and Norfolk, Va. He is a man of ability 
and character. 
m 
A SOLDIER George D. Powell is a retired Regimental Sergeant 
Major of the United States Army, having 
served thirty years in the 24th United 
States Infantry. This regiment fought 
against the Indians from 1881 to 1888; took 
part in the Spanish American Wa r in 
Cuba where it lost one hundred and four 
men, killed and wounded, at San Juan Hill. 
It then went to the Philippines where it 
served under General Lawton. Mr. Powell 
was in all the battles, and won one gold, 
one silver and two bronze medals for marksmanship and service. He is now living in 
Washington, D. C. 
m 
BUSINESS Robert R. Church, Jr., son 
AND POLITICS of a widely known father, 
was born in Memphis, Tenn., 
in 1885. He was educated at Oberlin, and 
became president of the Solvent Savings 
Bank and Trust Company in Memphis in 
1909. He is a member of the Board of 
Directors of the Standard Life Insurance 
Company. Mr. Church was a delegate to 
the Republican Convention in 1912, is a 
member of the State Republican Executive 
Committee, and is making a strong fight for 
the political recognition of colored men. 
m 
A BAND- Major Walter H. Loving, for 
MASTER fourteen years conductor' of 
the Constabulary Band, has 
given up his work in the Philippines and 
will soon be retired from the service. His 
farewell concert was attended by a record 
breaking crowd. At the conclusion of the 
concert he was presented with a handsome 
gold watch by Judge Gilbert in behalf of 
the Manila community, and with a beautiful loving cup from the members of the 
organization. Loving's successor said, on 
receiving the baton, "Yo u have accomplished 
a wonderful thing. Other men have directed great bands but as a rule they have been 
able to select the best trained musicians 
from which to form them. You, in great 
measure, have trained the individual musicians who compose your organization. It 
has been a unique achievement. Your name 
and fame are known wherever great music 
is heard. But more than this, you have 
wrought this success with a modesty which 
has been becoming." 
A TEACHER R. G. Jackson was born in 
OF MUSIC Lexington, Ky., and received 
his musical education at 
Kansas University. He 'has for several 
years had charge of the Department of 
Music of Western University, at Quindaro, 
a colored institution; and also leads the 
music at Allen Chapel in Kansas City, Mo., 
where he has developed a fine choir. He 
has directed chorus work on the Pacific 
Coast and various parts of the West, and 
received much praise for the results. 
67 68 TH E CRISIS 
E. G. JACKSO N E. J. DAVI S T. W . FLEMIN G 
E. H . HUNTE R 
W . H. LOVIN G R. R. CHURCH , JR, G. D. POWEL L The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
INTERESTIN G developments in Negro 
* literature are taking place. First, there 
are persistent attempts at writing poetry, 
good, bad and indifferent. There lie on 
our desk seven little volumes of verse, most 
of them privately printed. Those by M. G. 
Williams, W. H. Shackleford, S. M. Means, 
Adolphus Johnson and E. M. Hampton call 
for no especial mention. Fenton Johnson's 
"Visions of Dusk" has bits of beauty here 
and there: 
"I was the starlight, 
I was the moonlight, 
I was the sunset, 
Before the dawning 
Of my life." 
G. M. McClellan's "Path of Dreams," 
written under circumstances of peculiar 
pathos, is conscientious work : 
"Awake ! Arise ! Oh, men of my race, 
I see our morning star, 
And feel the dawn-breeze on my face 
Creep inward, from afar." 
Novels are coming, too: "Redder Blood," 
by William N. Ashley, and "The Problem," 
by F. G. Gilmore. Both have the usual difficulty that we are too near realities to 
write beautifully about them. 
There are some essays: "The Black Soldier," by Mary Curtis; "The Birth of a 
Nation," by Isaac L. Thomas; "Plusieurs 
Points D'Histoire," by J. F. Geffrard, and 
"Ho w It Happened," by Mrs. J. C. Horton. 
This last little pamphlet is a frank and 
interesting life story and tells how a colored woman established a library in Oklahoma. 
W e must not forget the second number 
of the Journal of Negro History, edited by 
C. G. Woodson. It is a fine volume both in 
appearance and content. It should be in 
the hands of everyone interested in the 
Negro, race. The A. M. E. Church Review, 
under Dr. Ransom, has also become a periodical worth the reading. 
Three books are studies of black people 
by whites: M. S. Evans, of South Africa, 
writes of "Black and White in the Southern 
States." (229 pp., Macmillan, $2.25 net.) 
It is a disappointing book. Mr. Evans is a 
white man who has accepted the segregation and injustice of South Afric a and has 
come to America to prove his thesis. He 
does it to his own complete satisfaction, and 
while he tries to be fair, his querulousness 
and utter ignorance of the real American 
problems make his book most uniform ­
ing. 
H. M. Henry, of Emory and Henry College, writes of the "Police Control of the 
Slave in South Carolina" in 216 pp. The 
book impresses one as a conscientious setting forth of the facts surrounded by a 
rather desperate attempt to apologize for 
every fact that now seems unpleasant. One 
statement, however, may be quoted for the 
information of certain persons gifted with 
remarkable hind-sight: "In this study of 
South Carolina slavery the writer has 
found nothing to indicate that there was 
any movement or any serious discussion of 
the advisability of abolishing slavery or 
devising any plan that would eventually lead 
to it. Apparently no anti-slavery leaders 
like those in Virginia or North Carolina 
ever flourished in South Carolina. The 
Quakers, who were opposed to slavery, left 
the state in the early part of the nineteenth 
century, or gave up their scruples about it. 
The German settlers in Orangeburg and 
Lexington districts sought to abstain from 
slavery but drifted with the current and 
became slaveholders. Some doubtless deprecated slavery in an academic way, and 
some even maintained in practice their belief that slavery was wrong. Whether there 
was any tendency toward agitation or public sentiment suppressed it, would be difficult to determine. There is little reason to 
believe that such discussion would have secured an intelligent hearing." 
J. B. Earnest, of Norfolk, Va., publishes 
the "Religious Development of the Negro 
in Virginia," 233 pp. The book is rather 
unsystematic and therefore the more interesting. It brings out a number of striking facts, especially in regard to Negro 
preachers. One bit is illuminating: "The 
Negro judges the white man very frequently by the ruffians who attack him, or by the 
newspapers that libel his race; the white 
69 70 THE CRISIS 
man too frequently judges the Negro only 
by the inferior quality of work done by 
servants. Most cases of dislike that we 
have investigated showed an economic 
basis. The fact that our cook suddenly 
leaves, or a farm hand demands higher 
wages or even refuses to work, impels us to 
exclaim, 'How we hate a Nigger.' Does not 
this position seem a bit unjust? Our attitude toward this race is too important to be 
dealt with in anything but a large, fairminded way. Because a race lives on its 
own properties and no longer serves us in 
the same capacities as formerly are no just 
reasons for assuming an attitude of hostility to every phase of that race's existence. However, this very principle of dislike is at the root of much of the condemnation of the modern Negro. " 
THE BOURBONS AND HELEN 
KELLER 
THE letter from Helen Keller in the 
April CRISIS is printed in full as a 
paid advertisement in the Selma, Ala., 
Journal. The affluent writer continues: 
"The above letter is copied literally from 
the CRISIS, issue of April, 1916, official organ of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, published 
in New Yor k City. This association was 
formed some years ago, Miss Jane Addams 
being one of its chief promoters. The 
magazine is edited by a Negro, W. E. 
Burghardt DuBois and its editorial columns are usually well filled with abuse 
and vilifications of the white people of the 
South. He says he received this letter and 
contribution from Miss Helen Keller. We 
hope he is lying, but am afraid he is not. 
The people who did such wonderful work 
in training Miss Keller must have belonged 
to the old Abolition Gang, for they seem 
to have thoroughly poisoned her mind 
against her own people." 
The editor makes this interesting comment : 
"If there is not some mistake—and we 
fear that there is none in this case—then 
our own daughter of Alabama, Helen Keller, has given us the blackest eye of them 
all. This newspaper could not have believed what is published today as an advertisement in our columns, had it not 
been shown us in black and white. It is a 
real eye opener. This Negro editor says 
these terrible things about our own people 
and country are written by Helen Keller. 
Full of untruths, full of fawning and boot 
licking phrases directed toward northern 
white and Negro fanatics, full of things 
that cannot be proven and we challenge 
Miss Keller or anybody else to try to prove 
them. This article in the CRISIS is a blot 
and a blight on the good name this really 
wonderful woman has worked up in the 
country. 
"If Miss Keller admits authorship of this 
letter—and it would be a real pleasure to 
us if she would repudiate it—her visit to 
Selma will not be as welcome as it might 
have been, advocating and endorsing- as she 
does such unspeakable things as this Negro 
magazine stands for. If she is ashamed of 
her southland, why call their dollars? If 
she is ashamed of the state that gave her 
birth, we can worry along- without her. 
We are not the oppressors of the Negroes; 
we are the best friends they have ever had; 
Booker T. Washington bears out that statement. If we could have lived in blissful 
ignorance of Miss Keller's social equality 
ideas, we would have been much more happy 
when thinking of her." 
A writer in the Selma Times thus replies : 
"Wh y attempt to hold up to the public 
any views that she may have imbibed from 
her environment? We can forgive the 
people who have filled her with these ideas 
because they have given the world—Helen 
Keller. Of course, we of the southland 
know so well that if she had been reared 
in touch with the traditions, the history, 
the life of our people she would have been 
one of us. Instead she belongs to the world. 
As the modern miracle she stands above 
criticism." 
In the Journal our advertising man finds 
more matter of absorbing interest: 
"I quote this from the CRISIS in corroboration of the assertion heretofore made that 
it is the intention and the fixed purpose 
of northern Republicans and all other 
enemies of Democracy to break the solid 
South by putting the ballot in the hands 
of the Negro, in other words using the 
white women of the South as a means of 
enforcing the 15th Amendment. " 
SEGREGATION IN THE WORKING 
MR. H. M. BURKETT , a colored real 
estate man, sends this letter to the 
Baltimore, Md., News: THE LOOKING GLASS 71 
"The real estate market for colored 
people is at a standstill, although there are 
hundreds of colored people ready and 
anxious to purchase. But where will they 
buy? The segregation ordinance, which was 
aimed at the colored people, has as a matter of fact proved a boomerang and hit the 
white property owner harder than the colored purchaser. 
"To prevent the sale of any commodity 
to a consumer no doubt inconveniences the 
consumer; but it paralyzes the producer. 
It keeps the commodity on the hands of 
the producer and deprives him of the use 
of the capital tied up therein, as well as 
from the profits which would accrue from 
sales. 
"With this class of real estate there are 
other losses greater than the two mentioned. 
For not only is this field of industry crippled and the profits from sales lost, but 
many properties which white people do not 
occupy and would not occupy are left on 
their hands without a penny income, while 
they must at the same time pay the increased taxes and assessments, plus in many 
instances heavy ground rents. Here are, 
therefore, five direct losses to the owners 
of property which by location, condition 
and proximity to colored sections might be 
used with profit. 
"Beside these, there are other losses which 
the owners of this class of property must 
suffer. Take McCulloh street, for an example. There are on this street a score 
of buildings which have been idle for the 
last two or three years and where depreciation has been enormous. The paper has 
dropped from dampness; plumbing either 
rusted or been stolen; plastering fallen; 
paint cracked and blistered, window lights 
broken from front and rear until the whole 
external appearance looks like an abandoned honeycomb; while the inside is a 
veritable camp-meeting ground for rats. 
McCulloh street is only taken by way of 
illustration. There are dozens of other 
and smaller streets where similar conditions 
prevail. Wh o are the losers in such instances? White people of moderate means 
are fast moving to the suburbs, leaving 
scores of such houses an immovable burden 
on the hands of helpless owners who 
can neither sell nor rent. This condition is 
growing worse and worse daily, with no 
relief in sight, and will so continue until 
the present form of segregation is abandoned. This is the condition as it affects 
the owners, 99 per cent of whom are white. 
"The condition of affairs from the colored man's position is almost as bad. 
Scarcity of purchasable property for him, 
as in scarcity of all other things, has 
doubled the price. Houses in the 500 block 
Presstman street, which a few years ago 
sold for $900 and $1000, have recently sold 
for as high as $2000 and $2200. Small 
two-story houses in the 1500 block Druid 
Hill avenue, with $74 ground rents, are 
selling for $1600 and $1700. Unscrupulous 
dealers are taking advantage of the restriction forced by segregation and are 
charging the most outrageous prices to colored purchasers. So eager are some of 
these dealers to take advantage of these 
conditions that they are selling property 
to colored people for one-thirtieth of the 
price down, taking a lien for the other 
twenty-nine thirtieths until they have 
drained the purchaser of every available 
cent and then evict him under a carefully 
worded contract, and in the final analysis 
the unwary purchaser has neither dime nor 
domicile. 
"Segregation, or the Ghetto policy, of 
handling this real estate, looked at from 
its most charitable viewpoint, is bad. It 
means depreciation to the white owner. It 
means confiscation to the black purchaser. 
Both suffer, principle is wrong and jurisprudence has as yet to find a right way to 
do a wrong act." 
Contradictory testimony from southern 
editors discloses the wretched unfairness 
of the segregation program. The editor of 
the Richmond, Va., Times-Dispatch, writing 
for northern consumption, says: 
"If a section of a city may be set aside 
entirely for residences, no reason is perceived why the residence district may not 
be divided into squares for the separate 
habitations of white and colored people. 
"Richmond's segregation ordinance is an 
unqualified success. It preserves the public. peace, stabilizes values and increases 
prosperity. In the light of the decision in 
the city-planning case, it is difficult to see 
how an adverse decision could be rendered." 
What could sound fairer? And yet 
the editor of the Richmond NewsLeader bears testimony to the fact that 
under the Richmond ordinance the whites 72 TH E CRISIS 
get all the decent places, and the Negroes 
get nowhere : 
"When we say, as a city, that the Negroes shall not live in certain districts, 
then the very enactment carries with it an 
obligation to see that proper living quarters are provided for the Negroes elsewhere 
than in the districts denied them. This is 
all Richmond Negroes are asking for and 
this is the reason their appeal will not be 
in vain. 
"Exactly where new Negro residential 
districts can be opened to the best interests 
of all concerned is a question that must be 
studied with the utmost care." 
One cannot escape the logic of the New 
York Times, which appears to have found 
itself on the segregation question after having gone wrong in nearly every other matter affecting colored folk: 
" A man has a legal and constitutional 
right to occupy his own property! To 
exclude him from it on the ground of his 
color is a singular use or abuse of the so 
much overworked 'police power.' From the 
lay point of view, Judge Dyer's position 
seems inexpugnable; but 'seems' cannot be 
amended into 'is' until the ultimate tribunal 
has spoken." 
KILLING AND LYING 
MR. W. D. WEATHERFORD, in a 
pamphlet against lynching, which is 
being widely distributed, has this history 
of the rise of lynching: 
"It seems evident that the lynching habit 
in the South has, in general outline, grown 
up as follows: First, men lynched 
(whipped Indians) for misdemeanors, then 
they began to whip white men who committed crimes. Occasionally a Negro committed some crime and was summarily punished. Afte r the war, it seemed necessary 
to mete out immediate and harsh punishment to Negro men who molested white 
women. Then it was an easy step to lynch 
a Negro for murder, and finally for smaller 
offense. From this it was no difficult step 
to lynching a white man for an assault on 
a woman, then it became easy to lynch a 
white man for murder, and so the process 
has gone forward, ever increasing in facility and excuse." 
The above analysis is untrue. Lynching 
did not arise in Reconstruction times. Negroes did not attack white women as soon 
as they were freed. Not only is this the 
plain teaching of history but southern men 
who are honest confirm it. Colonel D. S. 
Henderson, in a recent address at Columbia, 
S. C, is thus quoted by the Columbia State: 
" 'Race hatred' was not preached by the 
leaders of the 'Red Shirts.' On the contrary, the endeavor of General Hampton and 
his lieutenants was to impress the Negroes 
that the white people were their friends. 
There were riots and political clashes in 
which Negroes were killed in those days, 
but in 1876 the word 'lynching' was scarcely 
heard in South Carolina. In some of the 
counties numbers of Negroes voted the Democratic ticket and there is a record of a 
county Democratic convention in Barnwell 
in the late seventies in which about two hundred delegates sat and one-fourth of them 
were Negroes. Between 1876 and 1886 Negro Democrats were sometimes elected to the 
Legislature from Colleton, Charleston, 
Orangeburg and, we believe, Barnwell. In 
some other counties Negro Democrats were 
elected to minor offices." 
Mob violence arose in Reconstruction 
times, and then in the eighties an attempt 
was made to justify it by calling it punishment for crime. When real crimes came 
and a Negro criminal class was evolved the 
anger and resentment of the South knew no 
bounds and the lynching horror culminated 
in the early nineties. Wha t was it that increased Negro crime? The convict lease 
system, and this which Weatherford scores: 
"W e white men must start a crusade 
against the white vultures who prey on 
colored girls. Immorality with colored 
women is not nearly so prevalent as it was 
before the war. In fact, comparatively 
speaking, it is a thing of the past, but any 
man who knows the facts knows full well 
that for every white woman assaulted by a 
Negro man, there are a number of colored 
girls who are seduced by white men. If 
there were fifty white women assaulted by 
Negroes in 1916, I have not a doubt there 
were many times that many colored girls 
seduced by low-down white men. It is not 
a truthful answer to say that all colored 
girls are open to approach. That is a lie 
far blacker than the face of any Negro in 
the land. That there are thousands of modest and self-respecting Negro girls every 
decent southern man who knows the race 
must acknowledge. We of the white race 
must brand every white man who seduces THE LOOKING GLASS 73 
a colored girl as a fiend of the same stripe 
as the Negro who rapes a white woman. " 
We quoted in April a southern woman 
writing in the Macon, Ga., Telegraph. We 
quote another white woman this month in 
the same paper: 
"Yo u ask in today's issue of the Telegraph what Lincoln had done that we love 
him. He died a martyr to the cause of freedom, law, wisdom, justice, moderation and 
common decency. The South was so corrupt that it needs must take a crucified body 
to free her from the horrible condition she 
was in financially, physically, socially, mentally and morally. 
"Lincoln freed the South financially and 
physically because of the dependence of the 
indolent white race upon the slaves, to the 
extent that there were absolutely none of 
the younger generation with energy and 
ambition. 
"He freed her socially because of the everincreasing number of half-breeds—a fact 
which even today makes every southern 
woman blush with shame when some brutish 
white man pretends that he helps to lynch a 
Negro in defense of his home and of southern women. God be merciful to hypocrites! 
I would hate to feel that such beasts are my 
defense! The mental and moral freedom is 
included in the above, and social and physical degradation can but ruin mentally and 
morally. I never pass a half-breed but my 
face burns with shame that I am a southern 
woman, and I heartily thank God for Lincoln. 
"I am a southern-born woman—a Georgia 
woman, a Bibb county woman and the 
daughter of a Confederate soldier who still 
bears a scar of a wounded right arm. God 
works all things after the counsel of His 
own will." 
As the Detroit, Mich., Journal says, southerners are a bit incoherent and contradictory in their explanations of the race problem : 
"The difficulty of understanding the 
southern lynching spirit soon disappears 
after one has had a better acquaintance with 
actual racial conditions. For instance, on 
Sunday a Florida mob lynched John Dukes, 
white, for participating in a shooting feud 
with another white neighbor. The Negro 
must be suppressed. And the lynching of 
white business men is undoubtedly intended 
to impress the Negroes thereabouts. Just 
as soon as the subnormal colored epileptics 
hear of the lynching of this white man for 
shooting, they will immediately become normal and safe units in society. It was to 
overawe the Negro that the Atlanta mob 
lynched a Jew last year. So, at least, southerners have explained lynchings to us." 
If the matter stopped with incoherence it 
would be explicable; but why must the 
South lie? The Lexington, Ky., Herald says 
of the Dixon picture play: 
"False history is taught in the presentation of the operations of the Ku Klux Klan. 
Instead of a band of patriots, of highminded and noble-spirited men, the Ku Klux 
Klan was a band of marauders who used the 
cover of night for the gratification of private greed, of passion, and of rapine. No 
more disgraceful was the regime of the 
carpet-bagger than the rule of the Ku Klux 
Klan." 
The Herald goes on to remind the South 
that during the war black men "protected 
the white womanhood of the South with absolute fidelity and loyalty." 
It is natural that the National Tribune, 
the G. A. R. organ, should emphasize the 
false history of the "Birth of a Nation: " 
"The whole Ku Klux Klan idea was cowardly and venomous to the last degree, and 
it is a wonder that the good sense of the 
good people of the South endured its degrading nonsense as long as they did. With all 
the contempt that the southerners pretend 
for the Negro, with the lack of ability, 
world-knowledge and force of character, 
which has been attributed to the down trodden race, yet the southerners would make 
out an exalted heroism, in a war upon a race 
which was everywhere inferior in number 
to them, and still more inferior in social 
position and education. It was cowardly because it was those who boasted their superiority, descending to sneaking midnight 
raids upon the humble huts of poor Negroes, 
fighting and even killing them. 
"There never was a redeeming feature 
about the whole disgraceful Ku Klux Klan 
system." 
The unspeakable libel against Thaddeus 
Stevens in that play led to a sharp battle 
when an attempt was made to introduce the 
play in his former congressional district. 
When the manager of the motion picture 
house at Lancaster, Pa., insisted on producing the film, the present congressman threat-74 TH E CRISIS 
"I realize, however, in view of the articles 
published in two of the papers, and the 
criticisms resulting therefrom, that my motives have not been understood. I further 
realize, and sadly, too, that I made a mistake, and am sorry. 
"I trust that my friends and the Memphis 
public will be gracious and kind enough to 
accept my sincere explanation. 
"I am a southern woman, and I have the 
same ideas on the race problem that any 
other southern woman has." 
Wha t is this almost tigerish power in the 
South that compels this slavish kow-towing? One gets a glimpse of it in a paper 
of the "people, " the Anderson, S. C , Farmers Tribune, an organ of the unspeakable 
Blease: 
"So, so, since Cole Blease delivered that 
famous Boston speech in the House of Governors, old sleepy Boston has woke up to 
the seriousness of the situation and we expect soon to see where they have drawn the 
color line and shut Mr. Nigge r out of his associations with white people, and especially 
stop the nigger children and white children 
from going to school together. May be then 
Neils Christensen will stay in Beaufort, the 
county that he misrepresents in the state 
senate, and not spend so much time in Boston. It's a pity that Cole Blease don't take 
to the platform and speak all over the North 
and let that Yankee crowd know the truth, 
then they would quit blaming the South 
for her attitude towards the nigger. " 
NEGRO ART 
THE development of a real Negro folk 
•*• theatre in the Harlem district of New 
York has long been foreshadowed, and may 
be a reality before another year goes by. 
The New York Tribune thus speaks of a 
recent performance of "Othello" : 
"With the exception of Brabantio's temporary stage fright in the first act the 
actors gave their lines without a slip. In 
spite of the fact that the players are amateurs, the 'Othello' they presented was by 
no means an amateur performance, and 
there were moments, such as the drinking 
scene in the second act and one of 'Othello's' 
long speeches in the fourth, when even the 
most supercilious critic would have forgotten to find fault. 
"The production is a distinct achievement of the colored race, and if Harlem can 
only cultivate a taste for Shakespeare durened to prosecute him for criminal libel, 
and the mayor declared that on conviction 
he would evoke the theatre's license. The 
manager tried to appeal to the courts, but 
finally yielded. Mrs. M. G. Brubaker, who 
started the local fight, writes us: 
"It is worth while to note, in explanation 
of Mr. Griest's letter, that by the laws, both 
of New York and Pennsylvania, to slander 
a dead man is criminal libel. The responsibility for foisting this infamy upon Pennsylvania rests primarily upon the State 
Board of Censors of Photo-plays, but had 
the judges of the courts in Philadelphia— 
and perhaps other cities—done their duty 
under the law, 'The Birth of a Nation' could 
have been kept out of many places on this 
ground." 
TEAPOT TEMPESTS 
THE outsider can scarcely realize the 
-"- spiritual tyranny in the South which 
begins with the Negro and ends in the most 
extraordinary places. A rich and prominent white woman of Memphis wished to 
reward some of her colored servants who 
had been in her employ some twenty years. 
She had them invite their friends and entertain themselves in her own parlor. The 
whole white city was apparently thrown into 
paroxisms of rage. The News Scimiter 
says: 
"Gorgeously dressed Negro women and 
Negro men attired in full dress suits and 
white gloves tripped to the strains of the 
latest dance music at the palatial home of 
Mrs. James H. Rees, 246 Madison avenue, 
a prominent Memphis society woman, Wednesday night, after a squad of police reserves, under Captain Couch, had quelled 
a mob in the street which threw eggs at the 
house and later at Mrs. Rees when she appeared on her porch." 
The Memphis Press says editorially: 
"The affair on Madison avenue, Wednesday night, caused a whole lot of wholesome 
indignation. It deserved condemnation. It 
got it. 
"In all probability there was a considerable amount of bad judgment back of the 
thing rather than a deliberate intention 
to stir up passions which are largely the 
heritage of an unhappy epoch, and which 
it is the duty of all good citizens, white or 
black, to keep suppressed." 
The poor lady is compelled to make almost hysterical apology in public print: THE LOOKING GLASS 75 
ing the two weeks that it will run the ambition of the courageous Mr. Wright, who 
has gathered together and trained the cast, 
will be fulfilled. He will be able to play 
'Othello' at the head of his own company 
in an extended tour through the cities where 
there are theatres for the colored race." 
In the New York Morning Telegraph the 
following bit appears: 
" 'The Negro is better fitted for a service 
to art than is the white.' 
" "Jack Johnson's shadow dancing is the 
most beautiful dancing of modern times, 
and when he strikes a fighting pose we are 
carried back to the days of Greek bronzes.' 
****** * 
" 'Nearly everything that is a contribution to art which is typically American today has been produced by the Negro.' 
" 'A Negro girl came under my notice who 
declared she could not draw. I gave her 
crayons and paper and told her to make a 
line with the crayons, if she could, using her 
own choice of color and her own idea of 
form. She produced in the course of time a 
picture which, if she had changed two 
straight lines and added one curved line, 
would have been one of the finest pieces of 
cubic art in this country, ranking with any 
that has been done here. And she had been 
given absolutely no instruction.' 
" 'The Negro lives a life, even in this age 
of cold commercialism, that is full of poetry.' 
"The foregoing quotations require an explanation, because they sound radical, do 
they not? 
"If you really think so, drop in some time 
for a quiet chat with Robert J. Coady, at 
the Washington Square Gallery, and I am 
of the opinion you will hear many more 
radical statements, for Coady has the courage of his convictions concerning art." 
THE COURTS 
THE most unforgivable thing about the 
white South is its corrupt courts. 
Southern testimony on this point is indisputable. The Elizabeth City, N. C , Independent says: 
" A man to occupy the office of sheriff of 
this big, busy, prosperous county should be 
a sober man. Chas. Reid is a drinking man. 
His drinking of late has been disgraceful 
to say the least. A man who drinks is not 
to be entrusted with public money or with 
the custody of prisoners. 
"Some time ago there was a murder committed in this town. To be exact, a Negro 
drayman by the name of Cicero White was 
murdered. The sheriff of the county could 
have been of service on that occasion in 
helping the police of the town to catch the 
murderers. But friends of the sheriff said 
that Reid was 'in his cups' that night. The 
murderers of Cicero White had no trouble 
from the sheriff's quarter in making good 
their escape. 
"Sheriff Reid is not to be considered a 
responsible sheriff. This newspaper has 
already told how he went to Norfolk one 
day last summer and arrested an innocent 
Negro, brought him out here without extradition papers and kept him in jail for 
several weeks before admitting his mistake. 
Chief of Police Thomas, in an interview 
given this paper some time ago, said that he 
told Reid he had the wrong Negro, and Reid 
told him to keep his mouth shut, not to let 
the fact get to the public. 
"Sheriff Reid is in charge of the county 
jail and responsible for the keeping of all 
prisoners in that jail. An investigation of 
conditions at the Pasquotank county jail 
will reveal the most loathsome immorality 
upon the part of prisoners confined in that 
institution, if reports are to be believed; 
and this newspaper has its reports from 
persons who have been confined in the jail 
and in position to know of the conduct of 
the prisoners in that institution. 
"A s a court officer, Sheriff Reid is not 
above suspicion. He has been charged with 
packing juries in behalf of his friends and 
against those who are not his friends. 
These charges have never been denied and 
the evidence is all against Reid. There can 
be no greater menace to the peace, happiness and prosperity of a county than a sheriff who will abuse and debase his office to 
thwart or misdirect the ends of justice. No 
county can afford to retain in office a sheriff 
upon whom such a suspicion rests. 
"This newspaper but briefly presents a 
few reasons why the candidacy of Chas. 
Reid should not be treated seriously in the 
present campaign. The gambling, liquor 
drinking, whore-mongering element in Elizabeth City and Pasquotank county will shout 
all the more vehemently for Reid after reading this editorial. It is from the drinking, 
gambling, whore-mongering element that 
Reid will get his chief support this time. 
The Independent makes no appeal to this 76 THE CRISIS 
element; there is another, a higher, a bigger, 
better and more powerful element in this 
county." 
The Miami, Fla., Metropolis, says: 
"Is it anybody's business to investigate 
why a Negro gambler violates the law ten 
dollars' worth, while a white man committing the same offense violates the law but 
five dollars' worth? Is there no one in 
authority in Miami who has the manhood 
to put a stop to this infamous discrimination? 
"In the municipal court, Monday morning, 
seven Negroes forfeited bonds of ten dollars each, and ten white men forfeited 
bonds of five dollars each—all having been 
arrested for gambling and none of them 
appearing for trial. The white 'gentlemen' 
also gave fictitious names for police court 
records, another privilege indulged in by 
citizens of their class, for the sake of protecting their social standing. 
"But the Negroes' little crap game was a 
ten dollar crime—since a Negro in Miami 
has no vote and no political power. Even 
if he 'knows' anything about 'high-up folks,' 
the Negro's knowledge is of little danger— 
it's the white man who must be handled 
with tender care. 
"Naturally, it would seem that the white 
man had committed the greater crime; it 
would seem that the white man, in his presumably greater comprehension of law and 
morals, would be held a greater criminal 
than his ignorant black brother, and that in 
consequence his would be the greater bond 
and the heavier punishment. If there is 
any difference in the bonds imposed, it 
should be the white man who pays the ten 
dollars, and the Negro the five. 
"The Metropolis has been watching this 
proposition a long time. It has seen the 
Negro boot-legger sent to the convict camp 
while gentlemen blind tigers were dismissed 
'for lack of evidence.' We have seen the 
alternative of a money fine save a white 
man from service on the county roads—the 
Negro serving his sentence in hard work, 
because he is without the funds to 'pay out.' 
It's an outrage, and reflects upon the honor 
of every decent white man in Dade county." 
OKLAHOMA AND THE SOCIALISTS 
OKLAHOM A has rewritten her "Grandfather" clause and it is before the 
voters in the coming election: 
" 'I had rather lose every federal and 
state office in Oklahoma than to see the 
grandfather clause defeated at the coming 
election,' spoke J. B. A. Robertson, former 
candidate for governor, before the Democratic county convention. 
" 'I never have seen the enthusiasm in the 
Republican party in twenty-five years that 
there is now,' continued Robertson. 'We 
Democrats have got to stand together and 
fight to make this a white man's country. 
No white man who has the interest of the 
state at heart will oppose the grandfather 
clause.' " 
The Socialist Appeal To Reason says: 
"W e wonder if the Socialists throughout 
the country really appreciate the tremendousness of the struggle that is facing the 
Oklahoma comrades. The Democrats of 
that state are stopping at nothing in their 
effort to 'beat the Socialists.' Afraid that 
the Socialist party may capture the state, 
the Democrats have passed a registration 
law which may result in the disfranchisement of the Socialists. Of course, the Socialists are already hard at work in a strenuous effort to have this corrupt law repealed. To show our readers how determined the anti-Socialists are, let us quote 
from The Clinton (Okla.) Chronicle, an 
organ of the Democratic party: 
" 'If we were a registrar under the new 
election law, we don't know any decent white 
Republican that we would dislike to register, but believe a Socialist or Negro would 
have a healthy chase to find us.' 
"In plain words, the Democratic registrars would simply avoid the Socialists. 
They are not expected, under the new law, 
to have a regular place where they are to 
register the citizens. They must be found. 
Corrupt politicians of the Oklahoma variety 
would be careful to let the Democrats know 
where they may be interviewed, but would 
certainly lead the voters of other parties a 
merry chase." 
The colored Black Dispatch, of Oklahoma 
City, says: 
"The Socialist party is preparing great 
colored posters, three feet by nine feet, 
which they intend to place in every voting 
precinct in the state. These posters will 
direct attention to a mass meeting of all 
citizens irrespective of party affiliation, to 
register the voters of that precinct. The 
posters will name Monday, May 1, as the 
day for this mass meeting. The Socialist THE LOOKING GLASS 77 
party especially invites the Negro to be 
present on that day so that he will have no 
difficulty in being registered and the Black 
Dispatch suggests that it will be a good idea 
for the Negro to follow this plan for the 
Democratic registrar intends to enforce the 
provisions of the statute that requires two 
freeholders to make affidavit that a challenged voter is a qualified elector. On that 
day there will be no trouble for black men 
to find there on the ground, freeholders who 
can satisfy the registrar. If he can be satisfied of your qualifications. Remember, no 
reading or writing goes, and do not forget 
that on the first Monday in May, sixteen 
days from date, a great opportunity presents itself especially to the Negroes who for 
the first time must register from the farms 
to go to the schoolhouse in their precinct 
and the Socialist party will help to see that 
a square deal is measured out to all." 
It looks as though Mr. Debs, in the 
National Rip-Saw, is right: 
"In every political party save alone the 
Socialist party the color line is sharply 
drawn, although every effort is made at 
election time to obliterate it and to have it 
appear that all men are equal without regard to their previous condition of servitude. A more ghastly lie than this was 
never told. The colored people in this country are to a large extent free in name only 
and most of them are actually deprived of 
the ballot. The politicians who do not openly despise them, cunningly contrive to control their votes in a way to keep them where 
they are, and when the election is over one 
of their number, the most active ward 
worker, is given a janitor's badge and permitted to clean the cuspidors of the white 
politicians in recognition of their political 
equality with the white race. 
"It is the veriest fraud and false pretense 
and no one knows this better than the 
hypocritical politicians who practice it. 
"In the Socialist party, upon the other 
hand, there is no color line. The only line 
drawn there is the class line, the line between exploiting masters and exploited 
wage-slaves." 
SOLDIERS 
VARDAMA N has had another spree in 
* the Senate. The Syracuse Post Standard says: 
"Senator Vardaman has not been heard 
from often since he left the governorship of 
Mississippi. His speeches appear in The 
Congressional Record, but in no publications 
that are read. The reason is simple enough. 
Vardaman's hatred of the Negro is his solo 
political capital. In Congress, with an Administration that has scrupulously and 
often cruelly avoided recognition of the 
Negro as a citizen, Vardaman has no text 
for ranting. 
"The senator seeks to make a case for his 
pet aversion in the army bill. He solemnly 
expresses his fear that under it Negro regiments will be recruited in the South which, 
in the hands of a 'hostile President,' may be 
used to oppress the whites. A t the moment 
when a colored regiment is proving so worthy its traditions of glory in Mexico, this 
outburst is peculiarly ridiculous. It is gratifying to record that the senator who 
promptly poked fun at it was Senator Vardaman's colleague, John Sharp Williams. 
"The American Negro makes a splendid 
soldier. He is obedient, strong, courageous 
and satisfied. His regiments are always 
close to maximum strength. He does not 
desert. The Association for the Advancement of the Colored People has asked that, 
in the army increase, there shall be two Negro regiments. Their request should be 
granted. The Negro has proved his worthiness of the army uniform." 
John Kenneth Turner, in the Appeal To 
Reason, gives us all this food for thought: 
"That the Mexicans were not in a position 
to offer resistance, is proven by the fact 
that there was no resistance—no battle. 
NOT A SINGLE AMERICA N WA S 
KILLE D IN EITHER 'ENGAGEMENT. ' 
In the second, not one was wounded. Four 
were reported wounded in the first, but none 
so seriously as to make a trip to the hospital necessary. 
"Wer e these four Negro cavalrymen 
wounded by Mexicans, or by accidents incident to the chase? Did the Mexicans have 
guns? If so, isn't it likely that at least 
ONE American would have been killed? 
"Great God! WHA T is really happening 
in Mexico? Ar e our black dogs of war 
running amuck, slaking their blood-lust 
upon unarmed natives?" 
MISCELLANEOUS 
"WE have received a communication 
versity relative to conditions there. We fail 
to see that it improves the situation any. 
We sympathize with the students, but they 
have a wrong conception of duty and re-78 THE CRISIS 
sponsibility. They were not sent to the University to play. They were sent there to 
study. The upper classes had their troubles and the upper classes were the ones to 
settle them. 
"In a large institution like that, if the 
students are to run the University instead 
of the regularly designated authorities, the 
sooner it is wiped out of existence, the better it will be for the one to be founded. 
One thing is certain, there was either something wrong with the students, or there was 
something wrong with the governing body. 
If a student has marked out just what he 
will do and what he will not do, regardless 
of superior authority, he is not suited to be 
a student. 
"W e have too many of that kind of people on the outside now. Military discipline 
is needed at Howard University. A compliance with rigid rules should be demanded. 
As we before stated, there are no fundamental rights involved in the controversy, 
so far as the students' contentions are concerned. If our young friend has not been 
able to understand and realize this, then we 
have a very poor opinion of his ability to 
argue to a final and satisfactory conclusion."—Richmond, Va., Planet. 
"An interesting illustration is a play now 
running with much interest and success 
which presents with great artistic ability 
and skill the tragic problem of a man apparently white, but with a slight and perhaps questionable strain of Negro blood, 
from some remote ancestor, who marries a 
white woman, only to have his secret and 
shadowy misfortune shouted to the whole 
world by the birth of a black child! 
"The motif, of course, is nut new, any 
more than that of Shakespeare's most famous plays, but has been utilized to a vivid 
and harrowing effect in a score of different 
stories, novels and plays on both sides of 
the Atlantic under such titles as 'The Black 
Frankenstein,' 'The Inescapable Blot,' 'The 
Dark Secret,' etc. 
"Further than this we have all heard 
lurid and sensational stories, usually rather 
vague as to name, date and place, but most 
circumstantial and convincing in all other 
details, of similar catastrophes. In fact, the 
belief that an apparently white man or 
woman, even one whose ancestors on both 
sides have passed for white for several generations, may at any time be suddenly confronted by his or her family skeleton in 
shape of a Negro child, is as universally believed and well attested as William Tell's 
apple, George Washington's hatchet, madstones, centenarians and hoopsnakes. 
"I am not concerned with the general 
merits of the play, its bearing upon race 
prejudice, etc. The only point to which I 
wish to call attention is the fact that the 
episode upon which its whole appeal is 
based has never yet been known to happen. 
In fact, we are able to say that it is highly 
improbable that it ever could happen."— 
Dr. Woods Hutchinson in New Yor k 
American. 
"This is what the Rev. William C. Jason, 
president of the State College for Colored 
Students, Dover, Del., says: 
" 'Do I want to be white? Ye s and no. 
No, if it appears that with patience and 
fidelity we can in time work out our own 
destiny and witness the glory of achievement under surpassing difficulties. Yes, if 
we are to be perpetually reminded that a 
black skin is a badge of inferiority which 
no excellence of character or ability can 
make less odious to the majority of our fellow citizens. If a white man is the only 
man who is to be given a man's chance even 
in our common country, then would God we 
were white.'"—The World Outlook for 
March. 
"In your campaign for preparedness and 
for the development of this district as a 
part of an intelligent program of preparedness, it occurs to me that none have as yet 
stressed what may be in the near future 
the 'best bit' on the board. We have in this 
district all the raw materials for iron and 
steel making, money for chemical production, good rail transportation, water at our 
door the year round, neither freezing nor 
runs so low as to stop shipping, nor any 
reason that railroad strikes should stop production or shipments. And the only reservoir of labor, ready for use and untapped, 
to wit, about 3,000,000 strong, healthy Negroes, who today are earning a scant living 
on many farms in many districts, a burden 
on farm owner and merchant, and for the 
first time in our history the 'boll-weevil' has 
created a condition where the cotton farmer 
is willing for him to leave and engage in 
other work."—R. A. Terrell, of Birmingham, Ala., in the Manufacturers' Record. Editorial 
INITIATIV E 
SUBTL E are the ways of racial 
hatred. One method is to 
use secret but persistent care 
to keep the hated people from 
using their own initiative. They 
must be made meekly to follow; 
they must be persuaded to wait until others point the way. Recently 
in a United States government office 
it fell to a colored clerk to discover 
and point out a serious error on the 
part o f his white superior officer. 
He made his memorandum with 
judgment and force and cited incontrovertible authority. He then laid 
the paper before his immediate chief. 
His chief hesitated and then said 
confidentially: "It is all right, 
Blank, but as a friend I would advise you not to put you r name to it. 
Yo u know our superior officer is a 
southerner and he would not like to 
be proved to be in the wron g by a 
colored man. Moreove r there is 
probably some graft in this thing 
anywa y which led to his original 
signature. Just send it in without 
you r signature." 
The colored man hesitated but finally he said: "If you orde r that signature to be taken off, all right, otherwise it goes. " The chief looked 
at him. The signature remained. 
Wha t happened? W e do not know, 
but we do know that there is one 
"mighty " mad southerner in Washington. 
CONSOLATION 
COLORE D folk can always get 
a dubious sort o f consolation in knowing that they have not always had a 
monopoly of the attentions of the 
discourteous and the cruel. A t a recent dinner given to the oldest woman 
doctor in the United States, Dr. Ann a 
Manning Comfort told o f the indignities which she suffered at Bellevue 
Hospital in 1865 for the unforgivable 
crime of being female : "W e had to 
g o to Bellevue Hospital for our practical work, and the indignities we 
were made to suffer are beyond belief. There wer e five hundred young 
men students taking post-graduate 
courses, and we wer e jeered at and 
catcalled, and the 'old wa r horses,' 
the doctors, joined the younge r men. 
"W e wer e considered aggressive. 
They said women did not have the 
same brains as men and wer e not 
trustworthy. All the work at the hospital was made as repulsively unpleasant for us as possible. There 
wer e originally six in the class, but 
all but two wer e unable to put up with 
the treatment to which we wer e subjected and dropped out. I trembled 
whenever I went to the hospital, and 
I said once that I could not bear it. 
Finally the women went to the authorities, who said that if we were 
not respectfully treated they would 
take the charter from the hospital. 
"A s a physician there wa s nothing 
that I could do that satisfied people. 
If I wor e square-toed shoes and 
swung my arms they said I was mannish, and if I carried a parasol and 
wor e a ribbon in my hair they said I 
wa s too feminine. If I smiled they 
said I had too much levity, and if I 
sighed they said I had no sand. 
"They tore down my sign when I 
began to practice ; the drug stores did 
not like to fill my prescriptions, and 
the older doctors would not consult 
with me. But that little band of 
women made it possible for the other 
women wh o have come later into the 
field to do their work. When my first 
patients came and saw me they said I 
79 80 THE CRISIS 
wa s too young, and they asked in horrified tones if I had studied dissecting just like the men. They wer e 
shocked at that, but they wer e mor e 
shocked when my bills wer e sent in to 
find that I charged as much as a 
man. " 
Remembe r this is the story of the 
treatment of a white woma n by 
chivalrous America n white men, the 
same men wh o tremble with indignation lest a black man look at one of 
these beautiful creatures. 
PROTECTION 
THE editor of the Morning Telegraph of New Yor k City apparently spends most of his 
waking hours in a storm cellar away from the buffets of this 
wicked world. He writes: "A s to 
the Negroes, a writer in the Herald 
makes a hysterical plea for their defense. 'Americ a does not protect 
them,' says the writer. Protect them 
from whom? Wh o hazes the Negro, 
anyway ? There is much flubdub and 
nonsense being written nowadays, but 
nothing mor e silly is seen in print 
than assertions that Negroe s are being ill treated. The whites employ 
them and pay them. Negroe s own 
land, attend schools, have their 
churches, enjoy life and are fairly 
prosperous. An d mor e than that, the 
Negroe s are satisfied, in the main, 
with their treatment in this country. 
Let them alone, everybody ; they are 
workin g out their own salvation." 
Of course ! To be sure! W e know 
that the oppressed are always happy, 
particularly in the eyes of the oppressor. Witness the poems about 
"milking maids " ; the joy s of the east 
end of London ; the "picturesque" 
peasant; the "horny-handed son of 
toil." In this world-wide happiness 
the Negro, naturally, is part and parcel. "Wh o hazes the Negro? " Wh o 
has lynched three thousand of them 
in the last generation ? Wh o has murdered about ten thousand more ? Wh o 
has raped their wome n and stunted 
their children? Wh o daily insults 
them from their getting up to their 
lying down ? An d in spite of all this, 
do they not "enjoy " life ? An d are 
they not fairly "prosperous? " Or, 
at any rate, if the editor of the Morning Telegraph is enjoying life and is 
fairly prosperous, wh y should he be 
bothered about colored folk ? 
THE CRISIS AND SCHOOLS 
WE have noted from time to 
time a curious attitude on 
the part o f some of the colored schools as regard to 
TH E CRISIS. Fo r the most part, naturally, TH E CRISIS has been welcomed 
and read with avidity. In one or tw o 
cases it has been surreptitiously suppressed and kept out o f the reading 
rooms, but protests from our friends 
have effected its reappearance with 
profuse apology. W e can realize the 
thought back o f some of these actions. 
Ho w fa r shall colored students be encouraged to look the facts in the face, 
or how far shall they be treated as 
perpetual children with little pats on 
the shoulders, and "There , there, never mind" ; and "D o you r duty that is 
best, leave unto the Lor d the rest! " 
Or how far shall they be faced frankly with the truth, aroused to the full 
realization o f their position and then 
trusted to fight—to fight with discretion and broadmindedness if possible, 
but to fight fo r freedom and for 
right ? A recent illustration o f this 
dilemma comes from one of the large 
institutions o f the southeast. A university Chapter of the N . A . A . C. P . 
had been arousing the institution 
bod y to the necessity o f joinin g their 
society to fight fo r manhood rights. 
On the other hand certain members 
o f the faculty dissuaded students telling them that to fight wa s "un-Christlike." A correspondent thus continues the story: "Ver y recently at 
chapel service a professor in the university told ho w he had the experience EDITORIAL 81 
o f traveling in a crowded train when 
some o f the ladies had to ride in the 
smoking car. He said the conductor 
requested a man to stop smoking, wh o 
said it wa s his right to smoke in a 
smoking car, and he did not intend to 
give up that right fo r anyone. He 
used this to show that colored people 
should not assert their rights, and 
advised them against standing firm 
on manhood rights. " 
Her e is the real inner Negr o problem. There is no powe r on earth that 
can keep ten million people from having wha t they want if those wants 
are in reasonable consonance with the 
aspirations o f civilized folk. But do 
w e colored people really want our 
rights; do w e dare stand and fight 
the good fight of faith ? 
TENEMENTS 
WE sincerely trust that individuals and organizations 
friendly to the Negro are 
not going to be led into 
segregation schemes and ghetto 
plans by organized real estate interests masking as philanthropists. 
Movements toward furnishing model 
tenements fo r colored people are on 
foot in New York , Chicago and other 
cities. They are on their face in 
every wa y commendable. Fo r the 
most part colored people in large 
cities have been compelled to put up 
with the old fashioned, inconvenient 
dwellings which white tenants no 
longer wanted, or they have gotten 
hold o f better class houses only by the 
payment o f exorbitant rents. The 
experiments o f the Suburban Home s 
Compan y in Ne w Yor k City show 
conclusively that an excellent class 
o f colored tenants may be had and 
goo d accommodations furnished at a 
fair rental. This effort should be extended ; but when we find taking part 
in such philanthropic efforts the identical real estate interests in Ne w 
Yor k which have been workin g fo r 
years to oust colored people from the 
decent parts o f Harlem and establish 
them upon the mud fiats of the river 
in the extreme northeast, we have a 
right to view the matter with suspicion. The crucial question is, in 
New Yor k and Chicago, WHER E are 
these proposed new tenements to be ? 
Ar e they to be in a segregated district, or are they to be where there is 
light, air, transportation and decent 
surroundings ? One great victory fo r 
anti-segregation democracy has been 
the buying of a site fo r the New Yor k 
colored branch of the Y . M. C. A . 
outside of the proposed segregated 
dead line. 
W e would be very glad if the Urban 
League and the Harlem Property 
Owners' Improvement Corporation 
would let the public know where their 
proposed new tenements in Ne w Yor k 
are to be erected. 
DECEPTION 
ONE o f the unforgivable things 
about the southern white 
press is the wa y in which 
it deliberately deceives its 
readers as to the attitude of civilized communities toward Negroes. 
Even the Columbia, S. C , State 
stoops to this petty deception. The 
State records the facts that hoodlums 
chased a Negro in Boston, and argues 
that the lynching spirit so far as 
Negroes are concerned is just as bad 
in Boston as in South Carolina, only 
that there are mor e policemen in Boston, and southern men are mor e 
"sensitive." This is nonsense. The 
fact o f the matter is that Boston is 
mor e law-abiding, and that an accused black man there even in the 
midst of a mo b can appeal to lawabiding bystanders and receive protection. In South Carolina the wellknown innocence of a black man 
could only in exceptional cases appeal to the white bystander. The 
Atlanta, Ga., Constitution assumes 
that the appointment of Miss Bosfield to a position among white clerks 
in a hospital in Massachusetts was 
something exceptional and that they 82 TH E CRISIS 
revolted against it just as Georgia 
would have. This is untrue and the 
Constitution probably knows that it 
is. There are dozens of colored 
clerks, male and female, workin g with 
their white fellows in all parts of 
Massachusetts. Just as long as the 
South receives from its daily press 
the silly impression that other parts 
o f the world are as crazy and unreasonable in their racial hatreds as 
are the southern United States, just 
so long there will be no appeal to 
reason in those half civilized districts. 
THE BOOMERANG 
FEW people realize how the 
southern white people suffer from their own prejudice. 
For instance. Senator Mc -
Gehee of Mississippi has been trying to amend the constitution of that 
state because he says that the white 
children are not getting a fair deal. 
The real trouble is this: Accordin g 
to Section 206 of the Mississippi constitution each county of the state receives $1.50 per capita fo r each child 
of school age in the county. In the 
"white " counties this money is distributed among a large numbe r of 
white children, the colored children 
getting a few remnants. In the black 
belt counties, where there are a very 
few white children and a large number of colored children the whites get 
the bulk of the fund, making their 
per capita allowance large, if not 
munificent. It has even been charged 
in the past that white school children 
have been sent to college on the public 
school funds. The colored school 
children get inadequate remnants. 
Wha t Mr. McGehee and his fellows 
want is not by any means to have the 
fund distributed equitably among 
whites and blacks. Oh, no ! Wha t 
he is fighting for is to have the fund 
distributed according to the population o f white school children. Black 
belt influence (that is, the influence 
o f the white barons of the black belt, 
not o f black men ) has hitherto prevented this, but the white Mississippi 
masses have the political power, and 
they are pressing for justice through 
injustice. 
FROM ATLANTA, GA. 
"PLEAS E let me congratulate you and you r staff on 
the most powerful publication in defense of right 
and justice circulated in the United 
States, TH E CRISIS. 
"I not only take it myself, but I 
purchase twelve copies every month 
and send them sub rosa to white 
friends and enemies in the South, and 
especially those of my city and state. 
Keep this to yourself. 
"I want to especially commen d you 
fo r that cut on lynching, and you r 
strong editorial on the shortcomings 
of the churches in general and the 
white churches in particular. Tha t is 
a splendid and tender place to hit the 
hypocrite. Hop e you will find time 
and space to hit him again. 
"I wish it wa s so that you could reproduce that cut on lynching on one 
page with some such inscription 
'American citizens murdered by 
American citizens, and not one cent 
or one soldier sent to catch the murderer.' Then on the next page have a 
cut of the few white America n citizens murdered by a few Mexicans, 
with some such inscription: 'American citizens murdered by a few Mexicans and ten thousand soldiers sent 
to catch them with the expenditure 
of millions of the government's 
money.' 
"O , ye white sepulchres—ye hypo ­
crites ! The day will come when you 
will be weighed in the balance and 
found wanting. 
"This is just as I think about it, 
I will be glad to help pay for the making of such a cut o f the Mexican mixup. " EDITORIAL 83 
LITTLE LETTERS FROM THE HEATHEN 
THE editor of the Saturday 
Evening Post writes to Leon 
Gardiner of Camden, N. J.: 
"Permit us to acknowledge 
you r note of February 20 in which 
you wer e so good as to bring up an 
interesting point as to the capitalization o f the wor d Negro . There is unquestionably something to be said in 
favor of the points you bring up, and 
we shall be glad to take the matter 
under further advisement. " 
Funk & Wagnalls write to Mr. 
Joseph L. Jones of Cincinnati, O.: 
"W e have to acknowledge with thanks 
your letter o f January 27, concerning 
the use of the wor d Negro with a 
lowe r case initial letter. W e have 
noted that in certain newspapers the 
use o f the capital initial is common, 
and shall keep you r letter befor e us 
until such time as we revise our dictionaries, when the subject will be 
referred to our editors for action. 
"Th e writer is aware that when the 
wor d wa s originally used, it was capitalized, but is also aware that at that 
time the knowledge of the different 
tribes and races was restricted. He 
directs your attention to the table of 
Africa n tribes in the new Standard 
Dictionary, from which stock many 
members o f the colored race trace 
their origin. He realizes, however, 
that it is impossible for most o f them 
to trace their origin back to any specific stock or tribe, and he feels that 
to call them Negroes is almost as contemptible as to call them blacks." 
Wh y is either "contemptible" ? 
The Cincinnati Enquirer, writing 
to the same gentleman, lives up to its 
reputation : "W e have given careful 
consideration to the suggestion contained in your letter, and can see no 
reason for changing the style of this 
office with reference to the use o f the 
wor d 'Negro.' 
"It will avail nothing to enter into 
an endless discussion as to the reasons 
for using lower case instead o f capital 
'n' in the spelling of that word. W e 
have, however, unimpeachable authority for the practice of the Enquirer. Certainly this practice is not 
to be taken as a reflection upon your 
people." 
"THE NEGRO" 
DEA R MR. DUBOIS : 
M y brother and myself 
read every day, after lunch, 
some standard work. In this 
way we have read together a good 
many volumes. For several weeks 
we have been reading in this wa y your 
volume, "Th e Negro. " W e have just 
finished it, and have been delighted 
with it. Yo u have done a splendid 
wor k in the preparation o f this volume and have rendered a most important service to the race. I wish 
that it might be very widely read, 
not only by the members o f our own 
race, but especially by the members 
of the white race. Yo u have brought 
to light so many things of interest in 
the history of the race and have discussed the whole subject so intelligently and broadly that even the enemies of the race will be compelled to 
take notice and to revise their judgment in regard to the Negro. Yo u 
have shown that he is not the little, 
insignificent, worthless specimen of 
humanity that he is represented to be 
by these enemies. All he needs is the 
opportunity, a fair chance in the race 
of life. 
FRANCIS J. GRIMKE , 
Washington, D. C. 
The May CRISIS was wron g in attributing the quotation on the Liberty 
Bell to Jethro. Jethro's contribution 
to human thought, as Mr. Milholland 
writes us, was the idea o f representative government set forth in the 18th 
chapter o f Exodus. POLLY'S HAC K RIDE 
By MRS. EMM A E. BUTLE R 
POLLY GRA Y had lived six and onehalf years without ever having enjoyed the luxury of a hack ride. 
The little shanty, merely an apology for 
a house, in which she lived with her parents, sat in a hollow on the main road in 
the village, at least fifteen feet below the 
road; and when Polly sat or stood at the 
front window up stairs, she watched with 
envy the finely dressed ladies and gentlemen riding by on their way to the big red 
brick building on the hill. 
On several occasions her secret longing 
got the best of her, and she mustered all 
the self control of which her nature boasted 
to keep from stealing a ride on behind, as 
she had seen her brothers do on the ice 
wagon, but the memory of the warm reception usually awaiting the little male Grays, 
accompanied by predictions of broken 
necks, arms, legs, etc., caused her little 
frame to shiver. 
Wh o then could say that Polly was wanting in sisterly love when she exulted in the 
fact that she was going to a funeral? 
Wha t did it matter if Ma Gray was heartbroken, and Pa Gray couldn't eat but six 
biscuits for his supper when he came home 
and found the long white fringed sash floating from the cracked door knob? 
Polly reviewed the events leading up to 
her present stage of ecstacy: Ma Gray had 
sent in hot haste for Aunt Betty Williams, 
who came with question marks stamped on 
her face, and when she found Ella, the twoyear-old pet of the family in the throes of 
death she was by far too discreet to say so 
but advised Ma Gray to put her clown. 
Polly had then become afraid and had run 
down stairs. She felt it—yes, sir—she felt 
it 'way down in her "stummik!" Something was going to happen, so when Ma 
Gray appeared at the head of the stairs 
with eyes swollen, and still a-swellin', and 
told her in a shaky voice to go to school for 
the children, she knew it had happened. 
She started off at break-neck speed but, 
undecided just as to the proper gait for one 
bearing a message of such grave importance, she walked mournfully along for a 
while, then as the vision of a hack and two 
white horses arose, she skipped and finally 
ran again until she reached the schoolhouse. 
The afternoon session had just begun, as 
she timidly knocked on the door of the 
class-room where the two elder Grays were 
"gettin' their schoolin'" ; and when the 
teacher opened the door, she beheld a very 
dirty little girl blubbering, "Ella's dead; 
Mamma's cryin'. Kin Bobby and Sally 
cum home? " 
Master Bobby and Miss Sally were dismissed with the reverence due the dignity 
of their bereavement, and on their way 
home they proceeded to extract such bits of 
information as they deemed suitable for 
the occasion: "Wer e her eyes open or shut? 
Had she turned black yet? Did Aunt Betty 
cry too? Did Mamma fall across the bed 
as the breath was leaving her body? " 
Whereupon Miss Polly, being a young lady 
of a rather keen imagination upon which 
she drew, and drew heavily in times of 
need, gave them quite a sensational version 
of the affair, and by the time they reached 
home they were fully prepared to grieve 
with a capital "G. " Sally ran to Ma Gray 
and with a shriek, threw both arms around 
her neck, while Bobby fell on his knees by 
the deceased Ella, imploring her to come 
back and be his baby sister once more. 
Aunt Betty told her next door neighbor 
afterwards that she had her hands full 
and her heart full too, trying to quiet 
them. And if the smell of fried liver and 
onions had not reminded Bobby that it was 
near dinner time, she really couldn't tell 
how she should have managed them. 
As plateful after plateful of liver, onions 
and mashed potatoes disappeared, the raging storm of grief subsided in the hearts of 
the young Grays, and by the time dinner 
was over Bobby was kept busy unpuckering 
his lips to suppress a whistle, and Sally had 
tried several bows of black ribbon on her 
hair to see which one looked best. 
After the dishes were cleared away, and 
Ma Gray was scouring the floor in a solution of concentrated lye, water and tears, 
Uncle Bangaway, a retired deacon in the 
Baptist church, stepped in to pay his respects. 
Uncle Bangaway was considered a fine 
84 POLLY'S HACK RIDE 85 
singer in his younger days and was quite 
proud of the accusation, so he proceeded to 
express his sympathy for Ma Gray in the 
words of his favorite hymn, kept in reserve for such occasions: 
"Wasn't my Lord mighty good and kind? 
O Yeah! 
"Wasn't my Lord mighty good and kind? 
O Yeah! 
"Wasn't my Lord mighty good and kind 
"T o take away the child and leave the 
mother behind? 
"O Yeah! O Yeah! O Yeah! " 
When he finished singing Ma Gray 
stopped crying to smile on him. It seemed 
that the hymn brought to her mind certain 
facts that were well worth considering. 
On the morning of the day appointed for 
the funeral, a dark cloud hung over the village when Polly awoke, and her heart sank 
within her. Oh! if it should rain! Every 
hack she had ever seen on a rainy day had 
the curtains down, and there was no use 
riding in a hack if you had to have the curtains down. Anyhow, she began to dress, 
and before she was half through the sun 
began to peep through the clouds, and finally it shone brightly; and so did Miss 
Polly's face. 
Who, then, could not pardon the cheerful 
face she brought down stairs where the 
funeral party was gathered? Dressed in a 
new black dress, new shoes, new hair ribbon, 
even new gloves, and a hack ride scheduled 
for the next two hours, was enough to make 
her very soul shine. 
She hardly heard the minister as he dwelt 
at length on the innocence of childhood; 
nor his reference to Him who suffered the 
little ones to come unto Him; but the closing strains of "Nearer My God To Thee" 
seemed to awaken her from pleasant 
dreams. 
When the funeral procession started out 
Polly felt very sad, but the tears wouldn't 
come and, of course, "you can't make 'em 
come, if you ain't got no raw onions." 
Now, it fell to her lot to sit in the hack 
with her great uncle, "Uncle Billings" Ma 
Gray called him, but Polly often wondered 
why Pa Gray spoke of him as "Uncle 
Rummy. " 
One of the many reasons for Polly's aversion to Uncle Billings was because of his 
prompt appearance before dinner every 
Sunday, when ho would call her mother's 
attention every time she, Polly, took another 
doughnut or cookie. So you may be sure 
her spirits fell when she realized the state 
of affairs. 
On the way to the cemetery neither found 
much to say to the other, but when they 
started home Uncle Billings began to lecture Polly concerning her apparent indifference to the family bereavement; during 
which discourse Polly sat without hearing 
one word, as her mind was otherwise engaged. She was trying to think of some 
manner in which to attract the attention of 
the Higdon girls as she passed the pump; 
she knew they would be there. 
Before her plans were matured, however, 
the red bonnet of Cecje Higdon loomed up 
at the corner, and standing right behind 
her were Bessie and Georgia Higdon and 
Lucy Matthews. 
Now was her chance! Now or never! So 
she sprang from her seat, leaned far out 
of the window, and gave one loud "Whee! " 
to the girls, waving her black-bordered 
handkerchief meanwhile. 
Uncle Billings had just dropped off in a 
doze, and Polly's whoop brought him out of 
it so suddenly that he could find nothing 
more appropriate to say than, "Hush your 
noise, gal! " when with a sudden jerk the 
hack stopped and they were home. 
As Polly alighted from the hack, she began to realize how, as a mourner, she had 
lowered her dignity by yelling from the 
window like a joy-rider, and she was not a 
little uneasy as to how Ma Gray would consider the matter should old Rummy inform 
her. So during supper she cautiously 
avoided meeting his eye, and as soon as she 
had finished eating she ran upstairs to 
change her clothes. 
Here her mother found her later, with her 
head resting on the open Bible, and when 
she tried to awaken her she said, "Yes'm, 
just tell him not to drive quite so fast." 86 THE CRISIS 
SONG OF THE AMERICAN DOVE 
(Written after reading "Song of the American Eagle." ) 
By LUCIA N B. WATKIN S 
I BUILD my nest not on the crest 
Of the mountain-throne, but in the 
breast— 
The sheltering arm of the forest warm, 
Where my dovelets swing 'mid the maddest 
storm: 
Here I see and sigh! 'neath the grieving 
sky, 
Lo, a race is hung on the trees to die! 
A-wing I go, and the land below 
Is riot-red with a cruel woe ; 
For the hand of Hate, at a furious rate, 
Is sowing the seeds of a terrible fate; 
And each venomous seed is the prejudice 
weed 
That buds and blooms with a murderous 
deed! 
Oh, I love the land of Justice grand, 
Where men are free, heart, head and hand; 
Where the smile and nod of the greening 
sod 
Ar e bright and glad with the gift of God: 
Where over the plains and the mountains 
reigns 
The flag that frees each soul from chains! 
"Land of the free," whose flag I see! 
Wha t boots thy boast of Liberty? 
Wha t avails thy might, while in thy sight 
A race is robbed of its dearest right? 
Hark! I hear the yell of the hounds of 
hell— 
Thy sons obsessed with the lynching spell! 
How I long to see thy Liberty 
With e'en thy lowliest subject free; 
With none denied or crushed in pride, 
But souls ascending side by side; 
Thy streaming Stars and bleeding Bars 
Thus mean a victory more than war's! 
"Let freedom ring!"—'tis well to sing, 
But let it from the mountains bring— 
Not only to the fortunate few— 
Its peace to all 'neath the "Red, White and 
Blue! " 
Ah ! I see and sign, 'neath the heavens high, 
While a race is hung on the trees to die! 
AN APOSTROPHE TO THE LYNCHED 
By LEIL A AMO S PENDLETO N 
HANG there, O my murdered brothers, 
sons of Ethiopia, our common Mother: Hang there, with faces upturned, 
mutely calling down vengeance from the 
Most High God! 
Call down vengeance upon this barbarous nation; a nation of hypocrites, timeservers and gold-worshippers; a nation of 
ranting, ramping, stamping creatures who 
call themselves evangelists and who practice the evangel of restriction and proscription; a nation of wolves who hunt in packs 
and who skulk away if caught alone; a 
nation always ready to "avenge" itself 
against the weak, but with mouth filled 
with ready excuses for not attacking the 
strong. 
Hang there until their eyes are unsealed 
and they behold themselves as they are and 
as they appear "to an amazed world! Hang 
there until their ears are opened to the 
ominous sounds of warning! Hang there 
until their foresworn souls perceive the 
true meaning of Liberty and Justice, until 
they catch a glimmer of the meaning of 
Christianity! 
Martyrs to lawlessness, bigotry prejudice, if you by dying can accomplish some 
of these things, Death will have been swallowed up in Victory. National Association for the Ad 
vancement of Colored People 
THE SEGREGATION ISSUE 
THE Supreme Court of the United States 
on April 17 restored to its docket for 
reargument before a full bench the case 
involving- the constitutionality of the Louisville, Ky., segregation ordinance which was 
argued the previous week before seven justices by Moorfield Storey, National President of the N. A. A. C. P., and Clayton B. 
Blakey, of Louisville, representing this Association. Chief Justice White gave no explanation for the decision to have the case 
reargued, but it is believed the court is 
about evenly divided on the question. 
It will probably not be reached by the full 
court until after the opening of the term 
in October, by which time it is hoped the 
nomination of Mr. Brandeis will have been 
confirmed. 
On the same day Judge Dyer in the 
United States District Court issued a temporary injunction restraining the city officials of St. Louis from enforcing the two 
segregation ordinances passed by that city 
at the special election on February 29. The 
Judge declared he would have issued a 
permanent injunction except for the fact 
that the Supreme Court has under consideration the Louisville case which will decide the fate of the Negroes in a dozen cities. 
He said that as a citizen he had voted 
against the two ordinances and that at the 
time he thought them unconstitutional; as 
a jurist he held the same opinion. 
"The Negro, " the court declared, "is entitled to the same rights as is a white man. 
And, gentlemen, it would be a shame for 
me not to administer justice to them. The 
Negro doesn't want social equality. He 
wants the same rights before the law as 
the white man and he should have them." 
Wells H. Blodgett, Isaac H. Lionberger, 
Frederick Judson, and George B. Webster 
were the attorneys for the colored people. 
The injunction restrains Mayor Kiel, the 
Board of Police Commissioners, the City 
Counselor, and other city officials from establishing the Negro ghetto. 
STILL FIGHTING THE FILM 
THE successes in two states and several 
cities won by the colored people 
against the producers of the great spectacle 
which seeks to defame them, is largely 
neutralized by the advertising which this 
opposition has given the film. But such 
incidents as this, copied from the Chicago 
American of April 24, explain how impossible it is for the branches of this Association to abandon the fight: 
"LAFAYETTE, IND., April 23.—After witnessing the picture of 'The Birth of a Nation,' Henry Brocj, who five weeks ago 
came here from Kentucky, walked out on 
the main street of the city and fired three 
bullets into the body of Edward Manson, a 
Negro high school student, fifteen years old. 
The boy died to-night. There was no provocation for the tragedy and Brocj is in 
jail under charge of murder." 
The City Council of Des Moines, Ia., after 
a splendid fight by the Branch, barred the 
production by a vote of 4 to 1 under authority of an ordinance which forbids stirring 
up race prejudice. The Gary Local succeeded for the second time in stopping the 
"Birth of a Nation" from showing; and the 
opposition has been as vigorous along the 
Rio Grande as the pursuit of Villa, and much 
more successful. Emory D. Williams, a 
member of the El Paso Branch, persuaded 
the management at Las Cruces, N. M., to 
refrain from showing the film; and the 
most objectionable features were eliminated 
when it was shown at Douglas, Ariz. Jasper B. Williams, President of the El Paso 
Branch, and U. S. Goen, formerly U. S. District Attorney, carried on a vigorous publicity campaign which was largely responsible for the successes. In Tacoma the film 
was blocked by a city ordinance won through 
the untiring efforts of Col. Albert E. Joab 
and Evan S. Stallcup, a son of the late 
Judge Stallcup, two distinguished white 
members of the National Association who 
are always to be found on the firing line in 
any struggle for human rights in the Northwest. 
Regarding the question of credit for its 
suppression in Ohio, recently raised by the 
editor of the Cleveland Gazette, the only 
credit desired by the N. A. A. C. P. is that 
of having fought the thing consistently 
wherever we have a branch from the day 
of its first production in the United States. 
We only wish we could divide honors with 
more men like Harry C. Smith. 
87 88 THE CRISIS 
THE GRAND PRIZE SCHOLARSHIP 
THE Pittsburg Branch has just announced the winner of the two hundred dollar scholarship awarded for turning in the largest net amount in Association 
memberships and CRISIS subscriptions in the 
contest last fall. Donald Jefferson, who 
was chosen from among four candidates because of his character and scholarship, is a 
Pittsburg boy of twenty, the son of William Jefferson, of 1608 Colwell street. He 
graduated from the Pittsburg High School 
in June, 1915, where he stood equally high 
in his class and on the athletic field, having 
won his letter in track and baseball as well 
as making half-back on an all-star football 
team. At present he is employed in one of 
the local drug stores. The scholarship will 
enable him to carry out his ambition to 
study chemistry, and is good for the year 
1916-17 in any American institution for 
higher education to which the candidate is 
eligible. 
THE CLEVELAND CONFERENCE 
THE first District Conference to be held 
by branches of the National Association will occupy four sessions on May 30 
and 31, in Cleveland, O. Delegates from 
the Pittsburg, Columbus, Detroit, Toledo, 
Buffalo, Dayton, and Springfield Branches 
will participate in the following program 
which has been arranged by a committee of 
the Cleveland Branch headed by F. E. 
Young : 
At the afternoon session, May 30, a symposium will be held on Community Problems 
and on Women's Responsibility in Building 
up the N. A. A. C. P.; at the evening session the Mayor will welcome the delegates, 
and Judge E. J. Hart, delegates, and the 
president of the Cleveland Branch will 
speak. The afternoon session on May 31 
wall be given over to a discussion of The 
Negro's Opportunity in the Industrial 
Fields of the North, and to Efficiency of 
Branches; Governor Willis, of Ohio, and a 
representative of the National Office will 
address the final session. 
The idea of this conference is one that 
should appeal to all branches. Distance 
makes it impossible for many to send delegates to the annual meeting of the Association ; the number of branches and locals 
is becoming so great that it is equally difficult for National Headquarters to keep in 
personal touch with the sixty-five smaller 
units. It is therefore proposed that the 
DONAL D JEFFERSO N 
N. A. A. C. P. organize in ten district 
groups, each to hold an annual conference 
during the first fifteen days of November 
under the auspices of some central branch. 
The following districts are suggested tentatively: 
District I: Boston, Providence, New 
York, Newark, East Orange, Trenton, Philadelphia. 
District II: Washington, Howard University, Baltimore, Lincoln University, Virginia Union University, Harrisburg, Baltimore County Local, York, Pa., Local, and 
Wilmington. 
District III: Pittsburg, Cleveland, Detroit, Columbus, Toledo, Springfield, Ohio, 
Dayton, Buffalo. 
District IV : Louisville, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Terra Haute, Vincennes, Indiana, 
and Evansville, Ind. 
District V : Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul, 
Minneapolis, Gary, Ind., Galesburg, Peoria, 
Champaign, Decatur, and Danville. 
District VI : St. Louis, East St. Louis, 
Alton, Springfield, Ill., Jacksonville, Ill., 
Quincy, Carbondale, Cairo, and Mounds 
Local. 
District VII: Kansas City, Mo., Kansas 
City, Kans., St. Joseph, Topeka, Des Moines, 
Muskogee, and Denver. N. A. A. C. P. 89 
District VIII: New Orleans, Shreveport, 
Key West Local. 
District IX : Los Angeles, Northern California, Albuquerque, and El Paso. 
District X : Portland, Seattle, Tacoma, and 
Walla Walla. 
APRIL GAINS 
ANOTHE R ease of Civil Service discrimination has been won by the Washington, D. C , Branch in securing the appointment of a colored girl who stood highest on the list, but who had been repeatedly 
passed over until within two weeks of the 
expiration of her eligibility. 
The treatment of Mrs. H. E. Plunkett by 
the New England Sanatorium indicates that 
there is amply need for this Association 
even in the home of the Abolitionists. Mrs. 
Plunkett and her husband arranged over 
the telephone for her confinement at the 
Stoneham institution. Their carriage called 
and set her down at the door about 8.30 in 
the evening. Soon after, a nurse came into 
the waiting room. 
"Oh, you are colored, aren't you? " she 
asked. 
"Obviously," Mrs. Plunkett replied. 
The patient waited nearly an hour, then 
Dr. Cross came in. 
"Wh y didn't you tell me you were colored? I would have saved you the trouble 
of coming here. It would make no difference if you had money to pay for a room. " 
Mrs. Plunkett asked that she be sent home 
at once, but was told that the team had been 
put up for the night. She was shown to a 
bed in the maternity ward, a screen was 
placed about it to shield the other patients 
from contamination, and she was given permission to sleep. No night dress was offered her. 
"The hospital had none, and of course 
none of the patients would loan one to a 
colored woman, " Dr. Bliss testified later. 
Twelve hours of tears and agony intervened between her arrival and the time 
when she went, unassisted, to the carriage 
that bore her home, resolved to die with 
her unborn rather than risk such humiliation again at the gentle hands of organized charity. 
A t the meeting of protest which was immediately organized by Mrs. Butler R. Wilson of the Boston Branch, the head of the 
institution rose and disavowed the acts of 
his assistants; but it is a pleasure to record 
that the town of Stoneham is suing the hospital for the taxes from which it was exempted when it pretended to come within 
the definition of a "charitable institution." 
Boston, too, has been making a strong appeal to have colored girls admitted to the 
department stores as saleswomen; two 
thousand replies from patrons of the stores 
received by the Branch indicate clearly that 
prejudice against colored clerks is imaginary rather than real; the general Boston 
public is entirely willing to be served by anyone who is efficient. Along the same line, 
the Cleveland Branch is making an effort 
to open more places to colored men in industry, and report that several large factories in Cleveland and neighboring towns 
are beginning to employ colored labor in 
large numbers. 
MEETINGS 
MISS KATHRY N JOHNSON, Field 
Agent for the N. A. A. C. P., has 
been carrying the faith of the new abolitionism into darkest Louisiana during April. 
As evidence of just how dark the situation 
is, she calls attention to an eight column 
heading in the Shreveport Times: "Every 
loyal Democrat's ballot is needed to administer a crushing defeat to the first attempt 
in twenty years to Republicanize Louisiana 
and destroy white supremacy here," which 
is to be read along with the inscription 
over a choice collection of guns in the vestibule of a local museum: "These are the 
guns with which we maintained white supremacy at the polls in Louisiana." 
After affecting a reorganization of the 
Shreveport Branch, Miss Johnson plunged 
into the ten days' campaign for five hundred members which New Orleans is carrying on as we go to press. The sixty members of the Branch organized in five teams 
which report daily at the Y. M. C. A. Our 
latest word is a telegram requesting several 
thousand more membership blanks, so we 
trust the hosts are rallying. 
A meeting was held on April 28 to discuss 
initial steps for organizing a New York 
Branch. Charles H. Studin, of the Board 
of Directors, presided, and the meeting was 
addressed by Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, Mary 
White Ovington, and Mrs. Butler R. Wilson of Boston. A committee of thirty appointed at that meeting are at work upon 
the details of organization. 
Mrs. Wilson and Archibald H. Grimke, 
President of the Washington Branch, addressed practically the entire student body 90 THE CRISIS 
and faculty of Lincoln University on the 
evening- of May 1, the beginning of commencement week. Mr. Grimke spoke on 
"Negro Ideals and Aspirations," and Mrs. 
Wilson on the N. A. A. C. P. The latter 
addressed the One Hundredth General Conference of the A. M. E. Church in Philadelphia on May 4, and the night previous 
raised a generous contribution for the 
Louisville segregation ease at a meeting arranged by the Newark, N. J., Branch. 
Through the courtesy of Rev. Percy 
Grant, the Public Forum of the Church of 
the Ascension, New York, was turned over 
to the N. A. A. C. P. on Sunday evening, 
May 7. "Race Discrimination and How to 
Combat It" was the general topic, Dr. Du 
Bois speaking on the National Problem, Miss 
Mary White Ovington on the Position of 
the Negro in New York, and Mrs. Butler 
Wilson on the Work of the National Association. 
In an address before the New England 
Dry Goods Association at the City Club in 
Boston on April 18, Moorfield Storey, National President of the Association, said that 
color prejudice was doing more to prevent 
the advancement of the race than all the 
efforts of education and social work in the 
other direction. 
"Yo u cannot plant in the community a 
body of men who feel that they have been 
injured without in the end paying for it, as 
Massachusetts and Boston are now paying 
for the prejudices which were held a few 
decades ago against the Irish, by the class 
government which the latter wield." 
Musicales, too, have been part of the 
month's branch activities. Baltimore netted 
seventy-five dollars on a concert given by the 
Williams Colored Singers; and Cleveland 
presented Misses Pinckney and Nickerson 
and Mr. Allen, from the Oberlin Conservatory of Music, in a recital on May 3. The 
latter branch also held an enthusiastic mass 
meeting early in April which was addressed 
by Major John R. Lynch. 
JUVENILE DEPARTMENT 
THE second annual event given by the 
Junior League of the District of Columbia Branch took the form of a play 
which was written by Miss Hallie E. Queen. 
The children of the Junior League who 
so creditably enacted the parts in the drama 
are deserving of all praise. The speeches 
which the author put into the mouths of 
her characters as she developed the action 
of the play were stimulants to thought on 
the part of the young people. 
There have been many requests for a repetition of the play, and it is heartily recommended for production by the branches 
everywhere. 
THE WASHER-WOMAN 
By OTTO L. BOHANA N 
A great swart cheek and the gleam 
of tears, 
The flutter of hopes and the shadow 
of fears, 
An d all day long the rub and scrub 
With only a breath betwixt tub and 
tub. 
Fool! Thou hast toiled for fifty years 
An d what hast thou now but thy 
dusty tears? 
In silence she rubbed . . . But her 
face I had seen, 
Wher e the light o f her soul fell shining and clean. THE GEORGIA ODD FELLOWS 91 
The Georgia Odd 
Fellows 
1. A STATEMENT FROM BENJAMIN J. DAVIS. 
BAC K of all the Odd Fellow troubles in 
Georgia is the desire of Grand Master 
Morris to perpetuate himself in office. A 
secondary factor is the customary attitude 
of certain members of our race toward 
others who have succeeded in getting visible 
results. 
When Edward H. Morris was made Grand 
Master at Baltimore in 1910 it was by 
means of the representatives from Georgia. 
J. C. Asbury, who was the defeated candidate then, left the Order and attempted to 
organize a separate Order of Odd Fellows. 
Morris made a sacred pledge that he wanted 
the office for only two years because he was 
going abroad and desired to enjoy the privileges which his rank would give; that when 
the Biennial Movable Committee should 
meet in Atlanta two years hence he would 
not be a candidate for office, but would use 
his efforts to elect B. J. Davis. Morris 
broke his word in Atlanta by refusing to 
enter into the election and adjourning the 
meeting, keeping himself in office. Because 
under the law he was ineligible to succeed 
himself, in Boston he had the law of succession repealed. Knowing that at Washington this year Georgia's representation 
would be large enough to prevent the continuance of these tactics he conspired to 
place back into the Order an expelled member, A. Graves, who brought certain socalled charges against the District Grand 
Lodge officers. These charges alleged gross 
mismanagement of the Order's business, insubordination and contempt of the SubCommittee of Management, and oppression 
of the women members of the Order. The 
evidence at the trial showed, instead of 
mismanagement, the growth of the Order 
in Georgia in ten years from near bankruptcy to nearly three-quarters of a million 
in assets, and under the same management; 
of no order or decree of the Sub-Committee 
having ever been violated; of the salvation 
of the Household of Ruth from bankruptcy 
by taking over their Endowment Department and putting it on a business basis. We 
were found guilty—of what no one knows— 
and Ingram, District Grand Master, and 
Davis, District Grand Secretary, were susGRAN D MASTE R E. H. MORRI S 
pended for one year, while the charter of 
the State Organization was revoked. No 
provision was made to carry on the business 
of the Order, which has cash collections 
of nearly twenty thousand dollars a month, 
and with assets of nearly seven hundred 
and fifty thousand dollars. At one stroke 
all form of organization was wiped out, the 
charter revoked, the active officers removed 
and no provision made for either reorganizing the Order, or the placing of any one 
in charge. To prevent dissipation and loss 
the State Courts were invoked and receivers 
requested for the Order's affairs. The 
Court appointed the same officers elected in 
August as receivers. 
To strike down a man who stood in the 
way of his ambition, Edward H. Morris 
has endeavored to destroy the wealthiest 
Negro concern in the world, to stop its 
growth and dissipate its accumulations. I 
do not claim all the credit for what the Odd 
Fellows of Georgia have done, but at least I 
conceived the idea, furnished the plans and 
the inspiration, and actually did by day and 
night much of the hard work. Visible success is distasteful to some of our people, 
and so I have made enemies. I am fighting 
the Sub-Committee decrees, not for my selfish interest, but to preserve to the race the 92 THE CRISIS 
accumulations of these years, to disprove 
the theory that the race can create but cannot preserve. I am right, and though I go 
down in defeat it will not conquer my soul 
or weaken my will. I should begin all over 
anew and do it all over again, for what I 
have done I still can do. 
2. A STATEMENT FROM THE GRAND MASTER. 
THE highest executive and judicial authority in the Grand United Order 
of Odd Fellows in America is the SubCommittee of Management. In this body 
is vested the power to establish, regulate 
and control all other branches and members of the order. 
The enactments of the Biennial Movable 
Committee, the highest legislative branch 
in the order, may be declared unconstitutional, void or inoperative by the SubCommittee, subject in this regard only to 
review by the Committee of Management. 
Every branch of the order, and there are 
more than forty thousand, owes its existence 
and right to be classed as one of the links 
in the chain of Friendship, Love and 
Truth to either the Committee or Sub-Committee, and in many instances to both. 
The Sub-Committee consists of nine members, viz : A Master, Deputy, Treasurer, 
one Secretary and five Directors, chosen 
every two years by various delegates from 
lodges in the Biennial Movable Committee 
assembled. 
Whoever is of the order and desires to 
remain one of its vast army, now more than 
three million (over half a million in the 
United States), must bow in obedience to 
the law of the order; not the law as he 
thinks it is or ought to be, but the law as 
defined, construed, interpreted and declared by the Sub-Committee. 
In addition to the inherent powers of the 
Sub-Committee it is expressly provided by 
one of the written laws enacted by a Biennial Movable Committee that "the SubCommittee of Management shall have original jurisdiction to punish any lodge, District Grand Lodge, or member thereof for 
any failure, neglect or refusal to obey any 
order, mandate, ruling, decision or judgment, of the Sub-Committee of Management." 
At one of the regular meetings of the 
Sub-Committee it ordered and directed the 
District Grand Lodge of Georgia and the 
officials thereof to do certain things, and to 
refrain from doing certain others in relation to the Endowment Department of the 
Household of Ruth, the female branch of 
the order. 
Complaint was made to the Sub-Committee by various members in Georgia that its 
orders were not being obeyed, and thereupon a rule was entered against all parties 
concerned to show cause why they and each 
of them should not be adjudged guilty of 
contempt of the Sub-Committee. 
After a full and complete hearing by the 
entire Sub-Committee, all parties being 
present in person and by counsel, two of the 
defendants were found guilty and declared 
suspended for one year. The other defendants were acquitted. 
The strength and glory of the Grand 
United Order of Odd Fellows is its universality and oneness; an Odd Fellow in New 
York, California, Africa, Cuba or Great 
Britain is not a New Yor k Odd Fellow, a 
California Odd Fellow, an Odd Fellow of 
Africa, Cuba or Great Britain, but an Odd 
Fellow. It is this that makes the order 
worth the while. The Sub-Committee is 
the tie that binds the link that holds them 
all together. 
The loss of two men or two hundred men, 
no matter who they are or what places 
they have held, can make no vacancy in the 
ranks of the order or cause more than passing notice. The order marches on and on, 
and speeds the going of all who do not 
obey. 
He who would lead must know how to 
follow. He who would teach must know 
how to obey. 
B. J. DAVIS Curtains of Gloom 
TW O BOYS 
TIME moves rapidly after the days of 
•* kilts and "Buster Brown" suits. Theodore and Marion spent the first years of 
their lives on the campus of Fisk University, 
in Nashville, Tenn. White and colored were 
so mixed there that they had never heard 
of distinctions till we moved to Louisville, 
Ky., in their fifth and seventh years—they 
to enter the public schools and I to teach 
in the high schools. Not long afterwards 
they came home from school one day greatly 
puzzled. 
"Papa, are we colored folk? " They were 
seeing their first street fights between the 
white and colored children, and they were 
hearing things about colored folk. 
Later on there was more definite teaching 
about prayer. "Papa, do you mean I have 
to pray for white boys, too? " That was 
Theodore. He could not see why he should 
pray for boys who called him "nigger " and 
threw rocks at him. 
When they came to the eighth grade my 
little colored boys were no longer in existence except in feature and color. In 
thought, action, purpose and ambition they 
had become white boys. All the books they 
read were about white boys—fine boys, too. 
All the girls they read about had blue eyes, 
golden hair and rosebud lips. All the history they studied never told anything worth 
remembering and calculated to inspire except about white people. The only pictures 
of colored children they saw were the "Gold 
Dust Twins, " and all that kind of fine art 
which those artists so love to hold up in 
ridicule. They are not to be blamed, of 
course, for they never saw any colored children whose young faces showed character 
and bright hopes for all the blessed conditions of life. So my boys of their own accord in mind and thought were white. The 
week before Thanksgiving Day Theodore's 
teacher assigned for the subject of his essay 
to be brought in The Manners and Customs 
of Our Forefathers. When he had written 
all he knew, he came to me with this re-, 
quest: "Papa, will you give me some points 
about the manners and customs of our forefathers?" "Certainly, son; our forefathers 
in summer time went bare-footed, worked 
the plantations, wore copperas pants, and 
our mothers wore bandannas around their 
heads." I can hear still the snort of disgust which cut short my enumeration of 
valuable points. "Yo u know that I mean 
our Pilgrim Fathers." Yes, I knew. I 
knew that my boys, in character, intelligence, hopes, and in all commendable boyhood things were white except in the privilege to make the most of themselves without having to fight proscription every inch 
of the way in life. 
At last they came into the high school 
and began to talk college, and the days were 
but few till I saw them off on the train for 
college, with all their gay life and hopes 
for the future. For years it had been just 
we three, and the days that followed were 
lonely ones for me. 
But I looked four years ahead to the 
commencement season of 1916, hoping to 
get my boys back with finished education 
and consequent college culture. 
Last spring I brought Theodore home and 
was told that he was in the incipient stage 
of tuberculosis. The blow was so staggering it well nigh benumbed my senses, but 
for a while I was reassured, so rapidly did 
he respond to the heroic measures taken. 
But in the early fall he began losing ground, 
and by November I was told that his only 
hope lay in getting in a good tubercular 
sanatorium in a favorable climate. Denver 
was recommended. I found upon inquiry 
that all the sanatoriums of Denver closed 
their doors against colored people. Saranac, New York, was tried in vain. Through 
a friend, Colorado Springs was canvassed 
and no reply of any kind seemed forthcoming. I wrote the head physician of the 
Denver City Hospital to rent a private 
ward. "No, " came my telegram. In utter 
despair, December 11, I sent my boy to Dr. 
Westbrook to get him in a colored family 
for such benefit as could be had under such 
a situation in a favorable climate. After 
he was gone word came from a friend in 
Colorado Springs saying St. Francis, a 
Catholic hospital, would take my son. 
A t the end of the first week in January, 
1916, a telegram came telling me my boy 
had come near to death in a violent hemor93 94 THE CRISIS 
rhage. I went on to him as fast as steam 
could take me. He rallied, and at this date 
is about and doing well. After an examination by one of Denver's tubercular experts 
I was told that to take the boy back to 
Kentucky would mean certain death, but 
that if I should take my son down into New 
Mexico or Arizona, there would still be 
some hope of recovery. I wrote Dr. Shortle's sanatorium at Albuquerque, N. M., St. 
Vincent, the Catholic sanatorium at Santa 
Fe, N. M., and the Tucson, Ariz., sanatorium. From Albuquerque came the set reply, 
"W e do not take colored patients." No reply has come from Tucson. From St. Vincent, the Catholic sanatorium at Santa Fe, 
"W e will take your son; the rates are 
eighty dollar's per month." God bless St. 
Francis, St. Vincent, and the Catholics forevermore. In our sorrowful quest—in the 
unspeakable agony and heartbreak of it all, 
hunting for a place where my boy, smitten 
with death, might make a last stand and 
have the pitiful chance to make a fight for 
his life, we brought along with us the culture of Fisk University, Hartford Seminary, 
the University of Indiana, but we had to 
bring along also the fact that we are colored, and no matter what else we had, nor 
how grievously a boy on the threshhold of 
useful and most promising manhood was 
smitten, that "colored" was enough to put 
us with all except the Catholics beyond the 
pale of a common humanity. A black bear, 
a hound dog, a chimpanzee are creatures 
also that suffer and die with tuberculosis. 
Had these applied at these sanatoriums 
could they have been more ruthlessly and 
with less compunction shut out? Santa Fe 
is secured, but the boy is suffering from the 
altitude of Denver, and Santa Fe is higher 
than Denver; but after a week or ten days 
more we must move on from Denver southward, still hunting a suitable place. The 
expense is enormous. My salary is all I 
have with which to support my boy, and 
that stops all the time I am away on leave 
of absence; but I cannot take him back to 
Louisville and I will not leave him without 
being provided with the care and security 
of sanatorium provisions. I will fight to 
the last ditch, and, if I must, go clear down 
to the gates with him, that being the eternal limit set as the distance one mortal may 
go with another. I am rushing through my 
new book of poems. If you will take a copy 
to help us, send $1.50 to Mr. W. L. Evans, 
920 West Chestnut, Louisville, Ky. In my 
absence he has the publication in charge. 
With me now it is my hour of the greatest 
heartache and the greatest need I ever 
knew. Any friend who will take a copy of 
the book and be enough of a book agent to 
pass this to another may help to give me 
victory for my boy's life. 
G. M. MCCLELLAN. 
m 
PROGRESSIVE OKLAHOMA 
THE Bristow Record and the Bristow Enterprise, two white weekly newspapers published at Bristow, Okla., both 
featured on the front page a story of a 
Negro committing the crime of burglary 
on Monday, April 24, and both told of the 
severe punishment dished out to the colored 
man who had stolen from white men. 
On the same day, April 24, at Bristow, 
a fiendish white man criminally assaulted a 
thirteen year old colored girl and was arrested and afterwards released on a straw 
bond approved by the same justice of the 
peace who so severely punished the colored 
man for stealing, but neither of these white 
papers published a single line about the 
white man who committed the crime of 
rape! This is adding insult to injury. It 
manifests a spirit of unfairness which lurks 
only in the hearts of beastly moral cowards. 
No really good citizen who respects the law 
and loves the sanctuary of his own home 
would condone by silence the unspeakable 
crime against woman. And for two newspapers in a town where such crime is committed to refuse to publish it because the 
criminal is a white man and the victim a colored girl, renders the crime the more appalling because it bespeaks a dangerous social condition. The colored people of Bristow have proved themselves law-abiding, 
peace-loving- citizens. They have appealed 
to the law but, so far, in vain. This puts it 
squarely up to all race-loving colored men 
in Bristow to take the protection of their 
wives and daughters, sisters and mothers in 
their own hands and defend them against 
the fiendish, unscrupulous white hell-hounds 
who are permitted to commit all manner of 
crime against them. 
If the criminal in such case should happen 
to be a colored man, both the Record and 
the Enterprise would work overtime to get 
out a special edition, or a full front page 
write-up, picturing the antics of the "fiendish black brute" and the angelic virtue of his CURTAINS OF GLOOM 95 
victim. But in this case they are as silent 
as a tombstone. 
No self-respecting colored man or woman 
should subscribe for such narrow, prejudiced 
and unfair papers as these. 
Law and order demands that J. R. Middleton, the white rapist of little Emma 
Charles, a thirteen year old colored girl of 
Bristow, and the would-be mob-murderer of 
Daniel Sea, grandfather of the girl who 
caught him in the act, be punished, and by 
the eternal gods, if there is any justice in 
Oklahoma, he must be. The Star will not 
rest until this crime has been avenged!— 
Tulsa, Okla., Star. 
In Checotah, Okla., about two years ago, 
a white woman returned home one evening, 
very much bruised and injured. She stated 
to her husband and friends that a "big, 
burly Negro had mistreated her." The 
writer was in the town when this happened. Immediately the bloodhounds were 
brought down from Eufaula, the county 
seat, and next day a strange Negro, whom 
no one seemed to know, was lodged in jail 
and identified by the assaulted woman. 
Later on in the day another white lady appeared at the sheriff's office and convincingly explained that on the night previous 
she had caught this woman, who said she 
had been assaulted and who had even identified her assaulter, with her husband and 
said she: "I put every bruise and mark on 
her myself." The strange Negro, who just 
happened to be bumming through the community, was turned loose. Everything 
quieted down, but not until almost every 
one of the humble homes of black folk of 
that town had been turned upside down in 
search for a criminal who never existed, except in the heart of a woman who would 
destroy a human being for pride and a good 
name. No, that town was not quiet until a 
gang of hoodlums had been dispersed who 
had gathered together to lynch an innocent 
black man. 
Last year a poor little black-skinned, nineyear-old girl told a pitiful story of how she 
had been enticed into a back room of a 
white shoe maker on his pretense of sending clothes to her mother to be washed. The 
poor little girl bore unmistakable marks of 
this brute having carried out his fiendish 
intentions—but he was white! and she was 
black—and even though this heinous crime 
was brought to the attention of the authorities, nobody suffered but the poor little 
black-skinned daughter of a washerwoman. 
Truly, the evil thoughts that fell from the 
lips of Chief Justice Taney years ago live 
today and the Negro has no rights that the 
white man will respect. Could any Negro 
be blamed for trying to shield that poor, 
helpless, penniless member of the race at 
Checotah who, but for the frankness and 
honesty of an enraged wife, would have 
been lynched? 
Does anyone feel that the scales are ever 
very evenly balanced when the law will wink 
at white men for the same offense for which 
white hoodlums "best citizens" instantly feel 
that they must destroy unconvicted and 
sometimes innocent black folk?—Black Dispatch, Oklahoma City, Okla. 
MISCELLANEOU S 
BENSON, one of the few post offices in 
- the United States under the management of Negroes, is to go dead June 30, and 
a rural route, with a white man carrier to 
be substituted in its place. Benson was 
founded and named for a Negro, William E. 
Benson, the leading citizen of a community 
of one thousand prosperous Negroes. The 
post office has been doing good work for 
years, and the present Democratic administration inconveniences these Negroes very 
much by this change. 
Miss Malvenia Chandler graduated from 
Minneapolis South High School recently. 
In a class of one hundred and twenty-seven 
she finished with the first three receiving 
honorable mention. In appreciation of her 
scholarly attainments the superintendent of 
the school had an opportunity of recommending a student to one of the largest 
milling establishments in the Northwest for 
a position of stenographer. Without hesitating he recommended her, adding that 
though she was colored, for ability she outranked any of the other members in her 
class. The manager of the concern promptly 
replied, while appreciating her qualifications, he could not give her the position on 
account of her color; adding not that he 
cared, but that on account of the other 
employers. Aside from being a brilliant 
student. Miss Chandler is an accomplished 
pianist of an amiable disposition and an 
obedient daughter. OUR BRAV E POLICEME N 
"Afte r a terrific struggle the burly Negr o was finally subdued. ' 
96 THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 97 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
STOC K 
Constitutes the most popular investment today 
Because 
It has the three important elements of a good investment 
Safety Convertibility Profit 
I And more, no financial organization stands higher before the public than the 
| Standard Life Insurance Company. It has the hearty endorsement of Insurance 
j Commissioners, of prominent insurance men and officials, of leading financial and 
j insurance journals and papers—North, East, South and West. The stockholders 
| (35 0 in number) are among the most careful, successful, trustworthy professional 
| and business men and banking institutions of the race. 
I Life insurance is a rich business. It pays handsome dividends and pays them 
I often. It is an all-year-round' business. No dull months. No form of investment 
I has proven more safe and profitable than the shares of stock in an Old-Line Legal 
j Reserve Life Insurance Company. All companies that have been carefully man-
| aged have paid large returns to stockholders. 
| The Standard Life Insurance Company has had a healthy growth, and a low 
j mortality since commencing business in 1913. With a held practically to our-
! selves and practically limitless, the stock is sure to increase rapidly in value and 
I to pay large dividends. The company is now on the eve of being on a dividend1 paying basis. 
I At the rate that subscriptions for this stock have been coming in, the entire 
I issue will be placed within thirty days. 
1 Yo u may secure this stock— 
1. By paying cash $200.00 a share. 2. By giving First Mortgage on Real 
i Estate for 5 years. 3. By paying 20 per cent cash ($40.00), and balance 20 per 
! cent ($40.00) in three, six, nine and twelve months. 4. By a small first payment 
I of $8.00 and $8.00 monthly payments. 
1 This is worthy of your consideration. 
I STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
1
 1 HEMA N E. PERR Y President 
I desire to purchase A. L. LEWI S Florida Vice President 
r
 I THOS. H. HAYES , Tennessee. Vice President 
shares under option No 1 R. L. ISAACS, Texas Vice President 
c t f l EMMET T J. SCOTT, Alabama.. . Vice Pres. 
above. I enclose first payment of HARR Y H. PACE Secretary-Treasurer 
$ herewith. Please H. C. DUGA S Asst. Secretary 
C. C. CATER, M.D Medical Director 
forward all papers necessary to WM > H WM. H. KIN G Director of Agencies 
complete the subscription. | J. C. NAPIER, Nashville, 
I Chairman Advisory Board 
Full Name I 
Address I 
HOME OFFICE: 
20 0 AUBUR N AVENU E 
Cit y an d Stat e
 ATLANT A GEORGI A 
(C , June, 1916) 
Mentio n T h e C risis 98 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National President 
MOORFIEL D STOREY , Boston 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN , New York 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR. W . E. B. D U BOIS . New York 
Vice-Presidents 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , New York 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLMES , New York 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAND , Ne w York 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMKE . Washington 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON . Brooklyn 
REV . G. R. WALLER , Springfield, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Treasurer 
RO Y NAS H 
Acting Secretary 
ADDITIONA L MEMBER S OF TH E BOAR D OF DIRECTOR S 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
Boston 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONE S 
DR. O. M. WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N Philadelphia 
Baltimor e Dr. WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T Washington 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O PROF. GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCH1N S C. BISHO P 
REV . W . H. BROOK S 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR. TOHN G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
SEGREGATIO N passed during the last two months in St. 
Louis, Dallas, and Oklahoma City. Unless yo u believe in 
Negr o ghettos, help us to fight this issue through the courts 
by joining the N. A. A. C. P. W e need 1,00 0 mor e $5 memberships right now. 
Sustaining Members pay $25.0 0 per year 
Contributing Members . $2.00—$10.0 0 per year 
Associate Members $1.0 0 per year 
Th e Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying 
two dollars or more. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
Date , 1916. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 99 
TAKE N FRO M NEALE' S Lis t 
"The Nealc Publishing Company possesses a rare reputation for its 
standard series of works on American history."—Toronto Mail and Empire. 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; at present Major in United States 
Army. Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
The Negro Races: Second Volume of the 
Series, Containing a Full Account of the 
Slave Trade. By Jerome Dowd , white; 
Professor of Sociology and Economics, University of Oklahoma. The price of each 
volume of the series is $2.50 net; by mail, 
$2.65. 
Haiti: He r History and He r Detractors. 
By J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. 
Tw o editions; one in English and the other 
in French. Each edition $3.20 by mail. 
The Monroe Doctrine in Its Relation to the 
Republic of Haiti. By William A. MacCorkle, LL.D., white; author of "The White 
Sulphur Springs," published by this house, 
and other books. $1.00 by mail. 
Negro Tales. By Joseph S. Cotter, colored; 
Principal of one of the largest schools for 
Negroes in the South. Something new in 
literature. $1.00 by mail. 
The Political History of Slavery in the 
United States. By the late James Z. 
George, white; formerly Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court of Mississippi; later 
United States Senator. Introduction by 
John Bassett Moore , Professor of International Law and Diplomacy, Columbia University. Edited by William Hayne Leavell, 
United States Minister to Guatemala, who 
supplies a sketch of Senator George. A 
comprehensive survey of the political history of slavery in this country. $3.25 by 
mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D.D., 
K. C, colored; with an introduction by 
Adna B. Leonard, D.D., LL.D. $1.60 by 
mail. 
Th e Seed That Wa s Sown in the Colony of 
Georgia. By Charles Spaulding Wylly, 
white. "N o one," says the Knoxville Sentinel, "has better understood the institution 
of slavery, its mission, and its defects," than 
Colonel Wylly. $1.3 5 by mail. 
Rac e Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and 
Professor of Mathematics, Howard University. Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. Dean 
Miller's latest book, "Out of the House of 
Bondage, " which is also published by this 
company, has already reached a large sale. 
$1.65 by mail. 
Order through 
TH E NEAL E PUBLISHIN G CO. , 44- Fourth Avenue new York City 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and Young 
Women, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
Chief Characteristics of the Southern 
Negro. By E. H. Randle, A.M., LL.D., 
white; Dr. Randle discusses the changes 
wrought in the Negro character by the conditions of his freedom, the specialized education that the Negro requires, the Negro 
as a wage earner, his social qualities, the 
effect of the elective franchise, and many 
other matters. $1.00 by mail. 
The Key ; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. $1.00 by mail. 
Race Orthodoxy in the South. By Thomas 
Pearce Bailey, white; formerly Professor in 
the Universities of California, Chicago, and 
Mississippi, and now a Professor in the 
University of the South. $2.15 by mail. 
Redder Blood. By William M. Ashby, colored. One of the few novels of the Negro 
by a Negro to be published in this country. 
Mr. Ashby is a Yale man. $1.00 by mail. 
The Voic e of Mizriam. By John Walter 
Paisley, colored. This volume of poems, by 
a teacher of literature, deserves a place in 
the rapidly increasing library of American 
Negro poets, to which Dunbar, Corrothers, 
Braithwaite, and others have made valuable 
additions in recent years. $1.2 5 by mail. 
My Ogowe . By Robert Hamill Nassau, 
M.D., S.T.D., white; for forty-five years a 
resident of Africa; pioneer and explorer; 
scientist and man of letters. The work of a 
lifetime; 700 octavo pages of text with 50 
full-page illustrations. $3.25 by mail. Dr. 
Nassau's book entitled "In an Elephant 
Corral" is also published by this house. 
$1.00 by mail. 
The New Negro ; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit.D., 
colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
easily among the foremost men of his race. 
$1.60 by mail. 
Or TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth avenue New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S 100 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
18 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY a ATLANTA. GA. 
TH E CURSE OF RAC E PREJUDICE 
By James F. Morion, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Ten poems by 
Effie T. BATTLE, A.M. 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRICE 25 CENTS. 
ADDRESS: OKOLONA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTIO N 
By T. G. STEWARD 
A book of 300 pases, beautifully Illustrated. 
Tells the story of the birth of the Black Republic. 
$1.2 5 NE T 
"No one can read this book without a greater love of freedom."—Kansas City Sun. 
"No more interesting book has been written "— Army and 
Navy Register. 
"Picturesque story."—Boston Transcript. 
"In a word the book is excellent."—Louisville News. 
"Should be read by every colored man and woman in America."—Chicago Defender. 
"Wonderful book. "—Amsterdam News. 
"Temperate, comprehensive, instructive."—Columbus Evening 
Despatch 
ORDER FROM THE AUTHOR 
T . G . STEWARD , WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Or from THE CRISIS. 70 Fifth Ave., New York. 
Colored People's Progress 
A new race history, soon to be placed on 
the market at $1.50; an inspiring volume, 
showing the wonderful advancement of the 
Colored Americans, reads like magic, so rapid 
has been their progress in every department— 
Industry, Science, Art, Religion, Literature. 
Imparts practical suggestions for self-improvement and teaches the way to success. 
The publishers, Austin & Jenkins Co., Washington, D. C, are now placing agents. Anybody can sell. SECURE THE AGENCY AT ONCE 
by getting a fine prospectus by sending 10 
cents in postage. AGENT S make $10.00 per 
day. It sells on sight. 
BOOKS ! BOOKS ! 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
135 W . 135th St. , Ne w Yor k Cit y 
WORLD'S FAMOUS NEGRO WRITERS 
Bargains in Rare Books Mail Orders Solicited 
Open July 1st Closed September 1st 
THE OCEA N HOUSE 
SEA ISLE CITY, N. J. 
This hotel is right on the ocea n front. It has 
wide porches, large conservator;' dining room wher e 
on e ha s a beautiful vie w o f the sea whil e dining, 
and every room open s on the ocean . Special rates 
for July : room and board , $8.00 per week . Personally manage d b y Mrs. Luc y Lee , 5 Plain St.. 
Elmhurst, L. T. Address after Jun e 22nd, Ocea n 
House , Se a Isle City, X . J. 
BOOKS? See the Selected List on 
the Inside Front Cover 
Rid your house of roaches with 
"Deli" Roach Powder 
25c. and $1.00 
BANEKE R CHEMICA L CO . 
809 N, Jefferson Ave., St. Louis, Mo. 
Agents Wanted 
Mentio n THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 10 1 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 an d up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail Orde r plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today— Now! 
j MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street ' Chicago, Ill. 
TEACHERS The new efficiency era calls fo r th e moder n wa y o f 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of th e embarrassment of job hunting and covers th e whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
COLORED HELP WANTED 
Privat e familie s (also Hotels, season 
191 6 
SUBURBA N TRAD E SPECIALT Y 
Houseworkers $25-$35; cook s $30-
$100 ; chambermaids, waitresses $25-
$30 ; waiters, useful men , butlers, 
$25-$60; couple s $50-$80; other 
positions, goo d pay . Send stamp for reply. 
N . Y . & N. J. INDUSTRIA L 
EXCHANG E 
1931 Broadway , co r 65th St. 
Ne w Yor k City. 
Samuel T. Marro w 
Prop. Mrs. E. Marro w 
Asst. 
I FEET 
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS. BUNIONS, INGROWN NAILS, AND ALL 
other AILMENT S of the FEET . • 
Examinatio n and Advic e Free. ^fcaB 
B^^ T DR . WILLIA M J. CARTE R 
CHIROPODIS T 
Telephone 1284 Audubon . 167 West 136th St., New York City. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th St. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
By ou r method , ap t students writ e stenography , 
transcrib e thei r shorthan d note s an d operat e a type ­
write r accuratel y in 60 days. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, Pres. 
SHORTHAND ! A HOM E STUD Y COURS E 
THA T BRING S RESULTS . 
A course in standard PITMANIC Shorthand written just as a 
teacher would explain it. No t a newly invented system to be 
learned in a week or so, but the kind of shorthand now in 
use made simple enough for a child. Wit h the completion of 
the twentieth lesson you are able to do court reporting. 
PRIC E OF COURSE . $6.00 . 
Address SHORTHAN D DEPT. , 4277 Cote Brilliante. St, Louis. 
A Ste p Forwar d 
towar d recognition , independenc e _ and wealth is 
to ow n on e o f our desirable building lots, garden 
plots or farms. 
Wh y slave for the landlord ? Le t us build yo u 
a home on a rent paying basis. 
Improved City Building Lots, $100 up. 
1/4 Acre Garden Plots, $32.50. 
Good Farming Land, $75 an acre. 
$3.00 Down and $3.00 monthly. 
No interest and no taxes. 
Guaranteed titles. 
TH E N . T . HEGEMA N CO . 
Builders and Developers, 
Suite 32, 9 Church St., Ne w Yor k City. 
Agents Wanted , men and women , o n attractive terms. 
Colored agents wanted everywhere to supply the big demand for our high grade 
GANT T QUIN O SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E 
Enroll in our Correspondence School. Anything in Beauty Culture. By Mail. Diplomas issued. 
Terms Fine, Quino Hai r Grower, 50c. Templ e Oil. 75c. Try a Box. 
Write : QUINO . 636 Fogg Street. NASHVILLE . TENN . 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8t h & Plu m 
Cincinnati , Ohi o 
Mentio n T h e Crisis 10 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Evan s Ar t 
Pianos and Players 
Factor y to Yo u 
$125 
and up can be saved by m y plan o f 
selling direct from m y factory to you. I can 
sav e you from $125 to $250 on an Evans Artist 
Model Piano or Player . 
Freight Paid
 The easiest kind of terms, week- ly, monthly, quarterly or yearly 
payments to suit your convenience . Al l middle -
men . jobbers , dealer s an d agent s profits cu t 
out . Thes e are some of the reasons whyI1 can sell 
the Evan s Artist Mode l Piano s for such little 
money . Le t m e send you the othe r reasons. 
3 0 DAY S FRE E TRIA L 
W e allow all freight charges, let you us e the 
beautiful Evan s Artist Mode l Pian o for thirty 
days free . If you are not entirety satisfied, we will 
take it back without any cost t o you—you ar e the 
sole judg e to decide. If you wan t t o keep it, you 
ma y do so on our low factor y wholesale price on 
most convenient terms. 
Musi c Lesson s Withou t Cos t 
T o every custome r w e will giv e a tw o year s 
cours e of piano instruction free . As k about our 
insurance plan. Writ e today . 
STOR Y & CLAR K PIAN O CO . 
F. O . EVANS . Gen . Mgr. , Dept . B 3 5 Chicag o 
$60 A WEEK and this free automobile 
EVERY AGENT CAN 
GET AN AUTO FREE 
NO CONTEST 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
YOU—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Fre e 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willin g to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 60 years- the ROBINSON FOLDING 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating Tu b Furnished- Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house.. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years, Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 80 days. Rev. Otto Schulze. Mo., got $1000 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 In 17 days, Hamlinton, of 
Wyo , made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if you mean business. But you must be 
ambitions, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG, CO. 
4198 Factories Building TOLEDO . OHI O 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
T.l.„t,„„.. . /Centra l 104-W Telephones: | Mai n 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
A ttorney-at- L a w N otar y Publi c 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D . Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L . D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counsellor-at- L a w 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St , Cor. Washington, Newark, N . J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
A ttorne y and Counsellor-at- L a w 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
A ttorney-at-L a w 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
A ttorne y an d C ounsellor-at -LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W . F . McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore. Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W . 135th Street Ne w York City 
J. E. ORMES 
ACCOUNTANT 
Audits Systems 
Business Information by mail. Open fo r 
engagements July and August 
Box 25 , Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce , O . 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
I
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1, No . 2 an d No . 3 
For Scalp, Hair an d Skin 
P . O . Bo x 102 , WILMINGTON , DEL . 
Mention TH E CRISI S A Ne w Boo k b y Dr. D u Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editor, are Professor. GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Clot h bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r _ 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sol d separatel y - - 50c. net 
Postage extra 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES : 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W . Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODA Y 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
The CRISIS, 7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mentio n THE CRISIS SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR : Musician 
HIS LIFE AND LETTERS By W. C. Berwick Sayers Illust
SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLOR , the first compose r of classic music to 
come from the colored races, was born in Londo n forty years ago. His 
genius asserted itself at the early age of six when, as one of his admirers 
describes it, he was found "holding a very small-sized violin in one hand, and 
playing at marbles with the other." The real discovery was, however, made by his 
guardian, friend, and benefactor, Colonel Herbert, of the Queen's Regiment. 
At thirteen, he was a brilliant solo violinist. Entering the Roya l College of 
Music in 1890, three years later, he won an open scholarship for composition. His 
progress was marked by such landmarks as "Hiawatha's Weddin g Feast," known 
the world over, "Herod, " "Ulysses," "Nero, " "Faust," "Endymion's Dream," " A 
Tale of Old Japan," "Othello. " 
The tribute we pay to the darker races of the world who have produced artists, 
thinkers, and composers is notorious by its absence. Proud of his race, it was 
indeed characteristic of the sturdy, honest nature of Coleridge-Taylor that he never 
sought to keep in the background his Negro origin, but, on the contrary, was 
thoroughly proud of it and of his own position. Of the fascination the tale of his 
life holds for a biographer, it is needless to speak. Mr. Berwick Sayers has 
brought to his loving task an enthusiasm which makes of his volume charming 
reading. 
Alfred Noyes, in the poem entitled "Samuel Coleridge-Taylor," writes: 
The spark that falls from heaven, not oft on earth, 
To human hearts its vital splendor gives; 
His was the simple, true, immortal birth! 
Scholars compose; but 
THI S MAN' S MUSI C LIVES . 
Price, $2.25. Postage Extra 
TH E CRISI S : : : : : : 7 0 Fift h Avenue , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Th e Journa l o f Negr o Histor y 
Published Quarterly Edited by 10 0 Pages 
CARTER G. WOODSON 
TH E JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y is the official organ of 
the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, which is now 
trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race 
but to show how civilization has been influenced by contact with the people 
of color. This publication aims to popularize the movement to save and 
make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information 
generally unknown. It is concerned with facts not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1.00 per year. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. 
Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to TH E JOURNA L O F NEGR O 
HISTOR Y and addressed to 
CARTER G. WOODSON, 2223 12th St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 