AUGUST 
1915 THE CRISIS AUGUST 
1915 
VOTE S FOR WOME N School of Medicine of Howard University 
Including 
Medical, Dental and Pharmaceutic Colleges 
1867-191 5 
Stephen M. Newman, D.D., President Edward A. Balloch, M.D., Dean 
The FORTY-EIGHT E ANNUA L SESSION will begin October 1, 
1915, and continue eight months. 
Requires for admission to Aledical College two years of college work 
including courses in inorganic and organic chemistry, qualitative analysis, 
physics, biology and either French or German. Full corps of instructors, 
well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital facilities. 
For catalog or information concerning Medical, Dental, 
Pharmaceutic or Post-Graduate courses write 
w. c. MCNEILL, M.D. , sec. 
Fifth and "W" Streets, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
Phis school oilers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school will not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but will open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuition is free. 
Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLI E ITNCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CKISI S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association for the Advancement ol Colored People 
Contents for August, 1915 
PICTURES 
COVER. Abraham Lincoln and Sojourner Truth. Composite photograph by Hinton Gilmore. Page 
Portraits of twenty contributors to the Symposium 180ff 
Tablet to Harriet Tubman _ 192 
ARTICLES 
THE BLACK MAMMY. A Poem By James Weldon Johnson 176 
VOTES FOR WOMEN. A Symposium By Rev. F. J. Grimke, 
Hon. Oscar De Priest, Benjamin Brawley, Bishop John Hurst, 
Hon. J. W. Johnson, Hon. R. H. Terrell, Dr. W. H. Crogman, C. W. Chesnutt, Hon. J. R. Lynch, L. M. Hershaw, Mrs. 
Paul Laurence Dunbar, Mrs. M. B. Talbert, Mrs. C. F. Cook, Mrs. 
C. W. Clifford, Dr. M. F. Waring, W. S. Braithewaite, Miss N. H. 
Burroughs, Miss M. E. Jackson, Mrs. J. St. P. Ruffin, Mrs. A. W. 
Hunton, Miss M. L. Baldwin, Miss A. H. Jones, Mrs. B. K. Bruce, 
Mrs. E. L. Davis, Mrs. M. C. Terrell and Mrs. L. A. Turner 178 
THE RAINS. A Story of Jamaica By Kelsey Percival Kitchel 193 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 163 
MEN OF THE MONTH 169 
OPINIONS 171 
EDITORIAL 177 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 197 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 160 THE CRISIS 
Knoxville College Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drain-
•ge. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. Fal Term Begins September, 1915 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
THE AGRICULTURAL 
and 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of 
North Carolina 
(Formerly the A. 6s M. College) 
The 22d annual session will begin September 1. 1915. Board, 
lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. Four year courses leading 
to trade certificates. Four year 
college courses leading to degrees 
of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture and Bachelor of Science in 
Mechanics. 
For cataloifor furtherlinformation 7 Address ~ 
President Dudley, A. & T. Colege 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
Mention 
ADVERTISER 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for girls, under the direction of the Sisters of S
Mary. Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 611 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa
AVOID BAD SCHOOLS 
Educate your children at home under our expert (cache** Courses for Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Write to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. Founded 1866 Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer in Negro music. Special study in Negro life
Ideal and sanitary buildings and ground*
Wel-equipped Science building. Christian home life. High standard of independent manhood and womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
C. W. Morrow, Acting President 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist Colege) ATLANTA, GA. Colege, Academy, Divinity School An institution famous within recent yearf for its emphasis on all sides of manly develo
ment—the only institution in the far South devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. Graduates given high ranking by greatest northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A
athletics, all live features. For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifuly located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. The courses of study include High School. Normal School and Colege, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates of Yale. Harvard, Dartmouth and Welesley. Forty-six years 
of successful work have been completed. Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universaly successful. For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA, GA. 
THE CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 161 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Welleslev graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT . 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
\ \ e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year" 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
Founded by Negro soldiers. Supported by Jthe State of Missouri. For 
both men "and women. Faculty of 34 
from the best schools and colleges of 
the country. College Department, offering four years' course with degree 
Eachelor of Arts; Normal Department, 
offering two years' course, followed by 
four years of Standard High School 
work, and leading to the Degree 
Bachelor of Pedagogy; College preparatory course. Music, art, domestic 
science, elocution, agriculture, and 
trades courses. Normal diploma. Life 
certificate to teach in the public schools 
of Missouri. One of the best schools 
in the country for students of limited 
means. Catalog on request. 
Opens September 1st 
BENJAMI N FRANKLI N ALLE N 
President 
JEFFERSON CITY MISSOURI 
Downingtown Industrial 
and Agricultural School 
Downingtown , Pa. 
Eleventh Session Begins 
SEPTEMBER 16, 1915 
CO-EDUCATIONA L 
Full Literary, Commercial, Domestic Science 
and Art, Trades and Agricultural Courses. 
For information write Wm. A. Creditt, President, 628 So. 19th Street, Philadelphia, Pa., or 
B. C. Burnett, Secretary, Industrial School, 
Downingtown, Pa. 
PUBLISHER' S CHA T 
The September CRISIS will be 
CHICAG O NUMBE R 
devoted to an exposition of the splendid work of the 
50,000 colored people of Chicago. There will he 
pictures of the Eighth Regiment, its armory and its 
oflicers; biographies of prominent citizens; views of 
churches, buildings, etc. The October CRISI S as usual 
will be 
CHILDREN'S NUMBER 
W e want to publish 100 pictures of the most interesting colored babies in America. All pictures must 
be in this office before September first. Send us unconventional, stirring pictures and, if possible, do not 
ask for the return of photographs. If returns must 
he made, mark plainly on the back, and enclose postage. Begin and send pictures now. They cannot 
come too early. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero OR High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts OF the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor OF the Paulist Chortaters, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Pan's ON May 25, 1912: 
"Dear MR. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
•leful and succinctly written book ON 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' YOUR own appreciation OF 
the psychology OF singing and the fundamental principles OF the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
•imple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers OF Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands OF all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingh 
his 'Practical Method OF Singing' is a most concist 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
Tocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPED HIM GREATLY 
"Since I practised your exercises OF 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonani 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that 1 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 lOtl 
•t., N. W. t Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 DREXEI 
Ave., Chicago, 111.; OR Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., OR Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, 111. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Through us school authorities, without expense OR 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions OR advancement should 
register with US and avail themselves OF our expert 
•ervice. Prompt and courteous attention to corres 
pondence. 
B. F. BOWLES, MANAGER, 
2739 CONVERSE AVENUE EAST ST. LOUIS, III . 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementaryand advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio: 30 W . 132d STREET, NE W YOR K CITY 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
(George Younfl 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colored Authors and Books on Race Problems 
a Specialty. 
135 W. 135th Street New York City 
Learn 
Beauty Culture 
By Mail 
Special Correspondence 
Course and Ten Dollars 
worth of my Preparations 
FIFTEEN DOLLAR S 
Write (or particulars 
Madam Barreau 
Bristol Building" 
New Bedford, Mass. 
School Teachers Wanted 
We can place 3000 school teachers who wish to 
be pleasantly and profitably employed during their 
vacation time. 
Write us today for full information and free circular reproductions of our specialties. 
W e will appoint you our representative and show 
you how to make from $2.00 to $10.00 per day and 
be your own boss. 
Agents wanted everywhere. Special offer for 
ministers. 
DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S CO . 
3S4 8 VERNO N AVE . (DEPT. K ) CHICAGO , 111. 
MENTION TH E CRISIS 
ITrade Mark) THE CRISIS 
VOL. 10 -NO . 4 AUGUST , 1915 WHOLE NO. 58 
V. B. SPRATLIN MISS GOSSIN MISS LEALTA D L. H. RUSSELL 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 
EDUCATION 
C? EVERA L cases of scholastic distinc-
^ tion have come to us since last 
month. Miss Catherine Deaver Lealtad 
graduated from McAlester College, St. 
Paul, Minnesota, with first honors in a 
class of twenty-five completing the 
course in three years. She made the best 
scholarship record in the history of the 
college and received the Noyes' scholarship prize. 
CI n Denver, Colorado, Valaurez B. 
Spratlin a seventeen year old student 
was among the honor men in a class of 
two hundred and sixty-four graduates 
of the Denver East Side High School. 
Spratlin pursued his whole course with 
his body encased in plaster of paris on 
account of an attack of spinal meningitis. 
Spratlin is also a brilliant pianist. 
CI n the Museum of Fine Arts School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, Miss Susan P. 
V. Gossin a great granddaughter of John 
B. Vashon and great-great granddaughter of the Rev. Thomas Paul has 
been awarded a special scholarship for 
excellence in the department of design. 
CLouis H. Russell received the degree 
of Master of Arts from Cornell for 
work in physics and mathematics. 
•2 William B. Jason received the degree 
of Master of Arts from the University 
of Pennsylvania for work in mathematics and physics. 
D Russell Lee of Des Moines, Iowa, is 
eleven years of age and in three years 
has done the school work which a normal child takes five and one-half years 
to do. The principal of his school says: 
"In all my experience as a teacher I have 
never seen a pupil make such remarkable 
progress." In a recent test in mathematics Lee ranked the whole school in 
accuracy and efficiency. 
([Miss Bernice Sanders who ranked her 
class at Wilberforce University received 
her degree "Summa Cum Laude" instead 
of "Magna" as announced last month. 
She attained "A " in every subject during 
her entire college course. She has been 
appointed a teacher in Wilberforce University with a year's leave of absence for 
study at Radcliffe. 
(I Edith A. Stone of Minneapolis occupied the honor seat in the Whittier 
School the last three months of the year 
and will enter the high school at the age 
of twelve. 
([Miss R. A. Guinn of Xew Bedford is 
a graduate of the Massachusetts College 
of Pharmacy and has passed the examination for the State Board. 
([The colored school district of the 
Highland Park section, Louisville. Ken-164 TH E CRISIS 
TRAC K TEAM, PITTSBURG, PA., CENTRA L HIGH SCHOOL 
tucky, has received five thousand dollars, 
their proportionate share of a railway 
condemnation compromise. 
£Mr . Julius Rosenwald has since October 1st, 1914, donated $6,191 toward the 
building of twenty-one school houses for 
colored children of Alabama. The State 
of Alabama gave $3,150; white people 
gave $1,570 and colored people themselves raised $9,279, a total of $21,190. 
Mr. Rosenwald is offering to help build 
two hundred school houses in Alabama 
and the South during a period of five 
years and will donate in all about $70,-
000. The money is given on condition 
that the State and the colored people 
help. The fund is administered by the 
extention department of Tuskegee Institute. 
d James N. Saunders who holds a 
Washington M Street High School 
scholarship was graduated from Syracuse University .and won a prize for 
essay, writing. 
CT- D. Coleman a freshman of Bates 
College has been awarded a scholarship 
in Harvard College and a prize for excellence in Greek. 
([Miss E. V. Johnson graduated in 
music from the University of Pennsylvania having made an excellent record. 
CTh e track team of the Pittsburgh Central High School consists of eight members ; four white and four colored. One 
of the colored boys is captain. 
([Pisk University graduated thirtyeight students ; twenty-one Bachelors of 
Art; twelve normal graduates and five 
with certificates in teaching. There are 
1,041 living alumni. 
([Colored people of Jackson County, 
Arkansas, have purchased land on which 
they plan to build an industrial school, 
Old Glory College, in the fall. 
([Miss Mary M. Gibson of Radcliffe has 
written the music for the class song. 
([ A granddaughter of the late Bishop 
Holly of Haiti was graduated this year 
from St. Paul's School, Lawrenceville, 
Virginia. 
([ A permanent office of the Association 
of Negro Industrial and Secondary 
Schools has been established at 20 Vesey 
Street, New York City, with A. R. 
Burnett as executive secretary. The 
membership includes twenty-seven 
schools in ten states and the Association 
will be a center for publicity, methods, 
standardized finance and co-operation. 
([Th e Governor of Pennsylvania, the 
Hon. J. C. Napier, and the Rev. William 
N. DeBerry have been elected trustees 
of Fisk University. 
([Prof. William Pickens has been 
chosen Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. 
([Miss Florence Anderson has been appointed State Supervisor of Colored 
Rural Schools in Kentucky. 
CO n the twenty-fifth anniversary of 
their marriage, Mr. and Mrs. Tulius 
Rosenwald sent $5,000 to Tuskegee, to 
be distributed among the teachers there. 
C Fountain Peyton, a lawyer, has been 
appointed to succeed Dr. C. H. Marshall 
on the School Board of the District of 
Columbia. 
([Mr. Harry C. Turner, Jr., son of Mr. 
and Mrs. H. C. Turner of Boston, Mass.. 
was on June 2d awarded the degree of 
Ch. B. from the Medical Department of 
Boston University. ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 165 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
PRESI DEN T WILSO N has issued a 
proclamation bespeaking national 
interest in the Negro exposition to be 
held in Richmond, Virginia, during the 
month of July- The President says 
with characteristic diffidence : 
"The action of Congress in this matter 
indicates very happily the desire of the 
nation as well as of the people of Virginia to encourage the Negro in his 
efforts to solve his industrial problem." 
CHenry Taylor a colored man of Trenton, Tennessee, rescued a fifteen year old 
white girl from drowning. He will be 
recommended for a Carnegie medal. 
There are no threats of lynching. 
C A Virginia Lawn Tennis Association 
has been formed and held an interesting 
tournament at Lawrenceville. 
CTh e colored members of the Grand 
Jury of Passaic County, New Tersey, 
Messrs. Williams, Collins and Hopper 
were banqueted at Paterson recently. A 
white Episcopal clergyman presided and 
the sheriff of the county was present. 
CTh e Chicago exposition has received 
an additional grant of $25,000 from the 
legislature on condition that they raise 
a similar sum. 
([Lyman Beecher Stowe and Emmet TScott are at work on a life of Booker T. 
Washington. 
CJ- O. Hopkins was re-elected to the 
City Council of Wilmington, Delaware 
for a second term. 
CBecause of ill health Mrs. W. H. 
Baldwin, Jr., has resigned as chairman 
of the National Urban League. 
CTh e City Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs, Kansas City, Missouri, 
celebrated its tenth anniversary with a 
banquet in the gymnasium of the new 
$100,000 Y. M. C. A. Two hundred and 
twenty persons were present. The 
Federation includes nineteen clubs interested in painting, needlework, philanthropy, school work and social study. 
£W . R. Dyke, of Goode, Bedford County, Virginia, who rescued a baby from a 
burning house has received the Carnegie 
Medal for heroism and one thousand 
dollars. 
([Mrs. Mary C. Terrell was one of the 
principal speakers at the session of the 
Baptist Council of Women for Home 
Missions, which was held at the Panama 
Kxposition. 
CBernicc Hartley is the first colored 
woman to register as a voter in Nevada. 
([Th e Masons of Washington, D. C , 
have begun work on their new temple. 
([Th e National League on Urban Conditions has opened a home for convalescents at White Plains, New York. 
CTh e Stoddard Baptist Home, Washington, D. C , a retreat for the aged, will 
soon be opened. 
CTh e Public School Board of Roslyn, 
Long Island, has been ordered by the 
court to admit the colored children 
which it formerly segregated. At a later 
appearance at court they must show 
cause why this order should not be made 
permanent. 
CDr. S. C. Dickerson of Chicago, has 
been placed upon the staff of the Rush 
Medical College. 
CTh e Rhode Island Pure Food and 
Drug Commission has made Roscoe 
Heathman a member of its staff of drug 
experts. 
CAfte r passing a successful examination, Arthur Sanderson, a patrolman of 
Oakland, has been advanced to the 
grade of corporal. 
m 
MEETINGS 
'TH E bronze statue of Wendell Phil-
-"- lips, by French, was dedicated last 
month in Boston. It has been well 
placed on a new boulevard. There were 
speeches by prominent men of both races 
and singing by a large colored choir. 
CTh e sixteenth annual session of the 
National Medical Association will be 
held in Chicago in August. 
CTh e Iowa State Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs will hold its fourteenth 
annual session in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 
CDr. B. T. Washington was one of the 
speakers at the Bloomington, Illinois 
Chautauqua. 
CTh e New York State Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs unveiled a 
monument to Harriet Tubman last 
month in the Fort Hill Cemetery, 
Auburn, New York. 
C Semi-centennial celebrations of freedom will be held in Los Angeles and 
Keokuk, Iowa. White and colored people will take part in both celebrations. 166 TH E CRISIS 
CTh e Nebraska State Federation of 
Women's Clubs held its tenth annual 
session in Lincoln. 
([A t the recent meeting of the Southern 
Sociological Congress at Houston, 
Texas, the colored speakers were Dr. C. 
V. Roman, Dr. L. K. Williams, Prof. J. 
W . Gilbert, Pres. J. A. Booker, Dr. R. 
R. Wright and Monroe N. Work. 
m 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
MISS SARA H M. TALBER T of 
Buffalo, New York, daughter of 
Mrs. Mary B. Talbert, president of the 
New York State Federation of Clubs, 
was a graduating member of the piano 
class of 1915, of the New England Conservatory, Boston, Mass. 
(JIN the Devonshire town of Exeter, the 
Exeter Oratorio Society gave a concert 
for the Wa r Fund of England, at which 
the first two parts of the Hiawatha Trilogy were the cantatas presented. 
During the same month at Bournemouth, England, the program of the 
Pop Concert illustrating nationalistic 
tendencies, gave S. Coleridge-Taylor's 
tone-poem for Orchestra, "Bamboula," 
as an example of British music. 
([O n June 17th at the second concert or 
the Lyric Club, Charles Citv, Iowa, 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Low Breathing 
Winds " was sung by the club under the 
direction of Frank Parker of Cedar 
Valley Seminary. 
([Harry T. Burleigh's "The Glory of 
the Day was in Her Face," a song for 
high voice, the words by James Johnson, 
is named by Musical America as an 
American composition worthy of recognition for teaching and public performance. 
"Heigh Ho, " by Burleigh, was among 
the song offerings of Mr. Joseph 
Mathieu, tenor, of the Stanley Quartet 
of New York, at a concert given at 
Kingston, New York. 
CTh e pupils of Miss Georgine Glover, 
pianist, of Boston, Mass., were heard in 
a successful recital at Court Hall on 
June 25th. 
([Another program of merit was presented by the piano pupils of Miss Mary 
L. Europe, on June 25th at Lincoln 
Temple, Washington, D. C. 
([Albert Spalding, the distinguished 
American violinist-composer, has continued the production of violin adaptations of old plantation melodies and will 
offer the same to the South American 
music-lovers during his present concert 
tour. 
([Th e North Side Choral Club and 
Orchestra under the direction of J. R. 
Rogers gave "Hiawatha's Wedding 
Feast" in Pittsburgh. 
([Miss M. L. York gave a piano recital 
at the Bethel A. M. E. Church at New 
Bedford, Mass. 
CTh e People's Choral Society of Philadelphia gave a benefit concert at Musical 
Fund Hall to assist Miss Marion E. 
Anderson, a young contralto with a very 
beautiful voice. 
C A Negro Folk Song Festival with five 
hundred voices under the direction of 
Mme. Lincolnia Haynes-Morgan was 
given at the Texas Normal Industrial 
Institute at Dallas, Texas. Over fifteen 
hundred persons attended. 
m 
PERSONA L 
MR. F. C. COOPE R a colored 
Jamaican and second year student 
in medicine at Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, has rendered a signal service to 
his college, as well as shown evidence of 
exceptional ability, in his chosen profession, by drawing a set of twenty-five 
charts, or diagrams in colors, for use in 
the Histological Department of the Medical College. These diagrams are scientifically correct as well as artistically beyond criticism, but further than that they 
consitute a very valuable asset in the 
teaching equipment. 
CMr . Charles Alexander has been put 
in charge of the correspondence with 
colored people at the Panama Exposition. 
CN . H. Lane, the aged janitor of an 
office building in Los Angeles, groped his 
way through the smoke in the burning 
building and saved two men. 
CMrs. Anna R. Copeland, widow of W . 
L. Copeland, whose brother was executed with John Brown, died recently in 
Hot Springs, Va. 
CGustavus Milhiser, a wealthy mill 
owner of Richmond, Va., bequeathed 
five hundred dollars to Rosa S. Dixon, 
and a sum'to be placed in trust, from ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 167 
which she will derive five hundred dollars a year. 
CTh e will of E. E. Des Verncy of 
Savannah, Ga., disposes of $50,000. 
C^Ir. U. Buckner. a colored man, is 
trainer for the Chicago White Sox. 
CThoma s Rutling, the first tenor of the 
famous Fisk Jubilee Choir, and its last 
surviving member, died recently at Harrowgate, England. 
CRev . T. W. Henderson, D.D., a prominent minister of the A. M. E. Church, 
is dead. 
CTh e Delta Penny Savings Bank at Indianola, Miss., has been certified by the 
State Banking Department. 
CE . C. Brown, who has conducted a 
successful banking business in Newport 
News, plans to open a bank in Washington, D. C. 
CMr. Chas. McQueen of Texas has invented a weight motor house-fan, that 
goes automatically by winding, like a 
clock. 
CDr. G. A. Buckner of Indiana, U. S. 
Minister to Liberia, who is home on 
leave, says that country is feeling the 
effects of the European War. The foreign trade of the country has stopped 
entirely. 
CDr. Chas. H. Roberts, a leading dentist of New York City, has gone to 
Paris to work in the clinic for the 
soldiers. 
TH E CHURCH 
C INCE the establishment of the Cath-
^ olic Board for Colored Missions, 
forcy new missions have been started 
and over five thousand children received 
in school. The work which has been 
done mainly in the South suffers from a 
lack of priests and sisters. 
CTh e New England Missionary Baptist Convention held its forty-first annual session at Mt. Olivet Baptist 
Church, New York City. 
C A Census report, relating to the Negro 
Church, says there are four colored 
priests in the Roman Catholic Church in 
the U. S. and one colored priest in the 
Greek Church. 
CTh e splendid new building of St. 
James Presbyterian Church, in New 
York City was dedicated in June. 
ECONOMICS 
H P H E Fai r Publishing Company, 
backed by colored people, is said 
to be about to begin a series of weekly 
newspapers published in Philadelphia 
and distributed with local additions in 
Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Baltimore and Washington. W. W. Rouke 
is editor and Dr. A. T. Boyer president 
of the corporation. 
CPlans are nearly complete for the reopening of the bank in Mound Bayou. 
The old bank building has been bought 
and $10,000 deposited in the Cleveland 
Slate Bank. 
CTh e Tunnel and Subway Contractors' 
International Union, New York City, 
the Tobacco Workers and the United 
Mine Workers of America, are three 
unions that admit colored men freely. 
CTeachers of industrial arts in the 
Baltimore and Washington schools have 
formed an Interstate Industrial Arts 
Association with Mr. D. A. Brooks as 
president. 
FOREIGN 
DELOS R. DAVIS , Kansas City, 
died recently in Amherstburg, 
Canada. His father escaped to Canada 
on the underground railroad. 
CA t the bead of the regiment of Egyptian artillery, now fighting on the Yser, 
is a young West African, Col. Pasquale 
Denoix, who made a brilliant record at 
the Military Academy at Bordeaux. 
C A colored commissioner of St. Thomas, D. Hamilton Jackson, made a special 
trip to Denmark and obtained from the 
Parliament, freedom of speech for the 
islanders, full suffrage for natives, university education in Denmark for graduates of the island schools, replacement 
of white gendarmes by native police. 
The governor, who was the friend of 
the planters, has been recalled and the 
land which has been held by the planters 
has been thrown open to the natives, who 
can get loans from the government with 
which to buy it. 
Mr. Jackson spoke before the King of 
Denmark and was invited by the King 
of Sweden to visit him. He will pass 
through New York shortly. 
CMrs. Sharp, who conducts a school 
for girls in the bush country, West 168 TH E CRISIS 
Africa, tells in a letter to friends here 
of the country's need for provisions, because of the stopping of all commerce. 
What little food is left is very high. She 
also tells of the help Major Charles 
Young has given her. He heard of her 
school from the natives and built a road, 
cleared some land, planted rice and gave 
her one hundred dollars. 
(IOne of a company of signalers,, attached to the First West India Regiment, now taking part in the fighting 
against the Germans in Africa, displayed 
great bravery recently, under a thick 
fire. 
([Th e official report from Paris tells of 
the successful capture of a trench near 
the Dardanelles, under cover of the dark. 
Following orders, a mixed company of 
colored and white volunteers crept on 
hands and knees, up the embankment, 
and so surprised the Turks that they 
fired in the air and fled. 
([Bishop Joseph C. Hartzell of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church, recently 
returned from Africa, says that the war 
is affecting every part of the country, 
making living high and stopping business. Fighting between the different 
colonial forces is going on all over the 
continent. 
([Christopher A. Sapara Williams, a 
barrister, native of Sierra Leone, but 
resident in Lagos, is dead. He was an 
influential man in the colony and held 
many positions of public trust. 
COURTS 
T AWYE R HARR Y E. DAVI S of 
Cleveland, Ohio, won a case some 
time ago under the Ohio Civil Rights 
law, where a restaurant had refused to 
serve a colored man. The case was appealed to the highest court. Lately the 
court has sustained the verdict against 
the restaurant people who were fined 
fifty dollars. 
TH E GHETT O 
/^•ASE S which grew out of the mur-
^ der of Negroes by a mob in Palestine, Tex., some years ago, have been 
thrown out of court. 
([Senator Vardaman of Mississippi is 
speaking for Chautauquas throughout 
the west. His subject is always the race 
question. 
(JFear is expressed in a white newspaper that Negroes will be able to name 
members of the City Council in Way -
cross, Ga., if the new charter is adopted. 
([Mrs. Alice Jackson, a colored woman 
who with Geo. Savage, white, was convicted of violating the Mann Ac t and 
sent to prison, is in ill health. Savage 
was pardoned by President Wilson but 
no thought has been given to the woman. 
([ A story comes from Oklahoma of the 
death-bed confession of Robert Lawson, 
a white man, who says he killed and 
robbed M. J. Scott, a wealthy resident 
of Kingston, De Soto Parish, La., thirtyfour years ago. At the time a Negro, 
Wash Allen, was quickly lynched for the 
crime. 
([Betty Hicks, who fell heir to an $80,-
000 estate from the white father of her 
•children, has been declared insane by a 
Tennessee jury. There is not the slightest contention that she is insane but the 
courts want to appoint a white guardian 
for her money. The case is still pending 
in court and the lawyers are getting a 
large part of the estate. 
([John Donaldson, Frank Wickware 
and a Cuban named Mendez, all colored, 
are said to be the equal of the best 
pitchers in the major leagues. White 
managers are aware of the splendid material they miss through color prejudice. 
([Dr. T. T. Wilkerson, of Jersey City, 
left $10,000 to a former fiancee, who 
broke her engagement to him when she 
discovered he was colored. She is married and lives in Jersey City. The rest 
of his estate he left to charities in the 
South. 
S3 
CRIME 
' I ' H E following lynchings have taken 
A
 place since our last record: At 
Round Oak, Jones County, Ga., S. 
Thomas, W . Gordon and S. Farrar and 
"probably" Green and his son; an "unknown man" and perhaps "several 
more," for the alleged murder of a white 
planter who was forcibly collecting a 
"small debt." 
At West Point, Mississippi, a Negro 
accused of entering a white girl's room. 
At Lewisville, Arkansas, Lon Healy, 
who shot and killed Ro y Lester after a 
dispute concerning food on credit. CD 
MEN of the MONTH | 
£3, 
A NOTE D SINGER 
A NIT A PATT I BROW N was born 
• near Atlanta, Georgia, and as a 
child showed unusual fondness for singing. Pier parents moved to Indianapolis, 
Indiana, where she sang in the choir but 
her father did little to support the family and before she was sixteen the girl 
was working in private homes for a living. Eventually she came to Chicago 
and married Mr. A. A. Brown who immediately made it possible for her to 
carry on her studies. 
She won a scholarship in the Chicago 
Musical College and soon began her concert trips. She has traveled all over the 
United States, the British West Indies 
and South America and is without doubt 
one of the best soloists among Negro 
Americans and notable among Americans of any race. 
A SOCIAL LEADER 
MRS. EURETTA B O Z E M A N 
MATTHEW S 
was born at Troy, 
New York, March 
28th, 1851. In 1876 
she came to Washington as a teacher 
a^d s o o n attained 
p rominenc c as a 
writer o f shor t 
articles. In 1883 she 
married William E. 
Matthews, a successful broker and leader 
in social circles. He 
acquired a considerable fortun e and 
after his death in 
1894 Mrs. Matthews 
carried on his work. 
Finally, however, she 
retired from business 
and devote d her MME. ANIT A PATTI-BROWN gj 
time to studies and the education of 
her daughter. She had an extended 
knowledge of literature and history, was 
a keen student and singularly free from 
prejudices. She numbered the leading 
colored men of her day among her intimate friends. Many of her relatives 
attained prominence. Tier brother was 
the first colored physician of Charleston, 
South Carolina, and at one time postmaster of the city. Another brother was 
section chief of the treasury department. 
A sister was the wife of the late Andrew 
T. Tones of Philadelphia. 
For several years Mrs. Matthews 
made her home with her daughter at 
Macon, Georgia, where her death took 
place in the spring. 
A SOCIAL WORKE R 
MRS. MUSETT E B. GREGOR Y 
•*• • was born in Washington, D. C , 
and educated in the public schools. She 
afterward became a 
teacher bu t finally 
married Mr. Eugene 
Gregory, a graduate 
of Harvard and lawyer in New York 
City. Mrs. Gregory 
devotes much of her 
time to the work of 
social uplift. She is a 
member of the board 
of managers of the 
Old Folks' Home of 
Newark and of the 
Music School Settlement of New York 
City; she is a member 
and ex-President of 
the Phyllis Wheatley 
Literary Society of 
Newark and founder 
of the Urban Liter-170 TH E CRISIS 
THE LATE MRS. E. B. MATTHEW S 
ary Society of Trenton. Most of Mrs. 
Gregory's time, however, is given to the 
Home for Working Girls at 132 West 
131st Street, New York City. This home 
is under the patronage of the Missionary 
MRS. M. B. GREGOR Y 
Committee of the Episcopal Cathedral of 
St. John the Divine and is doing excellent service for working girls. The home 
has been in existence for five years and 
is now looking for larger quarters. 
BANQUET.OF.THEIFEDERATION OF COLORED WOMEN'S.CLUBS, KANSA S CITY, MO. (See p. 1651 Opinions 
TH E GRANDFATHE R DECISION 
TH E NORTHER N The mass (if opinion 
PRESS winch has been brought 
out by the decision of 
the Supreme Court is, on the whole, 
most encouraging to believers in democracy, and a distinct warning to the reactionary South. The Oklahoma law 
which was declared unconstitutional is 
as follows: 
"No person shall be registered as an 
elector of this state or be allowed to vote 
in any election herein unless he shall be 
able to read and write any section of the 
Constitution of the State of Oklahoma; 
but no person who was on January 1, 
1866, or at any time prior thereto, entitled to vote under any form of government, or who at any time resided in 
some foreign nation and no lineal descendant of such person shall be denied 
the right to register and vote because of 
his inability to so read and write sections 
of such Constitution." 
Several papers dwell on the unreasonable time it has taken the Supreme Court 
to come to this case. "It has looked for 
years," says the Troy (N. Y.) Times, 
"as if the United States Supreme Court 
would never get face to face with the 
attempt to disfranchise the Negroes of 
the South." 
The Boston Post, the Helena (Mont.) 
Record and the New York Evening Post 
comment upon this. The last paper says: 
"Everybody has always known that 
these discriminating suffrage statutes 
were shams and tricks. They pretended 
to do one thing while compassing another. But now it is the technicality loving judges who have brushed aside the 
technicalities, gone straight to the heart 
of the case, and declared bluntly that no 
such thing as a 'subterfuge' franchise 
can exist in this republic. All the talk 
for years past of doing something to enhance the popular esteem for the courts 
seems weak and pale compared with 
what the Supreme Court has done to 
exalt itself as a tribunal of high and exact justice, by this one splendid stroke." 
In the North there is much speculation 
as to the practical result of this decision. 
"It is a great victory for the colored 
race; it is a great victory for civilization 
and citizenship," says the New Haven 
(Conn.) Times Leader. 
Some papers are very optimistic. The 
Gazette of Trenton, N. T., says: 
"It is possible that most of the legislation in the southern states to prevent 
Negroes from voting will be upset, or at 
least greatly modified." 
The Gazette Times of Pittsburgh, Pa., 
adds: 
"Congress has power to enact laws enforcing the Fifteenth Amendment, and 
it can reach into any state to regulate 
federal elections. The Democrats have 
been talking of passing a cloture rule in 
the Senate next winter, so that no measure can be talked to death and that action one way or the other can be secured. 
If they do that, and in the next or a succeeding Congress the Republicans obtain 
contiol, then there is likely to be revival 
of the effort to assure fuller voting 
rights to the colored men of the South. 
That opens illimitable possibilities of 
contention." 
The Bridgeport (Conn.) Post says: 
"The importance of this ruling for the 
North cannot be over estimated. Part 
of the Southern control of Congress 
comes from the effect of such unconstitutional laws. With equal suffrage in 
the South today that control would not 
exist in the incoming Congress. The decision is of vital importance." 
The Times of Portsmouth, Ohio, 
thinks that this decision "again opens 
for contention those civic or quasi public rights, such as the common admission 
to hotels, theatres, trains and other quasi 
public places and amusements from 
which the Negro has been quite extensively debarred." 
Other papers are less optimistic, but 172 TH E CRISIS 
nevertheless hopeful. The Democrat 
Chronicle of Rochester, N. Y., writes: 
"The most that can be expected from 
the decision, in states where race bigotry 
is rampant, is that the status of the colored voter will be improved. The history of his struggle for his rights forbids 
any hope that he will at once be freely 
accorded all that is his due. The thing 
most to be dreaded is a return to old 
forms of intimidation." 
The New Bedford, (Mass.) Standard 
inquires 
"Whether the ingenuity of the southern states will be equal to devising an 
arrangement which will, in effect, disfranchise the majority of the Negroes 
without violating the Fifteenth Amendment." 
The Kansas City (Mo.) Journal is 
sure that "for the time being at least a 
halt has been called to the defiance of 
the constitutional provision that the right 
of suffrage shall not be denied by reason 
of race, color or previous condition of 
servitude. Something must be devised 
more ingenious than this crude attempt 
to circumvent the plain letter of the 
solemn and binding amendment to the 
federal constitution, an amendment written in the blood of half a million men 
who gave their lives on Northern and 
Southern fields during four years of 
civil war." 
And the Springfield Republican says: 
"The South is again confronted with 
the suffrage problem by reason of this 
decision. The nullity of the Oklahoma 
law carries with it the nullity of all similar laws. Practically the effect need 
not be the capture of the state governments, the county governments and the 
municipal governments by ignorant 
masses of voters again enfranchised. 
Literacy and property tests for voting 
applied as hitherto would insure government by the educated portion of the 
population and also that portion having 
a property stake in the community. What 
is now necessary is that the ignorant and 
illiterate white as well as the ignorant 
and illiterate black shall be barred." 
On the other hand, the Plain Dealer 
of Cleveland, Ohio, fears that further 
efforts to circumvent the Fifteenth 
Amendment will not only be tolerated 
but "welcomed" in the South. 
The Buffalo Express says: 
"This may end the legal attempts to 
keep Negroes from voting. But how 
about the illegal ones? When is the 
United States to suppress intimidation 
and false counting?" 
The Norwich (Conn.) Record reminds us that there are places in the 
South where a Negro would not dare 
even "to try to vote." 
The Binghamton (N . Y. ) Press says: 
"But there is still a question unanswered. The Federal Court can abolish 
the 'grandfather clause,' but it can't 
abolish the grandfathers, or the grandsons, either. And the Negro citizen may 
find in Oklahoma, as they have found 
elsewhere, that getting the right to vote 
from the Supreme Court in Washington 
is not exactly the same thing as getting 
the right from the election board in tb.eir 
own voting district." 
Most of the papers dwell upon the 
essentially undemocratic nature of the 
"Grandfather Clause." "It reeked with 
injustice," says the Public Ledger of 
Philadelphia. "These 'trick laws' have 
'been a disgrace,' " says the Philadelphia 
Enquirer. It adds: 
"If Southern States were in actual 
danger of being subjected to rule by 
ignorant colored voters there would be 
much sympathy for them. But there is 
no reason why they should be—that is 
if they are willing to eliminate all illiterate persons, whether white or black, 
from the voting franchise. They cannot 
point to illiterate colored men and say 
to them, 'You shall not vote,' unless at 
the same time they shall point to the illiterate whites and say precisely the same 
thing to them." 
The Hartford (Conn.) Courant says: 
"If the South would accept the doctrine that ignorance is just as bad in a 
white man as in a Negro, and make its 
political estimates on personal character 
instead of the color of the skin or the 
tint of the eyes, the white citizens and 
the Negro citizens of that region would 
soon work their problem out in satisfactory shape." 
A few of the editors strike at the 
deeper questions involved. The Boston 
Traveler, for instance, declares that: 
"The whites of the South have never, 
as a body, shown any great degree of OPINION S 17o 
reverence for any law that conflicted 
with their wishes, local or general. The 
conditions prevailing at Atlanta, Ga., of 
late, where companies of soldiers have 
had to protect the Governor of the state 
from the fury of the mob because of the 
conscientious performance of his duty, 
is characteristic of die dangerous vagaries of the white people of the South. 
Their neighborhood feuds and murders 
are symptomatic of their attitude of 
mind toward matters of broader national importance. With many of them 
prejudice and hatred are more powerful 
than statutes and courts. To many of 
them a lynching is a holiday and a 'nigger hunt' an occasion of rare enjoyment." 
The Milwaukee (Wis.) Leader says: 
"The Farmers' alliance and the Populist movements made it manifest to the 
small white farmers that they had an 
identity of economic and political interests with the Negro renters. It was this 
very fact that made the Populist movement so menacing to the ruling oligarchies then in control of the Democratic party. Though devoted to 'white 
supremacy' and opposed to Negro suffrage, the Democratic organizations in 
such states as Alabama and Georgia only 
succeeded in maintaining their hold by 
gigantic ballot frauds in the black counties. They ceased, by their own showing 
in ihe fraudulent election returns, to be 
the choice of white majorities and owed 
their election and continuance in power 
to Negro votes. 
"The Supreme Court has interpreted 
and defined the law, but it can not very 
well invade every voting precinct in the 
South and place a ballot in the Negro's 
hands. When the time shall come, when 
economic conditions and the education 
of the masses in the South shall awaken 
the men who toil and labor to their common interests, the very class that is now 
so fearful of 'Negro sovereignty' will be 
found appealing to the Negro voter to 
help save 'Old Massa' from the scalawags who want to 'confiscate' his property. 
"The Almighty Dollar knows no color 
line." 
The Paterson (N. JO Press says: 
"One of the curious sequences of this 
discussion is the change it has brought 
in the attitude of the South towards 
woman suffrage. That section had been 
rcpoited as generally opposed to equal 
suffrage, fearing that it would give votes 
to Negro women. Now it is said that 
Democratic politicians in the South feel 
that woman suffrage is their only salvation. But, as that cause is based upon 
equal rights for all, if it is won how can 
Negro women be ruled out of the voting 
class? And if they do vote, will not the 
race trouble be as acute as it was before ?" 
A fair statement of the conclusion of 
level-headed thinkers is given in the 
Washington correspondence in the New 
York Evening Post sent on the day of 
the decision. 
"The most important race decision 
since the Dred Scott holding, is the way 
in which the capital today regards the 
Supreme Court's decision striking down 
the 'grandfather clause' legislation of 
the Southern States. Taken in connection with another of the court's decisions—all rendered yesterday—to the effect that a Negro not only has a constitutional right to vote, but to have his 
vote counted, it is believed that the Negro once more may become a potent 
factor in the community in the Southland, wherever he may reside. 
"By upholding a criminal conviction 
of election officials in the Oklahoma case 
for denying Negroes the right to vote, 
and by approving the award of money as 
damages to Negroes turned away from 
the registration booths in Annapolis, 
Md., the court demonstrated that both 
the penitentiary and the purse of election 
officials are to be used as means of enforcing the nation's supreme law that the 
right of citizens to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or 
the States on account of race, color, or 
previous condition of servitude." 
m 
TH E COPPERHEAD PRESS. 
SOUTHER N The New York Times leads 
SYMPA - the "copperheads" in the 
TIIIZEK S North with a long distribe 
against Negro suffrage and 
some fine heroics about "the determination of the white man to rule the land 
wherein he lived!" 
The New York Sufi also declares that: 174 TH E CRISIS 
"There is no sentiment of substantial 
importance North or South for a radical 
change in the political status of the 
Negro in the Southern States." 
"Legal attempts to keep the Negroes 
from voting may stop," says the Knickerbocker Press of Albany, New York, 
"but the illegal attempts are likely to 
continue and they are likely to be successful, for the white people of the south 
will continue to refuse to let Negroes 
rule them through the ballot box. There 
is no law which is strong enough to overcome this race prejudice or to suppress 
intimidation and false counting." 
"The situation is almost unbearable," 
says the Union Advertiser of Rochester, 
New York : 
"The whites have proved that, if 
necessary, they will resort to force of 
arms to prevent the blacks from gaining 
the supremacy, and the Fifteenth 
Amendment stands directly in the way 
of their gaining what they will have by 
legal methods. Intimidation, bad politics, 
illegality have been the result of a seemingly unsolvable problem." 
The Waterbury (Conn.) American 
complains of being disturbed since "the 
country had for the most part become 
reconciled to the devise by which the 
South had overcome the constitutional 
amendment which allowed the Negroes 
to vote." 
The southern editor of the Chicago 
Tribune in a long and rather maudlin 
editorial complains that we are thus 
"brought back to the existence of the 
Fifteenth Amendment and to the great 
problem its authors foolishly thought 
could be solved by words. But underlying this situation there is a problem of 
the national mind which affects all our 
problems. We indulge ourselves in a 
theoretical altruism for which we are 
seldom willing to pay. We pamper ourselves with an optimism which we will 
not permit to be challenged by uncomfortable facts." 
M 
TH E SOUTH. 
BOURBON The attitude of the South 
AND PRO- toward the Supreme Court 
GRESSIVE decision is most illuminating. 
First, there are certain confessions of fact. The Columbia (S. C.) 
State says, for instance: 
"There are now in South Carolina 
about 180,000 white men of voting age 
and about 175,000 Negroes. Of the 
latter about 33,000 are qualified to obtain registration certificates as propertyholders, regardless of literacy and, according to the loose census definition, 
only 40,000 of the Negro male adults are 
illiterate. Probably 50,000 or 60,000 
Negroes in this State are lawfully qualified to register. In the last presidential 
election the combined Taft and Roosevelt vote was less than 2,000." 
J. C. Manning a banished southerner 
writing for the Boston Traveler declares 
that the white masses "voted against 
Alabama's disfranchising constitution" 
but all in vain because "ratification was 
secured by the black belt frauds. Dallas 
county, for example, having 2,500 whites 
and 8,000 colored male citizens of voting 
age, would return 8,000 majority for the 
ratification of the constitution. 
"The results we see in Alabama today. 
The present Governor of Alabama is 
Governor by the grace of about 60,000 
voters. There are as many disfranchised 
whites in Alabama as there are of disfranchised colored. The motive of the 
legislation was not so much to disfranchise the Negro, as claimed, as to obliterate the opposition to the Democratic 
oligarchy. This fact is what the American people need to understand." 
The first impulse of the South is to 
dismiss such facts together with this decision as unimportant. "It may be confidently predicted," says the Knoxville 
(Term.) Sentinel, "that any expectations 
of political revolutions in the near future 
in the South that may be based upon the 
decision declaring the 'Grandfather 
clauses' unconstitutional are doomed to 
be disappointed." 
The Times Union of Jacksonville, 
Fla., is even more naive: 
"So the South does not need to discriminate between voters on the color line. 
The Negro cannot control anywhere, and 
is not even the balance of power anywhere. The Negro has increased the 
representation of Southern states in 
Congress, and the vote of Southern 
states in the electoral college, and that 
is all that remains of the effect of the OPINIONS 175 
laws that gave him the ballot; and that 
increase in representation in Congress 
and in the vote in the electoral college 
is a Democratic increase, and would remain so if the grandfather clause were 
taken out of every state constitution in 
which it has been inserted." 
Even if there is any danger say 
other papers it can be easily "circumvented" by "contrivances." Thus the 
Raleigh (N. C.) Times says, "It would 
not be hard to devise another amendment that would stand." 
The News Observer of the same city 
declares that "Those who think that it is 
impossible to frame suffrage laws to 
meet the necessity fail to understand the 
resource of the statesmanship of the 
South." 
The Louisville (Ky.) Times suggests 
that: 
"Certain it is that the white man will 
not again submit to his political domination as in the days of the Carpetbagger. 
The simple expedient of force will 
doubtless be used if all other means 
fail." 
On the whole, the faith of the South 
is pinned to the "White Primary" and 
we have two frank explanations of what 
the "White Primary" means. One is 
from the Columbia (S. C.) State; 
"As the Negroes ceased voting, in the 
early eighties, in the counties, primaries 
were instituted and these rapidly came to 
be the deciding elections. In 1886 members of the National House of Representatives began to be chosen by primaries and some years later the primaries 
became the method of choosing State 
officers, too. 
"In other words South Carolina went 
back practically to the system that prevailed in 1860. The primary became 
what the general election was then. The 
Negroes were gradually excluded from 
the primaries." 
The Saginaw (Mich.) News adds this 
illuminating bit: 
"Take for instance the so-called 'blackcounties' of Texas. In many of these 
counties, lying principally in the Colorado and Brazos river bottoms, the 
Negro population numerically is the 
largest, and without the methods adopted 
by the whites to control the majority the 
blacks could and would elect their own 
race officials. But for many years there 
has existed in these counties a white 
man's league. It includes every reputable white man, irrespective of politics, 
in the county. As soon as a new comer 
arrhes he is invited to join the league. 
Failing to do so, he can obtain no credit 
or financial assistance from any member. 
As these are strictly farming communities where the crops, principally cotton, 
are raised on credit, the efficiency of the 
plan is apparent. The white man's 
league holds conventions, settles its own 
differences, political and otherwise, and 
makes its nominations for county officers. 
"Now comes the place where the 
Texas law lends its aid to the leaguers. 
The bonds of county officials must be 
signed by responsible individuals residing within the county. As every financially responsible bondsman is a member 
of the league only its nominee can 
qualify." 
Small wonder that the Macon (Ga.) 
Nezcs declares "the white primary has 
long since solved the problem of the 
Negro in politics in this State, and even 
if the Georgia registration law should 
ever be annulled by the Supreme Court 
of the United States the Negro would 
only be able to participate in the general 
elections and in the national electipn. 
The Negro is eliminated from Georgia 
politics for good and for all time." 
Several papers, however, see beyond 
their noses. The Louisville (Ky.) Post 
pins its faith to the continued solid white 
vote of the South. The Charleston 
Nezvs and Courier sees, however, the unfortunate results of this method of voting. "The net result of the 15th Amendment, the full force of which is now 
asserted by the Supreme Court, has been 
to prevent the white people of the Southern States from dividing upon political 
questions into those natural divisions 
which are the rule elsewhere. It has not 
given the Negro any practical advantage 
whatsoever. Instead it has made matters 
more difficult for him. But it has repressed the development of a healthy 
political independence on the part of the 
whites." 
The real danger of intelligent efforts 
in the white South lies in the ignorance 
of white people. The Louisiana des-176 TH E CRISIS 
patch to the New York Herald says that 
the coming' constitutional convention 
"will face the problem of whether the 
several thousand of illiterate white 
voters possessed of no property" shall 
be "disfranchised or be admitted to the 
franchise through some new method." 
The Charleston News and Courier, 
says "Wherever any considerable number of white men are unable to read and 
write there is a joint in the armor of 
white supremacy. This is the South's, 
real weakness, which ought to be cured 
without delay." 
Of course the corollary of this is that 
the Negroes must be kept in becoming 
ignorance ! Meantime the plea to intelligent Negroes not to want to vote and, 
not to let their followers vote bobs up, 
again. The Nezvs Leader of Richmond, 
Va., says: 
"The intelligent, law-abiding, self-respecting Negroes, who are the product 
of the South's 'restricted franchise legislation,' and who are in a position to 
leaven the masses with higher aspirations, would be guilty of a crime against 
their race if they did not discourage all 
suggestion from any quarter whatever 
that the decision in the 'grandfather, 
clause' cases stands for aught but what 
appears on its face." 
The Chronicle of Augusta, Ga., is of 
course sure that "politics is the greatest 
danger of the Negro." 
The Houston (Tex.) Chronicle is 
most amusing. It practically says "sh!" 
"The less said about politics, so far as 
the Negro is concerned, and the less 
laws passed and the less commotion invited the better it will be for him and 
for the white people with whom he lives 
and to whom, under favorable conditions, he is of tremendous economic 
value." 
"Southern journalist," writing in the 
Boston Transcript regards all this of 
little avail. He declares that "the general disqualification of the Negro in the 
South by a literacy test is not possible," 
and also that the Negro is becoming a 
property holder on a large scale. While 
the Supreme Court decision is not likely 
to have immediate political effect yet he 
says: 
"It will, however, have a revolutionary, though slow, influence on the whole 
social and industrial structure of the 
South. It will be worth, in educational 
value, more than a direct appropriation 
or endowment of millions for schools. 
It will, in a word, do more to reduce 
illiteracy than all the propaganda and 
compulsory education laws put together. 
It is not an exaggeration, therefore, to 
say that the ultimate effect of the decision on Southern development will be 
but slightly less than that exerted by the 
Emancipation Proclamation." 
THE BLACK MAMMY 
By JAMES WELDO N JOHNSON 
O whitened head entwined in turban gay, 
O kind black face, O crude, but tender 
hand, 
O foster-mother in whose arms there lay 
Th.i race whose sons are masters of the 
land! 
It was thine arms that sheltered in their 
fold, 
It was thine eyes that followed through 
the length 
Of infant days these sons. In times of 
old 
It was thy breast that nourished them to 
strength. 
So often hast thou to thy bosom pressed 
The golden head, the face and brow of 
snow; 
So often has it 'gainst thy broad, dark 
breast 
Lain, set off like a quickened cameo. 
Thou simple soul, as cuddling that babe 
With thy sweet croon, so plaintive and 
so wild, 
Came ne'er the thought to thee, swift 
like a stab, 
That it some day might crush thine own 
black child? LINCOLN AND TRUT H 
H E picture of Sojourner 
Truth with Lincoln, on 
the cover of your August 
number, revives many 
thrilling childhood memories in my mind. Sojourner Truth stayed with us dirough 
the time of one of the woman suffrage 
conventions in New York City. I was a 
little girl and very proud of my reading, 
and I used to read to Sojourner. One 
day she told me, when I suppose I 
showed some surprise at her not being 
able to read, that "she could not read 
such little things as letters; that she read 
men." 
HARRIOT STANTON BLATCH . 
'VOTES FOR WOMEN " 
H E editor had naturally 
expected to embellish 
this number of TH E 
CRISIS with a particularly stron g article on 
woman suffrage. He 
was going to marshall arguments, use a 
bit of sarcasm and end with some appeal 
to justice and sentiment. 
However, after he had read the symposiums sent us so quickly and courteously by our friends from Boston to 
Tacoma and from St. Paul to Atlanta 
he saw no necessity of adding a singie 
word to what must be regarded as one 
of ihe strongest cumulative attacks on 
sex and race discrimination in politics 
ever written. 
FRANK 
H E Frank case only offers 
illustration of the truth 
that in the South all 
things may be brought 
about by an appeal to 
prejudice. This case differs from similar cases principally in 
that the victim was a Jew instead of a 
Negro and that a governor had courage 
enough at the last to resist the popular 
clamor for his blood and base his decision on the evidence in the case. The 
case also illustrates strikingly the inadequacy of our legal machinery in solving 
questions of justice. Frank escaped a 
legal lynching by the narrowest possible 
margin. His sentence was commuted by 
Governor Slaton only a few hours before the time appointed for his death. 
His appeal had been carried to the Supreme Court of the United States. The 
majority of the body like that of the 
State Supreme Court based its adverse 
decision entirely on points of law. It 
practically said that Frank had had a 
fair trial in law, if not in fact. 
It is also difficult, it seems, for Boards 
of Fardon and Governors to deal with 
an "atmosphere"—say such an atmosphere as that of Atlanta, during the 
hours in which Frank's life hung in the 
balance. Perhaps that is the real reason 
for the logical decision that a man of 
whose guilt there is too grave a doubt 
to hang him, may still be found guilty 
with enough certainty to spend his life 
in a Georgia convict camp. At all events 
it is very like the law. 
Editorial VOTES FOR WOMEN 
A Symposium by Leading Thinkers of Colored America 
THE LOGIC OF WOMA N SUFFRAGE 
BY REV. FRANCIS J. GRIMKE 
Pastor ijth St. Presbyterian Church, 
Washington, D. C. 
I
A M heartily in favor of woman suffrage. I did not use to he, but it 
was simply because I had not given the 
subject due consideration. The moment 
I began to think seriously about it, I 
became convinced that I was wrong, and 
swung over on the other side, and have 
been on that side ever since. I do not 
see how any one who stops to think, 
who takes a common sense view of 
things, can be opposed to the franchise 
for women. What is this right to vote, 
after all? Is it not simply the right to 
form an opinion or judgment as to the 
character and fitness of those who are to 
be entrusted with the high and responsible duty of making laws and of administering the laws after they are made, 
and of having that judgment count in 
the selection of public officials? The 
ballot is simply the expression of the individual judgment in regard to such 
matters. Such being the case three 
things are perfectly clear in my mind: 
(1) . The interests of women are just 
as much involved in the enactment of 
laws, and in the administration of laws, 
as are the interests of men. In some 
respects they are even more so. In 
many things, such as the liquor traffic, 
the social evil, and other demoralizing 
influences, which directly affect the 
peace and happiness of the home, the 
kind of laws that are enacted, and the 
character of the men who are to enforce 
them, have for women a peculiar, a special interest. 
(2) . The average woman is just as 
well qualified to form an opinion as to 
the character and qualifications of those 
who are to be entrusted with power as 
the average man. The average man is 
in no sense superior to the average 
woman, either in point of intelligence, 
or of character. The average woman, 
in point pf character, is superior to the 
average man ; and, in so far as she is, 
she is better fitted to share in the selection of public officials. 
(3) . To deprive her of the right to 
vote is to govern her without her consent, which is contrary to the fundamental principle of democracy. That 
principle is clearly expressed in the 
Declaration of Independence, where we 
read: "Governments are instituted 
among men, deriving their just powers 
from the consent of the governed." 
Under this principle, which is a just 
principle, women have the same right to 
vote as men have. Are they not governed? And being governed, can the 
government imposed upon them be justly imposed upon them without their con-VOTES FOR WOME N 179 
sent? It is simply to treat them as minors and inferiors, which every self-respecting woman should resent, and continue to resent until this stigma is removed from her sex. The time is certainly coming, and coming soon I believe, 
when this just claim on the part of 
women will be fully recognized in all 
truly civilized countries. 
m 
CHICAGO AN D WOMAN' S SUFFRAGE 
BY HON . OSCAR DE PRIEST 
Alderman of the City of Chicago 
I favor extension of the right of suffrage to women. The experience in Chicago has been that the women cast as intelligent a vote as the men. In the first 
campaign in which the women voted in 
Chicago, a certain degree of timidity attended their advent. In the recent campaign, however, the work of the women 
was as earnest and the interest as keen 
as that of the men and in some instances 
the partisanship was almost bitter. As 
far as the colored men are concerned, in 
the aldermanic campaign of 1914 the 
feeling was so high that it penetrated 
social, church and other circles and some 
friendships of long standing were threatened. In the campaign of 1915 when 
colored men were primary candidates for 
alderman, the women of the race seemed 
to realize fully what was expected of 
them, and, with the men, rolled up a 
very large and significant vote for the 
colored candidates ; and they were consistent at the election, contributing to a 
plurality of over 3,000 votes for the successful colored candidate in a field of 
five. Personally, I am more than thankful for their work and as electors believe they have every necessary qualification that the men possess. 
m 
POLITICS AN D WOMANLINES S 
BY BENJAMI N BRAWLEY 
Dean of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Ga. 
The argument is all for woman suffrage. More and more one who takes 
the opposing view finds himself looking 
to the past rather than to the future. 
Each woman as well as each man is a 
child of God, and is entitled to all the 
privileges of that high heritage. We are 
reminded of the heroine in " A Doll's 
House: " "Before all else you are a 
wife and mother," says the husband in 
Ibsen's play. "No, " replies Nora, "before all else I am a human being." 
There is one objection which many 
honestly find it difficult to overcome. 
There are thousands of men in this 
country who are theoretically in favor 
of woman suffrage, but who would be 
sorry to see their wives and sisters at the 
polls. They cannot overcome the feeling that woman loses something of her 
fineness of character when she takes her 
place with a crowd of men to fight out 
a live issue. Her very need of a protector calls forth man's chivalry; take 
away that need and the basis of woman's 
strongest appeal to man is gone. 
Even this last objection, merely a 
practical one, can be overcome. The 
finest and deepest culture is not that 
which keeps its possessor forever enclosed in a Doll's House. It is rather 
that which looks at life in the large, with 
a just appreciation of its problems and 
sorrow, and that labors in the most intelligent manner to right the wrongs that 
are in existence. When once everywhere 
woman has entered the fray and helped 
to clean up some of the graft in our 
cities and to improve the tone of our 
voting places, even this last fear will 
disappear. 
m 
CHRISTIANIT Y AN D WOMA N 
BY JOH N HUKST, D.D., 
Bishop of the African M. E. Church and 
Secretary of the Bishops' Council 
The earlier civilizations seem to have 
conspired to limit woman's sphere; her 
position and functions as member of the 
community were to extend so far and no 
further. Intellectual accomplishments 
and graces could raise her beyond the 
status of the slave, but not beyond the 
estimate put upon a toy, a bauble or a 
common-place ornament. Often she was 
subjected to systems leading to degradation, stifling her soul and stealing away 
from her the qualities that make an individual and a woman. The law forbidding her to abstain from the service 
at the Jewish Synagogue, said she should 
not be seen. Amidst the civilization of 
classic antiquity, even down to the enlightened age of Pericles, she was subservient to the caprices and rude pas-180 TH E CRISIS 
DR. GRIMKE MR. LEWIS JUDGE TERRELL MISS JACKSON 
sions of the other sex. Her fate was 
disposed of with little regard to her 
wishes. She had even no choice as to 
whom she should marry. The sacred 
fire of love was not supposed to burn 
upon the altar of her heart. She was 
but a commodity, a chattel to be bartered 
off. Under the Roman law, her status 
was hardly that of a human being. 
Whether under the Empire or the Republic, she had not even a first name. 
But with the advent of Christianity, 
the path for a true, honorable and lasting civilization was laid. It discarded 
and upset the teachings of the past It 
gave woman her freedom, and womanhood has been lifted to the place where 
it justly belongs. Christianity established equality and community of woman 
with man in the privileges of Grace, as 
being heir together with all the great 
gifts of life; receiving one faith, one 
baptism and partaking of the same holy 
table. Its thundering message to all is 
"There is neither Jew nor Greek, there 
is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female, for we are all one in 
Christ Jesus," and the echo of its teachings the world over is to "Loose her and 
let her go. " 
"ABOU T AUNTIES " 
BY HON . J. W. JOHNSON , 
Formerly U. S. Consul to Nicaragua 
There is one thing very annoying 
about the cause of Woman Suffrage and 
that is the absurdity of the arguments 
against it which one is called upon to 
combat. It is very much more difficult 
to combat an absurd argument than to 
combat a sound argument. The holder 
of a sound argument is generally a person amenable to reason and open to conviction ; whereas, the holder of an absurd argument is always a person blinded by prejudice or bound by some such 
consideration as custom or sentiment; a 
person, indeed, to whom it is often impossible to prove that 2 and 2 make_4. 
The people who oppose votes for 
women are divided into two classes:— 
those who boldly declare that women 
are inferior beings, neither fit nor capable of becoming fit to exercise the right 
of suffrage, and those who apologetically contend that the ballot will drag 
woman down from her domestic throne 
and rob her of all gentleness, charm, 
goodness,—this list of angelic qualities 
may be extended to any length desired. 
It takes only a glance to see the striking analogy between these two arguments and the old pro-slavery arguments. 
The very ease with which they can be 
disproved makes them exasperating. 
But, regardless of all arguments, for 
or against, woman is going to gain universal suffrage. The wonderful progress made by the sex in the last century 
and a half places this beyond doubt. 
This progress is nowhere more graphically indicated than by the fact that in 
the first edition of the Encyclopedia 
Britannica (1771) the article "Woman " 
consisted of eight words, "Woman,—the 
female of man—See Homo. " In the 
edition of 1910 the article "Woman " 
takes up seven pages. Besides there are 
thirty women among the writers of the 
Encyclopedia, and the work contains 
articles on more than five hundred 
women, distinguished in history, literature and art. VOTES FOR WOME N 181 
Woman has made her place in the arts, 
she is making her place in the economic 
world, and she is sure to make her place 
in the political world. 
m 
OU R DEBT TO SUFFRAGISTS 
BY HON . ROBERT H. TERRELL, 
Justice of the Municipal Court, District of 
Columbia 
Of all the elements in our great cosmopolitan population the Negro should 
be most ardently in favor of woman suffrage, for above all others, lie knows 
what a denial of the ballot means to a 
people. He has seen his rights trampled 
on, he has been humiliated and insulted 
in public, and he has brooded over his 
weakness and helplessness in private, all 
because he did not possess the power 
given by the vote to protect himself in 
the same manner as other classes of citizens defend themselves against wrong 
and injustice. To those who oppose the 
right of women to vote it may be well 
to quote the stirring words of Benjamin 
Wade, of Ohio, uttered on the floor of 
the United States Senate, when he was 
advocating Negro Suffrage. He said: 
"I have a contempt I cannot name for 
the man who would demand rights for 
himself that he is not willing to grant 
to every one else." 
Finally, as a matter of sentiment, 
every man with Negro blood in his veins 
should favor woman suffrage. Garrison, 
Phillips. Frederick Douglass and Robert 
Purvis and the whole host of abolitionists were advocates of the rigfht. I often 
heard it said when I was a bov in Boston that immediately after the Civil Wa r 
Susan B. Anthony, Tulia Ward Howe, 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and other leaders of the women's rights movement at 
the request of these men devoted all of 
their efforts towards obtaining the ballot 
for the Negro, even to the neglect of 
their own dearly cherished cause, hoping, indeed, that the black man, who 
would be in some measure the beneficiary of their work and sacrifice, would 
in turn give them the aid they so sorely 
needed at that time. Now what our 
fathers failed to do for these pioneers 
who did so much for our cause before 
and after the great war, let us do for 
those who are now leading the fight for 
woman suffrage. I believe that in supporting them we will render our country 
a great and much needed service. 
WOMA N IN TH E ANCIENT STAT E 
BY W. H . CROCMAN, LITT.D., 
Professor of Ancient Languages, Clark University, S. Atlanta, Ga. 
Slowly but steadily woman has risen 
from a state of servile dependence to her 
legitimate position of respect and consideration, and it needs no prophetic 
vision to see that the full recognition of 
her civic rights is near at hand. To 
form a just estimate of her achievements 
to date one must necessarily take into 
consideration the point from which she 
started, that is to say, the condition of 
her sex in the ancient state. 
For light on this we turn naturally to 
the two most enlightened nations of antiquity. In the Homeric age woman 
was treated, we should infer, with tender and affectionate regard, and her 
virtues were sung by the greatest of 
poets. Even today, after twenty-seven 
centuries have rolled by, one cannot read 
without emotion and a thrill of admiration the story of Penelope's conjugal 
fidelity to her absent husband. Nor are 
we less affected by the scene of Hector 
and Andromache with the babe in her 
arms. Yet it would not be safe to conclude that these instances were fairly 
representative of the general status of 
woman in the ancient state, for at the 
same period there also existed cruelty, 
brutality, treachery. Beside the fidelity 
of Penelope may easily be placed the infidelity of Helen and the perfidity of 
Paris. Women were captured in war 
and subjected to the unspeakable. The 
greatest poem of the ages is but a recital 
of the fatal quarrel of two brutal men 
over the disposal of a captive maiden. 
Woman had practically no part in state 
affairs. Her duties were chiefly confined to the home. Says one writer: 
"At no time of her life could a woman 
be without a guardian. If her husband 
was not alive, it would be her nearest 
male relative, and this person remained 
her guardian even when she was married. After her husband's death her son 
was her guardian. She could not legally 
make any contract beyond a shilling or 
two—there was no occasion for an 
Athenian to advertise that he would not 182 TH E CRISIS 
MISS BURROUGHS MRS. DAVIS MISS JONES MRS. TURNE R 
be responsible for his wife's debts—and 
she could not bring actions at law." 
And all this in Athens, in Athens at 
the summit of her greatness ! 
It is needless to sav that a somewhat 
similar state of things existed at Rome 
where the father had the right of life 
and death over every member of the 
family. Verily it is a far cry from the 
rostrum of today, graced by the presence 
of a woman earnestly pleading for her 
civic rights, to that dismal period when 
she was a negligible factor in human 
affairs. 
WOMEN' S RIGHTS 
BY CHARLES W. CHESNUTT 
Author of "The Wife of His Youth," "The 
Marrow of Tradition," etc. 
I believe that all persons of full age 
and sound mind should have a voice in 
the making of the laws by which they 
are governed, or in the selection of those 
who make those laws. As long as the 
family was the social unit, it was perhaps well enough for the householder, 
representing the family, to monopolize 
the vote. But with the broadening of 
woman's sphere the situation has 
changed, and many women have interests which are not concerned with the 
family. 
Experience has shown that the rights 
and interests of no class are safe so 
long as they are entirely in the hands of 
another class—the rights and interests 
of the poor in the hands of the rich, of 
the rich in the hands of the poor, of 
one race in the hands of another. And 
while there is no such line of cleavage 
between the sexes as exists between 
other social classes, yet so far as women 
constitute a class as differentiated from 
men, neither can their rights be left with 
entire safety solely in the hands of men. 
In the gradual extension of statutory 
rights, women are in many countries, 
the equals of men before the law. They 
have always been subject to the burdens 
of citizenship. The burden of taxation, 
generally speaking, falls more heavily 
upon them, perhaps because they are 
more honest in returning their personal 
property for taxation, or less cunning in 
concealing it. They are subject, equally 
with men, to the criminal laws, though 
there, I suspect, for sentimental reasons, 
the burden has not fallen so heavily upon 
them. Their rights need protection, and 
they should be guarded against oppression, and the ballot is the most effective 
weapon by which these things can be 
accomplished. 
I am not in favor of woman suffrage 
because I expect any great improvement 
in legislation to result from it. The contrary, from woman's lack of experience 
in government, might not unreasonably 
be expected. Women are certainly no 
wiser or more logical than men. But 
they enjoy equal opportunities for education, and large numbers of them are 
successfully engaged in business and in 
the professions and have the requisite 
experience and knowledge to judge intelligently of proposed legislation. Even 
should their judgment be at fault—as 
men's judgment too often is—thev have 
fine intuitions, which are many times a 
safe guide to action; and their sympathies are apt to be in support of those 
things which are clean and honest and 
just and therefore desirable—all of VOTES FOR WOME N 183 
which ought to make them a valuable 
factor in government. 
M 
STATES ' RIGHTS AN D TH E SUFFRAGE 
B Y HON . JOH N R. LYNC H 
Major, Retired. U. S. Army; formerly Speaker 
of the House of Representatives of Mississippi; U. S. Representative, 6th District of 
Mississippi, 43rd, 44th a)id 47th Congresses; 
4th Auditor of the U. S. Treasury, 1889-93; 
etc. 
What the friends and advocates of 
equal suffrage have to fear more than 
anything else, is the dangerous and mischievous doctrine of "States' Rights." 
Those who are opposed to equal suffrage 
contend that it is a local and not a National question—one that each State 
must determine for itself. But what is 
a State ? It seems to be an indefinable 
abstraction. "The United States," the 
National Constitution declares, "shall 
guarantee to every state in this Union a 
republican form of government," but 
this is a meaningless declaration. It has 
remained a dead letter since the adoption 
of the constitution, because some of the 
so-called states were and are nothing 
more nor less than despotic oligarchies. 
We have seen and now see that what is 
called the "State," in some parts of the 
country, is simply a part of the white 
males who obtained (it matters not 
how), possession of the local machinery 
which they call, and the National Government recognizes, as the "State Government." This government never allows 
any of the inhabitants of the "State" 
who are not identified with the ruling 
oligarchy to have any voice in its government. The friends of Equal Rights can 
hope for no favorable action from such 
governments as these, for they are not 
only close corporations, but they are determined to allow none to become members of the corporation that the managers can not absolutely and easily control. With a view of perpetuating themselves in power through the local machinery called "the State," some of them 
have, during the past twenty-five years, 
practically nullified the fifteenth amendment of the Federal Constitution. The 
recent decision of the Supreme Court by 
which some of the different schemes and 
devices for this purpose were declared 
unconstitutional and void is a most hopeful and encouraging indication. Let the 
friends of equal suffrage take on renewed hope. Victory, and that too on a 
national basis will ultimately be an accomplished fact. 
DISFRANCHISEMENT IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
B Y I.. 11. 1IKKSIIA W 
Of the United Slates Land Office 
As regards the ballot, men and women 
are equal in the District of Columbia; 
both are deprived of it. Citizens of the 
District of Columbia have not voted 
since 1874, the year in which the ballot 
was taken from them by act of Congress. 
From time to time since then fitful 
efforts have been made to recover the 
lost right, but there has been no properly 
organized sustained movement with that 
object in view. 
The female population of the District 
of Columbia exceeds the male population in round numbers by 16,000. In 
intelligence, in public spirit, in moral influence and in support of established institutions and philanthropies the female 
population is the equal, and in some instances the superior of the male population. If suffrage is ever restored to the 
citizens of the District it should be made 
to include the women. The right of the 
woman to vote rests on the same basis 
as the right of die man: her humanity. 
"Honio sum, et humani a mi nil alienum 
puto ;"—I am a human being, and I consider nothing belonging to the human 
race foreign to me is the maxim constituting the major premise of the logic of 
human rights. To deny woman the right 
to vote is so far forth a denial of her 
humanity. 
In the District of Columbia where 
neither man nor woman votes, the 
woman is as worthy a member of the 
community as the man. If Congress 
should reenact suffrage in the District 
it is difficult to see how it could except 
women from its exercise without fixing 
upon them an undeserved stigma. The 
example of women voting in the District 
would go a long way toward educating 
the backward and unprogressive throughout the country to the necessity of doing 
justice to the other half of our common 
humanity. 184 TH E CRISIS 
VOTES AND LITERATURE 
BY MRS. PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 
Matthew Arnold defined literature as 
a "criticism of life." By that he meant 
life in its entirety, not a part of it. 
Therefore, if a woman is to produce real 
literature, not pretty phrasing, she needs 
to have a firm grasp on all that makes life 
complete. The completion and perfection of life is love—love of home and 
family, love of humanity, love of country. No person living a mentally starved 
existence can do enduring work in any 
field, and woman without all the possibilities of life is starved, pinched, 
poverty-stricken. It is difficult to love 
your home and family if you be outcast 
and despised by them ; perplexing to love 
humanity, if it gives you nothing but 
blows; impracticable to love your country, if it denies you all the rights and 
privileges which as citizens you should 
enjoy. j :? ' 
George Eliot, George Sand, Harriet 
Beecher Stowe wrote great novels because they looked at life from the point 
of view of the masculine mind, with a 
background of centuries of suffrage. 
Yet each was peculiarly feminine. It is 
a significant fact that the American and 
English women who are now doing the 
real work in literature—not necessarily 
fiction—are the women who are most 
vitally interested in universal suffrage. 
WOMEN AND COLORED WOMEN 
BY MRS. MAR Y B. TALBERT 
Vice President-at-large, National Association 
of Colored Women 
- Tt should not be necessary to struggle 
forever against popular prejudice, and 
with us as colored women, this struggle 
becomes two-fold, first, because we are 
women and second, because we are 
colored women. Although some resistance is experienced in portions of our 
country against the ballot for women, 
because colored women will be included, 
I firmly believe that enlightened men, 
are now numerous enough everywhere 
to encourage this just privilege of the 
ballot for women, ignoring prejudice of 
all kinds. 
The great desire of our nation to produce the most perfect form of government, shows incontestible proofs of advance. Advanced methods in prison reforms are shown by ottr own state Commissioner, Miss Katherine B. Davis. 
Advanced methods in school reforms are 
shown by Mrs.Ella Flagg Young, Superintendent of Education of Chicago. Advanced methods in the treatment of 
childhood and adolescence, are shown by 
the bureau of child welfare under Mrs. 
[ulia C. Lathrop. Each of these women 
have been most kindly toward the 
colored women. In our own race advanced methods of industrial training 
are shown by Miss Nannie Ii. Burroughs, Mrs. Charlotte Hawkins Brown, 
and Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, and 
numbers of other colored women in various lines have blazed the path of reform. 
By her peculiar position the colored 
woman has gained clear powers of observation and judgment—exactly the 
sort of powers which are today peculiarly necessary to the building of an 
ideal country. 
"VOTES FOR MOTHERS" 
BY MRS. ( OKA LIE FRANKLI N COOK 
Member of the Board of Education, District 
of Columbia 
I wonder if anybody in all this greatworld ever thought to consider man's 
rights as an individual, by his status as 
a father? yet you ask me to say something about "Votes for Mothers," as if 
mothers were a separate and peculiar 
people. After all, I think you are not so 
far wrong. Mothers are different, or 
ought to be different, from other folk. 
The woman who smilingly goes out, 
willing to meet the Death Angel, that a 
child may be born, comes back from that 
journey, not only the mother of her own 
adored babe, but a near-mother to all 
other children. As she serves that little 
one, there grows within her a passion to. 
serve humanity ; not race, not class, not 
sex, but God's creatures as he has sent 
them to earth. 
It is not strange that enlightened 
womanhood has so far broken its chains 
as to be able to know that to perform 
such service, woman should help both to 
make and to administer the laws under 
which she lives, should feel responsible 
for the conduct of educational systems, 
charitable and correctional institutions, 
public sanitation and municipal ordinances in general. Wh o should be more VOTES FOR WOME N 135 
competent to control the presence of bar 
rooms and "red-light districts" than 
mothers whose sons they are meant to 
lure to degradation and death? Who 
knows better than the girl's mother at 
what age the girl may legally barter her 
own body? Surely not the men who 
have put upon our statute books, 16, 14, 
12, aye, be it to their eternal shame, even 
10 and 8 years, as "the age of consent!". 
If men could choose their own 
mothers, would they choose free women 
or bond-women? Disfranchisement because of sex is curiously like disfranchisement because of color. It cripples 
the individual, it handicaps progress, it 
sets a limitation upon mental and spiritual development. I grow in breadth, in 
vision, in die power to do, just in proportion as I use the capacities with which 
Nature, the All-Mother, has endowed 
me. I transmit to the child who is bone 
of my bone, flesh of my flesh and 
thought of my thought; somewhat of my 
own power or weakness. Is not the 
voice which is crying out for "Votes for 
Mothers" the Spirit of the Age crying 
out for the Rights of Children? 
!fii 
"VOTES FO R CHILDREN" 
BY MRS. CARRIE W. CLIFFORD 
Hditorary President of the Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs of Ohio 
It is die ballot that opens the schoolhouse and closes the saloon; that keeps 
the food pure and the cost of living low; 
that causes a park to grow where a 
dump-pile grew before. It is the ballot 
that regulates capital and protects labor; 
that up-roots disease and plants health. 
In short, it is by the ballot we hope to 
develop the wonderful ideal state for 
which we are all so zealously working. 
When the fact is considered that 
woman is the chosen channel through 
which the race is to be perpetuated; that 
she sustains the most sacred and intimate 
communion with the unborn babe; that 
later, she understands in a manner truly 
marvelous (and explain only by that 
vague term "instinct") its wants and 
its needs, the wonder grows that her 
voice is not the first heard in planning 
for the ideal State in which her child, as 
future citizen, is to play his part. 
The family is the miniature State, and 
here the influence of the mother is felt 
in teaching, directing and executing, to 
a degree far greater than that of the 
lather. At his mother's knee the child 
gets his first impressions of love, justice 
and mercy ; and by obedience to the laws 
of die home he gets his earliest training 
in civics. 
More and more is it beginning to be 
understood that the mother's zeal for 
the ballot is prompted by her solicitude 
for her family-circle. 
That the child's food may be pure, 
that his environment shall be wholesome 
and his surrounding sanitary—these are 
the things which engage her thought. 
That his mind shall be properly developed and his education wisely directed ; that his occupation shall be clean 
and his ideals high—all these are things 
of supreme importance to her, who began to plan for the little life before it 
was even dreamed of by the father. 
Kindergartens, vacation-schools, playgrounds ; the movement for the City 
Beautiful; societies for temperance and 
for the prevention of cruelty to children 
and animals—diese and many other 
practical reforms she has brought to 
pass, in spite of not having the ballot. 
But as she wisely argues, why should 
she be forced to use indirect methods to 
accomplish a thing that could be done so 
much more quickly and satisfactorily by 
the direct method—by casting her own 
ballot ? 
The ballot! the sign of power, the 
means by which things are brought to 
pass, the talisman that makes our dreams 
come true! Her dream is of a State 
where war shall cease, where peace and 
unity be established and where love shall 
reign. 
Yes, it is the great mother-heart reaching out to save her children from war, 
famine and pestilence; from death degradation and destruction, that induces 
her to demand "Votes for Women, " 
knowing well that fundamentally it is 
rcallv a campaign for "Votes for Children." ^ 
TRAININ G AN D TH E BALLOT 
. BY MAR Y FITZBUTLER WAKING, M. D. 
Chairman of the Department of Health and 
Hygiene, N. A. C. W. 
In the earlier ages, the thought was 
common among the nations of the worid, 186 TH E CRISIS 
BISHOP HURST MRS . ASBERR Y MRS. BRUCE MRS. TERRELL 
that woman was not the equal of man. 
Socially, religiously and politically she 
was compelled to take an inferior position and to submit to the will and wiles 
of man. In some countries she was not 
even considered as the legal parent of 
her own child. 
The ability to weigh the merits of the 
persons to fill office and the value of 
ordinances which govern the people, requires a knowledge of men and affairs. 
A trained mind, no matter in what profession, is more capable of making logical deductions; therefore the people 
naturally turn for information to the enlightened. The question of sex is of no 
importance. 
The work of the professional woman 
just as that of the professional man 
places her in a position to help the many 
with whom she necessarily comes in contact, and therefore her influence is a 
power to be reckoned with. The ethical 
relations of the professional woman 
makes her, ofttimes, the confidant and 
advisor of others and for that reason she 
should he well informed on political 
issues and aspirants for public office. 
Trained judgment is needed everywhere and it should alwavs lie armed 
with the ballot. 
M 
DEMOCRAC Y AN D ART 
BY WILLIA M STANLEY BRAITHEWAITE 
Author of Anthologies of Magazine Verse, etc. 
We find that at almost every stage of 
its development Democracy has been betrayed by one or another of its idealist 
professors, except one. Democracy has 
its source in political ethics, but neither 
religion nor social justice have performed towards it, in practice, those 
strict obligations which are defined by 
the nature of their idealisms. Art alone 
has kept her covenant with Democracy. 
Art is the embodiment of spiritual 
ideals. There is no human progress 
without a previsioning of the aspiration 
through one of the symbolic languages 
of art. All the great craving desires of 
humanity have been promised and attained through the message of art. Art 
cannot flourish in a democracy, is the 
critical opinion common to a good many. 
I say, that in the future, art will not 
flourish without democracy. All that 
democracy has gained in the last twenty 
years it has owed to the ideals of art. 
Was the social conscience of America 
vitalized by religion or the justice and 
wisdom of political enactments? No ; 
but by an art, the art of poetry. The 
undemocratic methods of industrial 
power, did the Christian church protest 
against it? No ; it was a poet with a 
passion and a message. Now, art has 
seen to it that public opinion consider all 
the rights and demands that democracy 
makes towards the justification of its 
ideals. These have not all been accomplished. It has got to eliminate racial 
prejudice which has governmental sanction, and it has got to win sufferance for 
all citizens alike. Art is bringing democracy face to face with beauty, and beauty 
knows neither race, caste nor sex. The 
social vision of art is complete. And its 
light is ever shining upon the luminous 
figure of Democracy, the ideal Mother 
of human hopes, the hopes of lite rejected, of the denied, of the subjected 
individual. 
The voice of art expressing the spirit 
of democracy is beautifully illustrated in VOTES FOR WOME N 187 
this passage from Mr. Witter Bynner's 
recently published poem "The New 
World: " 
"To stop the wound and heal the scar 
Of time, with sudden glorious aptitude 
Woman assumes her part. Iler pity in 
a flood 
Flings down the gate. 
She has been made to wait 
Too long, undreaming and untaught 
The touch and beauty of democracy. 
But, entering now the strife 
In which her saving sense is due. 
She watches and she grows aware, 
Holding a child more dear than property, 
That the many perish to empower the 
few, 
That homeless politics have split apart 
The common country of the common 
heart." ^ 
BLACK WOME N AN D REFORM 
BY MIS S N. II. BURROUGHS 
Secretary of the Woman's Auxiliary to the 
National Baptist Convention 
The Negro Church means the Negro 
woman. Without her, the race could not 
properly support rive hundred churches 
in the whole world. Today they have 
40,000 churches in the United States. 
She is not only a great moral and spiritual asset, but she is a great economic 
asset. I was asked by a southern white 
woman who is an enthusiastic worker 
for "votes for (white) women," "What 
can the Negro woman do with the ballot?" I asked her, "What can she do 
without it?" When the ballot is put into 
the hands of the American woman the 
world is going to get a correct estimate 
of the Negro woman. It will find her 
a tower of strength of which poets have 
never sung, orators have never spoken, 
and scholars have never written. 
Because the black man does not know 
the value of the ballot, and has bartered 
and sold his most valuable possession, it 
is no evidence that the Negro woman 
will do the same. The Negro woman, 
therefore, needs the ballot to get back, 
by the wise use of it, what the Negro 
man has lost by the misuse of it. She 
needs it to ransom her race. A fact 
worthy of note is that in every reform 
in which the Negro woman has taken 
part, during the past fifty years, she has 
been as aggressive, progressive and dependable as those who inspired the reform or led it. The world has yet to 
learn that the Negro woman is quite 
superior in bearing moral responsibility. 
A comparison witli the men ol her race, 
in moral issues, is odious. She carries 
the burdens of the Church, and of the 
school and bears a great (leal more than 
her economic share in the home. 
Anothe r striking fact is that the 
Negro woman carries die moral destiny 
o f two races in her hand. I lad she not 
been the woman of unusual moral 
stamina that she is, the black race would 
have been made a great deal whiter, and 
the white race a great deal blacker during the past fifty years. She has been 
left a prey for the men of every race, but 
in .spite of this, she has held the enemies 
o f Negro female chastity at bay. The 
Negro woman is the white woman's as 
well as the white race's most needed ally 
in preserving an unmixed race. 
The ballot, wisely used, will bring to 
her the respect and protection that she 
needs. It is her weapon of moral defence. Under present conditions, when 
she appears in court in defence of her 
virtue, she is looked upon with amused 
contempt. She needs the ballot to reckon 
with men who place no value upon her 
v
:
rtue, and to mould healthy public sentim:nt in favor of her own protection. 
TH E SELF-SUPPORTING WOMA N AN D 
TH E BALLO T 
BY MIS S M. E. JACKSON 
Of the Civil Service of the State of Rhode 
Island, President of the R. I. Association 
of Colored Women's Clubs 
Looked at from a sane point of view, 
all objections to the ballot for women are 
but protests against progress, civilization 
and good sense. 
"Woman's place is in the home." 
Would that the poorly paid toilers in 
field, work-shop, mill and kitchen, might 
enjoy the blessed refreshment of their 
own homes with accompanying assurance that those dependent upon them 
might be fed, clothed, properly reared 
and educated. 
Each morning's sun beholds a mighty 
army of 8,000,000 souls marching forth 
to do battle for daily bread. You inquire 
who they are? Why, the mothers, wives, 
sisters and daughters of the men of 
America. "The weake r vessels," the 
majority of whom are constrained from 
necessity. 188 TH E CRISIS 
DR. WARIN G DR. CROGMA N MRS. TALBER T PRESIDENT HOPE 
There is no field of activity in the 
country where women are not successfully competing with men. In the agricultural pursuits alone, there are over 
900,000. In the ministry 7,000 dare 
preach the gospel with "Heads uncovered." And 1,010 possess the courage to invade the field of the Solons, 
bravely interpreting the laws, although 
their brothers in all but twelve of the 
forty-five States (so far as the ballot is 
concerned), class them with criminals, 
insane and feeble-minded. 
The self-supporting woman out of her 
earnings, pays taxes, into the public 
treasury and through church, club and 
civic organization gives her moral backing unstintingly to her Country. 
Imagine if you can the withdrawal of 
this marvelous economic force,—the 
working women of America! It is a 
fundamental necessity of modern civilization. 
The laboring man has discovered beyond peradventure that his most effective weapon of defence is the ballot m 
his own hand. The self-supporting 
woman asks for and will accept nothing 
less. 
"TRUST TH E WOMEN! " 
BY MRS. JOSEPHINE ST. PIERRE RUFFIN 
Pioneer in the elub movement among Colored 
Women of the United Stales 
Many colored men doubt the wisdom 
of women suffrage because they fear that 
it will increase the number of our political enemies. I have been in suffrage 
work in Massachusetts for forty years 
and more. I have voted 41 times under 
the school suffrage laws. I was welcomed into the Massachusetts Woman's 
Suffrage Association by Lucy Stone, 
Julia Ward Howe, Ednah Cheney, Abby 
Morton Diaz and those other pioneer 
workers who were broad enough to include "no distinction because of race" 
with "no distinctions because of sex." I 
feel that a movement inaugurated by 
men and women of such wisdom and 
vision as that of the early workers, cannot dwindle or be side-tracked, and that 
today, as in those early days, the big 
women, the far seeing women, are in the 
ranks of the suffragists. W e can afford 
to follow those women. W e are justified 
in believing that the success of this 
movement for equality of the sexes 
means more progress toward equality of 
the races. I have worked, along with 
other colored women with those pioneers 
in the Abolition movement, in the various movements to open educational opportunities for women, business opportunities for women and to equalize the 
laws; the longer I have been associated 
with them, the more deeply I have been 
impressed by this farsightedness and 
broadmindedness of the leaders, both 
early and late, in the Woman Suffrage 
Movement. 
Y. W. C. A. 
BY MRS. A. W. HUNTO N 
Formerly Adviser to the National Board of 
Directors. Y. W. C. A. 
A membership of more than a half 
million, representing some seventeen 
nationalities, makes the Young Women's 
Christian Association a world movement. 
In the United States three hundred 
thousand members, distributed in 979 
college, city and county associations have 
as their objective the advancement of the VOTES FOR WOME N 189 
"physical, social, intellectual, moral and 
spiritual interests of young women." 
One of the most unique and wonderful 
characteristics of the association is the 
adaptability to meet the needs of all 
types of women, so that its membership 
is as diversified as women's lives and interests. This diversified membership, 
constituting at once the governing and 
sustaining force of the association, is its 
strongest barrier to any creed save that 
upon which the movement is founded. 
However difficult it is to express any 
relation between the association and the 
suffrage movement, it is not difficult to 
understand that the association spirit 
dominating womanhood would count foj 
righteousness in the solution of this important question. 
Acutely suffering from the wrongs 
and humiliations of an unjustly restricted suffrage, it is but natural that 
the colored woman should feel deeply 
and keenly wherever the question of suffrage arises. But the colored woman 
within the association, in common with 
thousands of her sisters who have been 
touched by other spiritual forces, is animated by a fine spirit of idealism—an 
idealism not too far removed from 
everyday existence to find expression in 
service. Hence she is giving her energy 
largely to the development of the highest 
qualities of mind and soul—for these 
alone can give to the nation the best 
there is in citizenship. 
m 
VOTE S FOR TEACHERS 
BY MIS S MARI A L. BALDWI N 
Principal of the Agassis Public School. 
Cambridac, Mass. 
Women teachers in those states where 
school suffrage has already been granted 
them have found out that even so meagre 
a share of voting power has given them 
a definite influence, and has brought 
about a few notable results. In several 
cases local schools have been kept, by 
the women's vote, from the control of 
persons who threatened all that was best 
in them. Candidates for election to 
school boards reckon early with the 
"teacher vote" and hasten to announce 
their "rightness" on this or that issue 
supposedly dear to teachers. It is wholly 
reasonable to infer that the extension 
of the suffrage will enable teachers to 
secure more consideration for themselves, and to have an important influence on the quality of the persons 
chosen to direct the schools. 
At the outset teachers will be confronted by the temptation of power—the 
temptation to use it for personal or selfish ends. What, as a class, will they do 
with this temptation! What motives 
will lie behind their advocacy of men 
and measures? What tests of fitness 
will they apply to the candidate for their 
votes? Will they decline to recognize 
line qualities for school service in one 
wh o may hold heretical views about increase of salaries, or length of vacations? These questions, which would 
test any group of workers, I cannot 
answer. I can only submit what seems 
an earnest that this group may stand the 
test. 
The profession of teaching has a rich 
inheritance. These convictions were bequeathed to it, to have and to hold: that 
the dearest interests of life are in its 
keeping; that its peculiar service to 
society is to nourish and perpetuate 
those noblest aspirations called its ideals ; 
that to do such work one must be devoted and unselfish. 
This tradition still inspires the teacher. 
Some of the unrest, the dissatisfaction 
with conditions that are everywhere has 
penetrated her world, but probably no 
other work is done less in the commercial 
spirit nor any service more expanded 
beyond what "is nominated in the bond." 
Many school rooms are moving pictures 
of this spirit at work. 
One is warranted in thinking that 
teachers will transfer to their use of the 
ballot this habit of fidelity to ideals. 
WOMA N SUFFRAGE AN D SOCIAL 
REFORM 
BY MIS S ANN A H. JONES 
Chairman of the Department of Education, 
National Association of Colored Women 
Of the four great institutions of 
human uplift—the home, the school, the 
church, and the State, woman has a direct controlling force in the first three 
institutions. In the State her influence 
at present is indirect. Since her control 
in the three is unquestioned, should she 
not have the legal means—the ballot—to 
widen and deepen her work? 
In terms of today, her work is the 
conservation and improvement of the 190 TH E CRISIS 
MRS. HUNTO N MR. CHESNUTT MAJOR LYNC H MR. HERSHAW 
child ; child labor laws, inspection of the 
health of school children, safeguarding 
the youth in the home, in the school, in 
the court, in the street, in the place of 
amusement. Her work is the prevention 
of vice with its train of physical and 
moral evils; the enactment of laws to 
secure and regulate sanitation, pure 
food, prohibition, divorce; the care of 
the aged, the unfortunate, the orphan. 
All the questions touch in a very direct 
way the home—woman's kingdom. 
When an experiment has been tried 
for a certain purpose it seems logical to 
refer to its success or failure. A review 
of the States in which women have had 
the ballot will show that their exercise 
of the franchise has been along the lines 
of reform mentioned above. Her ballot 
has not been cast against the forces of 
right. Is it probable that in the other, 
the more conservative States, her course 
will be less judicial ? 
It may take a little time for woman to 
learn to make the ballot count for 
righteousness, but her closer view, and 
sympathetic touch will be of material 
assistance in the solution of the social 
problems that confront her as the homemaker. 
The century awaits the "finer issues" 
of woman's "finely touched spirit." 
m 
COLORED WOMEN' S CLUBS 
BY MRS. B. K. BRUCE 
Editor of the official oraan of the National 
Association of Colored Women 
The national club movement among 
colored women began definitely in 1895, 
when a call was sent out from Boston 
bv Mrs. [osephine St. P. Ruffin to a 
number of prominent colored women to 
meet in conference. 
The special object of that conference 
was to repel and refute a vicious statement by an evil minded individual who 
had given currency to his false and misleading statements in book form. A 
national association called The National 
Federation of Colored Women, was 
formed at this conference. 
The first convention of the new organization was called to meet a year 
later in July 1896, in Washington, D. C. 
In August of 1896 the first convention 
of the National League of Colored 
Women was held. The two organizations united under the name, National 
Association of Colored Women. In 1916 
this organization will hold its tenth biennial session in Baltimore, Maryland. 
One year ago in Wilberforce, Ohio, the 
largest and most successful convention 
in its history was held. Over four hundred delegates, representing 50,000 
women organized in clubs throughout 
the country, were present. The delegates came from the East, the West, the 
North, the South. The burden of the 
song of the numberless reports and addresses was social service not alone for 
colored people but for humanity. Miss 
Zona Gale said of the meeting that she 
had never attended a convention which 
so confirmed her belief in the possibilities of the common human race. 
One thousand clubs are numbered 
with The National Association of 
Colored Women. In 1912-13 these clubs 
raised $82,424. Over $60,000 was spent 
in purchasing property for Orphans' 
Plomes, Working Girls' Homes, Christian Association Homes, Social Settlements and so on. In 1914 the valuation 
of the various properties exceeded $100,-
000. VOTES FOR WOME N 191 
VOTE S FOR PHILANTHROP Y 
BY MRS. ELIZABETH LINDSAY DAVIS 
National Organiser, National Association of 
Colored Women 
The New citizen is no longer a novelty 
nor an experiment. She is demonstrating at all times her fitness for her duties 
and responsibilities by study ; by insistent investigation of all candidates for 
public office regardless of party lines; by 
an intelligent use of the ballot in correcting the evils arising from graft, dishonesty and misappropriation of public 
funds; by persistent agitation to arouse 
civic consciousness, until now she is a 
potent factor in the body politic. 
Men recognize her intuitive ability to 
think and decide for herself, respect her 
opinions and bid for her vote. 
The keynote in the music of the 
Twentieth Century is Social Service, and 
in no better way can systematic philanthropy be done than by using the power 
of the ballot upon the heads of the great 
corporations and private individuals to 
direct their attention to the serious consequences of present day industrial and 
social unrest, the crime, disease, and 
poverty emanating from bad housing 
and unwholesome environment, to train 
their hands to give systematically to the 
cause of human betterment. 
Woman is a pioneer in the forward 
movement for Social uplift, racial and 
community development, whether for 
the abandoned wife, the wage earning 
girl, the dependent and delinquent child 
or the countless hordes of the unemployed. 
The highest and most successfully developed philanthropical work depends 
absolutely upon the control of political 
influence by the best American citizenship, men and women working in unity 
and cooperation at the polls. 
WOMA N SUFFRAGE AN D TH E 15TH 
AMENDMEN T 
BY MRS. MAR Y CHURC H TERRELL 
Honorary President of the National Association of Colored Women 
Even if I believed that women should 
be denied the right of suffrage, wild 
horses could not drag such an admission 
from my pen or my lips, for this reason : 
precisely the same arguments used to 
prove that the ballot be withheld from 
women are advanced to prove that 
colored men should not be allowed to 
vote. The reasons for repealing the 
Fifteenth Amendment differ but little 
from the arguments advanced by those 
who oppose the enfranchisement of 
women. Consequently, nothing could be 
more inconsistent than that colored people should use their influence against 
granting the ballot to women, if they believe that colored men should enjoy this 
right which citizenship confers. 
What could be more absurd and 
ridiculous than that one group of individuals who are trying to throw off the 
yoke of oppression themselves, so as to 
get relief from conditions which handicap and injure them, should favor laws 
and customs which impede the progress 
of another unfortunate group and hinder 
them in every conceivable way. For the 
sake of consistency, therefore, if my 
sense of justice were not developed at 
all, and I could not reason intelligently, 
as a colored woman I should not tell my 
dearest friend that I opposed woman 
suffrage. 
But how can any one who is able to 
use reason, and who believes in dealing 
out justice to all God's creatures, think 
it is right to withhold from one-half the 
human race rights and privileges freely 
accorded to the other half, which is 
neither more deserving nor more capable 
of exercising them ? 
For two thousand years mankind has 
been breaking down the various barriers 
which interposed themselves between 
human beings and their perfect freedom 
to exercise all the faculties with which 
they were divinely endowed. Even in 
monarchies old fetters which formerly 
restricted freedom, dwarfed the intellect 
and doomed certain individuals to narrow circumscribed spheres, because of 
the mere accident of birth, arc being 
loosed and broken one by one. In view 
of such wisdom and experience the 
political subjection of women in the 
United States can be likened only to a 
relic of barbarism, or to a spot upon the 
sun, or to an octopus holding this republic in its hideous grasp, so that further 
progress to the best form of government 
is impossible and that precious ideal its 
founders promised it would be it seems 
nothing more tangible than a mirage. 192 TH E CRISIS 
VOTE S FOR HOUSEWIVE S 
BY MRS. LILLIA N A. TURNER 
Honorary President of the Minnesota Association of Colored Women's Clubs 
That the housewife, that great reasoner, will vote intelligently, is my happy 
conclusion, after reading the ponderous 
decision of a wise man, who protests that 
voters should be "only those who are 
able to substitute reason for sentiment." 
It is such a relief to have an impartial 
definition even though its close analysis 
The bronze tablet in memory of Harriet Tubman erected at Auburn, 
New York. Designed and cast by John Williams, Inc. 
Bronze Founders, New York. 
might exclude a large portion of present 
voters. But my concern is with the 
housewife, the future voter, as tested by 
the wise man's definition. 
Now, Sentiment is the housewife's 
most cherished possession; to this assertion all agree—the man, the anti-suffragist and the rest of us. Furthermore, 
lack of excessive use will keep it so, for 
the housewife early learns to substitute 
Reason for Sentiment. When Sentiment 
wails because husband walks two steps 
ahead instead of beside 
her; weeps because 
Boy's curls are shorn; 
foolishly resents the 
absence of the old attentions, and mor e 
foolishly dwells on an 
infinite variet y of 
things, Reason comes 
nobly to the rescue and 
teaches her that none 
of these things are 
necessar y to life. 
Reason is the constant 
substitute fo r her. 
cherished Sentiment. 
But Reason's assertion, 
that protection from 
vice for Son of the 
Shorn Curls, is impracticable for business reasons, is too 
difficult for mental 
gymnastics. Sentiment 
conquers , and the 
housewife unreason ­
ably demands the ballot to protect Son! 
However, Reason being already so well developed through "discipline by substitution" 
(still quoting the wise 
man) I have ceased to 
tremble when I hear 
dire predictions of the 
ruin that is expected 
to follow the rapid approach of woman's 
franchise. 
[Articles were received too 
late for insertion from President John Hope, Hon. C. W. 
Anderson, Mrs. G. W. Morgan, Hon. W. H. Lewis and 
Mrs. N. J. Asberry.l TH E RAIN S 
A Story of Jamaica 
By KELSEY PERCIVAL K1TCHEL 
"Some love too little, some too 
long, 
Some sell and others buy; 
Some do the deed with many 
tears, 
And some without a sigh: 
For each man kills the things 
he loves." 
The Ballad of Reading 
Gaol. 
WHE N Tedd y Bamaby 
" * sailed for Jamaica he 
carried mingled feelings of 
heroism, heartache and hope in 
his youthful breast. He was 
thoroughly alive, so he told his 
friends, to the grave importance of his departure for the 
distant wastes of the tropics. 
How could there be a real civilization so fa r from Hyde 
Park he questioned. 
His eyes stung a bit as he 
watched a certain little figure 
grow dim on the wharf as the 
"Port Antonio" slid into deep 
water. Oh, yes, he loved her 
truly, the pink-and-white girl 
standing there wavin g her 
handkerchief and crying. He 
promised himself for the hundredth time to make haste to 
earn enough for his return to 
England for the wedding they 
had planned together so often. 
Then he considered the paradisaical season that should be 
theirs in Devon after which She.would 
go back with him to the islands. He 
was sorry for himself. From self pity 
his thoughts ran on to the hazy but 
limitless schemes he had for fortunemaking in the coffee-fields. 
Once in Kingston he settled comfortably in the slow gait of tropic life, waiting unconcernedly for the issue of a letter his father had sent to a friend of the 
Rugby days, gone years before to the 
West Indies. It had been hoped he 
would find the boy employment. There is scant room for 
younger sons at Home. 
The letter brought Colonel 
Willoughby in person to see 
the son of his long ago chum. 
And rather excitedly, for he 
was old and addicted to the use 
of planters' punch, he besought 
Teddy to take the place of 
head-man at Blenheim, which 
was on e of the Colonel's 
estates laid edgewise on the 
South side of the Blue Mountains. With the situatio n 
went the princely remuneration 
of two hundred pounds a year. 
So Teddy packed his London clothes and his French 
novels in the two tin boxes 
which the Colonel had insisted 
he would need to protect his 
belongings from the ants and 
rain, and the two men drove 
to Gordon Town ; there they 
found pack-mules and the lean 
hill horses waiting to take them 
up the narrow trail to the 
mountains. 
Riding past sugar - banana -
and coffee-plantations and then 
into the steamy darkness of the 
virgin forest Teddy Barnaby 
stared about him with a .faint 
distaste: Jamaic a was too 
crude; he preferred England. 
And this fact he told his 
mother and his promised wife 
in almost all of the fat letters 
he sent home. He described too, as 
vividly as possible his one-room tin 
house and his loneliness—especially the 
loneliness. 
In time he discovered that the islanders were really civilized enough to have 
tea in their precipitous rose-gardens just 
as the people in England did. 
Daily he amused himself by imagining 
how the dainty pink-and-white person 
would adorn the rose-embowered cottage 
among the cloud-capped mountains; and 194 TH E CRISIS 
he planted roses against the corrugatediron walls preparing for the future. 
This, too, he wrote about to the two 
women who secretly cried a little and 
kissed the letters much. 
But as the months scarcely varying in 
heat, passed, his enthusiasm for the new 
work wore away and Teddy looked 
about for diversion; letter-writing could 
not fill all the long blank evenings after 
the Rains came. 
The Rains were partly responsible for 
his choice of diversion. 
They march over the mountains 
straight and heavy without wind or 
thunder; shutting out hill after hill, tree 
after tree ; the rocks seem to gush water; 
springs start from under a man's very 
feet; and the rivers roar and groan under 
their burden. When, at rare intervals 
the clouds break, the unfathomable blue 
of the tropical sky is revealed an 1, perhaps, the palpitant pale line of the sea ; 
then the light and color vanish behind 
the grey circle of snoring rain. And always from the valleys rises the deep 
song of running water. 
Teddy sat in his one room shuddering 
with loneliness. And so, when slender 
black Phema came with the regularity of 
the early nightfall to prepare his tea and 
light the lamp, he found himself making 
excuses for her to stay and listen to him 
talk. He was very lonely. 
The Rains may be borne for a day or 
two or for a week, but when the narrow 
ring of rain curtains the newcomer for 
a month or more, he stands in danger of 
many things. He must have iron nerve 
or no imagination to live the first wet 
season through alone without a scar on 
mind or conscience. The older planters 
pass the time with bottle or book ; with 
accounts or butterfly collections, or in 
whist at ha'penny points. But Teddy, 
remembering the Summer storms at 
home idled at his window waiting for 
the clouds to lift. 
He was the only white man on the 
mountain then, for the Colonel had betaken himself to England to drink the 
wine of his youth, and Teddy was left 
in charge of "Blenheim." He should 
have known better—the Colonel—his 
head-man was too young and too ignorant of hill-life to watch out the first 
Rains alone. 
He braved them for two weeks. Then 
something in him snapped—the tender 
threads which bound him to the outer 
world, the White world of the north. 
The interminable ages between a daylight and a dark came full of a hideous, 
dread. A longing for companionship 
gripped him. Pie wondered how he 
could endure the night of shadows ; the 
prying fingers of the rain about the roof ; 
the phantoms tapping at the door till in 
spite of himself he opened to them to 
find nothing but a wild breath of the 
mountain spirit which blew mockingly 
upon his cheek wetting it with warm 
rain. Fretfully he would slam the thin 
door shut and sit nursing his thoughts 
which were anything but wholesome. 
Something in him snapped, that night, 
indeed. 
After the two months passed and the 
-breaking clouds let the streaming, smoking hills extend their vast backs in the 
warmth of the revivifying sun, Teddy 
took up his life where he had left it off 
or near enough to the old way to deceive 
himself. 
Astride his Waler he went among "the 
people" as they gathered the scarlet 
cherries on the hill-sides; he dogged the 
"boys " cutting "bush," and when the 
spirit moved him he flicked the bent 
backs with the curling whip which was 
always tucked in his belt. In return 
they loved him ; loved him for the very 
welts and bruises which he lavished on 
them. And added to the reverence and 
affection for him as the better man 
which stirred the hearts of the male 
blacks, the women worshipped him. 
Through the picking he was always 
far afield and Phema brought his luncheon daily down the steeps. The tray, 
laden with curried fowl and boiled 
plantain and covered neatly with a serviette from the interested gaze of _the 
people, made the journey on her head; 
she never raised her hand to steady it as 
she swayed between the coffee-trees, her 
slim body balancing from rock to rock, 
her skin showing blue-black through the 
rags of her bleached blouse. 
She was attractive in her way and it 
was a way that Teddy liked. There was 
a pleasure for him in her eyes as from 
under her vivid handkerchief they TH E RAINS 195 
sought his with the glance of abject 
love; he liked her fresh, damp lips protruding childishly as though she pouted 
ever so little; he liked the supple play 
of her body at the waist, and the small 
faultless breasts under the coarse linen. 
Placing the tray beneath some orange-tree she would kneel waiting her 
master's will. In the ring of shade, leaning over his trav he would toss a word 
to her now and then at which her face 
would light and flinging her arms 
across her chest she would rock with 
joy, crooning some black girl's bewitching song of the hills. 
And Teddy was content. 
He dropped into the way of calling her 
by names which his tongue had learned 
in England—names belonging to a fairer 
woman. 
When he thought of home it was 
vaguely ; when letters came he read them 
carefully, affectionately, but his fancy 
did not fly so often to the possibilities of 
the rose-embowered cottage. 
At last the crop was in and rejoicing 
at die respite from his labors, Teddy 
had his horse saddled for a journey to 
Kingston. Meekly Phema packed the 
clothes of civilization in the tin box ; 
then with her dog-like eyes she followed 
him down the bridle-path till he disappeared behind a shoulder of the mountain. At once she set about preparing a 
feast for his return. 
She learned that season to face him 
dry-eyed when he announced his intention of departing for "the bottom." He 
disliked tears. She tried to reason out 
some comfort for herself but always 
ended with the simple wish that he 
would never go away from her again. 
So the year ran out that kept the 
Colonel in England. 
He arrived at last in his big stone 
house and he brought many messages 
from two women for Teddy. And in 
fond remembrance of long sweet English days that caused him to wink quickly in recalling, he offered the boy six 
months' leave and a generous advance 
upon the two hundred a year. 
Teddy, with all the stored-up hearthunger of eighteen months' absence from 
everything that he held dear, exulted as 
he ordered Phema to pack his boxes. 
He intimated that he might be gone a 
little longer than usual but he could not 
bring himself to tell her any more. 
She watched him ride singing down 
the path, and she waited for his homecoming. She put the tin house in 
order ; she cooked his ricey-coco, and she 
waited. 
Then a whisper grew and stirred 
among the people that the Young Master had gone Home to take a wife. Patiently Phema denied and waited. 
The roses which Teddy had planted 
flourished, half-covering the unsightly 
walls and Phema tended them, still waiting. The black women shunned her and 
laughed behind their hands for she had 
been too simple and too happy to throw 
an>' cloak of concealment over her great 
enchantment. So in her solitude she 
waited. 
Teddy Barnaby and his wife stepped 
from the gang-plank of the "Port Antonio" six months later and he carried 
his head with the conscious pride of the 
man who walks beside a woman more 
than pretty and who is all—his. 
It was not reluctantly that they 
mounted their horses and started on the 
upward climbing path to the cloudy 
hills. The future held so much for both 
of them that they were eager for each 
day's dawning. 
She looked with curiosity about her; 
so lately come from bland and urban 
England the ride through the virile, 
primal jungle was an awakening. She 
had only known tamed trees and fields 
and flowers and fragrant blossomed 
hedgerows along quiet lanes; she had 
only known passionless, faint skies and 
she gazed wide-eyed at the raw gigantic 
wilderness. She felt, so she told Teddy, 
as though behind the lush trees, the 
beetling cliffs, the blazing sky there 
lurked a Thing with enigmatic smile, 
waiting, brooding . . . 
He laughed outright at her. "That's 
silly, you know, little woman!" and 
thereafter she kept her fears to herself. 
The path twisting on itself wound 
through teak and mahogany forests. 
Tall wild begonia and heliotrope brushed 
the face of Teddy's wife "As though 
thev were trying me! " she thought with 
a little shiver. In the indentures of the 
highlands—creases left by some dead 
volcano—singing burns danced down 196 TH E CRISIS 
over massed rocks and between high 
fern. On one side rose the sheer hills 
to the scintillant sky; on the other they 
fell away till rivers and verdure below 
were lost in mist. Sometimes a string 
of galled donkeys laden with coffee 
would pass, crushing Teddv and his wife 
close to the warm red rocks. 
Lianas reached across the path; 
orchids flickered in the trees like living 
flame; John Crows hung motionless 
waiting for the ever-present death to 
feed them. To Teddy's wife everything 
seemed to be waiting. 
Darkness fell and the homely little 
lights shone out from the tenants' huts 
and in the air was the sharp smell of 
wood fires and frying yams. The Peakshouldered up into the brightening stars 
and in the stillness of the hill-night 
Teddy and his wife came to Blenheim. 
The Colonel, pushing aside his own 
punch which was dearer to his heart 
than all the grapes of Italy, honored 
them with his imported bottles. And as 
thev laughed and lingered over dinner he 
told how the tin house had undergone a 
change for the bride's sake—it was "now 
a bungalow over which I trust you arc 
to reign in happiness!" he said gallantly. 
He led them there in the starlight and 
it was the rose-embowered cottage of 
Teddy's dreams come true. And then 
the Colonel left them with their new 
happiness and their old love. 
Teddy's wife was provided with two 
black girls who were to obey her housewifely commands and to serve the meals 
in the jalousied dining-room. Teddv no 
longer staved in the fields for luncheon 
but rode the hot steep miles to sit in the 
bungalow with the girl whose face 
haunted him all the hours he was away 
from her,—the face with its fearless 
eyes and mouth to be crushed with kissing. 
But she bein? mistress of so small a 
dwelling found, that prolong it as she 
might, she could occupy but a portion 
of each day in the care thereof, sought 
out the "poor " as she called the blacks. 
For the whole of a London season she 
had slummed and now she threw herself 
enthusiastically into the life of the people. 
Teddy came home from the coffeefields to find her brewing gruels and 
broths; or else hemming sundry garments ; once he said to her: 
"Don't poke about too much; you may 
run across a skeleton!" and they both 
laughed. Gradually her dread of the 
Thing grew less. 
As for Teddy, he had not seen Phema 
since his return and he harboured a hazy 
hope at the back of his brain that the 
Colonel must have "heard something" 
and sent her to another estate; he was 
a good sort, the Colonel, and he would 
do that, Teddy was quite sure. So he 
pushed his memories aside. 
But there came a morning when as • 
the black girl cleared the breakfast table, 
she glanced toward Teddy's wife filling 
a shallow bowl with flaunting orchids, 
and some obscure emotion rose in her, 
some world-old race-hate for the flowerlike face. 
"Phema, she sick, Missus," she said 
laconically. 
Instantly the orchids dropped and the 
mobile countenance, reflected the sympathy of the voice that asked where Phema 
was to be found and who Phema was. 
"She yonder, Missus," and the girl 
pointed to a thatched hut below the 
bungalow. 
"Why, I didn't know anyone lived 
there! Yo u girls have always said the 
hut was empty—" and Teddy's wife 
hastily filled the bowl with her flowers, 
then clasping a jar of broth in her hands 
and with a bancra full of medicines on 
her arm, she scrambled down the coffeefields to the hut. 
The acre of ground surrounding it 
was planted in scallions; a dishevelled 
banana grew beside the step and in the 
path wallowed a scraggy hog. 
The door and single window were 
tightly closed in order to keep out the 
"duppy" that seeks to enter a house of 
sickness. Teddy's wife tapped, expectant of the dozen friends who hoverround the bed of an afflicted black, but 
there was no answer. She lifted the 
wooden latch and stepped within, blinded at first with the dark of the airless 
room. Faintly she heard the broken 
speech of delirium. 
Over and over the voice said a name. 
Teddy's wife shrank against the door, 
a catch in her throat—why must it be 
that name of all there were in the world, N. A. A. C. P. 19/ 
she thought. Then goaded by the spectre-thing smiling, waiting in the great 
hideous jungle—smiling at her and her 
puny fear—she walked across the room. 
She leaned over the tossing bundle in 
the corner and her clasp on the jar of 
broth tightened; her heart beat thickly 
and she shivered a little for in the crook 
of the black woman's arm lay a child 
but a few hours born and it was nearly 
white. 
The mother's eyes, blued with pain 
and the shine which precedes death, 
opened and the clouded mind struggled 
to understand the meaning of the face 
that had risen from the silence to stare 
at the baby in that dreadful way. Reason came presently and Phema snatched 
the baby close to her meagre breast and 
whispered: 
"Why, Missus,.-hab yo' come? Yp' 
want my baby? . . . His baby? . . . 
Ah ! yo' buckra will not even let us 
black people die in peace! W use us 
fo' yo' work or to' yo ' pleasure like de 
mules, until we die—den yo' come to 
look an' laugh !" 
Teddy's wife shivered again and the 
jar o f broth slipped from her fingers. 
Phema's small, choked whisper continued : 
"Yo ' be de wife Young Massa went 
to England to fetch out. Me know! 
Me watched yo' in de house wid he. . . . 
Yo ' kep' he from me t'rough one dry 
season and de Rains . . . an' yet, Young 
Massa did gib me—dis!" She touched 
the child; her red-brown eyes met the 
blue ones of Teddy's wife while over 
each face crept die grey of death—one 
of the body—one of the soul. 
And outside in the hard, white sunlight Teddy Barnaby rode singing home 
to luncheon. 
VITALIZIN G TH E FIFTEENTH 
AMENDMEN T 
The decision of the United States 
Supreme Court handed down by Chief 
Justice White, a Southerner and exConfederate soldier, and declaring the 
"Grandfather Clause" laws void, is the 
most important decision affecting colored 
people rendered by the Supreme Court 
in twenty-five years. It vitalizes the 
Fifteenth Amendment. The National 
Association which through its President, 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, filed a brief in the 
Guinn and Beal case from Oklahoma 
had a part in this important proceeding. 
Three cases were before the Court: one 
from Maryland where the clause was 
embodied in a law relating to registration 
and municipal elections ; two others from 
Oklahoma where the clause was embodied in an amendment to the Constitution which imposed a literacy test from 
which those who were entitled to vote 
prior to January 1, 1866, those who were 
then foreigners, and their lineal descendants were exempted. Chief Justice 
White handed down first the Court's 
opinion in the Oklahoma case of Guinn 
and Beal and that made the ruling out 
of the Maryland statute inevitable. The 
Court was unanimous in the two principal cases. Mr. Justice Lamar dissented 
in the case from Oklahoma wherein Mr. 
fustice Holmes delivered the opinion. 
Mr. Justice McReynolds took no part in 
the cases. 
The Constitution of Oklahoma, upon 
which that territory was admitted to 
the Union as a State, gave something 
like manhood suffrage. Prior to the 
election of 1910, however, an amendment was adopted restricting the franchise by a "Grandfather Clause." The 
case from Oklahoma known as the 
National association for the advancement of colo198 TH E CRISIS 
case of Frank Guinn and J. J. Beal 
vs. the United States arose from the 
indictment and conviction of certain 
election officers in Oklahoma for their 
part in enforcing- the State Constitutional Amendment in question at the general election in 1910. The opinion of the 
Supreme Court was technically an answer by that Court to questions certified 
to it by the United States Circuit Court 
of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. 
The United States Government was 
represented by its Solicitor General who, 
on the request of our President, Mr. 
Storey, permitted him to file a brief for 
this Association. This was done in 
October, 1913, and Mr. Jackson Ralston, 
an eminent lawyer of Washington, D. C. 
who presented the brief to the Court for 
Mr. Storey, wrote that the Solicitor 
General had expressed himself as being 
extremely sympathetic with regard to 
the position taken by this Association, 
and confident as to what he apparently 
regarded as the necessary result of the 
argument. 
The Association's offer of assistance 
to the colored men concerned in the 
Maryland cases brought to test the 
validity of the Annapolis Election Law 
was refused. It afterward developed 
that these suits were set on foot by the 
State Central Committee of the Republican Party during the campaign of 1909. 
which turned upon the issue of a disfranchising amendment to the State Constitution. This amendment was defeated. 
The suits were tried in the lower court 
by the Hon. Charles J. Bonaparte and 
other counsel. Mr. Bonaparte did not, 
however, argue the cases in the Supreme 
Court. It is reported that immediately 
after Judge Morris of the United States 
District Court of Maryland declared the 
Election Law invalid, the town of Ellicott, Md., was unable to hold its election 
because both Republicans and Democrats 
refused to serve as election officers. 
The Chief Justice of the United States 
Supreme Court summed up the opinion 
of the Court in these words : 
"There seems no escape from the conclusion that to hold that there was even 
possibility for dispute on the subject 
would be but to declare that the Fifteenth Amendment not only had not the 
self-executing power which it has been 
recognized to have from the beginning, 
but that its provisions were wholly inoperative because susceptible of being 
rendered inapplicable by mere forms of 
expression embodying no exercise of 
judgment and resting upon no discernible reason other than the purpose to 
disregard the prohibitions of the amendment by creating a standard of voting 
which on its face was in substance but 
a revitalization of the conditions which, 
when they prevailed in the past, had 
been destroyed by the self-operative 
force of the amendment. * * * It is 
true it contains no express words of an 
exclusion, from the standard which it 
establishes, of any persons on account 
of race, color, or previous condition of 
servitude prohibited by the Fifteenth 
Amendment, but the standard itself inherently brings that result to existence, 
since it is based purely on a period of 
time before the enactment of the Fifteenth Amendment and makes that 
period the controlling and dominant test 
of the right of suffrage. 
"We are unable to discover how, unless the prohibitions of the Fifteenth 
Amendment were considered, the slightest reason was afforded for basing the 
classification upon a period of time prior 
to the Fifteenth Amendment. Certainly 
it cannot be said that there was any 
peculiar necromancy in the time named 
which engendered attributes affecting 
the qualification to vote which would not 
exist at another and different period unless the Fifteenth Amendment was in 
view." 
m 
LOUISVILLE SEGREGATION 
ORDINANC E 
The National Association has also put 
its legal work on record in the Louisville 
segregation case passed upon by the 
Kentucky Court of Appeals on June 18 
when the Court declared the segregation 
ordinance valid. This case was carried 
through the lower courts to the Court of 
Appeals by the Louisville Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P., with the assistance of 
the National office. The Branch began 
its activities in this case about a year ago 
when the Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of the National Association 
and Mr. Brinsmade, who was then its 
attorney, addressed a mass meeting in N. A. A. C. P. 199 
Quinn Chapel, Louisville, called to protest against the passage of the ordinance. 
The decision of the Court of Appeals 
was anticipated by the National Association and a representative from Headquarters was in pLouisville when the 
Court declared the ordinance valid. A 
series of meetings was immediately held 
by the local Branch culminating in a 
mass meeting at which the work of the 
Branch was endorsed and a Committee 
of One Hundred and More of its members organized to begin a campaign to 
raise part of the funds necessary to carry 
the case up to the Supreme Court of the 
United States. The Committee of One 
Hundred and More represents all elements of the city including churches, 
schools, and secret societies, and is working under twenty-five captains. The 
National office has agreed to furnish the 
balance of the funds necessary and to 
cooperate with the Branch with legal advice. A full account of the work of the 
Committee will appear in a later issue of 
T H E CRISIS . 
The importance of the Louisville ordinance is far reaching: Birmingham, Ala., 
and other cities are watching the outcome of this case before proceeding to 
pass segregation ordinances. A segregation case brought by the Baltimore 
Branch to test the new city ordinance is 
now pending in the highest court of 
Maryland, and in St. Louis our Branch 
is endeavoring to check the attempt 
which local real estate men are making 
to pass a segregation ordinance by means 
of an initiative petition. 
In the Louisville case, C. H. Buchanan, 
a white man, is suing William Warley, 
a colored man, for failure on the part of 
the latter to fulfil his contract in paying 
for a lot which he purchased from 
Buchanan and on which one hundred 
dollars has already been paid down. Mr. 
Warley, who is President of the local 
Branch, refuses to pay the balance, on 
the ground that he is prevented from 
using the lot by the segregation ordinance. The men who are responsible for 
the Louisville ordinance are reported to 
have taken many suggestions from the 
decision of the Maryland Supreme Court 
which, in declaring the former Baltimore 
segregation ordinance invalid, pointed 
out how a valid ordinance might be 
drawn. The makers of the Louisville 
ordinance claim that its strength is in its 
protection of vested right9. In giving 
the decision of the Kentucky Court of 
Appeals, the Judge said that if colored 
people did not like the parts of the city 
in which they were segregated, they 
could improve them as whites have improved the sections they occupy! 
One of the most aggravating things 
about diis ordinance is that it does not 
represent the real feeling of the best 
white people of Louisville who have generally been friendly to colored people. It 
is the result of the work of a few politicians who represent the interests of a 
small group of white property owners. 
Many of the white people of Louisville, 
although they are indifferent and would 
take no active part against the ordinance, 
disapprove it, and some openly express 
their condemnation. The only ones, 
however, who had the courage publicly 
to protest were three white women, representative Southerners, who when the 
measure was before the Mayor, went to 
him and urged him not to sign it. The 
Men's Federation took no'action whatever on this ordinance. In this connection it is interesting to note that this 
club, which claims to represent the civic 
interests of Louisville, does not include 
in its membership Unitarians, Roman 
Catholics, Jews or colored people! 
Just before this ordinance passed, an 
attempt was made by another group of 
property owners to introduce Jim Crow 
cars. This group of white people who 
are developing a new suburb, to reach 
the heart of the city are obliged to ride 
through a colored section of the town 
in cars which are often crowded with 
colored people. It is reported that the 
failure of this effort to bring in the Jim 
Crow car was largely due to some broadminded white women. 
It will be remembered that the National Association refused to associate 
with counsel in the Jim Crow car case 
brought from Oklahoma known as Mc -
Cabe et al. vs. Atchison, Topeka and 
Santa Fe Railway Company, although in 
order to help Mr. Harrison, the colored 
lawyer who had charge of the case, the 
Association paid one hundred and eighty 
dollars to print the record. Mr. Storey 
refused to file a brief or appear before 200 TH E CRISIS 
the U. S. Supreme Court on the ground 
that the case was not properly drawn. 
As was noted in the CRISI S for January, 
his comment on the case almost a year 
before the opinion of the Court was 
handed down, was almost identical with 
that of Judge Hughes, who said that if 
the case had come before the Court in 
proper form it would have had a good 
chance of having been decided on its 
merits. 
It is the purpose of the Association to 
bring a succession of cases to the Supreme Court until it has placed that 
Court on record on Jim Crow cars, segregation and the race question in general. 
BRANCHES 
Baltimore: 
Mr. Carl J. Murphy, a graduate of 
Harvard, 1913, and instructor in German, has been refused admission to the 
summer courses of Johns Hopkins University on the ground that "no provision 
has been made for colored students." 
The matter was referred to the National 
office and a letter of protest immediately 
sent to the university authorities. 
Mr. Julius C. Johnson was elected 
President of the Branch in place of Dr. 
F. N. Cardozo, whose resignation was 
accepted with regret and with a vote of 
appreciation for his services. Under 
Dr. Cardozo's leadership the Baltimore 
Branch has grown in influence and membership until it ranks among the best in 
the Association. Dr. Cardozo, although 
a busy physician, has been an indefatigable worker for the Association. He 
has given generously of his time and of 
his income as his unselfish devotion to 
the cause often compelled him to neglect 
his practice. He has never received 
remuneration of any kind for his services and was always anxious that public recognition should be given to his 
associates rather than himself. The Association knows it will have his cooperation in the ranks as heartily as when he 
was president. He has set a high standard of idealism and achievement for his 
successor. 
Boston: 
The reception and supper which the 
Boston Branch gave in the vestry of the 
Park Street Church in honor of Miss 
Elizabeth C. Putnam, was attended by 
one hundred and twenty-five guests. Mr. 
Garrison, the President, resigned the 
chair to Mr. Butler R. Wilson who presided. The object in giving the supper 
to Miss Putnam was-happily presented 
by the Rev. Horace Bumstead, and Miss 
Putnam responded in a most interesting 
address, largely reminiscent, giving the 
history of the relations of her family 
with colored people as far back as the 
Revolution. There were short addresses 
by Dr. Ernest Gruening, Miss Maria L. 
Baldwin, the Rev. Benjamin F. Swain 
and others. A selection of songs was 
given by Mrs. Mattie McAdoo . 
Among the generous contributions 
which the Association has recently received, is a check for $91.03 from Mrs. 
Butler R. Wilson of Boston, the balance 
of the proceeds from a series of musicales and assemblies arranged by Mrs. 
Wilson which have already netted the 
Association $67.20. 
California, Northern: 
This Branch gave a reception to Mr. 
Moorfield Storey, the National President, at which Mr. Storey made an address emphasizing the necessity o f 
thorough organization, the need of a 
strong working fund, of the development 
of a central scheme for work, and the 
dropping of petty differences. Short 
addresses were made by Mr. Walter A. 
Butler, Mr. T. M. Jackson and others. 
Cleveland: 
This Branch reports that it has succeeded in having a teacher who discriminated against colored pupils removed 
from the public schools and that it has 
also been able to place men in positions 
which had previously been closed to colored applicants. It has held several successful meetings with Judge Thomas M. 
Kennedy, Hon. John P. Green, Mrs. 
Mary Bethune, the Rev. B. F. Bradley 
and Mrs. Carrie W . Clifford of Washington as speakers. 
Columbus: 
A committee of this Branch, uniting 
with churches and other organizations, 
filed a protest with the Chief of Police 
requesting the investigation of the shooting of a colored woman, Miss Hallie 
Harris, who happened to be passing 
along the street when two police officers,. 
Thomas Robinson and William Bragg,. N. A. A. C. P. 201 
were trying to arrest a colored boy without warrant for an alleged misdemeanor. 
The shooting took place about three 
o'clock in the afternoon. The petition 
demanded the suspension of the police 
officers pending investigation. 
District of Columbia: 
Discrimination in the Post Office in 
Washington has again been reported to 
the National office and a strong protest 
sent to the Postmaster General who has 
replied that the matter is being investigated. 
The President, Air. Grimke, has succeeded in getting two colored girls reinstated on the temporary force in the 
Department of the Auditor of the Post 
Office. In presenting the matter to Mr. 
Kram, Chief of this department, Mr. 
Grimke pointed out that in discharging 
these girls who were the only colored 
employees, the Department had dismissed 10 0 per cent, of the colored temporary force, at the same time discharging only about 35 per cent, of the corresponding white force. 
The Branch closed its campaign for 
new members with an enrollment of 
1100 . Mr. William Miner, of the committee, secured the largest number, sixty-six new members and fourteen subscribers to the CRISIS . The report of 
this committee, of which Prof. Thomas 
W. Turner is Chairman and Miss Mary 
Cromwell, Secretary, was received too 
late for publication this month. The 
greater part of it will be printed in the 
next issue. 
Des Moines: 
On June 2 this Branch held a second 
educational meeting with Dr. G. H. 
Sumner, Secretary of the Iowa Board 
of Health as the chief speaker. This 
wa9 one of a series of meetings arranged 
by the Educational Committee which is 
giving the colored people of the city an 
opportunity to hear lectures by some of 
the State's most distinguished citizens. 
Los Angeles: 
The Los Angeles Branch addressed a 
circular letter to the candidates for 
Mayor and the City Council which in a 
series of questions requested an expression of opinion on the following matters 
to be decided at the coming election: 
Single telephone plan, the initiative ordinance relating to jitney busses which 
permits discrimination against colored 
people, an ordinance creating a censoring board vested with sufficient authority 
to prohibit pictures against the public 
interest, and an ordinance prohibiting 
discrimination in the matter of seats in 
motion picture houses. The Los Angeles 
P'ost, in publishing a summary of the 
answers and in recommending that 
colored people vote for those candidates 
whose answers showed them alive to the 
interests of colored people, emphasized 
that the N. A. A. C. P. did not endorse 
any political parly or candidate. 
Pittsburgh: 
Although this Branch has only been 
organized a few months, its membership 
is over four hundred. This increase is 
largely due to the splendid work of the 
Membership Committee which has associated with it a number of representative women in sub-committees whose 
energetic efforts in a short time brought 
in almost one hundred and fifty members. 
The Pittsburgh Branch united with 
other organizations in a public protest 
against "The Birth of a Nation" and a 
committee from the Branch called upon 
the Mayor to protest*. An ordinance 
prepared by Mr. William M. Randolph, 
the President, prohibiting moving picture plays "which shall tend to prejudice 
the public mind against any class of lawabiding citizens" was referred to the 
City Law Department by the Mayor. 
Through the activity of the Branch 
discrimination in one of the large department stores has been checked. A 
committee is now conferring with the 
officers of the Boy Scouts in regard to 
conditions on which colored boys can be 
admitted to that organization. 
The quarterly meeting of the Branch 
on June 23rd, was attended by about 
500 . Miss Nerney made the principal 
address. 
The sum of the matter is this: Half the governed, even in culture lands, 
have no voice in their government. This is zvrong. Next November you may 
help right this zvrong. Will you do it? 
Remember that one step toward the abolition of unjust Race discrimination is the abolition of unfair discrimination because of Sex. 202 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Whe n Wil l I B e Insurabl e ? 
There comes once in the lifetime of every man the opportunity to do the thing 
which he ought. If he fails then, that chance never comes again. The things which 
we fail to do are the greatest tests of our lives. W e do not realize until we look 
backward and see. Most of us have more hindsight than foresight. Consequently, 
all our chances are behind us rather than before. And the chance that is behind 
never comes again. 
Not long ago, one of our men received a letter. "If you will call and sec me 
at once, I will take that insurance we were talking about," wrote a man whom he 
had solicited for months. He called and was shocked to note the changed appearance, the slackened step, the lusterless eye of a man who three months before 
had been an example of physical vigor. Yesterday, I learned of that man's death. 
He made the mistake that men so often make of WAITIN G UNTIL H E WA S 
READ Y T O DIE BEFORE PREPARIN G FO R IT. He put the matter off 
until later. But when he was ready to insure H E WA S NO T INSURABLE. 
Now, you who read this, and you who have for several months been reading 
this series of talks, have you ever stopped and asked yourself seriously: "When 
will I be insurable?" When a life insurance agent talked to you last, maybe you 
put him off until LATER. But do you know that in insurance LATE R does not 
come? You know you are going to die. There is no doubt of it. Do you intend 
to wait until you realize that Death is near before insuring? You are making a 
mistake. Whenever the realization dawns on you that you. have not long to live, 
the physician who examines you. if he is honest, and most of them are, knows the 
same thing. When you get so near death that you want insurance, you are too 
near for a life insurance company to take a risk on your life. 
You are insurable today; but when you will be in the future, nobody 
knows. You have no mortgage on the future, neither have you any mortgage 
on continued good health. The greatest thing in the world is life insurance. 
It is the only one of a man's assets that his death automatically converts into 
cash. The poorest thing in the world is the oft-repeated intention to insure. 
The widow and the children can get no bread with the intentions you had 
to insure. The supreme test of your life is: Will you insure NOW, or will you 
put it off until later? W e will send you an application blank and rates for 
the asking. Our physician will examine you no matter where you live. 
Clip the coupon now and mail it, and then AC T when we reply. 
A COPY OF THE STANDARD LIFE YEAR BOOK 
Please \ FREE FOR THE ASKING. 
send me '. f 
particulars \ 
about 
insurance. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
Amount $ •-. 200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA, GEORGI A 
Sex '. 
A
«
e
 Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.0© 
Weight '•. Over One Million and a Half Insurance in Force 
Occupation : Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
Name \ . 
Address \ HEMA N E. PERRY, President 
(C. August, 1915) HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 203 
A VALUABLE BOOK 
The Education of the 
Negro Prior to 1861 
The History of the Education of the Colored People of the 
United States from the Beginning of Slavery to the Civil War 
By 
CARTER GODWIN WOODSON, Ph. D. 
(HARVARD) 
460 pp. $2.00; by mail $2.15 
"This book is neither a controversial treatise on Negro education nor a 
study of recent problems. Dr. Woodson has given us something new. He 
has by scientific treatment amassed numerous facts to show the persistent 
strivings of ante-bellum Negroes anxious to be enlightened. What they 
accomplished is all but marvelous." 
The author aims to put the student of history in touch with the great 
movements which effected the uplift of the Negroes, and to determine the 
causes which finally reduced many of them to heathenism. 
The titles of the chapters are: "Introduction," "Religion with Letters/' 
"Education as a Right of Man," "Actual Education," "Better Beginnings," 
"Educating the Urban Negro," "The Reaction," "Religion without Letters," 
"Learning in Spite of Opposition," "Educating Negroes Transplanted to 
Free Soil," "Higher Education," "Vocational Training," "Education at 
Public Expense." In the appendix are found a number of valuable documents. The volume contains also a critical bibliography and a helpful index. 
OPINIONS 
"I like it very much. You seem to have loosened up on your style a bit and you have done 
an excellent piece of research. .. . I hope that your book will have a good sale."—Edward Chanmng, McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History, Harvard University. 
"It seems clear to me that you have made a substantia^ contribution to the subject and I know 
I shall profit by it."—Frederick J. Turner, Professor of History, Harvard University. 
"I thought at first it would be out of my line, but on turning its pages, I discovered that 
it may well hold the attention of everybody with an intelligent interest in the colored people. 
You write easily and flexibly and have certainly compiled important material in the true spirit of 
scholarship. I congratulate you sincerely."—Ferdinand Schevill, Professor of History in the University of Chicago. 
"It seems to me that you have taken a field of which little has been known and developed 
in it a most interesting and valuable book. I am glad to have it in my library and rejoice that I 
have had the privilege of some personal acquaintance with the author."—Francis W. Shepardson, 
Professor of History in the University of Chicago. 
"I am delighted with the thoroughly scholarly way in which it has been put together and I 
know enough about the subject to appreciate what it has cost you in time and effort to perform 
this work."—Dr. Robert E. Park. 
"It is the story of the effort on the part of certain agencies to educate the Negro. It is above 
all the story of the strivings of the Negro himself under tremendous difficulties and opposition, to 
learn things,, to know more, to be more. . . . Apart from the fund of information on the subiect 
which Dr. Woodson has here offered, the supreme point of this study is the unconquerable will of 
the Negro. . . . The book, as a whole, is an illumination of the recent development of education 
among the colored people."—The Washington Star. 
THIS BOOK MAY BE OBTAINED FROM THE AUTHOR 
222 3 Twelfth Street, Northwest Washington, D. C. 204 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Th e Haitia n Revolutio n 
or 
Sid e Light s o n th e Frenc h Revolutio n 
By T. G. STEWARD 
Second Edition 
"No more interesting book has been written than this of Chaplain 
Steward's on the revolution which converted the colony of St. Domingo into 
the Republic of Haiti."—Army and Navy Register. 
"It cannot fail to be serviceable for an understanding both of the 
Negro race and the relations of France with the West Indies."—Professor 
Albert Bushnell Hart. 
Agents wanted 
Address: T. G. STEWARD, Wilberforce, Ohio 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 8 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY :: ATLANTA, GA. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
Make Extra Money Each Week 
Light, pleasant and very profitable work. Take 
orders for our high grade calling cards at 50 for 25 
cents with name and address. Big demand everywhere. Large commissions. Exclusive territory. 
Write now for samples and terms. 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWINIING. Indianapolis, Ind. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Ten poems by 
EFFIK T. BATTLE , A.M. 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W. Cable. 
PRICE 2 5 CENTS. 
ADDRESS: OKOLON A INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
"THE LIFE AND WORKS OF PAUL 
LAURENCE DUNBAR" 
Containing his COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS, his best short stories, 
numerous anecdotes and a complete 
biography by Lida Keck Wiggins. This 
great book should be in every Negro 
home. Dunbar was the World's Great-
— est Negro Poet and his work stands in 
« a class alone. Contains 430 pages—60 
full-page illustrations Price $1.75 net. 
Postage extra 15c. AGENTS WANTED. 
TEXAS COLORED TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Book Department, Desk D 
1025 Boll St. Dallas, Texas 
Note to Teachers—A post card will 
bring information concerning our teachers* placing agency. We recommend 
competent teachers to positions all over 
the South. Address inquiry to Registration Department. 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 205 
teachers Th *
 ne * efficiency era calls LEJAL.ntjita fo r th c modern way of 
•electing teachers, through A live agency that furnishes 
*
 c £nnect *n
8 [ medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the einbarrassm
^xrt °^ ^ unt i
n
8 and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West VIRGINIA. 
Our list of teachers covers even A wider territory. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
H. Geo. Davenport 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Nowl 
MAIL DEALERS WHOLESALE HOUSE 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may BE made in commissions BY parties HANDLING 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-AMERICAN 
War" combined with "History of the Negro LACE." 
400 PAGES, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
pnnf " To Every Woman 
mm W^L ^ ™ m
m wr *
tes < on e c °P y °»:
 "Ladies Cyclopedia of Health and 
H B H Beauty." This book contains information indispensable to every 
woman; on every subject women are most interested 
in. Tells how to cultivate health and beauty, what 
to use and how to use it. 
1312 Farnam Street 
LOUI S MCCREAR Y 
Omaha, Neb. 
REGALI A 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO 
JOS. L. JONES, PRES. 
CORNER 8th And PLUM STREETS, CINCINNATI, OHIO 
A Race 
Enterprise. 
Modern 
Improvements. 
Office und 
Lobby on 
First Floor. 
Rates to 
Convention 
Delegates. 
Handy for 
Exposition 
Visitors. 
A Hotel for 
Your Wife, 
Daughter or 
Mother. 
34lb St., and Wabash Ave., South 
CHICAGO, ILL. 
Take State Street car, get off at 34th and State Streets, walk one 
block to Wabash Avenue. 
F. C.-BROWN, Proprietor, formerly of Hotel Brown, Charleston, 
W. Va., and Owner of Hotel Brown, of Springfield, 111. "ft _ 
HOTEL BROWN 
T h e Ocean House 
BETTER 
KNOWN AI 
SEA ISLE CITY 
N. J. 
Closes Sept. 15 
The Gordon Sea View, 
Personally managed by Mrs. Lucy Lee. THIS is 
the only property we own on the Atlantic Beach 
front. Every room opens on the ocean. Bathing, 
boating, fishing, music, dancing. A beautiful view of 
the ocean while dining from our new conservatory 
dining room. 
Special rates to school teachers for July. 
Write for rates. Address: 
MRS. LUCY LEE, 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, N. Y. 
After July 1st, The Ocean House, Sea Isle, N. J. 
HOTE L LINCOL N 
(American or European Plan) 
Opens May 15th M±ee"Z 
Combines the restful 
quiet of the country and 
sea-shore with thegayeties of a great city. Only 
a few minutes' ride by 
train separates Ne w 
York City from this delightful spot. HOTE L 
LINCOLN is within 
three minutes' walk of 
the beach where there 
are bathing, boating and 
fishing. 26 magnificently appointed rooms, 
single or en suite. Every 
convenience to suit the 
most exacting.' 
EXCELLENT CUISINE-MODERATE, RATES—BEST OF SERVICE 
For information write C. A. BRECKENRIDGE, Prop. 
Telephone 1417 Hammels Arverne, Long Island 
Mention TH E CRISIS 206 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Wealt h i s Powe r 
The Union Development Company's 
stock is a wealth producer. $40,000.00 
of stock for sale at $10.00 per share. 
Stock is now paying 7%. Every dollar 
invested in first class improved business 
property, located in the heart of the city; 
no risk, no failure. Company duly 
chartered under the laws of Georgia; is 
composed of some of the most successful 
and influential business men and women 
of the city and has great earning possibilities. Send at once for free circular 
giving full information. 
Union Development Co. 
45 8 West Broad Street Savannah, Ga. 
COLORED AGENTS WANTED 
LIBERAL COMMISSION; A POSTAL BRINGS PARTICULARS. 
THE PATRICK-LEE REALTY CO. 
DEPT. O., 2743 WELTON STREET, DENVER, COLO. 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
™ I . ft , /Central 104-W Telephones: { Mai n 6 1 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKINS & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
pianos player pianos 
Factory T O Hom e 
B Y M Y PLAN 
OF SELLING DIRECT FROM FACTORY TO HOME, F CAN SAVE YON 
FROM $110 TO $200 ON MY CELEBRATED EVANS_ARTI8T 
MODEL PIANOS. 
TW P TO FOU R YEAR S TO PA Y 
THE' EASIEST KIND OF TERMS, WEEKLY, MONTHLY, QUAR--
TERLY OR YEARLY PAYMENTS TO SUIT YOUR CONVENIENCE. 
ALL MIDDLEMEN, JOBBERS, DEALERS AND AGENTS 
PROFITS CUT OUT. NO CHARGE FOR SALESROOM EXPENSE FOR M Y 
OFFICE IS IN RNY FACTORY. THESE ARE SOME OF THE REASONS 
WHY I CAN SELL THE EVANS ARTIST MODEL PIANOS FOR SUCH LITTLE 
MONEY. LET ME SEND YOU THE OTHER REASONS WRITE TODAY. 
3 0 DAY S FRE E TRIA L 
WE ALLOW ALL FREIGHT CHARGES, LET YOU.USE Hs&//V 
BEAUTIFUL EVANS ARTIST MODEL PIANO FOR THIRTY ^»// / 
FREE. IF YOU ARE NOT ENTIRELY SATISFIED, WE WILL ta^^y^jf 
IT BACK WITHOUT ANY' COST TO YOU—YOU ARE THE SOLE S ' 
JUDGE TO DECIDE- IF YOU WANT TO KEEP IT, YOU RNAV ^x ^V * 
DO SO ON OUR LOW FACTORY WHOLESALE PRICE ON/S?-' 
MOST CONVENIENT TERMS. 
FRE E MUSI C LESSON S 
TO KVEEY CUSTO M M / 
WE WILL GIVE A TWO YEAR* CORME OF PIANO "V&XCR.^ ^ 
INSTRUCTION FREE. ASK ABOUT OAR LNSUK A 
PLAN AND OUR METHOD OL SAVING // , 
YOU MONEY. WRITE TODAY. ,fi^ 
F. O . EVN S PIANO CO. 
DEPT. 81 
PERSONAL CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. 135th Street New York CITY 
WILLIAM L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
300 Odd Fellow Bldg. ATLANTA, GA. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTANT 
AUDITA SYSTEM! 
BUSINESS INFORMATION BY MAIL. OPEN FOR 
ENGAGEMENTS JULY AND AUGUST 
BOX 25, WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
WILBERFORCE, O. 
AGENT S WANTE D FO R 
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 
FO R SCALP , HAI R AN D SKI N 
P . O . BOX 102 , WILMINGTON , DEL . 
Mention THE CRISIS A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. IT is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
A T THE LO W PRICE OF 5 0 CENTS NET—B Y MAI L 5 6 CENTS 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
These book* may be obtained from The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
The Home University Library 
It made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Clot h bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r r*/ \ „ • 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sold separatel y - - OUC < Ilcl 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C Pigou 
94 volumes now ready. Send for a list 
HENRY HOLT AN D COMPAN Y
 3 4
 : E ™ T 
Mention TH E CRISIS A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HOUSE BEHIN D THE CEDARS. (Charles W. Chesnutt) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRICS OF LOWL Y LIFE. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARROW OF TRADITION. (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPORT OF TH E GODS . (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D OF PRIMITIVE MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HAL L AND HI S FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 5 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBA R 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICAN ABROAD. 2 Volumes. (William H. Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORED INVENTOR. (Henry E. Baker) 1 5 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. (Julia L . Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISIS ' 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S 