EMANCIPATIO N NUMBE R 
TH E CRISIS 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 371 TE N CENT S A COP Y 
Vol . 5—No. 3 JANUARY , 1913 Whole No . 27 Bert. Williams 
invites you to hear him sing the songs that have made 
him famous. His droll, humorous portrayal of those 
comic songs is heard exclusively on Columbia Records. 
We Sell Columbia Machines and Records 
The world's greatest artists may be assembled in your record cabinet and 
brought forth at any moment to entertain, inspire and educate. There's Josef 
Hoffman, with a soft masterly interpretation of Mendelssohn's "Spring Song;" 
a bit of nonsense from Weber and Fields, a classic number from Mary Garden, 
Zenatello, David Bispham, or the recorded voices of any of the world's great 
artists without one exception. 
The whole realm of music awaits your every mood and fancy; a record to 
meet your every demand and a machine artistic in appearance and rich in tonal 
quality to fit the size of your purse. 
Columbi a "Eclipse," $20 Record s fro m 65c. up 
We have a splendid machine for $13.50 
Columbias sell from $17.50 to $250.00 
The "Eclipse" embodies all the latest Columbia features—the continuous 
and uninterrupted tone chamber, the perfected Columbia reproducer, the Columbia 
tapered tone arm, the Columbia tone-control shutters, the faultless and noiseless 
Columbia motor (double-spring drive). 
The "Eclipse" is 15 5/8 inches square, built of beautiful quartered oak (or 
mahogany)—plays 3 disc records with one winding. 
New records are issued monthly. If you already have a machine let us 
send you each month a catalogue of these new records. 
Simply write and say: "Send me a record catalogue each month." This 
service is FREE . 
Your local dealer may meet our prices, but he cannot duplicate our service. 
His machine has probably been in the store several months, exposed to dust, 
light, linger prints, etc.; ours is shipped new from the factory. Write for 
catalogue of machines and records. 
THE DUNBAR CO., 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE . A T 26 VESE Y STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Edited by W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard , 
W . S. Braithwaite, M . W . Ovington, Charles Edwar d Russell and others. 
Contents for January, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE . B y Laur a Wheeler . 
ARTICLE S 
PAGE 
A HOLIDA Y SUGGESTION . B y M . V . Clar k 132 
EMMY . A Story. (Concluded.) B y Jessie Fause t 134 
EQUALIT Y AN D LIBERTY . B y Caleb S. S. Dutto n 144 
TH E ROA D T O TH E BOW . A Poem . B y Jame s D . Corrother s 121 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 111 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 119 
OPINIO N 122 
EDITORIA L 127 
LETTER S •• •• 130 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 143 
TH E BURDE N 145 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The, date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can-be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 108 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
FORWARD 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for Negro 
Yout h which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus. Te n 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintained in par t by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term began September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C . N . I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located i n the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manua l training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers ar t 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth , Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthfu l Location . 
Th e Best Mora l an d Spiritua l Environment. 
A Splendi d Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s ver y reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fal l Ter m Bega n September , 1912. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subject! 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy , with manua l training , giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepar e a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Daytona Educational and Industrial 
School for Negro Girls 
DAYTONA , FLORID A 
It reaches, b y reaso n of its location , a larg e 
territor y of Negr o childre n deprive d of educa ­
tiona l privileges. 
Its comfortabl e hom e lif e an d Christia n Influence s insur e a certai n individua l attentio n 
an d superio r trainin g impossibl e i n large r Institution s o f its kind . 
Mrs . France s R . Keyser , formerl y i n charg e 
of the Whit e Ros e Hom e fo r Workin g Girls, 
in Ne w Yor k City , ha s been elected Principa l 
of th e Academi c Department . Writ e fo r catalo g 
an d detaile d information . 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUN E 
Founder and Principal 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 109 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY'S 
328 Leno x Avenue 
Telephone Harle m 1896 
126th Street, NE W YORK . 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l Wav ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice i n parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen' l Intr.; Dr . Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
Open all year 'round. For Males 
only. Facilities unsurpassed. Strong 
Faculty. Practical Courses. 
Board, Lodging and Tuition $7 
per month. 
Winter Term Began December 2, 
1912. 
Write to-day for catalog or free 
tuition. 
JAS . B . DUDLEY , President 
GREENSBORO, N . C. 
Southern Business College 
BIRMINGHAM , ALA . 
Ba y and night school, teaching Shorthand, Type ­
writing, Business English, Business Arithmetic , 
Bookkeeping and preparing for Civi l Service. A 
high-grade commercial school with competent instructors and healthy surroundings. The only Negro 
school of its kin d in the world. Fo r catalogue and 
furthe r information address 
Southern Business College 
4th Avenue and 15th Street 
W . J . ECHOLS , Principa l 
J . P . BOND , Secretary-Manage r 
Send you r boy South—the land of Opportunity. 
Th e Prairi e Vie w State Norma l and Industrial 
College of Texas. E . L . Blackshear . Principal . W . 
C . Rollins, Treasurer . Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the Unite d States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industrial advantages. Ex ­
penses low—idea l climate—new buildings. 
Fo r particular s address: 
H . J . MASON , Secretary 
Prairi e View, Walle r County, Texas 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sol d Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlant a University , Atlanta , Ga . 
A NARRATIV E of F 
o 
R 
B 
i 
R 
t 
H 
d 
A 
y 
s 
TH E NEGR O 
B y Mrs . Leil a Amo s Pendleton 
A comprehensive history of the 
Negro race from the earliest period 
to the present time; told in pleasing narrative style; may be read 
and understood by children. Bound 
in cloth and illustrated. 
Address: Pric e $1.50 
MRS . L . A . PENDLETO N 
1824 11th Street, N . W. , 
Washington , D . C . 
F 
o 
R 
E 
Y 
E 
R 
Y 
D 
A 
Y 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
B y Jame s F . Morton , Jr. , A . M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York , N. Y . 
HOM E OCCUPATION S FO R BOY S AN D GIRL S 
B y Berth a Johnston 
Mothe r finds some happy work for little hands 
to do, Pric e 50 cents. Address the Author , 1054 
Bergen Street, Brooklyn , N. Y . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 110 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
G O T O COLLEG E 
The World To-day Is Calling for 
College-trained Me n and Women. 
It has been found that out of every one hundred 
pupils in the graded schools only seven reach the 
high school and less than two per cent, go to 
college. Lac k of means is found to be the primar y 
cause. Bu t a way has been opened by the World's 
Cyclopedia Company to overcome the handicap of 
money. A little energy on your part and the goal 
is won ! 
We want high-class student canvassers, and a 
little work on their part will insur e a college career 
at Harvard , Yale, Brown, Dartmouth, Smith, Wellesley, Radcliffe, etc. 
The tuition fee at any of the colleges named 
averages $150.00, and to any high school student 
who secures one hundred and fifty bona fide subscriptions to Murray's Historica l and Biographica l • 
Encyclopedi a of the Colored Race Throughout the 
World , the World's Cyclopedia Company will pay one 
hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) as a bonus in 
addition to a regular commission of 10 per cent. 
Eve n if you fail to reach the mark you will have 
your 10 per cent. 
If you are now i n college you are also eligible 
to enter this contest. Note that it is not limited 
to the first student, but open to every student. 
If you are ambitious, and wish to take advantage 
of this splendid offer, write the Scholarship Department of the WORLD' S CYCLOPEDI A COMPAN Y at 
Washington, D . C. —P . O. Bo x 2379—for full information and literary outfit. 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCA L STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l metho d of singin g fo r 
dail y practice , (base d upo n artisti c 
principles, togethe r wit h a care ­
full y prepare d numbe r of exercises. 
Fro m ''Musica l Courier, " N. Y.: 
A ver y practica l littl e boo k is 
"Ton e Placin g and Voic e Development," b y Pedr o T, Tinsley . It 
contain s some ver y excellen t materia l an d voca l 
exercises, an d shoul d be i n th e haud s of al l voca l 
students. 
WORD S O F APPRECIATIO N 
I offe r yo u th e .heartiest possibl e endorsemen t 
of you r work , whic h I believ e to be the most complet e cours e of th e kin d tha t ha s eve r come 
unde r m y notice. — Glen n Dillar d Gunn , Chicag o 
1
 'Tribune.' ' 
Fro m ''Musi c News," ' Chicago , Ill.: Accordingl y 
his "Practica l Method of Singing " is a most con ­
cis e an d practica l littl e manual , containin g man y 
valuabl e voca l exercises. It canno t fai l to b e 
helpfu l to al l ambitiou s voca l students. 
CANNO T FAI L O F GOO D RESULT S 
Th e wor k is especiall y commendabl e becaus e i t 
treats i n a clea r an d systemati c manne r al l the vita l 
points so essentia l to the student , makin g i t eas y 
fo r hi m to advanc e to the highest poin t o f 
development. — Geo . I. Holt , De s Moines , Iowa . 
PRIC E $1.00 
Addres s the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
FL Y WIT H TH E 
Flying 
Squadron 
T O BUTTERFL Y LAN D 
JANUARY THIR D 
MAJESTI C HAL L 
125 East 125th St., N . Y . Cit y 
BENEFIT of the N. A. A.CP. 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
(Wit h a Protected Tip ) 
FO R POLISHIN G AL L METALS , SIGNS . PIANOS , 
FURNITURE , GUNS , HARNESS , AUTOMO ­
BIL E BODIES , LAMPS , HARDWOO D 
FLOORS , ETC . 
Full y Protects the Han d Saves Tim e and Labo r 
A n incomparable duster for the household. A 
combination shoe polisher second to none. 
Ca n be used 
with or without 
oil or polish. 
Mad e of special 
tanne d lamb's 
wool on the hide, 
thoroughly cleaned and combed of 
all grit. Wil l not scratch the finest surface. A 
household wonder that simplifies housekeeping. Fits 
either hand and wil l last a long time of hard usage. 
Adopted by the Pullma n Company for porters' 
use on the best trains and used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furnitur e houses; 
on dining cars, ocean liners, yachts and thousands 
of households because it's the best practical polishing device on earth. 
B y mail postpaid 25c. each (stamps or currency). 
Special prices to large users. 
A splendid proposition for agents. Writ e to-day 
for particulars. 
J . E. REDDICK 
1028 Sout h 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 5, No. 3 JANUARY , 1913 Whole No. 27 
ALONG 
COLOR LINE 
POLITICS. 
AMON G the results of the late 
presidential election have been the 
following: 
Edward D. Green, a colored member of 
the legislature in Illinois for four consecutive sessions, was defeated. Major R. R. 
Jackson, a colored candidate for that legislature, was also defeated. Both of these 
were Republicans. On the other hand, 
B. F . Moseley was elected presidential elector 
on the Progressive ticket. He is the first 
colored man to hold that office. 
* In Kansas a colored lawyer, W. L. 
Sayers, has been elected county attorney of 
Graham County on the Democratic ticket. 
He received 888 votes, against 564 for the 
Republican candidate. 
* R. L. Fitzgerald was elected freeholder of 
Atlantic City by a vote of 1,054 against the 
Democratic candidate, who had 865. 
In Hutchinson, Kan.- James W. Green 
was elected constable, receiving 1,291 votes, 
against 1,235 for his nearest opponent. 
^ In New York City the colored Democrats have been celebrating with two banquets—one to Bishop Alexander Walters, 
the chairman of the colored organization, 
and the other to Robert N . Wood, chief of 
the New York organization. 
*J Colored men holding civil-service positions 
in the South are alarmed at the advent of 
the Democratic party. A letter to TH E 
CRISIS printed in the New York Evening 
Post says: 
"Colored employees in the Federal service 
have become very fearful of injustice, and 
even of losing their employment, as a result 
of the election. Al l the colored employees in 
the Federal service at , became connected 
with the service through competitive examinations required under the civil-service act, and 
they feel that they have a right to continue 
in the service as long as they prove faithful 
to their duty and are competent and efficient 
in its discharge. Since the election the 
report has been widespread and the belief is 
general that every colored employee in the 
Federal service at will lose his or her 
employment as soon as Mr. Wilson's friends 
are placed at the head of the bureaus in this 
district if the new President is not warned 
of the danger in advance. 
"There is not a colored person here, 
whether in the service or not, who believes 
Mr. Wilson would countenance such an outrage as common report has will follow his 
inauguration, if he knew of the pernicious 
purpose before his appointees were selected 
to co-operate with him in his oft-expressed 
plan to do justice to all in the real democratic sense. 
"None of the colored employees took any 
part in politics one way or the other, feeling that obedience to the civil-service regulations was as much an important part of their 112 TH E CRISI S 
duties as their work. They, therefore, feel 
that, having violated no rule of the civilservice provisions, their tenure of employment under the civil-service act should not 
be disturbed by the incoming administration 
simply because they are colored. 
"If the President-elect would see to it that 
a square deal and fair play shall rule from 
the beginning to the end of his administration his doing so would not only be right, 
but it 'would have a more salutary and wholesome effect in bettering the condition of 
affairs between the races than the work of 
all the Republican Presidents put together 
since the war, and insure good will, peace and 
happiness to all the citizens of this country. 
"We colored people of the South have all 
along believed that, if it were possible to 
have a Democratic President who would have 
the courage to do right to all men, and wrong 
to none, North, South, East and West, such 
a President would be the one to set matters 
right. But we have feared that such a 
patriot and statesman would be hard to find 
in the Democratic party." 
^ Reactionary Democrats are already beginning operations. 
In Missouri there is a plan to disfranchise 
the Negro vote and adopt a "grandfather 
clause" to save the ignorant white vote. 
Such a law has been discussed for the last 
six years. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
NASHVILLE , Tenn., has a publishing 
•'•^ house conducted by the African 
Methodist Episcopal Church and another 
large publishing establishment under the 
Baptist Church. From these and other 
printing establishments are issued a Quarterly 
Review, two small monthlies and three weekly 
newspapers. There are three large undertaking establishments, two banks, fifty 
colored physicians, four institutions of higher 
learning and a medical school. Three colored 
bishops reside in the city and there are 
numerous churches. A considerable proportion of the skilled labor is done by colored 
men. Negroes are in the tailoring business 
and also deal in second-hand furniture. 
There are two colored photographers, several 
electrical contractors and plumbers and two 
hospitals. 
^ Rev. H . S. Dunn, in reviewing the progress of the Negro in New Orleans, says: 
"Our higher institutions, with one single 
exception, have an increased attendance. 
Straight University has an enrollment of 
500 students, with 140 in the high school and 
college department. New Orleans University 
has an enrollment of 465, with 145 in the 
high school and college department. 
Southern University has an enrollment of 
479, with 166 in the high school and normal 
department. Leland University has an enrollment of 222, with 72 in the college and 
normal department. The Negro public 
schools all have a larger attendance, and with 
few exceptions have a parents' club, which 
is co-operating with the school board and 
the teachers in order to secure better results. 
Last year several of these clubs furnished 
drawing material for their schools, and some 
furnished shoes for the poorer children. I 
recently visited all of the schools and found 
the general outlook promising. I found a 
total of 7,813 pupils and 125 colored teachers. 
Four of these schools are taught by 31 white 
teachers. The list of colored teachers has 
been completely exhausted, which necessitates another examination for colored 
applicants. 
"The one great need of the colored schools 
is that of manual training. It is hoped that 
the board will soon introduce this most practical phase of training in our schools. A 
note is now being taken of exceptional 
children which will aid much in the progress 
now being made in the schools. This plan 
will group the exceptionally brilliant and the 
exceptionally dull pupils for the good of 
all. The Seventh Ward Educational League, 
under the leadership of Rev. A . Lawless! Jr., 
has completed the payment on the six lots of 
grounds and the property has been turned 
over to the city for the erection of a school 
building for the children of the Miro School. 
The superintendents express a desire of 
having the Daniel School erected in the 
fourteenth ward. The erection of this 
school will supply a great need." 
<I Andrew Carnegie has given $25,000 for a 
library in New Orleans and the city has at 
last furnished a playground for colored 
children. 
<I In Seattle, Wash., the colored people have 
five churches, two physicians, two lawyers, 
one newspaper, four apartment houses, six 
fraternal organizations. The estimated 
colored population is 2,463. 
1 The movement for erecting and equipping 
first-class Y . M . C. A . buildings for colored ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 113 
TH E HOWARD-LINCOL N FOOTBAL L GAME . 
people has received great impetus during 
the month. 
In Baltimore the colored people have 
raised $31,000 in ten days, which secures 
them $75,000 of contingent gifts. They will 
erect a $100,000 building. 
A $100,000 building will also be erected 
in Cincinnati. It will be a five-story structure, 77 x 152 feet, and will accommodate 
between 1,500 and 2,000 men and boys. 
q In the athletic season just drawing to a 
close Howard University and Atlanta Baptist College seem to have the chief honors. 
On Thanksgiving Day Howard defeated 
Lincoln by a score of 13 to 0. On the same 
day, in Nashville, 1,200 people watched the 
championship game between Fisk and 
Atlanta Baptist College. Atlanta Baptist 
College had before defeated Atlanta University, Clark University and Tuskegee, 
while Fisk had defeated Roger Williams, the 
Alabama Mechanical College and Tuskegee. 
The Nashville game was won by Atlanta Baptist College. 
q A n unusually large athletic meet is 
planned at Washington by colored organizations during inauguration festivities. 
q There are rumors of extravagance and 
incompetence on the part of the colored men 
at the head of the emancipation celebration 
in Pennsylvania. Representative Henry W. 
Bass, who has made an unfortunate record 
as a machine politician, has apparently surrendered the arrangements for the celebration into the hands of politicians to a large 
extent. 
q A provisional gift of $10,000 toward a 
school and old folks' home in New Jersey 
was announced at the Colored Women's Congress in Montclair. 
q Among the 1,500 boy scouts who dined 
at the 22d Regiment armory in New York 
was a troop of colored boys from Brooklyn. 
q The new $60,000 Hubbard Hospital at 
Meharry Medical College, Nashville, has 
been dedicated. It is a three-story structure. 
q Miss Lucretia A . Carter, a colored woman 
of Helena, Ark., has taken a State examination to practice medicine. 
q Colored social settlements are planned in 
Richmond, Va., Wilmington, Del., and 
Duluth, Minn. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE annual reports of the auditor of the 
State of Virginia show the following 
facts about Negro property. 
The total assessed value of property owned 
by Negroes has increased as follows: 
1891 ...$12,089,965 
1900 15,856,570 
1911 32,944,246 
The colored people paid in taxes 
$312,000 in 1911. 
TH E HOWARD-LINCOL N GAME : TH E CROW D 114 TH E CRISI S 
^ In Kansas City, Mo., with a colored population of 23,566, a white investigator reports 
800 Negro property owners assessed at 
$1,400,000. Fifty Negroes own property 
valued at $10,000 or more; one hundred 
between $5,000 and $10,000; two hundred 
between $1,000 and $5,000; four hundred 
and fifty between $500 and $1,000. The 
investigator says: 
"The city takes little interest in any of 
the Negro districts except to have them well 
patrolled by policemen. The streets and 
walks are poorly kept, and no provision 
whatever is made for parks, playgrounds or 
public baths. Nevertheless the Negro takes 
great interest in his yard and house." 
The occupations of 8,000 colored people 
in Kansas City between the ages of 14 and 
60 are as follows: 
Barbers 240 
Dentists 4 
Doctors 23 
Janitors 350 
Laborers 5,006 
Lawyers 6 
Police service 8 
Postal service 20 
Porters in barber shops 375 
Porters i n hotels 140 
Porters i n saloons 600 
Proprietors, independent 90 
Pool-hall owners 75 
Preachers 25 
Pullman service 140 
Railway service 250 
Teachers 30 
Teamsters 210 
Waiters 510 
The total annual wages received is 
$3,811,140. Nine hundred of the 5,006 
common laborers are employed at packing 
plants, eight hundred are hod carriers, two 
thousand work on the street for the city or 
for the Metropolitan Street Railway Company, and the remaining 1,306 are engaged 
in various forms of labor. 
The Negro churches own $300,000 worth 
of property with a mortgaged indebtedness 
of $50,000. A house-to-house canvass of 
348 colored families shows the following 
annual expenditure per family: 
Annua l Per 
Expenditure. Cent. 
Food $202.41 38.46 
Rent 116.29 21.27 
Clothing 49.15 7.62 
Fue l and light 24.81 4.20 
Carfare 18.80 3.00 
Other expense s an d 
savings 228.29 25 45 
<J The colored people of Los Angeles claim 
that they are the best-housed group of their 
race in the United States. They are 
beginning now to build business blocks. 
• A colored man was sent to jail for murder twenty-three years ago in Alabama. He 
was recently pardoned by the governor, and 
found that a small piece of property worth 
one or two hundred dollars when he was 
incarcerated is now worth $20,000. 
< Mr. John Mitchell, Jr., of Richmond, is 
projecting an "Anglo-American Finance 
Corporation" with a capital of $125,000. 
q The colored waiters of Washington, D. C , 
are planning a school for the instruction of 
waiters. 
« The will of Edward J. Fatin, a colored 
caterer of Baltimore worth $25,000, has been 
broken by his sister. He attempted to found 
an agricultural school. 
EDUCATION. 
MISS ALIC E M . CURTI S has left 
$5,000 each to Atlanta University, 
Hampton Institute and Tuskegee. The will 
says: 
"These sums I give to said institutions in 
memory of my mother, Marian A . Curtis, 
and of her enthusiastic efforts during the 
struggle against human slavery in this 
country, and believing that they are doing an 
especially effective, promising and necessary 
work in the education and training of the 
colored people to become citizens of the 
United States; said three sums to be 
invested and held respectively by said institutions as permanent funds, the income to be 
used in such manner and for such purposes 
as the trustees or other governing bodies of 
said institutions may determine will, in view 
of my motives in giving said sums, best 
serve the interests of said respective institutions." 
1 The Nashville Institute for Negro Christian Workers was founded January 1. 
The board of trustees is composed of colored 
and white men and the grounds are near 
Fisk University. The work will begin with 
the training of deaconesses. 
^ The income of Howard University for the 
year ending June 30, 1912, was: 
Government appropriation. . .$92,900 
Pai d by students 49,370 
Endowment 13,853 
Miscellaneous 4,490 
100.00 $160,613 ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 115 
The total endowment fund amounts to 
$2S1,319, and the land and equipment are 
valued at $1,274,985. 
*l Colored teachers of Evansville, Ind., will 
make an educational tour in the South next 
spring. 
*I Colored teachers' associations are meeting 
during the holiday season all over the South. 
The inauguration of Stephen Morrell 
Newman as president of Howard University 
took place December 13. 
^ At the meeting of the Association of 
American Agricultural Colleges held at 
Atlanta, Ga., nine colored colleges were represented. These institutions also held separate meetings at Atlanta University. President Byrd Prillerman, of West Virginia 
Colored Institute, acted as chairman of the 
latter conferences. 
^ From three different sources in the South 
a call for better educational opportunities for 
colored children has been made. 
In Savannah, Ga., J. B. Hammond, the 
Southern white president of a colored college, made a strong plea for Southern help 
for Negro education. 
At Fort Worth, Tex., in a discussion on 
compulsory school laws, it was charged that 
the East Texas credit merchants would not 
let Negro children go to school. 
At the Southern Educational Association, 
which met at Louisville, Ky., a committee 
was appointed on the subject of Negro 
education. 
«J Florence County, S. C , had, in 1900, 
about 16,000 colored people and 12,000 white 
people. There were enrolled in school in 
1912, 4,621 white and 4,066 colored children. 
There were 139 white teachers employed and 
63 colored teachers. The white schools ran 
30 weeks, the Negro schools ran 13 1/2 weeks. 
There was spent on the schools $93,172; of 
this the whites got $84,034, the Negroes 
$9,138. White teachers received in salaries 
$57,399 and Negro teachers $8,583. 
MEETINGS . 
A MEETIN G at the Civic Club, in New 
York, on the problem of the city 
Negro was addressed by Dr. George E. 
Haynes of Fisk University, Ray Stannard 
Baker and others. Dr. Haynes made the 
following suggestions: 
"First, we must see to it that the better 
element of white people and the better element of colored people shall come together 
in each city in some organized way. 
"In the second place, the Negro must have 
leaders of his own—strong, wise, welltrained leaders, who are learned in all the 
American ways of doing things, and in the 
life and history of their own people. These 
leaders are absolutely indispensable as a 
medium of communication between the segregated Negro world and the white world 
which incloses them. 
"In the third place, the white people must 
see that the Negro gets a fair opportunity 
in all phases of city life. He must have a 
fair chance to get work, to hold his job, 
and ample facilities to prepare himself for 
any and all work for which he has capacity, 
and for which he may develop ability. He 
must have good houses in which to live, for 
which he must not be compelled to pay 
exorbitant rents, nor must he be segregated 
to the poorer sections of the cities when his 
impulses, his culture and his purse enable 
him to buy or rent elsewhere." 
Ray Stannard Baker said: "I do not know 
which is worse, the social disabilities placed 
on Negroes or the moral disabilities which 
we incur in our treatment of the Negroes." 
^ The colored State fair of Georgia, held 
at Macon, was unusually successful. There 
was an attendance of 40,000, a street parade, 
horse races, ball games, an education day and 
an ex-slaves' day. 
*& Washington County (Texas) farmers have 
had a fair with music and exhibits. 
*I The fourth annual carnival has been held 
by colored people for six days at West End 
Park, Houston, Tex. 
<I The fifth annual Negro fair, held in 
Augusta, Ga., had exhibits from the colored 
schools and from women and farmers. 
1 The second annual Orangeburg County 
(S. C.) fair had an attendance of 25,000 
people. 
1 There will be a widespread celebration of 
the fiftieth anniversary of emancipation, 
January 1, among colored people. 116 TH E CRISI S 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
THE London Daily News says: 
" A strange story of the last moments 
of Mr. Coleridge-Taylor, the composer, who 
died recently, was told to the Windsor and 
Eton Choral Society at their annual meeting by Sir Walter Parratt, the King's Master 
of Music. 
"He had written a violin concerto, which 
was performed for the first time on Tuesday evening at Queen's Hall, and just before 
he died he sat up in bed and conducted the 
whole of the concerto to an imaginary orchestra. At the close he bowed three times to an 
imaginary audience, just as a conductor 
would." 
^ A great concert was given on November 
22, at Royal Albert Hall, London, England, 
by a Coleridge-Taylor memorial committee 
under the presidency of the Earl of Pembroke, the proceeds of which are to be 
handed to the widow of Mr. Coleridge-Taylor. 
The committee included Lord Alverstone 
(the Lord Chief Justice), the Earl of 
Shaftesbury, the Earl of Plymouth, Sir 
Beerbohm-Tree, Sir Hubert Parry, Sir Frederick Cowan and other noblemen and wellknown leaders in the profession. 
The program was selected from the works 
of the late Coleridge-Taylor. 
The orchestra and chorus consisted of 1,250 
persons from the Royal Choral Society, 
Alexander Palace Choral Society, Crystal 
Palace Choir, London Choral Society, London Symphony Orchestra, New Symphony 
Orchestra, Royal Amateur Orchestral Society, 
Stock Exchange Orchestral Society and the 
Handel Society. 
The artists were Ruth Vincent, Esta 
D'Argo, Ada Crossley, Ben Davies, Gervase 
Elves, Robert Radford and Julien Henry. 
The organist was H . L. Balfour, Mus. B. 
The conductors were Sir Frederick Bridge, 
Sir Charles Villiers Stanford and Mr. Landon Ronald. 
The London Musical Times considered the 
concert a fitting tribute to a man who has 
afforded so much delight to his generation, 
and quoted Noyes' tribute: "Generous as a 
child; so wholly free from all base pride that 
fools forgot his crown." 
1 Before the American Geographical Society, 
on October 17, the Kneisel Quartet, a stringquartet of international fame, presented a 
program of music. 
The soloist for the occasion was Mr. Harry 
T. Burleigh, baritone, of New York. Mr. 
Burleigh sang a group of folk songs of different countries, and also an interesting 
group of songs by modern composers. 
« Mr. Roland W. Hayes, tenor, gave a concert on November 19, at Jordan Hall, Boston, 
Mass., where he was heard before an exceptionally large audience which included a number of musicians of prominence. 
The assisting artists were Roy W. Tibbs, 
pianist, of Washington, D. C.; Wm. H . 
Richardson, baritone, and Maud Cuney 
Hare, accompanist. 
The Boston Herald, under the signature 
of Philip Hale, said of the concert: 
"Mr. Hayes has an unusually good voice. 
The natural quality is beautiful. It is a 
luscious yet manly voice. Mr. Hayes sings 
freely and with taste, though in his youthful enthusiasm he occasionally, last evening, 
forced an upper tone. With patience and 
still further study he should go far. 
"Mr. Richardson is also singularly blessed 
by nature. His voice is resonant, firm, commanding, yet smooth and even throughout a 
liberal compass. He, too, sang fluently and 
with marked authority. 
"The pianist showed facility and strength 
in the toccata and fugue and greatly pleased 
the audience by his interpretation of the 
other pieces." 
* During the last fortnight in November 
Mr. Hayes was heard in concert at Chicago, 
Ill., Detroit, Mich., and Syracuse, N . Y . 
•I Mrs. E . Azalia Haekley, soprano, sang 
before a very large audience on November 
11, at Washington, D. C , under a long list 
of influential patrons. 
*J Mrs. Portia Washington Pittman, the 
daughter of Mr. Booker T. Washington, is 
now teaching piano-forte at Dallas, Tex. 
Mrs. Pittman was a student of piano-forte 
under Martin Krause, of Berlin, Germany. 
<I On November 10, at Chicago, Ill., a large 
public memorial was held by the Choral 
Study Club, Mr. Walter E . Gossett, conductor. Al l numbers performed were drawn 
from compositions by Mr. Coleridge-Taylor. 
Dr. Charles E . Bentley was the speaker. 
"Hiawatha's Departure" and "The Blind 
Girl of Castle Cuille" were given by the 
society. The chorus was assisted by Mrs. 
Martha B. Anderson, Mrs. Mayme Marshall, 
Mr. Daniel Protheroe and Mr. Harrison 
Emmanuel, violinist. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 117 
SI Carlisle Kawbowgam, a full-blooded 
American Chippewa Indian, a graduate of 
the Carlisle Indian School and the Yale 
School of Medicine, and who possesses a remarkable tenor voice, is preparing for grand 
opera in Berlin, Germany. Critics declare 
that the singer is destined to rank among 
the world's greatest tenors. 
SI There is now on exhibition in the Corcoran 
Art Gallery at Washington, D. C , one of 
Henry Tanner's pictures, the subject of 
which is "Christ Learning to Read." Mr. 
Tanner will sail from Europe about the 
fifteenth of this month for New York, where 
soon after his arrival he will have an exhibition of some of his work. 
SI The following note comes from the art 
critic in the Washington (D. C.) Star: 
"At the Veerhoff gallery there is now on 
exhibition a portrait bust in plaster of Assistant Attorney-General William H . Lewis, the 
work of May Howard Jackson of this city. 
It is strongly and feelingly modeled and is 
vital as well as structurally good. Mrs. 
Jackson has already done some creditable 
work, but this is more than promising; it is 
an achievement. A portrait to deserve the 
name must be more than a likeness; it must 
interpret character; it must have personality. 
Of this bust as much can be truly said." 
PERSONAL . 
AFTE R rescuing fifteen persons from 
burning at the St. George Hotel, Los 
Angeles, Cal., Julius Malone, a colored 
porter, lost his life in trying to rescue 
another person. Mr. Malone was 38 years 
of age and had worked for the proprietor 
of the hotel for twenty-three years. Oscar 
Bell, the colored elevator boy, is also mentioned as unusually heroic. 
«J T. W. Walker, of Gloucester County, Va., 
has received much well-deserved notice 
from the article concerning his work in a 
recent number of the World's Work. 
SI Fritz F . Porter, a colored custodian of a 
country club near New York, bought lots 
in Wyoming some years ago which are now 
worth over $50,000 on account of mineral 
rights. 
SI Edward H . Morris, grand master of the 
colored Odd Fellows, while abroad last year, 
met with the Annual Movable Conference of 
English Odd Fellows at Cardiff, South 
Wales. He was accorded especial attention. 
In the street parade he had a place of honor 
at the head of the procession with the grand 
officers. He was also a guest at the Lord 
Mayor's dinner and made several speeches. 
SI Henry Bozeman Jones of Philadelphia, 
grandson of the late Henry Jones, is developing talent in portraiture. He has painted two 
pictures of Frederick Douglass. 
SI Caleb Nelson, a former slave, is dead at 
Allentown, Pa. He left an estate of $10,000. 
SI Mrs. Susan Paul Vashon, the last surviving 
child of Elijah W. Smith, is dead at St. 
Louis. Her father was a member of Frank 
Johnson's band which played before Queen 
Victoria in 1854. Her husband was Professor G. B. Vashon, who conducted a wellknown school in Pittsburgh, Pa. The late 
Wright Cuney and many other distinguished 
colored men were his pupils. 
SI Two white presidents of Negro colleges are 
dead. Isaac Rendell of Lincoln and George 
A . Gates of Fisk. Dr. Rendell was born in 
1825, and the establishment of Lincoln University was very largely due to him. 
SI Dr. Lyman B. Teft, president of Hartshorn Memorial College for Girls at Richmond, Va., for twenty-nine years, has 
resigned. W. Riglar succeeds him. 
SI Arthur Reed, a colored player on the 
Everett High School football team, has been 
named on the "all-scholastic" eleven. 
SI Z. W. Mitchell, a charlatan who has been 
repeatedly exposed, is operating now in the 
Southwest. Mitchell is a colored man and has 
a "Loyal Legion Co-operative system" for 
collecting money. 
SI Dr. William D. Crum, Minister Resident 
and Consul-General at Monrovia, Liberia, 
died at Charleston, S. C , from fever contracted in Africa. Dr. Crum was nominated 
by President Roosevelt as collector of the 
port of Charleston in 1902 and in 1903 he 
was rejected by the Senate. The President 
renominated Dr. Crum and placed him in 
charge of the customs house pending his 
confirmation. Some three years ago he was 
appointed Minister to Liberia. 
Dr. Crum was born in Charleston February 5, 1859. 
SI Howard P. Drew, representing the Springfield High School of Springfield, Mass., 
equaled the world's record of 7 1-5 seconds 
for the seventy-yard dash at the games of 
the Bradhurst Field Club. Drew started from 
the back mark, and, after working hard in 118 TH E CRISI S 
his trial and semi-final heats, put on so much 
power in his run for the tape in the final 
that he fairly ran through the men placed far 
in front of him before half the distance was 
covered. 
TH E CHURCH. 
THE missionary headquarters of the 
colored Baptists has been moved from 
Louisville to Philadelphia. Dr. L. G. Jordan 
is still in charge. 
<I The general convention of the congregational churches has been meeting in Savannah, Ga. It is composed of colored ministers 
from all over the South. 
q The Rev. John W. Lee and his congregation have been celebrating the 105th anniversary of the First African Presbyterian 
Church in Philadelphia. This church was 
founded May 28, 1807. Its first pastor was 
the Rev. John Gloucester, a slave whose 
freedom was purchased. 
TH E GHETTO. 
THER E is a movement for "Jim Crow" 
street cars in the District of Columbia, 
agitated by the "Central Citizens' Association." 
q Winston-Salem, S. C , has already segregated Negro residences and is now trying 
to segregate Negro business enterprises. 
q A segregation bill has been introduced into 
the Missouri legislature. 
q The "Progressive Committee of White 
Fraternities" is asking support for a measure 
to kee p Negroes from using the names of 
Masons, Odd Fellows, etc. The bill has been 
introduced into Congress by a Massachusetts 
representative, E. W. Roberts. 
* Th e authorities of Atlanta, Ga., will not 
grant licenses to colored men to operate 
moving-picture machines. 
q Macon, Ga., has a segregated vice district. 
In the district they have included a thriving 
colored Baptist church and a colored public 
school. 
q Miss Edna Clanton, a colored girl, was 
appointed stenographer at the Elgin (Ill.) 
State Hospital. She was "frozen out" by 
being given no work to do and left the 
place. 
q Th e following note appears in the New 
Orleans Picayune of November 29: 
" 'She's my wife. We have lived together 
thirty-eight years. The law cannot estrange 
us.' Thus spoke Joseph Lawrence, a white 
farmer, in the second criminal court at New 
Orleans, La., recently, while he was awaiting 
trial on the charge of marrying a colored 
woman. Through the arrest of Lawrence and 
his colored wife the police discovered a hard 
situation. Al l around Lee Station the white 
farmers and fishermen and other classes have 
intermarried with colored people and reared 
large families regardless of the law against 
such. A number of arrests have been made, 
but it has been impossible to convict one for 
the reason that the white parties all went 
on the stand and swore they were colored. 
Just what the prosecuting attorney can do 
remains to be seen." 
CRIME. 
THE following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Two Negroes at Newberry, S. C , charged 
with murder; one Wil l Thomas was shot to 
death; the other has not been found. 
In Bossier parish, Louisiana, three 
Negroes—Burke, Heard and Jimeson—were 
lynched for wounding a sheriff. The 
Shreveport Journal has a picture of the 
lynching and devotes several columns to the 
details. 
At Ocala, Fla., Priest Niles, a Negro, was 
lynched for murder and John Archer, also 
colored, was shot for talking about the 
lynching. 
At Cordele, Ga., Williams, a Negro, was 
lynched for murder and alleged assault. 
At Butler, Ala., A . Curtis and three other 
colored men were lynched for the alleged 
murder of a planter. 
In Enid, Okla., Dixon, a colored man, 
fearing a mob, hanged himself in jail. He 
was accused of murder. 
In North Dakota George Baker, a white 
man, was lynched. 
1 Four colored boys, all under 15 years 
of age, have been made State prisoners in 
Alabama for stealing a bicycle. 
q Negroes have been killed by officers at 
Macon Ga.. Thomason, Ala., and Lumber 
City, Ga. 
*J The governor of Mississippi has been 
asked to pardon Gene Burns, a colored man, 
who was sent to the penitentiary for life for 
criminal assault. The father of the girl 
says that he has discovered that Burns was 
not guilty. A MAKE R OF SCHOOLS. 
THE organization of the colored school 
system in the District of Columbia is 
due to the Cook family more largely than 
to any other persons. The Rev. John P. 
Cook maintained a colored school from 1834 
to 1855, with the exception of one year, when 
this school was stopped by a mob. On the 
21st of May, 1862, Congress set aside 10 
per cent, of the taxes paid by colored people 
for colored schools. In 1864 one teacher was 
employed. In that same year the colored 
ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
TH E LAT E G. F . T. COO K A T TH E 
AG E O F 50. 
children were allowed their proportion of 
the school taxes according to their numbers. 
Under this act in 1868 George Frederick 
Thompson Cook became superintendent of 
the colored schools. Mr. Cook was a son of 
the Rev. John F . Cook and a brother of the 
late well-known John F . Cook who died a 
few years ago. George F. T. Cook was given 
full responsibility; he faced a tremendous 
task and he accomplished it. He built up 
what was, until a few years ago, the best 
colored public-school system in the United 
States and one of the best school systems 
anywhere. He found the schools in shanties 
and old abandoned barracks and left, in 
1900, when he relinquished his trust, twentythree well-housed elementary schools, a high 
school and a normal school. 
Mr. Cook died, after a brief illness, 
August 7, 1912, at the age of 77. 
The office of superintendent of colored 
public schools was, after Mr. Cook's retirement, subordinated to the superintendent of 
the white schools, and to-day the colored 
superintendent is practically an executive 
clerk and not a responsible official. 
On November 19 the teachers of the 
District of Columbia held memorial exercises 
in honor of their late superintendent. Dr. 
W. S. Montgomery, in the course of an unusually fine address, said: 
"George F . T. Cook was a brave man, an 
independent man. He never flinched, from 
uttering his thoughts when occasion demanded. His yea was yea, and his nay, 
nay. In him was not a jot or iota of 
deception, duplicity or indirection. No dishonesty tinged or beclouded his character and 
name, which remain a magnificent legacy 
to a people just planting their feet on 
freedom's ground and winning recognition 
and a place in American civilization." 
TH E GEORGIA BAPTIST MAN . 
WILLIA M J. WHIT E was born in 
Georgia in 1832. He was, as a 
slave, employed at cabinet making and 
learned his letters from his mother, who was 
a white woman. He taught a night school 
from 1853 to 1865. 
During reconstruction he was made agent 
of the Freedmen's Bureau by Gen. O. O. 
Howard. In 1866 he was ordained as a 120 TH E CRISI S 
WILLIA M J . WHITE . 
Baptist minister and later spent eleven years 
in the service of the United States Revenue 
Department in Georgia. 
Mr. White has been president of four 
different Negro conventions in Georgia and 
is the most conspicuous leader in his church. 
He is the founder of Atlanta Baptist College. 
Perhaps his greatest work, however, is the 
Georgia Baptist. This influential weekly was 
first issued October 28, 1880 and is to-day 
beginning its thirty-third year. 
Mr. White is a clean, honest man, absolutely incorruptible, a clear thinker and an 
intrepid fighter, and yet withal the most 
genial and lovable of persons. 
A MA N O F BUSINESS . 
JOSEP H LAWRENC E JONE S is the 
founder and proprietor of the Central 
Regalia Company of Cincinnati. He was 
born near that city June 12, 1868. His 
father was secretary of the colored school 
board before the war, and his mother is 
still a well-known worker among colored 
women's clubs. Jones graduated from the 
Gaines High School under Peter H . Clark, 
became first a teacher and then worked in the 
civil service. In 1902 he organized the 
Central Regalia Company, which is the 
largest colored organization in the world for 
manufacturing secret and fraternal association badges and uniforms, and employs from 
ten to thirty persons, according to season. 
Mr. Jones and his son and four daughters 
live in a pretty modern home in Walnut 
Hills. 
TH E PRESIDENT OF HAITI. 
TANCRED E AUGUSTE , president of the 
republic of Haiti, was born at Cape 
Haitien March 10, 1856, and is consequently 
56 years of age. He is a business man and 
banker and was. made head of the department of the interior and of the police by 
President Hyppolite in 1895. He held office 
until 1902 when he returned to business 
life, but his advice and aid were repeatedly 
sought during the administrations of Nord 
and Simon. After the flight of Simon, 
Auguste was at the head of the committee 
of public safety, which preserved order, and 
when the late President Le Conte perished in 
the terrible accident of August last, Auguste 
was elected his successor by a large majority. 
Free to a greater extent, in the manner of 
his accession to power, than most of his 
predecessors from the machinations of 
political enemies and the importunities of 
political friends, great reforms and great 
achievements are expected of him because 
he is believed to possess both the power and 
the inclination to bring them about. 
JOSEP H L . JONES . ME N O F TH E MONT H 121 
HI S EXCELLENCY , TANCRED E AUGUST E 
President of the Republi c of Haiti . 
The Road to the B
By J AME S D . CORROTHERS. 
Ever and ever and anon, 
After the black storm, the eternal, 
beauteous bow! 
Brother, to rosy-painted mists that arch 
beyond, 
Blithely I go. 
My brows men laureled and my lyre 
Twined with immortal ivy for one little 
rippling song; 
My "House of Golden Leaves" they praised 
and "passionate fire"—• 
But, Friend, the way is long! 
Onward and onward, up! away! 
Though Fear flaunt all his banners in my 
face, 
And my feet stumble, lo! the Orphean Day! 
Forward by God's grace! 
These signs are still before me: "Fear," 
"Danger," "Unprecedented," and I hear 
black "No" 
Still thundering, and "Churl." Good Friend, 
I rest me here— 
Then to the glittering bow! 
Loometh and cometh Hate in wrath, 
Mailed Wrong, swart Servitude and 
Shame, with bitter rue, 
Nathless a Negro poet's feet must tread the 
path 
The winged god knew. 
Thus, my true Brother, dream-led, I 
Forefend the anathema, following the 
span. 
I hold my head as proudly high 
As any man. The New York Globe in 
the course of a long 
editorial says: 
"At the election, as a result of the treatment of the Southern Negro delegates by 
the Bull Moose convention and of Negro 
dissatisfaction with the Taft administration's policy, a large percentage of Negroes 
voted for Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat and 
a man of Southern birth, whose father was 
a violent clerical upholder of slavery and a 
bitter opponent of emancipation. Approximately 20 per cent., according to accepted 
estimates, of the total Negro vote went 
Democratic. No party is now characteristically the party of the Negro. " 
The editor goes on to say: 
"So the great army of Democratic Negroes 
are looking with keen interest to see what 
will be the policy of the new administration. 
It can hardly do much worse in an office 
way than its predecessor, for of 9,876 presidential appointments but thirty have been 
allotted to Negroes. But it is not the offices 
in which the more intelligent members of 
the race are interested. What is to be the 
attitude toward the Negro generally? Is 
the policy to be the one of keeping the 
Negro down, or of helping him to rise? Is 
he to be treated as a member of a permanently inferior race, no matter what his 
personal merits, or is he to be treated as a 
citizen who is to get the same privileges and 
recognitions as others when he deserves 
them? Is the new administration, with 
respect to the race question, to be a democratic one?" 
It is evident that the Bourbon Democracy 
of the South, which votes on nothing but 
the Negro question, has already been stirred 
into activity by the success of the Democrats at the polls. 
In Missouri there is a proposed disfranchisement bill with a "grandfather" clause, 
and also a bill entitled "A n ordinance for 
preserving peace, preventing conflict and ill 
feeling between the white and colored races 
in the city of St. Louis and promoting the 
general welfare of the city by providing, 
as far as practicable, for the use of separate blocks by white and colored people for 
residences, churches and schools." 
It provides it shall be unlawful for either 
white or colored persons to move their residence into a block in which the major portion of the inhabitable feet frontage is 
occupied by the other class. It provides 
that Negro servants may reside with their 
employers. 
The bill prescribes a penalty of $5 to $50 
a day for each day during which the ordinance shall be violated, and authorizes the 
building commissioner to identify blocks as 
"white" or "colored." 
Police department permits must be issued 
before any person shall move into a "mixed" 
block, according to the provision of the bill. 
The St. Louis Globe-Democrat asks why 
the Democrats want to disfranchise the 
Negro in Missouri, since they form but 5 
per cent, of the population. It goes on to 
say: 
"Some of the Democratic leaders in the 
State made an especial appeal to the Negroes 
in the recent campaign. They were asked 
to support Wilson and Major, as being 
better friends of the black race than were 
their Republican rivals. A boast was made, 
too, that a considerable number of Negroes 
were enrolled in Democratic clubs, and that 
this number was steadily on the increase. 
What sort of a commentary on this talk does 
the projected anti-Negro legislation in 
Jefferson City make?" 
The Pittsburgh Despatch says that it is 
plain "that the sole reason for the proposed 
disfranchisement is to prevent, if possible, 
another defeat of the Democratic organization by eliminating enough votes from the 
presumably Republican element. It is difficult to believe that the enlightened public 
opinion of Missouri will permit so outTHE DEMOCRATS 
AND THE NEGRO. OPINIO N 123 
rageous abuse of power. If it is carried 
out it is sure to be resented, and the outcome will probably be more disastrous to 
the schemers than if they played fair and 
trusted to their record to keep them in 
control." 
The colored people of St. Louis are publicly protesting particularly against the 
segregation law. Their organ, the St. Louis 
Advance, is despondent: 
"It looks as if, one by one, nearly all the 
rights gained through the manly advocacy 
of the Negro leaders of a generation ago 
are now being stolen from us. We had Jim 
Crow cars in St. Louis a generation or more 
ago, but the leading Negroes of that day 
made 'a manly, not a sycophantic, fight 
against them and won. Now we are not 
only threatened with Jim Crow cars, but 
Jim Crow streets and Jim Crow blocks, and 
the supineness of the young leading Negro 
of to-day shows that he has fallen asleep at 
his post, and when he wakes up he will find 
himself stripped and naked before the fierce 
and chilling blast, of American race hate. 
' Our young men are largely Booker 
Washingtonized. Their policy is submission 
and surrender, a policy which, as pursued 
by Washington, has cost us nearly all our 
rights in the Southern States, and now it is 
invading the North and we see it teaching 
the doctrine of race separation, proscription 
and surrender everywhere." 
We cannot forbear in this connection to 
print a poem which the Woman's Journal 
attributes to Cotton's Weekly. It is entitled 
"It Pays to Kick, " and runs like this: 
There lived two frogs, so I am told, 
On a quiet wayside pool. 
And One of these frogs was a blamed bright 
frog, 
But the other frog was a fool. 
Now a farmer man with a big milk can 
Was wont _to pass that way, 
And he used to stop and add a drop 
Of the water, so they say. 
And it chanced one morn, in the early dawn, 
When the farmer's sight was dim, 
He scooped those frogs in the water he 
dipped, 
Which same was a joke on him. 
The fool frog sank in the swashing tank 
As the farmer bumped to town, 
But the smart frog flew like a tugboat screw, 
And swore he'd not go down. 
So he kicked and splashed and slammed and 
thrashed, 
And he kept on top through all, 
And he churned that milk in first-class shape 
Into a great big butter ball. 
The two most talked of 
persons in the United 
States in the last month 
have been Mr. Cole Blease of South Carolina 
and Mr. Jack Johnson of Chicago. Many bitter and sarcastic things have been said of both. 
The New York Evening Post, commenting 
on Blease's defense of lynching, says that 
even ''if one could accept Governor Blease's 
position, in fairness to the colored people he 
should have stated that, of the 2,942 lynchings recorded by the Chicago Tribune since 
1885—there have been far more—but 24.7 
per cent, have been of persons charged with 
the crime of rape. How many of those 
actually lynched for it were innocent, no 
one knows; 50 per cent, would not be a 
rash estimate. Of the other lynchings, 42.2 
per cent, were for murder, and no less than 
33.1 per cent, for other crimes. Moreover, 
of the total of 2,942 killed by mobs, 900 
were white. We venture to prophesy that 
when this tendency goes a little further, 
even Governor Blease will find lynchings less 
praiseworthy. Now, however, the head of a 
Christian American commonwealth in solemn conclave applauds the mob and upholds , 
its lust for blood. Never has a governor 
sunk so low. Even Vardaman sought to put 
down the mob." 
The New York Times adds: 
"There are Bleases in the North as well 
as in the South. It is tedious to 'get the 
right man' by the winnowing processes of 
the law. The law's delay is often exasperating even to those who abide by it. Its technicalities sprang from times when there were 
scores of capital offenses, from the penalty 
of which the judges sought escape for hapless prisoners. But criminal procedure has 
of late become swifter. The lynching of 
even Negro assailants of women in the South 
may not longer be condoned, and it never 
could be. The philosophy of 'getting the 
right man' does not stop with Negroes, as 
the record of murderous Southern feuds 
evinces. This is not an age for Blease and 
his like." 
Now, when the milkman got to town 
An d opened the can, there lay 
The fool frog drowned, but hale and sound, 
The kicker, he hopped away. 
Moral: 
Don't fret your life with endless strife, 
Ye t let this teaching stick, 
You'l l find, old man, in the world's bi g can, 
It sometimes pays to kick. 
MESSRS. BLEASE 
AND JOHNSON. 124 TH E CRISI S 
A correspondent to the New York World 
asserts that Blease belongs to the "poor 
white trash" and that it is the rise of this 
class that has debauched the political South. 
Thus the rise of the oppressed in a democracy is made the cause of such birth pains 
of democracy as Blease represents. In 
exactly the same way Jack Johnson is being 
made the excuse for further Negro oppression because in the face of bitter public 
opinion he married the girl whom he was 
accused of wronging. As the New York 
World says: 
"There is a growing suspicion that no 
matter how bad a man Johnson may be— 
and he is bad undoubtedly—popular clamor 
and race prejudice are making him blacker 
than he is. Whatever he may be, he is 
entitled to his rights under laws impartially 
administered." 
Perhaps the fairest comment on the 
whole pitiable situation is the half-satirical 
comment of Le Temps of Paris, with all its 
curious mistakes. The translation is our 
own: 
"The telegrams from the United States 
convey two pieces of news equally interesting for those who follow with an attentive 
and impartial eye the vagaries of the Negro 
problem of North America. On the one 
hand we learn that Mr. Jack Johnson, the 
boxer, known throughout the world, and the 
holder of a unique record, having knocked 
out all sorts of adversaries of all colors, is 
having annoyance because a young white 
woman has become susceptible to the prestige of his glory. Mr. Jack Johnson, 
although he has a solid fist, has nevertheless 
liberal ideas and a heart accessible to all 
tenderness. He defends himself against race 
prejudice as valiantly as against the uppercuts of his antagonists, white or black. * * * 
"But the. heroine of this touching idyl 
had a father—a noble father, or one calling 
himself such. This patriarch neglected nothing to blacken beyond measure the future 
son-in-law which his daughter dared to pretend to impose upon him. First he poured 
upon Jack Johnson a large quantity of ink; 
literally without the least metaphor. This 
spectacle was seen in the streets of Chicago: 
a flood of the black liquid poured from the 
twentieth story, splashed the passersby 
under pretext of getting at the brave boxer 
who, attending to his own business, was 
going at a leisurely gait to cash a check at 
his bankers. This paternal vengeance having 
rather missed its mark, namely, to blacken 
a black. man, the irate father has just 
arraigned the excellent boxer of ebony hue 
before a tribunal which will be quite embarrassed to render a just verdict. For, after 
all, they never trouble about the whites who 
seduce Negro women. Why then this unheard-of rigor against a Negro who, having 
attained results by his own personal merit, 
which make him a very eligible party, lets 
himself be loved by a white girl, and follows 
the perfect love with a person who is evidently in love with him. The fury of the 
former planters and slave owners is of a 
kind excessively comic. For it is impossible 
to answer their unforgettable misdeeds by a 
more amiable vengeance. This transatlantic 
episode would rejoice the heart of the excellent woman who wrote 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.' 
"Happily, America gives us by the same 
courier the account of an affair quite opposite to this laughable episode. 
"Al l friends of the United States will be 
glad to know that the young American army 
has just shown how its intelligent liberalism 
can raise it above former prejudices and 
lawless passions in rendering public homage 
to chivalric bravery and military valor, without occupying itself with the quarrels of 
race which have so cruelly divided the followers of Judge Lynch and the apostles of 
justice. Many ridiculous and harmful 
sophisms have been dissipated since the day 
when Mr. Roosevelt, by a commendable act, 
invited Mr. Booker Washington to the presidential table at the White House. 
"There is in that young army already 
marked by notable prowess an excellent 
officer named Charles Young. It was he 
who, in the Cuban War, June, 1898, saved 
from certain destruction the Rough Riders 
of Colonel Roosevelt. Charles Young, who is 
as black as the heroes recently celebrated 
by Colonel Baratier in a series of 'd'Epopees 
Africaines,' has just been made a major in 
the Federal army. * * * 
"The legitimate advancement of Major 
Young happened at an opportune moment 
to illustrate the fine points in a recent book 
on 'Le Negre aux Etats-Unis,' by Warrington Dawson. One can only wish the continuance of this movement toward justice." 
THE NEGRO 
LABORER. 
There are growing indications 
that the colored laborer is 
beginning to think. A privately 
printed circular sent to Pullman porters OPINIO N 125 
by one of their own number runs thus: 
" I say, brother, because I am one of the 
number that makes to see and to know the 
need of a union—and that union should 
extend throughout the United States and to 
every porter that is employed by the Pullman Company; yes, and to those who are 
expecting to be employed. To be divided as 
we are, and without any protection, we are 
practically no good for any purpose. It 
has been thoroughly proved in the past, as 
we have felt, tasted and seen our condition 
for living. 
"We feel the need of a union among us, 
whereby we may protect ourselves. We 
taste the bitter pills given to us by the socalled officers. We see the disadvantages 
under which we are working. We see our 
money taken away from us and we dare not 
say a word. We see how we are dogged and 
driven about by those illiterate and ignorant 
conductors, and we are almost afraid to 
open our mouths We see how we are 
forced to honor—to be submissive, to humble 
ourselves to every person, from a millionaire 
down to a tramp. This is all done because 
we are lacking of a union among us. It will 
continue and increase in every way if we do 
not do something to check it." 
The Defender, a colored paper of Chicago, 
noted that: 
" A number of the labor unions are beginning to realize that they must admit the 
Negro workman if they hope to preserve 
their unions. This striking and finding their 
places permanently filled by the dark brother 
is getting serious. Both must work and both 
must work to live; the color of the skin 
doesn't matter. If he were permitted to 
join the unions, to share in their fortunes, 
be they good or bad, he would stick." 
There is some evidence of distinctly Socialistic leaning; for instance, the Ethiopian 
Phalanx of Covington, Ga., reprints a whole 
column of editorial paragraphs from the 
socialistic Appeal to Reason, and the Advocate-Verdict of Harrisburg, Pa., in an editorial says: 
"Since there was so much talk during 
the recent campaign about the Negro dividing his vote, and there seems to be some 
assurance of them breaking away from the 
old party, it might be well for them to 
look into the Socialist camp to see if the 
conditions there are as favorable as 
reported." 
The Southern advisers 
PROFITABL E CRIME . of the editors of the 
Outlook have allowed them to say a few 
words on the shameful traffic in crime in 
the South: 
"The report of the State convict board 
of Alabama shows that the total gross earnings of convicts in that State for the year 
ending September 10 was $1,073,280.16. 
These figures, without taking into account 
the earnings of one hundred convicts who 
were employed on the State farm, from whom 
the State would have received $30,000 more 
if they had been leased on the same terms 
as the others, shows a gain for 1912 over 
the previous year of $16,456.93. The 
figures for other States where the convict 
lease system is in force are not at hand, but 
there is every reason to believe that the 
above is a fair sample of the profits made 
elsewhere. * * * How many know or have 
considered the actual facts in regard to the 
matter, namely, that under the fee system, 
as it still exists in Alabama and other parts 
of the South, the sheriff is put in the position of a recruiting agent for the employers of the convict labor; that about 87 
per cent, of all convicts of the State 
are Negroes, many of whom, arrested for 
trifling offenses, have drifted into crime because of ignorance and the neglect of the 
State properly to educate them; that' in 
spite of the regulations to protect these 
unfortunate slaves of the State, life in the 
convict camps to-day is more degrading and 
cruel than it ever was under the worst form 
of slavery." 
Further comment on methods of treating 
criminals come from widely separate sources. 
The Afro-American Ledger, a colored paper, 
says: 
"In a riot which occurred up in Connecticut during a strike a white woman was 
killed by a shot fired by one of the strikers. 
The shot was not intended for the woman, 
and so the defendants got off, although they 
were tried for murder. A colored man in 
South Baltimore shot at a colored man and 
the shot went astray and killed a colored 
woman. This man was tried for murder and 
convicted and is now waiting for the time 
of execution. Why the difference?" 
A white paper, the Eatonton (Ga.) Messenger, commenting on the shooting of a 
Negro by a white man, says: 
"It is hoped that, should he recover, his 
shooting will have a salutary effect upon his 126 TH E CRISI S 
future conduct. Impudent and obstreperous 
Negroes are getting entirely too numerous in 
this immediate section and an object lesson, 
a real first-class hanging, will undoubtedly 
put some check to the false teachings of 
many of their leaders and ' 'ciety houses.' " 
TH E ETERNA L 
PROBLEM . 
A n editorial in the Philadelphia Bulletin has been widely 
quoted in the South. It is 
entitled "The Negro as a Local Problem" 
and is of the well-known "leave-the-questionto-the-South" order; in a course of six 
inches of argument it turns an extraordinary 
logical somersault and declares that "certainly the problem is one which ultimately 
will demand the wisdom of the entire nation 
rather than of any section." 
"The Negro in America is still a problem," 
says the Minneapolis Tribune. "Yet on we 
go inculcating the highest standards of 
personal refinement in these, our neighbors, 
only to bar their women from all the better 
hotels, to crowd them into segregated sections in the theatres, to run 'Jim Crow' 
cars for them in a third of our States, to 
teach them recreations they cannot follow 
with the rest of us. 
"Coleridge-Taylor writes excellent modern 
music; Tanner paints excellent pictures; 
Dunbar writes excellent poetry. We receive 
them, hear them, talk with them—and shut 
them out. It is all so cruel a tragedy! But 
no thoughtful man has yet come forward 
with a remedy which either the Negro or 
white man could seriously consider." 
The Brooklyn Daily Eagle has this bit: 
"The keen hatred which the South has 
against the Negro did not seem particularly 
interesting to the large audience which last 
night witnessed Edward Sheldon's play, 'The 
Nigger,' at the Green point social settlement. 
Judged by the actions of the audience, the 
play sustained interest until almost the 
last, when the fact that Georgianna Byrd, a 
typical Southern belle, did not marry Philip 
Morrow, the governor, just because he was 
a 'Nigger,' was sincerely bemoaned. 
" 'It was a good show, but it didn't end 
right,' was the comment made by many of 
the 'regulars' in the lobby after the play." 
The American Israelite declares that 
increase and wealth and refinement will not 
settle the Negro problem: 
"As long as the Jew was pack peddler, 
pawnbroker, junk-shop keeper and oldclothes dealer and kept himself to himself, 
and bore himself with humanity toward his 
Christian neighbor, and showed that he 
appreciated their generosity in allowing him 
to live, there was little, if any, prejudice 
against him in the United States, generally 
speaking. But as soon as he and many of 
his brethren became wealthy and strove for 
social recognition, and the Jewish women 
began to rival their Christian sisters in dress, 
jewelry, equipage, and manner of living 
generally, the trouble began." 
The Rev. H . P. Dewey, a white congregational minister of Minneapolis, declares for 
social equality without intermarriage: 
"But what we contend is that no legislature 
shall prevent white children and black children from studying together under the same 
roof if they elect to do so, and that there 
shall be no criticism from any source if we 
choose to ask any man of whatsoever color or 
origin to sit at our table, or to sleep in our 
spare bedroom. We cannot legislate the 
social relationship. They are determined by 
influences more subtle and delicate than those 
exerted by the State. They are governed by 
other forces than the volition of man. They 
are fixed by the laws of nature and of 
nature's God. An d who is the man who is 
at once the truest aristocrat and the truest 
democrat? He is the one who is possessed 
of the sane mind and the large heart and the 
honorable conscience and the resolute will. 
Sooner or later that man must find every 
door opened to him; he must be laureled and 
crowned without regard to the accident of 
his beginnings or of his complexion." 
Prof. Charles Zueblin, lecturing in Boston, 
declares: 
"It is all very well to glory in the thought 
that we are a superior race. History is 
strewn with the relics of superior races. 
The Romans became so enervated by slaveholding, taxes, conquests and luxuries that 
when they met the unspoiled hordes of the 
North they fell prone before them. 
"We need to cultivate nationalism in this 
country and to avoid provincialism and 
racial antipathy. Provincialism is the result of immobility, not of nativity. The 
returned New Englander is as virile and 
valuable as the immigrant, but decadence 
threatens the stationary native. There is no 
prospect that all the racial elements in the 
United States will be fused, but if we cannot 
have race unity we can have race 
reciprocity." A PHILOSOPH Y FO R 1913. 
I AM by birth and law a 
free black American 
citizen. 
As such I have both 
rights and duties. 
If I neglect my duties 
my rights are always in danger. If I do 
not maintain my rights I cannot perform 
my duties. 
I will listen, therefore, neither to the 
fool who would make me neglect the 
things I ought to do, nor to the rascal 
who advises me to forget the opportunities which I and my children ought 
to have, and must have, and will have. 
Boldly and without flinching, I will 
face the hard fact that in this, my 
fatherland, I must expect insult and 
discrimination from persons who call 
themselves philanthropists and Christains and gentlemen. I do not wish to 
meet this despicable attitude by blows; 
sometimes I cannot even protest by 
words; but may God forget me and 
mine if in time or eternity I ever weakly 
admit to myself or the world that wrong 
is not wrong, that insult is not insult, 
or that color discrimination is anything 
but an inhuman and damnable shame. 
Believing this with my utmost soul, I 
shall fight race prejudice continually. 
If possible, I shall fight it openly and 
decidedly by word and deed. When that 
is not possible I will give of my money 
to help others to do the deed and say 
the word which I cannot.. This contribution to the greatest of causes shall be my 
most sacred obligation. 
Whenever I meet personal-discrimination on account of my race and color I 
shall protest. If the discrimination is 
old and deep seated, and sanctioned by 
law, I shall deem it my duty to make 
my grievance known, to bring it before 
the organs of public opinion and to the 
attention of men of influence, and to 
urge relief in courts and legislatures. 
I will not, because of inertia or 
timidity or even sensitiveness, allow new 
discriminations to become usual and 
habitual. To this end I will make it my 
duty without ostentation, but with firmness, to assert my right to vote, to frequent places of public entertainment and 
to appear as a man among men. I will 
religiously do this from time to time, 
even when personally I prefer the refuge 
of friends and family. 
While thus fighting for Right and, 
Justice, I will keep my soul clean and 
serene. I will not permit cruel and 
persistent persecution to deprive me of 
the luxury of friends, the enjoyment of 
laughter, the beauty of sunsets, or the 
inspiration of a well-written word. 
Without bitterness (but also without 
lies), without useless recrimination (but 
also without cowardly acquiescence), 
without unnecessary heartache (but 
with no self-deception), I will walk my 
way, with uplifted head and level eyes, 
respecting myself too much to endure 
without protest studied disrespect from 
others, and steadily refusing to assent 
to the silly exaltation of a mere tint of 
skin or curl of hair. 
In fine, I will be a man and know 
myself to be one, even among those who 
secretly and openly deny my manhood, 
and I shall persistently and unwaveringly seek by every possible method to 
compel all men to treat me as I treat 
them. 
EDITORIA L 128 TH E CRISI S 
EMANCIPATION . 
FIFT Y years ago, on the 
first day of January, 
1863, the America n 
people, by the hand of 
Abraham Lincoln , took 
the first forma l and legal 
step to remove the unsightly shackles 
of slavery from the footstool of American liberty. They di d not do this deed 
deliberately and wit h lofty purpose, but 
being forced into a war for the integrit y of the Union , they found themselves 
compelled i n self-defense to destroy the 
power of the South by depriving the 
South of slave labor and drafting slaves 
into Northern armies. 
Once having realized that Libert y and 
Slavery were incompatible, the nation 
yielded, for a moment, leadership to its 
highest ideals: it gave black men not 
simply physical freedom, but it 
attempted to give them politica l freedom 
and economic freedom and social freedom. It knew then, as it knows now, that 
no people can be free unless they have 
the right to vote, the right to land and 
capital and the right to choose their 
friends. To call a man free who has not 
these rights is to mock him and bewilder 
him and debase him. This the nation 
knew, and for a time it tried to be true 
to its nobler self. Bu t social reform 
costs money and time, and if it seeks 
to right i n a generation three centuries 
of unspeakable oppression it faces a 
task of awful proportions. Pacin g this 
task and finding it hard, the nation 
faltered, quibbled and finally is tryin g 
an actual volte-face. It has allowed the 
right to vote to be taken from one and a 
half out of two millio n black voters. It 
has allowed growing land monopoly and 
a labor legislation that means peonage, 
chil d labor and the defilement of women. 
An d above all it has insisted on such 
barriers to decent human intercourse 
and understanding between the races 
that to-day few white men dare call a 
Negro friend. 
The result of this silly and suicidal 
policy has been crime, lynching, mob 
law, poverty, disease an d social unrest. 
Bu t i n spite of this the Negro has 
refused to believe that the present hesitation and hypocrisy of Americ a is final. 
Buoye d then by an unfaltering faith, 
he accumulates property, educates his 
children, an d even enters the worl d of 
literature and art. Indeed, so firm has 
been his faith that large numbers of 
Negroes have even assented to waive all 
discussion of their rights, consent to 
present disfranchisement and do just 
as far as possible exactly what Americ a 
wants them to do. Bu t even here let 
there be no mistake; wit h Negro agitators and Negro submissionists there is 
the one goal: eventual ful l America n 
citizenship wit h all rights an d opportunities of citizens. Remove this hope 
and you weld ten millio n men into one 
unwavering mass who wil l speak with 
one voice. 
Yet, after fifty years of attempted 
liberty, the reactionary South and the 
acquiescent Nort h come forward with 
this program: 
1. The absolute disfranchisement of 
all citizens of Negro descent 
forever. 
2. The curtailment and regulation of 
property rights by segregation. 
3. Strictl y limited education of 
Negro children as servants and 
laborers. 
4. The absolute subjection of Negro 
women by prohibition of legal 
marriage between races. 
5. The eventual drivin g of the Negro 
out of the land by disease, 
starvation or mob violence. 
Ever y single item i n this program 
has powerful and active support i n the 
halls of legislatures, i n the courts of 
justice, i n the editorial rooms of periodicals, and i n the councils of Southern 
secret societies. 
There are many organizations workin g against this program, but i n most 
cases the opposition is not vigorous and 
direct, but apologetic and explanatory, 
and based on temporary philanthropic EDITORIA L 129 
relief, rather than eternal justice. W e 
have friends of the Negro who oppose 
disfranchisement by a program of 
partia l and temporary and • indefinite 
disfranchisement; who tell the Negro to 
buy propert y and ignore ghetto legislation ; who believe i n caste education and 
hotly accuse others who do not of being 
ashamed of work ; who would preserve 
one foolish white woman if it costs the 
degradation of ten innocent colored 
girls, and who would greet the death of 
every black man i n the worl d wit h a 
sigh of infinite relief. 
The Nationa l Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People almost 
alone stands for a frank, open, front, 
forward attack on the reactionary 
Southern program. It demands a 
nation-wide fight for human rights, 
regardless of race and color; it calls for 
real democracy, social and economic 
justice, and a respect for women which 
is not confined to women of one 
privileged class. 
I n this fight we want your help. W e 
need it desperately. The nation needs 
it. Ho w i n Heaven's name shall Libert y 
and Justice survive i n this land i f we 
do not oppose this program of slavery 
and injustice ? Abraham Lincol n began 
the emancipation of the Negro-American. The Nationa l Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People proposes to complete it. 
m 
OUR OWN CONSENT. 
WE should remember that 
i n these days great 
groups of men are not 
long oppressed but by 
their own consent. Oppression costs the oppressor too much if the oppressed stand up 
and protest. The protest need not be 
merely physical—the throwing of stones 
and bullets—if it is mental and spiritual, 
if it expresses itself i n silent, persistent 
dissatisfaction, the cost to the oppressor 
is terrific. 
This fact we continually forget. W e 
say: the South is i n saddle; what can 
we do against twenty millions? The 
white oppressor rules; of what avail is 
agitation against ninety millions? 
If you doubt the efficacy of agitation 
and protest, ask yourself: Wh y is the 
reactionary oligarchic South so afraid 
of even one protesting voice? Wh y are 
the Northern doughfaces, their millionaire backers and their allied teachers i n 
Southern schools so panicstricken at 
one small voice? Wh y is the America n 
Negro hater always so anxious to affirm 
that the Negro assents to his chains and 
insults, or that the "responsible " 
Negroes assent, or that "the only real 
Negro leader " assents? Is it because 
they know that when one protesting 
voice finds its fellows it may find soon 
ten millions? An d when ten million 
voices are raised to say: 
Disfranchisement is undemocratic; 
"Ji m Crow " legislation adds insult to 
theft; "colo r discrimination is barbarism—•" 
Whe n ten millio n voices say this they 
will , they must, be heard. An d when 
their cause is once heard, its justice wil l 
be evident and its triump h sure. Agi ­
tate then, brother; protest, reveal the 
truth and refuse to be silenced. The 
most damnable canker at the heart of 
Americ a is her treatment of colored 
folk. \ 
IN ACCOUNT WITH TH E OLD YEAR. 
CREDIT . 
FUL L fifty years of freedom and celebrations planned i n Pennsylvania 
and New Jersey. 
Defeat of the "grandfathe r clause " 
i n Arkansas. 
Enfranchisement of 50,000 colored 
women. 
The independent political vote. 
Several civil rights cases won. 
Large new Y . M . C. A . buildings 
planned i n Chicago and Indianapolis 
and finished i n Washington. 
Census reports showing the reduction 
of our illiteracy to 30 per cent. 
Continued increase i n property holding throughout the nation. 130 TH E CRISI S 
Promotion of Majo r Young . 
Promotion of Lieutenant of Police 
Childs. 
Establishment of Lincol n Institute. 
I n art and letters: Two doctors of 
philosophy, two artists and the "Auto ­
biography of an ex-Colored Man. " 
DEBIT . 
Over sixty lynchings. 
Segregation laws and ordinances. 
The color bar i n the America n Ba r 
Association. 
The Roosevelt disfranchisement. 
The hanging of a colored girl. 
The deaths of Coleridge-Taylor, Fred ­
erick McGhee, Josephine Silone-Yates, 
Drs. Boy d and McClennan , Bishop 
Gaines, George Sale and Mar y Dunlop 
Maclean. 
i i 
50,000. 
IN February,. 1911, we 
asked for 10,000 readers. "We had them in ­
side of two months. I n 
April , 1911, we asked 
for 25.000 readers. W e 
expect to have that number for our 
coming Easte r issue. W e ask now 
for complete financial independence and 
the assurance of permanence. This 
means 50,000 readers. If every present 
reader of TH E CRISI S wil l send us one 
more the goal of our present ambition 
wil l practically be reached. This may 
be done i n many ways: Yo u can bring 
the magazine to the attention of persons 
who do not know of it. Their thanks wil l 
then be added to ours. Yo u may give the 
magazine as a present to a friend— 
twelve presents; i n fact, twelve monthly 
reminders of your thoughtfulness. Wha t 
cheaper Christmas or birthday present 
could you give and what more valuable 
one ? Yo u may subscribe and have the 
magazine sent to some white friend 
who needs to know the trut h as we see 
it. One club i n Topeka has sent us fifteen 
subscriptions and ordered TH E CRISI S 
sent to fifteen of the most prominent 
white men i n the city. One hospital sent 
us 100 subscriptions for its white donors, 
that the truth might make them free. 
Do yo u not know some white man i n 
your town who needs TH E CRISIS ? 
Perhaps yo u want to raise money or 
buy books for a church or other organization ; get up a club of CRISI S 
subscribers and use the libera l premiums for you r purpose. 
A t any rate give us 50,000 readers 
before Januar y 1, 1915. 
LETTER S 
Yesterday I was talking to an assembly of 
colored men and women. About a hundred 
were present at the meeting. I want to tell 
you in a very personal way that I was 
greatly impressed with the character and 
the presumed environment of all these ladies 
and gentlemen. Ten years seem to me to 
have given a distinct lifting to the best part 
of your people. 
I venture to transmit to you this bit of 
evidence. It is of no value in itself, but it 
may have value taken in connection with 
other places. 
CHARLE S F . THWING . 
I cannot refrain from writing you to 
express my keen indignation at the scurrilous article respecting you originating in 
the Bee (rather too busy to be thoughtful 
or even moral) and reprinted in other Negro 
newspapers. You very well know that I do 
not always agree with you or with TH E 
CRISIS, but the brutal and untruthful criticisms of you contained in this article are 
such as I think no honest friend of the Negro 
should permit to pass without at least a word 
of sympathy to you. One often wonders 
whether such things are worth the notice of 
a gentleman, and ordinarily they would not LETTER S 131 
be. The only possible seriousness attaching 
to such an utterance and to the person out 
of whose mouth it came is that the thoughtless will assume the truthfulness of the only 
two points which give the aforementioned 
article any character: First, that you do 
nothing; and, secondly, that your fundamental sympathies are not with the Negroes. 
The man who has engineered or inspired the 
gathering of most of the knowledge we now 
have respecting the conditions of the American Negro has provided the basis for all 
activities of a louder and more palpable sort. 
If there were any comparison, and if knowledge be the basis of intelligent action, such 
accomplishment is not only first in order of 
time, but also first in order of importance. 
The man, furthermore, who has kept before 
his people the cultural and the human ideal 
(whether his method of so doing is wise or 
not is not now the important point) has performed for all time, and particularly for 
this generation, a service so important as to 
constitute it a norm of true progress. In 
my individual opinion your method of service has not been one which I myself would 
always have chosen; but the method of selfmanifestation of any individual is primarily 
his own, and no one has the right to belie a 
fact because the method of its discovery or 
of its realization does not happen to please 
him. 
I would like to call to your attention and 
to that of readers of TH E CRISIS the remarkable and deep-visioned article "The 
Negro Consciousness and Democracy" in the 
Public of August 30. To my mind the 
great danger of the Negro in America is 
not that he will not become economically 
competent and powerful, but that the forces 
and the motives which play upon and in him 
will drive him along the same old dreary 
road which the white man has so long followed, and which, thank God, his conscience 
is now impelling him to desert for a better, 
even if a more difficult path. If it were not 
for the ideals which Dr. Crogman, you, 
Professor Kelly Miller and many another 
brave colored man are preaching, the future 
of the Negro would be much more dubious 
than if he continued for a time to lack the 
economic competency and wealth momentum 
the necessity of which is so insistently 
dinned into his ears. 
Faithfully yours, 
SAMUE L H . BISHOP . 
Can you give me any information that 
might help in my advice to one of my 
parishioners, who is seeking assistance in 
regard to the possibility of her daughter 
getting some paid opportunity either in 
social-settlement work or as a stenographer 
under somebody who would treat her 
decently ? 
You will understand my difficulty when 
I tell you that my parishioner has the misfortune to be colored. That, you know, in 
this land of godly enlightenment and human 
liberty, is a crime! It is a cause for profanity to know that there is increasing difficulty for people of color to find occupation 
beyond running an elevator or going out to 
service, just because they are colored. In 
plain English, it is damnable! An d is but 
sowing the seeds that, one day, will grow 
a crop of hatred and war. 
The girl is now in College, taking the 
secretarial course, and she is very competent. 
She will be ready in a year's time. But in 
trying to find some little opportunity for 
her to try her hand at social-settlement work, 
during last summer's vacation, the fact was 
revealed that she is not wanted, even in 
philanthropy, just because she is colored. 
Therefore her mother is getting anxious for 
fear that she will have no opportunity to 
use her gifts after she has trained them at 
. She could go South, but that 
means hell for a colored girl. One was subjected to the indignity, recently, of beingcompelled to stay all night in the toilet on a 
journey South. They wouldn't sell her a 
stateroom. Some colored girls coming up 
from the South had to stay a while in the 
railroad station in a large Southern city. 
The room for colored persons was beingrepaired. They went, naturally, into the 
other waiting room. With what result? 
They were arrested, marched by the officer 
to the police station and fined! And these 
are some of the reasons why the mother 
fears to have her daughter go South and 
is seeking employment for her in Boston or 
New York. 
A N EPISCOPAL CLERGYMAN . 
You have fused new life and vigor to bring 
together a mighty host that will continue to 
plead for the advancements and every right 
the Constitution stands for. 
JAME S T. BRADFORD, 
Philadelphia, Pa . A HOLIDA Y SUGGESTIO N 
By M . V . CLAR K 
THE State Charities Ai d Association places friendless 
children fro m orpha n 
asylums i n carefull y 
selecte d family homes 
throughout the • State of 
New York and in adjoining 
States. During the past fifteen years 
ninety-six colored children have been 
provided with good homes. Here are 
some of the pictures of the children 
already placed out and a few pictures of 
children who are waiting for homes. There 
are a great many colored children in orphan 
asylums in various parts of the State. 
Hundreds of them are in institutions where 
both white and colored are received. In the 
three institutions for the colored alone there 
are nearly 800 children, many of them 
deprived by death or desertion of the parents 
who should care for them. About 600 of 
these are little boys and girls between five 
and fourteen years of age, and about a. 
hundred are between two and five. Many of 
these little ones will remain all their young 
lives in an orphan asylum, only to go out at 
fourteen or sixteen into a friendless world 
with no one to turn to for love, sympathy 
and counsel. People who have visited 
orphanages cannot know just how monotonous is the daily routine of a big institution to the children who live there day after 
day and year after year. Even in the 
smaller and more homelike institutions there 
is nothing that quite takes the place of the 
parents' individual love and care. Children 
need individual and not wholesale treatment; 
homes are made for children; that is what 
they are for, and everyone who has a childless home ought to want a child. Childless 
couples, widows and spinsters living alone in 
comfortable homes without children are 
missing a great opportunity. Their lives 
would be made much brighter and happier by 
the affection of some of the little ones now in 
institutions. The pictures of the boys and 
girls who have been placed in homes are a 
sufficient indication of their well-being and 
happiness, and of the good care that they 
are getting from their loving foster-parents. 
The association is very careful in the selection of homes for the children for which it 
is responsible, sending one of its agents to 
visit, personally, the family who applies for 
a child, to talk with them about their requirements, to see what sort of a home they offer, 
and to interview, confidentially, persons in 
the neighborhood knowing them, who can give 
reliable testimony regarding their character 
and standing in the community, and the kind 
of a chance that they are likely to offer a 
friendless child. If the home thus visited 
and investigated seems to be a good one, a 
child is selected who will as nearly as possible 
fit into that particular home, and meet the 
special requirements of that individual 
family. Then by frequent correspondence 
and occasional visits the association keeps 
in touch with the family and the child and 
stands ready in case of misfortune to make 
other provision for the little one. 
When there are brothers and sisters 
brought to the attention of the society, an 
effort is made to put them either in the 
same home or with families who are friends 
and neighbors, where they can attend the 
same school and keep in touch with one 
another. 
Would not some family or _ some two 
neighbors like to provide such a home or 
homes for a little brother and sister? They 
are attached to each other and hope they 
will not have to be separated. One little 
three-year-old boy in the picture has a 
twelve-year-old brother who has already 
been placed in a good home, but they were 
separated when the little one was too young 
to remember his elder brother, so it does 
not matter if he goes by himself. 
The association would be glad to have 
the co-operation of the readers of TH E 
CRISIS in its work for these homeless colored 
children. Wil l you either take one of these 
friendless little ones into your home or 
speak to your friends who are childless, or 
whose children are grown up, and suggest to 
them the desirability of their making a home 
for another child? 
Letters sent to TH E CRISIS will find us 
quickly. FIV E LITTL E PRESENT S EMM Y 
By JESSIE FAUSE T 
(Concluded from the December CRISIS. ) 
SYNOPSI S O F PRECEDIN G CHAPTER S 
(Emmy, a pretty brown girl of Central Pennsylvania , is engaged to Archi e Ferrers, 
a young engineer, whose Negro blood is just perceptible. Archi e has ^secured employment wit h the large engineering firm of Mr . Nicholas Fields of Philadelphia . Fields 
assumes that Archi e is of foreign extraction and Archi e has not undeceived him. Emmy 
and her mother are spending a week wit h Archi e i n the city.) 
NOT even for lovers can a week last 
" forever. Archie had kept till the last 
day what he considered his choicest bit of 
exploring. This was to take Emmy down 
into old Philadelphia and show her how the 
city had grown up from the waterfront— 
and by means of what tortuous self-governing streets. It was a sight at once dear and 
yet painful to his methodical, mathematical 
mind. They had explored Dock and Beach 
Streets, and had got over into Shackamaxon, 
where he showed her Penn Treaty Park, and 
they had sat in the little pavilion overlooking 
the Delaware. 
Not many colored people came through 
this vicinity, and the striking pair caught 
many a wondering, as well as admiring, 
glance. They caught, too, the aimless, 
wandering eye of Mr. Nicholas Fields as he 
lounged, comfortably smoking, on the rear 
of a "Gunner's Run" car, on his way to 
Shackamaxon Ferry. Something in the 
young fellow's walk seemed vaguely familiar 
to him, and he leaned way out toward the 
sidewalk to see who that he knew could 
be over in this cheerless, forsaken locality. 
"Gad! " he said to himself in surprise, "if 
it isn't young Ferrers, with a lady, too! 
Hello, why it's a colored woman! Ain't he 
a rip? Always thought he seemed* too 
proper. Got her dressed to death, too; so 
that's how his money goes!" He dismissed 
the matter with a smile and a shrug of his 
shoulders. 
Perhaps he would never have thought of 
it again had not Archie, rushing into the 
office a trifle late the next morning, caromed 
directly into him. 
"Oh, it's you," he said, receiving his clerk's 
smiling apology. "What d'you mean by 
knocking into anybody like that?" Mr. 
Fields was facetious with his favorite employees. "Evidently your Shackamaxon trip 
upset you a little. Where'd you get your 
black Venus, my boy? I'll bet you don't 
have one cent to rub against another at the 
end of a month. Oh, you needn't get red; 
boys will be boys, and everyone to his taste. 
Clarkson," he broke off, crossing to his 
secretary, "if Mr. Hunter calls me up, hold 
the 'phone and send over to the bank for 
me." 
He had gone, and Archie, white now and 
shaken, entered his own little room. He sat 
down at the desk and sank his head in his 
hands. It had taken a moment for the insult 
to Emmy to sink in, but even when it did 
the thought of his own false position had 
held him back. The shame of it bit into him. 
"I'm a coward," he said to himself, staring miserably at the familiar wall. "I'm a 
wretched cad to let him think that of Emmy 
—Emmy! and she the whitest angel that ONC E SH E SAID : "NO W THIS , I SUPPOSE , IS WHA T THE Y CAL L A TRAGEDY . 136 TH E CRISI S 
ever lived, purity incarnate." His cowardice 
made him sick. "I'l l go and tell him," he 
said, and started for the door. 
"If you do," whispered common sense, 
"you'll lose your job and then what would 
become of you? After all Emmy need never 
know." 
"But I'll always know I didn't defend 
her," he answered back silently. 
"He's gone out to the bank anyhow," went 
on the inward opposition. "What's the use 
of rushing in there and telling him before 
the whole board of directors?" 
"Well, then, when he comes back," he 
capitulated, but he felt himself weaken. 
But Mr. Fields didn't come back. When 
Mr. Hunter called him up, Clarkson connected him with the bank, with the result 
that Mr. Fields left for Reading in the course 
of an hour. . He didn't come back for a 
week. 
Meanwhile Archie tasted the depths of 
self-abasement. "But what am I to do ?" he 
groaned to himself at nights. "If I tell him 
I'm colored he'll kick me out, and if I go 
anywhere else I'd run the same risk. If 
I'd only knocked him down! After all she'll 
never know and I'll make it up to her. I'll 
be so good to her—dear little Emmy! But 
how could I know that he would take that 
view of it—beastly low mind he must have!" 
He colored up like a girl at the thought of it. 
He passed the week thus, alternately reviling and defending himself. He knew 
now though that he would never have the 
courage to tell. The economy of the thing 
he decided was at least as important as the 
principle. An d always he wrote to Emmy 
letters of such passionate adoration that the 
girl for all her natural steadiness was carried 
off her feet. 
"How he loves me," she thought happily. 
"If mother is willing I believe—yes, I will— 
I'll marry him Christmas. But I won't tell 
him till he comes Thanksgiving." 
When Mr. Fields came back he sent immediately for his son Peter. The two held 
some rather stormy consultations, which were 
renewed for several days. Peter roomed in 
town, while his father lived out at Chestnut 
Hill . Eventually Archie was sent for. 
"You're not looking very fit, my boy." Mr. 
Fields greeted^ him kindly; "working too 
hard I suppose over those specifications. 
Well, here's a tonic for you. This last week 
has shown me that I need someone younger 
than myself to take a hand in the business. 
I'm getting too old or too tired or something. 
Anyhow, I'm played out. 
"I've tried to make this young man here, 
•—with an angry glance at his son—"see that 
the mantle ought to fall on him, but he won't 
hear of it. Says the business can stop for 
all he cares; he's got enough money anyway. 
Gad, in my day young men liked to work, 
instead of dabbling around in this filthy 
social settlement business—with a lot of old 
maids." 
Peter smiled contentedly. "Sally in our 
alley, what?" he put in diabolically. The 
older man glared at him, exasperated. 
"Now look here, Ferrers," he went on 
abruptly. "I've had my eye on you ever 
since you first came. I don't know a thing 
about you outside of Mr. Fallon's recommendation, but I can see you've got good 
stuff in you—and what's more, you're a born 
engineer. If you had some money, I'd take 
you into partnership at once, but I believe 
you told me that all you had was your 
salary." Archie nodded. 
"Well, now, I tell you what I'm going to 
do. I'm going to take you in as 
a sort of silent partner, teach you 
the business end of the concern, and in 
the course of a few years, place the greater 
part of the management in your hands. You 
can see you won't lose by it. Of course I'll 
still be head, and after I step out Peter will 
take my place, though only nominally I 
suppose." 
He sighed; his son's business defection was 
a bitter point with him. But that imperturbable young man only nodded. 
"The boss guessed right the very first 
time," he paraphrased cheerfully. "You bet 
I'll be head in name only. Young Ferrers, 
there's just the man for the job. What d'you 
say, Archie?" 
The latter tried to collect himself. "Of 
course I accept it, Mr. Fields, and I—I don"t 
think you'll ever regret it." He actually 
stammered. Was there ever such wonderful 
luck? 
"Oh, that's all right," Mr. Fields went on, 
"you wouldn't be getting this chance if you 
didn't deserve it. See here, what about your 
boarding out at Chestnut Hil l for a year or 
two? Then I can lay my hands on you any 
time, and you can get hold of thing's that 
much sooner. You live on Green Street, 
don't you? Well, give your landlady a EMM Y 137 
month's notice and quit the 1st of December. 
A young man coming on like you ought to 
be thinking of a home anyway. Can't find 
some nice girl to marry you, what?" 
Archie, flushing a little, acknowledged his 
engagement. 
"Good, that's fine!" Then with sudden 
recollection—"Oh, so you're reformed. Well, 
I thought you'd get over that. Can't settle 
down too soon. A lot of nice little cottages 
out there at Chestnut Hill . Peter, your 
mother says she wishes you'd come out to 
dinner to-night. The youngest Wilton girl 
is to be there, I believe. Guess that's all for 
this afternoon, Ferrers." 
VI . 
ARCHI E walked up Chestnut Street on 
air. "It's better to be born lucky than 
rich," he reflected. "But I'll be rich, too— 
and what a lot I can do for Emmy. Glad 
I didn't tell Mr. Fields now. Wonder what 
those 'little cottages' out to Chestnut Hil l 
sell for. Emmy " He stopped short, 
struck by a sudden realization. 
"Why, I must be stark, staring crazy," he 
said to himself, standing still right in the 
middle of Chestnut Street. A stout gentleman whom his sudden stopping had seriously 
incommoded gave him, as he passed by, a 
vicious prod with his elbow. It started him 
on again. 
"If I hadn't clean forgotten all about it. 
Oh, Lord, what am I to do? Of course 
Emmy can't go out to Chestnut Hil l to live— 
well, that would be a give-away. And he 
advised me to live out there for a year or 
two—and he knows I'm engaged, and—now 
—making more than enough to marry on." 
He turned aimlessly down 19th Street, and 
spying Rittenhouse Square sat down i n it. 
The cutting November wind swirled brown, 
crackling leaves right into his face, but he 
never saw one of them. 
When he arose again, long after his dinner hour, he had made his decision. After 
all Emmy was a sensible girl; she knew he 
had only his salary to depend on. And, of 
course, he wouldn't have to stay out in 
Chestnut Hil l forever. They could buy, or 
perhaps—he smiled proudly—even build 
now, far out in West Philadelphia, as far 
as possible away from Mr. Fields. He'd 
just ask her to postpone their marriage— 
perhaps for two years. He sighed a little, 
for he was very much in love. 
"It seems funny that prosperity should 
make a fellow put off his happiness," he 
thought ruefully, swinging himself aboard 
a North 19th Street car. 
He decided to go to Plainville and tell her 
about it—he could go up Saturday afternoon. "Let's see, I can get an express 
to Harrisburg, and a sleeper to Plainville, 
and come back Sunday afternoon. Emmy'll 
like a surprise like that." He thought of 
their improvised trip to the Academy and 
how she had made him buy gallery seats. 
"Lucky she has that little saving streak in 
her. She'll see through the whole thing like 
a brick." His simile made him smile. As 
soon as he reached home he scribbled her 
a note: 
"I'm coming Sunday," he said briefly, "and 
I have something awfully important to ask 
you. I'll be there only from 3 to ' 7. 
'When Time let's slip one little perfect hour,' 
that's that Omar thing you're always quoting, 
isn't it? Well, there'll be four perfect hours 
this trip." 
Al l the way on the slow poky local 
from Harrisburg he pictured her surprise, 
" I guess she won't mind the postponement 
one bit," he thought with a brief pang. "She 
never was keen on marrying. Girls certainly 
are funny. Here she admits she's in love 
and willing to marry, and yet she's always 
hung fire about the date." He dozed fitfully. 
As a matter of fact Emmy had fixed the 
date. "Of course," she said to herself happily, "the 'something important' is that he 
wants me to marry him right away. Well, 
I'll tell him that I will, Christmas. Dear 
old Archie coming all this distance to ask 
me that. I'll let him beg me two or three 
times first, and then I'll tell him. Won't 
he be pleased? I shouldn't be a bit surprised 
if he went down on his knees again." She, 
flushed a little, thinking of that first wonderful time. 
"Being in love is just—dandy," she decided. " I guess I'll wear my red dress." 
Afterward the sight of that red dress always caused Emmy a pang of actual physical anguish. She never saw it without seeing, 
too, every detail of that disastrous Sunday 
afternoon. Archie had come—she had gone 
to the door to meet him—they had lingered 
happily in the hall a few moments, and then 
she had brought him in to her mother and 
Celeste. 
The old French woman had kissed him on 138 TH E CRISI S 
both cheeks. "See, then it's thou, my 
cherished one!" she cried ecstatically. "How 
long a time it is since thou art here." 
Mrs. Carrel's greeting, though not so demonstrative, was no less sincere, and when 
the two were left to themselves "the cherished one" was radiant. 
"My , but your mother can make a fellow 
feel welcome, Emmy. She doesn't say much 
but what she does, goes." 
Emmy smiled a little absently. The gray 
mist outside in the sombre garden, the Are 
crackling on the hearth and casting ruddy 
shadows on Archie's hair, the very red of 
her dress, Archie himself—all this was making for her a picture, which she saw repeated 
on endless future Sunday afternoons in 
Philadelphia. She sighed contentedly. 
"I've got something to tell you, sweetheart," said Archie. 
"It's coming," she thought. "Oh, isn't it 
lovely! Of all the people in the world— 
he loves me, loves me!" She almost missed 
the beginning of his story. For he was telling her of Mr. Fields and his wonderful 
offer. 
When she finally caught the drift of what 
he was saying she was vaguely disappointed. 
He was talking business, in which she was 
really very little interested. The "saving 
streak" which Archie had attributed to her 
was merely sporadic, and was due to a nice 
girl's delicacy at having money spent on her 
by a man. But, of course, she listened. 
"So you see the future is practically settled—there's only one immediate drawback," 
he said earnestly. She shut her eyes—it was 
coming after all. 
He went on a little puzzled by her silence; 
"only one drawback, and that is that, of 
course, we can't be married for at least two 
years yet." 
Her eyes flew open. "Not marry for two 
years! Why—why ever not?" 
Even then he might have saved the situation by telling her first of his own cruel 
disappointment, for her loveliness, as she sat 
there, all glowing red and bronze in the firelit dusk, smote him very strongly. 
But he only floundered on. 
"Why, Emmy, of course, you can see— 
you're so much darker than I—anybody can 
tell at a glance what you— er— are." He 
was crude, he knew it, but he couldn't see 
how to help himself. "An d we'd have to live 
at Chestnut Hill , at first, right there near 
the Fields', and there'd be no way with you 
there to keep people from knowing that I— 
that—oh, confound it all—Emmy, you must 
understand! You don't mind, do you? You 
know you never were keen on marrying anyway. If we were both the same color—why, 
Emmy, what is it?" 
For she had risen and was looking at him 
as though he were someone entirely strange. 
Then she turned and gazed unseeingly out 
the window. So that was it—the "something important"—he was ashamed of her, 
of her color; he was always talking about a 
white man's chances. Why, of course, how 
foolish she'd been all along—how could he 
be white with her at his side? An d she 
had thought he had come to urge her to 
marry him at once—the sting of it sent her 
head up higher. She turned and faced 
him, her beautiful silhouette distinctly outlined against the gray blur of the window. 
She wanted to hurt him—she was quite cool 
now, 
"I have something to tell you, too, Archie," 
she said evenly. "I've been meaning to tell 
you for some time. It seems I've been making a mistake all along. I don't really love 
you"—she was surprised dully that the 
words didn't choke her—"so, of course, I 
can't marry you. I was wondering how I 
could get out of it—you can't think how 
tiresome it's all been." She had to stop. 
He was standing, frozen, motionless like 
something carved. 
"This seems as good an opportunity as 
any—oh, here's your ring," she finished, 
holding it out to him coldly. It was a beautiful diamond, small but flawless—the only 
thing he'd ever gone into debt for. 
The statue came to life. "Emmy, you're 
crazy," he cried passionately, seizing her by 
the wrist. "You've got the wrong idea. 
You think I don't want you to marry me. 
What a cad you must take me for. I only 
asked you to postpone it a little while, so 
we'd be happier afterward. I'm doing it all 
for you, girl. I never dreamed—it's preposterous, Emmy! An d you can't say you 
don't love me—that's all nonsense!" 
But she clung to her lie desperately. 
"No, really, Archie, I don't love you one 
bit; of course I like you awfully—let go my 
wrist, you can think how strong you are. 
I should have told you long ago, but I hadn't 
the heart—and it really was interesting." 
No grand lady on the stage could have been 
more detached. He should know, too, how 
it felt not to be wanted. EMM Y 139 
He was at her feet now, clutching desperately, as she retreated, at her dress—the 
red dress she had donned so bravely. He 
couldn't believe in her heartlessness. "You 
must love me, Emmy, and even if you don't 
you must marry me anyway. Why, you 
promised—you don't know what it means to 
me, Emmy—it's my very life—I've never 
even dreamed of another woman but you! 
Take it back, Emmy, you can't mean it." 
But she convinced him that she could. "I 
wish you'd stop, Archie," she said wearily; 
"this is awfully tiresome. And, anyway, I 
think you'd better go now if you want to 
catch your train." 
He stumbled to his feet, the life all out 
of him. In the hall he turned around: "You'll 
say good-by to your mother for me," he 
said mechanically. She nodded. He opened 
the front door. It seemed to close of its own 
accord behind him. 
She came back into the sitting room, wondering why the place had suddenly grown so 
intolerably hot. She opened a window. 
From somewhere out of the gray mists came 
the strains of "Alice, Where Art Thou?" 
executed with exceeding mournfulness on 
an organ. The girl listened with a curious 
detached intentness. 
"That must be Willie Holborn," she 
thought; "no one else could play as wretchedly as that." She crossed heavily to the 
armchair and flung herself in it. Her mind 
seemed to go on acting as though it were 
clockwork and she were watching it. 
Once she said: "Now this, I suppose, is 
what they call a tragedy." An d again: "He 
did get down on his knees." 
VII. 
THER E was nothing detached or impersonal in Archie's consideration of his 
plight. Al l through the trip home, through 
the long days that followed and the still 
longer nights, he was in torment. Again and 
again he went over the scene. 
"She was making a plaything out of me," 
he chafed bitterly. "Al l these months she's 
been only fooling. An d yet I wonder if she 
really meant it, if she didn't just do it to 
make it easier for me to be white. If that's 
the case what an insufferable cad she must 
take me for. No, she couldn't have cared for 
me, because if she had she'd have 
seen through it all right away." 
By the end of ten days he had worked 
himself almost into a fever. His burning 
face and shaking hands made him resolve, as 
he dressed that morning, to 'phone the office 
that he was too ill to come to work. 
"An d I'll stay home and write her a letter 
that she'll. have to answer." For although 
he had sent her one and sometimes two letters every day ever since his return, there 
had been no reply. 
"She must answer that," he said to himself 
at length, when the late afternoon shadows 
were creeping in. He had torn up letter 
after letter—he had been proud and beseeching by turns. But in this last he had laid 
his very heart bare. 
"An d if she doesn't answer it"—it seemed 
to him he couldn't face the possibility. He 
was at the writing desk where her picture 
stood in its little silver frame. It had been 
there all that day. As a rule he kept it 
locked up, afraid of what it might reveal to 
his landlady's vigilant eye.' He sat there, 
his head bowed over the picture, wondering 
dully how be should endure his misery. 
Someone touched him on the shoulder. 
"Gad, boy," said Mr. Nicholas Fields, 
"here I thought you were sick in bed, and 
come here to find you mooning over a picture. What's the matter? Won't the lady 
have you? Let's see who it is that's been 
breaking you up so." Archie watched him 
in fascinated horror, while he picked up the 
photograph and walked over to the window. 
As he scanned it his expression changed. 
"Oh," he said, with a little puzzled frown 
and yet laughing, too, "it's your colored 
lady friend again. Won't she let you go? 
That's the way with these black women, once 
they get hold of a white man—bleed 'em to 
death. I don't see how you can stand them 
anyway; it's the Spanish in you, I suppose. 
Better get rid of her before you get married. Hello " he broke off. 
For Archie was standing menacingly over 
him. "If you say another word about that 
girl I'll break every rotten bone in your 
body." 
"Oh, come," said Mr. Fields, still pleasant, "isn't that going it a little too strong? 
Why, what can a woman like that mean to 
you?" 
"She can mean," said the other slowly, 
"everything that the woman who has promised to be my wife ought to mean." The 
broken engagement meant nothing in a time 
like this. 
Mr. Fields forgot his composure. "To be 
your wife! Why, you idiot, you—you'd ruin 140 TH E CRISI S 
yourself—marry a Negro—have you lost 
your senses? Oh, I suppose it's some of 
your crazy foreign notions. In this country 
white gentlemen don't marry colored 
women." 
Archie had not expected this loophole. 
He hesitated, then with a shrug he burnt all 
his bridges behind him. One by one he saw 
his ambitions flare up and vanish. 
"No, you're right," he rejoined. "White 
gentlemen don't, but colored men do." Then 
he waited calmly for the avalanche. 
It came. "You mean," said Mr. Nicholas 
Fields, at first with only wonder and then 
with growing suspicion in his voice, "you 
mean that you're colored?" Archie nodded 
and watched him turn into a maniac. 
"Why, you low-lived young blackguard, 
you " he swore horribly. "An d you've let 
me think all this time " He broke off 
again, hunting for something insulting 
enough to say. "You Nigger!" he hurled at 
him. He really felt there was nothing worse, 
so he repeated it again and again with fresh 
imprecations. 
"I think," said Archie, "that that will do. 
I shouldn't like to forget myself, and I'm 
in a pretty reckless mood to-day. You must 
remember, Mr. Fields, you didn't ask me who 
I was, and I had no occasion to tell you. 
Of course I won't come back to the office." 
"If you do," said Mr. Fields, white to 
the lips, "I'll have you locked up if I have 
to perjure my soul to find a charge against 
you. I'll show you what a white man can 
do—you " 
But Archie had taken him by the shoulder 
and pushed him outside the door. 
"An d that's all right," he said to himself 
with a sudden heady sense of liberty. He 
surveyed himself curiously in the mirror. 
"Wouldn't anybody think I had changed 
into some horrible ravening beast. Lord, 
how that one little word changed him." He 
ruminated over the injustice—the petty, 
foolish injustice of the whole thing. 
" I don't believe," he said slowly, "it's 
worth while having a white man's chances if 
one has to be like that. I see what Emmy 
used to be driving at now." The thought of 
her sobered him. 
"If it should be on account of my chances 
that you're letting me go," he assured the 
picture gravely, "it's all quite unnecessary, 
for I'll never have another opportunity like 
that." 
In which he was quite right. It even 
looked as though he couldn't get any work 
at all along his own line. There was no 
demand for colored engineers. 
"If you keep your mouth shut," one man 
said, "and not let the other clerks know 
what you are I might try you for awhile." 
There was nothing for him to do but accept. 
A t the end of two weeks—the day before 
Thanksgiving—he found out that the men 
beside him, doing exactly the same kind of 
work as his own, were receiving for it five 
dollars more a week. The old injustice 
based on color had begun to hedge him in. 
It seemed to him that his unhappiness and 
humiliation were more than he could stand. 
VIII. 
BUT at least his life was occupied. Emmy, 
on the other hand, saw her own life 
stretching out through endless vistas of 
empty, useless days. She grew thin and 
listless, all the brightness and vividness of 
living toned down for her into one gray, 
flat monotony. By Thanksgiving Day the 
strain showed its effects on her very plainly. 
Her mother, who had listened in her usual 
silence when her daughter told her the cause 
of the broken engagement, tried to help her. 
"Emmy," she said, "you're probably doing 
Archie an injustice. I don't believe he ever 
dreamed of being ashamed of you. I think 
it is your own wilful pride that is at fault. 
You'd better consider carefully—if you are 
making a mistake you'll regret it to the day 
of your death. The sorrow of it will never 
leave you." 
Emmy was petulant. "Oh, mother, what 
can you know about it? Celeste says you 
married when you were young, even younger 
than I—married to the man you loved, and 
you were with him, I suppose, till he died. 
You couldn't know how I feel." She fell to 
staring absently out the window. It was 
a long time before her mother spoke again. 
"No, Emmy," she finally began again very 
gravely, " I wasn't with your father till he 
died. That is why I'm speaking to you as 
I am. I had sent him away—we had quarrelled—oh, I was passionate enough when I 
was your age, Emmy. He was jealous—he 
was a West Indian—I suppose Celeste has 
told you—and one day he came past the 
sitting room—it was just like this one, overlooking the garden. Well, as he glanced in 
the window he saw a man, a white man, put EMM Y 141 
his arms around me and kiss me. When he 
came in through the side door the man had 
gone. I was just about to explain—no, tell 
him—for I didn't know he had seen me 
when he began." She paused a little, but 
presently went on in her even, dispassionate 
voice: 
"He was furious, Emmy; oh, he was so 
angry, and he accused me—oh, my dear! 
He was almost insane. But it was really 
because he loved me. And then I became 
angry and I wouldn't tell him anything. And 
finally, Emmy, he struck me—you mustn't 
blame him, child; remember, it was the same 
spirit showing in both of us, in different 
ways. I was doing all I could to provoke 
him by keeping silence and he merely retaliated in his way. The blow wouldn't have 
harmed a little bird. But—well, Emmy, 1 
think I must have gone crazy. I ordered 
him from the house—it had been my mother's—and I told him never, never to let me 
see him again." She smiled drearily. 
"I never did see him again. After he left 
Celeste and I packed up our things and 
came here to America. You were the littlest 
thing, Emmy. You can't remember living 
in France at all, can you? Well, when your 
father found out where I was he wrote and 
asked me to forgive him and to let him come 
back. 'I am on my knees,' the letter said. 
I wrote and told him yes—I loved him, 
Emmy; oh, child, you with your talk of 
color; you don't know what love is. If you 
really loved Archie you'd let him marry you 
and lock you off, away from all the world, 
just so long as you were with him. 
"I was so happy," she resumed. "I hadn't 
seen him for two years. Well, he started— 
he was in Hayti then; he got to New York 
safely and started here. There was a wreck 
—just a little one—only five people killed, 
but he was one of them. He was so badly 
mangled, they wouldn't even let me see him." 
"Oh! " breathed Emmy. "Oh, mother!" 
After a long time she ventured a question. 
"Who was the other man, mother?" 
"The other man? Oh! that was my 
father; my mother's guardian, protector, 
everything, but not her husband. She was 
a slave, you know, in New Orleans, and he 
helped her to get away. He took her to 
Hayti first, and then, afterward, sent her 
over to France, where I was born. He never 
ceased in his kindness. After my mother's 
death I didn't see him for ten years, not 
till after I was married. That was the time 
Emile—you were named for your father, 
you know—saw' him kiss me. Mr. Pechegru, 
my father, was genuinely attached to my 
mother, I think, and had come after all these 
years to make some reparation. It was 
through him I first began translating for the 
publishers. You know yourself how my 
work has grown." 
She was quite ordinary and matter of 
fact again. Suddenly her manner changed. 
"I lost him when I was 22. Emmy— 
think of it—and my life has been nothing 
ever since. That's why I want you to think 
—to, consider " She was . weeping passionately now. 
Her mother in tears! To Emmy it was 
as though the world lay in ruins about her 
feet. 
IX . 
AS it happened Mrs. Carrel's story only 
plunged her daughter into deeper 
gloom. 
"It couldn't have happened at all if we' 
hadn't been colored," she told herself 
moodily. "If grandmother hadn't been colored she wouldn't have been a slave, and if 
she hadn't been a slave—That's what it 
is, color—color—it's wrecked mother's life 
and now it's wrecking mine." 
She couldn't get away from the thought 
of it. Archie's words, said so long ago, came 
back to her: "Just wait till color keeps you 
from the thing you want the most," he had 
told her. 
"It must be wonderful to be white," she 
said to herself, staring absently at the 
Stevenson motto on the wall of her little 
room. She went up close and surveyed it 
unseeingly. "If only I weren't colored," she 
thought. She checked herself angrily, enveloped by a sudden sense of shame. "It 
doesn't seem as though I could be the same 
girl." 
A thin ray of cold December sunlight 
picked out from the motto a little gilded 
phrase: "To renounce when that shall be 
necessary and not be embittered." She read 
it over and over and smiled whimsically. 
"I've renounced—there's no question about 
that," she thought, "but no one could expect 
me not to be bitter." 
If she could just get up strength enough, 
she reflected, as the days passed by, she 
would try to be cheerful in her mother's 
presence. But it was so easy to be melancholy. 142 TH E CRISI S 
About a week before Christmas her mother 
went to New York. She would see her publishers and do some shopping and would be 
back Christmas Eve. Emmy was really glad 
to see her go. 
"I'll spend that time in getting myself 
together," she told herself, "and when mother 
comes back I'll be all right." Nevertheless, 
for the first few days she was, if anything, 
more listless than ever. But Christmas Eve 
and the prospect of her mother's return 
gave her a sudden brace. 
"Without bitterness," she kept saying to 
herself, "to renounce without bitterness." 
Well, she would—she would. When her 
mother came back she should be astonished. 
She would even wear the red dress. But the 
sight of it made her weak; she couldn't put 
it on. But she did dress herself very carefully in white, remembering how gay she 
had been last Christmas Eve. She had put 
mistletoe in her hair and Archie had taken 
it out. 
"I don't have to have mistletoe," he had 
whispered to her proudly. 
In the late afternoon she ran out to Holborn's. As she came back 'round the corner 
she saw the stage drive away. Her mother, 
of course, had come. She ran into the sitting 
room wondering why the door was closed. 
" I will be all right," she said to herself, 
her hand on the knob, and stepped into the 
room—to walk straight into Archie's arms. 
She clung to him as though she could never 
let him go. 
"Oh, Archie, you've come back, you really 
wanted me." 
He strained her closer. "I've never stopped 
wanting you," he told her, his lips on her 
hair. 
Presently, when they were sitting by the 
fire, she in the armchair and he at her 
feet, he began to explain. She would not 
listen at first, it was all her fault, she said. 
"No, indeed," he protested generously, "it 
was mine. I was so crude; it's a wonder you 
can care at all about anyone as stupid as I 
am. And I think I was too ambitious— 
though in a way it was all for you, Emmy; 
you must always believe that. But I'm at 
the bottom rung now, sweetheart; you see, I 
told Mr. Fields everything and—he put me 
out." 
"Oh, Archie," she praised him, "that was 
really noble, since you weren't obliged to 
tell him." 
"Well, but in one sense I was obliged to— 
to keep my self-respect, you know. So there 
wasn't anything very noble about it after 
all. " He couldn't tell her what had really 
happened. "I'm genuinely poor now, dearest, but your mother sent for me to come 
over to New York. She knows some pretty 
all-right people there—she's a wonderful 
woman, Emmy—and I'm to go out to the 
Philippines. Could you—do you think you 
could come out there, Emmy? " 
She could, she assured him, go anywhere. 
"Only don't let it be too long, Archie— 
I—- " 
He was ecstatic. "Emmy—you—you don't 
mean you would be willing to start out there 
with me, do you? Why, that's only three 
months off. When " He stopped, peering out the window. "Who is that coming 
up the path? " 
"It's Willie Holborn," said Emmy. "I 
suppose Mary sent him around with my 
present. Wait, I'll let him in. " 
But it wasn't Willie Holborn, unless he 
had been suddenly converted into a small and 
very grubby special-delivery boy. 
"Mr. A . Ferrers," he said laconically, 
thrusting a book out at her. "Sign here." 
She took the letter back into the pleasant 
room, and A . Ferrers, scanning the postmark, 
tore it open. "It's from my landlady; she's 
the only person in Philadelphia who knows 
where I am. Wonder what's up?" he said 
incuriously. " I know I didn't forget to pay 
her my bill . Hello, what's this?" For within 
was a yellow envelope—a telegram. 
Together they tore it open. 
"Don't be a blooming idiot," it read; "the 
governor says come back and receive apologies and accept job. Merry Christmas. 
"PETE R FIELDS. " 
"Oh, " said Emmy, "isn't it lovely? Why 
does he say 'receive apologies,' Archie?" 
"Oh, I don't know," he quibbled, reflecting 
that if Peter hadn't said just that his return would have been as impossible as ever. 
"It's just his queer way of talking. He's 
the funniest chap! Looks as though I 
wouldn't have to go to the Philippines after 
all. But that doesn't alter the main question. 
How soon do you think you can marry me, 
Emmy?" 
His voice was light, but his eyes— 
"Well, " said Emmy bravely, "what do you 
think of Christmas?'" 
TH E END . NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORED PEOPLE 
MEMBERSHIP. 
AS we go to press our new members for 
the past month have reached a total of 
115, of which Boston secured 69. 
The annual meeting of the association will 
be held January 21, at 4 p. m., in the New 
York Evening Post Building, 20 Vesey 
Street. There will be an art exhibit and 
tea will be served at the offices, 26 Vesey 
Street. 
To supply the demand from the various 
branches which are planning emancipation 
meetings, the association has reprinted part 
of the emancipation supplement of the New 
York Evening Post of September 21, 1912, 
and added a page of interesting matter. 
Single copies, postpaid, cost three cents, 
two for five cents; in quantities, 100 for 
two dollars. 
TH E BOSTON BRANCH. 
THE Boston branch had its annual meeting November 9,1912. The speakers were 
the president, Mr. Francis J. Garrison, 
Hon. Albert E . Pillsbury, Mr. John E. 
Milholland and Miss Nerney. Mr. Pillsbury described the proceedings of the American Bar Association at Milwaukee. Mr. 
Pillsbury and Judge Harvey H . Baker of 
the Juvenile Court gave up their vacations 
to make the journey to Milwaukee, in the 
heat and discomfort of late August, in order 
to protest against the drawing of the color 
line. 
ON E OF OUR TYPICAL CASES. 
THE following interesting case successfully investigated by the legal 
redress committee of the branch was 
reported by the secretary, Mr. Wilson: 
"Another ease was that of a girl i n one of 
the Roxbury grammar schools. Early in 
the spring her mother was informed by the 
master that the girl would not be allowed 
to graduate, and was with the reluctant 
•consent of the mother, without adequate 
reason, transferred to the Trade School for 
Girls. While in the trade school she was 
wrongly marked as absent twenty-one times 
from the grammar school. The mother, a 
poor woman, working by the day for a 
living, applied to friends who sought the 
reason for the transfer of the girl, and for 
the statement that she would not be allowed 
to graduate. Acting under their advice the 
girl applied to the school board for an 
examination, and was informed that no 
reason appeared for refusing her graduation. 
"When the master was pressed for the 
reason for this statement that the girl should 
not graduate, he failed to give any adequate 
reason, became irritable and finally failed 
in courtesy and requested the association's 
representative to withdraw from his office. 
Later the girl was told that she could not 
attend school, and her mother, working by 
the day in Brookline, was told that she 
must come herself to the school at 8 o'clock 
to see the master. She had called on him 
several times without result and informed 
him that she would lose her job if she were 
away from it at 8 o'clock. This had no 
influence upon him. The association quietly 
and persistently pushed the ease. There was 
no noise or blare of trumpets, but the girl 
graduated with her class and is now a member of one of the Boston high schools." 
MEETINGS. 
THE assistant secretary, Miss Gruening, 
addressed meetings in Brooklyn at the 
Berean Baptist Church and at the People's 
Forum. In Manassas, Va., she spoke to the 
students of the Manassas Industrial School 
for Colored Youth. In Hampton she 
addressed the graduates and seniors of 
Hampton Institute and also spoke in the 
Zion Baptist Church. . At the latter meeting an aged Negro who had been a slave 
arose and said in comment on the message 
to which he had listened: "This is the second 
time in my life I have heard the voice of 
God; I first heard it fifty years ago." EQUALIT Y AN D LIBERT Y 
B y CALE B S. S. DUTTO N 
• THE doctrine of the equality 
of mankind by virtue of 
their birth as men, with its 
consequent right to equality 
of opportunity for selfdevelopment as a part of 
social justice, establishes a 
common basis of conviction, in respect to 
man, and a definite end as one main object 
of the State; and these elements are primary 
in the democratic scheme. Liberty is the 
next step, and is the means by which that 
end is secured. It is so cardinal in democracy as to seem hardly secondary to 
equality in importance. 
We say that and immediately the gravest 
problem in our national life looms up. The 
Negro problem is the mortal spot of our 
democracy. In America we have a racial 
problem of more fearful portent than that 
of any of the nations of Europe. We are 
still paying the price of slavery. The South 
is psychologically cramped. The North is 
bewildered. 
At the moment we are beset by the problem of Negro suffrage. It is being urged by 
a dominant school of thought that the 
immediate salvation of the Negro is less 
political than economic, and that his possession of money and education (above all, of 
technical education) will eventually compel 
the grant to him of full political rights at 
a time when he can best avail himself of 
them. This non-resistant attitude is hotly 
repelled by another group, who declare that 
Negro acquiescence in Negro disfranchisement is a denial of democracy, a surrender 
to race prejudice, and an obstacle in the 
path of the accumulation of money and 
education, which is the very alternative proposed to political rights. "If we have not 
the vote," they say, "we shall have neither 
education nor justice; if we have not the 
vote, our schools will be starved and our 
farms and our jobs lost." 
Whatever the merits of this controversy 
as a matter of ethics or practical politics, 
it seems probable—rather more than probable—that the present democratic movement, uneasily recognizing this danger in 
its rear, will move forward, leaving the 
problem of the Negro suffrage to one side. 
Witness the attitude of the three great 
parties to-day. 
It is perhaps possible to evade this issue 
if we can satisfy ourselves that the vote is 
not immediately essential to Negro civilization—it is not difficult to find sophistries to 
bolster this thought; the mouse can find 
many reasons, philanthropic and other, for 
not belling the cat. But we may not presume to make the Negro an "underman," to 
offer him a subhuman or a subcivilized life. 
For, as he grows, the Negro, if he be 
not given, will take. Even as we advance, 
hoping, perhaps, that democracy won and 
wrought by the whites will descend as an 
easy heritage to the re-enfranchised Negroes, 
we are oppressed by the dread of what may 
occur. There may arise a Negro consciousness, a sense of outraged racial dignity. 
There may come a stirring of a rebellious 
spirit among ten, or, as it will soon be, of 
fifteen or twenty million black folk. We 
cannot hope forever to sit quietly at the 
feast of life and let the black man serve. 
We cannot build upon an assumed 
superiority over these black men, who are 
seemingly humble to-day, but who to-morrow 
may be imperious, exigent, and proudly 
race conscious. 
If the democracy in America is to be a 
white democracy, and the civilization in 
America is to be a white civilization; if it 
is proposed to make the Negro a thing without rights, a permanent semi-emancipated 
slave, a headless, strong-armed worker, then 
let the white civilization beware. We may 
sunder the races if we can; we may preserve race integrity if we can; we may 
temporarily limit the Negro's suffrage—but 
this rock-bottom truth remains: if we seek 
to set up lower standards for one race, if 
we abate the ultimate rights, prerogatives 
and privileges of either race we shall plant 
the seeds of our own undoing. Our selfprotection, as much as our sense of justice, 
must impel us toward the Negro's cause. 
Whether we love the Negro or hate him, we 
are, and shall continue to be, tied to him. 
Let us never forget that the best antidote 
to democracy is jingoism and race hatred. 
Stir up race or national hatred and you 
postpone your social development. CHAPTE R I. 
"BARTOW , NOV. 5.—An unknown Negro 
has been creating a little excitement in Bartow lately. Last week, late in the night, he 
went into the home of George Mann, and 
later, in the same night, the same Negro or 
his pal went into the house of R. M . Oglesby, 
bent on robbery, but he failed to secure any • 
valuables, and was chased by the county 
bloodhounds, but without success. On a 
later night he tried to enter the house of 
Mr. Minnis. Last night, about 6 o'clock, a 
Negro, supposedly the same Negro, entered 
the home of Tom Page, near the Tillis 
Hotel. While rambling around in one of the 
rooms of the house, a telephone girl who 
boards at the Page home came into the room, 
and the Negro knocked her down, rendering 
her unconscious for a while, and then made 
his escape. Several good marksmen and 
householders are wishing that they could 
get a crack at this Negro."—Lakeland (Fla.) 
Evening Telegram. 
CHAPTE R II. 
"BARTOW , Nov. 7.—Last Monday afternoon late it was related that a Negro bent 
on robbery entered the home of Tom Page, 
and on being intercepted by a young lady 
roomer who works for the telephone company knocked the young lady senseless. 
The sequel to this occurrence took place last 
night. 
"Mrs. Page, on returning home about 5 
o'clock, found her back door unbolted. On 
leaving home she had securedly bolted it. 
On making a search of her room it was 
found that some thief had rummaged through 
the bureau, trunks, etc., and had taken some 
of Mrs. Page's clothing and considerable of 
her jewelry. The county bloodhounds were 
secured at once and taken to the back yard 
where footprints were found. The hounds 
trailed around the yard, but refused to leave 
the premises. Noticing that the footprints in 
the yard were rather small, and suspicioning 
that the depredations had been committed by 
someone in the house, J. P. Murdaugh, who 
had charge of the hounds, asked the telephone girl to let them measure her feet, and 
upon measuring her feet they were found to 
be of the same dimensions as the tracks in 
the yard. A search of her room was then 
made and all the stolen articles were found 
between the mattresses of her bed. She had 
taken all of Mrs. Page's best jewelry, some 
of her best clothing and a pair of trousers 
belonging to Tom Page. We suppose that 
she was going off to get married. The girl 
is a Georgia girl who has not been working 
at the local telephone office very long. 
"It is said that the young lady in question 
was for a time night operator at the telephone exchange in Lakeland."—Lakeland 
(Fla.) Evening Telegram. 
HARRIE T GIBBS-MARSHALL . President 
HARR Y A . WILLIAMS , Vice-President 
LOUI S G . GREGORY , Financia l Secretary 
GREGORI A A . FRASER , Recording Secretary 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression 
Piano , Violin , Win d Instruments, Pian o Tuning , Voca l Expression , Histor y of 
Musi c Theor y and Moder n Language s 
The first and only Mission Music School founded and controlled by Negroes 
in America. 
Many scholarships awarded. Talented students never turned away unaided. 
902 T Street, N . W . WASHINGTON , D . C . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 
TH E BURDE N 146 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Publishers' Page 
THE CRISIS FOR 1913 
Amon g the man y articles to be published are extracts fro m unpublished 
letters of Rober t Goul d Shaw, the brave leader of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, who was "buried unde r his Niggers! " 
"Th e Blac k Half, " by Jacob Riis. 
Th e "Alph a Ph i Alpha, " a new college fraternity amon g college men: 
W e shall make a specialty of fiction and expect short stories fro m Charle s W . 
Chesnutt and Miss Fauset. 
W e have already a striking story by Harr y H . Pace , Gran d Exalte d Rule r 
of the Colore d Elks; also one fro m Mrs. Pau l Laurenc e Dunbar . 
"Wh y didn't you tell me about your Children's Number ? I woul d have 
sent you a picture of m y boy. " 
Th e Advertisin g Ma n looked surprised, for the speaker was a woma n of muc h 
intelligence and one of our oldest subscribers. 
"Don't blame us," he replied. "It was announced in the magazine several 
months ahead and request was made for photographs of children." 
"I didn't read that. Wher e was it?" 
Turnin g to the Publishers' Pag e the Ad . Ma n pointed to the announcement 
in the Septembe r number , printed in clear, bold-face type. 
"Oh , I never read that page." 
Th e Publishers' Pag e is not "stuck in" at the last momen t to "fill space " It 
is there for a purpose. I T IS TH E PUBLISHERS ' PERSONA L PAGE . Don't 
forget to read it. 
Important notices regarding our growth, changes of polic y an d innovations 
appear on this page. The n once in a whil e the publisher s grow real "chatty" and 
talk about their plans, ideas and dreams—all of which make s interesting reading. 
ADVERTISIN G -Address all inquirie s to Albo n L , Holsey, Advertisin g Manager . 
CIRCULATION—Th e present circulation of TH E CRISI S is 22,000 copies per mouth, i n 
every State i n the Unio n and in 26 foreign lands. Ou r circulation books are open to interested 
parties. 
AGENTS—TH E CRISI S has at present a staff of 469 agents. Onl y agents who can 
furnish first-class references are desired. 
LETTERS—Addres s business letters to W . E . B . D u Bois, Manager . Dra w all checks to 
TH E CRISIS , 26 Vesey Street, New Yor k City . 
Professiona l Americanism, " by a leading colored teacher. 
A PAGE WORTH READING 
Business Matters 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 147 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 26 Vesey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25, 1911 
Nationa l President—Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev . Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E Milholland . New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R. Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Chairman of the Boar d of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Vlllard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E. Sachs, New York . 
Director of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B. D u Bois, New York . 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Childs Nerney, Brooklyn , N. Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Marth a Gruelling, New 
York . 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which TH E CRISIS puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY , join this 
Association and help us to put our words into DEEDS . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO E TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ » a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name , 
Address.. 
Class 1. Lif e Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying 
per year. 
$25 
Class 4. Contributing Members, paying $10, 
$5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 per 
year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISI S is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISI S subscription. 
Al l members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annua l 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
OFFICER S 148 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which YO U 
have been looking may possibly be here on this page. 
AGENT S something new 
Brandt's newly patented Combinatio n Shav ­
ing Brus h an d Bear d Softener. Lather s the 
face ; instead of using hands to rub in , use 
the littl e rubbe r fingers attached to shaving 
brush. Onl y sanitar y method of rubbing 
i n lathe r to prepar e face for shaving. 
Softens the beard muc h better than ordinar y 
method. Just the thing for a ma n with wiry 
beard an d tender skin. Give s a facia l massage with 
even' shave. Prevents ingrowing hairs. Bristle s 
set i n rubber. Sells on sight; every ma n wants 
one. Writ e for wholesale terms an d prices. 
R. V . Brand t Brush Co. , 42 Hudson St., N . Y . Cit y 
Yo u ar e no t to o youn g o r to o ol d to start makin g 
plent y of mone y sellin g REDDICK' S WORLD' S 
GREATES T POLISHIN G MITT . 
Th e newest practica l polishin g devic e o f the age . 
Writ e at onc e fo r agency . It positivel y sells o n 
sight . 
Se e pag e 11 0 fo r advertisement . 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOM A 
Th e real comin g countr y where there are 
opportunitie s and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ame s Bldg . Muskogee , Okla . 
AGENTS — Bi g money. Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted Negr o pictures. Portraits. Pillow Tops. Catalo g 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U , Chicago , Ill. 
Statemen t of the Ownership , Management , etc., 
o f TH E CRISIS , publishe d monthl y at 2 6 Vese y 
Street , Ne w York , require d b y the Ac t of Augus t 
24 , 1912 . 
Edito r an d Business Manager : W . E . B . D u Bois . 
2 6 Vese y Street , Ne w Yor k City . 
Publisher : Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Ad ­
vancemen t of Colore d People , 2 6 Vese v Street , Ne w 
Yor k City . 
Owners : The , Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Ad ­
vancemen t of Colore d People , a corporation , com ­
pose d of 3 0 directors; n o stoc k issued . 
Know n bondholders, mortgagee s an d othe r 
securit y holders, holdin g 1 pe r cent, o r mor e o f 
tota l amoun t of bonds, mortgage s o r othe r 
securities, none . 
W . E . B. DU BOIS , 
Swor n to an d subscribe d befor e me this first 
da y o f October . 1912 . 
HATTI E KASBERG , 
Commissione r o f Deeds, 
5 Beekma n Street , 
[Seal] Ne w York . 
MUTUAL TEACHERS ' 
AGENCY 
Recommend s teachers for schools; secures 
employmen t for teachers. Blank s and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington, D. C. 
TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
Jewetts , $11 .5 0 each; 
Franklins, Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. Al l guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Par k Row. New Yor k 
PRES I DENT S 
NEGR O REPUBLI C 
i n colors an d a short histor y o f Liberia . 16 x 20. 
Read y to han g o n th e walls ; onl y 50c . prepaid : in 
gol d "frame s $1.25 . Everybod y want s one . Writ e 
NEGR O PRESS , Bo x 126 ; Gainesville , Fla. , U . S. A . 
1,00 0 agents wanted . 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturin g Badges, 
Banner s and Supplie s 
for all Fraterna l and 
Churc h Societies. Cata ­
logue upo n request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones. Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8th and Plu m Sts. 
Cincinnati , Ohio 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to settle on FRE E Government Lands in Chaves County, New 
Mexico. Blackdom is a Negro colony. 
Fertile soil, ideal climate. N o "Jim 
Crow" Laws. Fo r information write 
JAS . HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom, Ne w Mexico 
Folding BATH TU
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water. Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lasts for years. Write for special agents offer and description. Robinson Mfg. Co
Mentio n THE CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 149 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 8935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertaker s and Embalmer s 
Notar y Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York , N. Y . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
A PLAC E T O STO P 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Servic e for First-class Peopl e 
3252 Wabas h Avenue , 
Chicago , Ill. 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
Formerl y Manage r Virgini a Transfe r Company 
459 SEVENT H AVENU E Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Order s by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C . V . B . A . 
PERSONA L CARD S 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbac h Bloc k Omaha , Neb . 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephone 4885 Morningsid e 
DR . D . W . ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W . Cor . 133d St. and Leno x Ave., New Yor k 
Office Honrs: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays b y Appointment 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architec t 
Cor . 8th an d Princess Streets 
Wilmington , N . C . 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Residence 2546 Michiga n Office Phone 
Bell Phone E-2161 Home 58 Mai n 
C . H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
117 W . 6th Street Kansa s City, Mo . 
FRANKLI N W . WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Real Estat e Conveyancer 
206 Parris h Street Durham , N . C. 
J . DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k Cit y 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
Telephone 5574 Beekman Rooms 905 to 907 
WILFOR D H . SMIT H 
Lawye r 
160 Nassau Street New Yor k Cit y 
Uptown Office—136 West 136th Street 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probat e Matter s a Specialty 
ROBER T B . BARCU S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
Office: Room 502, Eberl y Block, Columbus, O. 
B . S. SMIT H 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . P. McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Mention: TH E CRISIS . 150 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
YOU- D o yo u remembe r tha t five-spot yo u 
ble w i n tha t time , an d th e "ten " yo u 
waste d o n unnecessar y extravagance , 
an d th e man y littl e sum s yo u ha d i n 
you r han d an d le t ge t awa y withou t 
a singl e thin g t o sho w fo r them ? 
The y woul d b e ver y comfortin g if 
yo u ha d the m now , wouldn ' t they ? 
Especiall y so if yo u ha d the m wisel y 
invested . 
Bu t yo u di d no t kee p them . I f yo u 
ha d the y woul d no w b e keepin g you . 
" A hundre d dollars wisel y investe d 
earn s as muc h as a ma n steadil y em ­
ployed. " Th e eminen t financier, Ja y 
Gould , sai d that—an d prove d it. 
Suppose You Should Lose 
Your Job To-morrow? 
Th e averag e Negr o is dependen t 
upo n his job . Wha t opportunit y is 
ope n t o hi m if he lose s it ? O n ever y 
han d th e "Doo r o f Opportunity " is 
bein g close d against him , burdensom e 
restriction s hedg e hi m abou t an d un ­
just an d humiliatin g discrimination s 
operat e t o handica p an d discourag e 
him . I n competitio n wit h othe r race s 
the "squar e deal " is bein g denie d hi m 
i n eve n his humbles t an d mos t menia l 
efforts t o ear n a living . 
What Is the Remedy? 
Th e Negr o must make his own job 
—mus t ge t int o business o f his own . 
H e must ente r th e manufacturing , 
mercantil e an d commercia l fields — 
must becom e a produce r instea d o f a 
consume r only . H e must mak e fo r 
himsel f th e "Opportunity " denie d 
him ; must himself—i n his ow n enterprises—mak e opening s fo r his son s 
an d daughters, so the y ma y hav e em ­
ploymen t whe n thei r "schooling " is 
done . . 
But he can do this only 
through combination and cooperation. Therein alone is 
his protection and self-preservation. 
The American Sales 
Corporation 
F . W . Williams, President. 
Jno . S. Collins, 1st Vice-President. 
W . W . Jefferson, 2d Vice-President. 
W . J . Kemp , Secretary-Manager . 
Chas. S. Carter , Treasurer . 
A Negro-America n corporatio n 
organized and chartered unde r the 
strict Corporat e Law s of the State 
of Virgini a fo r business promotio n 
and development in manufacturing , 
mercantil e and commercia l lines. Its 
operations are unde r the direct supervision of the State Corporat e Com ­
mission. 
It ha s fo r its nucleu s a bi g profi t 
manufacturin g business tha t is boun d 
t o becom e nationa l i n siz e becaus e o f 
th e tremendou s an d universa l nee d 
fo r its . product . It is "you r oppor ­
tunity " t o invest a fe w spar e dollar s 
wher e the y wil l brin g yo u ver y larg e 
return s an d at th e sam e tim e giv e 
employmen t t o a n increasin g numbe r 
o f ou r youn g me n an d women . It is 
you r chanc e t o becom e par t owne r in 
a business tha t is alread y going , tha t 
is alread y furnishin g desirabl e em ­
ploymen t openings, tha t is o f produc ­
tive natur e an d tha t offers unusuall y 
quic k an d profitabl e "turn-over " fo r 
you r money . 
Provide an Income for Your 
Future 
"One Good Investment Is 
Better Than a Lifetime 
of Labor" 
Share s o f Preferre d Treasur y Stoc k 
ar e $10 each , payabl e i n eas y monthl y 
installment s if desired . 
Ful l information for the asking. 
Cal l o r writ e the Secretary, 206 
Quee n Street, Norfolk , Va . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 151 
The Crisis Calendar 
FO R 1913 
Tw o pretty dart baby faces in colors, and the 
celebrated "Credo," by W . E . B . D u Bois, beautifully printed, together with a large legible calendar 
by months. Price 25 cents, postpaid. 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People 
EMANCIPATION JUBILEE SEALS 
for your letters during the holidays and all next 
year, handsomely designed by Richard L . Brown, 
and done in colors. Price 1 cent each. 
" Show your belief in freedom on every letter you 
write in 1913." 
Emancipation Literature 
for celebrations, arguments, facts, pictures 
^== = Price 5 cents ==== = 
The Dunbar Company, 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 152 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TELLIN G A STORY 
T o friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over to 
strangers is quite different. 
Telling a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch," for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
Your business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch" they won't "pull." 
Correct business stationery is the "punch" that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'll show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
W e print for Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS. 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New Yor k 
B y 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Wit h a foreword by Dr . Fran z Boa s of Columbi a Universit y 
Chapte r I. Ho w th e colore d peopl e wo n thei r civi l an d politica l rights. 
Chapter s II . an d III . Th e Negr o tenemen t an d th e lif e o f th e poor . 
Chapters IV . an d V. Ho w th e colore d ma n earn s his living , wit h a ful l descrip ­
tio n o f th e professions; th e ministry , th e stage . 
Chapte r VI. Th e colore d woman , he r discouragement s an d successes. 
Chapte r VII . A vivi d descriptio n o f th e lif e o f th e well-to-d o Negroes. 
Chapte r VIII . Th e Negr o i n politic s i n Ne w York . 
Chapte r IX . Th e author's persona l view s o n th e rac e question . 
Pric e $1.00; b y mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
Thi s boo k is for sal e i n th e Boo k Departmen t o f Th e Crisis, 26 Vese y St. , N . Y . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 153 
$
5 
Brings Oliver 
Typewriter 
Send $5 for Th e Olive r Typewriter—the 
machine will come a-flying. The newest 
Model— No. 5—the regular $100 machine— 
with no extra charge for Printype. 
Fo r the price of a good fountain pen you 
secure the World's Greatest Typewriter. Yo u 
can pay the balance at the rate of 17 cents a 
day. 
This irresistible "$5 offer" is sweeping everything before it. The era of universal typewriting is coming. The triumph of the typewriter over primitive pen-and-ink has been 
brought about by the same machine that 
introduced visible writing. 
The OLIVE R 
Typewriter 
The Standard Visible Writer 
Thi s is the typewrite r whos e high efficiency has 
made it the choic e o f the greatest firms an d corporations. It is the simplest o f al l standar d type ­
writers, ye t the swiftest an d b y fa r the most 
versatile. Th e movin g parts wor k freel y i n a soli d 
metal framework , makin g the machin e so strong 
tha t the hardest usage has no effect upo n it. 
No Extra Charge for 
"Printype' »»» 
Mos t peopl e prefe r to hav e the machin e equippe d 
to writ e i n Printype . Thi s beautifu l typ e is obtain ­
abl e onl y o n Th e Olive r Typewriter . 
It is the greatest style improvemen t eve r evolve d 
fo r typewriters—th e most easil y rea d typ e i n existence—th e typ e whic h conform s to tha t i n universa l 
use o n the world 's printin g presses! 
Win Success with the Oliver! 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r aid s success-seekers i n a 
multitud e o f ways. Th e real-lif e storie s o f achieve ­
men t tha t cente r aroun d i t woul d fil l volumes. 
N o matte r wha t you r wor k ma y be—i n office, 
store , sho p o r home—Th e Olive r Typewrite r wil l 
prov e itself a grea t convenienc e an d a n actua l 
money-maker. 
It stand s fo r order an d system an d success. It is 
the visibl e evidenc e o f the progressiveness o f its 
owner. Youn g peopl e wit h brains, ambitio n an d 
Olive r Typewriter s ar e succeedin g everywhere. Ca n 
yo u affor d to let $5 stan d betwee n yo u an d success? 
Sen d fo r Specia l Circula r an d Ar t Catalo g 
Ful l details regardin g the 
Olive r Easy-Purchase-Plan , 
beautifu l catalo g an d a 
specime n lette r writte n i n 
Printyp e wil l be sent yo u 
o n request. 
Le t this $5 offer awake n 
yo u to you r need o f Th e 
Olive r Typewrite r an d the 
ease wit h whic h yo u ma y 
own it. 
_ Remember—$ 5 onl y an d on 
comes The Oliver Typewriter! Sale s Departmen t 
(206) 
The Oliver Typewriter Company 
310 Broadwa y NE W YORK , N . Y . 
ODESS A MILLINER Y 
Exclusiv e Parisian Creations for the 
Smartl y Dressed Woman . 
41 West 135th Street Ne w Yor k 
'Phon e 624 Harlem . 
P. and A . 'Phone 5252-F 
HEIN Z 
TH E TAILO R 
I carry a full line of the best woolens. 
Ladies' and Gents' suits made to order. 
Cleanin g and Pressing a Specialty. 
1713 Wyli e Avenu e Pittsburgh, Pa . 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 154 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
COLLEGE AN D FRATERNIT Y PINS 
W e ar e no w prepare d to suppl y colleges, fraterna l organizations, basebal l clubs, athleti c 
associations, etc., wit h pin s an d emblems, n o matte r wha t shap e o r design . 
Sen d u s you r ide a an d le t u s sen d yo u a drawin g an d a quotatio n surprisingl y small , 
considerin g th e superio r workmanshi p an d qualit y o f materials. 
Watc h fobs, rings, cuff button s an d meta l noveltie s of specia l desig n ar e als o produce d 
to you r order. 
Sterling Silve r Pins 40 cents up; Gold-filled 60 cents up ; Solid Gol d $1.10 up 
THE DUNBAR COMPANY, 26 Vesey Street, New York 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim : T o keep its technic equal to the best 
Founde d 1891 
Th e first trainin g schoo l fo r colore d 
nurse s i n this country , Freedman' s 
excepted . 
Comprise s a trainin g schoo l fo r 
nurses, hospital , dispensary . an d 
thoroughl y equippe d children' s department ; whe n fund s ar e ample , postgraduat e wor k ma y be undertaken . 
Th e hospita l is ope n t o all . Th e 
race s co-operat e i n th e boar d of 
trustees, i n th e medica l staff an d i n 
administration ; the institutio n is the 
onl y on e of its kin d i n whic h a colore d 
ma n ma y ac t as interne . 
Cost of building s an d equipment , 
$100,000 ; fre e fro m debt . Endowment , 
$50,000 . contribute d mostl y b y will s 
mad e b y colore d men . Additiona l 
endowmen t needed , $50,000 . 
Th e nurses' cours e covers thre e 
years; trainin g an d instructio n give n 
b y bot h races, accordin g to the highest 
36th an d Dearbor n Sts. , Chicago , Ill. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . BES T BOOK S 
Fo r students of the Negr o Proble m and general readers. You r librar y will 
be incomplet e without a selection fro m this up-to-date list. 
Thes e are books produced by the best writers and most able authorities on 
the problems affecting the races. B y mail at following prices: 
J 
ESSAYS 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . 
Kell y Mille r $2.15 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . 
W . E . B. D u Bois 1.35 
CURS E O F RAC E PREJUDICE . 
Jas. F . Morton , J r .27 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY STUDIES 
Th e Atlant a Universit y Studies are an 
annual study of decennially recurring subjects, covering every phase of Negro-American life. 
No . 7 — TH E NEGR O ARTISA N $ .75 
No. 8 — TH E NEGR O CHURC H 1.50 
No . 9— NOTE S O N NEGR O CRIM E . . .50 
No . 10 — BIBLIOGRAPH Y O F TH E 
NEGRO-AMERICA N .25 
No . 11 — HEALT H AN D PHYSIQU E 
O F TH E NEGRO-AMERICA N 1.50 
No . 12 — ECONOMI C CO-OPERATIO N 
AMON G NEGRO-AMERICAN S 1.00 
No . 13 — TH E NEGR O - AMERICA N 
FAMIL Y .75 
No . 14 — EFFORT S FO R SOCIA L 
BETTERMEN T AMON G NEGRO -
AMERICAN S .75 
No . 15 — TH E COLLEGE-BRE D NEGRO -
AMERICA N 75 
No . 16 — TH E NEGR O COMMO N 
SCHOO L 75 
FICTION 
QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE . 
W . E . B . D u Bois $1.50 
FLOWE R O' TH E PEACH . 
Perciva l Gibbo n 1.45 
MARRO W O F TRADITION . 
Chas. W . Chesnntt 1.65 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.65 
TH E WIF E O F HI S YOUTH . 
Chas. W . Chesnntt 1.65 
TH E CONJUR E WOMAN . 
Chas. W . Chesnutt 1.40 
SPOR T O F TH E GODS . 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 1.65 
TH E TESTIN G FIRE . 
Alexande r Corke y 1.35 
WISDOM' S CALL . 
Sutton E . Griggs .60 
POEMS 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . 
Paul Laurenc e Dunba r $1.40 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIF E (Illustrated) 
Paul Laurenc e Dunba r 1.75 
LIF E AN D WOR K O F PAU L 
LAURENC E DUNBA R (Complete) 
Cloth 2.00 
Half Morocco 2.60 
Ful l Morocco 3.65 
POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 1.10 
SUNLIGH T AN D STARLIGHT . 
Henr y G. Kost 1.58 
HISTORICAL AN D SCIENTIFIC 
NEGR O I N TH E SOUTH . 
Washington and D u Bois $1.10 
NEGR O I N TH E NE W WORLD . 
Si r Harr y Johnston 6 30 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . 
Fran z Boaz 1.65 
INTER-RACIA L PROBLEMS . 
Official Record. Univ . R. C 2.55 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGR O RACE . 
E . A . Johnson 1.40 
NEGR O EXPLORE R A T TH E NORT H 
POLE . 
Matthew A . Henson 1.10 
HOM E OCCUPATION S FO R BOY S 
AN D GIRLS . 
Berth a Johnston .55 
BIOGRAPHIES, ETC. 
JOH N BROWN . 
W . E . B . D u Bois $1.40 
FREDERIC K DOUGLASS . 
Booke r T. Washington 1.40 
LIF E O F HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE . 
B y her son and grandson 1.65 
U P FRO M SLAVERY . 
Booke r T. Washington 1.65 
AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX -
COLORE D MAN . 
(Anonymous) 1.40 
SOCIAL STUDIES 
HALF-A-MAN . 
M . W. Ovington $1.12 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . 
W . A . Sinclai r 1.65 
SOUTHER N SOUTH . 
Alber t B . Har t 1.65 
RAC E PREJUDICE . 
J . Fino t 3.25 
NEGR O AN D TH E NATION . 
G . C. Merria m 1.92 
FRE E 
Should yo u at any 
time require special information concerning 
books, author s or publishers, WRIT E US . 
Ou r location gives us 
the opportunit y to 
rende r this service to 
our man y patrons. 
This service is FREE . 
SPECIAL OFFER Ad d 75 cents to the 
regular price quoted 
for any of these books and we will send yo u TH E 
CRISI S for one year and one CRISI S cove r design, 
printed on plain paper, for framing . Size 8 1/2 x 11. 
Address all orders to 
THE DUNBAR COMPANY 
26 Vesey Street New Yor k City 
Mention TH E CRISIS . WH Y NOT YOU ? 
Mrs. DAIS Y TAPLE Y 
New York s favorite contralto and vocal instructor 
Mrs. Tapley says: "I find Crisis Maid Face 
Powder a most valuable toilet accessory." 
Whethe r the complexion is cream, olive or 
brown, we have a tint to match it. Price 50 cents 
per box. Send 2-cent stamp and name of druggist 
for sample. 
Perfec t Fac e Powde r 
TH E DUNBA R CO., 26 Vesey St., New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 