SUPPLEMENT TO TH E CRISIS, JULY , 1917, VOL. 14, NO. 3 
MEMPHIS 
May 22, A. D., 1917 
A n account taken solely from the Memphis white daily papers, save that 
we have added explanatory headings. 
TH E CRIME. 
The bruta l crime of the outrage an d murder of Antoinett e Rappa l by El l Persons, 
occurred earl y Monda y morning , Apri l 30. 
Th e Negr o El l Persons worked a plot of 
groun d on the Maco n roadside, 300 yards 
from the scene of the murder. H e admitted he had watched the little girl ride 
by mornin g after morning.—:Herald, Ma y 22. 
TH E ARREST. 
He was twice arrested on suspicion and 
twice released by Sheriff Tate . H e was first 
arrested Thursda y followin g his crime, 
then again Friday . 
The day followin g his second release he 
was seized by W . H . Wilfong , uncle of the 
girl , turned over to Joh n Sailors and held at 
Binghamton.—Th e Press, Ma y 22. 
SWORN TESTIMON Y OF TH E SUPERSTITIONS OF W. H. WILFONG. 
This is to certify tha t G . Hansen , the 
psychologist at 1120 Jackso n avenue, Mem ­
phis, Tenn., came to me on Saturda y morning , the fifth (5th) day of May , 1917, wit h 
Mr . Jacobi, the constable, i n search for the 
murdere r of Antoinett e Rappel. Mr . Hansen 
described the scene of the crime, also a little 
lo g cabin, where he said the guilt y one could 
be found, and also gave a thorough description of him, also his wife , before he ever saw 
them, and insisted that we go there, which 
we did.—Advertisemen t in Herald, June 3. 
THIRD DEGRE E AN D "A LON G SIEGE 
O F BEATING. " 
H e was turned over to the county jaile r 
Saturday . His freshly washed pants and 
shoes were found on the premises of his 
home. 
These facts were laid before Sheriff Tate , 
an d then followed the dramati c enactment 
of thir d degree tactics to force a confession 
from the slayer. 
Afte r a long siege of beating, the officers 
trie d strategy. 
"There's blood on your shoes!" shouted 
Cit y Detective Hoyle . 
Th e Negr o broke down and confessed.— 
Press, Ma y 22. 
DETENTION . 
O n Tuesda y morning , Ma y 8, he was 
rushed to Nashvill e by Deput y Sheriff M . 
W. Palme r and Detectives Brunne r and 
Hoyle , landed i n the state penitentiary, and 
then transferre d to the Nashvill e jai l for 
safekeeping. Since then the avengers have 
been stirrin g up things, and one nigh t the 
Sheriff of Davidso n County, Joe Wright , 
ha d to move hi m to Springfield on the report 
tha t a mob was coming to the capita l after 
him.—Herald, Ma y 22. 
TH E LYNCHERS . 
Ever y preparation, wit h the exception of 
the presence of the prisoner, was made yesterday for the tria l Frida y in the first division, of the crimina l court of El l Persons 
for the murde r of Antoinett e Rappal . 
Whil e the court was assembling its ma ­
chinery, men who had come in automobiles 
stood outside vowin g vengeance of mob violence for the crime which has excited a whole 
people, and wit h a bitterness born of waitin g and disappointment. 
Lawyers, each protesting that for one 
reason or another he was disqualified, were 
appointed by Judge Puryea r to defend the 
Negro . The date, time of the trial , was 
fixed for Frida y mornin g at 10 o'clock.— 
Commiercial-AppeaI, Ma y 22. 
Tha t the mob, whic h seems to be under 
the supreme leadership of one man who is 
unknown to the forces of the law, is determined to lynch the Negr o is evident. It is 
said that it has established a systematic 
organization, and the fact that all members 
can be communicated wit h in less than 20 
minutes' time, tends to bear out this statement. It is even rumored that they have 
elected a treasure r and assessed members 
for funds necessary to pay expenses of men 
who have been sent to Nashvill e to keep 
constant watch on the Davidson county jail . 
—Commercial-Appeal, Ma y 22. 
Practicall y every passenger train entering 
Shelby County from the north and east, it is 
said, was stopped and searched Monda y 
mornin g by armed mobs bent upon finding 
El l Persons.—Herald, Ma y 22. 
A Nashvill e telegram says that Deputy 
Sheriffs R. B . Wilro y and G. E . Thoma s 
took the Negr o El l Persons from the David ­
son County jai l at o'clock Monda y morn ­
in g to brin g him to Memphis. 
The y put him on a Louisvill e & Nashvill e 
train goin g south, carryin g him into Ala ­
bama, thence back up the Frisc o toward 
Holl y Springs.—Memphis Herald, Ma y 22, 
A . M . 
A special to the Herald from Potts Camp , 
Miss. , thirteen miles southeast of Holl y 
Springs, stated that the two deputy sheriffs 
in charge of El l Persons seemed to be surprised when the fast Frisc o trai n stopped 
at a coal chute about a mile from Potts 
Camp , and about twenty-five men—part of 
the Shelby avengers—climbed on and took 
El l Persons from them. One report is that 
they were slow to give him up, but finally 
did so.—Memphis Morning Herald, Ma y 22. 
PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMEN T O F TH E COM ­
ING LYNCHING. 
The avengers passed through Caplevill e 
just before 3 o'clock this mornin g wit h El l 
Persons, en route to the Maco n road bridge. 
H e wil l be burned at the stake by dayI 1 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 
light.—Memphis Morning Herald, Ma y 22. 
Cit y folk who read i n the mornin g pape r 
that the mob was assembled at the Wol f 
Rive r bridge , flocked to the scene by the 
hundreds i n automobiles. Befor e 7 o'clock 
the crowd was greater than it had been at 
midnight.—Commercial-Appeal, Ma y 23. 
Prof. E . E . Smit h of Centra l Hig h School 
asserted he was shocked the mornin g of the 
lynchin g to find fifty boys absent. Late r he 
was informed the boys, wit h their fathers or 
relatives, had gone to witness the lynchin g 
scene.—Herald, Ma y 27. 
Scores of parents sent notes to school by 
their children yesterday askin g that they 
be excused so that they migh t witness the 
lynchin g of El l Persons, slayer of Antoinett e 
Rappal. This informatio n came to the office of the board of education to-day. 
The children were not excused. 
Count y schools were dismissed early on 
account of examinations and hundreds of 
the pupils hurrie d to the scene of the lynch ­
ing.—Memphis Press, Ma y 23. 
TH E ORGANIZED MOB. 
News of the capture was flashed by telephone and telegraph to the surroundin g 
towns and country. Whereve r the news was 
received armed men climbed into automobiles and started towar d a rendezvous apparently known to all.—Commercial-Ap ­
peal, Ma y 22. 
The mob that burned El l Person was wonderfully organized. Members were i n touch 
wit h Nashvill e and all surroundin g counties 
and towns. 
Leaders were designated by number.— 
Memphis Press, Ma y 22 (P.M.) . 
It is said this is the first time in the record of lynchin g that the mob lynched i n the 
broad daylight, did not seek to hide their 
identity or wea r masks.—News Scimitar, 
Ma y 22. 
"Traffic officers" and "policemen" to 
maintai n "order " at the place selected for 
the execution of El l Persons by Judge Lync h 
were among the details which went to show 
that the crowd of avengers was thoroughly 
organized by the "invisibl e government " 
which has had this case in charge.—Memphis News Scimitar, P. M. , Ma y 22. 
PREPARATION . 
It was like a holiday on the Maco n road 
this morning . Hundreds of men and some 
women, too, had spent the night at the 
bridge over which Antoinett e Rappa l rode 
on her bicycle just before her murder. Bu t 
most of the watchers had gone home and 
started to return early this morning . Fro m 
every direction they came, many without 
breakfast. Me n and women, some of them 
with their children, gathered by hundreds. 
A t 8 o'clock there were 3,000 persons gathered around wit h end of the bridge and the 
Macon road in every direction was black 
wit h those who came in autos and those 
who tramped on foot. 
Fo r a mile and a half up the road the 
autos were packed in an endless strin g by 9 
o'clock. Those on foot struggled in and out 
of the car. Mothers carryin g childre n staggered from exhaustion as the wor d spread 
that the posse bringin g Perso n ha d almost 
reached the bridge . A n old ma n on crutches 
hobbled and bemoaned the fate that migh t 
keep him from arrivin g i n time.—Memphis 
Press, Ma y 22 (P. M.) . 
Conspicuous amon g the mob were several 
venders of sandwiches an d chewin g gum. 
Their sales were enormous.—Memphis News 
Scimitar, P . M. , Ma y 22. 
A t 9 o'clock Mrs. Woo d arrive d i n an 
auto, whic h halted on the levee i n front of 
the crowd. Almost at the same time another 
auto, in whic h the Negr o wa s seated, appeared on the bridge . 
The master of ceremonies raised his 
hands to command silence, and announced 
that the mothe r of the murdere d girl desired to make a statement. The crowd 
surged closer to catch her words, which 
proved to be audible fo r a distance of about 
50 feet. 
" I wan t to thank all my friends who have 
worked so har d i n m y behalf, " she said. 
"Le t the Negr o suffer as my littl e gir l suffered, only 10 times worse. " 
"We'l l bur n him, " the crowd yelled. 
"Yes, bur n hi m on the spot where he 
killed my littl e girl, " she said. 
The crowd yelled at this, but the leader 
explained tha t the committee had decided 
to execute Persons i n a cleared space on the 
opposite side of the levee, where more people could see. Mrs. Woo d assented.—Commercial-Appeal, Ma y 23. 
The mob went wil d as the Negro , heavily 
shackled, was lifted from the ca r and walked 
into the field where a place had been cleared 
for his execution.—Press, Ma y 23. 
TH E "CONFESSION." 
Then came word that the Negr o wanted 
to make a confession and the crowd surged 
awa y from the tree wit h the rope and back 
to the road. Aroun d an auto on the west 
end of the bridge stood dozens of men with 
rifles and shotguns. 
The crowd surged aroun d and fought for 
a view of the victim. Marsha l Sailo r of 
Binghamto n pleaded wit h the crowd to be 
orderly. Sailor, knowin g the determination 
of the mob, did his best to prevent any disorder and succeeded i n doin g so. 
Sailo r stood up i n the ca r and beside him 
stood the Negro . Th e murdere r was calm, 
but his eyes rolled white , for the crowd 
screamed when it saw him. 
Leaders trie d to get silence, and finally 
they succeeded. 
"Perso n has a statement to make, " shouted Sailor. Bu t the Negr o could not speak 
and the marsha l spoke for him.—Press, 
Ma y 22. 
TH E BURNING. 
"Bur n him, " screamed a woman . "An d 
burn him slow, " shouted another one. The 
crowd cheered.—Press, Ma y 22. 
On one side was the road, 10 feet above 
the hollow into whic h the Negr o was 
dragged and chained to a log. On the other TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 3 
three sides was a forest, the trees black 
wit h the figures of men who had climbed 
into them fo r better views.—Press, Ma y 22, 
P. M . 
Te n gallons of gasoline was then poured 
over his clothin g and a match applied. 
Whil e the fire, startin g at his feet, crept 
slowl y towar d his face a 10-year-old Negr o 
boy wa s placed on the other end of the log. 
"Tak e a good look, boy, " someone told 
him. "W e wan t you to remember this the 
longest day you live . This is wha t happens 
to niggers who molest whit e women. " 
Althoug h he writhe d i n agony Persons 
made no outcry. Whil e the flames were at 
their height several hundred members of the 
mob crowded about, fighting for bits of his 
clothin g and the rope. Two men cut off his 
ears and carried them awa y as souvenirs.— 
Memphis News Scimitar, P. M. , Ma y 22. 
They fought and screamed and crowded to 
get a glimps e of him and the mob closed in 
and struggled around the fire as the flames 
flared hig h and the smoke rolled over their 
heads. 
Tw o of them hacked off his ears as he 
burned ; another tried to cut off a toe, but 
they stopped him. 
The y crowded i n and crowded out, so that 
all migh t see the burnin g body. An d they 
were stil l surgin g around it when the flesh 
had been burned from the bones and the 
withered frame of wha t was once a human 
being la y cracklin g i n the flames.—Memphis 
Press, P. M. , Ma y 22. 
Persons went to his death terrified beyond the powe r of expression- His anima l 
eyes rolled and shifted unceasingly, and he 
frequently moistened his parched lips, 
through whic h speech was scarcely audible, 
but he did not flinch when led to the funeral 
pyr e nor cr y out when the oil flames surged 
over his body. 
His death was almost instantaneous. 
The Negr o dran k deep of the first sheet of 
flame and smoke, and relaxed upon his hellish couch. Whe n the body had been burned 
sufficient to satisfy the lust of the executioners, one man i n the crowd cut out the 
Negro's heart, two others cut off his ears, 
whil e another hacked off his head.—Commercial-Appeal, Ma y 23. 
The flames and smoke .shot hig h in the 
air, and the frenzied men cheered as their 
victim writhe d in agony and then was stilled 
in death. 
Th e crowd looked on grimly . Man y city 
women paled through the paint on their 
cheeks, and not a few others were sickened 
by the ghastly sight.—Commercial-Appeal, 
Ma y 23. 
A woman near me screamed not to use 
gasoline, "He'l l burn too fast; he'll burn 
too fast, " she cried, over and over again, 
and others took up the shout.—Press, Ma y 
22, P. M . 
SOUVENIRS. 
Tw o men darted in an d with knives 
slashed the Negro's ears from his head. 
Othe r men fought the crowd back to keep it 
from followin g their example. 
The brigh t flames caused by the gasoline 
gave wa y to dense smoke when the flames 
attacked the moist wood and the body of the 
victim. Despite the smoke and the sickenin g smell of the burnin g flesh the thousands 
still struggled to get a glimpse. Me n held 
other men on their shoulders. Wome n 
helped hold each other up. 
Th e Negr o lay in the flames in the center, 
his arms crossed on his chest. If he spoke, 
no one ever heard him above the shouts of 
the crowd. He died quickly, though 15 min ­
utes later excitable persons still shouted 
that he lived when they saw the charred 
remains move as does meat in a hot fryin g 
pan. ;—Press, Ma y 22. 
Three men, presumably members of the 
mob which lynched El i Persons, drove up in 
an automobile shortly before 1 o'clock 
Tuesday at Raybur n boulevard and Beale 
avenue and stopped before a crowd o f Ne ­
groes. 
"Tak e this wit h our compliments, " one of 
the auto's occupants addressed the group of 
Negroes, and i n their midst fell Persons' 
head and one of his feet. 
The body had been dismembered at the 
scene of the lynching. Persons' head was 
taken down from the post near the bridge 
on which it had been placed shortly after the 
lynching. The men who brought it to town 
hurriedl y drove off after dropping their 
grewsome burden. 
Persons' head had been shorn of its ears 
and a portion of its nose. It was taken i n 
charge by county authorities.—Memphis 
News Scimitar, Ma y 22 (P . M.) . 
Women wit h children i n their arms stampeded with several hundred men i n the rush 
for souvenirs. Bits of Persons' clothing 
were snatched from his burnin g body and 
the huge rope wit h which he was first secured was cut into shreds.—Memphis News 
Scimitar, P. M. , Ma y 22. 
AFTE R TH E BURNING. 
"The y burned him too quick; they burned 
him too quick, " was the complaint on all 
sides. The universa l sentiment seemed to 
be that too much gasoline had been used. 
Whe n the fire had almost died down and 
no stretch of the imagination could have 
pictured the charred mass in the midst as 
the remains of a human being, men and 
particularl y women still struggled to get 
near for a glimpse. 
Thousands left. They walked and twisted and scrambled in and out among perhaps 
3,000 machines that were parked so close 
that drivers could not move them in some 
cases for hours. 
An d all the way to Memphis those who 
were leaving passed the crowds which were 
just coming. 
These bemoaned the fact that they were 
too late, but seized on every little cloud of 
smoke they saw as an indication that the 
fire was still burning , that some portion of 
the spectacle migh t still be left for them. 
—Press, Ma y 22. 
" A Negr o automobile drive r named Bur t 
Ingram, close to the pyre, unbalanced by 
the excitement, caught up an America n flag, 
and, wavin g it above his head, shouted: 4 TH E CRISIS SUPPLEMENT 
"We'r e al l throug h here, boys. Let's 
joi n the Germans. " 
"H e tore the flag to shreds and was im ­
mediately grabbed by a crowd of whit e men 
who attempted to rus h him to the dyin g 
blaze, where Persons' skeleton stil l hung . 
Fiv e policemen rescued him. H e wil l be 
turned over to the Federa l authorities."— 
Memphis Herald, quoting St. Louis Times, 
Ma y 24. 
TH E MAJEST Y OF TH E LAW . 
Gov. T. C. Rye—Wer e you not full y and 
dul y informed of al l the facts i n the El l 
Persons outrage and horribl e murde r of little Antoinett e Rappel ? 
Is it not a fact tha t you were asked to 
send soldiers to Memphis to protect El l Persons so he could get a fair trial ? 
Di d not Attorney-Genera l Hunte r Wilso n 
ask you for two companies of soldiers i n the 
trial ? 
Di d not the two judges of the crimina l 
courts, Davi d B . Puryea r and T. W . Harsh , 
fully represent to you the state of hig h 
feeling here, the mob prospect, and ask you 
for soldiers to protect? 
Di d not Mayo r Ashcroft do practicall y 
the same? 
In all these terribl y menacing conditions, 
wit h these requests, these facts, the volume 
of newspaper publications, too, wh y did you 
not act to save Memphis and Shelby County 
from wha t happened and wha t the law officials told you was prospective?—Herald, 
Ma y 27. 
Everybod y knows that Memphis was terrorized and intimidate d by the avengers for 
days and nights preceding the final apprehension of El l Persons in another state, and 
his return here to be burned at the stake. 
The law wa s as powerless as if it had not 
existed. No t a law officer went to the front 
in the face of the situation to check it—not 
one.—Daily Herald, Ma y 25. 
A request for troops to protect El l Person, 
Negr o ax fiend, from a mob which had seized 
him at Potts Camp , was wired last night to 
Gov. Bilb o by the sheriff of Marshal l 
County. 
Gov. Bilb o wired the sheriff to organize a 
citizens' posse, as the state troops were in 
the Federa l service, and not under his control.—Memphis Press, Ma y 22, P. M . 
AFTE R THOUGHT . 
"We , clergymen of the Cit y of Memphis, 
met in solemn assembly, do hereby resolve 
that we, as clergymen and citizens, confess 
our dereliction of duty in not havin g warned 
an inflamed public opinion against mob violence, when it was apparent to every reader 
of newspapers that preparations had been 
made for lynchin g the brute who had cornmitted an unspeakable crime."—Press, Ma y 
24. 
We burned a Negr o at the stake yesterday. 
Le t us underscore the wor d "WE." 
So if we are proud of it, let us be proud 
of it together. 
If we are ashamed of it, let us be ashamed 
of it together. 
Let's not be cowardl y enough to pu t it off 
onto someone else, claimin g tha t we wer e at 
home attending to business. 
It woul d be as senseless to pu t al l the 
blame on the ma n who made the brimstone 
for the matc h tha t ignite d the funera l pyr e 
as it woul d to put it all upon the men who 
participate d i n the lynchin g itself. 
Publi c opinion burned El l Person—the 
stake yesterday. 
Publi c opinion burne d El l Person—the 
ministe r of the gospel, the lawyer, the doctor, the newspape r editor, the ma n who talks 
to others on the street corner or the street 
car—he shared i n it, tha t is he di d unless 
he protested an d there wer e few protests. 
Th e majorit y approved. Th e minorit y kept 
silent, an d silence gives consent. 
An d so, to-day, when the reaction has 
come and we shudder at the story of the man 
who cut out the heart of the half-roasted 
fiend, of the men who severed his head and 
sped to town to throw it into the street, let 
us stop and see wha t part we played i n it. 
An d i f we find tha t we don't approve of 
it then let's start creatin g a publi c opinion 
that wil l uphold the majesty of the law. 
Le t us resolve that we wil l put into office 
only men who realize the responsibility they 
are assuming. 
Le t us resolve tha t when we are called 
upon to sit on a jur y we won't shir k our 
duty and let chronic jurors brin g i n a verdict that causes the publi c to have only contempt for the law. 
Man y a lynchin g has been bred i n the 
courthouse. 
Let's realize that as citizens who ma y 
wan t society's protection we are members of 
tha t society and must make it strong. 
It cannot be weak for others and strong 
for us. 
It wil l be as strong or as weak as W E 
make it. 
Editoria l in the Memphis Press, Ma y 23. 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D B Y YEAR S 
1885-1916. 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 90 
1891 121 
1893 155 
1893 154 
1894 134 
1895 112 
1896 80 
1,897 122 
1898 102 
1899 84 
1900 107 
1901 107 
1902 86 
1903 86 
1904 83 
1905 61 
1906 64 
1907 60 
1908 93 
1909 73 
1910 65 
1911 63 
1912 63 
1913 79 
1914 69 
1915 80 
1916 55 
Tota l . .2,867 
What are we going to do about this record? The civilization of America is at 
slake. The sincerity of Christianity is challenged. 
Interested persons may write to Roy 
Nash, Secretary, 70 Fifth Avenue, New 
York City. 