THE 
CRISIS NOV 1920 
I 5 C 
FRANK 
WALTS A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mar y White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1-25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY * (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.50 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) ... . 1.1 0 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE . (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (B. G. Brawley) 1.50 
TH E SHADOW . (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B . D u Bois) 1.75 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W . Ellis) 3.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B . Du Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B . DuBois) 2.0 0 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyma n 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED B Y TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOE TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFT H AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED B Y W. E. BUBGHARD T DU BOIS; JESSIE REDMON FAUSET, LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 21—No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1920 Whole No. 121 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . Drawing by Frank Walts. 
"RUT H IS NOT COMING OU T OF COLLEGE " 13 
"THE Y HAV E EARS BUT THE Y HEA R NOT." A Cartoon. Albert A. Smith 17 
COLORE D CLERKS A T MONTGOMERY , WAR D & COMPAN Y 21 
TH E ATLANT A CONFERENCE, N. A. A. C. P. 23-26 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 33 
ARTICLES 
TH E DEACON'S AWAKENING . A Play in One Act. Willis Richardson. 
Illustrated by Laura Wheeler 10 
VALUES . A Poem. Winifred Virginia Jordan ' 15 
TH E SOCIAL EQUALIT Y OF WHITES AND BLACKS . W. E. B. DuBois 16 
IT'S GREA T T O BE A PROBLEM. A Poem. J . W. Work 18 
PLEASURABLE PROFIT IN OTHE R TONGUES. Yetta Kay Stoddard 19 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 5 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 20 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE '•••'••'•>,••<<• 23 
TH E LOOKING GLAS S •;••;••<.••' ; • •••«• \'•••], • 27 
ME N OF TH E MONTH:- ' •••'•*•'• 32 
TH E HORIZON , ,J 34 
TH E DECEMBE R CRISIS 
The annual Christmas Number comes next: a beautiful cover in color*, an illustrated Christmas 
poem from the French, and an estimate of the West Indian leader, Marcus Garvey. The CRISI S 
CALENDA R for 1921 will be ready soon. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 2 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY Lincoln University 
Ranked in Class 1 
among colleges for colored students MANUA L TRAINING & by the American Medical Association 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL College and Theological Seminary 
opened Sept. 21, 1920 FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN, N. J. " Address: 
President, John B. Rendall, D.D. A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, Lincoln University, 
thorough instruction, wholesome sur­ Chester County, Pa. 
roundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and The Cheyney Training School 
trades for boys, including auto re­ for Teachers 
pairing. Cheyney, Pa. Courses in domestic science and do­ Made in 1020 an accredited State Normal SchooIr
mestic art for girls. offering in addition to the regular Normal course A new trades building, thoroughly of two years professional three year courses in Home 
equipped. Economics and Manual Training. A diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach New girls' dormitory thoroughly and in the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
modernly equipped. High School Course is offered to all who have com­ pleted the eighth grammar grade. Terms reasonable. Board and Tuition S1F3.00 
Fall term opened September, 1920. 1st Semester, September 13, 1920 
For information address 2nd Semester, January 26, 1921 
For further pat ticrtlars and catalog, write— W. R. VALENTINE, Principal LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal, 
CHEYNEY , PA . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 3 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta, Ga. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers full courses in the fol­ lowing departments: College, Normal, High School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Ex­ penses very reasonable. 
Began September 15, 1920. 
For catalog- and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J , KELL Y GIFFE N Knoxville, Tenn . 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1920 ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Ove r 10 0 acre s o f beautifu l campus . Twelv e building s 
wit h ne w $100,00 0 administratio n buildin g wit h moder n 
chape l an d gymnasiu m unde r construction . Stron g facul ­
ty — Religiou s atmosphere—Athletics — Co-educational . Ad ­
missio n onl y b y application . 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junio r Hig h School—7t h an d 8th Grade s an d 1st an d 
2n d Tears * Hig h Schoo l Courses, wit h Certificate . 
Junio r College—3r d an d 4t h Yea r Hig h Schoo l wit h 
Freshma n an d Sophomor e years o f Colleg e work , wit h 
Diploma , 
College—Fou r years abov e Hig h School , o r tw o years 
abov e Junio r Colleg e Course , wit h degre e o f A.B . 
Domesti c Science —Commerce—Normal — 
Pre-medica l Cours e 
51st yea r o f nin e month s opene d Septembe r 22 , 1920. 
$16.0 0 pe r mont h pay s tuition , board , roo m an d laundry . 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , Presiden t 
THE Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. The wily Institution In the Stat« having for Its object Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Col­ ored citizens in Kentucky. Special training in Insurance, Social Service. Nursing and Hospital Work. Normal, Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary training class. Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C . H . Parrish 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the .only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Blddl e University, operate d unde r th eauspicesof 
the Norther n Presbyteria n Church , ha s fou r Depart ­
ment! — High School , Art e am i Science s Theologica l 
an d Industrial . Th e completio n of a Gramma r Schoo l 
cours e Is th e requiremen t fo r entranc e t o th e flrat rea r 
o f th e Hig h School . 
Th e Schoo l o f Art s an d Science s offers tw o courm* , 
u f study , th e Classica l an d th e Scientific , i n th e 
scientific . Germa n Is substitute d fo r Gree k o r Latin . 
Th e entranc e requiremen t fo r th e Freshma n Class is 
IS units o f Hig h Schoo l work . 
Th e Theologica l Departmen t offers tw o courses, eac h 
consistin g o f thre e years. Th e flrat Is purel y English . 
Gree k an d Hebre w ar e taugh t I n th e others. 
Al l students I n th e Hig h Schoo l Dept . ar e require d 
U i tak e trade s in th e Industria l Dept . 
Fe r furthe r information, address 
President H . L . MoCrerey , 
Charlotte , N . C . 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of special­ ists, trained in some of the best universities in the North and in the South. Noted for high standard of scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Chris­ tian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses rea­ sonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School,
Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September, 1920. 
For further information address 
JOHN H . LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J . S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Wiley University 
Marshall , Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas. Louisiana. Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Students from six different states. Graduates ex­ empted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHAHGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Both of Us Lose, Young Man 
If you fail to study the superior advantages North Carolina 
offers you through The Agricultural and Technical College 
for securing good, practical and 
technical training. 
Four Strong Departments: 
Agricultural Academic 
Mechanical Teacher-Training 
Night School for those who 
desire to work in the day. 
Fall Term began, September 1,1920 
Address: 
JAS. B. DUDLEY, President 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Have you children in your home 
or are there some children on your 
list of special friends? Then you will 
want them to have the 
BROWNIES ' BOOK , 
a monthly magazine designed especially for our children but good as 
well for "grown-ups." It contains 
stories, pictures, games, history, biography, current events and lots of 
interesting things. 
SPECIAL OFFER: Five paid-up yearly 
subscriptions to the BROWNIES ' 
BOO K sent in at one time will entitle the sender to a year's subscription free. This offer holds good until 
midnight of December 31, 1920. 
15 cents per copy 
$1.50 per year 
Address: 
DuBois and Dill 
Publishers 
2 West 13th Street, New York, N . Y. 
TH E UPWARD PATH 
A Reader for Colored Children 
(Compiled by Myron T. Pritchard 
and Mary IV. Ovington. With an 
Introduction by Maj. R. R. Moton.) 
Poems, stories and addresses 
by Negro authors. The first distinguished compilation to give an adequate comprehension of the depth 
and richness inherent in the literary 
product of our Negro authors. Illustrated by a Negro artist. 
Price $1.35 
" I regard "The Upward Path' as a distinct contribution to the literature produced by Negro authors, and a book which will do much toward 
inculcating in the minds of Negro youth a pride in the achievements of colored writers. It should be in the hands of every person who de­ sires to see the better side of the colored race. 
"James Weldon Johnson, "Actin g Secretary, N . A. A. C. P. " 
HARCOURT, BRACE & HOWE 
1 West 47th St. New York, N. Y. 
or from The CRISIS 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 21. No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1920 Whole No. 121 
Opinion
of W. E. B. DuBois 
OU R TENT H ANNIVERSARY . 
TEN years ago, in November, 
1910 , the first issue of TH E 
CRISI S made its appearance 
and published the following 
as its first editorial: 
TH E CRISI S 
The object of this publication is to 
set forth those facts and arguments 
which show the danger of race prejudice, particularly as manifested today toward colored people. It takes 
its name from the fact that the editors believe that this is a critical time 
in the history of the advancement of 
men. Catholicity and tolerance, reason and forbearance can today make 
the world-old dream of human brotherhood approach realization; while 
bigotry and prejudice, emphasized 
race consciousness and force can repeat the awful history of the contact 
of nations and groups in the past. We 
strive for this higher and broader 
vision of Peace and Good Will . 
The policy of TH E CRISI S will be 
simple and well defined: 
It wil l first and foremost be a 
newspaper: it wil l record important 
happenings and movements in the 
world which bear on the great problem of inter-racial relations and especially those which affect the Negro 
American. 
Secondly, it wil l be a review of 
opinion and literature, recording 
briefly books, articles and important 
expressions of opinion in the white 
and colored press on the race problem. 
Thirdly , it wil l publish a few short 
articles. 
Finally, its editorial page will stand 
for the rights of men, irrespective of 
color or race; for the highest ideals 
of American democracy; and for reasonable but earnest and persistent 
attempt to gain these rights and realize these ideals. The magazine will 
be the organ of no clique or party and 
will avoid personal rancor of all sorts. 
In the absence of proof to the contrary it wil l assume honesty of purpose on the part of all men, North 
and South, white and black. 
PROGRES S 
THE progress of the colored 
American in the last five 
years has been the most marvelous of any period since 
emancipation. Visits and investigations North, East, South and West 
show an activity, a persistence and an 
accomplishment which is astounding. 
New ownership of land, new and 
beautiful homes, new business enterprises, larger amounts of capital seeking investment, new appreciation of 
and joining with labor unions, new 
kinds of better paid work and a larger 
number of children pressing into the 
schools is the almost universal story. 
But above all comes the New Spirit: 
from a bewildered, almost listless, 
creeping sense of impotence and despair have come a new vigor, hopefulness and feeling of power. We are 
no longer depending upon our friends; 
we are depending upon ourselves. If 
mobs attack us we are prepared to 
defend ourselves and we are going to 
defend ourselves as Washington and 
Chicago know. Bu t far from seeking 
to arouse the mob spirit we are or5 6 THE CRISIS 
ganizing for social uplift in every possible way and seeking alliance with 
the great national agencies. 
The secret of our new progress and 
success lies largely i n our new selfdiscovery. There are still a few of 
us who are running away to avoid 
each other with the vague feeling that 
we shall thus lose ourselves in the 
world and be free. But the mass of 
black folks have made the Great 
Discovery: they have discovered each 
other. They have come to know what 
fine, lovable companionship and inspiration can be had in their own race. 
They are happily glad, almost at 
times mad, with the joy of the new 
discovery. It frees and heartens them, 
makes them self confident and human. 
The tide of the New Day rises with 
majestic force, but does it yet fully 
feel and recognize the Industrial 
Revolution that is sweeping the earth? 
REASON IN SCHOOL AND BUSINESS 
A CORRESPONDEN T asks us 
to denounce a Negro theatre 
that has refused to employ 
colored architects, engineers 
or builders; another writer takes us 
to task for our article on Wilberforce; 
and several of our readers dislike the 
article on the "Weaknesses of the 
Negro College". 
These and other letters lead us to 
again make clear the position of The 
CRISIS : we believe that colored people should support Negro business enterprise; but on the other hand we do 
not believe in the exclusion of white 
teachers from all Negro colleges. We 
regard the African Methodist Church 
as perhaps the greatest accomplishment done by black folk in the last 
500 years; we are desperately eager to 
see Wilberforce University survive 
as a church school and for this very 
reason we oppose policies that 
threaten its very existence. 
We are too thankful for the fine 
missionary spirit of Cravath, Ware 
and Armstrong to decry our white 
teachers; but we are painfully aware 
of the white men of small calibre and 
selfish aims whom we encounter in 
some of our southern schools. 
Efficiency and devotion do not lie in color 
or race and we should be the last of 
any men to let our resentment lead us 
into a silly cry for self-segregation or 
a scream of "U p Black and Down 
White! " A world of triumphant, disdainful white-hating Negroes would 
be just as wicked and just as surely 
doomed to eventual disaster as a 
world of triumphant, disdainful 
Negro-hating whites is today. For this 
reason we need and need desperately 
to keep clear and fair every point of 
human contact between the races; and 
the school is by far the best remaining 
medium. 
But this does not excuse incompetent teachers, overbearing executives 
and mediaeval discipline. Morehouse, 
Tuskegee and a host of other schools 
prove that we can furnish black executives ; other schools show that 
there are still available competent 
and devoted white executives. Le t us 
get the men then, regardless of race 
and color. 
An d what is true in education is 
true in business. So far as possible 
it is our bounden duty to use the colored physician, dentist, grocer, publisher, insurance company and what 
not, because color prejudice so often 
denies them a white clientele. On the 
other hand the colored business man 
must not ask patronage simply because he is colored. If an architect 
wishes to plan my house, he must 
come as an architect and not simply 
as a Negro; and if I refuse him the 
job it will be because he does not 
know his business and not because of 
his race. 
Even here, however, there are refinements : suppose this Negro builder does know his work and can do it 
well, but because of lack of capital or 
color hate he cannot do the work quite 
as cheaply as his white competitor? OPINION 7 
Here, manifestly, it may be wise and 
just to pay a few hundred or even a 
few thousand dollars more to give the 
black man his first chance, provided, 
of course, that one does, not risk too 
far the hard-earned savings of the 
many i n order to give a doubtful 
chance to one or two. 
Al l this wandering brings us to our 
point: the development and further 
progress of the American Negro has 
reached a plane which demands from 
now on, careful reasoning, clear 
thinking and knowledge of fact. No 
longer is the short, snappy slogan or 
the universal platitude capable of explaining every situation or pointing 
the path in every clouded way. We 
must think. We must know. We 
must discuss. 
TH E CRISI S wishes and wishes 
deeply to be a forum for such deliberation. It has no monopoly of reason 
and truth, but it is free to think and 
fearless i n conclusion. 
PIT Y TH E POO R AUTHO R 
E VER Y once in a while some 
one drops in and says cozily: 
"I wish you'd give me a 
copy of your last book " 
Or they write : 
"The Western Aggregation of 
Sunny Girls has just opened a reading 
room. Won't you donate one or two 
of your books?" 
I guard myself carefully in such 
cases, so as not to be surprised into 
violence. Letters, I can answer with 
polite vagueness or forget. Personal 
appeals I turn into a joke, provided I 
can summon the necessary self control quickly. But sometimes I am a 
ghastly failure. Then I turn and ask 
grimly : 
"Do you know that I have to buy 
my own books?" 
They are vastly surprised. 
Apparently they had been under the impression that I had a tree in my backyard 
which grew a profusion of delicate 
darkwaters and Negroes and souls of 
various folk and that all I had to do 
was to go out and water it and shake 
it. 
I proceed: A n author usually gets 
six free copies with which he partially supplies his family of six, his poor 
cousins and twenty close friends. Al l 
further copies he must buy of the 
publisher. He gets the same small 
discount as the retail merchant, but 
no more. 
A request then of an author for a 
copy of his latest is simply a demand 
for him to give you $1.80 cash, in addition to postage. 
Now it may be that you are in need 
of charity and that he is a bloated 
bond-holder to whom $1.80 is a bagatelle. But it may, on the other hand, 
be barely possible that $1.80 looks 
just as big to him as to you. An d in 
addition, he has had the job of writing the book. 
A t any rate, you don't go to your 
personal friend the grocer and say: 
" I wish you'd make me a present of 
ten pounds of that nice sugar!" 
An d you don't hail your friend the 
carpenter with : 
"Come and fix my gate for nothing, 
Bill ; I do so like your work." 
An d if you do not expect the carpenter and the grocer to serve you for 
nothing, why, in Heaven's name, do 
you pick on the poor author? 
SUFFRAG E 
THER E was a time when the 
South appealed to the world 
against the Negro on the 
ground that he was ignorant 
and inefficient. The answer to this 
was that education and social justice 
would gradually work the same 
changes in black as in white folk. 
Nevertheless, the strength of the 
southern argument lay in its insistence that during the transition from 
the ignorance of slavery to the efficiency of freedom, temporary disfranchisement and segregation were jus­8 THE CRISIS 
tinable. It was this plea, repeated 
again and again with every appeal to 
class feeling and personal experience, 
that gained in the land and in the 
world so wide an acquiescence in the 
Southern Caste program. 
Meantime in slow and fatal certainty the problem changed. The educated and efficient Negro appeared—now 
here and there, now in groups and 
mass movements. Subtly the southern 
argument changed. It was not merely 
ignorance and inefficiency that was to 
be feared—it was rather the intelligence and efficiency of black folk. Indeed the more gifted and better 
trained the black man, the more the 
white man must fear him. In other 
words, it is not human stupidity and 
blundering that the South fights, it 
is race; and if one immediately 
points out that according to modern 
science there is no such thing as 
"race", the argument marches right 
on with the mediaeval Blumenbach 
and Gobineau. 
Nothing illustrates this descensus 
Averno better than woman suffrage. 
The Washington correspondent of the 
Norfolk, Va. , Virginian Pilot in an 
interview with Representative Henry 
D. Flood, "dean of the Virgini a delegation in the House", says that 
Section 19 of the Virginia Constitution, 
which Mr. Flood would revive to meet 
the present occasion, was the famous 
alternative military, property, or understanding qualification. Under it 
a white applicant for registration 
would not necessarily be disqualified 
if unable to read and write, whereas 
a colored applicant would not necessarily be qualified even if able to read 
and write. 
"This" , said Mr. Flood today, 
"would enable all the white women in 
the state to be registered and would 
practically exclude all the Negro women, throwing the same safeguards 
round the electorate with regard to 
females as in 1902 and 1903 we 
threw round it with regard to males." 
Not satisfied with this amazing 
confession, the Virginian Pilot replies 
editorially (the italics are ours) : 
"To invoke Articl e 19 anew and apply it to a State-wide registration of 
women when suffrage becomes a fait 
accompli, would be to bring to the 
fore again public distempers that have 
long lain dormant. It would be far 
less easy in the present state of belligerent race consciousness to apply this 
article in such a manner as to obtain 
the desired end today, than it was 2 0 
years ago. .. . It is not the 
superior intelligence of colored 
women over colored men that 
threatens white supremacy. They 
cannot become a disturbing political 
factor until their intelligence as a 
class is superior to that of white women. If an inexplicable reversion of 
all recorded history should put such 
an eventuality within the range of 
probability it wil l not occur overnight. There will be ample warning 
and it will be time enough then to resort to a drastic redressing of the 
voting lists." 
Think of it! If the black race at 
any time or place comes to excel the 
whites, then we wil l pull them down 
by force! Wil l we? 
THE ELECTION 
THE presidential election, together with certain state and 
local elections, comes 
November second. Every black man 
and woman ought to vote. It is a 
great and pressing duty. First of all, 
you must have registered. If you 
have not, you cannot vote; but take a 
great vote never to let it happen 
again. 
If you have registered be sure to 
vote. Let no timidity restrain you because you are black or female or just 
twenty-one. OPINIO N 9 
Below is a sample ballot for a 
state election. In the presidential election there is in addition 
to the state officials, a series of 
columns like those opposite. 
In this case you make a cross 
in the column of the party for 
which you wish to vote: for instance, this ticket is marked to 
count for the eight Harding 
electors. These electors if they 
receive a majority will cast the 
electoral vote of your state for 
the Republican party. 
REPUBLICA N DEMOCRATI C SOCIALIS T 
HD D For Presiden t Harding Cox Deb , 
For 
Vice Coolidge Roosevelt Stedman 
President 
Pete r Jame s 
Joh n Smit h 
For Mary Watson 
Sims Anderson 
Jacob Stein 
Presidential 
electors Jacob Stein 
Harr y Bly n 
Willia m Jone s 
FACSIMILE OF BALLOT FOR GENERAL ELECTION 1. T o vote for a candidate on this ballot make a single, cross X mark in one of the squares to the 
right of an emblem opposite his name. 
2. T o vote for a candidate not on this ballot write his name on a blank line under the candidates fur 
that office. 
S. Mar k only with a pencil having black lead. 
4. An y other mark or erasure on this ballot is unlawful. 
5. If you tear, or deface, or wrongly mark this ballot, return it and obtain another. 
"VOTE for ONE! 
PRESIDENT OF TH E 
BOARD OF ALDERMEN. Vote for three 
JUSTICES OF TH E CITY COURT. MEMBER OF. ASSEMBLY—Twenty second 
Vote for one Assembly District. 
ROBERT U MORA."* Democratic LOUIS WEN DEL Democratic CHARLES SIEGEL LEVY Democratic 
FIORELLO H. LA GUARDIA. . .Republican THOMAS T. RE1LLEY Democratic OSCAR J SMITH Republican 
JAMES ONEAL Socialist JOSEPH M. CALLAHAN Democratic LEIGHTON BACKER Socialist 
EDWARD A- PACKER Prohibition RICHARD It SMITH.................RepublicanJudiciary BENJAMIN W. BURGER Single Tax 
JOHN DONAHUE Social Labor HENRY K DAVIS Republican 
JOSEPH DANA MILLER Single Tax WILLIAM M. CHOROSH Republican 
ALDERMAN—Seventeenth 
JACOB HANNEFIELD Socialist Vote for one! Aldermanic District 
DAVID PANTIEL Socialist FRANK MULLEN Democratic 
HENRY GILBERT Socialist CLIFFORD ­ BOSTWICK Republican JUSTICES OF TH E SUPREME 
COURT FOR TH E FIRST George OBERDORFER Socialists . JUDICIAL DISTRICT Vote for two! RobertJ. J. McAUSLAND Prohibition 
ROBERT L LUCE Democratic 
IRWIN Untermyer Democratic 
PHILIP J. McCOOk . .Republican 
JOSEPH E- SEWBURGER .RepublicanJudiciary VoU for one I SURROGATE. 
ADOLPH WARSHOW Socialist JAMES A. FOLEY Democratic 
GEORGE STROBEL Socialist JAMES O'Malley Republican 
HANS P. FREECE Prohibition 
GEORGE H. HINDS Prohibition CHARLES E- MANIIERRE Prohibition 
PRESIDENT OF THE BOROUGH 
Vote for • •«••• OF MANHATTAN 
EDWARD F DOYLE Democratic 
HENRY H CURRAN Rrpnblkan 
SAMUEL E- BEARDSLEV Socialist TH E DEACON'S AWAKENING 
A Play in One Act 
Rights of reproduction reserved. 
WILLI S RICHARDSO N 
THE scene is the sitting-room at the 
JONES' house. In the center of the 
room is a table, at the right of which is a 
large arm-chair and at the left of which 
•is a straight chair. At the right is a door 
which leads to the dining-room and kitchen. 
Above is a door which leads to the hall. 
Persons entering the hall door from the 
left come from the street, while those entering from the right come from other 
parts of the house. At the right of the 
hall door is a well filled bookcase arid 
around the walls hang a few well chosen 
pictures. MARTHA JONES is sitting at 
the left of the table reading the morning 
paper. She is an intelligent colored woman 
of five and forty, wearing a house dress 
which makes her look as neat as her surroundings. She is different from most 
housewives (whose work never ends), in that 
she always keeps ahead of her work, and 
for this reason has time to read between 
luncheon and dinner. MARTHA continues 
to read, not raising her head until EVA 
enters from the hall. EVA is a brownskinned lady of two and twenty. She is 
dressed to go out and is carrying a light 
coat on her arm. RUTH enters behind 
EVA. She is about EVA'S age but seems 
to be a little more determined in her manner; she is also dressed to go out. 
Marth a (Looking up)—Aren't yo u al l 
afrai d you'll be late? 
Rut h (Starting out)—I hope not. Come 
on, Eva . 
Marth a (Letting the paper fall to her 
lap; Ruth stops)—Just one minute , Ruth . 
There's something wrong . (Eva stops in 
the act of pulling on her coat) 
Rut h (Her jaw dropping)—Wrong how? 
Martha—I believe the thin g has leaked 
out somehow. 
Eva—It can't be. 
Ruth—D o you mean that someone has 
told, Mama ? 
Martha—It seems that way to me. 
Ruth—Wha t makes you think so? 
Martha—Come here. (The two move 
closer to her.) 
Marth a (In a subdued voice)—I heard 
them whisperin g 
Ruth—Them? 
Martha—You r father and 
Eva—An d Papa ? 
Martha—Yes. 
Ruth—Wha t were they saying? 
Martha—I heard them mention the meeting . I couldn't hea r it all , but you r fathe r 
stayed home from wor k today, and I thin k 
he means to go to tha t meeting. 
Rut h (Disappointed)—And I ha d hoped 
to keep it a secret unti l after the election. 
Martha—O f course, we won't let this stop 
us; but I'm sorr y he decided to go on the 
very day you planned to make you r speech. 
Rut h (hi disagreement with the state of 
affairs)—Just when we are a t our best, 
too. If they woul d let us alone we'd have 
everybody i n this city ready to vote. 
Eva—Wil l you make you r speech i f he 
comes, Ruth ? 
Rut h (Determined)—Yes, I'm goin g to 
make that speech anyway . 
Martha—That's right ; we can't afford to 
back out now. We' d have to face i t sometime i n the future ; so I guess it's just as 
w.ell that we face it now. 
Ruth—That's wha t I say too. 
Eva—Well , I'm brave ; I'l l stick righ t beside you. 
Marth a (After pondering a moment) — 
Ther e ma y be a wa y out of it yet. 
Eva—How ? 
Martha—I f I ca n keep Dav e from goin g 
Ruth—Bu t you said he wa s stayin g home 
for that. 
Martha—I know, but I have a plan . 
Ev a (Curious)—Tell us. 
Martha—Yo u see, Joe Luca s is sick ; and 
if I can get him to go there an d get Joe 
and Nel l to keep hi m a whil e everythin g 
wil l be al l right. Nel l and Joe are both 
wit h us. 
Rut h (Pleased)— That'l l be great! 
Eva—Bu t suppose my fathe r comes to 
the meeting? It'l l be just as bad, because 
he'll see everythin g and tell. 
Martha—You r father went to work . 
Eva—That's al l right, then. 
Martha—Yo u all ru n along, now, before 
you're too late ; and I'l l cal l Nel l u p and 
fix it wit h her. You' d better take a taxi . 
(Ruth and Eva hurry out; Martha ponders 
a. moment, then speaks through the telephone) Martha—East 1824-W. (A pause) 
10 TH E DEACON' S 11 
Is tha t yo u Nell ? Ver y well ; how is Joe 
today? (Speaking lower) Nell , I have a 
scheme I want"yo u to help me with . Well , 
Dave is up in arms about the Voting 
Society. I don't know how he found out 
about it ; but he is stayin g home today to 
go to the meeting. Yes, the very day they 
asked Rut h to speak. I want you to call 
hi m u p i n five minutes and tr y to get him 
to come there somehow. Tel l him Joe 
wants to see him. Thanks! Tha t wil l help 
us alon g a bit. Kee p him as long as you 
can. Good-bye. (She hangs up the receiver 
and begins to read her paper again. 
Presently DAVID JONES enters. He is a man 
50 years old, of medium size and wearing 
large side whiskers. He has his coat off. 
His collar is on but is unbuttoned in front, 
and his shoes are both unlaced.) 
Dav e (Coming to her)—Martha , button 
this colla r up fo r me, wil l you? 
Marth a (Feigning surprise)—I didn't 
know you were goin g out. (She rises and 
begins to button his collar) 
Dave—Yes, A h heard 'bout that suffrage 
meetin' they're goin ' to have, and Ah' m 
goin ' there to see wha t A h can find out. 
Martha—It's not exactly a suffrage meeting . 
Dave—Wha t is it, then? 
Martha—It's a meeting to urge women 
to vote, now tha t they have the right. 
Dave—It's the same thing . 
Marth a (Struggling with the collar which 
is too small for his neck)—What do you 
wan t to find out? 
Dave—A h wants to find out who's goin' 
to be there. 
Martha—Wha t good wil l that do? 
Dav e (Fating the issue)—Well, A h see 
A h can't get 'round tellin ' you. The deacon's board appointed me to go to that 
meetin' and find out the names of all the 
women there who belong to our church, 
so A h can brin g the names up before the 
deacons at the next meetin'. 
Martha—Ho w di d they find out about the 
meeting? 
Dave—That's a secret. 
Marth a (Finishing her job)—Bring the 
names before the board fo r what ? 
Dav e (Tying his tie)—So we can have 
the women up. W e don't mean to have 
the women in our congregation goin' to the 
polls to vote. A h believe in a woman stayin ' 
i n he r place and not tryin ' to fill a man's 
shoes. 
 AWAKENIN G 
Martha—Th e women don't want to take 
the men's places, Dave . 
Dave (Sitting to lace his shoes)—Yes, 
they do; you needn't tr y to take up for 'em. 
If A h caught a woman A h had anythin g 
to do wit h m this mess Ah' d 
Martha—Wha t would yo u do? 
Dave;—Ah—A h don't know wha t A h 
wouldn't do. (The telephone rings) 
Marth a (Answering)—Hello—Yes. Al l 
right, he's righ t here. (Turning to Dave) 
Dave , Nel l wants to speak to you fo r Joe. 
Dave (Going to the telephone)—Is he any 
worse? 
Martha—Sh e didn't say. 
Dave (At the telephone)—Hello—Yes. 
What's the matter, is he worse? Well , 
Ah'l l hurr y righ t over there. (Leaving the 
telephone) She says Joe's a little worse. 
Ah'l l have to ru n over there before A h go 
to the meetin'. (He hurries in lacing his 
shoes) Ah' m goin ' to tr y not to be late. 
Martha—I hope he's not bad off. 
Dave (Rising)—Ah hope not. Where's 
ma coat? 
Martha—Yo u didn't brin g it downstairs 
wit h you. 
Dave—Shucks! (He rushes out and goes 
upstairs. Presently he hurries past the 
door, pulling on his coat. Martha smiles 
when she hears the door slam. She ponders 
a moment, then goes out through the diningroom. She returns with sewing in her hand. 
Just as she starts to sit down, SOL rushes 
in from the street. He resembles Dave 
save that he has a long mustache and no 
side xvhiskers. He has his hat in his hand 
and appears to be very much excited.) 
Marth a (Perplexed)—What are you doin g home, Sol ? 
Sc l (Excitedly)— Where's Dave ? 
Martha—He went around to see Joe 
Lucas. What's the matter? 
Sol— Di d you know Rut h was at that 
Votin ' Meetin' ? 
Marth a (Evasively)—Ruth was at the 
meeting? 
Sol—Yes, she was there. A mob of toughs 
broke the meetin' up and she got mussed up 
a little . 
Marth a (Starting and raising her hand 
In her cheek)—Hurt! 
Sol—No , she got off lucky—just mussed 
up a little. A h reckon she'll be along i n a 
minute. Ah' m goin' to find Dave . (He 
hurries out) 12 TH E CRISI S 
Marth a (To herself)—The ruffians! 
(The telephone rings) 
Marth a (Answering)—Hello. Yo u 
could'nt keep him? It's all right. The 
meeting was broken up anyway . A mob 
of ruffians did it. No , I'm expecting her at 
any minute. I understand she wa s handled a littl e roughly. I hope not, myself. 
Good-bye. (As she hangs up the receiver, 
Ruth enters, followed by Eva. Her hair is 
out of shape, her dress is torn and her 
wrist is bound with a handkerchief) 
Marth a (Going to her)—I heard it happened. Ho w was it ? 
Eva—Th e mob rushed on us. 
Martha—Rushe d on you? 
Eva—Yes, they were lik e wil d men. 
Martha—Ho w do you feel, Ruth ? 
Rut h (Grasping her wrist) —Al l right, 
except tha t m y wrist pains a little . 
Martha—Ha d you made your speech? 
Ruth—No . 
Eva—Th e chairma n was just callin g the 
meeting to order, when the mob, mostly 
made up of street loafers, rushed upon the 
platform and pushed everybody off. 
Ruth—Ther e were some respectable lookin g men among them, too! 
Marth a (Angry)—Did they put their 
hands on you? 
Ruth—Yes; I was pushed off a chair and 
i n tryin g to catch myself I hurt m y wrist. 
Martha—You r fathe r didn't get there, 
did he? 
Ruth—I didn't see him. 
Eva—Bu t it's just as bad ; my fathe r was 
there and he'll tell everything. 
Martha—I know he was there. Di d he 
see you? 
Eva—H e didn't see me, but I'm sure he 
saw Rut h when they were puttin g he r i n 
the taxi. I saw hi m start towards he r 
when he first saw her; then he checked him ­
self and rushed out of the crowd. 
Martha—Well , i f that's the case, we'll 
have to prepare for trouble. 
Rut h (Holding her ivrist)—It had to 
come sometime. 
Marth a (To Ruth)—You'd better go up 
and straighten yourself out a little ; your 
fathe r wil l be here i n a few minutes. I 
know he'll hea r it before he gets here because Sol has gone to meet him. 
Eva—Yes, come on, Ruth , and change 
your dress. I guess they'll both come i n 
as ma d as wet hens. (They go out. The 
room is left vacant until Dave and Sol enter from the street) 
Sol (As they enter)—Ah'looked fo r yo u 
everywhere—A h came here and A h went 
to Joe Lucas' house, but A h couldn't find 
you. 
Dave—Yes, A h went by Joe Lucas' , an d 
when A h gat to the hal l everybody wa s 
gone. 
Sol—Th e mob broke up the meetin'. 
that's wh y everybody wa s gone. 
Dav e (Surprised)—Mob? 
Sol—Yes, mob! A mob broke u p the 
meetin'. 
Dav e (Sitting in the armchair)—Ah 
heard they ha d trouble, but 
So l (Standing in front of him)—That 
ain't half of it. 
Dav e (Looking up at him)—What else? 
Sol—Rut h wa s there. 
Dav e (Exploding)—Ruth? 
Sol—Yes, she wa s there and the mob 
mussed he r up a little , too. 
Dav e (Forgetting that he is a deacon) — 
Mussed—wha t the devil was she doin ' there ? 
Sol—That's wha t we've got to find out. 
Dave—Nobod y said nothin ' to me 'bout 
her goin' there. 
Sol—That's wha t we've got to see about; 
wha t she was doin' there. Al l A h kno w is 
that she was there. A h woul d of doubted 
it, but A h saw he r wit h ma own eyes. He r 
hair was al l out, he r dress wa s torn , an d 
she had something (tied around he r wrist. 
Dave—An d you'r e sure it was Ruth ? 
Sol—Sur e as Ah' m born. 
Dav e (Rising)—Well, Ah'l l find out 'bout 
it. 
Marth a (Entering as he rises)—You 
both back so soon? 
Dav e (Facing her)—Do you know anythin g 'bout Rut h bein' ait tha t Votin ' 
Meetin' ? 
Marth a (Pleasayitly)—Yes, I believe she 
was there. 
Dav e (Raising his voice)—Well, wha t 
was she doin' there? 
Marth a (Resenting his tone with a cold 
look before speaking)—You migh t ask her. 
I'l l brin g her down. (She goes out) 
Dav e (Draws a deep breath, but seems 
too surprised for words; turning to Sol) — 
A h don't know what's gettin' into these 
women. 
Sol—Th e devil, A h reckon. 
Dave—A h never saw Marth a lik e this 
before. Laura Wheeler 
"RUT H IS NO T COMIN G OU T O F COLLEGE " 
1 3 1 4 TH E
Sol—Dave , it's this Votin' ' business, Ah'l l 
bet. If that ga l of mine ever gets it into 
her head, A h don't know wha t Ah'l l do to 
her. 
(Martha enters, followed by Ruth and 
Eva. They have both changed their dresses. 
There is a tense silence as they enter.) 
Rut h (Going to the armchair)—Do you 
want to sit here, Mama ? 
Marth a (Standing by Ruth)—No, sit 
down, child. 
Rut h (As she sits and takes her wrist in 
her hand)—You look angry, Papa ; what's 
the matter ? 
Dav e (Angrily)—Ah want to know what, 
you were doin' at tha t Votin ' Meetin' . 
Rut h (Looking down at her wrist, then 
up at him)—I went to make a speech. 
(This is a thunderbolt. Martha and Ruth 
are watching Dave. Eva looks at her 
father to see how he takes it. Dave and 
Sol are outraged.) 
Dave—What ? 
Rut h (As calmly as before)—I went to 
make a speech. 
Dave (Hardly able to get the words 
out)—You went to make a speech? 
Ruth—Yes, sir. 
Dave—Ho w did that happen? Wha t 
would you be doin' makin ' a speech there? 
Ruth—I'm a member of the society; and 
we want to have the women ready to vote 
when the time comes. 
Dav e (Leaning forward to be sure that 
he catches her answer)—You belong to 
that crowd? 
Ruth— Yes, sir. 
Dave (Looking from Rutli to Martha and 
Eva, then back to Ruth)—How long's this 
been goin' on? 
Ruth — Yo u mean how long have I been a 
member? 
Dave—Yes. 
Ruth— I helped to organize the society 
soon after the women were given the righ t 
to vote. 
Dave—Yo u mean to say you've been 
mixed up i n this thin g ever since it started? 
Ruth—Yes, sir. 
Dave— Eve n when A h was at the head of 
the deacon's board you was workin ' for this 
thin g against me? 
Ruth—I wasn't exactly against you ; 1 
was for the movement. 
Dave—It's the very same thing. (Ruth 
lets this pass) Do you know wha t I'm 
goin ' to do to you? (Ruth looks up at him) 
 CRISI S 
Ah' m goin ' to take you out of school and 
let you go to work. Yo u won't go back to 
Howar d an y more. Mayb e then 
Sol—That's the ver y thin g Ah' d do wit h 
mine i f she was mixe d up i n it. 
Ev a (Turning to Sol)—I am mixe d u p 
i n it, Papa . 
Sol (In surprise)—You? 
Eva—Yes, sir. 
Sol—Yo u don't mean to tell me 
Eva — I was there wit h Ruth , and I'm a 
member. 
Sol (Going close to her and shaking his 
hand in her face)—Well, A h won't allow 
it! A h won't have it ; yo u understand ! 
Ou t of Howar d you'll come. (He says no 
more but glares at her) 
Marth a (Calmly)—Well, Rut h is not 
coming out of college. 
Dave—Not ? 
Martha—No , she's goin g to stay unti l she 
finishes. 
Dave—Ar e yo u i n sympath y wit h he r 
after she's disgraced us? 
Martha — I don't consider myself disgraced. 
Dave—Yo u don't? 
Martha—No , not at all . 
Dave — Di d yo u know she wa s mixe d up 
i n this thing ? 
Martha— Yes. 
(Dave's mouth comes open, but he seems 
unable to decide what he ivishes to say) 
Dav e (Finally forming some words) — 
An d never said anythin g to me about it ? 
Martha—Tha t wa s because I wa s mixe d 
up in. it myself. We'v e got to get these 
colored women ready fo r the election. 
Dav e (Dumbfounded)—You're i n this 
business too? 
Martha—Yes, I'm a member o f the society, and I give money to it—you r money. 
Dav e (Angrily, as he turns to go)—Ah 
haven't got anythin g else to say. 
Martha—Wai t a minute ; I've got somethin g else to say. (He comes back) 
Dave—Wha t is it ? 
Martha — W e migh t just as wel l understand each other now a s an y othe r time . 
Dave—Yes, A h reckon we had . G o on 
and say wha t you've got to say. 
Martha—Yo u men seem to have the 
wron g idea about women. Yo u thin k our 
minds never go furthe r tha n cookin g and 
darnin g socks: but you're ver y muc h mistaken. We thin k about other things the 
same as you do. Th e time has passed VALUE S 15 
when women are willin g to be considered 
merely as parts of the house, and you men 
migh t as well get your minds righ t on tha i 
point. 
Dave—Yo u don't mean to say you want 
to vote? 
Martha—Yes, I do. No w tha t we can 
vote, we al l wan t to vote. 
Dave—Wha t do yo u wan t to vote for ? 
You'r e gettin' on all right. 
Martha— I wan t to vote fo r the same 
reason yo u wan t to vote, and so do the 
girls. Whe n we add ou r votin g strength to 
yours you'l l get along better. 
Dave—Yo u can talk all you wan t to, but 
you can't make me believe i n a woman 
votin' . 
Martha—I' m not tryin g to make you believe i n it . You'l l believe i n it o f your own 
accord as soon as yo u wak e up. It's already 
here. 
(The two men have begun to feel that 
they are beaten, but are not yet willing to 
surrender.) 
Martha—Come on, girls, let's get dinner. 
(She and the girls go out. The men look 
at each other for a moment, then Dave 
——. smiles) 
Dave—A h reckon they got us, Sol. 
Sol—Tha t won't make me believe it's 
right. 
(There is a silence while Dave stares in 
front of him and Sol paces the floor. 
Presently Martha returns) 
Martha—I'v e started the girls off wit h 
the dinner; now I wan t you to give me 
some good reason wh y you object to your 
daughters voting ? 
Dav e (Answering for both)—It's too 
public . 
Sol—Yes, i t keeps 'em out too much when 
they ought to be home. 
Martha—Don' t you thin k women wan t to 
hold positions of importance sometimes 1? 
Sol—The y ought to leave that to the 
men. 
Martha—That's the trouble now. We've 
been leaving too much to men. Yo u cut a 
girl's opportunity off, then whine when a 
girl child is born instead of a boy. 
Dave—Wh o whines? 
Martha—Bot h of you did and you know 
it. An d that's the very reason. Yo u think 
a gir l wil l have to be supported, and wil l 
never be able to be anythin g of importance, 
so you object to their being born. Whe n 
you tell people you have a daughter, you 
do it wit h a feeling of shame and if they 
don't pit y you i n words they do in their 
hearts. 
Dave—Don't talk foolishness, Martha . 
Martha—Yo u know it's the truth . 
Sol—Do you think you can make us want 
women to vote just because men like boy 
children better than girls ? 
Martha—It's not a question of your wantin g it. You'v e got to take it ; it's already 
here. Ou r great trouble is to make you 
colored men and women aware of the fact 
that it is already here! 
Sol (Surrendering)—All right, have your 
own wa y about it. A h won't have nothin ' 
to do wit h it. 
Martha—Bu t you'll both keep naggin g at 
us. 
Sol—A h won't; A h never na g at anybody. 
Dave—A h won't say another word . 
Marth a (Pleased)—May I tell the girls ? 
Sol — A h don't care. 
Marth a (Calling)— Ruth ! Eva ! 
(Dave and Sol are standing like two 
schoolboys who have been getting a scolding, 
when the girls enter with their aprons on.) 
Martha—It's all right! 
(The girls with cries of joy embrace their 
fathers.) 
VALUES 
WINIFRE D VIRGINI A JORDA N 
I G O about my life ; 
I do each task, 
An d smile and laug h wit h you, 
Giv e words you ask. 
An d yet, how very fa r 
We are apart! 
Yo u know no happy thin g 
Withi n my heart! TH E SOCIAL EQUALITY OF WHITES AN D 
BLACKS 
W . E . B . D u Bois 
WHEN Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r 
the Advancemen t of Colored People 
was organized it seemed to us that the subject of "socia l equality" between races was 
not one tha t we need touch officially what-' 
ever our privat e opinions migh t be. W e 
announced clearly our object as being the 
politica l and civi l rights of Negroes and 
this seemed to us a sufficiently clear explanation of our work . 
We soon found, however, certain difficulties: Wa s the righ t to attend a theatre 
a civi l or a social right ? Is a hotel a pri ­
vate or a public institution,? Wha t should 
be our stand as to publi c trave l or publi c 
celebrations or public dinners to discuss 
socia l uplift ? An d above all , should we be 
silent when laws were proposed takin g 
awa y from a white father all lega l responsibility fo r his colored child? 
Moreover, no matte r wha t our attitude, 
acts and clear statements have been, we 
were continually being "accused" of advocating "socia l equality" and back of the 
accusations were implied the most astonishin g assumptions: our secretary was assaulted i n Texa s fo r "advocating social 
equality" when i n fac t he wa s present to 
prove that we were a lega l organization 
under Texa s law. Attempts were made i n 
Nort h Carolin a to forbid a state school from 
advertising i n our organ TH E CRISI S on the 
ground tha t "now and then it injects a 
note of social equality" and i n general we 
have seen theft, injustice, lynchings, riot 
and murde r based on "accusations " or attempts at "socia l equality" . 
Th e time has, therefore, evidently come 
for TH E CRISI S to take a public stand on 
this question i n the interest of Justic e and 
clear thinking . Le t us openly define our 
terms and beliefs and let there be no further unjustifiable reticence on our part or 
underground skulkin g by enemies of the 
Negr o race. This statement does not impl y 
any change of attitude on our part; it simpl y means a clear and forma l expression 
on matters whic h hitherto we have mistakenly assumed were unimportant i n their 
relation to our mai n work. 
W e make this statement, too, the more 
willingl y because recent events lead us to 
realize tha t there lurk s i n the use an d the 
misuse of the phras e "socia l equality " muc h 
of the same viru s tha t fo r thousands of 
years has separated and insulted an d in ­
jure d men of man y races and groups and 
social classes. 
W e believe tha t socia l equality, by a reasonable interpretation o f the words, means 
moral, menta l and physica l fitness to associate wit h one's fellowmen. I n this sense 
TH E CRISI S believes absolutely i n the Socia l 
Equalit y of the Blac k an d Whit e an d Yel ­
low races and it believes too tha t an y attempt to deny this equality by la w or custom is a blow a t Humanity , Religio n and 
Democracy. 
N o sooner is this incontestable statement 
made, however, than man y minds immediate ­
l y adduce furthe r implications: they say 
that such a statement and belief implie s 
the righ t of black folk to force themselves 
into the privat e social lif e of whites an d to 
intermarr y wit h them. 
This is a forced and illogica l definition 
of social equality. Socia l equals, even i n 
the narrowest sense of the term, do not 
have the right to be invite d to, or attend privat e receptions, or to marr y persons who do not wis h to marr y them. Such 
a righ t would impl y not mer e equality—it 
would mean superiority. Suc h rights 
inhere i n reignin g monarchs i n certain 
times and countries, but no man , blac k or 
white, ever dreamed of claimin g a righ t to 
invade the privat e social lif e of any man . 
On the other hand, every self-respecting 
person does claim the righ t to mingl e wit h 
his fellows if he is invited and to be 
free from insult or hindranc e because of 
his presence. When , therefore, the publi c 
is invited, or when he is privatel y invite d 
to social gatherings, the Negr o has a righ t 
to accept and no other guest has a righ t to 
complain ; they have only the righ t to absent themselves. The late Booke r T . 
Washingto n could hardl y be called a n advocate of "socia l equality " i n any sense 
and yet he repeatedly accepted invitation s 
to privat e an d public functions and certainl y ha d the righ t to. 
To the question of intermarriag e there 
are three aspects: 
1 6 SOUTHER N 
JUDG E 
SOUTHERN , 
JUR Y 
Southern 
Law ALBERTALEX SMIT H 
"THE Y HAV E EAR S BU T THE Y HEA R NOT " 
Psalms CXXX-17 , 18 TH E CRISI S 
1. Th e individua l righ t 
2. Th e social expediency 
3. The physica l result 
A s to the individua l righ t of any two 
sane grown individuals of any race to 
marr y there can be no denia l i n any civilized land. Th e mora l results of any attempt 
to deny this righ t are too terribl e and of 
this the southern Unite d States is an awfu l 
and abiding example. Eithe r whit e people 
and black people wan t to mingl e sexually 
o r they do not. If they do, no law wil l 
stop them and attempted laws are cruel, in ­
huma n and immoral. If they do not, no 
laws are necessary. 
Bu t above the individua l problem lies the 
question of the social expediency of the in ­
termarriag e of whites and blacks today i n 
America . The answer to this is perfectly 
clear: it is not socially expedient today for 
such marriage s to take place; the reasons 
are evident: where there are great differences of ideal, culture, taste and 'public 
esteem, the intermarriag e of groups is un ­
wise because it involves too grea t a strai n 
to evolve a compatible, agreeable famil y 
life and to trai n up prope r children. On 
this point there is almost complete agreement among colored and whit e people and 
the stron g opinion here is not only that of 
the whites—it is the growin g determination 
of the blacks to accept no alliances so longas there is any shadow of condescension; 
and to build a great black race traditio n of 
whic h the Negr o t.nd the worl d wil l be as 
proud i n the futur e as it has been i n the 
ancient world . 
TH E CRISIS , therefore, most emphaticall y 
advises against race intermarriag e i n 
Americ a but it does so whil e maintainin g 
the mora l and lega l righ t of individuals 
who ma y thin k otherwise and it most emphaticall y refuses to base its opposition on 
other than socia l grounds. 
TH E CRISI S does not believe, fo r instance, 
tha t the intermarriag e of races is physicall y crimina l or deleterious. Th e overwhelmin g weight of scientific opinion and 
huma n experience is against this assumptio n and it is a crue l insult to seek to 
transmut e a perfectly permissibl e socia l 
taste or thoughtful social advice into a 
confession or accusation of physica l in ­
feriorit y and contamination. 
To sum up then : TH E CRISI S advises 
strongly against interracia l marriag e i n the 
Unite d States today because of socia l conditions and prejudice and not fo r physica l 
reasons; at the same time it maintain s absolute lega l righ t of such marriag e fo r such 
as will , for the simple reason tha t any 
other solution is immora l and dangerous. 
TH E CRISI S does not fo r a moment believe tha t any ma n has a righ t to force his 
company on others i n their privat e lives 
but i t maintains just as strongl y that the 
righ t of any ma n to associate privatel y 
wit h those who wis h to associate wit h hi m 
and publicl y wit h anybody so lon g as he 
conducts himself gently, is the most funda ­
mental righ t of a Huma n Being . 
IT'S GREA T TO BE A PROBLEM 
J . W . WOR K 
IT' S great to be a problem, 
A problem just like me ; 
To have the world inquirin g 
An d askin g wha t you be. 
Yo u must be this, 
Yo u can't be that, 
Examine d through and through ; 
So different from all other men, 
The worl d is studyin g you. 
M y grandfathe r cursed my father, 
Fo r Noa h cursed Ham , you know ; 
Therefore, my father's children, 
The rocky road must go. 
We can't tur n here, 
We can't tur n there, 
Because the world's i n doubt, 
Wha t we would do, 
Wher e we would go, 
Wha t we would be about. 
I'm sullen i f I speak not, 
I'm insolent i f I speak; 
Must curb my aspirations, 
I must be lowly , meek. 
I can't eat here, 
I can't sleep there, 
Must " Jim-Cro w " on ful l fare ; 
The worl d can't know 
Wha t I would do, 
If I were treated square. 
It's grea t to be a problem, 
A problem just lik e me ; 
To have the worl d inquirin g 
An d askin g wha t yo u be. PLEASURABLE PROFIT IN OTHER TONGUES 
YETT A KA Y STODDAR D 
THI S is to suggest self-tuition i n foreign 
tongues to stay-at-homes, to those hungr y fo r self-improvement, to busy, thoughtfu l persons, old and young. The menta l 
dril l afforded by the first steps clears off 
brai n cobwebs, dispels "blues" ; pursued, 
such study opens a door to broad understandin g of other peoples, can be made the 
best of means fo r cultivatin g the true spirit 
of internationalism. 
Wha t I have accomplished i n acquirin g 
a workin g knowledge of Spanish, Italian , 
German , Swedish, Dutch , and Frenc h has 
been considered somewhat unusual. Really , 
it is only what, i f inclinatio n led i n the 
same direction, almost everyone could do. 
M y first equipment wa s ligh t and inexpensive. I n a country town hig h school I 
had one yea r of Germa n and three of 
Latin . Later, a ma n wh o ha d spent a few 
months i n Mexic o gave me twelve Spanish 
lessons and man y years late r still I had 
another twelve lessons from a Frenchma n 
who ha d lived three years i n Cuba . Wha t 
I know of Spanis h cost about five dollars. 
The pric e of a small book or two has been 
the only money-outlay on Italian , Swedish, 
Dutch , and French . 
Dependin g solely on public librarie s I 
worked into German , qualified as a teacher 
and fo r several years conducted three primar y classes i n a girl's privat e school. This 
wa s man y years ago when Germa n was not 
an unpopula r language. Afte r a fairl y 
thorough renovation, my Lati n served me 
to help littl e girls i n the same school through 
the elementary an d Caesa r classes. I 
taught Lati n successfully fo r si x years. 
A t present, French-at-home forms my 
dail y setting-up menta l exercise. I deferred 
the pleasure of studyin g Frenc h from yea r 
to year, hopin g always to have leisure, opportunity, and the affordable dollars to engage a first-class teacher—to sit down to 
lessons lik e other students. However, sickness an d man y calls upon the wherewitha l 
at m y disposal kept me sayin g "No " to this 
dearest of m y lifelong wishes. I am learnin g Frenc h i n my own fashion, bitin g off 
wha t I can chew; plannin g my work to fit 
i n wit h other duties and holdin g pretty 
closely to m y plan . 
Something else, more important, would 
suffer i f I gave more than half-an-hour 
dail y to actua l study. Therefore, the best 
value must be squeezed out of that time. M y 
base of operations is a paper-covered 
twenty-five-cent book, "Frenc h SelfTaught" . Its one hundred and twenty 
error-filled pages are divided into thirt y 
parts, one fo r each day of the month. 
Studyin g fast—it helps concentration—I 
began to "bite off" four pages every morning , beginning wit h the first day of No ­
vember last. 
I n December I took from the librar y a 
very simple grammar, divided it into thirt y 
sections, as before, one of whic h wa s each 
day quickl y read through i n about fifteen 
minutes. The other fifteen minutes were 
spent at "base"—"Frenc h Self -Taught" ; 
discovering how little had been retained of 
November's studying ; recognition of perhaps a thir d of the words i n each section, 
and a n atrociously bad approximation to 
their pronunciation. 
In Januar y I had out a more advanced 
grammar, divided the noun-section into 
thirt y short parts, each of whic h I tried 
to master i n the first half of my dail y 
study-period, reserving the other half for 
"base" work. Moineau would not stick; 
neither would il m'en veut; but a t the beginnin g of Februar y every wor d and phrase 
on the pages of the little book had made 
three distinct impressions on m y brain . 
Some Frenc h expressions were old friends 
i n March . 
I am alone i n the morning , and steal my 
precious French-time when I can study 
aloud. A Frenchma n withi n hearin g would 
probably mistake my syllables fo r Chinese 
—but, al l the same, I now, after seven 
months, recognize, spell, and guess at the 
meanings of about five thousand words of 
his beautiful language. An d I can read ! 
Oh , yes, I "read " righ t along. I n the evening , when possible, but not makin g a duty 
of it, I take u p a n other-language story 
(drawn from the city library)—just as 
when as a tin y girl I played at reading 
Dickens and Thackeray , skippin g bi g 
words, getting at the heart of the tale, 
feeling it, hatin g bad people, lovin g good 
1 9 20 TH E CRISI S 
ones, enjoying myself; and trustin g tha t 
as I grow up i n French , Italian , and the 
other languages, man y of the unusua l expressions wil l become intelligible . 
Abou t Christma s time last yea r I 
brought home and "read " Marie Claire. M y 
husband challenged my abilit y to follow the 
thread of the narrative . To my own surprise I gave him the plot and filled i n man y 
charmin g details of the story—describing 
the girl's pure, loving , gentle nature ; he r 
experiences i n the convent, on the farm ; he r 
quiet submission to life's hardships. A t 
that time I could not have put three Frenc h 
words together i n a row. I am allowin g 
myself the recreation of thus "reading " 
one Frenc h story, generally one of Bazin's, 
each month. 
I am a middle-aged woman, busy wit h 
home-making and a bit of editoria l wor k 
fo r a children's column. M y husband 
is connected wit h people wh o have correspondence wit h al l quarters of the globe. 
I a m frequently called upon to mak e translations of letters written in Swedish, 
Spanish, Dutch, and French. Of course mine is 
not the wor k of a highly-traine d linguist, 
but common sense, ordinar y keenness, an d 
diligent dictionar y consultation enable me 
to put the plai n meanings of the foreig n 
writers into plai n English . 
Recently a letter i n Russia n came—my 
Waterloo ! Returnin g it, un-Englished , 
gave me an impuls e towards inquirin g into 
the meanings of the wil d Bolshevisticall y 
jumbled-up consonants. Perhaps, nex t 
year, when i t seems safe to destroy m y 
tattered "Frenc h Self-Taught" , I can find 
time to open min d an d heart to a n understanding of the Slavi c ego, as embodied i n 
the Russia n language . 
The Outer Pocket 
Middl e Drift , South Africa . 
I A M a missionary i n the Unio n of South 
Africa , to whic h place I came nearl y 
three years ago and received a most unwelcome and humiliatin g landin g at Cape 
Town . 
There, my wif e and I were as prisoners, 
not being permitted to put our feet upon the 
docks, much less being permitted the privilege to go to town, as the other passengers. 
A t East London, we were compelled to deposit £80, or nearly $400, wit h the agreement tha t we would return to Americ a on 
the first ship sailin g direct. Afte r a grea t 
deal of persuasion, I have been permitted 
to remain unti l the other missionary, who is 
here, goes home and returns, as he has 
domiciled rights. Th e temporary permit 
whic h was issued, as permits are issued to 
aliens durin g the war, must be renewed 
every six months. I am statin g this affair 
i n a mil d way , fo r the fire has ha d three 
years to die away ; but it stil l burns withi n 
my bosom. 
... . Ca n you conceive of such a frightfu l crime as the following , being committed 
by civilize d people i n a heathen land , and bein g dealt wit h by civilize d people who are 
bringin g Christianit y to our people here? 
The Crime s of Belgia n Congo are mil d to 
such. A whit e boy, sixteen years of age, 
named Danie l Nichola s Lourens, of Mulen ­
dema, nea r Lusaka , Rhodesia , shot an d mortall y wounded a native , named Mulawula . 
H e was indicted on a charge of murder, and 
was sentenced by Justic e Cloug h to be give n 
eight strikes wit h the cane. Th e native 
was sittin g i n grass about two inches high , 
and the whit e boy stepped back from the 
native , to get a good aim, and whe n two of 
the eye witnesses remonstrated, he told them 
to "voetsak" (get out), a n expression we 
use to dogs, and fired; this wa s agreed upo n 
by three eye witnesses and accepted b y the 
judge. Th e jur y found the accused guilt y 
of manslaughter, but begged clemency. 
Th e judge, i n passin g the sentence, sai d 
i f he should give the boy a priso n term, he 
would make a crimina l out of him, an d the 
best he could do wa s to give hi m eight lick s 
wit h the cane. 
H . A . PAYNE . 
Brookline , Mass. 
Whe n the grea t desire to help war-tor n 
Franc e took possession of America , I 
thought wha t a splendid thin g i t woul d be 
fo r the colored American s to do something, 
since Franc e ha d taken such a noble stand 
i n behalf of black soldiers i n genera l and COLORE D CLERK S A T MONTGOMERY , WAR D AND COMPANY , CHICAGO 
21 22 TH E
our men in particular. I say colored 
Americans in particular because she kept to her 
course i n spite of deliberate efforts on the 
the part of American s to prejudice her. 
W e did not act then. Ca n we not now 
do something tha t ma y serve as a perma ­
nent memoria l of our gratitude ? A t the 
time referred to above, i t wa s stated that 
two thousand ($2,000) dollars woul d restore a devastated village . Th e cost is 
probably double now, but I had i n min d 
some such visible permanent thing , or a 
fund fo r any permanent memoria l the 
Frenc h Government migh t deem fitting, so 
that the generations of Frenc h to come ma y 
think of the foreign colored as we of today think of Lafayette . 
ELEANOR A A . SMITH . 
The followin g huma n document is an exact copy of a letter whic h was sent by a 
white girl to a "colored" school-mate: 
Darlin g Bessie : 
I have a confession to make to you and 
after you read this yo u wil l perhaps 
deem me unworthy of any explanation whatever. 
M y first knowledge of the trut h was one 
afternoon this week, Tuesday I believe; 
you were standing on the corner of 125th 
and 7th Avenu e wit h several colored girls 
and I was shocked at the idea of a white 
girl associating wit h colored girls and I 
said as much to my friend . She said, 
"Why , did you not know that Bessie is colored herself? " I did not and wha t is more 
it is not true. Thu s I called my best friend 
a liar, the worst insult a Southerne r can 
give. She referred me to other girls and 
I asked them and they each told me you 
were not white. 
I was shocked and shamed; I who had 
held myself up so proudly had done wha t 
would have caused me to be held i n scorn 
i n my home i n the South. I thought that 
I could keep awa y from you unti l today 
and then I said "Bessie " i n spite of my 
will . It seemed as though God did not 
want me to give up the girl I had spoken 
of so much to my mother and whom I loved 
dearly and I called to you. 
Afte r this could you ever forgive me for 
my false pride and prejudice? Please tr y 
to. I have but one defense,—that I am a 
Southerne r by blood and traditio n and I 
 CRISI S 
have been raised and educated as such. 
Well , dear, you know the prejudic e of the 
Southerne r who wil l not even allow a colored person i n the same ca r wit h a whit e 
person. 
Wil l not this cause gran t me you r forgiveness and love? 
If you can possibly forgiv e me come to 
room 314 at 2:30. I shall wait. 
Wit h love and repentance, 
Sincerely you r friend , 
Th e followin g letter wa s sent to a colored 
undertake r of Charleston, S. C , unde r the 
mistaken impression tha t he wa s white : 
Imperia l Palace , 
Invisibl e Empire , 
Knights of the K u Klu x Klan , 
Office of Imperia l Kleagle , 
P. O. Bo x 1204, 
Atlanta , Ga . 
August 23, 1920. 
A s a leading citizen of you r community , 
and havin g confidence i n you r patriotism, I 
take the libert y of bringin g to you r attention a matte r whic h cannot fai l to appeal 
to every rea l American . 
The story of the K u Klu x Klan , of the 
reconstruction days, and its valian t services 
in behalf of whit e supremacy, insure s i t a 
place in the heart of every true American , 
thereby adding to the glor y whic h clusters 
around the names of General Nathan 
Bedford Forrest, its Grand Wizard, and Gen. 
Jno. B . Gordon, who was at the head of the 
wor k i n Georgia . 
A branch of the reorganized Kla n of today, whic h has been broadened int o a 
standard fraterna l order, thereby enlargin g 
the scope of its work, yet retainin g al l of 
the protective features of the old Klan , 
should be in every community of the 
Nation. 
Its need today, whe n the fourteen millio n 
people of the colored race of Americ a are 
organizing, and when the Anarchist and 
Bolshevik forces ar e encroaching dail y upon 
the basic principle s of Americanism , cannot 
fai l to be apparent to the thinkin g man . 
If you are interested i n this matte r I 
would be glad to hear from yo u a t once. 
Yours ver y truly , 
EDW . YA Z CLARK .  
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
WOMEN' S CITIZENSHI P CLASSE S 
BRANCHES in Alabama, Georgia, 
Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, Virginia, West Virginia and 
New York have already formed classes for 
the political education and training of the 
newly enfranchised colored woman voter. 
Each day brings new requests for information and literature from other branches. 
The plan outlined in the September number 
of The Branch Bulletin and in the October 
issue of TH E CRISIS brought surprisingly 
immediate and numerous responses which 
are indicative of the eagerness with which 
the colored woman is entering upon her new 
citizenship duties and responsibilities. 
The October issue of The Branch Bulletin 
carries as its leading article a further detailed statement of some of the essential 
steps under the caption, "The A B C's 
of Voting". After telling of necessary 
qualifications for registration, for voting in 
the primary elections and then in the general elections, various forms of government 
in the United States,—city, county and 
state—it describes the functions and method of functioning of the electoral college 
and of a nationa l election. A n entire page 
is given to a facsimile of a ballot used i n 
Ne w Yor k state i n a general election. 
Th e first case of refusal to allow colored 
women to register has come up i n South 
Carolin a and is being actively fought. I n 
Columbia , the State capital, a numbe r of 
women appeared on September 8 before 
the board of registration of Richlan d County, 
fo r the Novembe r elections. Instead of bein g required to read the constitution, as the 
law provides, they were given sections from 
the civi l and crimina l codes of the State to 
read whic h they did read i n an intelligent 
and orderly manner. The y were then asked 
to explain these laws, a thin g they refused 
to do since it was not required by law, and • 
as they knew that it was an attempt on the 
part of the board to disqualify them. The 
registrars thereupon refused to give the 
women registration certificates. 
Thirty-two of the women immediately employed a competent lawye r who filed for 
them an appeal i n the .county court from 
the decision of the board of registration settin g forth the facts outlined above. The 
TH E ATLANT A CONFERENCE , N. A. A. C. P. {over) 
23 over) 
papers in the case have been turned over 
to the office of the Attorne y Genera l of the 
State fo r action. 
A n interesting letter on this situation 
comes to us from a citizen of South 
Carolina. It reads: 
Two clippings from loca l papers wil l 
show you wha t we are doing regardin g the 
refusal to registe r the Negr o women of 
Richlan d County. W e are i n this fight 
"unti l Hel l freezes over " or unti l we achieve 
wha t we are contending for. Yo u see that 
our branch has a very bi g fight on its hands 
at present. The women, though treated very 
discourteously, I am very proud to say, exhibited much fortitude, courage and womanhood. 
Briefly, the case is this: The laws of this 
State requir e one seeking to be registered 
to be able to read any section of the constitution and writ e the same or pay taxes on 
TH E ATLANT A Ml 
$300 wort h of propert y or more. These colored women were not given the constitution 
to read, but were given sections from the 
civi l and crimina l codes and afte r readin g 
them, they wer e asked to explai n the same. 
Of course, they knew tha t they could' not 
explain them to the satisfaction of the 
board. The y refused and were accordingly 
denied registration certificates. 
Amon g some of the women refused were 
graduates of the followin g colleges an d having the degree of Bachelor of Arts: 
Benedict, Shaw, Fisk, Allen and the State 
College at Orangeburg, which is controlled by 
a whit e board of trustees, and teachers i n 
the high school department of the city of 
Columbia . I feel confident that these women 
in Richlan d Count y wil l wi n their case and 
be registered i n time to cast their votes i n 
the general election in November. 
The Associatio n is making- this yea r a 
study of the election and particularl y the 
24 CE , N. A. A. C. P. 
disfranchisement of colored voters. It is 
urgentl y requested that all persons report 
to the Nationa l Office immediately all cases 
i n whic h they can secure definite informa ­
tion, preferably in the form of affidavits, on 
these points: 
1. Wher e colored men or women are denied the righ t to register. 
2. Wher e colored men or women are prevented either forcibly or by intimida ­
tion through threats of violence from 
registerin g or voting. 
3. Wher e frau d is practised against colored voters or where votes are not 
properl y counted. 
Suc h reports should give the names of 
all parties concerned, dates and places and 
the fullest possible detail. 
(over) 
DEVELOPMENT S I N TH E HAITIA N 
SITUATIO N 
THE expose of vicious exploitation of the 
island republic of Hait i by America n 
capitalisti c interests and the action of the 
Wilso n administratio n i n conniving at this 
gross wron g has created a furore i n politica l and financial circles. Shortly after he 
returned from Haiti , Mr . Johnson furnished 
Senator Hardin g facts which were used 
by Mr . Hardin g i n his Constitution Da y address i n whic h the Republican presidentia l 
candidate attacked the Wilso n administra ­
tion for the rape of Haiti . These facts 
were published about the same time in TH E 
CRISIS and The Nation and have been referred to before in The Branch Bulletin. 
The administration, through the Secre25 26 TH E CRISI S 
tar y of State, Mr . Colby, and the Secretary 
of the Navy , Mr . Daniels, immediately wa s 
forced to make some defense. Frankli n D . 
Roosevelt, forme r Assistan t Secretary of the 
Nav y and now Democrati c candidate fo r 
vice-president, i n the course of a politica l 
speech had declared wit h consummate impudence, " I wrote Haiti's constitution myself." 
This faux pas of Mr . Roosevelt made 
the task of Messrs. Colb y and Daniels all the 
more difficult. In a labored defense of the 
Administration's unwarrante d action, Mr . 
Colb y spoke of the "benevolent purposes " 
for which the Unite d States government had 
sent troops to occupy Hait i i n July , 1915; 
how anarchy had reigned supreme i n the 
island and through the "bounteous altruism" 
of the Unite d States, this was now about 
ended. Littl e reference was made to the effective methods put into use by the marines, 
of ending civi l warfar e between Haitian s 
by slaughtering Haitians. I n other words, 
to stop a fight between two men, the formul a seems to have been, kil l both of the 
men. Secretary of the Nav y Daniels' comment on the killing of three thousand 
Haitians was naive. It was to the effect that 
it was "unpatriotic " and "un-American " 
even to mention so distressing an affair. 
He now admits that 3 250 were kille d and 
man y more wounded. His own subordinate 
was "shocked beyond expression" at this 
"most startlin g thin g of its kin d that has 
ever taken place i n the Marin e Corps. " 
O n the question of the arbitrar y with ­
holdin g of the salaries of the Haitia n president and other officials, Mr . Colb y wa s even 
more indefinite. H e claimed tha t this wa s 
being done because Haitia n officials ha d 
refused to ratif y a n agreement between the 
two countries. Haiti , i n reply, claime d that 
a clause had been inserted i n this agreement by some unknown person after it ha d 
been agreed upon by representatives of the 
two governments whic h gave complete contro l to the Unite d States and the Nationa l 
Cit y Ban k of Ne w Yor k ove r the finances 
of Haiti . 
Thus, an impasse resulted. A n interestin g conjecture is the probable attitude of 
the Unite d States should some government. 
England , fo r example, attemp t to force it 
to agree to a simila r proposition, wit h the 
Unite d States occupyin g the position Hait i 
now occupies i n the controversy, on the 
ground tha t a n explosion i n Wal l Street 
and the lynchin g of nearly . one hundred 
citizens each yea r necessitated "benevolent " 
interference to "maintai n order " an d end 
"anarchy " i n the Unite d States. 
Thus, the situation stands. Th e Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People has injected into American 
politica l and financial lif e as liv e an issue 
as it has experienced recently. Accordin g 
to all present indications, American 
misrule in Haiti will soon end. 
{over) TH E ATLANT A CONFERENCE , N. A. A. C. P. THE Looking Glass 
FIVE BOOKS 
THE Upwar d Path " (Harcourt, Brac e 
& Howe ) is a smal l reader fo r colored children, excellently edited by M . T. 
Pritchard , Principa l of a Boston Publi c 
School, and Mar y W . Ovington . It contain s 67 selections from leading colored authors and works, and is a most excellent 
book for the home an d school. No t the 
least of its attractions are the illustrations 
by Laur a Wheeler. 
R . M . Andrews' "Joh n Merrick " is a most 
interesting account of a lif e accomplishment live d by a colored ma n i n the South. 
It is well writte n and neatly printed an d 
deserves wide reading. 
Edga r H . Webste r deserves to ran k wit h 
Cravath , War e and Armstron g as a teacher 
of Negr o youth. H e belongs to a younger 
generation tha n they and yet for more 
tha n a quarter-century he has been a 
teacher at Atlant a University . H e has 
just issued "Chums and Brothers (Badger) 
a n interpretation of a socia l group of our 
America n citizenr y wh o are i n the first an d 
last analysis 'Just Folks'. " It is an interesting miscellany wit h intimat e huma n 
touches. 
R. T. Kerlin's "Th e Voic e of the Negro " 
(E . P . Dutto n & Co.) is a most commendable idea, ver y inadequately carried out. 
This southern whit e professor has attempted to study Negr o opinion throug h colored 
periodicals. Unfortunatel y he did not know 
his periodicals lon g o r intimatel y enough to 
properly evaluate them as reflectors of 
Negro life and thought. Nevertheless, his 
wor k is symptomati c and as fa r as i t goes, 
wort h while . 
R. T. Browne's "Th e Myster y of Space " 
(E . P . Dutto n & Co.) is a metaphysica l 
study of space according to the mathematica l method. Th e common reader wil l not 
understand it because of the almost unnecessarily involved English ; the scientific 
reader will admir e Mr . Browne's long 
thought and erudition but will , i f he is a 
physicist, object to his metaphysics, and if 
he is a metaphysician he wil l explai n the 
phenomena of space muc h mor e readil y than 
Mr . Browne does. Nevertheless, it is most 
interesting to see our thought entering 
these highe r fields, fa r from racia l controversy. 
AMERICAN DISUNION 
STEPHE N GRAHA M i n the Fortnightly 
Review, quoted in the September 
Current Opinion, writes of the disunity of 
America since the war. He speaks of 
Germans, Jews and Irish, Poles and Czechs and 
finally of the "ferment of the Negroes" : 
Ther e are said to be some fifteen mil ­
lions of colored people i n the Unite d States 
—the ex-slaves and their children. The wa r 
has affected these black masses i n a profound way. Americ a does not advertize 
her Negr o population and her Negr o problem; she has kept the Negr o i n the background of her composite nationa l life . An d 
the Negr o has felt himself to be i n the 
background. H e has not been i n vita l 
touch wit h Europ e as the whit e ma n has 
been. It was therefore a dumbfounding 
moment when the Unite d States began to 
take the Negr o young men and dril l them 
and draft them into its vast new conscript 
army . It would not have been so strange 
but tha t the Negr o i n the South is deprived 
socially of the status of man, and for the 
Southerner ranks wit h the animals. H e is 
denied his lega l rights at every turn , and 
languishes i n a state of peonage whic h i n 
some respects is every whi t as bad as the 
slavery from whic h he escaped i n 1863. 
The lynchin g and burnin g of Negroes has 
not disappeared, but has become a sport, 
beginning generally wit h a man-hunt wit h 
bloodhounds. Whe n the Negr o was told 
that he had to go to German y and stop the 
Germans committin g atrocities he was surprised, arid, well, his native humor came 
to the rescue of his mind , and he chuckled, 
and said to his neighbor i n the ranks: 
"Brother, we's going to make the worl d safe 
for democracy," whic h he seemed to regard 
as one of the greatest of jokes. 
The southern whit e ma n had two points 
of view about the Negr o i n the army ; one 
was tha t he ought not to be taken at all , 
as he was not worth y of dyin g for his country ; the other wa s tha t it was a good thin g 
to send the Negr o to France , as a large 
numbe r would then be killed , and it would 
be a blessing to be ri d of them. Th e story 
of the consequent treatment of the Negr o 
units is too large to be described detailedly. 
Suffice it tha t i t was ver y unworthy. . . . 
Race-rioting broke out in the North, at 
Chicago, even at Washington. The Negroes 
fought the whit e mob at Chicago, and, in ­
deed, fought the rio t til l it ceased. Th e 
colored people have been forced to organize 
27 28 TH E CRISI S 
themselves to resist intolerance. The legend 
of the love of the Southerner for the Negr o 
and of the Negr o fo r the Southerner has at 
last been dissipated. Mothers now teach their 
children that the white man is their enemy. 
Afro-America n racia l pride is fostered at 
every Negr o school and by every Negr o 
society; but the idea of the mergin g of the 
two races i n one has been stopped, the blacks 
have accepted the impossibility of a genera l 
blending, and now demand the means of 
equal parallel and distinct development. 
A LIE 
EDGA R CALDWEL L was crucified i n 
Anniston , Ala. , fo r defending himself 
against devils. O n the scaffold he said : 
" I am being sacrificed today upon the 
alta r of passion and racia l hatred tha t appears to be the bulwar k of America's civ ­
ilization. If it would alleviate the pai n and 
sufferings of my race, I woul d count myself 
fortunate i n dying , but I am but one of the 
man y victims among m y people who are 
payin g the price of America's mockery of 
law and dishonesty i n her profession of a 
worl d democracy. " 
* * * 
This is wha t the Memphis Appeal published : 
Before going to his death on the gallows 
here today for the murde r of a street ca r 
conductor two years ago Edga r C. Cald ­
well, a Negro , forme r army sergeant, delivered a 20-minute talk to a crowd of 2500 
persons. H e warned against the effects of 
whisky , cigarettes and carryin g firearms. 
* * * 
Wha t can be gained from so pitifu l a lie ? 
RECOGNITION 
THE thoughtful whit e man or woma n 
watchin g the Negr o problem must 
feel sometimes constrained to speak out i n 
meeting. "Miss Critica l Observer " does so 
i n the Daily Baltimore American. She 
says: 
America n white women for decades have 
been blindfolded and duped as to the colored 
man . The colored ma n has been held up before our eyes as a lustfu l and vicious creature. A s a consequence, grea t masses of us, 
through lack of individua l experience, and 
because of ignorance of literatur e an d statistics, bearin g on the trut h of the case, 
have come to believe the unwarrante d and 
unfounded charge against the colored ma n 
as a class. Bu t the undeniable rock-bottom 
trut h is that colored men are no more prone 
to commit heinous crimes against women 
than are other men. If there be any 
doubt of the trut h of this statement let 
them make a comparative study of the statistics bearin g on lecherous crimes against 
women and their doubts wil l vanish. The 
result of the comparison wil l be i n favo r 
of the colored man. If I were to publish the 
figures I have on my desk I woul d startl e 
my readers. Colored men i n other countries 
such as Canada , Centra l America , Sout h 
America , West Indies and Afric a ar e not 
pictured as the arc h assailants of women. 
In fact, it is sai d tha t the attitude of the 
native Africa n towar d women is superior 
i n point of decency to tha t of men i n most 
highl y cultured countries. Whe n I am told 
that the colored ma n is so lustfull y inclined , 
I ask wh y it is tha t there are 4,000,000 
mulattoes i n the Unite d States an d tha t this 
numbe r yearl y increases? Whit e me n tremble before this question. The y know they 
are responsible. Ye t man y of them are always tellin g us women about "Negr o rap ­
ists. " I n the South, my native home, where 
.there is the loudest cr y about "rac e separa ­
tion " and "whit e purity, " the greatest ming ­
lin g of whit e men and colored women takes 
place. The South is the garden spot of mu ­
lattoes. 
O f course I am intelligent enough to know 
the reason fo r this denunciation of the colored man . One of the objects is to keep the 
gap as wide as possible between the whit e 
woman an d the colored man . Bu t wh y is 
there littl e or no effort to wide n the gap 
between the whit e ma n an d the colored 
woman? Wh y ar e our men not punished 
for intimat e relations wit h colored women? 
No ! This woul d interfer e wit h the whit e 
man's socia l freedom. Ye t they arrogat e 
unto themselves the righ t of supreme dicta ­
tor as to the race or color of men wit h whom 
we must or must not mingle , whil e they wil l 
brook no interference as to the race or color 
of women wit h whom they mingl e and become intimate . * * * 
Th e Freeman shows tha t black an d brown 
men are reall y the stuff on whic h Europea n 
nations buil d their empires: 
The Frenc h generally, like other people, 
are less responsive i n these days to la gloire 
and are distinctl y averse to furthe r taxatio n 
fo r militar y purposes, though, of course, 
there are alway s the Senegalese fo r Marsha l 
Foc h to fal l back on i n time of need. This 
is fa r from a sneer; one remembers how, 
the other day, it somehow crept into the reports of the fighting i n and about Constantinople tha t the Frenc h wounded were Senegalese and the Britis h wounded were natives 
of the Punjab . N o wonde r the colonia l system is wort h keeping. 
* * * 
Fran k H . Simonds inadvertentl y indicates 
his recognition of the fac t tha t Negroe s 
meet wit h injustic e i n this country. H e 
write s i n the Bosto n Sunday Herald: 
Ha d the Senate accepted the treat y wit h 
its own reservations appended, we should 
have been legall y exempted but morall y and 
materiall y compromised. Moreover, i n addin g the Iris h amendment, the Senate gave 
clear evidence of exactly the sort of controversy whic h follows closely upon the applicatio n of the treaty. Certainl y the Uni ­
ted States has just as muc h righ t to be con­TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 
cerned over the condition of the Iris h as, 
say, of the Jews i n Roumania , on behalf 
of whom we and the Britis h demanded tha t 
Roumani a consent to drasti c limitations of 
her own nationa l sovereignty. Bu t actually 
this concedes an equal righ t to the Britis h 
and to the Roumanian s to interfere on behalf of the America n Negro . 
SELF-CONDEMNED 
AN anonymous correspondent sends us 
the followin g from a n unnamed maga ­
zine : 
Justic e does not demand fo r either race 
the privilege of crowdin g itself upon the 
other race. Recent events have shown that 
i n the Nort h as well as i n the South it is 
fo r the rea l welfar e of both races that the 
lines of social cleavage be distinctl y drawn 
and tha t each race keep to its own side of 
the line. The Ji m Cro w laws, fo r al l 
the unwisdom wit h whic h they are occasionally administered, are, on the whole, 
wise social regulations. Th e distinction between them and the denia l to the Negr o 
of any lega l righ t is plai n to any one who 
wil l consider for but a moment. 
» * * 
Perhap s it is not quite fair to say that 
this correspondent is anonymous for he 
names himself i n the following—an d surely 
he ought to know!— 
"This magazine cuttin g shows how the 
Negroes are always tryin g to get social 
recognition; as one grea t America n write r 
says, 'Th e Negr o is a child race and should 
be treated as such.' 
" I belong to the 'Whit e Trash ' and am 
gla d to say I have not the slightest trace 
of Negr o blood i n my veins. To me the 
nigge r is a horribl e creature and is only 
fit for slavery. " 
EQUALITY 
IF Madame Rolan d were livin g today i n 
the Unite d States she would probably 
change her famous exclamation to 
"Equality! What crimes are committed in thy 
name! " Anis e comments i n the Seattle, 
Wash. , Union Record on the miscarriage 
of law and justic e i n Mississipp i wit h regar d to "Socia l Equality" : 
Abou t four months ago 
* * * 
The y passed a la w 
* * * 
I n the state of Mississipp i 
* * * 
Tha t anyone who spread abroad 
* * * 
Information or arguments 
* * « 
In favor of 
* * * 
"SOCIA L EQUALIT Y 
* * * 
Between whites and Negroes " 
* * * 
Should be FINE D 
* * * 
An d IMPRISONED ! 
* * * 
An d a few weeks later 
* * * 
The Reverend E . R. Jackson, 
* * * 
A young Negr o preacher, 
Wa s going to the funera l 
* * * 
O f his SISTER , 
* * * 
Down i n Mississippi, 
* * * 
An d happened on the trai n 
* * * 
To give away 
* * * 
A MAGAZIN E 
* * * 
Tha t told about our doughboys 
* * * 
Ove r i n France , 
* * * 
Speaking i n special praise 
* * * 
Of our NEGR O soldiers, 
* * * 
An d tellin g how 
* * * 
They were received 
* * * 
A s EQUAL S 
* * * 
B y the French ! 
I don't suppose 
* * * 
The Rev. Mr . Jackson KNE W 
* * * 
He was committing a crime 
In passing that magazine, 
* * * 
Bu t he WAS ! 
* * * 
An d so 
* * * 
A n armed MOB-me t him, 
* * * 
An d struck him wit h guns 
* * * 
An d beat him wit h ropes, + * * 
An d chased him out of town 
* * * 
Alon g the railroa d track, 
* * * 
Wher e he hid all nigh t 
* * * 
I n a SWAM P TH E 30 
In a thunderstorm, 
* * * 
Whil e the mob howled about 
* * * 
Huntin g him. 
* * * 
The next mornin g 
* * * 
He crawled from the wate r 
* * * 
An d made his wa y to town 
To the justic e of the peace, 
* * * 
An d as soon 
* * * 
A s he told his story 
* * * 
The justice arrested him 
* * * 
An d sentenced him 
Withou t trial , 
To the CHAI N GANG . 
* * * 
The BAI L that he offered 
* * * 
Wa s refused; 
* * • 
The LAWYE R he summoned 
* * * 
Wa s threatened wit h lynching ; 
An d the governor of the state 
* * * 
Replied to all protests: 
"This fellow got off 
* * * 
EASIE R 
* * * 
Then he DESERVED! " 
I am quite sure 
* * * 
Tha t AFTE R THA T 
* * * 
The Reverend Mr . Jackson 
* * H.­
Wil l never again 
* * * 
Be foolish enough 
* * * 
To believe 
* * * 
The Declaratio n of Independence, 
An d wil l carefully avoid 
* * * 
The great CRIM E 
* * * 
O f advocatin TO WHOMg IT MAY CONCERN 
* * * 
SURINA M or Dutc h Guian a is tha t por­ EQUALITY ! 
tion of land lyin g between Frenc h Guian a 
on the east, Britis h Guian a on the west, wit h 
 CRISI S 
Brazi l on the south an d the Atlanti c Ocean 
on the north. It has an are a of 38,000,000 
acres of whic h 58,500 acres are cultivated 
land ; wit h a tota l population of 110,000 of 
whic h the large r portion are Creoles and the 
remainde r native Indians, African s and 
Europea n people. Th e greate r part of the 
land is wood land whic h can easily be 
drained. Undraine d lan d can be obtained 
at a rate of less than $2 per acre wit h the 
opportunity of workin g the lan d fo r six 
years withou t a cent down. Ther e is a 
ready marke t fo r wood everywher e an d the 
ma n wit h a littl e knowledge of the lumbe r 
business can easily get a start wit h littl e 
money. Read y drained lan d wit h roads 
suitable for transportatio n purposes can also 
be obtained at the rate of $12 to $100 pe r 
acre. Afte r said sum has been paid , the 
righ t of ownership can be obtained wit h a 
fixed yearl y tax payment. 
Ther e is a n opportunit y presentin g itself 
here to colored men whic h has never before in the histor y of the worl d offered itself an d we, interested i n the welfar e of 
our country and people, are endeavoring to 
keep our race from being swamped out. 
This body of men have taken it upon themselves to writ e to some of the leadin g men 
of the U . S. of Americ a interested i n the 
uplift of colored people of the world . We 
are therefore addressing this letter to you 
to ask you for you r heartiest co-operation i n 
getting colored men to settle i n our midst. 
We promise to provide them wit h land , liv ­
in g quarters, far m implements, money and 
the necessary protection. 
Ther e is a wide field open to men of wit 
and energy and this being a place wit h 
large territor y and smal l population, we 
Surinamers are doing our level best to get 
men who already know something along the 
lines of Agricultur e to settle down. Nearl y 
all of us who have affixed our names have 
travelled through the Unite d States and 
know conditions there. W e can assure any 
one that the opportunitie s here are nowhere better fo r men wit h a littl e trainin g 
than i n this Colony. Ou r boys have been 
leavin g and are stil l leavin g the Colon y to 
receive some trainin g i n the Unite d States 
and Europe , and some of them are now returning . 
Ou r suga r estates, coffee, cocoa, cotton, 
corn, gold mines, wood, rubbe r fields, etc., 
are now being sold at snap prices and 
America n capitalists are here alread y on 
the scene; factories are bein g added and 
business is getting on a footing. W e are 
now establishing a colony composed of 
American s and we are askin g you for your 
heartiest co-operation i n obtainin g settlers 
whic h we hope wil l assist us to become and 
to remai n commercia l men i n the business 
world . A s we consider yo u one of the stars 
of the other continent, we are pleadin g to 
you, to do your ver y best tha t you r ligh t 
migh t not only shine on tha t continent, but 
that some of you r ray s migh t touch our 
shores, where all , regardless' of race, creed 
or color, enjoy the righ t to live . W e are TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 3' 
depending upon you for your heartiest cooperation ; this is as you already know your 
best chance, our best chance and al l of us 
wherever we ma y be must get together, understand each other, co-operate wit h each 
other, do al l tha t is withi n us to help each 
other onwar d and upward , for i f we fai l to 
do so at this critica l moment our lives' 
struggl e wil l be endless. 
An y one desirin g any furthe r informa ­
tion regardin g our plan , we wil l gladl y furnish them wit h same by addressing a letter 
to the undersigned stating wha t particula r 
line they would be interested in . 
Hopin g to hear from you at your earliest 
convenience, 
W e remai n You r Foreig n Brethren , 
P . A . MAY , and others. 
Paramaribo , Surinam, S. A . 
RACE HATE 
SOM E powerful words are being said on 
the matte r of racia l hate. The radica l 
Truth, Seeker, Ne w York , says: 
Wha t is the cause of the antipathy of 
the colored race against the white ? Tha t 
is the question. The colored people have a 
legitimat e grievance. The y are no longer 
slaves, no longer the white man's inferior, 
no longer the butt of an ignorant racia l 
prejudice, or rather, common sense wil l no 
longer allow them to be so rated. If in ­
telligent whit e men are not to be found to 
plead their cause, then all honor to the 
colored ma n of intelligence who is willin g 
to speak out boldly on behalf of his brethren. 
* * * 
The equally agnostic Freethinker of 
London adds: 
The Secretary for Indi a was almost quotin g from a paragrap h in this column of a 
week or so ago when he said there was a 
theory abroad tha t an Indian "is a person 
who is tolerable as long as he obeys your 
orders. " That, we think, is the attitude of 
the whit e ma n generally towards the colored races—black, brown , and yellow—all 
the worl d over. Nothin g seems capable of 
convincin g him that any man whose skin 
is not white can possibly be on the same 
level as himself. The colored people exist 
as the natura l food fo r the white ones. 
The y ma y be treated kindly , but they must 
be kept under. We thin k anyone who talks 
to people who have come home wil l agree 
wit h tha t conclusion on the relations of the 
two peoples; and, as we have pointed out 
before, it is a phenomenon that is peculiarl y a produc t of the Christia n ages. The 
Christia n interpretation of the brotherhood 
of ma n has never been allowed to interfere 
wit h it. An d it is psychologically responsible fo r the maintenance of the missionary 
business; fo r there agai n it is the superior 
Christia n dispensing to the inferio r colored 
ma n the benefits of the white man's Gospel. 
Bu t the strongest, finest word comes 
from the quadrennial address of the 
Bishops of the great Methodist Church at its 
last Genera l Conference. We quote from 
the Southwestern Christian Advocate: 
First : The world is not a whit e man's 
world. 
Second: The Churc h of Jesus Christ is 
not a white man's church. 
Some barriers have been broken down, 
but race misunderstanding, race prejudice, 
race assertion and race discriminatio n are 
universa l and acute. Me n are stil l saying 
that some races are superior and some in ­
ferior, that "there are ordained races and 
ordained places," rulin g races and subject 
races, races born to conquer and races bo m 
to be conquered. Ou r Christia n sentiments 
have not kept pace wit h race changes, migrations, and contacts. We have had a 
blindin g vision of humanit y as one, one 
race, one soul, one blood, and a swift, pagan 
reaction and rebellion against it. Loca l 
conflicts and new irritation s result, to the 
hurt of all races and the scandal of 
Christianity. Some of these outbreaks are small 
and near, but they portend a deeper, fiercer 
struggle that threatens to come on a world 
scale before the worl d gets much older. 
In the Unite d States we have two questions, both large, one much large r than the 
other. The smaller one is the suppression 
of local race riots, the prevention of race 
conflicts, and the elimination of irrationa l 
race prejudice. These conflicts and prejudices are not limited to one section- or to 
two races. The y are in the South, i n the 
North , and on both coasts. The large r 
problem is the makin g of a program for the 
whole nation, and the establishment of righ t 
relations between al l races here. One plan 
seeks to avoid conflicts, the other to create 
a permanent basis of life together i n the 
name and spirit of Christ. An d i n the 
Unite d States, as i n the world at large, 
the Christia n Churc h must be the chief 
force i n securing the final result. . . . 
The fight against certain diseases has 
been almost wholly defensive. Science now 
proposes to invade the homes and sources 
of those diseases. So it must be wit h race 
outbreaks and wit h war. We have been on 
the defensive. We must now invade and 
destroy the conditions, the spirit and attitudes that breed race riots and race wars. 
We must attack if we are to conquer. To 
do this the church must be the kin d of 
church that can take the leadership and 
make this program. The church, therefore, cannot be a sectional church, a racia l 
church or a nationa l church. She must 
herself be the kin d of church that creates 
and demonstrates withi n herself the kin d of 
world that Christ looks for. He r ordina ­
tion is not parochia l or racial, but huma n 
and universal. Men ofthe Month. THE late Mrs. Joh n J. Castne r was 
born at Newton , N . C , 72 years ago. I n 
1877 she marrie d and went wit h he r husband to Belt, Montana , where they opened 
up the Belt coal fields. Mrs. Castne r man ­
aged a hotel fo r 30 years and was known 
as the "Mothe r of Belt" . Since her husband's death in 1915 she has lived a retired life . She is survived by a son. 
MISS EDWIN A KRUSE , principa l of 
Howar d Hig h School, Wilmington , 
Del., has been retired from active service 
by the Boar d of Educatio n and made prin ­
cipa l emeritus of the school. She wil l be 
succeeded by Ra y Wooten.­
The Evening Journal of Wilmingto n says 
of Miss Kruse : 
"She earned more than the salary she received, every year tha t she wa s i n charge 
of the school, and is entitled full y to the 
sentiment contained i n the preamble and 
resolution whic h the Boar d of Educatio n 
adopted by unanimous vote when it named 
her principa l emeritus of a school whic h 
wil l stand for years as a monument to her 
administrative abilit y and her interest i n 
the educational advancement of the people 
of her race." 
HALLI E QUIN N BROW N was recently 
elected president of the National 
Association of Colored Women's Clubs. Miss 
Brow n was bom in Pittsburg h and is a 
graduate of Wilberforce . Durin g 1894­
1900 she lectured i n Grea t Britai n and 
German y and at the Grindewal d Conference i n Switzerland ; i n 1897 she entertained 
at the dinner given i n Londo n fo r poor children by the Princess of Wales'; i n 1899 she 
appeared before Queen Victoria ; she served 
at Wilberforc e as professor of elocution 
and a teacher of Englis h and public speaking. 
THE late Ethe l Louis e Richardso n was 
a graduat e of the Institut e o f Musica l 
Ar t i n Ne w Yor k City . She wa s chosen as 
one of 8 pianists, followin g a series of high 
class concerts given i n the First Regiment 
Armory , Newark , N . J. , i n whic h there 
were 40 competitors. Th e judge s were 
Messrs. H . C. Osgood of the Musical 
Courier and W . H . Murra y of the Musical 
Monitor. Whil e filling a concert engagement, Miss Richardso n became unconscious 
followin g an illness; she died three days 
later, at the age of 28. 
A WA Y back i n 1905 the editor of TH E 
CRISIS conceived this magazin e and 
because he had once met Jacob Schiff, he 
ventured to come to Ne w Yor k an d la y the 
scheme of a grea t Negr o journa l before the 
financier. 
Mr . Schiff did not help the project because his friends warne d hi m against this 
"radical, " but he showed his huma n sympathy and he gave evidence of tha t great 
bond whic h exists between two oppressed 
races. Afterwar d whe n TH E CRISIS became 
a realit y Mr . Schiff often expressed his appreciation of it. 
Jacob Heury Schiff was born in 
Germany in 1847 and migrated to America in 
1865. H e became a bank clerk and eventuall y a partner. His grea t powe r as a 
financier was used fo r worth y ends. He 
helped Japa n overcome Russia , he helped 
nurse the poor of Ne w York , he helped the 
oppressed of all lands and all races. His 
wealth was his monument because i t was 
used so largel y fo r the common weal. We 
may and do rightl y condemn a system that 
concentrates such economic and socia l power 
as he wielded i n the hands of a few, but 
when the powe r is used as Jacob Schiff 
used it, the evil of the system is least and 
the hope fo r a better system greatest. 
DUNBA R 
ANN E SPENCE R 
AH, how poets sin g and die ! 
Mak e one song and Heave n takes it : 
Hav e one heart and Beaut y breaks it : , 
Chatterton, Shelly, Keats, and I— 
Ah , how poets sin g and die ! 
32 HALLI E Q. BROW N TH E LAT E MRS . CASTNE R 
TH E LAT E JACO B SCHIF F 
TH E LAT E ETHE L RICHARDSO N EDWINA KRUSE 
33 THE HORIZON 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G . ALLISO N . 
INDUSTR Y 
MR. J . E . RECTOR , a colored posta l 
clerk at Littl e Rock, Ark. , has been 
retired after 43 years' service. 
G The Citizens' and Southern Bankin g 
Compan y has been opened i n Philadelphi a 
by Negroes; it is headed by Mr . R. R. 
Wright , Sr., of Savannah , Ga . The first 
day's deposits were $17,100 and at the end 
of the first week over $30,000 had been deposited. A buildin g costing $22,000 has 
been purchased at 19th and South Streets. 
The bank is open every night for the accommodation of workin g people; it receives 
deposits from various parts of the country 
and conducts a department of free financial 
advice. 
C Mrs. F . Irene Walton , of Philadelphia , 
Pa., has been appointed Foreign 
Commissioner of Deeds for New Jersey by the 
Governor. Mrs. Walton, who is colored, graduated from Templ e Universit y wit h an 
average of 98%, the highest i n a class of 
221 students. She holds a broker's license 
and is the founder of the Woman's Buildin g 
and Loa n Association. 
C Severa l hundred Negroes, union members, have replaced strikin g Iris h longshoremen at the Whit e Sta r pie r i n Ne w Yor k 
City . 
G Mrs. Cor a N . Brooks, a colored woman 
in Pittsburg , Pa. , has bought for investment 
a house at a cost of $22,500 cash. 
G A syndicate of Negr o tenants i n Ne w 
Yor k Cit y has purchased "Div a Court" , a 
6-story apartment house in Harlem , unde r 
the cooperative principle . 
G Dr. R. H . Boy d reports that durin g last 
year the Nationa l Baptist Publishin g Boar d 
at Nashville , Tenn., passed the $200,000 
mark. 
C Marti n V . French , a colored patrolma n 
at Chicago, has resigned his position after 
37% years' service, "wit h a perfect record" . 
H e is 67 years old. 
C Durin g 32 years' existence, the colored 
Berea n Buildin g and Loa n Associatio n o f 
Philadelphi a has matured stock amountin g 
to $415,350 and paid out $354,224 on stock 
withdraw n before maturity ; its assets are 
$354,989; 1600 familie s have been assisted 
i n the purchas e of homes and 441 additiona l 
homes are being purchased b y shareholders, 
who drew on mature d stock durin g August , 
$10,555. Th e Rev. Matthe w Anderso n is 
president of the organizatio n and W . Basi l 
Webb, secretary. 
C Th e colored Berr y & Ross Compan y of 
Ne w York , manufacturers of colored dolls, 
has purchased a 3-story building in 
Norfolk, Va., and plans to establish a chain of 
department stores. Because of its foreign 
trade it has formed the Gol d Coast Import 
& Produc e Corporation . Mr . H . S. Bouli n 
is president of the company. 
C The Insuranc e Agents' Department 
Store has been opened by Negroe s in. 
Savannah , Ga. , wit h a $40,000 stock; the 
company is capitalized at $100,000. The 
president is J. B . Brook s and the manager, 
J. W . McCall . 
G E. C. Brown, the colored banker of 
Philadelphia, has purchased 4 six-story apartment houses i n West 59th Street, Ne w Yor k 
City , at a pric e of $250,000. 
G The Philadelphia American celebrated 
its first year of business wit h a circulation 
of 60,000 copies weekly ; it has been incorporated wit h a capita l of $50,000 subscribed 
by its board. 
C A t Lexington , Ky. , 100 Negroe s have 
subscribed $2,000 and opened a grocery and 
meat marke t wit h 3 clerks. 
C Mrs. Maria n D . Butler, colored, has been 
appointed an attendant at the Woman's 
Bureau in the City Detention House, 
Washington, D. C. 
G Mr . R. W . Freeman , a Negro , has served 
as a letter carrie r i n Omaha , Neb., fo r 32 
years. H e was recently pensioned. 
MEETING S 
THE Student Secretaria l Y . M . C. A . 
Assembl y held at Lak e Forest, 111., 
passed resolutions touchin g favorabl y upon 
the race question i n America . Delegate s 
were present from every state i n the Union . 
34 TH E HORIZO N 35 
G The Universal Negro Improvement 
Association has held a 30-day conference in 
Ne w Yor k Cit y and inaugurate d Marcu s 
Garvey , as provisiona l president of Africa ; 
Gabrie l Johnson, potentate; George Osborne 
Mork , supreme deputy; and the Rev. Mr . 
James Walker Eason, leader of the 
American Negroes. 
G Th e Noel-Davis faction o f the Gran d 
Unite d Orde r of Odd Fellows held its 
biennia l session i n Wilmington , Del. , wit h 
309 delegates from 13 states. Mayo r Taylo r 
welcomed the convention and speeches were 
made b y Henr y Lincol n Johnson, Benjami n 
J. Davis, Mrs. Mami e Haile y and Harr y H . 
Pace. John S. Noel was re-elected 
Grandmaster. 
C Edward H. Morris was re-elected 
Grandmaster of the Grand United Order of Odd 
Fellows which convened in New York. 
Governor Smith and Mayor Hylan welcomed 
the convention; 40,000 members participated 
i n a parade. Th e orde r reports a membership of 550,000 and assets of $166,084 
of whic h $25,326 is cash balance on hand. 
C Th e Nationa l Baptist Association , Inc., 
meeting at Indianapolis, re-elected as 
president the Rev. E . C. Morris, who has 
been president fo r 30 years. Amon g the 
speakers were Governo r Goodrich, H . E . 
Yockey , representing the Mayor, an d Senator Watson . A feature of the program was 
a chorus of 200 singers directed by R. 
Alwyne Austin. 
G Quinn-Trent Post 73 of the American 
Legion, Fort Smith, Ark., has been granted a 
charte r an d opened club rooms. It has 50 
members, wit h M . Lafayett e Dea n as Post 
Commander. 
G The National Design Model and 
Dressmakers' Association has been formed by 
colored women. Mrs. Ma y Bell e Becks Cofer 
of Ne w Yor k Cit y is president. 
FRATERNITIE S 
GRAN D Lodge Masons and Easter n Sta r 
of Birmingham , Ala. , report receipts 
of $156,574 durin g last yea r and an increase 
of 4.000 i n membership. Walte r T. Woods 
of Tuskegee is grandmaster. 
G Supreme Orde r of Helpers has purchased 
a $40,000 buildin g i n Washington , D . C. Mr . 
J . C. Napie r is president. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
FRO M nine industria l centers the League's 
secretaries report this year 90,000 
Negro workers in 1,315 plants covering 25 
kind s of industry. 
G Milto n Rolan d has been appointed personnel director of colored employees of the 
Owens & Howar d Fir e Bric k Compan y at 
St. Louis, Mo. , on recommendation of the 
Urba n League. The St. Louis League was 
also instrumenta l i n securing the appointment of the first colored municipa l nurse, 
in the person of Miss Grace Hancock. 
During the summer vacation the League conducted a Grade Manua l i n one of the schools 
wit h such success that the superintendent 
of schools recommends it as a permanent 
feature to be supported by the Boar d of 
Educatio n and to be extended to another 
school next year. 
C A survey made i n Jamaica , Ne w York , 
by the Nationa l Urba n League disclosed 
the need for cooperative enterprise. A civic 
organization was formed and a site has 
been purchased fo r a community house and 
a cooperative store. 
C Throug h the Ne w Yor k Urba n League , 
the Wincheste r Fir e Arm s Company, Ne w 
Haven , Conn., has opened its doors to colored girls at an average wage of $20 per 
week. 
C Mrs. R. A . Gran t has been added to the 
staff of the Milwauke e Urba n League as 
block organize r for civi c improvement. 
C Howar d T. Gregg, Industria l Secretary 
of the Ne w Yor k Urba n League , has been 
successful i n placin g colored workers i n the 
followin g industries: Suffolk Engravin g 
Company, Ansonia Clock Company, 
Brooklyn Shield & Rubber Company, American 
Tube & Stamping Company, and the 
Columbia Graphonola Company of Bridgeport, 
Conn., and Wincheste r Firearms Compan y 
of Ne w Haven . H e has also induced the 
Continenta l Casualt y Compan y to use colored agents. 
C The records of the Detroit Urba n League 
for the fiscal year ending June 1, show that 
the League has furnished employment free 
to 11,782 persons; given care to 392 infants: 
secured homes through its room registry for 
242 persons and extended its social service 
in various ways to 144 other cases. I n addition to this the cases of 79 prisoners have 
been turned over to Mr . Dancy , Executiv e 
Secretary of the League , for investigation. 
by the judges of the Municipa l Court, and 
i n most cases where lawyers were needed 
the Negr o lawyers of Detroit have given 
their services free of charge through the 
League fo r the aid of the prisoners. 36 TH E CRISI S 
EDUCATIO N 
THE annua l report of the colored 
branches o f the Louisvill e Fre e Publi c 
Librar y fo r the yea r ending August 31, 
1920, shows a tota l circulatio n of 117,051 
books. 
C Shaw Universit y Alumn i Club s are bein g reorganized. Amon g recent reorganiza ­
tions are those of Philadelphi a and St. 
Louis. 
(I Lincol n Universit y has opened wit h an 
entering class of 80, the largest i n its history. Lewis A . Eaton , A.M., of Harrisburg, has been added to the faculty as 
Instructor in Chemistry. Coach F. D. 
Pollard announces the following football schedule: October 23, Morgan College at 
Lincoln; October 30, Shaw University at 
Philadelphia; November 6, Hampton Institute at 
Hampton; November 13, Wilberforce 
University at Pittsburgh; November 25, 
Howard University at Washington. Plans are 
being drawn fo r an Alumn i Gate i n honor 
of Lincol n men who served i n the late war. 
C Th e Colored Sumne r Hig h School, St. 
Louis, Mo. , has enrolled 891 pupils, a n in ­
crease of 80 over last year; i n the graded 
schools there is an enrollment of 7835, an 
increase of 928. 
C The Boar d of Education , St. Louis, Mo. , 
has turned over Pope School to the Negr o 
population; it wil l now be known as Warin g 
School i n honor of Osca r M . Waring , a 
forme r principa l of the colored Sumne r 
Hig h School. Mr . M . J. Gillia m is the prin ­
cipal. 
C A t Frederick , Md. , the first Negr o Hig h 
School has been opened; it has an enrollment of 24. The tota l enrollment of colored school children i n the city is 226. 
C At Kansas City, Mo., the Board of 
Education has let a contract for an addition of 
4 rooms to the colored Wendell Phillip s 
School. 
(T Yoland e DuBois, daughter of the editor 
of TH E CRISIS, has entered the Freshma n 
class at Fis k University ; Lydi a Mason , a 
young pianist, has been awarded a scholarship at the same school through the Fis k 
Universit y Club of Ne w Yor k of which Dr. 
M . V . Boutte is president. 
G Ruth Anna Fisher, a graduate of 
Oberlin and social worker, has sailed for 
England to study at the University of London. 
C St. Benedict the Moo r School has been 
transferred from Milwauke e to Corliss, 
Wis. , i n order to accommodate the increased 
enrollment. Last yea r there were 5 hig h 
school an d 7 other graduate s from the 
school, whic h has an enrollment of 150. The 
Rev. Fathe r Stephen is rector. 
G Louisian a has appropriate d $347,000 for 
Negr o education. Southern, Universit y receives $267,000 of whic h $67,000 is fo r current expenses and $200,000 fo r building ; 
the school has been give n the righ t to gran t 
college degrees. Th e sum of $80,000 is appropriated fo r establishing a school for 
blin d Negr o children. 
G A t the state examinatio n fo r teachers 
i n Birmingham , Ala. , there were 80 
whit e and 125 colored applicants. Dr . 
Baker, county superintendent, says: "Th e 
colored race is furnishin g al l the teachers 
needed fo r themselves, an d the Negroe s are 
improvin g their wor k steadily. Whe n a 
colored teacher fails to stand the state examinatio n he or she returns fo r the next 
examinatio n held, an d so on unti l they get 
a certificate. " 
TH E GHETT O 
BECAUS E he avowed support of J . H . 
Blount, colored, fo r governor, Dr . C. M . 
Wad e of Ho t Springs, who wa s nominated 
from the Sixt h Congressiona l Distric t of 
Arkansa s as presidentia l elector has been 
summaril y removed and his place filled by 
a Lily-White . 
G The Board of Awards of New York 
University has rejected Frederick Douglass for 
a place i n the Hal l of Fame . Th e election 
takes place every 5 years. 
CRIM E 
THE followin g lynching s have taken 
place since our last record : 
Graham, N . C , August 26—Joh n Jeffress, 
shot; attack upon whit e girl . 
Dallas, Texas, September 1—Frederick 
Douglas; murder. 
Danville , Va. , September 9—Leeli e Allen , 
shot; woundin g a farmer. 
Tulsa , Okla. , September 10—Tom M . 
Owens (white) ; murder. 
Quitman , Miss. , September 12 — Wil l 
Echols, shot; murder. 
Hartford , Ala. , September 13—Alt o 
Windha m (white ) ; insultin g whit e woman . 
Houston , Texas, September 24—Osca r 
Beasley; murder. 
McClenny , Fla. , October 5—Ra y Field , 
Be n Givens, Milto n Smith , hanged, Sam 
Duncan , shot; murder. TH E HORIZO N 37 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE Columbi a Graphophone Company is 
makin g a reproduction of the address 
on the Atlant a Expositio n made by the late 
Booke r T . Washington . 
(I Anit a Patt i Brow n has made a record of 
De l Acqua's "Villanelle" . 
C Mau d Cune y Hare , lecturer pianist, and 
Willia m H . Richardson , baritone, of Boston, 
Mass., began their season durin g October. 
Their booking, whic h is almost solid for 
1920, wil l include engagements under the 
auspices of branches o f the N . A . A . C. P . 
C Th e News and Press, a whit e dail y at 
Darlington , S. C., has reproduced a cartoon 
made fo r the Boar d of Healt h by a colored 
man , J . L . Brawley . 
(I Th e Cit y of Dallas, Tex., has employed 
Porti a W . Pittman , colored, to take charge 
of the Publi c Sin g fo r the colored parks. 
(I R. Nathanie l Dett has been presented in 
a recital at Ebenezer Baptist Church, 
Boston, with Lyllian J, Gwynn, soprano, and 
Loui a V . Jones, violinist, assisting. 
TH E CHURC H 
JOH N H . RIDLE Y and Colone l M . N . 
Lewis a t Newport News, Va. , have given 
two lots, costing $1,500 each, for the erection of a Presbyteria n church. 
(I Ebeneze r Baptist Churc h at Atchison , 
Kan. , has raised $5,930 i n cash toward a 
$10,000 goal. Th e Rev. W . Clifto n Cartwrigh t is pastor. 
C Olive t Baptist Churc h i n Chicago conducts 42 departments and auxiliarie s wit h 
512 officers; there are 24 pai d workers. The 
membership is 8,743 wit h a Sunday School 
enrollment of 3,100; durin g 1919, $56,209 
wa s collected and $54,959 disbursed; i n an 
80-day rall y $29,235 i n cash was realized. 
Th e Rev. L . K . William s is pastor. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
OUT of 303 Census enumerators i n eastern Oklahoma , Prof. P . J . Carter, a 
Negr o of Pateau, passed i n the second best 
papers and was complimented by Senator 
T. P . Gore . 
C Amelia R. Welcher has passed the 
Columbus, Ohio, Civil Service examination for 
director of recreation centers and playgrounds, averagin g 82.9%; the mar k required is 75%. This gives Miss Welche r a 
Class B position wit h first place on the 
eligible list. Miss Welche r at present is 
industria l secretary of the Y . W . C. A . in 
Ne w Yor k City . 
C. Dr . E . E . Smit h has opened an office 
buildin g costing $45,000, at Newport News, 
Va . 
C. Attorne y W . H . C. Brow n has bought a 
residence at Newport News, Va. , at a cost 
of $35,000. 
C Genera l Hospital, owned and operated 
by Negroes, has been opened at Columbus, 
Ohio, by Drs. Willia m A . Method and R. M . 
Tribbitt. It has 18 beds and is at the service of reputable physicians. 
C The population of 185 Negroes a t Grea t 
Falls, Montana , owns $91,900 i n taxable 
property and $12,900 i n church property. 
C The News, Indianapolis, Ind., is publishin g a column of "Note s on the Colored 
Folk" . 
C Colored parents of the uptown distric t in 
Atlanti c City , who protested against the 
concentration of Negro children in the 
Indiana Avenue School have won their case. 
(I Dr . Dougla s B . Johnson, colored, has 
been appointed to the out-patient clini c of 
Harle m Hospital, Ne w Yor k City . Dr. 
Johnson is a graduate of the Universit y of 
Vermont, a forme r practitione r of Virgini a 
and a late army surgeon. 
(I A $50,000 turberculosis sanitarium is 
being erected at Boley, Okla. , a Negr o town, 
by the State. Governor Robertson participated i n the ceremonies at the layin g of the 
cornerstone. 
C Th e colored branch of the Y . W . C. A 
i n Washington , D . C., erected at a cost of 
$200,000, has been opened. It has a cafeteri a and gymnasium, each wit h a capacity 
for 250 girls, 45 sleeping-rooms and 24 
dressing-rooms. 
C Mrs. Danev a W . Donnel, a colored clerk 
in the office of the County Treasurer, 
Indianapolis, served recently on the first allwoman jury . 
PERSONA L 
CHARLE S BROWN , a Negr o at West 
Columbia , Tex., is dead at the age of 
90. He was the owner of 3600 acres of oil 
land and leaves an estate estimated a t $2,­
000,000. A famil y of 7 children survive 
him. 
(T Edwar d H . Randolph, manage r of the 
Athenian-Nil e Clu b at Sa n Francisco , Cal. , 
for 14 years, is dead. Members of the 
club acted as honorary pall-bearers. TH E CRISI S 3S 
Henr y Randolph, his father, wa s i n charge 
of the hat-room of the Palac e Hote l a t San 
Francisc o for 40 years. 
(I Announcement is made of the marriag e 
of Mrs. Jessie S. Lee, a prominent business 
woman of Springfield, 111., to Colonel 
Charle s W . Fillmor e of the colored 15th 
Ne w Yor k Infantry . 
G Mr . and Mrs. Joh n Aver y Haga n announce the marriag e of their daughter, 
Hele n Eugenia , to Dr . Joh n Taylo r Wil ­
liams, of. Morristown , N . J. 
FOREIG N 
THE colored population of Colon, R. P. , 
has organized a Cooperative and 
Benevolent Society which has a membership 
of 500. Its object is to open Service 
Stations of foodstuffs, clothing materials and 
medical aid for its members. Dr. Hubert C. 
Edward s has been elected as the society's 
physician. 
C Native s of Gold Coast, West Africa , i n 
pre-war times bought cocoa for $50 a ton 
and held it ; now it is bringin g $300 a ton. 
Two hundred of these natives own automobiles, some costing $40,000 apiece. Colored 
shippers are formin g a cocoa trust. Wome n 
are acting as brokers and have adopted tailored suits and derby hats as their business 
dress. 
C The manufactur e of Morocca n pottery 
is being developed by a machin e whic h 
makes large tiles. 
(T Exports from Algeri a durin g the first 
3 months of 1920 reached 594,061,000 franc s 
as compared wit h 373,962,000 franc s for 
the corresponding period of 1919; the trade 
balance of 175,212,000 franc s for the first 
3 months of 1919 increased to 212,848,000 
franc s fo r 1920. 
C The Waterfal l Far m Missio n Industria l 
School at Salisbury , Rhodesia , for the promotion of practica l and industria l education 
among the natives, is appealin g for funds. 
The school owns 875 acres, 1 large thatched 
building , 6 huts and 20,000 bricks; it needs 
2 substantia l buildings. Mr . Abraha m Z. 
Twal a is the principal . 
C Protests from native s of Lagos, Sierr a 
Leone, West Africa , have prevented the 
use of a loan of $15,000,000 fo r setting 
apart desirable residentia l streets for 
whites and segregating colored people to 
the suburbs. 
G Frenc h trainers at Joinevill e School, 
Paris, have discovered Adbadahive , a sergeant i n an Algeria n colored company, who 
runs the 400 meter race i n 51 seconds, and 
800 meters i n 1:54. 
G Ex-Corpora l D . V . Watson , a returned 
Britis h West India n soldier, has started at 
Colon, the Colon Boys' Institut e League for 
mental and physica l training . 
TH E CIVILIZIN G O F HAIT I 
This postcar d was sent us from Haiti , wit h this inscription : "St . Miche l (Artibonite) , February . 1919 
Deu x poignets coupe s ct un c jambe ampute e avan t l'cxccutio n pa r u n gendarme . L 'oeuvr e d c l'office r 
americain , TH E 39 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL" Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal homo life, fine, mode m equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal, Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , 
30-DA Y SYSTE M Positions Secured 
DERRIC K 
BUSINES S SCHOO L The School of Results 
The Only One of Its Kind 
SHORTHAND TOUCH TYPEWRITING 
BOOK-KEEPING OFFICE TRAINING 
lar We teach a 30-Day Course. 
Impossible as it may seem—many students take dictation in 25 days. Ou r 
graduates are all over the country. 
As k them! Don't spend your valuable 
time LEARNIN G antiquated systems—• 
when you can be EARNIN G with 
Boyd's 30-Day Course. 
ENROL L IMMEDIATEL Y 
for Class Placement. Assignments are 
very limited—due to space. Announcement of removal to larger quarters 
very soon. 
Write for Catalog 14—Full Information of 
Fall Term. 
1435 CHESTNUT STREET, PHILA., PA. 
M . J . DERRICK, Priii. & Mgr. 
Berean Manual Training 
and Industrial School 
Fall Term Opened October 5th, 1920 
Are you looking for Training in goodpaying Tradest JOIN BEBEAN , 
Are you looking for special coaching in 
academic studies? JOIN BEREAN . 
Are you looking for sympathetic instruction in elementary studies! JOIN BEBEAN . 
Evening Classes. Moderate Tuition Fees. 
Painstaking Teachers. 
Write or Call on the Principal, 
MATTHEW ANDERSON 1926 South College Avenue, Philadelphia, Fa. 
Opposite Girard College 
CHURCH , SCHOOL, LITERARY 
Vital, Essential, Indispensible! Your town has Church and 
School, why not Literary 
also? Organize at once! 
Send 20 cents in stamps for 
topics, supplies, etc. Paid 
workers wanted. 
National Literary Associatio n 
0 You St., N. W. , Washington, D.C. 
Principal. 
Walker's BUSINESS COLLEGE 
FOR COLOREDJACKSONVILL E 
Located in our own $50,- FLORID A 
000 home. Large (acuity of 
'trained teachers. Open day 
and night, all year. Rates 
about hall those of other 
schools. Special correspondence courses lor (hose who 
cannot attend in person. Send 
for illustrated catalogue and 
terms. Positions secured for 
graduates. 
415-417-419 Broad Street 
LARGEST COLORED BUSINESS" 
— COLLEGE IN U.S.A. — 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction i n nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
HAL E INFIRMARY AN D NURSE TRAININ G 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala . Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 36, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
For the most valuable books 
dealing with the Negro Problem 
Address The CRISIS 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE, 1227 s. 17th st„ Phiia., Pa. 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
le t up equip you to take a position i n a Business Office i n a abort time by talcing our course i n Bonn. Pitma n Short­ hand. Touch Typewriting and Practica l Bookkeeping. Instructions given on the Multigraph, Mimeograph and Atldina Machines. Classes i n Touch System of Typewriting organized every Monday. Our certificated students are efficient and are In demand by business men al l over the country. 
JO B WORK—W e typewrite social and business letters, circulars, postal cards, funeral notices, sermons, essays, poems, 
addresses and duplicate handwriting, musio and drawings. Mult graphin g a specialty. 
Fall term opens Oct. 4. 1920. EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 4 0 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BE INDEPENDENT! 
Own a far m and enjoy the independent life of 
the modern farmer . Ge t awa y from the turmoi l of the city, the strikes, the lay-offs and 
the hig h cost of living . If you ac t QUICKL Y 
you can secure a Woodvill e country estate 
consisting of 10, 20 or 40 acres in a fine location in Michigan , for only 
$32.5 0 
per Acre 
ON VER Y EAS Y TERM S 
FRE E TOW N LO T wit h each 10 acre tract, 
also a SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUN T 
to those who act A T ONCE . Th e trac t is 
well located, right on a railroad, with the 
station righ t there. Th e land is high and 
dry and sold under a MONEY-BAC K GUAR ­
ANTEE . Th e TITL E is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEA R and is conveyed by WARRANT Y 
DEE D WITHOU T EXTR A COST . Send for 
our beautiful booklet and get al l the details 
without any obligation on your part. Simpl y 
ask for a WOODVILL E booklet and mention 
the Crisis. Send for it- TODA Y because the 
tracts are GOIN G FAST . Address 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
19 So. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY it ATLANTA . GA . 
BOOKS ! BOOKS ! 
N o one ca n hav e rac e prid e or rac e consciousness 
withou t knowledg e o f rac e histor y an d rac e literature . 
An y hook wante d b y colore d authors, writ e 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANGE , 
Mecc a of Negr o Histor y and Literatur e 
135 W . 135th St., New York, N. Y. 
NO W AR T 
READ Y For 1921 CALENDAR S WITH 
Beautifu l Negr o Subject s 
Also pictures of your business plac e or yourself can be 
set in one of our beautiful Ar t Border s 
Salesme n Wanted -{onlythosewho canproducecredntials Write Today—It's Getting Late 
MERCANTIL E CALENDA R COMPAN Y 
413 Florida Ave., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
NEGR O YEA R BOO K Latest Issue On Sale 
1918-191 9 Editio n Price Postpaid, paper cover, 75c; board cover, $1.25. 
Address: Negr o Yea r Boo k Company , 
Tuskege e Institute , Ala . 
A MONEY GETTE R becauBe it is A CROW D GETTER . 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that wil l afford an evening of Side-Splitting Fun , should have 
The Slabtown Convention A n entertainment In one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores or churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE , 50c. 
MISS NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Author Lincoln Heights. Washington. D . (V 
TWO GREA T BOOKS for $2.50 
NO_LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y of the Negr o Rac e and Negr o Soldiers in the 
Spanish-American War , Dating Back to Egyp t and the 
Pharoas—400 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2) Th e Pictoria l Histor y of the Negr o in the Grea t Worl d 
War , giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood , of the Fighting Fifteenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyle r and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think , only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESS i E. A. JOHNSON, 17 West 132nd Street, New York, N.Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 41 
Neither the mailed fist nor resolutions will cure the present state of unrest. But llie everyday practice of the Business Golden Rule—*'To live and let live"—by all individuals, associations and corporations engaged in business, will do much toward restoring confidence and contentment to the public. 
The Southern Ai d Society of Va. , Inc., did not raise its rates of premiums during the war 
period—nor since. It did not reduce the benefits to its members by any form of evasion. It did 
not withdraw its Unmatched Policy of Ful l Coverage and Life Time Protection to its members— 
and as a result of this liberal treatment to its members, the Southern Ai d Society has now the 
good will of all its members and enjoys a larger patronage in its field of operation than ever before. 
Thousands of contented members are constantly expressing themselves like the following:— 
A n Eminen t Physician and Surgeon Writes 
2GT W. Mai n St., Charlottesville, Va. , 
Ma y 6th, 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
It is my pleasure to state that I have been engaged in the practice of medicine in this city for about sixteen years. Having had ample opportunity to observe the great Southern Ai d Society in action, noting their prompt payments and excellent business procedure, I take pride in recom­ mending them as Above Them All . 
(Signed) Geo. R. Ferguson, M.D . 
Paid Clai m After 3 Days Membership 
Anderson Ave., Danville, Va. , 
Ma y 10th, 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
This is to certify that my husband, Sam Watkins, was a member of the Southern Ai d Society, 
receiving his policy on Monday, died on Wednesday, and I received his Death Claim on the following Monday. H e had paid the Society only 50 cents dues, and I received $28.75. 
I wish to say that the Southern Ai d Society is the best company I know for the prompt payment of both sick and death claims. 
Wishing you continued success, I am, 
Very truly yours, (Signed) (Mrs.) Lizzie Watkins. 
Weekly Benefits Each Week for 4 Years 
Prominent Physician Certifies to Fact 
1607 Taylor St., Lynchburg, Va. , 
Apri l 3, 1920. 
T O WHO M IT MA Y CONCERN: — 
I. Laur a Jackson, of 1607 Taylor St., Lynchburg, Va. , carry a policy. No. 62573, Premium 
35 cents a week, with the Southern Ai d Society of Va. , was taken sick Marc h 1, 1916, and have 
received my weekly benefits every week up to and including Apri l 3, 1920. 
I recommend the Southern Ai d Society to be prompt in their payments, and can say truthfully that they carry a perpetual paying policy. 
I have received during my illness the amount of $710.93. 
(Signed) Laura Jackson, (Witness) Irene Jackson. 
This is to certify that the above statement is correct and that I have filed certificates each week during Mrs. Laur a Jackson's illness. (Signed) J. A . Brown, M.D . 
N o insurable person in Virginia should be without the Superior Policy 
issued by the— 
Southern Aid Society of Va. , Inc. Hom e Office: 527 N . Second Street 
Richmond, Va . 
District Offices and Agencies thruout the State. Policy provides protection 
against Sickness, Accidents and Death—Al l for One Premium. 
A . D. PRICE—Pres. B. L . JORDAN—Sec . W . A . JORDAN—Ass't Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MUSI C I N TH E HOM E 
PUT S SUNSHIN E IN TH E HEAR T 
Standar d Song s Whic h Shoul d be i n Ever y Repertoir e 
 MOST DONE^ TH E ROUGH , ROCK Y ROA D (I'M
TRAVELLIN' ) Bv W. C. HANDY 
A beautiful spiritua l with a heart-throb in every note, wit h a new arrangement by one of America's 
foremost composers. PRIC E 40c. 
THINKIN G O F THE E A LITTL E SON G 
By HARRY H. PACE PRIC E 20c. For littl e tots and school children. 
PRIC E 30c: A ballad par-excellent. Just what the name implies. 
PICKANINN Y ROS E PRIC E 30c. A wonderfully melodious mother croon. A Lullaby . The sweetest song on Broadway. 
AFRO-AMERICA N HYM N SPHIN X 
'• • ' By IV. C. HANDY By J. BERN I BARBOUR 
A soul-stirring, martia l hymn of beauty. Special PRIC E 30c, A n Egyptia n Intermezzo. 
Prices In lots to Choirs and Schools. 
W E CA N SUPPL Y YO U WIT H AL L TH E 
LATES T SHEE T MUSI C 
WH Y DID YO U MAK E A PLAYTHIN G OF ME ? 
By J. BERN! BARBOUR •• • 
PRIC E 15c. A "Good Bye " appeal of a lover. Beautiful lyric s and wonderful music. A masterpiece of musical composition. 
LON G GON E ST. LOUIS BLUE S PRIC E 15c. Another "Casey Jones"' or "Steam­ PRIC E 30c. Sung by Marion Harris on Columboat Bill" . Sung by Marion Harris on Columbia bia Record. It's great. 
Record. 
THA T THIN G CALLE D LOV E PRIC E 30c. Sung by Mamie Smith on Okeh Record. The first colored girl to make a record of a popular song, and it's a wonderful record. 
Two Great Columbi a Records by BEAL E ST. BLUE S BER T WILLIAM S PRIC E 30c. Alway s a favorite. On all Player 
Rolls and Phonograph Records. "IT'S . YOU R MOV E NO W and 
"O DEATH . WHER E IS TH Y STING? " 
THIN K OF M E LITTL E DADD Y 
By MISS ALBERTS. WHITMAN 
PRIC E I5c. A song brimful of life. Recorded by Sweatman's Orchestra on Columbi a Record. 
OUR MUSIC IS ON AL L PHONOGRAP H RECORD S AN D PLAYE R ROLL S 
We can fill your orders for Playe r Rolls. 
Our music may be had wherever sheet music is sold, and at the music counters of Woolworth, 
Kress, Kresge. McCrory. Metropolitan and Nationa l Stores, or direct from the Publishers. 
N . B.—I f it is Sheet Music you want we can supply you. If we don't publish it we wil l get it for you, 
PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C CO. , Inc . 'PAC E & HAND Y BUILDING ) 
23 2 W . 46t h Stree t Dept. C Ne w York , N . Y . 
Mention THE CRISIS. 43 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Cleota J . Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
"Judging from the appear­ ance of a large number of music lovers, her sweet lyric voice held them spellbound. She was applauded again and again after each number."— Boston Chronicle. 
Address: 
1B6 HAMILTO N AVENUE , 
COLUMBUS , OHIO 
JOSEPHIN E A . JUNIU S 
CONTRALTO "Miss Junius is the possessor of a Contralto 
voice, lovely in quality, which she uses artistically."—Oscar Saenger. . 
74 W . 142d ST. ^^NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Clarence Cameron White 
Violinist 
Recitals, Concerts, Instruction 
Studio: 
616 Columbus Avenue Boston, Mass. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N Graduate of Institute of Musica l Art Organist-Director of Music of St. Marks M . E. Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. Harmony taught from beginning to com­ pletion. Private or correspondence. Geothius system. Studio: 250 W . 138th St., New York , N . Y . Telephone Morningside 1708. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau Wil l Help Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , 0. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L. JONES. Pres. 
N . E. Cor. 8th and Plum St.., Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telephone, Baring 7704 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgage* 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
LU C DORSINVILL E & CO . 
MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS 
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
PORT A U PRINCE, HAITI 
EXPOR T i IMPORT : 
COFFE E FLOU R . COCO A SOA P CASTO R BEAN S HARDWAR E LIGNU M VITA L 
MAHOGAN DR Y GOOD S Y 
LO G WOO D COTTO N FABRICS 
COTTO N FURNITUR E 
COCOANU T PAINT S 
Colored American business men desiring to trans, act business between Haiti and the United States of America, are cordially invited to communi­ cate with us. 
WANTED WANTED Liv e Agents A t Once To Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH for furniture, pianos, church pews, hard­ wood floors and hundreds of other things that have a varnished surface. Makes them look like new. Agents can make $50.00 to $75.00 per week selling- Dudley's Polish, to furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile stores, paint stores and grocery stores, Special Offer: For 90 days we wil l ship to al l new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this special offer at once. 
Dudley & Porter Manufacturing Co. 
116 South Main St., Muskogee, Okla. 
Colored Travelers 
Attention! 
N o matter where you live, or where 
you are going, we can secure desirable hotel accommodations ahead 
for you. 
Write to 
Traveler s Specialized Information Service, 
Correspondence Department. 
725 Florid a Ave. , N . W. , 
Washington , D . C. 
"You Name The City, We Hate The Hotel" 
Tel. 6437 Fort Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
~ WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue. New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
THE DANGER OF THE WINDS 
UNTI L 1807, when Fulton invented the first steamboat, commerce depended upon the winds for motive power. And 
oftimes these useful winds drove cargoes of riches on rockbound coasts and lurking sand bars. In fact, countless 
maritime disasters can be traced to the treachery of the winds. 
This is not enough to count against the winds, for greater 
still is the biting chaff and splitting scars it wrecks against 
milady's smooth complexion. 
It is fortunate however, that Madam C. J . Walker's Superfine Toilet Preparations prevent and repair the damage of 
the winds. 
FO R WINTER' S 
BITIN G WIND S MADA M C. J . WALKER' S 
WITC H HAZE L JELL Y 
and COL D CREA M 
AR E UNSURPASSE D 
Expensively compounded but conservatively priced 
THE MADAM C. J . WALKE R MFG. CO. 640 North West Street INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E 45 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LO T OFFE R EVE R MADE ! 
Excellent Lots, Developed Under New Plan, with Fruit Trees Planted on them, in 
Beautifu l ORCHARDVILL E 
FO R O N VER Y 
ONL Y $5 6 EAS Y TERM S 
PEOPL E FRO M AL L OVE R TH E COUNTR Y shed, etc., besides the room taken up by the fruit AR E SECURIN G THES E LOT S AN D TH E DE­ trees. MAN D FO R THE M IS INCREASIN G B Y EAC H LO T IS GUARANTEE D T O B E HIG H LEAP S AN D BOUNDS . If you want any yon AN D DR Y UNDE R A MONEY-BAC K GUAR ­ must AC T QUICKLY : ANTEE , and the title to the property is absolutely clear. Orchardville is located in a high grade fruit growing region and is to be developed into a The price of the lots is only $56, as stated above, BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CITY . Each lot will have and the terms are only $3.00 a month. Smaller FIV E HIG H GRAD E FRUI T TREE S PLANT ­ terms when more than one lot is purchased. N O E D O N IT. also a beautiful shade tree, which INTEREST . will be cultivated and taken care of by us for FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A COS T T O We have a beautiful booklet that gives all the 
YOU . When the fruit trees come into commer­ particulars of this offer, and that explains how 
cial bearing they should earn you EXCELLEN T to secure your lots. Send for one TODAY . 
YEARL Y RETURN S O N YOU R INVEST ­ Simply write your name and address on the cou­ MEN T WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N YOU R pon attached below and mail it to us RIGH T PART . AWAY . The number of lots is LIMITE D and 
The lots are sized 30 x 144 feet, and have plen­ they are GOIN G FAST , which makes it a case 
ty of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, of FIRS T COME—FIRS T SERVED . 
ADDRES S 
Arenso n Realty Development Corporation 
19 S. L a Salle Street -:- -:- CHICAGO , ILL . 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
Chicago, 111. Date 192 
Gentlemen:—I am interested in your Orchardvnlle offer and would like to receive one of 
your booklets without obligation to me. 
Name Address. 
Town State. 
CRI-11-20 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MADE TO MEASURE 
$15.00 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $15.00. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
mak e you a suit for $15.00, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Wh y not 
sav e 50 % on your next suit? We have such a tremendous business, buy all our materials in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
, You Save $9 to$J5 
This suit for $15.00 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailorin g field. W e offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell 
you about them. W e would rather you did Big Sample Outfit FREE not send us any money until we send our 
Writ e us today and we wil l mail you absolutely FREE our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. Yo u wil l be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don' t delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 60 1 CHICAG O 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 47 
Patti's Brazilian Toilette Luxuries Compounded with the same oaro as used in filling a doctor's prescription. 
Don't be ashamed and hide your face. Got Patti's Brazilian Seoret Booklet 
and learn how to care for your skin. Each day your skin grows smoother 
and your complexion clearer. 
Patti's Beauty Seoret Book, how to care for your skin, and six Toilette 
Preparations for $5.00. 1,000 agents wanted. 
_ „ „ _ „ Anita Roso Perfume $1.26 oz. bottle 
Pattl i Beauty Cream 6Bc Anita Lilao Perfume .. . 1.25 " ** 
Pattl'i Night Cream 6Bo Anita Lotus Perfume .. . I.2S " " 
Patti's Day Cream 6So Anita Trefle Perfume . . 1.25 " " 
Patti's "L a Travlata" Powder 68o Oriental Perfume. 1.25 " " 
Anita Diorkiss Perfumo I.2S " 
Send lOo postage for mailing one article—2o for each additional article. 
Send for Anita Patti Brown's Columbia song record, "VILLIANELLE" , 
by mall $2.25. Agents Wanted—No Samples or C. O. D. Orders. 
Address all orders to A . A . Brown , Manage r 
PATTI' S BEAUT Y EMPORIU M 
4723 St. Lawrence Ave., Apt. 3, CHICAGO , ILL. 
DARKWATE R A s the Holidays Approach OR 
Our "Selected List of Books" dealing with the 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin Negro Problem contains the best that is written 
on the subject. This list is printed on the inside front cover of this issue of the CRISIS . Dr . DuBois' new book is the sensa­ In fact we can secure for you any book pub­ tion of the day ; selling like "wil d fire." lished 
Pric e onl y $2.00. Orde r today. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. AGENT S WANTED ; send 50 cts. Special CRISIS Offer 
for outfit. Five paid-up yearly subscriptions to the 
CRISI S sent in at one time will entitle the 
sender to a year's subscription free. This offer AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . holds good until midnight of December 31, 
523 1920. 9th St. N . W. , Washington, D. C. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
FASHION BOOK MAILED FREE UPON REQUEST Beautiful Idlewild The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries Rea l Huma n Hai r of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine Uvea and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly Al l our wigs are teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
hand made and Do you enjoy bathing, boating. Ashing, hunting f 
strictly to order, Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries T from maker to Do you want a place to go where you can build u> wearer. your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency T 
Do yoa enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, WIGS, Trans­ progressive people of the day—people who do things! 
formations, switch­ Do you believe In progress and do you want to 
have a part in one of the most progressive move­ es, and Braids and ments of the time? Surely! 
all other articles of Then you will be Interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, hair goods. Michigan. If you act at once you can secure a beautiful lot for eoly I3S.M each; 
No . (04—Price 110.50 $6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
W transferred to you by an absolute e carry the largest selection of Hair Dress* warranty deed with abstract showers' Tools. ing clear title. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations Good live energetic 
agents wanted which makes the skin velvetlike, the hair 
silklike. Idle wild Resort 
Mme.Baum'sMailOrderHouse Company P. O. BOX 146, 1110 Hartford Bldg Fenn. Terminal Station, New YoTk, N. Y. So. Dearborn St. 
When writing, mention this paper. Chicago Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
NATIONAL CAPITAL CODE OF ETIQUETTE 
combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETT E 
PAR T i 
A Book absolutely in a class by itself. Interesting, 
instructive, handsomely illustrated. Wonderfu l pictures of Washington's prominent colored Society 
leaders on the street; at the Theatre; at Church ; 
in the Home ; at Receptions, Balls, Parties, Wed ­
dings, Dinners, &c , &c. The illustrations are so 
perfect and natural that the well bred, correctly 
clothed men and women almost speak to you. 
Learn how to dress and conduct yourself on any 
and all occasions; correct dress for men and 
women; suggestions in colors and materials for the 
ladies; hints as to footwear, hats, appropriate combinations, &c , for both sexes. 
Wha t to serve your guests at breakfast, lunch or 
dinner. 
Ho w to converse intelligently; how to know when 
to talk and when to remain silent; how to make 
friends and gain popularity. 
A book that will help the most prominent member 
of society or the most humble. 
STORIE S ^ 
PAR T 2 
A wonderful collection of Short Stories for Youn g and Old. Stories that will hold your attention from start to 
finish. By the most famous colored 
writer of Short Stories in America . Stories of Adventure Stories of Pluc k 
Stories of Bravery Stories of Success 
Stories of School Days Stories of Great Men 
Stories for Father, Mother or the Children. Funny Stories; Stories that will 
bring the tears to your eyes; Stories 
once started must be finished before 
laying aside the book. Handsomely il ­
lustrated—pictures that seem to live 
throughout the story. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
We are looking for wide awake hustlers to represent us 
We offer $10.00 to $20.00 a day to workers 
Do you realize that this book is in a class bv itself? N o such book has ever before 
been offered. You , by beginning at once, will be the first agent in your territory. 
Just think what it means to canvass for an article that is without competition! A 
book that will go like "WIL D FIRE. " It will break all records. Durin g the next 
few months there will be at least TW O MILLIO N COPIE S SOLD . Ou r agents 
will make more than " A MILLION " in profits. Get in on the ground floor and 
get the "EAS Y MONEY. " Writ e TODAY . 
Such an opportunity comes but once in a lifetime! Send 25 cents for an agent's outfit today 
AGENT S SAMPL E shows specimen pages, print, pictures and size of the 
volume. It represents exactly the complete book. The purpose of the sample is for 
use in taking orders. 
A BI G BOOK , containing over 400 large pages, including over so pages of 
pictures taken from actual photographs, and many excellent pen drawings, pictures 
of 100 interesting colored people 
Bound in vellum, de luxe cloth, with handsome capitol design, in three colors 
Price bv mail postpaid, only $2.50. ORDE R YOU R BOO K TODA Y 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. No. 523 9th Street 
Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. LET US SEND 
YOU A SUIT 
Made to your measure, payable 
after received, with the clear 
understanding that if the fit is not 
perfect, or if you are not satisfied i n 
every way; if you are not convinced 
that you have received a fine, highgrade, stylish, splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your measure 
and have saved at least $15.00 
to $20.00, you are not under the 
slightest obligation to keep it. 
Don't hesitate or feel timid, 
simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. Yo u are not out 
one penny. An y money you may 
have paid us is refunded at once. 
SEND NO MONEY-just your 
name and address for FREE 
samples and latest styles, 
beautiful NE W samplebook all sent FRE E — if you answer now. 
SAMPLE S FRE E 
Any man young or old, interested in saving money, who wants 
to dress well and not feel extravagant, is invited to answer at 
once and get our free book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply write letter or postal today, just say "Send me your 
samples" and get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have 
a special deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FRE E 
SAMPLE S and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Send at once. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING COMPANY 
Department 847, CHICAGO. ILL. 
TEAR OUT HERE—MAIL TODAY 
FRE E SAMPL E BOO K COUPO N KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORING COMPANY, Dept. 847, Chicago, ILL. 
Gentlemen: Plane tend me your complete book of samples and litest styles. Everything free and postpaid. 
Name .. .Address Nile Queen Buildins—Home of Nile Queen Preparations 
A n Unusua l Opportunit y 
for men and women capable of earning salary of $50.00 per 
week. W e have openings for aggressive, hustling persons to 
cover city, county or travel entire state territory doing special 
organization work. The Nile Queen Corporation now being 
organized on a profit-sharing basis is putting into operation 
a new plan which offers a gilt edge opportunity to small 
investors. 
Wide awake men and women who want to make real money 
or have their savings earn substantial dividends, cannot 
afford to overlook this opportunity. 
For full information address Dept. B, 
Incorporators Nile Queen Corporation or 
Kashmir Chemical Co. 3423 Indiana Avenue Chicago 