The CRISIS 
Vol . 8—No . 3 JULY , 1914 Whol e No . 45 
COMMENCEMEN T 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
B y MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
PRESS COMMENT S 
From " The Brooklyn Eagle ", Brooklyn, 
N. Y. 
Miss Ovington here reveals a gift by 
no means common—the gift of writing 
in a style that will appeal to the child 
mind, a style that is clear, direct and 
picturesque. An y child, regardless of 
race or color, would lie interested in the 
little hook, and many a grown-up would 
find the hour spent in its perusal one of 
entertainment and refreshment. 
From "The Four Seas", Boston, Mass. 
A good child's story is the hardest to 
write, because most authors of juvenile 
books think that being silly is the correct method of writing a child's story. 
"HAZEL " is a book which every saneminded person of larger growth will 
read with pleasure and because its 
heroine arouses a feeling of sympathy, 
every reader will be better disposed toward the colored people. This book 
ought to endure as long as "Alic e in 
Wonderland, " for it is the best child's 
story written since Selma Lagerhof's 
"Adventures of Nils. " 
From "The Amsterdam News", New 
York City. 
"HAZEL " is a story of juveniles for 
juveniles that is certainly good enough 
for the grown-up, who, in the rush of 
growing up, has not lost all memories 
of that delightful period . . . The story 
is full of pathos and tenderness and is 
informing to boot, and is good reading 
for both races. 
Price $1.00, net. 
From " The Springfield Republican", 
Springfield, Mass. 
The genius and sympathy of women 
has had much, thus far, to do with the 
lightening of the black man's burden,— 
beginning with Harrie t Martineau and 
Mrs. Stowe, and much remains for 
them to do. Mrs. Howe had her share 
in the "Battle Hymn " and many women 
since have lent a hand or lifted a voice. 
Mar y Whit e Ovington who writes this 
volume . . . has a closer and clearer view 
of the character of colored citizens and 
their children, Nort h and South, than 
Mrs. Stowe had of the slaves whose 
chains she helped to break, and she 
writes with less energy, but she produces the result aimed at, in the mind of 
the comparative few who will read her 
book. If it could be read and appreciated by Speaker Clarke and the women 
of the South their views on "segregation" would be modified. 
From "The Living Church", New York. 
The novelty of a story in regard to 
colored children and intended for 
colored children is at hand in "HAZEL " 
by Mar y Whit e Ovington, author of 
Half a Man. It is no "story with a purpose" nor docs it purport to raise, much 
less to solve, a problem ; yet if any one 
can read it and not have the awful 
pathos of the life of our colored people 
bear down upon him anew as a terrible 
burden which we Americans must bear, 
he must be less than human. If we only 
understood! 
Postage extra. 
TH E CRISIS PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YOR K CIT Y TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFTH AVENUE. NEW YOR K CITY 
Conducted by 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for July, 1914 
PICTURES 
COVER . Original Drawing. By John Henry Adams.
 Pa se 
A MISSIONAR Y O F EDUCATIO N AN D HI S LAS T CLAS S 130 
PORTRAIT S O F SIXTY-ON E RANKIN G COLORE D GRADUATES . 129 
ARTICLES 
COLLEGE S AN D THEI R GRADUATE S IN 1914 129 
A YEAR' S WORK : Reports of The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People at the Baltimore Meeting 140 
M Y HOUS E AN D A GLIMPS E O F M Y LIF E THEREIN . A Story. 
By Jessie Fauset 143 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 111 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 117 
OPINIO N 119 
EDITORIA L 125 
TH E BURDE N 145 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 108 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include Hig h 
School, Norma l School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduates of Yale . Harvard . 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Mora l and Spiritual Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fal l Term Begins September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGRA NAHA N 
KNOXVILLL, TENN . 
The fifteenth annual session of the State 
Summer School tor Colored Teachers of 
both sexes at the 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
will begin June 29, 1914. and continue five 
weeks. 
In addition to the regular work, an attractive 
lecture course has been arranged, in which 
wil l appear some of the most distinguished 
white and colored educators in the country. 
Board and lodging for the entire session, $12; 
tuition 25 cents per subject, unless other arrangements have been made. 
Limite d accommodations. Send $1 and have 
room reserved in advance. 
Fo r further information write at once to 
JAME S B. DUDLEY . President, or 
D . J. JORDAN . Director. 
A . & M . College. Greensboro. N . C. 
LINCOL N INSTITUT E 
Jefferson City, Missouri 
Founded by the Negro soldiers of 
the 64th and 65th Regiments. _ Supported by the State of Missouri. 
One of the best-equipped schools in 
the country for the education of Negro 
boys and girls. Normal. Collegiate, 
Agricultura l and Industrial Courses. 
Norma l diplomas carrying with them 
the degree B. Pd . are life certificates to 
teach in the public schools of Missouri. 
The degree A . B. conferred upon those 
who complete the collegiate course. 
Fou r teachers of Music : Voic e Culture, 
Piano, Violin , Band and Orchestra 
Practice. Elocution, Athletics, Draw ­
ing and Art . 
Boar d $9.50 a month. Tuitio n $3.00 
the year to Missouri students. Al l 
others pay $13.00 a year. Catalog free. 
B. F . ALLEN . A . M„ L.I. D . 
President 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlant a Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinit y School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
Northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
TOH N HOPE , President. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St. 
Mary . Address. 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N . 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa . 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 C. W . MORROW, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational 
and Social Science Courses. Pioneer in 
Negro music. Special study in Negr o history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life . 
Hig h standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 109 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
— REV . DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New Yor k City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y . M . C. A . 
and Y . W . C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N . C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Fo r teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course, extending from 
Jul y 1 to August 12. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CRISIS 110 
Morgan College and Branches 
JOH N O. SPENCER. President 
MORGAN COLLEGE . Baltimore. Md. 
LOCATION": Central in great college town between 
North and South. 
COURSES : Preparatory. Normal, Music. Advanced 
Education. Collegiate. Appropriate Degrees. 
INSTRUCTORS : College and University trained. 
Seven Colleges and Universities represented in 
Faculty. 
DORMITORIES : For a limited number, furnished. 
TERMS : Very reasonable. 
DEAN": Rev. "Charles Edmund Young. D. D. 
PRINCESS ANN E ACADEMY . Princess Anne, Md. 
(The Eastern branch of the Maryland Agricultural 
College.) 
LOCATION : The famous .eastern shore of Maryland, Somerset County. 
COURSES: Preparatory, Normal. Industrial, Domestic Science. Music. 
INSTRUCTORS : Collegiate and Technically trained. 
DORMITORIES: Carefully supervised, furnished. 
TERMS : Free tuition: other expenses moderate. 
PRINCIPAL: Rev. Thomas H. Kiah. A. B. 
VIRGINIA COLLEGIAT E and INDUSTRIA L INSTITUTE. Lynchburg, Ya. 
LOCATION : On beautiful hill, suburb of growing 
city. 
COURSES: Preparatory, Normal, Domestic Science. 
Gardening, Music. 
INSTRUCTORS: College trained: carefully selected. 
DORMITORIES: Furnished: steam heat; accommodations for 50 girls: carefully supervised. 
TERMS : Within the reach of all. 
PRINCIPAL: Frank Trice. A. M. 
AL L SCHOOLS OPEN SEPTEMBE R 1914. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as AGENT S 
for the sale of our properties in MUSKOGE E 
and TAFT . OKLAHOMA . The real coming 
country where there are opportunities and 
openings for all. Write us to-day. • giving 
your age and experience, and we will offer 
YOU a" FIX E PROPOSITION WHIC H 
WIL L MAK E YO U MOXEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO . 
Department C 
217 FLVNN-AME S BLDG. MUSKOGEE. OKLA . 
WW 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
Address : 70 Fifth Avenue. New York. 
OF INTEREST TO VOCA L STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, vii.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto. Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising. Position when Singing, 
H.">w to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing 
Contest held in Paris, on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours. 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," X. Y.: "A very* practical 
little book is Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music N'ews," Chicago. HI.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development* my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., X . W., Washington, D. C 
PRICE SI.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6445 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, 111.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, I1L 
ANNOUNCEMEN T 
We desire intelligent persons to act as our local 
distributors in communities where we are not already 
represented. Would be pleased to hear from students 
and teachers during vacation, or any reliable person 
able to furnish best references. Salary ?9 a week. 
SOUTHERN" DISTRIBUTORS COMPAN Y 
Odd Fellows Auditorium Atlanta, Ga. 
'Trade Mark1 
AN Y SPAR E TIME? 
WHY NOT TURN IT INTO MONEY? 
Our agents are making $10.00 per day and more, selling 
our new Negro picture. "A Joyful Welcome Into 
Heaven." the finest picture ever produced with the 
Negro as a subject. Pleasant agreeable work. Sells 
at sight! Write today for particulars, or send 15 cents 
stamps or coin for 50 cent sample and agent's terms. 
Money back if not satisfied at first glance! 
The Douglas Specialties Co. 
Departmen t K 
354 8 Verno n Avenue , :: Chicago , 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 8-No . 3 JULY , 1914 Whole No. 45 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE Paris edition of the Herald reports 
the followin g concerning the young 
America n artist of color: "Mr . Robert Hem -
mings, of Boston, has had his painting, 'Les 
Deu x Soeurs,' accepted at the Salon of the 
Societe des Artiste s Francais. Mr . Hem -
mings recently received a bronze medal for 
his water-colors at the exhibition at Ivry . 
t\ A n exhibition of sculpture by the artist, 
Mrs. Met a Vau x Warrick-Fuller, was held 
Ma y 17-22, at her home i n South Framing -
ton, Mass. The exhibition consisted of 
twenty-nine pieces of great variety, and was 
viewed by people of distinction who came 
from Boston, Worceste r and other nearby 
towns. The Framingto n Evening News 
states: "Mrs. Met a Vau x Warrick-Fuller's 
wor k is coming to be recognized i n artistic 
circles as bearing the true stamp of genius. 
Mrs. Fulle r is very modest about tier work 
but she is ful l of enthusiasm and the 'divine 
fire,' and not the least pleasing part of the 
occasion was the privilege of meeting the 
artist herself." The reviewer speaks i n detail o f the collection, and lays stress on the 
abilit y o f Mrs. Fulle r to portray action, motion and life . Amon g the relie f portraits is 
that o f the composer, S. Coleridge-Taylor, 
and "Th e Pianist " after Mrs. Mau d Cuney 
Hare . A bust o f Dr . Fulle r and one of the 
elder children are wonderfully life-like . The 
model of the group made for the New Yor k 
Emancipatio n Proclamatio n Commission i n 
1913 caused much interesting comment and 
praise. 
^ The Orpheus Clu b of Philadelphia , Pa. , 
conducted by the famous distinguished musician, Dr . Horati o Parker, of Yal e Uni ­
versity, held its third private concert at the 
Academy of Musi c on the 25th of April . 
The club was assisted by Mrs. Loga n Feland , 
soprano, and Mr . Ellis Clar k Hamman , 
pianist. Numbered on the excellent and 
varied program of modern compositions 
were, " A Vikin g Song " by Coleridge-Taylor, 
and "Swin g Along " by Wil l Mario n Cook, 
while Mrs. Felan d sang, as an encore, "The 
Birt h of Dawn, " the words of which are by 
Pau l Lawrenc e Dunbar. Honorar y members 
of the club are Davi d Bispham, Dr. Fran k 
Damrosch, Dr . George W . Chadwick and 
Dr. Willia m W . Gilchrist. 
<J The Mornin g Chora l Club, the leading 
choral society composed of white women of 
St. Louis, Mo. , gave, at their last concert 
of the season, "She Dwells by Great Ken -
hawa's Side " by Coleridge-Taylor. "Elea -
nore," a song by the same composer, was 
recently sung by the well-known Iris h tenor, 
Mr . Joh n McCorinack , at his recital at the 
Academy of Musi c i n Philadelphia , 
tj A t a recent Sunday service i n Weightma n 
Hall , of the Universit y of Pennsylvania , the 
program was composed entirely of music 
from the works of Harr y T. Burleigh , R . N . 
Dett and Coleridge-Taylor. 
C| Mr . T. Theodore Taylor, pianist, gave a 
recital at the Institutiona l Church, Chicago, 
111., assisted by Mrs. M . Bradu s Anderson, 
soprano, and Mr . Harriso n Emmanuel, violinist. Mr . Taylor's program consisted of 
numbers by Mozart, Chopin , Grieg , Debussy, 
Schumann and Beethoven. 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 112 TH E CRISI S 
CJ On Ma y 14, at the Mosai c Temple Theatre, Littl e Rock , Ark. , the Musi c Department 
of the Arkansa s Baptist College, one o f the 
most progressive institutions o f the South, 
gave an interesting performance of " A Nau ­
tical Knot, " an operetta by Willia m RysHerbert. under the direction of Miss Matti e 
A . Booker. Bot h the singin g and acting 
were of unusual excellence. 
CJ The exercises of commencement week at 
Wile y University . Marshall , Tex., began on 
Ma y 1st with a Pianofort e Recita l by Miss 
Helen Dean Littlejohn , graduate of both the 
piano and college departments, assisted by 
Miss Cynthi a Holmes, soprano, and Miss 
Ver a Hun t at the second piano. The Wile y 
Musi c Department, which is one of the best 
in the Southwest, has 115 pupils enrolled 
and five teachers who represent Fis k Uni ­
versity, Oberlin Conservatory and the New 
Englan d Conservatory of Boston. 
CJ "The Freedom Ring, " a picture of slave 
days by Eastmon Johnson, brought $750, 
the highest price of the evening at a sale i n 
the America n Ar t Galleries i n New Yor k recently. It is a picture of ''Littl e Pinky, " 
the slave child of a white father, whom Henr y 
War d Beecher sold into freedom i n his 
church i n 1S60. In the contribution was a 
valuable ring , the gift of Rose Terr y Cooke, 
which Mr . Beecher placed on the child's 
finder. The picture shows the child sitting 
before an open chest gazing at the ring . 
CJ Miss Blanche Esthe r Williams, soprano, 
presenting compositions by colored composers, was the soloist at the fifth annua l 
Sta r Concert of St. Augustine's Episcopa l 
Church at Harrisburg , Pa . Miss William s 
was assisted by the Tuskegee quartette and 
Mr . Wood , reader. Miss E . Vivie n William s 
was the accompanist. 
CJ A capacity house greeted the musicians 
of color who presented the municipa l concert program at Montclair, N . J. , at the Hill ­
side Auditorium on Ma y 18. The concert 
was one of a series of national programs. 
Augustus Granvill e Dil l was the pianist for 
the occasion and played from the works of 
Coleridge-Taylor. 
CJ On Ma y 3rd, under the leadership of 
Miss Wilhelmin a B . Patterson, the Prairi e 
Vie w Norma l Chorus, composed of one hundred singers, from the Prairi e Vie w State 
Norma l Institute, gave the last municipa l entertainment of the season at the city auditorium, Houston , Tex., before a mixed audience of over 5,000 people. Wit h but few 
exceptions, the songs were Negr o Spirituals 
and, b y special request, typica l America n 
Negr o songs by the older America n School 
of white composers. 
CJ The Hampto n Chora l Union , composed 
of the colored church choirs i n Hampto n and 
under the direction o f Mr . R . Nathanie l Dett, 
presented Mr . Harr y T. Burleigh , baritone, 
at Hampto n on Ma y 20. I n additio n to the 
large student body, one thousand people 
greeted this well-known singer. 
CJ The Cle f Clu b Symphon y Orchestr a and 
Glee Clu b o f Ne w York , composed of 145 
members wit h Danie l Kildar e as President 
and James T. Brym n as conductor, gave the 
fourth anniversary concert on Jun e 4. The 
club was assisted by Miss Abbi e Mitchell, 
Tom Fletche r and Harve y White . Carlos 
Sebastian, a society dancer, who is now at 
the Jardi n de Danse. appeared. 
CJ Kempe r Harreld , violinist, who has charge 
of the Musi c Department of Morehouse College i n Atlanta , Ga. , sailed wit h Mrs. Harreld on Jun e 4 fo r Berlin , where he will 
study durin g the summer. 
PERSONAL . 
PROF. HELE N C. MORGAN , for forty 
years a teacher at Fis k University , Nashville . Tenn.. died on Ma y 21. Abou t five 
years ago she was retired on the Carnegie 
Foundatio n for the Advancement o f Teaching . 
CJ Yoland e D u Bois was graduated from the 
gramma r department o f the Ethica l Culture 
School, Ne w Y'ork City , i n June . Accompanied by her mother, Mrs. W . E . B . Du 
Bois, she wil l sail for Englan d i n August 
where she wil l enter Bedale's School, Petersfield. Hampshire . 
CJ Benjami n T. Coard , a colored farmer of 
Accomac . Va. . who died i n February , was 
born i n slavery. His first wages were fifty 
cents per day and at his death he left property valued at $50,000. 
CJ Mrs. Francis Jane Brown , the mother of 
Miss Halli e Q. Brown , o f Wilberforee , died 
on Apri l 24 at her home i n Xenia , O. She 
was ninety-five years old. 
DRAMA . 
BERT WILLIAM S is playin g i n Ziegfeld's Follie s of 1914, whic h have recently opened on Broadwa y i n Ne w Yor k 
Cit y for the summer. Durin g the winte r he 
has been playin g i n vaudeville and posing 
for moving pictures wit h great success. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 113 
<I J . Leubri e Hill's Darktown Follie s played 
at Hammerstein's Theatre i n New Yor k the 
first week i n June . The origina l two-hour 
play , "M y Frien d from Kentucky, " i n which 
the company played to immense audiences at 
the Lafayette Theatre i n Ne w York , was cut 
to a forty-minut e sketch and, unfortunately, 
suffered i n the cutting Fo r this reason, the 
"Follies, " which, it was expected, would remain at Hammerstein's for a long run , 
played there only one week. It wil l now go 
to the Bijo u Theatre, on Broadway , 
q "Th e Smart Set " wit h S. Tutt Whitne y 
drew good audiences at its recent two weeks' 
ru n at the Lafayett e Theatre, New York , 
which ended June 7. The first week the company played a two-act sketch, "The First 
Mr . President, " and the second week appeared i n "Th e Mayo r of Newton. " Begin ­
nin g Jun e 8 the program at the Lafayette, 
which is again partl y under colored management, wil l consist o f vaudeville and moving 
pictures. 
<J The Uniqu e Theatre of Detroit, which was 
formerl y i n the hands of a white man, has 
been purchased for the sum of $6,000 by 
E . J . Johnson, a colored man, and wil l be 
managed by another colored man, J . W . 
Hamilton . 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY , Washington , 
D . C , was represented i n the College 
Women's Section o f the Suffrage parade i n 
Washington , D . C , on Ma y 9, by eight girls, 
as large a delegation as any Universit y had. 
I n contrast to the courteous treatment received b y these girls was that accorded the 
colored suffragists i n Philadelphi a who, as 
a matter of discrimination, it is said, were 
compelled, to march wit h the Socialists. 
C][ Miss Mar y Parker, a colored girl , i n the 
recent Fiel d Da y sports of Simmons College, 
Boston, broke the college record for the run ­
nin g broad jump and equalled the record 
fo r the standing broad jump . 
t$ Plan s fo r a state home fo r incorrigibl e 
colored girls i n Jefferson City , Mo. , have 
been approved. The estimated cost of the 
home is $89,000. 
<J A n industria l home for girls and a children's nursery, promoted by Mrs. Anni e M . 
Brooks, is expected to be ready for use soon 
i n Newport News, Va . 
C| Colored men of New Haven , Conn., are 
attempting to raise $50,000 for a Y . M . C. A . 
building . 
«I The Women's League for Mora l Uplift , 
an organization of colored women i n Phila ­
delphia, has signed a petition asking for the 
abolition of "Ladies' Entrances " to saloons 
and also that saloons be moved from the 
neighborhood of schools. 
•J Fo r the first time colored nurses have 
been placed i n responsible positions as attendants i n the state hospitals of Kansas. 
<I A t the graduation exercises of the Chil ­
dren's Choirs of the Presbyterian and Methodist churches i n Clinton , N . J. , five of the 
thirteen prize-winners were colored children. 
There are only six colored pupils i n the sixty 
pupils comprising these choirs. 
*I A . Vidal , a colored man, crippled i n one 
hand, rescued an eight-year-old white child 
at New Iberia, La. , from drowning. 
<][ Amon g the six winners of the State Hig h 
School Trac k Meet at Crawfordsville , Ind., 
from the Washingto n Hig h School, two 
colored students won eleven of the eighteen 
points made. 
<J The Capita l Cit y Directory, a hand book 
of the religious, social, fraternal and other 
activities of the colored people of Nashville , 
Tenn., has been published by the Nationa l 
Baptist Publishin g Board . 
<I Colored women of Princeton, N . J. , are 
plannin g the erection of a tablet to the memory of Olive r Cromwell, a Negro who fought 
i n the wa r of the Revolution. H e fought i n 
the battles of Trenton, Princeton, and Mon ­
mouth and his discharge was written i n General Washington's handwriting. H e died i n 
1853. 
(J The colored department of the General 
Hospita l Trainin g School for Nurses i n 
Kansa s City , Mo. , held its fifth commencement on Ma y 25. There were three graduates. 
<J The athletes of German East Afric a are 
said to be able to jump over a bar eight feet, 
five inches high winch is one foot, eleven and 
three-eighths inches higher than the world's 
record for the high jump . 
<J The Reverend C. D . Hubert's congregation 
at Rochester, N . Y. , which was but recently a 
Baptist mission, has finished payin g $8,000 
for a lot and the buildin g of the Sunday 
School room of its new church. The Reverend Hubert was the first Negr o graduate of 
Rochester Theological Seminary. H e was 
president of the class of 1912. 
*I Dr . E . P . Roberts, of New York , has established a scholarship at Tuskegee Institute 
for a worthy student and a priz e of $10 for 114 TH E CRISIS 
the student who makes the greatest progress 
i n the physica l culture classes, 
q Plan s fo r establishing a Y . M . C. A . for 
colored men i n Rochester, N . Y. , are on foot. 
CJ The alumn i body of Lincol n Universit y 
has dedicated a scholarship of $3,000 to be 
known as the I. X . Rendall Memoria l 
Scholarship. 
Q Amon g the five indictments returned by 
the Gran d Jur y of Louisian a against Bus h 
Jarratt, a white special officer i n Skreveport, 
was one for shooting at and assault wit h a 
dangerous weapon upo n Willia m Stewart, a 
Negro. 
<J Twenty colored men. none more than 
twenty years of age, landed wit h the battalion of Blu e Jackets from the Unite d 
States warships and fought unceasingly at 
the recent takin g of Ver a Cruz . There are 
few colored men wit h the ships' fighting 
forces at present but each of five warships 
landed at least four men and held others as 
substitutes i n cases of emergency. These 
men continued on shore after the fighting 
was over preserving order. One was slightly 
injured, but neither he nor the others 
dropped out notwithstanding the intense 
heat and scarcity of water. 
MEETINGS . 
THE annual meeting of the Negr o Press 
Association wil l take place i n Musko ­
gee, Okla., durin g the month of August, 
COLORE D BLU E JACKET S A T VER A CRUZ. 
q The State an d Tri-Stat e Medica l Associa ­
tion of Tennessee, Georgi a and Alabam a met 
i n Atlanta , Ga. , Ma y 12-14. 
<J The quadrennia l session of the Genera l 
Conference o f the Methodist Episcopa l 
Churc h convened i n St. Louis, Mo. , i n May . 
A committee was appointed to decide upon 
the place to establish the C. M . E . Publish ­
in g House , whic h is to be moved from Jackson, Tenn. Two new bishops were elected, 
A . R . Carte r fo r the Arkansa s an d Texas 
Conference and J . C. Cleaves fo r the Mississipp i and Alabam a Conference. Bisho p 
Isaiah Lane , the founder o f Lan e College i n 
Jackson, Tenn., was retired at his request. 
Bisho p George W . Stewart was foun d guilty 
of misappropriatio n of funds and deposed. 
<J The colored Alabam a Medical , Denta l and 
Pharmaceutica l Associatio n met i n its annual 
session at Decatur, Ala. , Ma y 11 an d 12. The 
Nort h Carolin a Association wil l meet i n Ra ­
leigh August 25-27. 
*J The commencement exercises of Atlant a 
University , Atlanta , Ga. , took place Ma y 21-
27. On Ma y 2.5 the Nineteenth Annua l Con ­
ference discussed "The Negr o and Crime. " 
A t the mornin g session Mr . L . M . Hershaw, 
of Washington , D . C , and Mr . Phili p Weltner, Secretary of the Priso n Associatio n of 
Georgia , spoke on "Prevention. " I n the 
afternoon came the annua l Mothers' Meetin g and exhibition of the Gate Cit y Fre e 
Kindergarte n Associatio n and at the evening ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 115 
session Judge W . W . Tindall , of Atlanta , 
spoke on "Juvenil e Courts, " and Mr . G . W . 
Moore , o f Morehouse College, spoke on 
"Probation. " Ma y 26 was alumni day and 
$870 was contributed by graduates. Rev. 
George L . Paine , o f Ne w Haven , was the 
commencement speaker. 
CJ The Southwest Virgini a Conference of 
Negr o workers met at Christiansburg Industria l Institute on Ma y 20. 
CJ Two hundred students received diplomas 
at Tuskegee's commencement. Practica l 
demonstrations o f the industria l work were 
given at the commencement exercises. Con ­
siderable donations were made to the school 
by the alumni. 
CJ The annua l meeting of the Women's 
State Baptist Convention, of which Miss A . 
L . Waytis is organizer and president, met i n 
Bosto n from Ma y 28 to 31. 
CJ The annua l meeting of the Colored Nort h 
Carolin a Teachers' Assembly wil l be held 
June 10-14 at Shaw University , Raleigh . 
CJ A n efficiency and welfare congress at 
which matters of interest to ministers were 
discussed was held i n Birmingham recently 
under the direction of Bisho p Wilbu r P . 
Thirkield . 
CJ The fiftieth annua l meeting of the Massa ­
chusetts Denta l Society was held i n Boston 
recently. Dr . Alfre d P . Russell, a colored 
dentist, conducted one of the clinics. 
CJ The Armstrong Association of Philadelphia , a white organization, met i n the sixth 
annua l meeting i n May . Reports show that 
$35,000 wort h o f wor k has been provided 
durin g the year by this association for colored men. 
CJ The ninety-fourth session o f the Ne w 
Yor k annua l conference of the A . M . E . 
Churc h met i n Alban y on Ma y 27. The reports showed that more than $100,000 had 
been raised b y the church durin g the year for 
all purposes. 
CJ The Nationa l Independent Civi l and Po ­
litica l Negr o League held a meeting of protest against segregation i n Philadelphi a on 
Ma y 18. Senator Wesley L . Jones, of Wash ­
ington, was the principa l speaker. 
FOREIGN . 
MR. H . A . JOSEPHS , a colored man, 
who is Assistant Attorney-Genera l of 
Jamaica , is now acting Attorney-General. 
CJ The first ordination to the priesthood i n 
the Negr o Theological Seminar y i n Uganda , 
Africa , took place lately. Two Negro priests 
were ordained. 
CJ I n the Palladium Theatre, London, a 
woman recently caused a disturbance by objecting to the presence of Kafirs i n the 
audience. 
CJ Madiso n R . Smith, the southern white 
man who was appointed as Ministe r to the 
black republi c of Hait i at the beginning of 
the present administration, has resigned. 
Arthu r Bailly-Blanchard , another white man, 
has been appointed. Haiti's internal affairs 
and foreign relations are, at present, in a 
critica l state. The Haitia n debt is about 
$35,000,000 and more than half of this is 
owed to the Frenc h government. Franc e 
and Germany want to establish an international commission form of government for 
the purpose of handling the Haitia n income, 
but the Haitia n government objects to this 
claiming that it has always been able to meet 
the interest on the debt. 
COURTS . 
THE Rev. G . H . Simms, a colored minister of New Yor k City , received $100 
damages from Spir o Matiato, proprietor of a 
small restaurant, who refused to serve Mr . 
Simms wit h two other men. 
CJ The jur y gave a verdict of $150 and costs 
i n the case brought against the Comstock 
Amusement Company, Cleveland, O., by 
Miss Hatti e Hairston , a youn g colored woman, who with Miss Mau d Yor k was refused 
admittance to the orchestra at a matinee performance. Miss York , whose case was settled out of court, received $50 damages. 
CJ The question as to whether ex-slaves can 
inherit is now before the Supreme Court of 
the Unite d States. The question came up i n 
the Supreme Court of Tennessee over the 
case of Joh n Jones who owned a small farm 
which should, at his death, have gone to his 
brother William . The Tennessee Court decided that ex-slaves could not inherit and 
this has been appealed to the Unite d States 
Supreme Court. 
CJ Judge Travis, a colored resident of Jersey City , N . J. , brought a case against the 
New Jersey Empir e Amusement Compan y 
for discrimination i n a theatre i n Hoboken . 
Mr . Travis was represented i n the case by 
Robert S. Hartgrove , a colored lawyer. A 
decision for $500 damages was given Mr . 
Travis. 116 TH E CRISI S 
<J A colored man, E . W . Fields, of Monro e 
County , Ala. , when unable to pa y a fine fo r 
larceny, contracted to work out the indebtedness wit h J . A . Reynolds, a white farmer. 
Late r Reynolds had Field s arrested for failin g to complete the contract and Field s hired 
himself out to another white man, G . W . 
Broughton . The federal government has 
carried the matter to the Supreme Court of 
the Unite d States and charges the two white 
men wit h peonage. 
TH E GHETTO . 
MR. B. T. WASHINGTO N has written 
a letter, which has been published i n 
most of the colored weeklies, asking the railroads for equal accommodations for white 
and colored people. H e asked that Sunday, 
June 7, be set aside as "Railroa d Day " to 
protest against the discrimination practised. 
<J The colored people of Ne w Bedford , 
Mass., held a mass meeting to protest against 
a lecture, misrepresenting and slandering 
Negroes, delivered there by a southern white 
man under the auspices of the free publi c 
library . 
<J The Nationa l Association of Colored 
Women's Clubs is protesting against the 
caricaturing of colored people upon bil l 
boards, i n magazines, i n advertisements of 
food products, etc. 
<j| The Mayo r of Louisville , Ky. , has signed 
the ordinance providin g for the segregation 
of Negroes. 
<I Fifty-two members of a colored Knights 
of Pythia s Lodge in Pittsburgh, Pa. , who 
were engaged rather noisily i n an initiation, 
were arrested and kept i n jai l all night until 
dismissed i n the morning by the magistrate. 
A large number of colored people held a 
mass meeting at one of the churches and protested to the Mayo r and asked for the discharge of Lieut. Joh n McArdle , who caused 
the arrest. 
<J Mrs. Ida Eversman, a white woman, is 
offering her residence on Forty-first Street, 
between Fourt h and Fift h Avenues, New 
Yor k City , for sale "to Negroes only. " She 
has become incensed at the treatment accorded her by her neighbors. 
CRIME . 
THE followin g colored men have been 
lynched since the last account: 
A t Grovetown, Ga. , Charles Jones was 
lynched by a mob of 150 white men. H e 
was accused o f stealing a pair o f shoes; no 
shoes were found on his premises an d other 
reports say that Jones was lynched because 
he was intoxicated and "talke d big. " A t 
Shreveport, La. , Edwar d Hamilton , eighteen 
years o f age, was lynched by a mob of 
5,000. H e was accused o f attacking a tenyear-old girl ; later reports refute this charge. 
A t Tampa , Fla. , James Woodsome , charged 
wit h tryin g to force his wa y into a white 
woman's hotel room, was lynched. 
<J A mob o f 250 men took Joh n Thomas, a 
colored man, from the Abbevill e (S. C.) jail , 
tortured him and cut off one ear. Thomas 
was accused of makin g "imprope r advances" 
to a white woman. 
q Sylvester Washington , a colored man of 
St. James, La. , accused o f murderin g two 
men, was shot to death by a crowd of "citizens." 
q A strange white man, passing through a 
Negr o settlement near Batesville , Miss., 
raped a ten-year-old chil d whil e her mother 
and father were i n the fields. A t the child's 
alarm the neighbors started out and captured 
the man about eight miles away from the 
scene o f the crime, but because the only evidence obtainable was that given by the small 
children who saw him, he was not indicted. 
C] Fanni e Chenault, a white woma n of Rich ­
mond, Va. , claimed that she was held up on 
the Richmond-Rappahannoc k ca r line and 
raped by a colored man on the night of Ma y 
9. The woman has not been able to identify 
any of the dozen men who have been accused of the crime and she has shown so 
much indecision i n the identification that the 
detectives seem to be losing interest i n the 
case. A s a result of her accusation one Negro who resisted arrest b y a plai n clothes 
man (and who Miss Chenault says positively 
was not the man) is dead, and another is 
fined $100 and given twelve months for carryin g concealed weapons. 
<I Officers o f Jefferson Parish , La. , shot and 
wounded very seriously an innocent colored 
man when, i n their search fo r a supposed 
criminal, they came upon him i n the woods. 
<J The Supreme Court o f Nort h Carolin a 
rendered a decision against the town of 
Winston-Salem i n its case against Willia m 
Darnell, a Negr o who occupied a house i n a 
white neighborhood. Chie f Justic e Clar k 
declared the aldermen had no right to pass 
a segregation ordinance. A N EDUCATO R 
THE Judges of the Supreme Court of the 
Distric t o f Columbi a have appointed 
Mrs. Corali e Frankli n Cook as a member of 
the Boar d of Educatio n fo r the Distric t to 
succeed Mrs. Carolin e W . Harris. This is 
an unusually fortunate selection. Mrs. Cook 
is a graduate of Storer College and taught 
many years there and i n the publi c schools. 
I n 1S93 she came to Washingto n as Superintendent o f a home for women and children. 
Fiv e years later she married George Willia m 
Cook, Secretary of Howar d University , and 
became Professor of Englis h i n that institution, a position which she held for several 
years. Wit h her husband, Mrs. Cook worked 
out the cottage system o f the Government 
Trainin g School at Blu e Plain s and won 
commendation for her wor k from the Distric t 
Commissioners. She has been especially in ­
terested i n children's playgrounds and was 
one of the speakers at the eightieth anniversary of the birt h of Susan B . Anthony . 
She is a member of the Nationa l Association 
for the Advancement of Colored Peopl e and 
a quiet, tactful, high-minded woman of culture and publi c spirit. 
m 
A REA L ESTAT E DEALE R 
HUGH M . BURKET T was born i n Baltimore a little less than thirty-seven 
years ago and is now the most successful 
colored rea l estate broke r i n the city, doing 
a business o f $50,000 a year. H e received 
his college trainin g at Lincol n and took his 
law course at Howard . Mr . Burkett has 
sold over five hundred homes to colored people on the better streets of Baltimor e and 
indeed was so successful i n the wor k as to 
be one o f the prime causes of the Negro 
segregation agitation i n that city. Mr . Bur ­
kett has just moved into new quarters; he 
has five assistants, an automobile for professional purposes, advertises i n the dail y 
papers and is called by the Baltimor e dail y 
Xeics an ''unique figure i n the real estate lif e 
of Baltimore. " It goes without saying that 
Mr . Burkett is a reader of TH E CRISIS and 
a member of the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. H e 
furnished bail for the colored man who shot 
into a mob recently and was acquitted by 
the efforts of our attorney. 
O F NEGR O DESCEN T 
AGAIN there comes to our notice the case 
of persons of Negro descent who have 
attained places of trust and prominence but 
HUG H M. BURKETT . 
MEN OF THE MONTH 118 TH E CRISI S 
are, especially after death, counted as white 
men. The state of Washingto n has a large 
number of such cases. I n 1905 a colored 
man named George Washingto n died i n that 
state. H e became wealthy, helped his former 
master's family and the present town of 
Centrali a is built largely on his land. A 
quadroon has been Mayo r of a city of 45,000 
inhabitants: another had a high federal office i n Seattle, and still another, W . 0 . Bush , 
now deceased, was a member of the last territoria l legislature i n 1SS4 and the first state 
legislature i n 1SS9-90. H e came to Wash ­
ington,from Missouri i n 1S84. H e was a 
quadroon, the son of a mulatto father an d 
a German-America n mother. The children 
of the famil y have intermarried wit h the 
white neighbors; one of the daughters is the 
wife of the sheriff of the County. 
A MISSIONAR Y IN EDUCATIO N 
MR. J. A . HENRY , who died recently i n 
Chattanooga, Tenn., was a northern 
Negro who went down into the Hous e of 
Bondage to help his people. H e was born 
i n Buffalo i n 1859 and trained i n the publi c 
schools and i n Atlant a University . H e went 
to Chattanooga in the year of his graduation 
William O. Bush, 1844 
TH E LAT E W. O. BUSH. 
and taught there for thirty-one years until 
his death. The Chattanooga Times said editorially : "Prof. Henr y was a man of character and had won his reputation as a clean, 
self-respecting an d responsible citizen by a 
faithfu l performance o f duty. " Another 
white dail y said : "Prof. Henr y enjoyed the 
respect o f the white as well as the colored 
people. H e was devoted to his duties and to 
the betterment o f his race an d his influence 
durin g the period, more than a quarter of a 
century, he had lived and labored i n Chattanooga was most beneficial not only to the 
children but to the adults of his race. 
His funera l was attended by six thousand 
people. Hi s body la y i n state i n a purple 
casket, covered wit h the masonic regalia of 
a Knigh t Templa r and thirty-thir d degree 
mason, whil e four white horses led a procession that blocked Nint h Street for an 
hour. The Mayo r of the city, the State Commissioner of Education , the Cit y Superintendent and man y prominent citizens, white 
and colored, were i n attendance. 
TH E LAT E S. H. BISHOP. 
(See Editorial) SISIRC EHT 
TH E PHILOSOPH Y O F MR . DOL E 
MR. Dole's letter and TH E 
A REJOINDER. ~ .. . . , , 
CRISIS editoria l reply continue to provoke discussion, especially by 
mail. Mr . Dol e himself sends us a letter 
which we regret we have not space for i n 
ful l on "Efficiency and Persuasion, " and 
fears that we do not altogether understand 
his point of view as to the prope r attitude 
toward people who differ wit h us or oppose 
us. H e concludes by saying : 
"M y point here is practica l efficiency. 
Yo u make no progress wit h prejudiced, vio ­
lent, and purse-proud or race-proud men by 
demanding you r rights of them. They are 
stirred to resist you . Yo u make the issue 
one of antagonism, as of yo u against them, 
which is essentially an inhumane kin d of 
issue. Bu t try' the way of your religion 
(which is also the philosophy of social dyn ­
amics) ; pu t yourself wit h the other as a 
fellow-human subject on the same passions 
and spiritua l perils, assume a good heart i n 
him and some conscience, respect and trust 
him a little, work wit!: (he grain and keep 
you r good temper—at other name for the 
health of you r own soul—and yo u wil l get 
results; you r rights will fall to you, as sure 
as the sun makes the corn grow. The world 
is slowly learning that, good : wil l is the 
mightiest practica l force i n the universe! 
"Please, therefore, Mr . Editor, allow this 
question, whether you r admirable abilities 
might not really be enhanced by magnanimously forbiddin g yourself to brood over 
the injustice and barbarism of the world , 
and filling yourself wit h that kin d of civiliz ­
in g powe r which no injustice can long resist." 
A veteran friend and co-worker with the 
Negr o race writes i n further support of Mr . 
Dole's contentions: 
" A man of Mr . Dole's spirit—a better 
spirit than Lyma n Abbott's or Mr . Ogden's 
—di d not deserve that kin d of treatment, 
nor di d it seem consistent wit h the deep respect and admiration which yo u professed 
for him personally. Most readers, I think, 
would lay down the magazine wit h praise of 
his spirit and rebuke of yours, and then 
hastily conclude that his argument was good 
and yours bad, and thus miss the real force 
of what yo u had been saying. That is the 
simple psychology wit h which much printed 
matter is read, and we cannot afford to ig ­
nore it. " 
Mr . George G . Bradfor d says: "Don't, 
for heaven's sake, slop over wit h any more 
such futile answers as yo u applied to Mr . 
Dole. " 
Then come these crumbs of comfort: 
You r "Philosoph y of Mr . Dole " and 
Picken's "Crisis " are wort h a nation-wide 
circulation. Broadside your editoria l and 
send it separately forth as a defiant note to 
maudlin missionaries and weak-kneed politicians. Nai l it on the church door; spread 
it over the Congress. It is a rea l fact fo r 
these miserable sycophantic times. 
Hastil y yours, 
RICHAR D T. GREENER . 
Thanks for your splendid editorial i n repl y to Charles F . Dole. I subscribe to every 
word of it. 
Faithfully , 
JOH N DAN A MILLER , 
Edito r of the Single Tax Review. 
Wil l you accept my hearty congratulations 
on your answer to the Rev. Charles Fletche r 
Dole. It is bully and right to the point. 
Muc h as I esteem TH E CRISIS, I think it 
quite outdid itself on this occasion. Kee p it 
up. Sincerely yours, 
ERNES T H . GRUENING . 
Just when I am beginning to think yo u 
aren't worth while yo u writ e some splendid 
thin g like that repl y to Charles F . Dole and 
OPINION 120 TH E CRISI S 
thrill me to my utmost soul. I simpl y cannot express my unbounded appreciation of 
that splendid rebuke. Wha t I admire about 
TH E CRISIS is its fearless attitude. Whe n 
TH E CRISIS ceases to speak out as it does, I 
shall have no further use for TH E CRISIS. 
Yours truly , 
CARRIE W . CLIFFORD. 
" I wish to thank you for you r repl y to 
Mr . Dol e and send you an example of the 
propagation of failure to capitalize Negro. " 
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSI N 
STYL E BOO K 
CAPITALIZATION 
CAPITALIZE 
Names of all races and nationalities, 
except negro. 
TH E ISHMAELITE . 
Elsi e Singmaster writes a 
A MAGAZINE SKETCH IN THE JUNE Century of 
STORY. AN OLD COLORED MAN WHO GOES TO 
Gettysburg Reunion. O f course, i n order to 
get i n the fiction pages of a large America n 
magazine the Negro had to be "lik e a child " 
with a "dul l mind " and "confused" while, 
of course, his eyes "rol l i n their sockets." 
Nevertheless, there is a deeply sympathetic 
note i n the sketch which shows how this 
poor, old, simple-minded man was almost 
lynched and finally died from exposure. 
"Bu t he saw no more, felt no more, i n this 
world. Sometime i n the night he rose aimlessly and moved a few steps away, and fell 
again, thus destroying the strange tableau 
of which he had made part. 
"I n the mornin g he was found, and was 
taken away. That he represented a great 
problem, that he was a creature of strange, 
pathetic, tremendous significance, no one 
noted. The land had purged itself of its 
sin, a blood-sacrifice had been made, the forbidden thing had been put away. Dow n i n 
the great camp thousands of Unio n veterans' 
shook hands wit h thousands of Confederate 
veterans; there rose hurrahin g and singin g 
and playin g of bands. Brothe r was united 
wit h brother; it was prope r that no discordant note should ma r the blessed harmony 
of peace and good fellowship. O f Johnson 
and his ki n no word was said. " 
TH E ELUSIV E JEOPARD . 
The Saturday Evening Post has 
PRESENC E THI G DIVERTING . TALE . 
OF MIND. ±yn applican t for a place as 
teacher i n one of the colored schools at 
Louisvill e was being examined touching his 
fitness fo r the position. H e was a small, 
dapper, yellow person, wearin g gold spectacles, a lon g black coat, and an abiding air 
of great dignity. 
The examination was i n part ora l and 
syntax had been reached. 
"Wha t is you r definition of the word 
'jeopardized'? " asked the examiner. 
The candidate's brow wrinkled . 
"Which? " he inquired . 
"Wha t do yo u understand the wor d 'jeopardized' to mean? " 
Fo r just one short half-minut e he hesitated. Then he answered sonorously: 
"I n repl y to yo ' question I woul d state 
that that woul d refer to any act committed 
by a jeopard. " 
M 
BALTIMOR E AN D MEMPHIS . 
The Baltimor e and Memphis 
Conferences of the National 
Associatio n fo r the Advancement of Colored Peopl e lead the Chicago 
Evening Post to say o f Mr . Villard's address : 
"W e cannot help congratulating the 
Negroes on the strategic cleverness as well 
as the hig h mora l qualit y of the men who 
are espousing their cause. 
"As k the average man about the American 
attitude toward the Negro, and he wil l tell 
yo u that the Nort h is the Negro's friend and 
that the South is i n league to hold him 
down ; that no southern voice dare lift itself 
on his behalf, and that, on the other hand, 
the white people of the South are unanimously agreed on the polic y of keeping the 
Negro i n his place and i n askin g the North 
to keep its hands off the problem. These 
ideas are common i n the North , and we do 
not doubt that they are just as common in 
the South. 
"The n comes the Nationa l Associatio n for 
the Advancement of Colore d People , right 
into a southern town whic h has recently distinguished itself by establishing a Negro 
pale, and tells the southerners that those 
ideas are not true ; that their own people are 
turnin g against the traditiona l an d reputed 
southern attitude." 
N . A. A. C. P. 
MEETINGS . OPINIO N 121 
The conference was not received wit h very 
widely open arms i n Baltimore , but it has 
undoubtedly done more good by one meeting 
there than it could do by five i n the North . 
The Ne w Yor k Evening Post prints the 
followin g dispatch from its Memphis correspondent : 
"Th e day of plai n speaking i n the South 
on the race question has come. Three evangelists descended upon Memphis, told some 
wholesome truths about the treatment o f the 
Negr o to a very large audience, and provoked no trouble i n the telling of it. It was 
what they called 'the new abolitionism' that 
was talked by Dr. W . E . Burghard t D u Bois, 
editor of TH E CRISIS; Dr . Joe l E . Spingarn , 
chairman of the board of directors of the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
o f Colore d People, and Prof. Willia m Pick ­
ens, o f Talladega College. Neve r before, it 
is said, has such language as theirs been 
heard i n these parts on this subject. 
"These men combined forces and secured 
one of the loca l churches for a publi c meeting . Then they inserted advertisements i n 
all the local papers, billin g the meeting under the auspices of the N . A . A . C. P. , and 
adding : 
AL L PERSON'S WH O LOVE TH E TRUT H 
AN D DARE TO HEA R IT ARE 
CORDIALLY INVITED 
"Memphis is ful l of 'social workers' just 
now who are here i n attendance upo n the 
Southern Sociologica l Congress and the Na ­
tiona l Conference o f Charities and Corrections. There has been considerable discussion o f the Negr o at the two conferences, 
but both conferences have been careful not 
to say anythin g whic h would offend Souther n sentiment on the Negr o question, or alienate the South from the progressive ideas 
o f social service and social reform for which 
the conferences stand. 
"Bu t the unusua l advertisement i n the 
papers woke Memphis u p to the fact that 
she was harboring, along wit h the 'social 
workers' o f unknown intellectual antecedents, at least, three men who held disagreeable views upo n the race question. A large, 
and possibly none too friendly, audience 
filled Aver y Chape l to hear a discussion of 
•"The Negr o Problem, " i n which the stock 
assumptions of Memphis on that subject 
were disregarded." 
The Survey says i n its report of the Con ­
ference of Charities and Corrections: 
"The race question was among those present, though it bore no credentials as a delegate. A Negro woman from Illinois was 
refused registration i n the Nationa l Conference of Charities and Correction by a clerk 
employed by the local committee, until Gra ­
ham Taylo r peremptorily ordered that her 
name be entered. The sessions of the Southern Sociological Conference were adjourned 
from the Orpheum theater to a white church 
i n order that the Negro members might sit 
on the main floor wit h their fellow members. 
"An d a front attack was made on both 
the nationa l and the southern bodies by the 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. W. E . Burghard t D u 
Bois, Joe l E . Spingar n of New York , and 
Prof. William . Pickens of Talladega College, 
spoke at a meeting advertised i n the papers 
for 'all persons who love the truth and dare 
to hear it.' " 
m 
MISCEGENATION . 
SEPARATING 
TH E RACES. 
A white South Carolinian , 
writin g i n the Columbi a Slate, 
makes some curious admissions 
from which we quote: 
"The mulatto and otherwise colored popu ­
lation is steadily increasing. The census 
fails to show the facts, as it makes no division among 'Negroes.' Bu t i f we look about 
us we must see that few i f any pureblooded 
Negroes remain. 
"Moreover, the Negro race i n our midst is 
all the time receiving new accessions of white 
blood. I n every community there are white 
men who have mulatto or quadroon or octoroon progeny. Some of these men have 
stocked their neighborhoods wit h these mongre l offsprings, and often have established 
them upon lands. Ever y rura l section is degraded by the knowledge of this double 
standard of morals and is cursed wit h the 
presence of this 'grade-white' population, 
prospective ancestors of higher 'grade-white' 
descendants finally to pass as white and be 
incorporated into the blood of the best that 
may still remain ! Thus the citadel of white 
supremacy is being betrayed by immora l 
white men, traitors to their race. 
"I n every town there are colored people 
who look white and would pass as white i f 
their antecedents were not known and i f they 122 TH E CRISI S 
di d not claim to be Negroes. Ho w man y 
newcomers into a community now or hereafter may be of this type, who can say? It 
makes us shudder. 
"Eve n i n the South before the wa r there 
were respectable and prominent families suspected of a Negro taint, and for that reason 
consciously avoided i n marriage. It is hinted 
that the much boasted blood of Pocahontas 
was sometimes adroitly claimed and courteously conceded to account for an off color 
of an apparently aristocratic immigran t 
from Ol d Virginia , who had left his home to 
escape a tradition of Negr o origi n and to 
buil d a prou d famil y i n new surroundings, 
possibly receiving from his reputed father 
the money wit h which to establish himself. 
"The infusion of Negro blood into our 
white stock had made enough progress i n the 
proud ante-helium South to give our courts 
occasion to lay down the common law rule 
that a person should be taken as legally 
white i f more than seven-eighths white and 
should be a Negro only i f as much as oneeighth Negro. 
•'In some localities at the outbreak of the 
wa r free men of color, nearly white in appearance but still socially and legally Negroes, enlisted i n the Confederate army and 
thereafter they were accorded the status of 
white men. Ol d timers tell us of such. You r 
descendants may intermarry with theirs. 
Mongrelism is begun i n the South. " 
The Charlotte Observer i n the same line 
has an editoria l on Villa's Negro blood. 
"W e at once rejected as improbabl e i n itself and as seemingly impossible by comparison of dates and ages the story that Vill a 
was a Marylan d mulatto who had served in 
the Tenth Cavalry . Unite d States Army . H e 
no doubt bears strong facia l resemblance to 
a former member of that colored regiment, 
as one man after another of those who have 
served i n it insists that his pictures portra y 
this man. Bu t the resemblance and the fact 
that the man wit h whom he is identified cannot be traced or located anywhere are not 
evidence enough. Villa's personal history i n 
Mexic o has been traced from rather early 
youth. However, it has been repeatedly 
stated by those who have given most attention to the facts of his career that he possesses a considerable and noticeable admixture of Negro blood. His mother was a 
Negress, according to all the accounts on this 
subject that we have seen. 
***#**#*» » 
"I f Vill a is mixe d white an d Negr o with ­
out any Indian , we ma y compar e hi m raciall y wit h Gen . Antoni o Maceo, the best 
fighter, unti l a Spanis h bullet foun d him, of 
the last Cuba n revolt. It does not seem possible, however, that any Mexica n of the 
lower class could fai l to possess more or less 
India n blood, the racia l basis of the whole 
country. " 
SEGREGATION . 
RESULTS OP 
"JIM-CROW " 
LEGISLATION. 
Kell y Mille r says i n the 
Washingto n Evening Star: 
" 'Separate but equal accommodations fo r both races' 
is the slogan of 'ji m crow' legislation. Ex ­
perience shows that this is impracticable , as 
reflection woul d show it to be impossible. 
Identity is the essence of equality i n all 
publi c functions. Tw o non-interchangeable 
parts cannot lon g maintai n their origina l 
parity . I f some of our sagacious statesmen 
should secure the enactment o f a law that 
there shall be different weights an d measures 
for the two races, but that the two yardsticks 
shall have the same length an d that pound 
weights shall contain the same number of 
ounces; provided that no Negr o shall be accommodated by the white man's units of 
weight and measure, an d vice versa, under 
heavy penalty of law ; i n the short process 
of time, human nature remainin g what we 
know it to be, the Negr o woul d be receiving 
the lighte r weight and the shorter measure. 
The man who cannot protect himself wil l 
become the victim i n every issue where his 
interests are separated from those of the 
community at large. I f there were two 
standards o f coinage, of the same weight and 
fineness, only that the one set o f coins must 
forever circulate among Negroes and the 
other among white people, the black man's 
coins woul d immediately depreciate i n comparison. The parit y could only be maintained b y free interchangeability. " 
This truth is illustrated by two clippings. 
The Richmon d Times-Dispatch says: 
"Ou r readers wil l recall that when the Um -
lau f ordinance was passed i n answer to a 
publi c demand, whic h the Times-Dispatch 
di d its best to foster, the numbe r o f barrooms i n the city was reduced to 150. A t 
the same time, the Judg e o f the Husting s 
Court, who was given ful l authority to pass 
on the location of saloons, let it be known 
that he woul d not grant licenses fo r bar-OPINIO N 123 
rooms i n residential sections. 
"Bu t the conditions disclosed i n the letter 
of our correspondent is contrary to the spirit 
o f the existing- ordinance, contrary to the 
rules o f common justice and contrary to the 
principle s o f sound morality. It is bad 
enough, i n all conscience, to have so many 
thousand of our colored citizens herded into 
the section north of Broa d Street; it is even 
worse to permit barrooms to flourish on 
practically every corner. Ho w can we expect our colored citizens to rear their families i n decency, purit y and self-respect i f 
we fill the chief colored residential section 
wit h saloons?" 
A colored correspondent writes to the Bal ­
timore American: 
"Ken t Islan d has a large number of Negr o 
inhabitants, considering its area. It has 
three colored schools, situated about six and 
four miles apart. A number of the children 
live four and a half to five miles from the 
schools. The school rooms are so uncomfortable that durin g the winte r months the smaller children have to remain at home; the 
older ones take turns sitting near the stove, 
while the teacher must retain her wraps. 
"O n the island about five-sixths of the 
Negr o families own their homes, boats and 
engines. Man y own horses and are payin g 
taxes on them; but there is but one schoolhouse, the other school rooms being a hall, 
rented, and a small dwelling-house, one room 
u p and one down, bought by the county. 
The teachers' salary for years has been $25 
a month. Boar d is cheap at $9. Now, after 
buyin g necessary periodicals, correspondence 
essentials and payin g church dues, what remains for the teachers to dress neatly on and 
to visit their homes durin g holidays'? The 
average housegirl gets from $3 to $4 a week; 
cooks from $3.50 to $5. There has been no 
one to visit our school from October until 
March , save the trustees, who do what they 
can to make the school rooms comfortable, 
even though they are not sanitary. 
m 
SOUT H AFRIC A 
PAUPERIZING 
TH E NATIVE. 
The population of the part of 
South Afric a under the Unio n 
Government was, i n 1911, 
1,300,000 European s and 5,200,000 colored 
people. The Nineteenth Century says: 
"Th e scarcity of native labor withi n the 
Unio n becomes greater every year, and today the suppl y is barely equal to fifty per 
cent of the demand, although the enormous 
sums spent i n recruiting are not diminished. 
Specia l efforts have been made withi n the 
last few years to populariz e labor among the 
natives livin g under the Unio n Government, 
but wit h such disappointing results that 
compulsory legislation has been freely discussed i n certain interested circles. 
"Unti l recently no serious trouble was experienced wit h white labor. Eve n at the 
mines, despite the danger of miner's phthisis, the suppl y has been equal to the demand. 
The plentitude of white labor and the scarcity of colored labor is the more remarkable 
when it is borne i n min d that the great bulk 
of the former has been attracted from foreign countries, while every inducement has 
failed to entice more than a meagre percentage of the native force resident inside the 
limits of the Unio n territory. A t present 
there are two white men for every vacant 
place and two vacant places for colored men 
for every one that is occupied. This extraordinar y position, without paralle l i n any 
other part of the world , is emphasized by the 
fact that only when colored labor is available can white labor be employed wit h advantage. 
"I n South Africa , wit h the exception of 
some parts of the Cape Province , a colored 
man may not do a white man's work. I n 
the Transvaa l he is debarred by statute from 
becoming an engineer or a miner. H e may 
not take charge of a steam engine or boiler, 
nor may he hold a blasting certificate. It is 
an unwritten law that no native shall be an 
artisan. Skille d labor i n all its branches is 
reserved for the European , as well as every 
position of responsibility i n connection wit h 
the industries of the country. 
"I n Chin a the railways, mines, and workshops are all manned by Chinese. I n Indi a 
they are manned by Indians, wit h the exception that about one-third of the enginedrivers and firemen on the railways are, for 
politica l reasons, English . I n both these 
countries there are the coolie classes who do 
the meaner work, just as i n Europea n countries there are the laboring classes. I n 
South Afric a Indians and Chinese come under the color ban wit h the native, and every 
Africa n workma n is, i n his own country, 
classed as a coolie. H e must not come into 
competition wit h the white man. An d the 
white man, however unskilled, must engage 
i n 'skilled' labor or remain idle. 
"This condition of things has created a 124 TH E CRISI S 
unique system of inter-dependence. I f a 
man gets a gang of a dozen 'boys' together 
and presents himself thus equipped at any 
mine or workshop, he wil l be employed with , 
and solely because of them. Shoul d he leave 
the job and the 'boys' elect to remain, another man must be found to take his place 
or the 'boys' wil l be thrown idle. 
"The highest position open to a native is 
that of 'boss boy,' which means that he in ­
terprets for the man i n charge and serves as 
a buffer between him and the other 'boys.' 
These 'boss boys' often remain for years, 
and wil l return again and again to work 
after a short holiday. This obtains i n every 
department, on the railway s as well as i n 
the mines, and is evidence that, wit h reasonable hope of advancement, the native would 
become a constant and reliable factor. Man y 
natives are quite capable of takin g charge of 
a stope or a drive. I f only these and simila r 
positions were open to them the end of all 
this shortage of labor woul d be well i n sight. 
And . i f the trades and professions were 
open to every man, whatever his color, a 
new and better era would soon dawn for 
South Africa . 
"* * * A white miner may rise to be 
manager of a mine, but a colored man can 
never succeed to a white man's job. the 
average 'boy's' pa y is from 2s. to 3s. a day, 
with food and lodging. The white miner 
over him gets 15s. to 1/. a day, i f pai d by 
the shift, and i f on contract may make considerable more. Artisans, such as carpenters and fitters, are pai d 11.'a day i n the 
Transvaal. 
"Soone r or later the sentiment that fixes 
so great a gulf between the wages, and consequently between the standards of living , of 
white and black must give way. * * * 
"The regeneration of South Afric a lies 
along these lines. This is the conclusion arrived at by the write r after over twenty 
years' experience on the Rand , i n almost 
every capacity up to that of general manager." 
Is South Afric a moving this way ? B y no 
means. It is reaching out for rulership over 
the large dependencies wit h their millions of 
natives and is especially determined to monopolize the land. 
On Ma y S, the President of the Africa n 
Nationa l Native Congress wrote TH E CRISIS 
as follows: 
"I am i n Capetown, enroute to England , 
with a part y being the delegates, seven i n 
number, chosen b y the South Africa n Nativ e 
Nationa l congress, to present the Africa n 
protest against the Natives' Lan d Act , 1913, 
passed by the Unio n o f South Afric a Parlia ­
ment last June , planne d to despoil our people and humble us i n the dust. 
" I wrote to yo u from Oklange , as di d Miss 
Blackburn . I trust yo u ma y feel able to 
render us some help. W e woul d be most 
grateful i f you r people could send yo u over 
durin g Jun e to help us by you r eloquence 
and personality i n appealin g to the Britis h 
public . 
"W e expect to arrive i n Englan d on June 
the 2nd. 
" I am, dear Doctor, 
"Faithfull y yours, 
(Signed) " JOH N L . DUBE. " 
TH E SMITH^LEVE R BIL L 
A TRIUMP H I N 
PREJUDICE. 
The Smith-Leve r bil l was 
quietly reported back from 
Conference on Monday , 
Apri l 27, without the two amendments 
which the Senate had adopted as a result of 
the efforts of the Nationa l Associatio n for 
the Advancement o f Colore d People . 
This action was reported to the Nationa l 
Association by its agent i n Washington , 
and we wired to our friends i n Senate and 
Hous e urgin g them to do al l i n their power 
to prevent the passage o f the bil l as reported by the Conference Committee. 
Whe n Senator Jones returned to the 
Senate, on Apri l 29, he had the Conference report recalled from the House, 
where it had been sent. Subsequently, on the 
same day, wit h the able assistance o f Senator 
Cummin s and others, he succeeded i n defeating an attempt o f Senators Smith 
and Hollis to rescind this action, and the 
30th of Apri l was reached wit h the report 
still i n the Senate for action. 
Finall y the Senate, by a vote o f thirtytwo to twenty-five, tabled the motion to reconsider the acceptance o f the report. 
A s soon as wor d was received of the final 
passage of the bil l without our amendments, 
a letter was sent to the President of the 
Unite d States, i n the name of the Nationa l 
Association, and signed b y Jane Addams, 
Herbert Parsons, Moorfield Storey, Oswald 
Garriso n Villard , Joe l E . Spingar n and 
Willia m S. Bennet, urgin g him to veto the 
bil l on the groun d that it discriminated 
against the colored farmers o f the South. 
The President signed the bill . EDITORIA L 
MUDDL E 
THE Negro problem is undoubtedly reaching a degree of spiritua l complication which makes the 
onlooker hesitate between tears and hysterical laughter. A Nationa l Conference of 
Charities and Correction recently met i n 
a great southern city. It is a conference that numbers i n its membership 
practically every great name i n American social reform. It stands for advance 
and uplift, help and development i n all 
lines of human endeavor. It met i n 
Memphis. Memphis has a population of 
142,619 wit h 52,441 Negroes and is the 
geographical center of the largest Negro 
population i n the western world. The 
traveler from Altruri a would surely assume that the problems touching these 
darker thousands and the relations of 
white and black would have been a matter of serious, thoughtful consideration. 
Not so. The Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People 
pleaded for the inclusion of such subjects as matters of general discussion. 
Bu t as the Survey says, the Negro problem was "not invited " and appeared but 
rarely and quite incidentally on the 
program. 
The excuse given by the officials was 
that the subject was too controversial 
and that the Southern Sociological Congress, meeting durin g the sessions of the 
Charities Conference, would discuss 
these matters. Ver y good. Bu t would 
not this same traveller from Altruri a 
assume that at least every effort would 
be made to interest colored people i n the 
general work of the conference? Her e 
were matters touching the saving of children, the reduction of crime, increased 
cleanliness, the protection of mothers, 
conditions of labor, etc., all of which 
Touched the colored people very closely 
i n their every-day life. One would have 
thought that the highways and hedges 
would have been scoured to make the 
colored people of Memphis, and particularly their teachers, preachers, professional men and business men, become acquainted wit h modern philanthropic 
effort. This was not done. On the contrary, at the peremptory demand of the 
local white committee all Negroes were 
segregated i n the gallery and, as a result, not a dozen Negroes attended the 
week's sessions of this mighty conference. Ho w could they and retain their 
self-respect ? 
It is doubtless the courteous and 
proper thin g for the Nationa l Conference to defer, i n many things, to the 
wish and opinion of the local entertaining committee. Bu t are there no limits 
to such deference? Is there no place 
where decency and principle can make 
a last stand? 
I n contrast to the moral cowardice of 
the northern leaders of social reform, 
the Southern Sociological Congress to 
whom the local colored committee also 
appealed for decent consideration i n the 
matter of accommodation, decided that 
they might be admitted to the ground 
floor of the theatre where both associations were holding their main sessions. 
The proprietors of the theatre thereupon 126 TH E CRISI S 
objected and the Sociological Congress 
changed the place of meeting. So that 
hundreds of colored people attended the 
meeting of this Congress. 
If, however, anyone thinks that this 
has been a happy solution of the difficulty, let them listen to Mr . Clarence 
Poe, of Nort h Carolina . Mr . Poe, i n declinin g re-election to the Executive Committee of the Congress, says: "I n the 
first place, I ought to explain that while 
I attended some of the sectional meetings of the Congress i n Atlant a last 
year, I di d not attend the general session or the race problem meetings, and 
it was not unti l I attended this year's 
meetings i n Memphis that I discovered 
that white men and white women, Negro 
men and Negro women are all admitted 
on terms of equality as members and as 
participants i n the Congress. A t Memphis, moreover, the seating of both 
whites and Negroes on the first floor and 
the- crowding out of white ladies by Negro men became so offensive (cultured 
ladies from my own town, for example, 
were escorted to their seats by Negro 
ushers) that the local Memphis committee could not endure it, and passed a 
resolution asking the officers to have the 
Negroes seated separately i n the first 
balcony. An d then it was that 'the 
officers of the conference' the dail y 
papers said—I do not know what officers, for you had just left town, I believe, and so far as I know, the Execu ­
tive Committee was not consulted—but 
at any rate, the 'officers,' i n order to keep 
the Negro members right wit h the 
whites, left the Orpheum Theatre, which 
our Memphis hosts had provided, and 
adjourned to a separate theatre for a 
final meeting on the Negro problem at 
which one white man, one Negro, and 
one mixed-breed entertained the mixed 
assemblage of members." 
This means that advanced opinion of 
the South has a fight on its hands and 
that i n the next ten years it is going to 
be determined whether or not the South 
can have two opinions concerning the 
Negro : one, the reactionary suppression 
of Poe, an d the other, social uplift i n 
"The Huma n "Way. " Moreover, the 
North , characteristically, has deserted 
the advanced South at just the moment 
when the South needed it. If Graham 
Taylor, the President, and the Executive 
Committee of the Conference of Charities had said, "This conference is going 
to admit every decently behaved human 
being, who wishes to hear its deliberations, on equal terms," then the Sociological Conference could have taken its 
stand wit h the mora l backing of the best 
of the nation. A s it is now, a brave devoted band find themselves holding a 
lonely outpost whil e their northern 
white brothers are bravely scuttling to 
the rear. 
I f now these southern social radicals 
look for help to the radica l movement in 
the South they find that movement 
largely i n the hands of demagogues like 
Blease an d Vardaman , an d radica l on 
everything except the Negro problem. 
On that they are reactionary, vindictive, 
and positively indecent to a degree 
which is almost inconceivable. A paper 
like the Harpoon of Austin , Tex., which 
is supposed to represent exceptional 
democracy an d abolition of privilege, 
never reaches its prope r depths of vile 
vituperation until it discusses the Negro, 
as it does most of the time, and yet it 
imagines itself i n harmony wit h the forwar d movements of the world ! 
Consider, then, these five elements: 
the struggling, emerging Negro, the 
cowardly white North , the advanced 
white southern reformers, the Negro 
hating southern radicals an d the reactionary Poes. Ca n one imagine a more 
mischief-making combination 1 
TH E CAUS E O F LYNCHIN G 
IT is exceedingly difficult 
to get at the real cause 
of lynchin g but TH E 
CRISI S is more and more 
convinced that the real 
cause is seldom the one 
alleged. I n the barbaric Oklahoma case 
of the lynchin g of a woman, the press EDITORIA L 127 
despatches made it a quarrel i n a "redlight " district, but two private letters i n 
our hands from apparently trustworthy 
persons declare that it was the case of 
a seventeen-year-old girl defending her 
own honor. 
Fro m Shreveport there are newspaper accounts of a horrible lynching of 
a Negro boy for attacking a ten-year-old 
child. Bu t again a private letter tells 
us that the girl was old enough to be 
ticket seller i n a theatre; that she was 
not injured i n the slightest degree, but 
was found "hale and hearty and singing " the day after; and that, as a matter 
of fact, the boy was lynched because of 
his relations wit h another and older 
white woman. 
"We have no way of proving these assertions; but they have many ear-marks 
of trut h and their very assertion is an 
astounding indictment of modern American barbarism. TH E CRISIS knows that 
Negroes are human and it does not for 
a moment presume that every Negro accused of a horrible crime is innocent. 
It wants, and wants for the sake of colored people even more than of others, 
that colored criminals be treated so as to 
decrease crime, whatever that treatment 
may be. It is painfully significant that 
of al l methods of suppressing crime 
lynchin g has certainly failed i n Shreveport ; i n that city and parish seven Negroes have been lynched i n two years, 
not counting ordinary murders. 
SAMUE L HENR Y BISHO P 
IN the death of Samuel 
Henr y Bishop the 
America n Negro loses 
a devoted friend. Mr . 
Bishop was born i n Wil -
liston, Vt. , i n 1863. H e 
received his education at the University 
of Vermon t and Unio n Theological Seminary, becoming a priest of the Episcopa l Churc h i n 1891. Fo r many years he 
served as rector i n and about New Yor k 
and at Colorado Springs. H e was a 
speaker of much eloquence and had both 
an imaginative and logical min d which 
he had cultivated by wide reading and 
study. I n 1906 he became general agent 
of the America n Churc h Institute for 
Negroes. This new institution was an 
attempt on the part of the Episcopa l 
Churc h to consolidate and organize its 
educational work i n the South for colored people. This was a matter of great 
difficulty because of the peculiar constitution of the church. The combination 
of a large class of wealthy northern people and a correspondingly large class of 
Southerners, representing the old master 
type, made it exceedingly difficult to 
treat the problem of the education of the 
Negro i n a consistent modern spirit. 
The result was, for many years, inertia 
and indifference, and of all the great religious organizations the Episcopa l 
Churc h has probably done least for 
southern education. To this task Mr . 
Bishop came. It is too much to say that 
he was successful, but certainly he succeeded i n arousing the church on the 
subject as it never had been aroused before, and i n securing a larger measure 
of unanimity i n the utterances of the 
Nort h and South than had ever been obtained previously. 
It was, however, heart-sickening work. 
Mr . Bishop was a delicate and sensitive 
man—a man who felt painfully and 
deeply the tragedy of the America n Negro, and who also knew by intimate contact and association the peculiar mental 
processes of Southerners and Northerners on the subject. He found his own 
solution i n a peculiar self-forgetful 
idealism—"Entbehren sollst du, sollst 
entbehren," he said i n the singularly 
beautiful sketch published i n the Marc h 
CRISIS. 
Mr . Bishop was a member of this Association and a careful reader of TH E 
CRISIS. We have not always agreed wit h 
Mr. Bishop i n the compromises which he 
was perhaps forced to make and i n some 
of his policies, but we have always loved 
him personally and honored his unusual 
singleness of purpose and high ideals. 128 TH E CRISIS 
COLLEG E EDUCATIO N 
THE trainin g of youth—the 
revelation of life, its 
present technique and 
its future possibilities in 
growing young people— 
is a matter of intricacy 
and difficulty to any people. Bu t it is 
peculiarly difficult to colored Americans 
who must, i n addition, teach of invisible 
bonds and concealed social barriers, of 
worlds withi n worlds and dangerous 
waste places, of subtle temptations and 
unnatura l restraints. Ever y artificially 
increased difficulty that surrounds colored children to-day should be additional incentive to make their education 
and mental development the highest possible. Onl y i n the higher intellectual 
life of to-day can they hope to find that 
freedom, fellowship and joy which fiendish ingenuity cuts out of so much of 
their work, their amusements and their 
daily walks. 
The colored people should strain every 
nerve to send their children through the 
best colleges. No matter what avenues 
of employment may be closed to them, 
give them thorough intellectual training 
according to their very best standards; 
then let them dig, cook and sew. Make 
them men even if they have to be 
menials. I n the long ru n they wil l burst 
their bonds and be modern free men. 
Bu t train them so that i n the day of sundered bonds they can take their place 
beside their fellows and not be held back 
then by ignorance as they are now by 
prejudice. 
m 
REA L ESTAT E IN NE W YOR K 
IF Negroes are to keep 
what little they have 
gained i n the right to 
decent dwelling 
places on the island of 
Manhattan, they would 
better be up and doing. 
Fo r a long time the widespread conspiracy of real-estate agencies has been 
seeking to attack the dwellin g places of 
colored people i n Harlem. Ever y effort 
has been made artificially to depress the 
value of real estate i n that section, and 
financial institutions, includin g those 
which carry thousands of dollars belongin g to colored people on deposit, have 
refused to renew the most reasonable 
mortgage propositions. I f the Negro 
was a large capitalist like the Jew he 
could reap great advantage from this 
campaign by simply buyin g up this depressed property. Some day, through 
widespread co-operation, colored people 
wil l learn to do this. 
To-day the real-estate sharks knowthat this is impossible and they are 
counting on this fact. Latel y a second 
step has been taken which is to organize a holding company to control the 
mortgages and sometimes the property 
of such owners as are willin g to eject 
Negro tenants. O f course, a little salve 
of hypocrisy was needed to help i n the 
bolting of this morsel. Consequently, 
the white Y . M . C. A . was found ready 
to furnish a hall for the meeting of 
these philanthropists and the scheme of 
"Negro uplift " was announced with a 
flourish, a part of which proposed the 
colonization of all colored people i n New 
Yor k on the pestilential mud flats of 
Harlem, where wit h all the city's crowding no one up to this time has been 
willin g to live. 
Bu t the 100,000 colored people of New 
Yor k still have the whi p hand if they 
wil l only remember this: It is simply 
necessary for colored families and 
institutions to hold the property now 
occupied not everywhere but at certain 
strategic points. O f course the matter 
of holding property at such strategic 
points is difficult but possible. If the 
property of the Negro churches is held 
and the Y . M . C. A . really intends to 
put its buildin g i n a decent site in 
Harlem and the Y . W . C. A . follows 
suit, and if the Colored Musi c School 
Settlement buys a home—all this and 
other possible co-operative effort will 
settle the matter for a long time. Colleges 
an d their 
Graduates 
i n 
1914 
DURING the commencement season 
of 1914 two hundred and 
fifty colored students wil l 
receive the Bachelors degree. This is a larger 
number than has been 
graduated i n recent years 
and perhaps the largest 
ever graduated from colleges rankin g as high as 
colored colleges do to-day. 
Unde r the lower requirements of 1905 there were 
two hundred and sixtyseven graduates. It is 
one of the most reassuring 
aspects o f the progress of 
the Negr o race i n Americ a 
that, despite every possible 
discouragement and argument the colored people 
realise to so great an extent that their future i n Americ a and i n the 
worl d must, i n the lon g run, depend upon 
the trained intellects of their most gifted 
men. The sending of colored boys and girls 
to college to-day is discouraged withi n the 
race and without. A long campaign of ridicule, abuse and argument has tried to tell 
colored people that the higher trainin g of 
youth is unnecessary and wasteful. Outside 
the Negr o race philanthropists have been unwillin g to help Negr o colleges or to encourage Negroes to go to college. Brigh t graduates of industria l schools have had every difficulty placed i n their pathway to keep them 
from takin g higher and broader courses. 
Onl y indomitabl e perseverance has put such 
men as W . T. B . Williams, of Hampton , and 
George W . Crawford , of Tuskegee, through 
A. L. JACKSON , CLAS S ORATOR , HARVARD , '14. 
Harvar d and Yale . Northern white colleges, 
have, in the last ten years, ceased to encourage Negro students and, i n many cases, 
actively discouraged them. The latest case 
of this is Cornell University, where a quiet 
attempt is being made to drive the colored 
students out of the dormitories. I n some 
places prospective colored students are tactfull y discouraged, as when a colored boy 
wrote to Ohio State University to ask about 
a course i n Engineering, he was sent this 
encouraging answer by the President: " I 
should be very glad to aid you i n any way 
possible i n securing an education i n Elec ­
trica l Engineering. I regret to say, however, that I have nothing at my disposal for 
your encouragement. There is no objection 
to your coming to the Ohio State Universit y A MISSIONAR Y I N EDUCATION RECEN T CLAS S (See Page 118) 132 TH E CRISIS 
MR. R. B. JACKSON , 
Atlanta University. 
MISS E. C CONNOR, 
Atlanta University. 
MR. L. R. POSEY , 
Fisk University. 
an d entering any course tor which yo u are 
qualified. Ever y year we have a number of 
youn g people of both sexes of the Negro race 
who attend the Universit y without any embarrassment or hindrance. The way is entirely open so far as that is concerned, and 
I shall be glad to be of any assistance to 
yo u i n my power. 
"O n one matter, however, I feel constrained to say just a word. The sentiment 
north of the Ohio Rive r seems to be so persistent against the Negr o i n skilled labor that 
I doubt very much whether an educated 
Negro has a fair show or a show worth while 
i n this part of the country. " 
A t Smit h College this year the usual battle "along the color line " had to be fought 
and, fortunately, justice and decency prevailed. Bot h Columbi a and Chicago Uni ­
versities have been active lately i n discouraging colored students in their summer 
schools by various devices. 
Despite all this, colored boys and girls go 
to college, and colored colleges survive. At ­
lanta Universit y graduates ten college students led by Ev a Corneli a Conno r and Rob ­
ert Bento n Jackson. Fis k Universit y sends 
out thirty-five Bachelors and two Masters led 
by Sadie Iol a Daniel, summa cum laude, 
and Lero y Raade l Posey. Benedic t College 
graduates seven college students led by Juliette Albert a Boyki n and Edit h Corinne 
Bishop . Juliu s C. Bryan t an d Charles L . 
Jefferson ran k highest i n the class of thirtyfive Bachelors from Lincol n University . 
Wilberforc e Universit y sends out three col-' 
lege graduates led by Charles E . Burch . Ar ­
kansas Baptist College graduates five college 
students led by Claiborne F . Taylo r and 
Joh n R. Booker. Eigh t Bachelors from 
Virgini a Unio n Universit y are led by Vatte l 
E . Danie l and N . D . Oyderinde . Isaiah H 
Bonne r and Herma n H . Blac k lead the class 
of three sent out by Knoxvill e College. 
James Brook s Dickens is the honor student 
in the class of four Bachelors graduating 
from Lan e College. Talladeg a College confers five Bachelors' degrees. Walde n Uni -
MR. H. R. TURNER . 
Rhode Island College. 
MISS VIVIE N HUNTER . 
University of Minnesota. 
MR. WALTE R MADDUX , 
University of Kansas. COLLEGE S AN D THEI R GRADUATE S 133 
MISS P. R. OBERDORFER , 
Howard University. 
MISS J. A. BOYKIN . 
MISS E. C. BISHOP, 
Benedict College. 
MISS L. M. PETTIJOHN , 
Delaware State College. 
versity graduates nine college students led 
by Earnest Charles Marti n and Luthe r Ed ­
gar Vincent. Ambros e Nut t and James H . 
Jones lead the college class of six graduated 
by Morehouse College. Fiv e students led by 
Ethely n Gardne r and Fanni e Maso n receive 
Bachelors' degrees from Spelman seminary. 
Howar d Universit y confers sixty-eight Bach ­
elors' degrees—forty-nine i n the College of 
Arts and Sciences wit h Ev a B . Dykes, summa 
tur n laude, and Lloy d H . Newman leading 
an d nineteen i n the Teachers' College wit h 
Paulin e Richardson Oberdorfer and Olive 
Ma e Wells leading. This is the largest colored college class i n modern history. Mor ­
ris Brow n College graduates two college students, J . Wesle y Butts and C. H . Fountain . 
Leol a Ma y Pettijohn ranks first in the college 
class graduates from the Delaware State College for Colored Students. 
The fifteen colleges enumerated wil l confer two hundred Bachelor of Arts degrees, 
eleven Bachelor of Science degrees and two 
Maste r of Arts degrees. There are probably 
at least twenty-five other college graduates 
from institutions which have not reported 
to us. 
Turnin g to Northern colleges Harvar d 
sends out this year two Bachelors of Arts, 
one of whom, A . L . Jackson, is class orator, 
and the other, Luciu s Lee Jordan , takes his 
degree cum laude. There are also two graduates i n Law , Benjami n A . M . Green and 
Beecher A . Jackson, and one i n Divinity , 
James A . Wright . Yal e sends out two graduates from the School of Religion, Edwar d 
K . Nichols and Aike n A . Pope . Fro m Co ­
lumbi a Willis N . Huggin s graduates as Bach ­
elor of Science from the Teachers' College, 
and Byro n K . Armstrong , Clayton 
Frenc h and Samuel Rose receive Master's 
degrees. Fro m Oberlin Universit y there 
are five graduates wit h Bachelors' degrees, 
Kathry n E . Stewart, L . Emme t Drewry , 
Rub y M . Wiley , H . H . Jones and Iphigeni a 
Coles; there are also two Masters i n Arts, 
Mar y 10. Brow n and Laur a F . Grayson, and 
one graduate i n Theology, Arnol d E . Gre ­
gory. Fro m the Universit y of Michiga n 
there are the following graduates: J . M . 
MR. A. B. NUTT , 
Morehouse College. 
MR. C. L. JEFFERSON , 
Lincoln University. 
MR. J. C. BRYANT, 
Lincoln University. 134 TH E CRISIS 
MR. LERO Y ROBBINS, 
University of Kansas. 
MRS. G. E. RUSH, 
Des Moines College. 
MR. A. E. GREGORY , 
Oberlin College. 
Gregory, Surgica l Dentistry ; J. A . Frank ­
lin , Medicine ; Charles Campbell, Law ; 
Curtis Jenkins and Charles A . Johnson, 
Pharmacy. Mr . Gregory has made an especiall y good record, standing so high as to be 
exempt from most examinations. Walte r 
Depou took his Master's degree from the Uni ­
versity of Chicago in August. Fro m Clar k 
MR. J. H. ECKLES . 
University of Pittsburg. 
MR. W. H. HUGGINS, 
Columbia University. 
MR. W. G. MOSELY . 
University of Colorado. 
Universit y there are three graduates wit h 
Masters' degrees, Thomas I. Brown , E . M . A . 
Chandle r and Joh n Purnell . Mr . Brow n was 
Assistant Edito r of the College Monthly. 
Two Bachelors, Joh n Eckle s and Willia m 
Haynes; one Engineer, Thomas Bailey , and 
three Pharmacists, H . D . Primes, W . W . 
Stewart and W . W . Wilson , are sent out 
MR. J. M. GREGORY , 
University of Michigan. 
MR. E. K. NICHOLS , 
Yale University. 
MR. G. C. ELLIS , 
University o£ Illinois. COLLEGE S AN D THEI R GRADUATE S 135 
MR. J. R. BOOKER . 
Arkansas Baptist College. 
MR. J. H. JONES. 
Morehouse College. 
MR. C. F. TAYLOR . 
Arkansas Baptist College. 
from the Universit y of Pittsburgh. Vivie n 
A . Hunte r receives a Bachelor's degree from 
the Universit y of Minnesota . The Universit y 
of Kansa s sends out three Bachelors, Edwar d 
versity. Dickinso n College sends out one 
student of Law , J . Stewart Davis. Nathanie l 
Wile y receives a Bachelor of Science degree 
from Ohio University. Wheaton College 
MISS S. G. DANIELS , 
Fisk University. 
MR. J. B. DICKENS, 
Lane College. 
MR. C. E. BURCH , 
Wilberforce University. 
Baker, Walte r Maddu x and Neosho Venerable, and one graduate i n Fin e Arts, Lero y 
Robbins. Haze l Jea n Lewis completes a 
Teacher's Trainin g Course i n Miam i Uni -
sends out one Bachelor, J . Henr y Lewis. 
Henr y I. Ashe r takes a Bachelor's degree at 
Indiana University. Harve y R. Turne r 
completes a course i n Civi l Engineerin g at 
MR. J. H . PURNELL , 
Clark University. 
MR. E. J. CHEEKS , 
Purdue University. 
MR. T. M. BAILEY , 
University of Pittsburg. 136 TH E CRISIS 
MR. L. E. DREWRY -
Obcrlin College. 
MR. U. S. DONALDSON , 
Hillsdale College. 
MR. H. C. ASHER , 
Indiana University. 
Rhode Island College. Hillsdal e College 
sends out one Bachelor, U . S. Donaldson. 
Washbur n College confers a Bachelor's degree upon Arthu r W . Hardy . Mrs. Gersends out one Maste r of Science, St. Elm o 
Brady , and one Bachelor, George C. Ellis. 
Willia m G . Mosel y takes a Bachelor's degree 
at the Universit y of Colorado. Benjami n T. 
MR. NATHANIE L WILEY , 
Ohio University. 
MR. E. M. A. CHANDLER . 
Clark University. 
MR. S. E. BRADY , 
University of Illinois. 
trude E . Rus h takes a Bachelor's degree at 
Des Moines College. Elme r J . Cheeks completes the Electrica l Engineerin g course at 
Purdu e University. The Universit y of Illinois 
Withers graduates from the College of Den ­
tal and Ora l Surgery i n Ne w Yor k Cit y wit h 
Honorar y Mention . Danie l Davi d Fowle r 
graduates from the Minin g Enginerin g De -
MR. J. A. WRIGHT. 
Andover Theological Seminary. 
MR. L. L. JORDAN , 
Harvard. 
MR. J. W. CRUMP , 
University of Iowa. COLLEGE S AN D THEI R GRADUATE S 137 
MR. H . H. BLACK . 
Knoxville College. 
MR. L. E. VINCENT, 
Walden University. 
MR. E. C. MARTIN , 
Walden University. 
partment of the Case School of Applie d from the Domestic Science Department o f 
Science. Fro m the Denta l Department of Drak e University. 
Temple Universit y are sent out, Clarence I n all, we have received of the followin g 
Bailey , Charles Ferguson, Joh n Holley , Per- degrees: Maste r of Arts, five; Maste r o f 
MR. T. I. BROWN , 
Clark University. 
MISS H. J. LUCAS , 
Miami University. 
MR. J. A. FRANKLIN , 
University of Michigan. 
civa l Johnson, Cenute Richardson ; from the Science, one; Bachelor of Arts, nineteen; 
Medica l Department are sent, George Fal - Bachelor of Science, seven; Bachelor of Mu -
coner, Arthu r Johnson, George Walke r and sic, one; Law , six ; Engineering, four; MediJoh n Watkins. Marth a Loeffler graduates cine, Pharmacy and Dentistry, fourteen; 
MR. N. D. OGERINDE, 
Virginia Union University. 
MR. I. H. BONNER, 
Knoxville College. 
MR. V. E. DANIEL, 
Virginia Union University. 138 TH E CRISIS 
MISS M. E. BROWN , 
Oberlin. 
MISS K. E. STEWART , 
Oberlin. 
MISS IPHIGENI A COLES , 
Oberlin. 
Theology, four; Fin e Arts, one; Teacher's 
Trainin g Course, one. There are probably 
ten or twelve other colored graduates of 
which we have no record. 
The colored colleges of the South seem to 
have had a fairl y prosperous year. Fis k 
has gotten the beginning of her endowment; 
Walde n has a new President, George F . Durgin, who has begun the erection of new build ­
ings and wil l raise the standard of the curriculum; Spelman Seminary has appointed 
a Supervisor of Industria l Wor k i n Rura l 
Schools i n Fulto n County. The Hon . Wil ­
liam Jennings Bryan , Secretary of State, 
delivered the commencement address at 
Howard . 
Miss Laur a Wheeler, a colored girl of 
Hartford , Conn., has been awarded a Euro ­
pean Travelin g Scholarship b y the Pennsylvani a Academy of Fin e Arts fo r her wor k 
i n the Illustration Department. 
Miss Isabel Vandervall , of Orange, N . J. , 
a Junio r i n the Ne w Yor k Medica l College 
and Hospita l for Women , received both 
prizes which are usually awarded to members of her class. A t the commencement 
exercises, whic h were held i n the Waldorf 
Astoria , the first prize , $25.00 i n gold, was 
awarded Miss Vanderval l fo r attainin g the 
highest average i n her class fo r the year; 
she received the second prize , a gol d watch, 
whic h is given by Judg e Alfre d Ommen, for 
makin g the highest mar k i n the Medica l 
Jurisprudenc e Examination . 
Messrs. J . E . Rose, Howar d Universit y 
1913, and Mordeca i W . Johnson, Universit y 
o f Chicago 1913, the only Negr o students at 
the Rochester Theologica l Seminary , have 
each won an Hono r Scholarship of $250 for 
the year 1914-1915. 
The intercollegiate essay contest priz e of 
$50 offered a yea r ago b y Prof. Kell y Mille r 
fo r the best essay on "Th e Effect of Eman ­
cipation upo n the Physica l Condito n of the 
Negro " has been awarded to Adolp h Hodge , 
of Howar d University . 
Julia n H . Lewis, a young colored man of 
Cairo , 111., has been awarded the second annua l Howar d Taylo r Rickett priz e o f $250 
by the medical faculty o f the Universit y of 
Chicago for origina l research wor k i n the 
department of pathology. Mr . Lewis reMR. J. S. DAVIS, 
Dickinson College. 
MR. CHARLE S CAMPBELL . 
University of Michigan. 
MR. D. D. FOWLER , 
Case School of Applied Science. COLLEGE S AN D THEI R GRADUATE S 139 
MR. W. G. HAYES . 
University of Pittsburg. 
MISS L. F. GRAYSON . 
Oberlin. 
MR. A. W. HARDY . 
Washburn College. 
ceived his Master's degree from the University o f Illinois i n 1912, and entered Chicago 
Universit y i n the fal l of that year. 
I n two colleges there have been administration difficulties between teachers, and students, Shaw and Clar k (South Atlanta , Ga.). 
Shaw has, unfortunately been compelled to 
give u p her medical school. N o conspicuous 
gifts to Negr o education have been made 
durin g the yea r but several bequests of 
$5,000 to $20,000 have been made. A t the 
sprin g meeting of Joh n D . Rockefeller's 
$40,000,000 education foundation Board , 
$15,000 was added to the annua l subscription of $10,000 
toward the current expenses of 
Hampton , an annua l subscription 
of $10,000 was 
made to Tuskegee 
and one of $15,-
000 to Spelma n 
Seminary ; $36,-
000 was appro ­
priated for the 
maintenance of 
Rura l School Su ­
pervisors i n each 
o f the Southern 
States. Colored 
summe r schools 
ar e becoming 
better organized 
and large r i n five 
or six leading 
centers. 
The America n 
Colonizatio n Society, whose in ­
vested funds have "RICHELIEU " A T HOWAR D UNIVERSITY . 
been used chiefly to ]jay salaries i n the last 
five decades, has transferred a sum of $60,-
000 to Liberi a for an industria l school. 
The Unite d States Burea u of Educatio n 
has co-operated wit h the Phelps-Stokes 
Fun d to make a study of Negro institutions. 
A s the investigators, so fa r as known, represent the industria l idea chiefly, some apprehension is felt by Negro colleges as to the 
.forthcoming report 
The year i n athletics and debates has been 
interesting. Atlanta , Fis k and Howar d debated the Monroe doctrine and Atlant a and 
Howar d were victorious. Wilberforc e won the 
debate on government ownership 
of telegraph and 
telephone sys ­
tems wit h How ­
ard. N o general 
athletic cham ­
pionship between 
colored colleges 
has been established, but i n At ­
lanta Morri s 
Brow n College 
leads i n baseball 
this year, not 
having lost a single game. I n the 
annual trac k 
meet participated 
i n by the four 
Atlant a colleges, 
Morehouse won 
the most points. 
Fis k and Howar d 
have played u p 
to their usual 
standard. TH E CRISI S 
MISS N. E. VENERABLE . 
University of Kansas. 
LLOY D H. NEWMAN . 
Howard University. 
EV A B. DYKES . 
Howard University. 
A YEAR'S WOR K 
Reports of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
at the Baltimore Meeting 
BESIDE the executive officers 
from the New Yor k office, 
there were twelve delegates, representing thirteen 
branches o f the Associa ­
tion i n various parts of the 
country, and also several 
written reports. 
A brie f resume of some of these reports 
follows: 
CLEVELAN D 
Mr . Harr y E . Davis reported that the 
branch started with 21 members and now 
enroll over 200. 'When only three weeks old 
it arranged the largest meeting i n the interest of colored people ever held i n Cleveland. 
The attendance was over 2,500, includin g 
many prominent white citizens, and Dr . 
Spingar n made the chief address. Prejudic e 
against colored people i n Cleveland is less 
pronounced than i n many places, but there 
is discrimination i n restaurants and other 
publi c places, and recent attempts at discrimination i n certain publi c institutions. 
A n effort has been made also to insert 
clauses in real estate deeds restricting transfer of propert y to colored citizens. The 
branch plans a legal defense fund and a 
large increase i n members. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Mr . S. A . Allen , President of the University Chapter, outlined its history an d work. 
It has listened to addresses by Dr . Spingarn , 
Mr . Neva l Thomas, Prof. Kell y Miller , Prof. 
L . B . Moore , President Newman , Mr . Archibald Grimke , Mr . W . A . Hawkins. It has 
celebrated the birthdays o f Lincol n and 
Douglass, and presented a pictur e of Lin ­
coln to the University . The Chapte r has encouraged the organization of branches i n 
other colleges and has already started two 
such branches. It has protested to the Na ­
tiona l Biscuit Compan y fo r discharging employees and attempting a boycott. 
KANSA S CIT Y 
Mr . J . D . Bowse r told o f the fight i n this 
city against segregation and the "Ji m Crow' ' 
street laws whic h has been successful. The 
branch also protested against the refusa l to 
admit colored welfare workers to a factory 
i n Kansa s Cit y and has received assurance 
that i n future no such discriminatio n wil l be 
made. No t being able to secure admission to 
the publi c bath house the branch has sue-A YEAR' S WOR K 141 
ceeded i n having a colored bath house erected 
wit h all modern appliances. The branch has 
also successfully contested state bills against 
intermarriage . 
QUINCY , ILLINOIS 
This branch was first organized four years 
ago as a civi c league to maintain the rights 
o f colored children i n the city publi c schools. 
It finally became a branch of the Associa ­
tio n wit h several distinguished white members. It has suffered i n the past year because of the activity of a certain Z. W . Mit ­
chell, who has a notorious record i n Ohio, 
Minnesot a and Canada . 
MINNEAPOLI S AN D ST . PAU L 
Fathe r Theobald, a colored priest of the 
Catholi c Church , reported fo r both these 
branches. They have been but recently organized and include representative colored 
and white people. The St. Pau l branch has 
held several notable meetings and the Minne ­
apolis branch has two pieces of work : one 
under Fathe r Cleary, is an endeavor to obtai n better employment for colored youth ; 
the other movement is an attempt to check 
growin g discrimination i n publi c schools. 
Rabb i Dinehart has made several addresses 
fo r the Association and has asked the 
churches i n Minneapolis to devote one Sun ­
da y a year to the Negro problem. 
BALTIMOR E 
Dr . Cardoza , President of the branch, reported successful meetings and campaigns 
fo r new members and the wor k of legal redress. Since Januar y they have secured an 
order from Judge Dawkin s declaring that 
i f the Baltimore , Chesapeake and Annapolis 
Steamboat Compan y di d not furnish equal 
accommodations fo r colored and white passengers, he woul d see that they were forced 
to do so. The last legislature considered a 
"Jim-Crow " street car bil l and a bil l to enable cities and towns to segregate colored 
people. Bot h these bills were killed largely 
as a result of hard work on the part of the 
Branch . 
DETROIT 
Fathe r Bagnall , a colored Episcopa l Rector, reported that this branch was not generally well-known i n the city until Dr. Spin -
garn's visit. The branch has been divided 
into two great committees, each having weekl y meetings. Durin g the past year fourteen 
cases o f discrimination i n theatres have been 
fought and four of them won. The For d 
Automobil e Shop began to discriminate 
against colored people i n some lines of work, 
but this has been stopped and three colored 
electricians are now employed i n the plant 
at a wage of nine dollars a day. One of them 
works side by side with Mr . Ford . Durin g 
Mr . Spingarn's visit colored people were for 
the first time admitted to the largest hotel 
to attend a banquet given in his honor. 
BOSTON 
Mr . Butle r Wilson , Secretary, said that 
the branch had i n its membership a large 
number of sons and daughters of the abolitionists. Durin g the year one hundred publi c and semi-public meetings have been held. 
The legal redress committee is at present 
tryin g to secure the indictment of certain 
wealthy and influential white men who made 
a most outrageous assault upo n a defenseless colored servant girl . The branch has 
been fighting the policy of certain department stores i n namin g a new color shade i n 
a manner insulting to colored people. Several of the stores have ceased the custom. 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBI A 
Mr . Neva l H . Thomas spoke of three lines 
of wor k i n this branch : first, to reach the 
masses of colored people wit h our propa ­
ganda ; second, to raise funds, and third, to 
fight hostile legislation. A series of remarkable mass meetings have been held and the 
Committee of Fift y and Mor e has carried 
the message of the Association to churches, 
lodges and neighborhoods. The branch has 
contributed $3,883 to the New Yor k headquarters and hopes it can soon contribute 
$1,000 a month. Mr . Grimke , the President, 
has represented the Association at congressional hearings and has been largely instrumental i n securing the postponement of segregation bills. H e made an effective protest 
against the intermarriage bill , and succeeded 
i n hastening plans for the new colored high 
school. The branch has secured a column 
each week i n the new colored newspaper, the 
Washingto n Sun, where an account of the 
work wil l be published regularly. 
CHICAGO 
Mr . Hallinan , one of the directors, told of 
a fight made i n the Illinois legislature against 
five intermarriage bills, a "Ji m Crow " car 
bill, and a bil l discriminating against colored 
chair car porters. A vigilance committee 
has been formed and is now fighting wit h 
vigor a case of incendiarism where the home 142 TH E CRISI S 
o f a colored chaffeur i n Oak Par k was 
burned. A committee is seeking to amend 
the State Civi l Rights Bil l so as to include 
cemeteries and hospitals. A case arose 
where a colored family , havin g made several 
burials i n one cemetery was refused the 
right to bury the rest of the family . This 
case is now before the Unite d States Su ­
preme Court on appeal. Two or three of the 
thirty hospitals i n Chicago have begun to 
advertise that they do not take colored pa ­
tients, and attempted segregation "and discrimination i n the publi c schools are creepin g in . Al l these matters the branch is fightin g vigorously. 
There were also reports from Indianapolis, 
Providence, and the recently formed Harrisbur g branch. 
A CRISIS AGEN T AN D ORGANIZER 
Miss Katherin e M . Johnson, who began 
as an agent of TH E CRISIS i n Kansa s City , 
Kansas, and who has. i n the last year travelled over the South and West i n the interest 
of TH E CRISIS and the Association, made a 
vivi d report. She found the colored people 
of Texas sympathetic but, on the whole, 
afraid to organize branches lest it be known 
that they were affiliated with the descendants 
of the abolitionists. I n several towns there 
were some threats of violence, particularl y 
one, where they had recently lynched a 
Negro. I n Louisian a the percentage of illiteracy is very high. Most of the colored 
people had never heard of the Association. 
It was reported to Miss Johnson that i n 
seventy parishes i n the state there was not a 
single school buildin g for colored children, 
and that i n New Orleans only S.000 out of 
28,000 colored children of school age were 
enrolled. THE CRISIS 
The manager of TH E CRISIS reported that 
the net paid circulation of TH E CRISIS for 
the month of Ma y was 35.93S copies. H e 
described the difficulties of magazine makin g 
to-day, the severe competition of ten and 
fifteen cent publications, and the difficulty 
of securing advertising for a publication like 
TH E CRISIS. Alread y TH E CRISIS has a circulation twice as large as any publication 
issued i n the interest of colored people. It 
has a force of over seven hundred agents i n 
all parts of the Union , i n all our dependencies, i n South Americ a and the West In ­
dies, and i n Europe , Asia , Afric a and Australia . Nevertheless, it must have a larger 
circulation i n order to solve its peculia r 
problem. W e ought to have 50,000 subscribers immediately and 100,000 withi n five 
years. Alread y TH E CRISIS subscription list 
is a sort o f nationa l directory of influential 
colored people and their sympathizers. It 
should be made even more complete i n this 
respect. 
TH E OFFIC E OF TH E SECRETAR Y 
The Secretary o f the Association , Miss 
Ma y Child s Nerney, reported briefly on the 
wor k of field organization. She said that 
the membership of the Associatio n was now 
over 4,000, there were 27 branches, 6 waitin g fo r admission, and about 40 locals which 
may become branches. These range as fa r 
South as Shreveport, La. , an d Talladega, 
Ala. , and west to Sa n Francisc o and Seattle. 
She reported equally encouraging progress 
i n organization wor k at Headquarters. The 
debt has been raised, there is modern equipment and a trained staff. 
The Secretary called attention to the work 
o f some o f the largest branches and described the fight against discriminatin g 
measures introduced i n Congress wit h which 
the Association had been kept i n touch 
through its legislative expert i n Washington . 
She also mentioned the fact that often the 
Association does importan t wor k fo r which 
it is unable to get credit and cited as an il ­
lustration a recent case i n a well known educational institution, where the Association 
won a distinct victory but had been requested 
by the people concerned to give the matter 
no publicity . 
Miss Nerne y told of the organization of 
the Press Burea u and the difficulties under 
which publicit y wor k for such an unpopula r 
cause as ours must be done. 
MR . VILLAE D I N TH E WES T 
Mr . Villar d spoke i n St. Louis on Monday , 
Ma y 11, meeting the Executiv e Committee of 
the St. Louis branches of the Urba n League 
and the X . A . A . C. P . i n the afternoon at 
the publi c library . I n the evening he addressed the annua l conference of the C. M . 
E . Churc h at which a number of prominent 
colored bishops were present. H e spoke before a fine meeting of the Kansa s Cit y 
branch o f the N . A . A . C. P . Wednesday 
evening. Ma y 13. i n the Second Baptist 
Church , Mr . H . M . Beardsley, ex-Mayo r of 
Kansa s City, and one of the strongest men 
i n the West, presiding at the meeting. This 
resulted in an increased membership for the 
branch. The next evening Mr . Villar d ad-M Y HOUS E 143 
dressed the Topek a branch at a meeting at 
the First Methodist Churc h which was presided over b y Mr . Arthu r Capper, the Pro ­
gressive candidate fo r Governor, and foremost newspaper proprieto r of Kansas. Mr , 
Fran k P . MacLenna n of the Kansa s State 
Journal, introduced Mr . Villard . O n the 
next day, Friday , Ma y 15, Mr . Villar d spoke 
before the Cit y Clu b i n Kansa s City , and i n 
the afternoon met a group o f leading workers of the Kansa s Cit y branch at the residence o f Mr . Taylor. Man y of the auditors 
of the Cit y Clu b were Southerners by birt h 
and education, but they listened intently to 
Mr . Villard's address on "Some Traitors to 
the South. " O n Saturday evening, Ma y 16, 
Mr . Villar d spoke i n the Unitaria n Churc h 
at Indianapolis before a large audience o f 
white and colored friends of the N . A . A . C. 
P . Sunda y evening he spoke i n Bethe l 
Churc h under the auspices of the Indianap ­
olis branch, going directly from the meeting 
to the train for Cleveland, where he spoke 
i n the evening at St. John's A . M . E . Church . 
Perhaps the most important meeting of the 
entire tri p was the closing address at a lun ­
cheon of the Cleveland Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday, Ma y 19, where nearly 
one hundred of the prominent business men 
of the city listened to Mr . Villard's address 
and asked a number of questions at the conclusion. The day previous Mr . Villar d was 
the guest at a private luncheon of fourteen 
or fifteen of the leading men of the city all 
of whom expressed the deepest interest i n 
the color problem and were eager to hear of 
the wor k of the N . A . A . C. P . Mr . Villar d 
was struck by the many warm friends of the 
race to be found i n both Cleveland and In ­
dianapolis, and the friendly feeling of many 
of the leading newspaper men i n Topeka , 
Indianapolis, and Cleveland. 
M Y HOUSE AN D A GLIMPSE OF 
M Y LIFE THEREI N 
B Y JESSIE FAUSE T 
FAR away on the top of a 
gently slopin g hill stands 
my house. O n one side 
the hil l slopes down into a 
valley, the site o f a large 
country town ; on the other 
it descends into a forest, 
thick wit h loft y trees and green, growin g 
things. Her e i n stately solitude amid such 
surroundings towers my dwelling ; its dullred bric k is barely visible through the thick 
ivy , but the gleaming tops o f its irregula r 
roo f and sloping gables catch the day's sunlight and crown it wit h a crown of gold. 
A n irregular, ramblin g buildin g is this 
house of mine, built on no particula r plan , 
followin g no order save that of desire and 
fancy. Peculiarl y juttin g rooms appear, 
and unsuspected towers and bay-windows,— 
the house seems almost to have built itself 
and to have followed its own wil l i n so doing. 
I f there be any one distinct feature at all, 
it is that halls long and very broad traverse 
the various parts o f the house, separating a 
special set o f rooms here, makin g another 
division there. Splendi d halls are these, 
wit h fire places and cosy arm-chairs, an d 
delightful, dark corners, and mysterious 
closets, and broad, shallow stairs. Just the 
place i n winte r for a host of young people 
to gather before the fire-place, and wit h popcorn and chestnuts, stories and apples, laugh 
away the speeding hours, while the win d 
howls without. 
The hall on the ground floor has smaller 
corridors that branch off and lead at their 
extremity into the garden. Surely, no parterre of the East, perfumed wit h all the 
odors of Araby , and peopled wit h houris, 
was ever so fair as my garden! Surely, nowhere does the snow lie so pure and smooth 
and deep, nowhere are the evergreen trees 
so very tall and stately as i n my garden i n 
winter! Most glorious is it i n late sprin g 
and early June. Out on the green, green 
sward I sit under the blossoming trees; i n 
sheer delightful idleness I spend my hours, 
listening to the blending of wind-song with 
the "sweet jargoning " of little birds. I f a 
shower threatens I flee across my garden's 
vast expanse, past the gorgeous rosebushes 
and purpl e lilacs, and safe withi n my little 
summer-house, watch the "straight-falling 
rain, " and think of other days, and sighing 
wis h that Kathlee n and I had not parted i n 
anger that far-off morning. 144 TH E CRISIS 
Whe n the shower ceases, 1 hasten down the 
broad path, under the shelter of lofty trees, 
until I reach one of my house's many doors. 
Once within , but still i n idle mood, I perch 
myself on a window-seat and look toward the 
town. Tal l spires and godly church steeples 
rise before me ; high above all climbs the 
town clock; farther over i n the west, smoke 
is curlin g from the foundries. Ho w busy is 
the lif e beyond my house! Through the 
length of the long hall to the window' at the 
opposite side I go, and watch the friendly 
nodding of tall trees 
and the tender intercourse of all this beautifu l green life . Sud ­
denly the place becomes 
transformed—this is an 
enchanted forest, the 
Forest Morgraun t — i n 
and out among the trees 
pass valiant knights and 
distressed ladies. Prosper le Ga i rides to the 
rescue of Isoult l a De ­
sirous. Surely, the forest 
lif e beyond my house is 
ful l of purpose and animation, too. 
Fro m the window I 
roam past the sweet, familia r chambers, to the 
attic staircase, with its 
half-hidden angles and 
crazy old baluster. U p to 
the top of the house I go, 
to a dark little storeroom under the eaves. I 
open the trap-door i n the 
middle of the ceiling, 
haul down a small ladder, 
mount its deliriously 
wobbly length, and behold, 1 am i n my chosen 
domain—a queen come 
into her very own ! I f I 
choose I can convert it 
into a dread and inaccessible fortress, by 
drawin g up my ladder and showering nutshells and acorns down on the heads of 
would-be intruders. Safe from all possible 
invasion, I browse through the store of old, 
old magazines and quaint books and journals, or wander half- timidl y through my in ­
finite unexplored lan d of mystery, pickin g 
my way past heaps of delightful rubbish 
and strong, secret chests, fancyin g goblins 
i n the shadowy corners, or watching from 
the little windows the sunbeams' play on the 
garden, and the grey-blue mist hangin g faroff over the hollow valley. 
Fro m such sights and fancies I descend to 
my library , there to supplement my flitting 
ideas wit h the fixed conception o f others. 
Althoug h I love every bric k and little bit of 
morta r i n my dwelling, my librar y is of all 
portions the very dearest to me. I n this 
part of the house more than any place else, 
have those irregula r rooms been added, to 
receive my ever-increasing store o f books. 
I n the large room,—the librar y proper,—is 
a broad, old-fashioned 
fire-place, and on the 
ru g i n front I lie and 
read, and read again, all 
the dear simpl e tales o f 
earlier days, "Mothe r 
Goose, " "Alic e i n Won ­
derland, " "Th e Arabia n 
Nights" ; here, too, I 
revel i n modern stories 
of impossible adventure. 
Bu t when a storm rises at 
night, say, and the rai n 
beats an d dashes, and 
all without is raging , I 
draw a huge, red armchair before the fire and 
curl into its hospitable 
depths, 
"An d there I sit 
Readin g ol d things, 
O f knights and lor n 
damsels, 
Whil e the win d sings— 
Oh, drearily sings! " 
Off i n one o f the littl e 
side-rooms stands my 
desk, covered wit h books 
that have caught my 
special fancy and awakened my thoughts. This 
i s m y living - room, 
where I spend my 
moods of bitterness and 
misunderstanding, and questioning, and joy , 
too, I think. Often i n the midst o f a heap of 
books, the Rubaiya t and a Bible , Walte r 
Pater's Essays, and "Robert Elsmere " and 
"Auror a Leigh, " and books of belief, of in ­
sinuation, of open unbelief, I bow my head 
on my desk i n a passion of doubt and ignorance and longing, an d ponder, ponder. Her e 
on this desk is a book i n whic h I jo t down 
all the little, beautiful word-wonders, whose 
meanings are so often unknown to me, but 
whose very mystery I love. I write , "In . TH E BURDE N 145 
Vishn u Lan d what Avatar? " and "Afte r the 
red pottage comes the exceedingly bitter 
cry, " and all the other sweet, incomprehensible fragments that haunt my memory so. 
Hig h u p on many of the shelves i n the 
many rooms are books as yet unread by me, 
Schopenhauer and Gorky , Petrarch and 
Sappho, Goethe and Kan t and Schelling ; 
much o f Ibsen, Plat o and Enniu s and Fir -
dausi, and Lafcadis Hearn,—a few of these 
i n the original. Wit h such reading i n store 
fo r me, is not my future rich ? 
Ca n such a house as this one of mine be 
without immediate and vivi d impression on 
its possessor? First and most of al l it im ­
bues me wit h a strong sense of home; banishment from my house woul d surely be life's 
most bitter sorrow. It is so eminently and 
fixedly mine, my very own, that the mere 
possession of it,—a house not yours or another's, but mine, to live i n as I will,—is 
very sweet to me. It is absolutely the chey 
soi of m y soul's desire. Wit h this sense of 
ownership, a sense whic h is deeper than I 
can express, a sense which is almost a longin g for some unknown, explainable , entire possession—passionate, spiritua l absorption of my dwelling—comes a feeling that is 
almost terror. Is it right to feel thus, to 
have this vivid , permeating and yet wholly 
intellectual enjoyment of the material loveliness and attractiveness of my house? Ma y 
this not be perhaps a sensuality of the mind , 
whose influence may be more insidious, more 
pernicious, more powerful to unfit me for 
the rea l duties of lif e than are other lower 
and yet more open forms of enjoyment? 
Oh, I pra y not! M y house is inexpressibly 
dear to me, but the light of the ideal beyond, 
"the light that never was on sea or land, " is 
dearer still. 
This, then, is my house, and this, i n measure, is my lif e i n my house. Here , amid my 
favorite books, and pictures, and fancies, 
and longings, and sweet mysteries, shall old 
age come upon me, i n fashion most inglorious, but i n equal degree most peaceful and 
happy. Perhaps—that is! Fo r after all my 
house is constructed of dream-fabric, and 
the place o f its buildin g is—Spain! 
TH E BURDE N 
ANOTHE R SOUTHER N DISASTE R 
THE News Leader, a "white " 
afternoon pape r of Rich -
, mond, Va. , is "opposed" to 
woman suffrage and also 
to Negroes. Recently it 
offered Ten Dollars for 
the best argument against 
woman suffrage. The contest was very successful. The Leader says: 
"Th e contest editor, a man of some experience i n this line of—well, we wil l call it 
work, fo r short—is frank to confess that no 
more interesting reading ever came under his 
observation, no keener competition for first 
honors was ever waged i n a simila r event in 
his knowledge, and no more difficult contest 
problem ever confronted him than of selectin g what he thought the best answer i n the 
625 received. " 
The n the managing editor wrote a right 
gallant epistle : 
"Dea r Mrs. Goode, 
"Herewit h the News Leader wishes to hand 
yo u a check fo r Te n Dollars ($10), fo r your 
very excellent answer submitted i n the contest, it having been declared the best received. W e congratulate yo u on you r win ­
nin g the first prize, and hope that when 
other contests are arranged we wil l see one 
or more answers from you. 
"The Contest Edito r would like to publish 
a photograph of you. Wil l yo u be kin d 
enough to oblige us by sending the picture, 
which wil l be returned to you after an etchin g is made of it ? 
"Yours very truly, 
(Signed) "Louis A . MACMAHON , 
"Managin g Editor. " 
November 1, 1913. 
Mrs. Goode responded with her photograph. It was not published in the Leader 
for lack o f space and so TH E CRISIS is kind ­
l y releasing the Leader of its natura l embarrassment. 
"M y Dea r Mrs. Goode " has also received 
a most cordia l appeal from the Virgini a 
ladies "Opposed, " etc. Mrs. Goode was 
formerly an assistant i n the Congressional 
Librar y but went to Virgini a to mother nine 
children whose own mother was dead. 146 TH E CRISI S 
MRS. A. J. GOODE . 
"The latter work is not productive of as 
many luxuries as I enjoyed at Washington , 
but the privilege of shaping so many youn g 
lives after my ideas of the beautiful, gives 
me a sense of happiness which words cannot express." 
W e are sorry that Mrs. Goode is opposed 
to votes for women and we are also sorry for 
the News Leader, but we think it quite permissible to chuckle quietly over the whole 
affair. 
13 
CIVI L SERVIC E REFOR M 
FOR the first time i n fifteen years, Dubli n 
has no Negro clerks i n her postoffice. 
James Tillery , who has held office here for 
the past fifteen years, has been removed, and 
Monda y mornin g the order removing him 
went into effect. 
Postmaster V . L . Stanley received a telegram several days ago from Congressman 
Hughe s stating that Tiller y had been removed, but the papers i n the case did not 
reach liim until Saturday. It is understood 
that the charges against Tiller y were incompetency and conduct unbecoming a postal 
employe. It wil l be remembered that he was 
indicted some time ago on the charge of arson, and although this indictment is several 
years old he has never cleared up this charge 
against him. 
Tiller y was put i n as clerk i n the Dubli n 
postoffice durin g the first administration of 
President McKinle y and Postmaster Clar k 
Grie r over the protest of the people of both 
the city and county and over the protest of 
congressmen from the Elevent h district, * 
Hon . W . G . Brantley , who represented Lau ­
rens at that time. H e has held office continuall y since u p to the last day of May , 
this year. 
Besides being the onl y Negr o clerk i n the 
Twelft h district, Tiller y was so fa r as known 
the only Negr o clerk i n a postoffice i n the 
entire state. The people o f Dubli n and the 
patrons o f the Dubli n office al l over the 
county generally commend Congressman 
Hughe s fo r havin g him removed.—Dublin 
(Ga.) Courier-Herald. 
Dea r Sir : 
Enclosed yo u wil l find a clippin g from the 
daily pape r of my home which tells its own 
story. I do not care a straw for the loss of 
the job, but I do want it known that I was 
put out fo r nothing i n the world , but because my face was black. Yo u wil l note that 
Congressman Dudle y M . Hughes, o f the 12th 
district, spent as much energy as it would 
take to stop the Mexica n war, to put out of 
a job, one poor black man . I was under 
the Civi l Service law, an d they could not 
get anythin g against me whatever, but went 
back five years and dug u p an old case which 
was brought against me for politica l reasons 
and for which a court of law i n Georgia 
would have long ago put me away i n the 
penitentiary, i f there had been the slightest 
bit of evidence. Hughe s and the Postmaster, 
V . L. Stanley, got after me as soon as the 
Democrats came i n power, but were long unable to show sufficient cause to remove me. 
Finally , I was removed 60 days ago, but the 
Postmaster, when he received the papers, 
could not find anyone at the time competent 
to fill my place ; he an d his assistant wrote 
and made visits to both Maco n and Atlant a 
to find a white man who was competent to 
take my position, and failin g ii i this they 
had to put up with a white man who has 
been workin g i n the office fo r several years 
but who they all agree is not as competent as 
I was. I would like to give this matter as 
wide airin g as possible. I am going to write 
the Civi l Service Commission at Washingto n 
to have the matter investigated, though I do 
not have any hopes that they will . I would 
not accept another position unde r the present Postmaster, as a Negr o cannot work 
under him i f he has a spark of manhood left 
i n him. I di d not ask any favors, but fought 
every move they made, an d after doin g this 
I am perfectly satisfied. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 147 
PRINTING 
T o be of value, the printed page must make 
its appeal by means of correct 
STATIONER Y 
and must give evidence of careful and artistic 
workmanship. Th e same is true of 
ENGRAVIN G 
We Print THE CRISIS 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6667 NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
I am a reader of TH E CRISIS, and always 
wil l be, fo r we have got to fight our own 
battles, and i f I fight and lose, I do not give 
up nor do I get discouraged. I f I live I wil l 
certainly meet them again. 
Respectfully yours, 
(Signed) JAME S TILLERY . 
(We notice that Mr . Tiller y runs a nice 
little photographi c gallery "on the side.") 
Do you like the 
CRISIS? 
If you do you are willing to help increase 
its circulation. Yo u can do that by speaking 
to your friends about the magazine. If you 
wish sample copies sent to your friends simply 
drop us a card with names and addresses. 
TH E CRISIS 
70 Fift h Avenue Ne w Yor k City 
AMBLER, PA . , June 11, 1914. 
Mrs. Harr y C . Hart has not renewed her 
subscription and docs not wish to have the 
CRISIS sent to her because she does not find 
that the paper teaches Peace, and docs not 
promote the mutual respect between the white 
and colored races, which in the northern 
states used to exist and which ought to exist 
always. 
Colored agents wanted everywhere to supply 
the big demand for our high grade Calling 
Cards. Latest Styles and sizes for ladies or 
gentlemen, with or without address, 100 for 50 
cents for 50 for 25 cents. Outfit free. Large 
commission. Exclusive territory. All orders 
filled promptly. Write for samples and terms. 
The House of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 148 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
LE T YOU R MONE Y EAR N A 
CLEA R DIVIDEN D 
A n investment in the Turne r Buildin g Limited , a company incorporated 
to own and construct an office building on Lo t 28 , Bloc k 13, Rive r Lo t 12 
and 14, in the business district of the city of Edmonton, Provinc e of Alberta , 
Canada, wil l earn clear profit for you from the commencement of business. 
This is not a speculation but an absolute legitimate, safe and profitable 
investment showing a clear profit after all estimated expenses have been 
paid. The building is already leased to a responsible realty broker of 
Edmonton. 
A limited number of shares are now offered to the public at $1 per 
share. 70 % of the total capital has already been arranged wit h local 
Edmonton business men. 
The fact that our proposition is centered in the city of Edmonton 
needs no further assurance as to the ultimate value of our proposition. 
Edmonton today is the fastest growing city on the continent, wit h a population of 75,00 0 and increasing at the rate of 15,00 0 annually. Ou r property 
is now worth $10,00 0 and undoubtedly within a few years wil l be worth 
twice the amount. 
Owin g to the limited amount of space we are unable to produce here 
all of the good qualities of our proposition. W e invite you to address the 
Turner Buildin g Limited , 10 2 Brow n Building , Edmonton, for further and 
complete information or cut out the following coupon and mail at once. 
INFORMATIO N COUPO N 
Cut out this blank and mail with check, postal or money order or 
currency for one dollar for one share which wil l earn for you a clear profit 
from the start and the investment wil l be continually increasing in value. 
191 4 
CLIFFOR D C . MITCHELL , 
Fisca l Agent, Turne r Building, Ltd. , 
10 2 Brow n Bldg., P. O. Bo x 2, Edmonton, Canada. 
DEA R SI R : Enclosed please find $ 1 for 1 share of the Turne r Building , 
Limited . 
Als o please send without further obligation to me a prospectus of your 
company and any further information that may induce me to subscribe 
further. 
It being understood that I am taking this share upon your representation that a clear profit wil l be made from the start. 
Yo u agreeing to return the money with 5 % interest if the required 
amount is not subscribed for within sixty days. 
Name 
Occupation 
Address 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and us wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLING GOO D HOMES IN CORONA , with all 
improvements, only five cents carefare to Ne w York . Corona is in the very 
center of Greater Ne w York , and in a few months wil l be reached by the 
rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that section of the 
city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand Central 
Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small means can get 
a modern home with all improvements at a moderate cost. W e would be 
glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New Yor k City has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best place 
in all Ne w Yor k for children. Fo r full particulars as to price and terms 
address 
L. S. REE D & COMPAN Y 
142 HUNTE R AVENU E :: LON G ISLAN D CIT Y 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 
^$3000 FOR YOU 
That' s th e mone y yo n shoul d ge t this year . I mea n it. I wan t Count y Sale s Manager * 
quick , me n o r wome n wh o believ e i n th e squar e deal , wh o wil l g o int o partnership wit h 
me . No experience needed . M y foldin g Bat h Tu b ha s take n th e countr y by storm . 
Solve s th e bathin g problem . No plumbing , n o wate r work s required - Ful l lengt h bat h 
i n an y room . Fold s i n smal l roll , hand y as an umbrella . I tel l yo n it's great! GREAT ! 
Rival s $100 bat h room . No w listen ! I wan t YO U t o handl e you r county . I'l l furnis h 
demonstratin g tu b o n libera l plan . I' m positive—absolutel y certain—yo u ra n ge t bigge r 
mone y i n a wee k wit h m e tha n yo u eve r mad e i n a mont h before . I KNOW IT ! 
Two Sates a Day— 
$300.00 a Month 
'^yviii} That's what you should pet—©very month. Needed in every home, badly wanted, 
eagerly bought. Modern bathing facilities for all the people. Take the orders tight 
and left. Quick sale*, immense 
profits. Look at these men— 
Smith, Ohio, got ]R orders first 
week; Meyers, Wis., $2-r>0 profit first 
m>mtli; Newton, California, $00 in 
three days. You should do as well. 2 
SALES A DAY MEAN S $^U0 A M UNTIL 
The work is very easy, pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating. It means a 
business o£ your own. 
Lit!)a capital needed. I grant 
credit—Help you out —Bark you up 
Don't doubt— Don't hesitate— Don't 
hold hack—You cannot lose. My other men are 
Building house?, bank accounts, HO can you. Ai t then 
— H" " BEND NO MONEY. Just name on penny post curd 
.V' for free tub offer. Hustle! 
9 Rnhirunn Pre?
 42 2 Factories Bldg.,
 TOLEDO , OHI O 
H. S. Robinson, Pres., Canadian Branch — Walkorville, Oil . 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
149 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
A Selected List of Book s 
Postage Extra 
TH E QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE . (W . E . B . D U Bois; $1.3 5 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARRO W O F TRADITION . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kell y Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B. G . Brawley ) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . (Fran z Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . (Willia m Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.5 0 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booke r T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S O F NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICA N ABROAD . 2 Volumes. (Willia m H . Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kell y Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . (Henr y E . Baker) 15 
A CHILD' S STOR Y O F DUNBAR . (Juli a L . Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New Yor k City 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Masterpieces of 
Negro Eloquence 
Edited by ALIC E MOORE DUNBAR. 
The one volume that contains the best 
speeches of fifty-one of the ablest Negroes of 
the United States, England, Africa and France, 
from 1818 to 1913. The wonderful eloquence 
of the most powerful Negro men and women 
of the world is contained in this book. Nothing 
more interesting and inspiring has ever been 
written. 
If you would know of the history of the 
race, appreciate the sacrifice for principle, 
understand the struggle for liberty, and properly 
value the oratorical achievement of the Negro, 
you should place this book in your library. 
The "Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence" will take you back to 1818, when Prince 
Saunders in his fascinating style eloquently pleaded for the abolition of slavery. It 
will give you the speech of Henry Highland Garnett, the first Negro ever asked to 
deliver a sermon in the United States House of Representatives; the speech of Frederick 
Douglass, who in 1852 with unexcelled eloquence demanded at Rochester to know, 
"What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?"; the speech that made Booker Washington 
famous; an estimate of Toussaint L'Ouverturc, by James McCune Smith, that ranks 
with Wendell Phillips' famous eulogy; Charles M. Langston's defiance of the Fugitive 
Slave Law, delivered in 1859; Judge Ruffin's famous eulogy of Crispus Attucks, a 
speech that should be read by every Negro boy and girl. 
These are but a few of the gems culled at random from this great book. The 
best of our present generation is well represented. 
This is a book that is a library, a reference book and an historical work, an indispensable addition to the library of every intelligent Negro. A book that shows in the 
Dest manner the best that the Negro has done. 
It is carefully edited, well printed and thoroughly indexed, bound 
in red and green silk cloth binding, 512 pages, gold top, uncut pages, 
We want every reader of TH E CRISIS to have a copy of this 
book. We have set aside 50,000 copies which we are going to sell 
to TH E CRISIS readers by allowing them to pay 50 cents down 
and 50 cents monthly for four months. 
Do not delay; sit down immediately, clip this coupon 
and send it to us with 50 cents, and a copy will be sent 
you by return mail. 
CRISIS Coupon 
CU T OU T AN D 
MAI L NO W 
THE DOUGLASS PUBLISHING COMPANY 
HARRISBURG, PA. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
The Douglass Pub. 
Co., 509 N. 4th St.. 
Harrisburg, Pa. 
Enclosed find 50c., for 
which send me a copy of 
"The Masterpieces of Negro 
Eloquence." I promise to pay 
50c. each month until $2.50 is 
paid. Title of the book to remain with you until the sum of 
2.50 is paid. 
Name 
Address 
151 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ATLANTA , GA . 
Th e Curs e o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F . Morton, Jr., A . M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street -:- Ne w York , N . Y . 
Valuable Book at Bargain Prices 
Big 12c. Library of Popular Books for men, women 
and children. Sample copy, 10c. Circulars free. 
SUPERIOR SALES CO., Box 171, Milford, Ohio. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YOR K 
AGENTS WANTED—Bi g seller. $3 to $5 per day. 
Costs you from 10 to 20 cents; sells for 35 cents 
and up. Sample free for the asking. 
G. A. ALBUR Y & CO., P. O. Box 414, Bristol, Pa. 
Mad e $3 0 Firs t Da y 
B. Basha, of Bell Island. Newfoundland, did this with our 
CHAMPION 
Minute Photo Machine 
That beginners make such profit 
at the otart, shows that no experience is needed in this wonderful money-making business. 
Robt. Bock,WUlow Hill, P a . took 
in $55 in one day. Vernard Baker, 
Holbrook, Neb., $29.90. Jas. P.Wende, Ashton, Idaho, 
' S26. C.V . Lovett, Ft. Meade, Fla., made £60 in one day. These 
testimonials are just a few of man? hundreds we have on rile. 
Pictures in Post OardB and on Buttons al l the rage 
at Fairs, Carnivals, Picnics, Resorts, Schools, Depots, Factories, on Streets—anywhere—everywhere. 
Our Champion Camera takes pictures size 2!$x3H, 
1VX2% and buttons. Finishes complete photo in 30 
seconds: 200 an hour. No dark room. Easiest, Quickest, 
Direest money-maker known. Small investment. About 85c 
profit on each dollar you take in. Be your ovm bom. Write at 
once for Free Book, Testimonials and Liberal Offer. 
AMERICAN MINUTE PHOTO CO. 
2214 Ogden Ave., Dept. A212, Chicago, 111. 
MILE S M . WEB B 
School of Practical Photography 
Al l branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses : Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTE R NOW . 
351 9 So. STAT E STREE T CHICAGO , III . 
Telephone Douglass 668 8 
FREE ShotGun 
JULL CHOKE 
Hammerless, 
Double-Barrel Shot 
Gun—very superior. Fitted with 
top snap-break, bar side locks, forged 
frame, case hardened locks and frames. 
Nicely finished, highly polished stock and 
fore end. Polished blued steel barrels; 
choke bored, 12 Gauge and either 30 or 32 
inch barrels. Well balanced and accurate. 
A perfect beauty. The same model used by 
Borne of the best shots in the country. We give it 
Absolutely FREE to Our Agents 
All that we require is that you show our 
samples and take a few orders for our 
special made-to-measure clothes. We 
pay highest cash profits and give extra 
presents besides. Your choice of 628 
valuable premiums—such as Leather Suit 
Cases, Musica l Instruments, Pipes, 
Watches, Sporting Goods, Hats,»etc. 
Write for elegant free outUt and full particulars 
SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept. 87 3 CHICAG O 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Kelsey*s Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price, 50c. each. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906, 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving. Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically tauglu. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme, A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr, Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephore, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TEACHERS The new efficiency era calls for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS * AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $i.oo 
Profit Margi n Fro m 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
an d other styles. 
Send for catalog? 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS. 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern in the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
MADAM : 
TAK E NOTICE! 
The Earle Mail Order House, on receipt of 
$1.00, will mail you this combination: 
1 Bottle Earle', Famous Princess Oil ... . $.50 
1 Jar Earle's Cold Cream Skin and Complexion Food .25 
1 Bottle Earle's Violet Water 50 
With a feu> dollars we can put 
you in mail order business. 
Addre«: P. O. BOX 390, NEWPORT, R. I. 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) 
to settle on FRE E Government Lands in 
Chaves County, Ne w Mexico . Blackdom 
is a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal 
climate. N o "Ji m Crow " Laws. Fo r 
information write 
JAS . HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom New Mexic o 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
REGALIA 
Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Ohio 
If You Plan to Visit 
New York This Summer 
Fo r study, sightseeing or pleasure 
and desire quiet, respectable accommodations with the best private 
families, write the Housing Bu ­
reau of the National League on 
Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes, 
at 127 W . 135th Street, Ne w York . 
Our Service Is Absolutely FREE 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
153 154 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
Residence 2546 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-2161 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARV PUBLIC 
117 W. 6th Street Kansas City, Mo. 
T , . f Central 104-W Telephones: , Ma _ n g, 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L . D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
Philadelphia p a 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW 
90S Walnut Street 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address. Ruben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbic Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORN EYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS . E. GREENE , JR. 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
B . F . BOOT H 
ATTORN EY-AT-LAW 
57 N . Second Street 
Memphis Tenn. 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. 135th Street New York City 
WILLIA M L. BEL L 
ARCHITECT 
E. ALDAM A JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teacher of Theor y and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio: 30 W. 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CITY 
THOMA S W . HOLME S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
43 Y> Decatur Street Atlanta, Georgia 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
MR . ALFRED ELI S D U BOIS, commercial agent 
at Jeremie, Haiti, offers his services for all 
kinds of business and exportation and importation between Haiti and the United States. 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
ANDRE W J. BRANIC, PROPRIETOR 
Packing and Shipping—Goods Forwarded to All Parts 
of the World 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. 
Trunks stored, 25c. per month. 
459 Seventh Avenue New York 
A Tri p to Washingto n this Summer ? 
Have your PHOTOGRAP H made by 
SCURLOC K 
Hundreds of CRISI S readers can tell you how (rood 
STUDIO 
90 0 U Street, N . W. , Washington , D . C. 
Advertising Sales Agents Wanted at Once 
Young men and women. Previous experience unnecessary. Liberal pay while you learn. Permanent 
position. Opportunity for advancement. An independent income. Brilliant opportunity for trustworthy 
young men and women. Vacancies are limited. 
Answer immediately. Must have representatives in 
every city and town in U. S. where not yet represented. Act quickly. Write at ONCE, enclosing 10 
cents for full instructions and information. Address 
Employment Department. 
WATER S BROS., 
97 Wickliffe St., Newark, N. J., U. S. A. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
138'A Auburn Avenue Atlanta, Ga. Business Block and Home Office of 
The North Carolina Mutual 
and Provident Association 
DURHAM , N. C. 
The Largest Negro Insurance Company 
in the World 
Five Millio n Dollars Insurance 
One Hundred Fifty Thousand in Assets 
Operating i n North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia on the 
Mutual Life and Legal Reserve Basis 
JOH N MERRIC K DR. A . M. MOOR E 
Founder and President Secretary and Treasurer 
C. C. SPAULDING 
Vice-President and General Manager 
Mention TH E CRISIS CAP E MAY , N . J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E. W. DALE , Owner. 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: T o keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,0C0; free from debt Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional endowment needed, $30,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
36th and Dearborn Sts.. Chicago, 111. modern standards. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 