NOTIC E T O READER , 
When you finish reading this magazine place a 
1-cent stamp on this notice, hand same to any postal 
employee and it will be placed In the hands of our 
soldiers or sailors at the front, No wrapping—No 
address. A. S. BURLESON, Postmaster General. 
The CRISIS 
Vol . 17—No. 4 FEBRUARY , 1919 Whole No . 100 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R RECONSTRUCTION TE N CENTS A COP Y 
NUMBER Are You Going to Allow 
Lynching Mobs to Continue? 
During the year just ended SIXTY-FIV E Negroes were lynched in the United States by mobs without trial. 
FOU R of them were colored women, two of the four being put to death just 
as they were about to become mothers. 
These sixty-five lynchings are only known lynchings. There are many lynch­ ings which are never recorded in the public press, as is evidenced by the fact that several of the number known were discovered through investigation and through 
confidential reports from persons in the communities where the unreported mur­ ders occurred. 
AL L of these lynchings occurred in Southern States except one. 
Of the causes assigned, whether true or not, THIRTEE N or exactly one-fifth of the total, were for "the usual crime," assault on white women. Other offenses included stealing hogs, "creating a disturbance," striking a police officer and sus­ picion of threatening a white man's life, as well as murder and the like. 
DO THES E FACT S MEA N ANYTHIN G TO YOU ? 
Whatever your race, as long as such things as these can continue, your life and the lives of your family are not safe, for if mob violence can be practiced on one race, it can and will spread to other races. 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is the one organization in America that is fighting this barbaric evil unrelentingly by in­ vestigating and publishing the facts of these outrageous travesties in the name of 
justice and of democracy. It is likewise working to secure adequate laws and 
their enforcement to abate this evil. To do this work, we need a fund maintained 
constantly of $10,000. To secure this fund, we need your help! 
If you believe that lynching should be stopped and that the democracy for which we have fought is to apply to all people, and particularly to a race of eleven millions of loyal Americans who unstintingly and unselfishly gave their young men, their money and their efforts to help America win the war, in spite of these terrible outrages even while the war was in progress on their race, you can show your desire to help in no better way than by helping in this work. 
Tear off the coupon below and send it today with your check to aid in making- America democratic in deed as well as in name. 
Date 1919 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New Yor k Cit y 
Sir: 
I enclose $ as my contribution to the ANTI-LYNCHIN G 
FUN D of $10,000 to help stamp out mob violence and lynching in the United 
States. 
Name 
Street 
City and. State TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHL Y AND COPYRIGHTE D BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOR K CITY. CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS 
MANAGE R 
Vol . 17—No. 4 FEBRUARY , 1919 Whole No . 100 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER : Photograph From Life. Captain Austin Thomas Walden, 
serving in the U. S. Army overseas. 
MA P OF AFRIC A 17S 
A NE W "FOREIGN LEGION" 185 
SENEGALIA N CHASSEURS 191 
ARTICLES 
AFRICA . A Poem. Virginia P. Jackson 166 
TH E COLORE D AMERICANS IN FRANCE. Lieutenant Charles A. Shaw. . 167 
RECONSTRUCTION AND TH E NEGRO. Mary White Ovington 169 
AFRICA AN D TH E WORL D DEMOCRAC Y 173 
CEDA R HILL SAVED . A Poem. Josephine T. Washington 179 
IN THIS HOUR. A Poem. B. B. Church 179 
TH E LYNCHING RECOR D FOR TH E YEA R 1918 180 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 163 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 177 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 182 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 186 
TH E HORIZON 192 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. . _ 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2. 1910. at the post office at New York. New York, 
under the Act of March 8, 1879. 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Nationa l Trainin g Schoo l 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENT S ALREAD Y ESTABLISHE D 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training of Colored Youth in the South. 
TH E FAL L TER M OPENE D OCTOBE R 1, 1918. 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohi o 
(Established 1856) 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science 
and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Government for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' 
Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. 
Courses of Study—College (Scientific, Classical and Educational) ; Normal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theological (Regular and English); Academy 
—-Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 
gymnasium just completed. 
School opened September 17th. For 
information address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , 
President. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
For reasonably mature students 
who have a good secondary 
school preparation, and who desire to become teachers, courses 
are offered during the regular 
term in academic work, domestic 
science, domestic art, physical 
training, elementary school methods, wood and metal working, 
and agriculture. Board room and 
laundry privileges for the year, 
$125. Fall term began Wednesday, September 18, 1918. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 161 
Atlanta University Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta. Ga. 
The courses of study include High school. Normal 
School and College with manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale. Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortynine years of successful work have been completed. 
Students coma from all parts of the South, Gradiates are almost universally aieceeiful. 
For further Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. Institution offers full courses in the follow­ ing departments: College, Normal, High School, Grammar School, Domestic Science and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Ex­ penses very reasonable. 
Tor catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
THE FLORIDA A.and M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President P . O . DRAWE R S2 4 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, com­ modious buildings with modern conveniences. High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well equipped library and laboratories—Literary societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses very low. $100 per year of eight months will pay tuition, board, room, etc. Comfortable dormitories with steam heat and gas light. 
COURSE S 07 STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. Academy—Four years with diploma. Pre-Medical—Two yea. a above academy. College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. First Semester opened October 2, 1916. 
HARR Y ANDREW S XING, President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
Aa Episcopal boarding school for firta, 
smderthe direction of .the Sisters of St, Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
600 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MOREHOUSBTCOLLBdB 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
^ATLANTA . GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
i A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . G A , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE . President 
p ; 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALI7 TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Gass 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN . President 
FISK UNIVERSITY NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc, write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
Morris Brown University Atlanta , Ga . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of special­ ists, trained in some of the best universities in the North and in the South. Noted for high standard of scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Chris­ tian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane sthletics under faculty supervision. Expenses rea­ sonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Nor mal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nnrs Training. Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. First Semester began October 1, 1018. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN. President 
Bishop J. S. Flipper, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Relijioui Co-Educational School will I 
Tradition 
Open to AO Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210just Completed 
and Read; 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session opening October, 1918. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C . SUGGS , President or 
J, E . Aggrey, Registrar 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College is improving its organization to 
meet the greater demand for skilled 
workmen. Four Strong, Practical 
Departments: 
1. The Academic Department. 
2 . The Agricultural Department. 
3. The Mechanical Department. 
4. The Department of Vocational 
Training in Agriculture. Short 
Courses in Agricultural and 
Mechanical Branches. 
The new Department, No. 4, presents an excellent opportunit y to those 
desiring to prepare as teachers of 
Agriculture . 
Write today for terms and catalog 
J AS. B. DUDLEY , President 
GREENSBORO, N . C. 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Diddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School. Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte. N. C. 
J. BRICK AGRICULTURAL, INDUSTRIAL 
AND NORMAL SCHOOL BRICKS, Edgecombe County, N, C. 
(On A. C. L. R. R.) 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic Art , 
Agriculture, Wor k in Wood, Iron and Mechanical 
Drawing. Piano and Voca l Music , Night School. 
A Two Yea r Teacher-Training Course 
Is Open To High School Graduates. 
Teachers and officers, 22; enrollment, 315— 
boarders, 212. Cottages and buildings, 23. School 
farm, 1129acres . Strong athletic, literary and 
Christian associations. School term 33 weeks. 
Environment fine. Telephone and telegraph En ­
field, N . C. For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN, Principal , BRICKS, N. C. 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School For Colored Youth of Both Sexea 
WINSTON-SALEM, N. 0. 
I. Offering Standard Courses In Academic Subjects, In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, In Education. II. Graduates receive the Teacher's Cer­ tificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the moun­ tain section of Western North Caro­ lina and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV. Accommodations excellent and expenses moderate. 
For further Information communicates with S. G . ATKINS , Principal • LATE R STATE NORMAL SCHOOL, 
Winston-Salem, N. C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home Mission Society of Chicago and Bolton and A. B H . Society of New York. Students from six different states, Graduate! ex­ empted on first trade by Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma. 
O. L . COLEMAN , President 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 198 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 17-No. 4 FEBRUARY , 1919 Whole No. 100 
Editorial 
THEODOR E ROOSEVELT 
A GREA T man has died and 
the whole world stands 
shocked and mourning. 
Humanity has lost its greatest 
exemplar of noble aims and singleminded devotion to the development 
of national welfare and glory. The 
youth of Americ a had no finer inspiration toward which to strive and with 
the passing of THEODORE ROOSEVELT 
passes the world's greatest protagonist of lofty ideals and principles. 
Take him all in all he was a man, 
generous, impulsive, fearless, loving 
the public eye, but intent on achieving the public good. An d because he 
was a man so splendidly human even 
his detractors admired him and his 
friends could not eulogize him too 
highly. 
We mourn wit h the rest of the 
world as is fitting, but there is too 
in our sorrow a quality peculiar and 
apart. We have lost a friend. That 
he was our friend proves the justice 
of our cause, for Roosevelt never 
championed a cause which was not in 
its essence right. He had his faults 
—o f the head, not of the heart—and 
even when we suffered as the result 
of an impulse which we could not reconcile with what we expected at his 
hands, we were more grieved because 
he had hurt us than at the hurt itself. 
Even in our hot bitterness over the 
Brownsville affair we knew that he 
believed he was right, and he of all 
men had to act in accordance with his 
beliefs. It is good to remember that 
in 1917 he justified our trust when at 
the time of the East St. Louis riots 
he alone, of all Americans prating 
of liberty and democracy, uttered his 
courageous pronouncement at the 
meeting in Carnegie Hall. 
"Justice with me," he shouted, "is 
not a mere form of words!" 
Well may we grieve for him, soldier, statesman and patriot! 
LETTER S FRO M DR. D U BOIS 
On Board the Orizaba, 
December 8, 1918. 
I A M nearing the coast of "L a 
Belle France," after a most delightful voyage. The weather 
has been cloudy and rainy and 
the sea rather rough, but the swell of 
the angry sea was glorious, and the 
food was fine and I was not sea-sick! 
I found when I reached the dock 
that my troubles were not over. 
Before I could board the ship I must obtain permission from Mr. Creel, who 
was in his office on the deck. I rushed 
in madly—it was crowded with men 
on the same errand. I waited until 
after twelve—then I got a chance at 
the much worried Creel! He had not 
heard of my intention to go from Mr. 
Scott or anyone else. He did not see 
how it was possible—there was no 
room. I sat down and waited. A t 
last Creel turned to me and handed 
me my credentials. 
By and by Moton, Walton and their 
secretary followed me aboard. We 
got a nice room together, with a private bath, and we've had a lovely time. 
There are fifty-two correspondents 
aboard, and both Moton and I have 
lectured to them! 
163 164 TH E CRISI S 
Paris, December 14, 1918. 
We reached Brest on the morning 
of Monday, December 9. Immediately 
hundreds of colored stevedores boarded us and worked all night long unloading the cargo of oats, salt, Red 
Cross packages, mail, etc. They 
worked fast and hard. Someone repeated what I had already heard, that 
the wonder of this war was the transfer of goods from America, and that 
Negroes had done marvelous work at 
this. These were rough workingmen 
but healthy, and bore themselves like 
men. We did not land Monday—indeed there was considerable confusion 
among the correspondents as to their 
future movements as they had not 
heard from Creel, who was on the 
President's ship. Afte r various negotiations—for Brest is a military 
zone and civilians must give strict account of themselves—we were transferred to a lighter Tuesday morning 
and landed in Brest under the escort 
of a military officer. We walked 
about the city and then had two extra 
coaches hitched to the five o'clock 
train and started for Paris. No sleeping cars were available, of course, and 
it was an all night ride of sixteen 
hours! In Paris the confusion at the 
Gare de Montparnasse was the worst 
I ever conceived of in well-ordered 
France: no one to collect tickets, no 
porters, no cabs and a surging crowd. 
I left Moton and Walton at the depot 
while Hunt and I went to find rooms; 
after trying four hotels we at last 
found comfortable and clean quarters 
at ten francs per day per person, not, 
of course, including meals. We will 
probably have to keep these rooms 
even when out of the city as Paris is 
full and still more coming. 
It seems that Moton is especially 
sent by the President and the 
Secretary of War to talk to colored troops 
before they embark and possibly to be 
consulted during the Peace 
Conference. I just happened to butt in and 
being the only one who knew any 
French, we have so far kept together. 
I presume we shall part tomorrow, 
when Moton and his party and 
Thomas Jesse Jones start for the camps. I 
may be able to get a military pass for 
this trip later, but I am not sure. 
Meantime I shall work on the PanAfrica n Conference.. I hope to see 
Walter Lippman, who is attached to 
the House party, tomorrow or 
Wednesday. 
President Wilson arrived i n Paris 
today. A holiday was declared and 
the streets were jammed by a vast 
crowd. I caught the merest glimpse 
of the cortege. 
Everywhere are evidences of war— 
cannon, protected buildings, soldiers 
of all nations—but most of all the 
women clothed in silent black! 
AFRIC A 
EUROP E had begun to look 
wit h covetous eyes toward 
Afric a as early as 1415 
when the Portuguese at the 
Battle of Ceuta gained a foothold i n 
Morocco. Thereafter Princ e Henr y 
of Portugal instituted the series of 
explorations which resulted not only 
in the discovery of Cape Verde, the 
Guinea Coast and the Cape of Good 
Hope, but by 1487 gave to Portugal 
the possession of a very fair slice of 
the Africa n East Coast. This was 
the beginning of the Portuguese 
Colonies of Guinea, Angola and East 
Africa . Other European nations, 
France, Holland, Spain, England and 
Denmark, followed and set up trading stations along the Africa n coast 
whose chief reason for existence was 
the fostering of the slave trade. 
But the partition of Afric a as we 
know it is much more recent and begins with the founding in 1884 of 
the Congo Free State whose inception was so zealously fostered by 
Leopold of Belgium and which i n 1908 
was annexed to Belgium. The EDITORIAL 165 
"scramble" for Africa n colonies was 
on and within a quarter of a century 
Afric a was virtually in the hands of 
Europe. 
In this division the Britis h Empir e 
gained a network of possessions extending from the Anglo-Egyptian 
Sudan down to South Afric a with 
valuable holdings on the East Coast 
and in Somaliland. France came 
next wit h an actually larger area, but 
wit h a smaller population. He r 
spoils reached from Morocco and 
Algeria, including the Algerian Sahara, 
to the French Congo, and on the 
Eastern Coast comprised Madagascar and 
French Somaliland. Germany, who 
was late i n entering the game of colonization, contrived none the less to 
become mistress of four very valuable colonies, Togoland, Kamerun, 
South-West Afric a and East Africa . 
Italy's and Spain's possessions were 
relatively unimportant, embracing 
for the former, Eritre a and Italian 
Somaliland, and for the latter Ri o de 
Oro and the Mun i Rive r settlements'. 
This was the state of affairs when 
the wa r broke out in 1914. In Afric a 
the only independent states were the 
Republic of Liberia , and the kingdom 
of Abyssini a which, according to history, has been independent since the 
days of Menelek, the reputed Son of 
Solomon, and the Queen of Sheba. 
The number of souls thus under the 
rule of aliens is astounding, amounting i n the case of England, France, 
Germany and Belgium to more than 
110,000,000. Durin g the course of 
the wa r Germany lost all four of her 
Africa n colonies with a population 
estimated at 13,420,000. It is the 
question of the reapportionment of 
this vast number of human beings 
which has started the Pan-African 
movement. Colored Americ a is indeed 
involved. 
"IF we do not feel the chain 
When it works another's pain, 
Are we not base slaves indeed 
Slaves unworthy to be freed?" 
RECONSTRUCTIO N AN D AFRIC A 
THE suggestion has been made 
that these colonies which 
Germany has lost should not 
be handed over to any other 
nation of Europe but should, under 
the guidance of organized civilization, 
be brought to a point of development 
which shall finally result in an autonomous state. This plan has met 
with much criticism and ridicule. 
Let the natives develop along their 
own lines and they wil l "go back," 
has been the cry. Back to what, in 
Heaven's name? 
Is a civilization naturally backward 
because it is different? Outside of 
cannibalism, which can be matched in 
this country, at least, by lynching, 
there is no vice and no degradation 
in native Africa n customs which can 
begin to touch the horrors thrust 
upon them by white masters. 
Drunkenness, terrible diseases, immorality, 
all these things have been the gifts 
of European civilization. There is no 
need to dwell on German and Belgian 
atrocities, the world knows them too 
well. No r have France and England 
been blameless. But even supposing 
that these masters had been models 
of kindness and rectitude, who shall 
say that any civilization is in itself 
so superior that it must be superimposed upon another nation without the expressed and intelligent consent of the people most concerned. 
The culture indigenous to a country, 
its folk-customs, its art, all this must 
have free scope or there is no such 
thing as freedom for the world. 
The truth is, white men are merely 
juggling wit h words—or worse— 
when they declare that the withdrawal of Europeans from Afric a wil l 
plunge that continent into chaos. 
Wha t Europe, and indeed only a small 
group in Europe, wants in, Afric a is 
not a field for the spread of European 
civilization, but a field for exploitation. They covet the raw materials,— 166 TH E CRISIS 
ivory, diamonds, copper and rubber 
in which the land abounds, and even 
more do they covet cheap native labor to mine and produce these things. 
Greed,—naked, pitiless lust for wealth 
and power, lie back of all of Europe's 
interest i n Afric a and the white world 
knows it and is not ashamed. 
An y readjustment of Afric a is not 
fair and cannot be lasting which does 
not consider the interests of native 
Africans and peoples of African descent. Prejudice, in European colonies in Africa , against the ambitious 
Negro is greater than in America, 
and that is saying much. Bu t with 
the establishment of a form of government which shall be based on the 
concept that Afric a is for Africans, 
there would be a chance for the colored American to emigrate and to 
go as a pioneer to a country which 
must, sentimentally at least, possess 
for him the same fascination as Eng ­
land does for Indian-born Englishmen. 
NO T "SEPARATISM " 
T
his not a "separatist" 
movement. There is no need 
to think that those who advocate the opening up of 
Afric a for Africans and those of African descent desire to deport any 
large number of colored Americans to 
a foreign and, in some respects, inhospitable land. Once for all, let us 
realize that we are Americans, that, 
we were brought here wit h the earliest settlers, and that the very sort 
of civilization from which we came 
made the complete adoption of western modes and customs imperative if 
we were to survive at all. In brief, 
there is nothing so indigenous, so 
completely "made in America " as we. 
It is as absurd to talk of a return to 
Africa , merely because that was our 
home 300 years ago, as it would be 
to expect the members of the Caucasian race to return to the fastnesses 
of the Caucasus Mountains from 
which, it is reputed, they sprang. 
But it is true that we as a people 
are not given to colonization, and that 
thereby a number of essential occupations and interests have been closed 
to us which the redemption of Afric a 
would open up. The Africa n movement means to us what the Zionist 
movement must mean to the Jews, the 
centralization of race effort and the 
recognition of a racial fount. To help 
bear the burden of Afric a does not 
mean any lessening of effort in our 
own problem at home. Rather it 
means increased interest. Fo r any 
ebullition of action and feeling that 
results in an amelioration of the lot 
of Afric a tends to ameliorate the condition of colored peoples throughout 
the world. An d no man liveth to himself. 
AFRIC A 
VIRGINI A P. JACKSO N 
O
FTE N now I hea r a voice a-calling, 
Callin g me across the might y sea, 
An d responsively my heart is swelling , 
Nativ e land, I long to answer thee. 
Lon g to leave the hate of foster mother, 
To be nurture d by thy kindl y hand, 
Sittin g at thy feet wit h my black brother, 
Africa ! to know thy sunny land . TH E COLORED AMERICANS IN FRANCE 
This article appeared in a newspaper in a town in France where the 
Ninety-second Division was temporarily quartered. The author was a 
French woman. The translation is by Lieutenant Charles A. Shaw. 
CAPTAIN J. A. KENNEDY , M, H. C , 
366th Infantry 
A PEACEFU L town, far from the front. 
A beautiful June day, full of the perfume of roses. Resplendent summer freely 
bursting into bloom, indifferent to human 
plaints, frets and agitations. 
Scene in the town: a boy of ten years, 
head like an urchin of the year one, runs 
through the streets crying, "The Americans 
are coming to B ; the inhabitants are 
invited to greet them." 
"The Americans!" For months they had 
been discussed, they had been expected and 
there was great curiosity; groups of people go down to the public square of the town 
where they see upon the white street the 
first ranks of the Allied soldiers. 
But, what a surprise—they are black soldiers! Black soldiers? Great astonishment, 
a little fear. The rural population, not wellinformed, knows well the Negro of Africa, 
but that from America—the country of 
the classical type, characterized by the cold, 
smooth white face—that from America 
could come this dark group, none could believe his own eyes. 
They dispute among themselves, they are 
a little irritated; some of the women become afraid. One of them confides to me 
that she feels the first symptoms of an attack of indigestion. Smiling, I reassure the 
lady with the all too emotional stomach: 
"Quiet yourself. They do not eat human 
flesh. Two or three days from now you will 
be perfectly used to them." 
I said two or three days, but from that 
very evening the ice is broken. Native 
and foreigner smile at each other, and try 
to understand each other. The next day 
we see the little children in the arms of 
the huge Negroes, confidently pressing their 
rosy cheeks to the cheeks of ebony, with 
their mothers looking on in approbation. 
A deep sympathy is created for these men, 
which yesterday was not even surmised. 
Very quickly it is seen that they have nothing of the savage in them, but that, on 
CAPTAIN WILLIAM H. THOMPSON, 
317th, Engineers 
167 168 TH E CRISIS 
the other hand, one could not find a soldier 
more faultless in his hearing, and in his 
manners more affable or more delicate than 
these Children, of the Sun, whose ancestors 
dreamed under the wonderful nights, along 
the murmuring streams. 
We admire their forms, handsome, vigorous and athletic; their intelligent and loyal 
faces, with their large, gleaming eyes, at 
times dreamy and with a bit of sadness 
in them. 
Fa r removed is the time when their inauspicious influence was felt upon the digestive organs of the lady. Now one is honored to have them at his table. He 
spends hours in long talks with them, with 
a great supply of dictionaries and manuals 
of conversation. The white mothers weep 
to see the photographs of the black mothers and display the portraits of their soldier sons. The fiancees of our poilus become interested in the fiancees across the 
sea—in their dress, in their head-dress, and 
in everything which makes woman resemble 
woman, in every clime. 
Late at night the workers of the fields 
forget their fatigue as they hear arise CAPTAIN JOSEPH LOWE, 317th Engineers 
through the peaceful night the melancholy 
voices which call up to the memory of the 
exile his distant country. 
In the lanes along the flowery hedges 
more than one blond head is seen moving 
thoughtfully beside a curly head, while the 
setting sun makes blue the neighboring hills, 
and gently the song of night is awakened. 
And then, these soldiers, who had become 
friends, depart. One evening sad adieux are 
exchanged. Adieux? How we wish they 
may be only "ati revoirs" (until we meet 
again) ! Promises to correspond, to return 
when furloughs are granted. Here and 
there tears fall, and when the next day the 
heavy trucks roll off in the chilly morning, 
carrying away to the front our exotic guests, 
a veritable sadness seizes us! 
Soldier Friends, our hearts, our wishes 
go with you. May the bullets of the enemy 
spare you. May destiny be merciful to 
you. And if any of you should never see 
your native home again, may the soil of 
France give you sweet repose. 
Soldiers, who arrived among us one clear 
CAPTAIN SPAHR H. DICKEY , 
351st Machine Gun Battalion 
June day, redolent with the
you will always live in our
 scent of
 hearts! 
 roses, RECONSTRUCTION AND TH E NEGRO 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON 
SIX months ago the word on everyone's 
lips was War: the need of continuing 
the struggle against the Central Powers. 
Today, the first thought of those who think 
at all is Reconstruction; what will be done 
for the people, in the land of the victor 
and the land of the vanquished? Out of 
this terrible slaughter, this immeasurable 
What is the Reconstruction that the loss of property and life, what advance will 
Negro demands? be made toward justice and humanity? 
Every oppressed group, workingmen, 
carving out others' fortunes while they 
themselves remain in poverty; women, deprived of their rights as citizens; small 
nationalities, disrupted by the ambitions of 
aggressive empires; so-called "inferior 
races," persecuted by the race at the moment in power; each and everyone of these 
groups is engaged in a separate struggle 
to secure something of value for itself in 
the chaos that comes at the close of a great 
war. Now, they realize, while systems are 
fluid, before the structure of society becomes 
rigid again, is the opportunity to win the 
reality of democracy. So among other 
signs, we see the Jews at length about to 
secure the government of Palestine; the 
Irish returning republican Sinn Feiners to 
the British parliament; Jugo-Slavs and 
Czecho-Slovaks throwing, off the Austrian 
rule; and in America, with growing persistence, we hear the American Negro demanding his rights as a citizen in the 
American democracy. 
Reconstruction for the Negro has a more 
complex aspect than Zionism or even than 
the setting up of an Irish republic. The 
Negro for many generations has been a 
native of the United States, and he has no 
yearning to return to his unsalubrious birthplace. Nor has he any Emerald Island of 
his own. He is living on a continent dominated by the white race, himself but a 
tenth in number of the population. His position may be compared to that of the 
emancipated serfs in Prussia, attached to 
the land of their birth, but demanding that 
the antiquated feudalism that kept them 
without the ballot and subject to many 
humiliations be removed. But, again, the 
dissimilarity of race has from the beginning 
made the advance of the emancipated black 
more difficult than that of the emancipated 
white. Probably among all the peoples 
clamoring for liberty and the right to fuller self-expression in this year of 1919 none 
has a more uphill road than the American 
Negro. 
Mr. J. R. Hawkins, of Washington, D. C , 
in an able speech made before the District 
of Columbia Branch of the N . A. A . C. P., 
which has been commented upon by a portion of the press, makes an analogy between President Wilson's fourteen peace 
points and the fourteen points desired by 
the Negro. Mr. Hawkins' fourteen points 
are: 
1. Universal suffrage. 
2. Better educational facilities in the 
South. 
3. Abolition of the so-called "Jim-Crow" 
system. 
4. Discontinuance of unjust discriminatory regulations and segregation 
in the various departments of the 
government. 
5. The same military training for colored youth as for white. 
6. The removal of an imaginary dead 
line in the recognition of fitness 
for promotion in military and naval service. 
7. The removal of the peonage system 
in the South. 
8. An economic wage to be applied to 
white and colored alike. 
9. Better housing conditions for colored 
employees in industrial plants. 
10. Better sanitary conditions in certain 
sections of our cities and towns. 
11. Reform in the penal institutions of 
the South. 
12. A fair and impartial trial by jury 
instead of lynching. 
13. Recognition of. the Negro's right and 
fitness to sit on juries. 
14. Fair play. "As the Negro has been 
among the first to give his best, 
169 170 TH E CRISIS 
his all, to his country in every 
struggle for the defence of its flag, 
so he wants and expects equal opportunity to serve in the development of his country and the full 
enjoyment of the fruits thereof." 
Now, the practical question that we must 
all ask ourselves is—How shall the 
American Negro go about it to secure as many 
as possible of these fourteen points which 
were so ably presented by Mr. Hawkins, but 
which we reproduce in bare outlines only? 
The recital of wrongs is essential to clear 
thinking upon the subject; agitation against 
wrong is absolutely necessary to awaken 
men's minds to the iniquities which are perpetrated; but a program for the righting 
of the wrong is also a prime necessity. To 
give such a comprehensive program within the space of a short magazine article 
is impossible. We can only indicate certain possibilities along which action may 
be taken. 
Mr. Hawkins' demands may be separated 
into two classes: Those relating solely to 
the Negro and those applicable, though in 
lesser degree, to all the American working 
class. 
To take the last group first: Six points 
are applicable to white as well as colored— 
the removal of peonage, the securing of a 
better wage, better schools, better housing, 
better sanitary conditions and reform in 
penal institutions. In so far as and to 
the extent that the level of Negro opportunity in given communities is below that 
of the whites in these six directions, if due 
or contributed to by denials of fundamental 
weapons of social and economic progress 
such as the ballot, there is, of course, an 
added factor of a purely race-discriminatory character to be overcome. 
Whenever possible the best thing that the 
Negro can do to achieve these six goals is 
to join with the progressive forces in the 
general community and to work with them 
for their attainment. This should not be 
impossible even in the South. White men 
and colored men, white women and colored 
women, have been working side by side in 
the war campaigns, and progress has been 
made along economic and sanitary lines. 
Every effort should be made to see that 
this community of effort does not cease. 
The Negro has shown conclusively that 
he can work with white men at difficult 
tasks and achieve equally good results. 
This has been demonstrated in some of the 
great industrial plants, notably in the shipyards and the steel works. The old contention that the Negro could not handle 
machinery has been proved to be false. The 
managers of great ship-building plants 
along the Atlantic seaboard testified before the Federal Shipbuilding Labor 
Adjustment Board that Negroes had worked 
on machines gauged to as fine a degree as 
one-one thousandth of an inch with perfect 
satisfaction. The first record-breaking riveting feat was won by a Negro crew at 
Sparrows Point, Md. Consequently, as never 
before, the Negro is an important factor 
in the world of skilled labor and the battle 
for a high standard of wages is his battle 
equally with the white man. He should 
accordingly fight for his right to join the 
union of his craft, or if that be denied him, 
form a union of his own. Until the Negro 
recognizes the solidarity of labor neither 
he nor the white man can permanently be 
assured of their industrial and manhood 
rights. 
The children south of Mason and 
Dixon's line are poorly educated. Compulsory 
education is almost unknown, and through 
long-stretching rural sections the schools 
are poorly equipped and the teachers paid 
meagre salaries. And while this is true of 
the white South it is several times more 
true of the colored. For school funds, 
raised per capita, are distributed per color. 
In North Carolina the. white child gets two 
and a half times the amount spent on him 
for teachers' salaries that is spent on the 
colored; in Virgini a the proportion is three 
and a half times; in Florida four times; in 
Alabama five times; in South Carolina seven 
times; in Louisiana ten times the amount 
spent on the colored—these latter states 
providing the pitiful sum of $1.44 and $1.31 
a year, respectively, in teachers' salaries, for 
each Negro child. This discrimination is 
disgraceful. The poverty of the schools 
and the lack of proper educational facilities are appalling. The cure today should 
be sought not only from the South itself 
in a demand for fair apportionment, but 
also from all of the United States. The 
wealth of the country is for the most part 
in the North and West, and the war, that RECONSTRUCTION AND TH E NEGRO 171 
immense national undertaking, achieved by 
the people as a whole, should smash for all 
time through state lines when the welfare 
of the coming generations is at stake. The 
poor white and the Negro of the South 
should together demand federal aid to education, aid based on the needs of the children. 
In the army of the United States (we 
shall soon have the exact figures) there 
were thousands upon thousands of illiterate, 
American-born young men, white and black, 
but chiefly black, who were conscripted to 
give their lives for their country, a country 
richer than any other land in the world, 
but which had not yet given them a sufficient education to enable them to read an 
order from a commanding officer. Illiteracy, 
it must not be forgotten, is an indictment, 
not of the individual but of society. On 
the basis of these figures of illiteracy, taken 
from army camp records, a campaign should 
at once open for immediate national, adequate aid to education that in ten years 
should wipe out all illiteracy among 
American-born children. Such a campaign, although the emphasis, Bulletins No. 38-39, 
U. S. Bureau of Education, 1916, Report 
on Negro Education, has so far been placed 
upon the needs of foreign-born citizens, has 
already been begun under the stimulus of 
Secretary of the Interior Lane. The 
Negro, who needs no "Americanization," 
should press for his right to be freed from 
the incubus of ignorance and illiteracy. To 
benefit him it must be seen to that federal 
aid, as is contemplated in the pending 
(Hoke) Smith Bill , be fairly apportioned 
as between white and colored schools, where 
separate schools are an established practice. 
Senator Hoke Smith, of Georgia, on his 
"own account and at the request of the 
National Education Association and the 
Association of College Presidents," has 
introduced a bill "to create a Department 
of Education, to appropriate money for 
Federal cooperation with the states in 
the encouragement and support of education, and for other purposes." For 
the support of the department $500,000 
annually is appropriated; for federal cooperation with the states, $100,000,000. 
This sum is allocated to several different 
objects or groups of objects, including the 
abolition of illiteracy. The states, in order 
to secure the benefits of the proposed law, 
must make appropriations for corresponding purposes equal to the allotments available in the form of federal aid, and must 
conform to various other requirements. 
Housing, sanitation—these are things 
that Reconstruction especially hopes to remedy. The war has grappled with disease, 
especially with social diseases, has built up 
standards of hygiene and has attacked the 
problem of decent housing. In the next few 
years ther i should be an immense impetus 
toward sanitation in country as well as 
city, toward the tearing down of unsanitary 
homes and the building of clean and attractive new ones. Think of the reconstruction work that we did in France! The 
Negro should unite with the whites to see 
that the same forces that made possible reconstruction in France are turned toward 
reconstruction in America and especially toward reconstruction in that part of the 
country that needs it most. 
Mr. Hawkins asks for better penal institutions in the South. Penal institutions 
are still horrible, disgusting breeders of disease and crime throughout the country and 
they are at their worst in the Southern 
States, as has been shown by scientific 
students of penology. Our whole conception of crime and of the treatment of the 
criminal has until recently been only a 
grade above the rack and the stake; and 
so intrenched are our penal institutions in 
politics that it is discouragingly difficult 
for new methods to receive a fair trial. The 
South has, however, a few reformatories 
where the colored youth is given a chance 
to redeem his life. This has come about 
through the devotion of Negro men and 
women of social vision who have given unstintingly of their personal service. Only 
the surface has been scratched in efforts for 
modern probation methods, juvenile courts 
and similar advanced practices of dealing 
with the offender, particularly the youth 
and first offenders. Institutions for feebleminded and defective Negroes are practically unknown for Negro unfortunates in 
the South. The prison reform associations 
and kindred bodies should be brought in 
closest touch with colored welfare workers 
and reform projects energetically pushed. 
The eight other points of Mr. Hawkins' 172 TH E
fourteen concern the Negro alone. They 
resolve themselves into a demand for the 
ballot, the right to travel as others travel, 
to live as others live, to enter without 
question into the life of the American citizen. Disfranchisement and segregation, 
unfair trial in the courts or no trial at all, 
these are relics of slavery, of that overlordship of which we first spoke, that strives 
to keep the worker where he has formerly 
been, stamped with the sign of inferiority. 
Thanks partly to the valiant American 
Negro soldier, it has become impossible to hold 
men as inferiors in Prussia; it is still easy 
to do so in America where the lord can 
always point to the difference in race, refusing to treat those of another color on 
their merits, segregating those who have 
long since left the group of workers with 
the humblest laborer, and employing learned 
Dryasdusts to prove the immense superiority of himself, the Superman. 
How, then, can the Negro battle to secure these great things which Mr. Hawkins 
enumerates—the abolition of segregation in 
government, in the army, in the daily life 
of the colored man as he moves from place 
to place or settles in his permanent abode? 
Reconstruction comes at the close of the 
war—a war fought for democracy—and it 
comes to aid in better living especially those 
who have served their country and their 
country's government. Yet the last place 
to which the returning colored soldier can 
look for justice is Washington, the very 
fountain-head of the government he has so 
faithfully served. Our government is today in the hands of men inimical to his 
claims for citizenship, men who degrade the 
uniform while they degrade him. The railroads are operated by the United States, 
but colored soldiers are Jim-Crowed as they 
return to their homes, are denied the right 
to sleep in Pullmans, are refused food at 
railroad restaurants. Since 1912 the 
Negro federal employee has been subjected to 
many petty acts of discrimination that have 
aroused race antagonism and created antipathies that never existed before. 
But, fortunately, in a republic legislatures change with considerable swiftness 
and in the coming two years the Negro 
will find many good friends to press his 
claims in the new Congress. He cannot, 
however, expect his friends to do much until 
 CRISIS 
he himself presents an immense driving 
force to stand behind whoever espouses his 
cause. The power of numbers, but organized numbers, is the power that wins the 
battle. Every reader of TH E CRISIS, white 
and colored, should be a member of the 
organization for which TH E CRISIS stands, 
of which it is a part. Progress is won 
when people band themselves together, conviction of the righteousness of their cause 
in their hearts. In a year the N . A . A . 
C. P. has linked together forty-three thousand people where formerly it had less than 
ten thousand. If it continues in the same 
proportion, it should have 160,000 by 
January 1, 1920. This would mean groups of 
men and women, throughout the whole country, who at a given moment could act unitedly for the benefit of the race. This is 
the first great force to be used to secure 
the franchise, fair trial by jury, antilynching. 
And the practical program for this fighting mass? It is not something to be decided on in its entirety. To stamp out 
segregation by legal decision, as the 
Supreme Court decision won by the 
Association through its President, Mr. Moorfield 
Storey, did stamp it out, was the work of 
years. To test the right of the state to 
segregate passengers in interstate travel 
will be a matter, perhaps, of many more 
years. To reduce southern representation 
by enforcing the Fourteenth Amendment 
will be a gigantic task to enter upon. But 
every day there is the unceasing battle, 
in smaller matters, against the tendency in 
the United States, North and South, to treat 
the Negro as one less worthy of regard 
than the white. The only way to progress 
is to take up each case as it comes and work 
to win it. How much this is done today 
the story of the Association's Branches, as 
told in the Bulletin, is evidence. It may be 
rescuing a woman from being convicted as 
a vagrant under the "work or fight" law 
in Georgia; it may be securing the right 
to sit in the orchestra of a theatre in a 
northern city; but each time it is a bit 
gained in the great movement for the destruction of racial discrimination in a 
democracy that has preached to the world 
freedom and justice to all. 
The last point to be touched upon in Mr. 
Hawkins' summary is the right of a Negro AFRIC A 173 AND TH E WORL D DEMOCRAC Y 
to a fair trial instead of lynching. 
The American people are beginning to be 
a trifle worried over the country's lynching 
record which is a standing reproach. Sixtyfour cases in 1918 is an increase of forty 
percent over the preceding year. 
Moreover, this year's lynchings have been on an 
average more brutal than ever before. 
Torturing, burning, the stringing up of a pregnant woman and mutilation of her body, 
hanging a soldier for resisting a sheriff's 
arrest; these are a few of the many ghastly 
tales. 
How to prevent their repetition! There 
are two things that make pre-eminently for 
lynching, ignorance, and the despotic power 
of one man over the life of another. In 
the ignorant, semi-civilized sections of the 
South, one would expect lynchings to continue until education was prevalent. But it 
is significant that some of the worst lynchings of the year have been in prosperous, 
attractive cities like Valdosta. The education of the white man will not bring these 
horrors to an end. Lynchings occur in such 
places because the South by legislation, by 
disfranchisement, has rendered the Negro 
practically helpless. He is as the Belgian 
when the German entered his land. If he 
is submissive, ready to obey the master 
class, he is not likely to be lynched, however heinous his crime. But any sign of 
rebellion and the torture begins. Thus, 
Mary Turner at Valdosta was lynched because she dared to say that her husband 
was innocent and had been wrongfully seized 
by the mob. A helpless man is the first to 
suffer from mob violence. An d so long as 
the Negro is helpless he will be a victim 
when his crime, or supposed crime, brings 
anger and passion to men's hearts. Often 
the passion stirred is that ignoble one of 
"white supremacy"—to be maintained even 
at the cost of the most brutal barbarity. 
Increasingly, in this world, we are learning that there is no half-way status—a man 
must be a man or a slave. When he ceases 
to be a slave, he can never be a safe element in the population until he becomes a 
man. America might as well face this. 
Europe is facing it among the many nationalities that have, of a sudden, sprung into 
prominence demanding their full manhood 
rights. We in the western hemisphere had 
hardly heard of these recalcitrant groups 
but their rulers had heard of them for 
centuries and with all their despotism had 
never been able to stifle the spirit that kept 
them a restless, menacing factor in the 
community life. They were the stumbling 
blocks to reform; to keep them "in their 
place" the empires that ruled them lost in 
finer forms of civilization. Now these peoples are coming into their own. And in the 
United States the oppressed Negro race, 
rich in genius, kindly, hard-working, is also 
coming into its own. The way may be long, 
but a good start has been made along the 
road. 
AFRICA AND TH E WORLD DEMOCRACY 
A REPORT 
AFRIC A must ultimately be returned to 
the Africans. They are the best custodians of their lives and ideals. This was 
the thought developed at the meeting for 
the Pan-African Movement, held January 
6, 1919, at Carnegie Hall, New York, under 
the auspices of the N . A . A . C. P. Mr. 
John R. Shillady, Secretary of the 
Association, presided. 
The man who was first presented to the 
audience was too shattered to speak, but his 
mere presence was a source of inspiration, 
and in itself constituted a strong plea for 
• the renewed consideration of Negro rights. 
This was Captain Napoleon Bonaparte 
Marshall, who was commissioned as 
Lieutenant two years ago, and who on his arrival in France was made Captain and 
Judge Advocate by Colonel Hayward. 
Captain Marshall has been wounded several 
times and now is wearing a steel harness. 
Interest in African affairs was immensely stimulated by the remarks of Dr. 
William Henry Sheppard, of Louisville, Ky. Dr. 
Sheppard has been a missionary to Africa 
and led the first known expedition into 174 TH E CRISIS 
the forbidden land of Kin g Lukenga. He 
also found a new tribe called Bakuka and 
discovered a lake in the interior of the 
Congo region which in 1910 was named Lake 
Sheppard by the Belgian Government. 
This pioneer into Central Afric a did much 
to bring the cause of native Africans close 
to the hearts of his audience. In a speech 
frequently intermingled with words and expressions in African dialect he told of the 
lives of those far-off peoples who are not 
naturally unkind, and who fight the invader 
only to protect themselves. If the visitor 
can satisfy the inhabitants of an African 
village as to his good intentions, he is made 
welcome. The tribes among which Dr. 
Sheppard had lived had reached a high 
state of civilization. They manufactured 
cloth, thread, and fashioned needles of iron; 
they made hats of cowrie shells and had 
razors which were deftly wielded by the 
women who are the African barbers. 
And then Dr. Sheppard told a horrible 
thing. One day a hostile African king was 
reported to be close at hand with his forces. 
At the risk of his own life the missionary 
travelled to the camp of this invader. He 
was received and ushered into the chamber 
of the king. And there he saw eighty-one 
right hands which had been cut off and 
were in process of being cured ! Above them 
waved the flag of Belgium and the king on 
being questioned produced papers from 
Belgian Leopold, of evil fame, asking for ivory, 
rubber or hands of men! Dr. Sheppard 
insists that the horrors of the Congo were 
the immediate result of Leopold's personal 
interest and not connected with the interests of the Belgian Government. The distinction is fine. 
After some musical numbers had been 
strikingly rendered by the Linwood Home 
Quartet and also by the Band of the "New 
Fifteenth," the discussion shifted then from 
the relation of actual experiences to the presentation of the extremely welcome theories 
of Professor Horace Meyer Kallen, of 
Harvard University, who is now working with 
Norman Angell on the League of Free 
Nations, and who is soon to attend the Peace 
Conference. 
Professor Kallen struck at the economic 
cause which lies back of the long and unclean story of atrocities in Africa. It is 
the greed, he declared, of a few men who 
persist in using both their black and white 
fellows to enrich themselves. Traders cross 
from Europe not to sell the native what 
would bring him happiness, but what would 
bring the white man wealth. The articles 
mostly offered for sale are rum and oldfashioned guns. 
When the natives gradually realizing that 
they are being made the victims of greed 
and exploitation offer resistance, the intervention of the home government is called 
in, the resistance is put down with a ruthless hand and a new colony is founded.' The 
lot of the natives of such a colony is a horrible one before they reach the state of 
subjection which will best serve the ends 
of the European country. Thus the 
Germans in Middle Africa treated the splendid 
tribe of the Hereros just as the Belgians 
treated the Congolese,—virtually wiped 
them out of existence. 
The remarkable thing is that, according 
to Professor Kallen, Europe has really 
gained nothing by her exploitation of 
Middle Africa. White people do not want to go 
there to live. They prefer America or 
Australia. Without the existence of trading 
companies and the ambitions of European 
bankers, Afric a would be left to work out 
her salvation as best she might. The 
cheapness of native labor constitutes a serious menace, for it works to the disadvantage of European labor. It is to the interest of the rank and file of mankind 
everywhere that middle Africa be regarded 
as a trust for the plain peoples of the 
world. 
This would call for a League of Free 
Nations whose purpose should be not to exploit but to encourage self-development. 
Experts are needed from all nations who 
understand conditions in Africa . Colored 
peoples, as the ones most concerned, must 
be included in such an organization. 
At the close of Professor Kallen's remarks, Mary White Ovington, Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the N . A . A . C. P., 
was presented. During the absence of 
Major Spingarn, who is abroad, Miss Ovington 
has been Acting-Chairman, but by a recent 
election she has become Chairman in full. 
Miss Ovington read the following significant 
cable which has been sent from France to 
the business session of the annual meeting Africa and the World Democracy 
HOW AFRICA WAS DIVIDED UP AMONG TH E NATIONS 
OF EUROPE BEFORE TH E WAR 
Area 
Country Sq. Miles Populat'n 
British Empire 3,700,000 52,325,000 
France 4,641,000 29,577,000 
Germany 931,000 13,420,000 
Portugal 749,000 8,244,000 
Italy ' 593,000 1,579,000 
Area 
Country Sq. Miles Populat'n 
Belgiu m (Belgian 
Congo) 909,000 15,000,000 
Spain 88,000 660,000 
INDEPENDENT STATES 
Abyssinia 432,000 8,000,000 
Liberia 40,000 1,800,000 
175 176 TH E CRISIS 
of the N . A . A . C. P., by Dr. W. E . B. Du 
Bois: 
"Greeting annual meeting. Race and 
friends -uniting here to secure recognition 
throughout world on terms of full equality. 
Soldiers returning determined to join in 
struggle for justice to all in America. In 
the world crisis let MS strive together without compromise or hesitation," 
James Weldon Johnson, Field Secretary 
of the N . A . A . C. P., followed the reading of Dr. DuBois' message with a statement of three reasons why the N . A . A . 
C. P. is interested in the discussion of the 
African question. 
1. Because no other nation is likely to 
bring it up. 
2. Because this is really an international 
question. Africa was at the bottom of the 
war. If this question is not settled, war 
will continue. 
3. Because the N . A . A . C. P. is interested in questions' concerning the Negro 
everywhere. 
Mr. Johnson then left the subject of 
Afric a and launched upon a magnificent 
plea for the establishment of the rights of 
Negroes in America. The American 
Negro problem is not going to be settled at 
Versailles. This is a domestic trouble and 
our fight must be at close quarters. The 
economic phase is important and must be 
dealt with. But there are two other conditions which we must meet. These are: 
1. Bitter race hatred. 
2. National apathy and indifference. 
It is hard to tell which works the greater 
havoc, but on the whole the second is, in 
the last analysis, the more disastrous. This 
last the N . A . A . C. P. means to attack 
during this year. 
"By intelligent, persistent, aggressive agitation," the speaker concluded, "we are going to startle, to sting, to whip this nation 
into action! The war is over and no miracle hag happened. We are going to fight 
not for the right to fight in France, but 
to fight more effectively here!" 
A brief statement followed then by 
Charles Edward Russell, one of the founders of 
the N . A . A. C. P., and a member of the 
Diplomatic Mission recently sent to Russia 
by the United States. Mr. Russell declared 
himself heartily in favor of the internationalization of the former Germany colonies. 
William Jay Schieffelin, who has recently 
been made Colonel of the "New Fifteenth," 
also expressed his interest in the movement 
of the N . A . A . C. P., and his hopes for 
its success. 
In accordance with suggestions offered 
by Professor Kallen and others, a cablegram was worded to President Wilson and 
a resolution drawn up for the Senate of 
the United States, urging their consideration of the African question. 
The death of Theodore Roosevelt also 
evoked an expression of sympathy from the 
audience. 
The cablegram and resolutions follow: 
Woodrow Wilson, 
President of the United States, 
Paris, France. 
Mass meeting, January 6, Carnegie Hall, 
New York, under auspices of National 
Association for Advancement of Colored 
People, greets the President of the United 
States and pledges him loyal support in his 
efforts toward establishment of a universal 
League of Free Nations which shall have 
among its central duties the protection and 
development of the peoples of Middle 
Africa. 
JOH N R. SHILLADY , 
Secretary. 
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED A T TH E MAS S MEETIN G 
OF TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE, 
CARNEGIE HALL , JAN . 6, 1919 
RESOLVED, That this mass meeting of citizens of the City of New York, held at 
Carnegie Hall, Monday evening, January 6, 
1919, under the auspices of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, to consider "Afric a and the World 
Democracy," urges upon the Senate of the 
United States the necessity for the creation 
at once of an international League of Free 
Nations which shall be charged, among 
other things, with the care and protection of the peoples of Middle Africa . 
RESOLVED, That the citizens of the City 
of New York, in a mass meeting held at 
Carnegie Hall, Monday evening, January 
6, 1919, express their deep sense of loss at 
Colonel Roosevelt's death and their keen 
sense of appreciation of the passion for 
fairness and right dealing which characterized his thoughts and actions in all his 
relations with his colored fellow-citizens. Men of the Month . NEGR O SOLDIER S 
DR. URBANE F. BASS, of 
Fredericksburg, Va., was one of the several 
hundred Negroe s who volunteered for service i n the U . S. Arm y and trained fo r officers' commissions at For t Des Moines. H e 
was graduated from Unio n Universit y i n 
1902 and from Shaw Universit y i n 1906; 
since the latte r yea r he had practised medicine at Fredericksburg . 
H e wa s commissioned First Lieutenant i n 
the 372d Infantr y and sailed wit h the 
America n Expeditionar y Forc e last March . 
O n October 7, Lieutenan t Bass, whil e attending wounded soldiers on the firing line 
was struck by a shell whic h cut off both 
his legs from the thigh . H e gave his life 
freely i n the service of his country. 
LIEUTENAN T MALLALIE U W . RUS H 
received his army commission from 
Fort Des Moines, wit h the distinction of 
being the tallest officer i n the America n 
army at tha t time. H e wa s a graduat e of 
Atlant a University , class of '16, and a 
signe r of the student petition to the government whic h helped to secure the trainin g 
camp for Negr o officers. 
Eigh t months ago Lieutenant Rus h sailed 
wit h the American Expeditionar y Force , a 
member of the 366th Infantry . He was 
given a Wa r Cross. I n a letter to his 
mother, a matro n at Atlant a University , he 
wrote : "Abou t a month ago Genera l 
sent fo r me and said he wanted to shake my 
hand and congratulate me upon the good 
wor k I wa s doing—I wil l fight and die wit h 
m y company. We have never yet been defeated no r made to cower by the enemy." 
And , so, a t the age of twenty-three, i n one 
of the last battles of the Grea t War , as a 
result of shell fire, he made the supreme 
sacrifice. 
LIEUTENAN T URBAN E F . BAS S LIEUTENAN T MALLALIE U W. RUS H 
177 178 TH E
CAPTAI N NAPOLEO N B . MARSHAL L 
CAPTAI N NAPOLEO N B . MARSHAL L 
was sent abroad November, 1917, wit h 
the "Fightin g Fifteenth. " H e is a graduate of the M Street High School, 
Washington, D. C, and of Harvard College and 
La w School. Previou s to going into army 
service he wa s a lawye r i n Ne w Yor k City . 
Fro m Marc h unti l October Captai n 
Marshal l served on the firing line. Thre e 
times he wa s confined to the hospital—first, 
fo r a dislocated shoulder; then he wa s 
gassed; and finally he wa s wounded by 
 CRISI S 
shell fire and shrapnel, October 21, whe n 
he went "ove r the top " i n "N o Man's Land. " 
H e wa s conducting on this occasion a nigh t 
rai d south of Met z to captur e a machine-gun 
position at a salient i n the enemy's line and 
to locate the enemy's fire. Fro m these raids, 
considered b y the Frenc h to be the highest 
test of braver y and ability , few return . 
Fift y yards from the emplacement Captai n 
Marshal l opened fire and i n returnin g ami d 
the terrific fire of the enemy was wounded 
so tha t he now wears a steel corset. H e 
was cited for gallantr y i n this action, and 
wa s among the soldiers recently returned 
to the States on the Celtic. 
THIR D BATTALION , 368T H INFANTRY , 
A . P. O. 766, A . E . F . 
October 3, 1918. 
FROM Commanding Officer, Third 
Battalion, 368th Infantry, to Commandin
Officer, 368th Infantry. Subject: 
Extraordinary heroism in action of First L
Robert L . Campbell. 
1. First Lieut. Robert L . Campbel l during1
 attack on Binarville made by this 
Battalion, 27 and 28 September, 1918, was attached to Battalio n Staff as liaiso n officer 
LIEUTENAN T ROBER T L . CAMPBEL L 179 I N THI S HOU R 
Throughou t the entire engagement he main ­
tained a forwar d message center on Vienne 
Le Chateau-Binarville road abreast of the 
firin g line a t al l times unde r machine gun 
and shell fire from the enemy. H e kept the 
Battalio n Headquarters at al l times i n 
touch wit h the firing line and maintained 
a highl y satisfactory and efficient liaison 
service withi n the Battalio n at great personal risk . 
2. O n the afternoon of 27 September, 
1918, it wa s necessary to send a runne r 
to the left flank of the firin g line about 
two kilometres south of Binarville , across 
an open field swept by heavy enemy machine 
gun fire. The runne r was wounded and fell 
in the middle of the field. Lieutenant 
Campbell at the risk of his life immediately 
crossed the field and brought the wounded 
runne r to a place of safety for medica l attention, whil e the same intense enemy ma ­
chine gun fire stil l swept the field. 
3. I n my opinion it was an act of extra ­
ordinar y heroism i n the face of the enemy 
and I cannot too strongly recommend 
Lieutenant Campbell for such' military honors 
as highe r authorit y ma y deem appropriate . 
B . F . NORMS , 
Major, 368th Infantry . 
CEDA R HILL SAVE D 
JOSEPHIN E T . WASHINGTO N 
Dedicated to the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs 
ABOV E Potomac's rhythmi c flow, 
To Ceda r Hil l I go; 
Its charm o'er sense and spirit steals, 
An d as of yore appeals 
I n cadence sweet and low. 
Once lived the hero of his race, 
Withi n this sacred place ; 
Th e magi c of his presence still 
Th e old home seems to fill, 
An d mem'r y paints his face. 
Far-fame d the spot where Douglass dwelt, 
Her e pilgrims oft have knelt 
In homage to his noble fame, 
Wit h blessings on his name, 
An d gratitude heart-felt. 
An d now before a double shrine, 
In praises we combine 
Wit h Douglass, great and wise and good, 
Devoted womanhood— 
'Roun d both our garlands twine . 
I n union strong throughout the land, 
A. consecrated band, 
A service measureless they wrought 
Whe n Ceda r Hil l they bought 
An d saved from alien hand. 
Fea r not, fain t not, O sable race ! 
The trut h naugh t can efface 
Is wri t on ev'ry passing breeze; 
Wit h women such as these 
Ou r fight is won a-pace. 
IN THIS HOUR 
B . B . CHURC H 
BE strong, m y son! 
Th e weaklin g neve r can secure 
Th e thin g fo r whic h he strives. Fo r he 
Wh o rests, and there supinely waits 
Fo r some chance guerdon of reward , 
But waits i n vain . 
Be strong ! Be strong ! 
Hav e faith , my son! 
Fo r i f wit h all thy strength, thou canst 
No t feel tha t God is on His throne, 
No r know tha t all th y lif e is but 
A prelude to a large r growth , 
Th y strength were vain . 
Hav e fait h i n God ! LYNCHIN G RECOR D FOR TH E YEA R 1918 
ACCORDIN G to TH E CRISI S records there 
were 64 Negroes, 5 of whom were 
Negro women, and four white men, lynched 
in the Unite d States durin g the yea r 1918, as 
compared wit h 224 persons lynched and 
kille d by mob violence durin g 1917, 44 of 
whom were lynchings of Negroes. The record fo r 1918 follows: 
January 17—Hazelhurst, Miss., Sam 
Edwards, burned to death; 
charged wit h murde r of 
Ber a Willes, seventeen year 
old whit e girl . 
" 26—Benton, La. , Ji m Hudson, 
hanged; livin g wit h a whit e 
woman. 
Februar y 7—Fayetteville , Ga. , "Bud " 
Cosby, hanged; intent to rob 
and kidnapping . 
12—Estil l Springs, Tenn., Ji m 
Mclllheron , burned ; accused 
of shooting to death two 
whit e men. G. W . Lych , 
who hi d Mclllheron , was 
shot to death. 
23—Fairfax , S. C , Walte r Best, 
hanged; accused of murder. 
" 26—Rayville , La. , Ji m Lewis, 
Ji m Jones and Wil l Powell, 
two hanged and one shot to 
death; accused of stealing 
hogs. I n the fra y one whit e 
ma n and one Negr o were 
killed i n the exchange of 
shots. 
" 26—Willacoochee, Ga., Ed. 
Dansy, shot; he had killed two 
whit e officers and wounded 
three others. 
Marc h 16—Monroe , La. , George Mc -
Nee l and Joh n Richards, 
hanged ; alleged attack upon 
a whit e woman. 
" 22—Crawfordville , Ga. , Spencer 
Evans, hanged ; convicted of 
crimina l assault upon a colored woman at the Februar y 
term of court and sentenced 
to be hanged, but a mob took 
hi m from jai l and lynched 
him. 
March 26—Lewiston, N. C, Peter 
Bazemore; alleged attack upon a 
whit e woman . 
Apri l 4—Collinsville , 111., Robert P . 
Praeger, hanged (white ) ; 
accused of makin g disloya l 
remarks. 
20—Poplarville , Miss. , Clau d 
Singleton, hanged ; accused 
of murderin g a whit e man . 
H e ha d been sentenced to 
lif e imprisonment. 
" 22—Lexington , Ky. , Berry 
Noyes, hanged ; murde r of 
Sheriff W . E . McBride . 
22—Monroe, La., Clyde 
Williams, hanged; shooting C. L. 
Thomas, Missouri - Pacifi c 
station agent at Fawndale . 
Ma y 17—Valdosta , Ga. , Wil l Head , 
Will Thompson, Hayes 
Turner, Mary Turner, Sydney 
Johnson, Eugene Rice , 
Chime Riley, Simon 
Schuman and three unidentified 
Negroes, hanged ; alleged 
complicit y i n the murde r of 
Hampto n Smith . 
20—Erwin, Tenn., Thomas 
Devert, shot and burned; alleged murde r of a whit e girl . 
22— Red Level, Ala., John 
Womack, shot; alleged assault 
on a whit e woman . 
" 22—Miami , Fla. , Henr y Jackson , 
hanged ; throwin g a whit e 
ma n underneath a train . 
23— Cordele, Ga. , Jame s Cobb, 
hanged ; alleged murde r of 
Mrs. Ro y Simmons. 
25—Barnesville, Ga., John 
Calhoun, shot; alleged murder 
of Joh n A . Willis. 
Jun e 4—Huntsville , Tex., Sarah 
Cabiness and he r six children : George, Peter, Cute , 
Tenola , Thoma s and Bessie, 
shot; alleged threa t by 
George Cabiness to A . P . W . 
Allen . 
180 181 LYNCHIN G RECOR D FO R TH E YEA R 1918 
June 4—Beaumont, Tex., Kirby 
Goolsie, hanged; alleged attack 
on a whit e girl . 
" 4—Sanderson, Tex., Edwar d 
Valentin e (white ) ; murder. 
" 18—Mangham, La., George 
Clayton, hanged; murder of his 
employer, Be n Brooks. I n a 
battle wit h the posse he 
wounded six men, probably 
fatally . 
18—Earle , Ark. , Alle n Mitchell , 
hanged; woundin g Mrs. W . 
M . Langston . 
29—Madill , Okla. , L . McGill , 
hanged; alleged attack upon 
a whit e woman. 
Jul y 27—Be n Hur , Tex., Gene Brown , 
hanged; alleged assault on a 
whit e woman. 
August 7—Bastrop, La. , "Bubber " Hall , 
hanged; alleged attack on a 
whit e woman. 
" 11—Colquit, Ga. , Ike Radney ; 
reason unknown . 
" 15—Nachez, Miss. , Bil l Dukes, 
shot to death. "H e was 
guilt y of a crime too revoltin g for publication. " 
" 15—Quincy, Fla. , unidentified 
Negro ; reason unknown . 
" 15—Macon, Ga. , Joh n Gilham, 
hanged; alleged attack on 
two whit e women. 
" 28—Hot Springs, Ark., 
Frederick Wagner (white) ; disloya l utterances. 
September 3—San Pedro, Cal. , Warre n 
Czeric h (white) ; murder. 
18—Buff Lake , Tex., Obe 
O'Neal ; shot and wounded 
whit e man . 
" 24—Waycross, Ga. , Sandy 
Reeves, hanged ; alleged assault on a whit e girl . 
Novembe r 5—Rolesville , N . G , George 
Taylor, hanged ; rape. 
11— Sheffield, Ala. , Willia m Bird , 
hanged ; "fo r creatin g disturbance. " 
12— Sheffield, Ala. , George 
Whiteside , hanged ; charged 
wit h the murde r of a policeman . 
November 14—Fort Ben d County, Tex., 
Charle s Shipman ; disagreement between landowner. 
" 24—Culpepper, Va. , Allie 
Thompson ; charged wit h 
assaulting a white woman . 
December 10—Green River, Wyo. , Edwar d 
Woodson; charged wit h kill ­
in g a railroa d switchman . 
" 16—Hickman, Ky., Charles 
Lewis, hanged; alleged to have 
beaten Deputy Sheriff 
Thomas. 
18—Newport, Ark., Willis 
Robinson, hanged; murder of 
Patrolma n Charle s Williams. 
" 21—Shubuta , Miss. , Majo r and 
'Andre w Clark e and Maggi e 
and Alm a House, hanged; 
accused of murde r of Dr. E . 
L . Johnston. 
ACCORDIN G TO STATE S 
Georgi a 19 Kentuck y 2 
Texa s 12 Arkansa s 3 
Louisian a 9 South Carolina . 1 
Mississipp i .. . 7 Oklahoma 1 
Tennessee ... . 3 Virgini a 1 
Alabam a 3 Wyomin g 1 
Nort h Carolina . 2 Californi a 1 
Florid a 2 Illinois 1 
B Y RAC E 
Negr o 64 Whit e 4 
B Y SE X (NEGROES ) 
Mal e 59 Femal e 5 
NEGROE S LYNCHE D B Y YEAR S 
1885-1918 
1885 78 1903 86 
1886 71 1904 83 
1887 80 1905 61 
1888 95 1906 64 
1889 95 1907 60 
1890 90 1908 9 3 
1891 121 1909 73 
1892 155 1910 65 
1893 154 1911 63 
1894 134 1912 63 
1895 112 1913 79 
1896 80 1914 69 
1897 122 1915 80 
1898 102 1916 5 5 
1899 84 1917 4 4 
1900 107 1918 64 
1901 107 
1902 86 Total, 2,975 National Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colored-People. 
Brief Summary of Anti-Lynching Work 
THE followin g is a condensed summar y 
of the Association's anti-lynchin g 
work for the yea r 'and of its program for 
1919. A fulle r report of the year's antilynchin g wor k wil l be published in pamphle t 
form and ma y be obtained, upon request, 
from the secretary. 
LYNCHING RECORD OF THE 
YEAR. 
THE record of the year's lynchings appears herein on page 181, classified 
chronologically, by states and by race and 
sex (of the Negroes) lynched, includin g also 
the numbe r of Negroes lynched each year 
from 1885 to 1918, inclusive . 
SPECIAL FEATURES OF 
LYNCHINGS 
FIVE of the victims have been women; 
two were burned at the stake before 
death; four were burned after death; three, 
aside from those burned at the stake, were 
tortured before death; in one case the vic ­
tim's dead body was carrie d into town on 
the runnin g board of an automobile and 
thrown into a public park where "i t was 
viewed by thousands" ; one victim had been 
captured and handed to the officers of the 
law by Negroes themselves. A Negr o soldier, in uniform, was lynched for knockin g 
down a deputy sheriff who attempted to 
arrest him on a charge of robbin g other 
Negroes. Most atrocious of all were the five 
days' orgy i n Brooks and Lownde s Counties, 
Ga. , and the horribl e cruelties visited upon 
Mar y Turner, an eight months' pregnant 
woman, whic h are recited in the investiga ­
tion published of our investigator's findings.* 
In two cases the lynchings were carried 
out in the court-house yar d and in one of 
these picture post-card photos were sold on 
the streets at twenty-five cents each. 
UNREPORTED LYNCHINGS 
INFORMATIO N has reached us tha t additiona l cases of lynchin g have occurred 
i n Brooks and Lownde s Counties, Georgia , 
since the Association's investigator uncovered five more cases tha n wer e reported by 
the Georgi a press as havin g occurred i n 
Ma y (See CRISI S fo r Sept., 1918). It is asserted by our informants tha t the only apparent effect i n Georgi a of the President's 
lynchin g pronouncement of Jul y 26 last has 
been an evidently concerted agreement on 
the part of the press and authoritie s to keep 
al l news regardin g lynching s out of the 
Georgi a press. Lendin g some color to this 
charge is the fac t tha t no Georgi a dail y has 
at any time since May , 1918, published any 
account of the investigation made by the 
Association or of the fact that seventeen names 
of mob leaders wer e put i n the hands of 
Governor Dorsey, despite the considerable 
press comment i n the press of other states. 
One of our Texa s branches (Houston ) 
reported the case of one alleged victim of 
a mob who was burie d secretly and no publicit y given to the facts. The branch's president has writte n to the acting-governor requesting an investigatio n of the circumstances. Finally , some lynching s whic h do 
get into the press are not carrie d beyond 
the immediate neighborhood, sometimes a 
very small one, unless there is some un ­
usua l feature to distinguis h the event. 
INNOCENCE ADMITTED 
PUBLICLY 
IN three cases of whic h we have record 
the press has spoken of the innocence 
of victims; one of these involved three persons, another the ten victims of Brook s an d 
Lownde s Counties mobs (aside from the one 
person who shot the whit e farme r whic h 
was the incentive to the lynchings). I n 
another case it is our informatio n tha t the 
husband of the woma n whom it wa s alleged 
the Negr o victim kille d is himself, or was, 
under arrest, charged wit h the murde r of 
his wife . In an additiona l case a bank 
cashier declared in an interview i n a n 
* The Work of a Mob, TH E CRISIS , Sept. 1918 pp. 251-223 . 
182 N 183 . A . A . C . P . 
Alabam a pape r tha t a certain lynchin g 
victim had committed no offense, tha t there 
had been a mistake made i n the ma n the mob 
wa s after. 
LEGAL ACTION 
GOVERNOR BICKETT, of North 
Carolina, ordered the sheriff to investigate one case; "guilt y partie s could not be 
ascertained. " H e personally appealed to a 
mob a t midnigh t and prevented the lynch ­
in g of a ma n who wa s late r hanged. Th e 
same governor ordered out, or secured the 
support of, a tan k corps of 250 federal army 
men durin g the past month to assist the 
loca l authoritie s of Winston-Salem i n holdin g the loca l jai l against a mob whic h wa s 
attemptin g to get at a Negr o prisone r to 
lync h him. 
The mayor and "home guards" of 
Winston-Salem protected the aforementioned 
prisone r at the cost of the lives of some 
of the whit e officers of the law—despite the 
fac t tha t they wer e emergency officers. 
Governo r Manning , of South Carolina , 
ordered a sheriff to arrest seventeen prominent farmers wh o had participated i n a 
lynching . Bai l wa s fixed a t a tota l of $97,­
500 i n February , but so fa r as we are 
awar e no convictions have followed, nor 
have we learned of a tria l being held. 
Governor Henderson, of Alabama, in 
November, actively supported the attorney genera l of the state who personally took charge 
of an investigation of two lynchings whic h 
occurred i n tha t state on the tenth and 
twelfth instants. Twenty-fou r indictments 
have been found as a result of this effort. 
U p to December 23, sixteen of these twentyfour had been arrested and lodged i n jail . 
ACTION BY EXECUTIVE OFFICE 
IN 32 instances telegrams were sent to governors of 12 states protesting against the 
lynchin g of one or more Negroes, inquirin g 
wha t action was being taken or was contemplated by loca l and state authorities to 
apprehend the members of lynchin g mobs, 
or, wher e efforts had been made to protect 
a Negr o from mob violence or to brin g mob 
members before the courts, commendatory 
telegrams and letters were sent. I n 33 cases 
Chambers of Commerc e were wire d urgin g 
them to take stron g and affirmative action to 
brin g the violators and flouters of the law to 
justice ; i n nine cases other officials were 
telegraphed. I n all such cases press publicit y was given to the Association's action, 
40 press stories being sent out. 
I n nine instances governors acknowledged 
our telegrams; i n eight cases Chambers of 
Commerc e replied and i n four cases other 
officials did so. 
Memorand a have been prepared and sent 
to the President, the Attorne y Genera l of the 
Unite d States and to the executive committee of the America n Ba r Association , on the 
general subject of lynchin g but wit h reference to immediate practica l action desired by 
the Association . Letters requesting editoria l interest i n the fight against lynchin g 
have been addressed to the leadin g papers 
of the country and matte r prepared fo r specific use by individua l papers. 
Publicit y i n the press has been secured 
for the memoranda to the President and the 
Attorne y General. Mr . Storey's address before the Wisconsi n Ba r Associatio n on "Th e 
Negr o Question, " * whic h contains much 
reference to lynching , has been sent to all 
the members of Congress, to governors of all 
the states, mayors of cities, to librarie s and 
to leading citizens i n the country, some 6,000 
copies havin g been distributed. Plan s to 
distribute 17,500 copies of this address have 
been made. 
The members of the executive staff have 
made reference to lynchin g i n addresses i n 
man y cities to both whit e and colored 
audiences. Certain of Field Secretary 
Johnson's addresses before white audiences have 
met wit h notable response. 
Th e Brook s and Lownde s Counties investigation has been printed as a pamphle t fo r 
general distribution. The offer of the San 
Antonio Express to pay rewards of $1,000 
fo r each conviction and substantia l punishment of the lynchers of a Negr o (and $500 
i f white ) has been given wide publicit y 
among the branches. 
INVESTIGATIONS 
SPECIA L investigations b y a member of 
the staff have been made of lynchings 
at Fayetteville , Ga. ; Brooks and Lownde s 
Counties, Ga.; Estill Springs, Tenn.; 
Blackshear, Ga.; and of race riots and disturbances at Camp Merritt , N . J. ; Brooklyn , 
N . Y. , and Philadelphia , Pa . 
" Moorfield Storey, President, N. A. A. C. P. 18 4 TH E
RESULTS 
THE following examples of results following publicity sent out by the 
Association and telegrams addressed to Governors 
and Chambers of Commerc e are reviewed : 
O n Novembe r 9 , telegrams were sent to 
Governor Bicket t of Nort h Carolin a and to 
the Chambe r of Commerc e of Raleig h of 
whic h tha t to the governor was' acknowledged. The governor said that he agreed 
wit h the points made i n the telegram and 
would back the county solicitor i n efforts 
to fix the blame fo r the affair. Th e solicito r carrie d on a n investigation fo r two 
weeks, examinin g twenty-one whit e and nine 
colored witnesses. Th e coroner's jur y ra n 
true to form, finding tha t the victim came to 
his death a t the hands of "partie s unknown " 
to the jury . Te n days late r the same governor appealed successfully to an adjacent 
army camp fo r help to support the mayo r 
and "home guards " of Winston-Salem i n 
holdin g the loca l jai l against a mob whic h 
wanted to take a Negr o prisone r to lync h 
him. Th e two leadin g Raleig h newspapers, 
one of them owned by the Secretary of the 
Nav y Daniels, carried strong editoria l comment against the lynchin g and criticized 
the dereliction of the officers i n allowin g the 
first victim to be taken from them. One of 
them commented directly and favorabl y on 
the Association's telegram. 
The Chambers of Commerce of 
Montgomery and Birmingham, Ala., acknowledged 
telegrams and letters of the Associatio n sent 
durin g November, sayin g tha t they supported our view and that the governor ha d ordered the action referred to on a previous 
page of this report, tha t of instructin g the 
attorney genera l of the state to push a n 
investigation of the lynchings at Sheffield, 
through whic h twenty-four members of two 
lynchin g mobs have been indicted. 
Notabl e is the comment of Governor 
Theodore G. Bilb o of Mississippi , who on 
being interviewed late i n December b y a 
Jackson, Miss. , reporter, said, i n repl y to a 
question as to wha t he was going to say to 
the Association's inquir y regardin g the 
lynchin g of two men and two girls under 
twenty—tha t he wa s going to tell them to 
go to h . 
Space forbids the citation of furthe r examples. 
 CRISI S 
BY-PRODUCTS 
THE most notable events affecting the 
anti-lynchin g campaign , aside from 
the Association's efforts, have been the 
President's pronouncement of Jul y 26, the 
formatio n of the Tennessee La w an d Orde r 
Leagu e i n Marc h and its present extension 
campaig n to organiz e simila r movements i n 
al l the Southern States and the offer of the 
San Antonio Express heretofore mentioned. 
The latte r offer is, of course, of scant promise fo r effective service i n the campaign . 
A n importan t effort of the committee is 
the securing of additional funds for the 
Anti-Lynching Fund. The December CRISIS 
carried a n advertisement fo r $10,00 0 to be 
raised at once. 
PROGRAM OF WORK FOR 1919 
INCREASE D effort alon g lines simila r to 
those whic h have proved their value 
must be made durin g 1919 . Publicit y wor k 
should be extended to reach the most influ ­
entia l sources of opinion. The lynchin g dat a 
i n possession of the Association , now bein g 
reviewed and prepared fo r effective use, 
must be printe d and widel y circulated . 
Th e press, dail y and periodical, the pulpit 
and platform, must be availed of to press 
our cause to the utmost of their ability . Ou r 
office staff must be supplemented by specia l 
workers devoting their exclusive attention, 
under the direction of the secretary, to this 
work . 
OFFICERS ELECTED 
AT the Board Meeting of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, held Monday afternoon, 
January 6, 1919, the following officers were 
elected: Nationa l President, Moorfield 
Storey, Boston ; Vice-Presidents, Archibal d 
H . Grimke , Washington ; Rev. Joh n Hayne s 
Holmes, Ne w York ; Bisho p Joh n Hurst , 
Baltimore ; Captai n Arthu r B . Spingarn , 
Ne w York ; Oswal d Garriso n Villard , Ne w 
York ; Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors, 
Mary White Ovington, New York; 
Treasurer, Oswald Garrison Villard, New York; 
Directo r of Publication s and Research, W . 
E . B . DuBois, Ne w York ; Secretary, Joh n 
R. Shillady , Ne w York ; Fiel d Secretary, 
James Weldon Johnson, New York; 
Assistant Secretary, Walter F. White New 
York . 185 
A NEW "FOREIGN LEGION" 
Including Men From Cuba, Panama, British West Indies, Nicaragua, Holland, Switzerland, France, Ireland and England The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
MAR Y BURRIL L i n the Liberator, "T o 
a Blac k Soldie r Falle n i n the War" : 
O Earth , lie ligh t upon him, 
Deep pillowed on th y breast; 
O Winds, blow soft above him, 
An d gently lul l to rest. 
O questioning Heart, be silent, 
Alla y the bitte r cr y — 
" Wh y should he thus perish? 
Why , fo r freedom, die? " 
* * * 
"Th e Futur e Belongs to the People " is 
the title of a volume containing a series 
of speeches made since the beginning of the 
wa r by Kar l Liebknecht. Th e book is edited 
and translated b y S. Ziman d and published 
by the Macmilla n Company, Ne w York . 
These speeches are well-wort h reading, i f 
only to get a concept of the intense and 
vigorous personality of their author. The 
introduction is by Walte r Weyl , wh o says 
of Liebknecht: 
"T o die among thousands, even to die 
alone, if you thin k you hea r the plaudits of 
your nation or your class, is a thin g man y 
of us have learned to do; but to stand up 
against a vindictive , irrationa l wa r spirit, 
such as ruled Germany, to stand up alone, 
to be condemned not only b y your enemies 
but by those who called themselves your 
comrades and friends, to be met by polite 
derision and by actua l threats of violence, 
to be called a mad-man, to be called a 
traitor, to be misunderstood and doubted; to 
l e met i n occasional moments of dejection, 
even by doubts i n you r own mind , and stil l 
to hold you r own bravel y and wit h cool passion, day after day and day after day, i n 
circumstances growin g dail y more difficult, 
and finally to go to prison gladly , triumph ­
antly—tha t is a courage surpassing the 
courage of the rest of us. It is easier to 
die, even by torture, than to persist i n this 
opposition to forces, physica l and mental, 
not only confronting but surroundin g and 
even penetrating us. " 
* * * 
Recent treatment of the Negr o i n periodicals : 
Movin g Da y Fro m Dixie . A . Lyons. 
World Outlook; October, 1918. 
Negro Exodus. H. W. Horwill. 
Contemporary Review, September, 1918. 
Afric a and South America ; Relations Be ­
tween the Africa n and South America n 
Fauna and Flora. H. H. Johnston, 
Nineteenth Century, July, 1918. 
Across South Afric a i n Wa r Time . G . 
Mason . Outlook, September 25, 1918. 
Rewards to Catch Lynchers. Nation, 
August 31, 1918. 
Democracy versus Demo-n-cracy. Survey, 
August 3, 1918. 
Fun d fo r the Suppression of Lynching . 
Survey, August 24, 1918. 
Conference of Negro Women. Survey, 
August 3, 1918. 
When Dixie Goes Over the Top. H. 
Whitaker. Independent, June 22, 1918. 
American Negro as a Fighting Man. 
Review of Reviews, August, 1918. 
Bush Germans Better Watch That 
Chocolate Front. Literary Digest, June 15, '18. 
N o Angry-Saxyums. Atlantic Monthly, 
September, 1918. 
Wit h the Negr o Troops. E . R. Cunbree . 
Survey, August 10, 1918. 
FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION 
AND NEGRO LABOR 
WILME R ATKINSO N writin g i n the 
Philadelphia , Pa. , North American, 
has this to say on the employment of Negr o 
soldiers after the war : 
Th e 300,000 colored soldiers abroad wil l 
be home i n the course of the comin g yea r 
and wil l be lookin g fo r jobs, and i n this 
search they should be give n fair-pla y b y 
their whit e fellow-citizens, i n recognition 
of their loya l services on the battlefields 
of France . 
* * * 
Bu t the Federa l Governmen t feels differently, for the U. S. Railroad 
Administration has issued the following bulletin for 
the Northwester n Division : 
UNITE D STATE S RAILROA D ADMINISTRATIO N 
W . G. MCADOO , DIRECTO R GENERA L 
WASHINGTON , D . C. 
NORTHWESTER N REGIO N 
Novembe r 13, 1918. 
"Employmen t of Negroe s an d the conditions unde r whic h Negroe s ar e employed as 
firemen, hostlers, switchmen, brakemen, etc., 
are not to be extended beyond the practic e 
heretofore existing ; an d yo u ar e cautioned 
186 TH E 187 LOOKIN G GLAS S 
against employin g Negroe s for this class 
of service, or i n any service not heretofore 
open to them, or to take the places of whit e 
men. 
"R . H . AISHTON , 
"Regiona l Director. " 
* * * 
Th e Buffalo, N . Y. , Express prints with ­
out comment the views of the Chicago 
Defender on this matter: 
Nothin g calls to min d so strongly the 
need of men of large ideas, forward-lookin g 
men, than the latest ukase from Mr. 
Aishton, Regional Director of Employees of the 
Railroa d Administration , i n whic h he seeks 
to restore Negr o railroa d men to a pre-wa r 
status. Mr . Aishto n is rockin g the boat. 
H e is drivin g us to Bolshevism. W e have 
alway s aligned ourselves on the side of law 
and order. Socia l discontent has never been 
permitted to enter into our hopes fo r better 
things. W e have been content to live with ­
i n the laws, supportin g our flag and constitution, determined at al l times to wor k out 
our salvation along the lines of sanity and 
decency. 
Bu t the most harmless worm can be 
drive n to turn . W e have the same aspira ­
tions, the same hopes, as other huma n beings. W e do not desire to become a part 
of the grea t army of unrest now musterin g 
its forces fo r a struggle, the outcome of 
whic h no ma n can see. To say, however, 
that we are blin d to al l the aspects of the 
situation is to assume tha t we ar e not 
huma n 
I f we are not deserving of al l the blessings tha t come as a rewar d of service well 
rendered, who is ? Shal l our faithfulness, 
shall our loyalt y i n every hou r of nationa l 
stress, be rewarded wit h a denia l of those 
fundamenta l rights tha t belong to every citizen of the republic ? Must we and our children
centu
 continue to go fettered through the 
ries? 
* * * 
Th e New York News wishes to know i f 
this is the cause fo r whic h our men have 
died : 
A t the close of a wa r fo r Democracy we 
find Jim-Crowis m quite as rampan t on the 
Government-controlled railroad s as it had 
been before the war, when these same railroads were controlled b y privat e interests. 
So muc h fo r Democrac y and "the rights of 
peoples grea t and small! " More , on these 
same Government-controlled railroads is in ­
stantly initiated a policy of industria l discriminatio n tha t cannot but be accepted b y 
intelligent Negroe s as livin g evidence tha t 
fo r them the Da y of Democrac y is not yet; 
that, i n fact, they are stil l existin g i n a 
lan d and i n a time wher e "al l expressions 
of democrati c sentiments are understood 
not to include Negroes." 
It concludes wit h natura l pessimism: 
W e had anticipated that graduall y but 
surely the industria l gates opened to the 
Negr o durin g an emergency would be slammed i n his face at the passing of tha t emergency. We had anticipated tha t i n most 
of his expectations the Negr o would be 
disappointed. Bu t we had hardl y looked 
for the spectacle of the United States 
Government itself and its accredited agents reintroducin g the er a of industria l strangula ­
tion fo r one-tenth of its own citizenship. 
BLACK WARRIORS 
THE whole black worl d ha s been represented in the Great War. The 
Milwaukee, Wis., Free Press says: 
A picturesque feature i n the allied marc h 
of victor y wa s the place of honor given 
by Franc e to two regiments. Ou t of an 
army of seasoned veterans, soldiers of 
proven valor, the lead wa s assigned to the 
Moroccans and the Foreig n Legion , singled 
out from a body of troops al l of whose regiments had a proud record. Lik e 
"the Gascony Cadets 
O f Carbon de Caste l Jaloux , 
Fame d fighters, liars, desperates," 
the Foreig n Legio n is made of Frenchme n 
whose crimina l record has put them beyond the pale, and wit h these cut-throats 
and desperadoes are combined an adventurous element, since this regiment alone is 
open to men of foreign birt h who enlist 
under the Frenc h flag. 
* * * 
Bu t even the spectacular Foreig n Legio n 
pales beside the Morocca n Division : 
The Frenc h troops whic h last Ma y barred 
Vo n Arnim . the Germa n general, from debouching from Mt . Kemme l against Mt . 
Catz , included the famous Morocca n division whic h formed a part of the wonderfu l Iro n Corps brought up from the Nanc y 
region. Foreign soldiers and Algerian 
Tirailleurs are brigaded in the Moroccan division , makin g it one of the choicest and 
hardest fighting units of the allied arms. 
Th e Morocca n division has seen more 
fighting than any other Frenc h unit durin g 
the war, particularl y i n Joffre's Champagne 
offensive i n 1915, and at Verdu n where it 
took part in the desperate Fleury and 
Thiaumont attacks which raged for weeks incessantly. 
It executed a mammot h rai d at Flirey , 
nort h of Toul , just before American s took 
over tha t sector, and afterwar d supported 
the American s stationed i n their rear. A t 
the beginnin g of Hindenburg's offensive last 
Ma y the Moroccans were shifted northwest, 
seconding Chasseurs and Alpin e troops, and 
late r were rushed to the nort h to take part 
i n the struggl e fo r possession of the ridges 
guardin g Ypre s and the channe l ports. 188 TH E
Durin g this attack Genera l Mangi n reported 
that his black troops were fighting lik e demons. 
Th e Moroccans, lik e all Frenc h colored 
troops, wea r yellow khak i instead of the 
usua l horizon-blue uniform. Members of 
the Foreig n Legio n wea r the blood-red 
shoulder brai d of the Legio n of Honor. 
Their divisio n has been fou r times cited 
as a unit fo r braver y i n the field. 
* * * 
Th e Somalis and South Africa n Negroes 
have covered themselves wit h glory : 
The Somali battalion, recruited i n Somaliland, are stric t Mohammedans, never 
touching win e or alcohol. Th e Somalis are 
ver y independent i n characte r and har d to 
deal with , but their Frenc h officers are 
accustomed to these freedom-loving tribesmen, and by appealing to their pride of race 
and their self-respect obtain their devoted 
obedience. The y lear n to handle modern 
infantr y weapons quickly, and excel i n grenade-throwing and i n rifle and machine-gun 
practice, fo r these are men of intelligence 
and ful l of initiative . 
Tw o hundred sixty-four personal citations 
for braver y were won by the Negr o soldiers of a single Somali battalion since it 
was landed i n France , June , 1916. O f these 
190 were gained i n the fierce battles along 
the Aisn e and the remainde r i n the vicinit y 
of Verdun . 
I n South Afric a 40,000 Negroes were 
servin g i n Botha's command, whil e i n the 
winte r of 1916-17 there were between 6,000 
and 7,000 Kafir-Zulu s and Basutos laborin g 
in France . 
* * * 
Americ a shows
Press concludes: 
 up well, too. Th e Free 
Fo r the first time i n America n history, 
though i n three wars thousands of colored 
men have fought unde r our flag, Negr o officers are leading Negr o troops. Mor e than 
600 men have been given commissions, 105 
as captains and 420 as first and second 
lieutenants. Our Fifty-fourth 
Massachusetts was the first to be organized, but for 
man y years there have been four Negr o 
regiments i n the regula r army , the Twenty -
fourth and Twenty-fifth infantry , and the 
Nint h and Tent h cavalry . The y are notably steady under fire, patient to endure 
hardships, cheerful and good-natured at all 
times. An d they can fight. 
AFRICAN COLONIES 
THE project of Afric a for African s has 
met wit h varyin g comment.. Fran k 
P. Chisholm, Fiel d Secretary of Tuskegee 
Institute, says in the Boston, Mass., 
American '• 
Should not the principl e of self-determination of smalle r nations and weake r peoples be made to apply i n the case of men 
 CRISI S 
even i n darkest Africa ? Do they not stan d 
i n need of justice , succor and sympathy , 
as well as the smalle r nations and weake r 
peoples of Europ e and the Balka n States, 
whose politica l and territoria l wa r aims you 
so clearl y and painstakingl y set forth ? Do 
not black men also cr y out fo r the righ t 
to elect or ordai n their own destiny unde r 
the leadership and guidanc e of enlightened 
and sympatheti c men, rathe r tha n unde r 
oppressive and crue l masters ? 
The fate of these Africa n peoples is 
bound to come before the Peac e Conference 
for settlement, and al l attempts, intentiona l 
or unintentional, to ignor e this fac t or to 
focus the situation otherwis e indicat e a 
tendency and probably a purpos e to "shun t 
aside" or to exclude the Africa n peoples 
i n some wa y from the benefits of the prin ­
ciple of self-determination. 
Is it not pertinent to ask, "Ar e Germa n 
colonies in Africa to be turned back to 
Germany, that the horrors of the past may 
be revisited upon their defenceless heads? " 
Blac k men of Americ a and Afric a have 
helped to defeat and humbl e the German . 
They, too, desire and deserve to have some 
voice i n the determination of their own 
destiny. 
* * * 
The Syracuse , N . Y. , Journal says i n an 
editorial: 
To be granted by the Peace Conference 
a goodly slice of Africa , wher e the Negr o 
race ma y prove its capacity fo r self-government under the principl e of "self-determination, " is a laudabl e ambition, and the 
action of the allied statesmen at Versaille s 
on the memoria l prepared fo r their consideration by a delegation is a matte r of grea t 
importance . 
The petitioners' ple a tha t they be given 
fo r the establishment of a colored man's 
government the forme r Germa n colonies i n 
South Afric a discloses no unsurmountabl e 
barrier, only the prospect of indifference 
to a proposal tha t cannot, howeve r nea r it 
ma y be to the hearts of the race it embraces, measure u p i n emergency and importance wit h countless others involved 
primaril y i n the subject of internationa l 
adjustments. 
Certainl y the colonies i n question wil l not 
be returned to their origina l owner. The y 
could be listed at a fixed pric e by the conference, accepted by some natio n or na ­
tions sufficiently interested i n the unexpected proposal to pa y a large pric e fo r 
negotiating the enterprise, and then turned 
oyer to the colored race unde r certai n conditions guaranteein g their prope r governmental use. Bu t such a course appears at 
this moment to be quite unlikely . To entertain a hope, however, tha t Franc e and 
Portuga l would listen to the suggestion tha t 
they tur n over their colonia l holdings in 
Africa , to be devoted to the enlargement 
of the proposed Negr o republic , is almost 
unthinkable . TH E 189 LOOKIN G GLAS S 
Some comments attempt to paint the project as being merely ridiculous. The Ne w 
Yor k Evening Sun think s tha t the setting 
up of an independent Negr o or Malaysia n 
"self-governing " republi c would be a wil d 
absurdity. History , however, does not recal l any failur e on the part of a black 
government mor e dir e tha n the break-down 
of modern civilizatio n durin g the last four 
years. Th e Evening Sim remarks: 
It is but natura l that i n these days of 
discussion preliminary to the Peace 
Conference the "lunatic fringe" should be a good 
deal i n evidence. Ever y one who has some 
patent nostrum to offer to insur e the millennium i n politics, industry, sociology, is 
naturall y tryin g to brin g it to public attention i n Paris just now 
Tha t serious discussion is devoted to such 
schemes and considerable space given them 
i n America n papers shows how much man y 
of our people have yet to lear n of interna ­
tiona l relationships, of diplomacy, of trade, 
of government, to say nothin g of the course 
of histor y i n the past. An d chasing that 
sort of rainbow ma y sometimes develop into 
a dangerous occupation. 
* * * 
Jame s W . Johnson, Fiel d Secretary of 
the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, has this reply to 
make to the Evening Sun's remark : 
I take i t tha t your, editoria l refers to the 
step taken b y the Nationa l Associatio n for 
the Advancemen t of Colored People i n sendin g W . E . B . DuBois to Franc e on a mission whic h includes a n effort to brin g to 
the attention of the peace delegates and 
the world a disposition of the former 
German colonies that would be in accord with 
America n wa r and peace aims. I so take 
i t because I know of no other organized 
effort i n this direction. 
Will you allow me to say that the 
Advancement Association has no intention of 
askin g tha t these colonies be made "in ­
dependent" black states? The program presented by Dr. DuBois contemplates only 
tha t these colonies be internationalized, and 
tha t their government be administered solely 
fo r the benefit and development of the natives, who should be given participatio n as 
fast as their development warrants. 
* * * 
Th e St. Louis, Mo. , Republican makes a 
sane comment: 
One of the most interesting of the side 
issues i n the Peace Conference wil l be the 
effort of America n Negroes i n behalf of the 
natives i n Germa n East Africa . Their 
idea appears to be tha t the tribes i n that 
country can be organized to govern themselves and tha t the Peace Conference should 
provide fo r their protection whil e that end 
is bein g realized. 
Intelligent Negroes, like Moto n and D u 
Bois, know, of course, that there can be no 
government among those people comparable 
to civilized governments, but, apparently, 
they see i n their plans a hope that the black 
ma n may eventually have a country of his 
own i n his native Africa . The y are lookin g forwar d to the day when the jeerin g 
song "Ever y Natio n Ha s A Fla g Bu t Th e 
Coon " wil l not be true. 
These thoughtful Negroes probably think 
of their scattered tribes somewhat as the 
Jews do and are seeking a Palestine. It 
is a natura l impulse, and the millions of 
Negroes i n this country wit h their ver y 
considerable wealth would contribute liberall y to schools and the other agencies of 
civilizatio n whic h would make an experiment i n the development of an Africa n na ­
tion i n the modern sense possible. Th e history of Liberi a is not encouraging, but these 
days are different from the days when the 
Liberia n ship of state set sail. 
PUBLIC OPINION 
PUBLI C opinion is beginning to voice the 
awakening of the social conscience. 
America , i n spite of herself, is forced to 
wonder how Negroes make her treatment of 
them measure up wit h their newly-acquired 
ideals of democracy. The New York 
Evening Globe says thoughtfully: 
Returnin g on the Celtic recently were five 
battle-scarred members of Colonel 
Hayward's famous Negro regiment, by all accounts second to none i n achievement i n 
the great business of roundin g up the 
Hu n 
They were glad they were back, as their 
shinin g faces attested. Wit h all he r faults 
they still love America . The y hope on tha t 
the sun of the day of justice and equality 
wil l yet rise. Souls of black folk—wha t 
they feel ma y be left to psychologists to 
analyze. Bu t it ma y be surmised tha t 
something aki n to bitterness at least temporaril y finds lodgment. The worl d is bein g made a safe place fo r democracy. Th e 
President is abroad on the great enterprise 
of securing equality fo r all. Ye t i n the 
homeland he thinks it no shame to come 
into close affiliation wit h elements whose 
chief politica l prepossession is that democracy shall cease functionin g when it approaches the cabin of the ma n of color. 
No t tha t the President is specially inconsistent or specially to blame. Ou r radica l elements, those complainin g most loudly 
against injustice, are as cold as marbl e to 
wron g done to 10,000,000 Americans. 
Marsha l Haig , i n his talk at Cologne, 
counselled the Britis h correspondents to do 
wha t they could to prevent an undue swellin g of Britis h heads. The advice is, also, 
good fo r us. Whe n we feel ourselves bein g puffed up by thought of our nationa l 190 TH E CRISI S 
virtues, let us thin k of the Negr o and be 
humble. It is by no means certain tha t 
those who have wor n the country's uniform 
and borne their ful l part i n protecting 
civilizatio n wil l gai n the primar y boon of 
being judged according to their merits as 
men rathe r tha n as members of a race 
against whic h there is discriminatio n more 
gross tha n tha t endured by any of the underdogs of Europe . I n one respect our hig h 
professions ar e a sham. 
Th e Ba y City , Mich. , Times-Tribune suggests a list of Ne w Yea r Resolutions: 
One of the suggestions is that the 
Amercan people cut out some of the offensive 
nickname s whic h have come into use—nicknames whic h carr y a stin g into the hearts 
of those to whom they are applied. 
Me n of foreign birth , or of color, should 
not be nicknamed. W e should not hurt the 
self-respect of other human beings. 
"Dago," "Wop," "Nigger" and similar appellations are disrespectful and hurt people's 
feelings. 
W e must remember tha t when the wa r 
came on, we wer e not particula r about a 
person's nationalit y or color, when looking 
for soldiers to fight the Germa n enemy. We 
called i n the Italian , the Hungarian , the 
Negro , and other nationalities, and told 
them to fight, and they did fight—fought 
as well as the soldiers of any other nationality. I n every battle these men gave a 
good account of themselves. The y showed 
heroism and darin g equal to other soldiers. 
The y helped wi n the wa r fo r us 
Ou r youn g people are asked to pledge 
themselves not to cal l a Negro , "Nigger" ; 
nor a Mexican , a "Greaser, " nor any foreign-born among us by any nickname offensive to him—an d nearl y every nickname is 
offensive to the person at whom it is thrown . 
Al l Bo y Scouts are asked to eliminate 
from their tal k al l these nicknames. Man y 
Bo y Scout camps already have given their 
word tha t they wil l do this. 
Hopes are entertained tha t when the time 
comes when all our boys and girls have 
discontinued this bad habit, grown-ups wil l 
place a closer guar d on their tongues, and 
then no one wil l be a "Nigger, " a "Wop, " 
a "Greaser, " or a "Guiney. " 
They'l l al l be men and women, standing 
on an equal footing i n this respect at least, 
be they ditchdiggers, scrubwomen, bankers 
or wives of millionaires. 
Honestly, we grown-ups would better 
blue-pencil some of our nickname stuff ourselves
it fo r
 before
 us! 
 our sons and daughters do 
* * * 
A writer in the Cincinnati, Ohio, 
Commercial Tribune pleads for the complete 
abolishment of the misnome r "nigger. " H e 
says: 
The person does not exist i n Americ a who 
can more rightfull y hold his head hig h by 
reason of his prid e i n heroic deeds done and 
amount of blood shed to was h the filth of 
aristocracy foreve r from America n soil tha n 
can the Negro . N o people by the sweat 
of their brow have excelled—if they have 
equalled—the Negr o i n helpin g to make this 
country the labyrint h of wealt h tha t it now 
is—certainl y those from whom we al l so 
justl y wis h to move the names of ridicul e 
have not. Th e ver y iron y of the thin g 
migh t be humorous to an outsider, don't 
you think ? It woul d be possible fo r it to 
strike hi m as being a paralle l case wit h the 
Biblica l Pharise e who praye d his praye r 
standin g i n the open marke t simpl y tha t the 
passer-by migh t hea r and applaud, but certainl y we understand tha t such is not the 
case. W e sin g ourselves hoarse wit h the 
word democracy too much fo r that; it just 
merely happens fo r some reason or other 
that i n ou r eagerness to extend our democracy to the strange r withi n our gates we, 
as a whole, have overlooked the wor d "nig ­
ger " used i n derision of our fellow-countrymen and comrades i n arms. 
A SORRY CONDITION 
THE rumo r tha t Congress wil l tr y to 
pass a bil l cuttin g down to constitutiona l limi t the representation of Southern 
States whic h do not permit Negroe s to vote 
meets wit h calm disbelief i n the press of 
both politica l parties. Th e Boston , Mass. , 
Post says: 
Amon g the ambitious plans alread y outlined by the Republica n chiefs who wil l contro l the next Hous e of Representative s is 
said to be one to put throug h a bil l whereby 
the numbe r of federa l representative s from 
the states shall be apportioned on the basis 
of the vote cast and not of population. 
Ther e is no denyin g the justic e of such 
a measure. Most of the Souther n States, 
on one pretext or another, deny the uninfluentia l colored ma n the vote. A la w 
such as tha t proposed would compel these 
states either to permit unrestraine d Negr o 
votin g or to find their representation i n 
Congress ver y much cut down. 
Bu t the Republicans wil l not pass such 
a bill . The y had the opportunit y to do 
so for man y years after the Civi l War , 
and they did not embrace it. Th e trouble 
is tha t the scheme woul d cut both ways, 
for i n some of the most populous Norther n 
Republica n States the vote is awa y behind 
the numbe r of inhabitants, and the G . O. P. 
migh t stand to lose full y as man y representatives i n Congress as the Democrats 
would. 
* * * 
Is not this the shame of a nation? 191 
Press Illustrating Company 
TH E NATIONA L FUNERA L OF GENERA L GALLIENI. TH E SENEGALIA N CHASSEURS . WH O TOO K PAR T IN TH E FAMOU S BATTL E OF OURCQU, WHIC H 
MAD E THI S GENERA L FAMOU S PREVIOU S TO TH E BATTL E OF TH E MARN E The Horizon 
VINCEN T 
SAUNDERS 
TH E WA R 
THE A . and T. College of Greensboro, 
N . C , has demobilized its S. A . T. C. 
Unit of 815 Negro soldiers. President 
Dudley has been informed by telegraph from 
the Committe e on Educatio n and Specia l 
Trainin g to proceed wit h the organization 
of the Reserve Arm y Trainin g Corps. 
ft Th e tota l casualties of the Ninety-sec ­
ond, colored, Divisio n has been estimated 
at 1,478. Amon g the kille d wer e 6 officers. 
One officer and 31 enlisted men died from 
wounds received i n action; 40 enlisted men 
died from diseases; 28 enlisted men are 
listed as "missing" ; 16 officers and 543 
enlisted men were wounded; 39 officers and 
G61 enlisted men were gassed. The 
Division's number of gassed is usually large. 
A reason is, perhaps, tha t the colored soldiers i n the front-line trenches of this division were unusuall y darin g i n makin g 
raids into the enemy's territory . 
ft Th e followin g additiona l reports have 
come to us of the recognition Franc e has 
given Negr o soldiers and regiments wit h 
the America n Expeditionar y Force : 370th, 
Illinois, Infantr y was twice cited for valiant conduct, 25 members were recommended 
fo r the Distinguishe d Service Cross and 100 
were decorated; the entire 367th, "Buffalo, " 
Infantr y wa s cited fo r braver y and each 
member awarded the Croix de Guerre; 124 
members of the 371st and 372d Infantrie s 
were decorated, four of whom received the 
Wa r Cross; the Medaille Militaire wa s 
awarded to Sergeant Depew Preyor, 
Corporal Clifton Morrison, Privates Clarence 
Va n Alle n and Kennet h Lewis, the second 
c f whom wa s kille d at his post by han d 
grenades. 
(J Figure s just made availabl e show tha t 
for the month of September there were 
handled at the America n base-ports i n 
Franc e 767,648 tons, or a dail y average of 
25,588 tons, an increase of nearl y ten pe r 
cent over August. Whe n it is considered 
tha t colored stevedores handled by fa r the 
largest percentage of this tonnage, some 
idea ca n be formed of the ver y valuabl e 
service these colored men are renderin g 
the government. 
ft I n a Peace Parad e i n Atlanta , Ga. , whit e 
Southerners joined i n cheers wit h the colored people whe n a Negr o Captain , Jame s 
H . Scott, passed a t the head of his 'S. A . 
T. C. Battalion . Th e dail y papers, however, made absolutely no mention of the 
colored participants, although beside the S. 
A . T. C. Battalio n there wer e mor e tha n 
a dozen organizations, represented b y nearl y 
three thousand Negroes. 
ft Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrel l has been appointed an assistant in the Personnel 
Department of the War Camp Community 
Service Headquarters at 1 Madison 
Avenue, New York City. 
ft Hil l 304, whic h the Frenc h so valiantl y 
held, wa s late r as valiantl y held by the 
colored soldiers fro m the Unite d States, 
wh o fought wit h al l the heroism and enduranc e tha t the best traditions of the 
army has recorded. 
ft A white soldier with the American 
Expeditionary Force has written to his 
mother: " A Frenc h officer said the other 
day tha t of al l the troops he ha d ever 
seen i n the line, barrin g none—British , 
French , Canadians, Australians—th e finest 
he had seen were the drafted 
Afro-Americans; they are wonderful in the open warfare. " 
ft Car l Jackson, a Negr o of Lon g Beach , 
Cal. , has been cited fo r bravery . H e wa s a 
membe r of a n America n scouting part y 
when he encountered three Germans. One 
of the Boches brought hi m down wit h a 
bulle t i n his righ t leg. However, whe n the 
Germans least expected, he raised up and 
wit h three shots from his revolve r wounded 
the three Boches and took them as prison ­
ers. 
ft French cooks in the employ of the 
American Red Cross in France are learning from 
a Georgi a Negro , Thoma s Kane , how to 
make pies, etc., for the American 
Expeditionary Force. 
192 TH E HORIZO N 193 
C Elsi e R. Lyons, a nurse at the Hospita l 
Americaine , Juilly , France , has writte n to 
America : " I wis h you could see me nursin g a bi g America n Negro . H e is dreadfull y wounded, but is just the best patient 
yo u could imagine . Really , al l the boys of 
his color are exceptionally good patients. 
W e haye three of them i n the building , and 
yo u ought to hear them tell of their experiences i n the trenches." 
C Sergeant-Majo r Sherma n D . Scruggs, of 
Kansa s City , Mo. , has passed the officers' 
examinatio n at the trainin g school i n 
Franc e and been made a First Lieutenant 
in the 370th Infantry . Whil e his division 
wa s unde r Frenc h command, he won a 
meda l fo r braver y i n action when carryin g 
orders through intense shell fire. 
C Th e Ninety-second Division , composed 
wholl y of colored troops under the command 
of Major-General Charle s G. Ballou , exhibited so much valor, courage and braver y 
tha t the Divisio n Commande r was impelled 
to send out a bulletin of congratulation 
to be read before each unit of the division. 
0 It has been suggested tha t the denunciatio n of Governo r McCall , of Massachusetts, 
b y Governor Cornwell, of Virginia , as a 
"foe of the South " eliminated the forme r 
governor from the Peace Commission. 
C Th e colored Fiel d Artiller y Regiment at 
Camp Jackson, Columbia , S. C , won first 
place i n a competitive dril l i n whic h twentyfou r whit e regiments participated. 
C Privat e Harr y Thomas, of Philadelphia , 
Pa. , enlisted i n the 369th Infantry , has 
been decorated b y the Frenc h fo r bravery. 
H e took a n active part i n the battle of 
the Marn e three days and nights withou t 
food or sleep. 
C Announcement is made that the 
Federal Board for Vocational Education will 
undertake regardless of race the trainin g 
of a disabled soldier fo r a new occupation 
or retrainin g to better fit him fo r his forme r occupation, this trainin g to be free of 
cost, i f he is entitled to compensation un ­
der the wa r ris k insuranc e law. The famil y 
or dependents of each disabled ma n wil l receive from the Government durin g his period of trainin g the same monthly allowance as tha t pai d prio r to his discharge 
from the Arm y or Navy . 
C A white officer of the American 
Expeditionary Force says of his assignment to 
MARY E. POPE, 
Assistant Orderly, Minneapolis, Minn., Motor Corps 
a colored regiment: " I didn't like the idea 
at first, felt tha t I had sort of had somethin g pushed over on me, but ever since I 
got here I have liked it better, and now I 
am ver y well satisfied. Muc h better i n a 
good man y ways than I would be i n a 
whit e regiment. There are several colored officers i n the regiment. The y are al l 
ver y gentlemanly and we get along tip ­
top. " 
C The Stevedore Cantonment and the 
Labor Encampments in the vicinity of 
Newport News, Va. , wil l hereafter be known 
collectively as Camp Alexander, i n honor 
of the late Lieutenant Joh n H . Alexander, 
Nint h U . S. Cavalry , a Negr o graduat e of 
the U . S. Militar y Academy , who served 
from the time of his graduation unti l his 
death as an officer of the U . S. Army . 
C Dr . Iverson O. Mitchell , of Washington , 
D . C , who enlisted as a privat e i n the 
Medica l Reserve of the Ninety-second, colored, Division , has been promoted to First 
Lieutenant i n the Denta l Corps, upon recommendation of the Commandin g Genera l 
of the America n Expeditionar y Force . 
C Captai n Joseph E . Trig g wit h the 368th 194 TH E
Infantr y has been transferre d to the staff 
and placed i n charge of munitions. Captai n 
Trig g took a n active and creditable part 
i n the reduction of the St. Mihie l salient. 
C A part of Genera l Order, numbe r eleven, 
issued by the Commandin g Genera l of the 
167th Fiel d Artiller y Brigade , colored, 
states: "The y have been zealous soldiers 
and skillfu l artillerymen . Their recompense lies i n their knowledge of wor k wel l 
done and i n the commendation of those wel l 
qualified to speak. B y day and night, often 
unde r a hai l of shrapnel, often through 
clouds of deadly gas, they have marched 
and fought, dragged their guns sometimes 
by hand into the line, kept open their 
lines of communication and brought up 
their supplies, always wit h a cheerfulness 
tha t earned them the admiratio n of all. " 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
COLONE L CHARLE S YOUN G has written the words and musi c of a song 
"There's a Servic e Fla g i n the Window, " 
whic h is dedicated to Charle s Burroughs. 
C "G o On , Mule, " a n army camp folk-song, 
developed by J. Fletche r Bryan t and R. 
Nathanie l Dett, has been published b y J . 
Fische r and Brother, Ne w York . 
C Th e Colored Centennia l Chorus of nearl y 
two hundred voices sang i n the Centennia l 
Celebration of the State of Illinois. 
(I Negr o Spirituals were the sole musi c at 
a recent vesper service i n the famous First 
Presbyteria n Churc h of Syracuse , Ne w 
York . 
(I A t one of the patrioti c song hours before the starting of work at Rothchild's 
Department Store, Chicago, 111., Mme. Anita 
Patt i Brow n and her accompanist, Miss 
Morley, appeared and rendered "The 
Colored Soldier Boys of Uncle Sam" and 
"Villanelle." 
d "Th e Sailo r and His Songs, " a continued 
articl e writte n b y Mau d Cune y Hare , is 
featured i n the Januar y numbe r of The 
Musical Observer. Mrs. Har e traces a number of sea "chanteys " to Afro-America n 
folk-song. 
C The 807th Pionee r Infantr y Band , Wil l 
Vodery , Director, has been doing praise ­
worth y wor k i n France . The y played at one 
of the base hospitals so acceptably tha t they 
were obliged to accept a retur n engagement. Loui a V . Jones, saxophonist, grad ­
 CRISI S 
uate in violin from the New England 
Conservatory of Music last June, has had occasion to appea r as violi n soloist as wel l 
as doing regula r band duty. Mr . Voder y 
has given muc h time to arrangin g musi c 
and acts fo r soldiers i n France . 
C A t a concert give n i n j?Eolian Hall , Ne w 
York, for the benefit of the Governor's 
Auxiliary of the American Red Cross by the 
U . S. Arm y Trainin g School Band , a mal e 
chorus sang two Negr o Spirituals noted b y 
Natali e Curtis Burlin . 
C Jea n Loncke , a Negr o tenor, gav e a song 
recita l at Rus h Memoria l Churc h i n Ne w 
York City under the auspices of the 
Harlem Conservatory of Fine Arts. Among 
his selections were work s of Burleigh , S. 
Coleridge-Taylor, Tosti , Meyerbeer, Verdi , 
Donizetti, Massenet, Moussorgsky . 
C Clarenc e Camero n White , violinist, an d 
T. Theo. Taylor, pianist, have appeared recently i n join t recitals on the Pacifi c Coast. 
The Sunda y Oregonian (Portland ) said : 
Mr . Whit e is wel l grounded i n violi n play ­
ing and in interpreting the Vitali 
"Chaccone" and his own setting of "Bandanna 
Sketches. " Mr . Whit e exhibited lovely 
tone, deft bowin g and culture d technique. 
I n the Dvora k and Coleridge-Taylo r numbers Mr . Whit e excelled and wa s rewarde d 
wit h delighted approva l fro m his audience. 
Mr . Taylo r is a finished pianist wit h a 
strong, masculin e touch. H e has been wel l 
schooled and is evidently a faithful , conscientious student, satisfied onl y wit h the 
best i n interpretativ e musica l values. H e is 
a n intelligent reade r of Grie g and Chopin , 
and excelled i n playin g the latter's delicate, 
beautiful, romanti c "Berceuse " an d "Scherz o 
i n B-Fla t Minor. " Mr . White's playin g of 
the Coleridge-Taylo r "Gyps y Song " and 
"Africa n Dance " also wa s deservedly admired. 
C The Utopi a Neighborhoo d Clu b of Ne w 
Yor k Cit y gave a matine e musical e and 
reception to wounded Negr o soldiers durin g 
the holiday season. Thirty-eigh t wounded 
soldiers from the base hospitals i n and 
around Ne w Yor k wer e guests on this occasion. 
INDUSTR Y 
THE Lycoming Rubber Company, 
Williamsport, Pa., is employing seventy 
colored girls who are makin g shoes. 
C The U. S. Employmen t Servic e has opened branc h offices i n colored neighborhoods 
and placed competent Negr o examiners i n 
charge i n Ne w York , Philadelphia , Chicago , 
St. Louis, Memphis, Chattanoog a an d At ­TH E 195 HORIZO N 
lanta , to better serve colored wage-earners, 
who ar e stil l eligibl e to service i n any office. Th e Departmen t of Labo r desires tha t 
i n every state the Negr o wage-earner shall 
get i n touch wit h these officials on al l matters relatin g to labor conditions affecting 
them. 
C. Dairy extension forces in North 
Carolina have placed eighteen head of purebred Jersey cows wit h Negr o farmers, 
whic h is said to be the first organized effort 
to place pure-bred animals for famil y use 
on Negr o farms. Th e Negroes paid an 
average of $100 a head fo r the stock. 
C. Dr . George E . Haynes, speaking before 
the Academy of Politica l Science at Hote l 
Astor, Ne w Yor k City , said : "I n Detroit, 
i n 1914, there were probably not a thousand 
Negroe s i n al l the factories i n tha t great 
automobile centre. Th e latest report from 
Detroit, about two months ago, stated that 
probably sixteen or seventeen thousand 
Negroes were engaged in the industries of 
tha t city. " 
(I Mrs. Tompkins, a colored woman employed by Sears, Roebuck Company, 
Chicago, 111., as entry clerk, has been made 
an instructor. This company recently employed two hundred colored girls to do clerica l work . 
(I Th e Mutua l Savings and Loa n Ban k has 
been opened by Negroe s at Charleston, W . 
Va. , wit h a capita l of $125,000. It is located i n the buildin g owned by the Gran d 
Lodge of Pythians, opposite the State 
Capitol. The officers are C. E. Mitchell, 
President; A. H. Brown and J. M. Canty, VicePresidents; T. G . Nutter, Secretary and 
Treasurer. 
(I One hundred an d forty-two Negr o men 
agents and 194 Negr o women agents of the 
U . S. Departmen t of Agricultur e and the 
State Agricultura l Colleges were at work 
i n the Southern States durin g the fiscal 
yea r endin g Jun e 30, 1918. 
MEETING S 
THE thirteenth annua l session of the 
State Associatio n of Negr o Teachers 
of Oklahoma wil l convene at Okmulgee, 
Februar y 21-22. 
G The Farmer's Industrial and 
Agricultural Congress has been organized in 
Okmulgee, Okla., with Mr. J. H. Wallace, 
President. 
C A t a meeting i n Hartford , Conn., of the 
Colored Cooks' and Waiters' Associatio n is 
wa s voted to enlarge the scope of the organization by admittin g porters and "Re d 
Caps " of Canad a and the Unite d States. 
d Th e Nationa l Urba n League held its 
seventh annua l meeting, December 4, i n Ne w 
Yor k City . The wor k of this organization 
is being carrie d on i n twenty-nine cities, 
by seventeen pai d executive secretaries and 
eighty-one other paid employees. Durin g 
the past yea r $102,500 was expended, as 
against $2,500 the first yea r of its existence. The name of the League was formall y changed to "Nationa l Urba n League, " 
wit h the understanding tha t the phrase 
"Fo r Socia l Service Amon g Negroes " would 
appear i n connection wit h the name whenever it appears i n print. Amon g the speakers were Professor Kell y Mille r and Arthu r 
Gleason, who has returned from England , 
where he studied the Britis h Labo r Party's 
Progra m for the Reconstruction Period. 
(I Th e Nationa l Committee on the Churches 
and the Mora l Aim s of the Wa r held an 
Institute, December 16-17, i n Memphis, 
Tenn., at Aver y Chape l A . M . E . Churc h 
and at Church's Auditorium. The followin g persons spoke on the Ne w Task s of 
Reconstruction: Industry, Rev. A. C. 
Williams; Religion, Rev. R. E. Jones; 
Economics, Fayette McKenzie; Social Service, 
Dr. C. H . Williamson ; Education , L . B . 
Moore ; Ne w Civi c Task, Emmet t J . Scott. 
C The Baptist Forwar d Movemen t has 
been organized at Louisville , Ky. , wit h Dr . 
H . W . Jones, President. 
(I Commissions of the Indiana State 
Baptist Association and the Union Baptist 
Association, colored organizations, have met 
at Indianapolis and adopted resolutions 
mergin g the organizations whic h have been 
separated fo r two years. The Rev. G. W . 
Ward , of Indianapolis, is the moderator of 
the Unio n Baptist Association , and the 
Rev. R. D . Leonard , of Connersville , is moderator of the Indian a Baptist Association . 
C A t the dinne r of the Leagu e of Nation s 
held i n Ne w Yor k Cit y at Caf e Boulevar d 
unde r the auspices of the Associatio n of 
Neighborhood Workers, of whic h Mrs. V. 
G. Simkhovich is president, Eugene 
Kinckle Jones, executive secretary of the Urban 
League , was the only Negr o present among 
400 guests. Mr . Jones asked tha t Americ a 196 TH E CRISI S 
whil e actin g as spokesman fo r the Ne w 
Democrac y save herself from an embarrassin g situation institutin g reform measures 
at home tha t woul d guarantee to al l its 
citizens—black as well as white—such a 
portion of justic e as woul d make them a 
free people indeed. 
C_ Nearl y three hundred delegates from 
thirty states attended the National 
Colored Congress conducted by the National 
Equa l Rights League at Washington , D . C. 
Eleven persons were elected to go to 
Versailles in the interest of the Negro during 
the Peace sessions. 
POLITIC S 
IN Los Angeles, Cal., Frederick M. 
Roberts, a colored man, was elected to the 
Assembl y from the Seventy-fourth District. 
(I The vote of Negr o Republicans i n the 
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Wards, Chicago, 
111., was the factor i n the defeat of Jame s 
C. Jones, Democrati c nominee fo r State 
Senator. 
C Willia m A . Riley , the colored nominee 
fo r the Legislature , St. Louis, Mo. , was 
defeated by a pluralit y of 337 votes of his 
Democrati c opponent. 
(I T. V . Coleman, a colored ma n of Fayett e 
County, formerl y postmaster at Kimberly , 
wa s elected to the Legislatur e of West 
Virginia . 
C Negro Democrats of the Fifth, 
Seventeenth, Eighteenth and Twenty-third 
Assembly Districts, Brooklyn, N. Y., have 
united into one organization, wit h twentyseven male and female members, unde r the 
leadership of Wesle y L . Young . 
EDUCATIO N 
OGDE N HALL , i n memor y of the late 
Robert C. Ogden, has been opened 
at Hampto n Institute. It is a new auditorium whic h accommodates 2,500 persons. 
The Rev. Henry Wilder Foote, of 
Cambridge, Mass., has been elected a member 
of the Boar d of Trustees of Hampton . 
C Fre e Evenin g Schools for Negroes have 
been opened at the Lincol n and Dunba r 
Schools, East St. Louis, 111. The first 
Public Evening School for Negroes in New 
Orleans, La. , has been opened by the Ne w 
Orleans School Board , at McDonoug h 
School 35, wit h T. W . Hoffman, Principa l 
of the Colored Hig h School, also principa l 
of the nigh t school. 
C Colored teachers and pupils of Evenin g 
School 17, Indianapolis, Ind., held an " 
Attendance Night," to bring before the people the opportunitie s offered. 
TH E CHURC H 
BEULA H BAPTIS T CHURCH , Tampa , 
Fla. , unde r the pastorship of the Rev. 
G. D . Griffin, has i n two and one-half years 
increased its membership from 300 to 725 
and its Sunda y collections from between 
$15 to $25 to $75 to $145. A recent 
rall y raised over $5,000. A parsonage and 
other propert y have been bought and a 
new, modern churc h is bein g contemplated. 
C Lieutenan t Alla n O. 
Newma n is Chaplai n i n 
the 366th Infantr y of 
the Ninety-second, colored, Divisio n of the 
Nationa l Army . 
C Righ t Rev. Edwar d 
Thoma s Demby, the 
first Negr o bishop of 
the Episcopa l Churc h 
wit h jurisdictio n i n the 
Unite d States of America , has ordained 
the Rev. Fran k Norma n Fitzpatric k to the 
priesthood, i n the Chape l of the Redeemer, 
Oklahoma City , Okla . The Rev . Fathe r 
Fitzpatric k is the first Nego r to be ordained 
a priest i n this countr y by a colored bishop. 
C The congregation of Ame s M . E . Church , 
Baltimore , Md. , i n three weeks raised $1,500, 
and since Apri l last $7,000 more, wit h whic h 
it has wiped out its mortgage . The Rev. 
Albert Mitchel l is pastor. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
THE U. S. Public Health Service, 
Washington, D. C, has published a free 
pamphle t i n its campaig n fo r a cleaner na ­
tion. 
C A colored nurse at Winnemucca , Nev., 
was paid thirt y dollars a day for services 
i n a famil y durin g the influenza epidemic. 
A Negr o cook i n Orleans, La. , has refused 
a n offer of thirt y dollars fro m a privat e 
family , though it is the highest wage ever 
offered fo r such services i n the South. 
C Jessie Elizabet h Jones, a colored woman , 
has been appointed Superviso r of Fiel d 
Work for the American Red Cross, at 
Chicago, 111. 
G The U . S. Paten t Office has granted 
Lieutenant Allan 0. 
Newman TH E HORIZO N 197 
patent No . 1,258,748 to Professor A . U . 
Craig , formerl y instructor i n the Dunba r 
Hig h School, Washington , D . C , for an air 
invention i n cushion supports for vehicles. 
Th e invention comprises a device for quickly 
absorbing the mino r vibrations of automobiles or other vehicles on their axles and is 
said to be of muc h practica l worth i n the 
use of motor vehicles. 
C A Negr o physicia n has been assigned to 
Bellevue Hospital, Ne w Yor k City , i n the 
person of Dr . J . B . Ford , a graduate of 
Howar d University . 
C Mr . H . E . Moore , a youn g colored man, 
has been appointed i n the La w Department 
of the Boston Elevate d Railroa d to do lega l 
wor k i n its claim department. 
C Captain Arthur B. Spingarn, of the 
Sanitary Corps, U. S. Army, and a member of 
the Boar d of Directors of the N . A . A . C. 
P. , is makin g a tri p through the West fo r 
the purpose of securing the practica l cooperation of colored people i n workin g out 
a constructive program for the care of colored soldiers as they are being demobilized. 
Amon g the cities to be visited by Captai n 
Spingar n are Chicago, Cincinnati , Des 
Moines, Kansa s City , Mo. , and Louisville , 
where the Associatio n has branches. 
Branche s are asked to co-operate wit h 
Captai n Spingar n i n every possible way . 
C Appropriatio n bills for the maintenance 
of the Negr o Cit y Hospital , St. Louis, Mo. , 
have been passed, providin g $25,000 for 
equipment, $19,000 fo r salaries, $13,000 fo r 
supplies. It wil l have 500 beds, 16 internes, 
56 nurses. Dr . R. C. Haskell , a graduate 
of Meharry , has been appointed superintendent. 
C Th e Court of Appeals, Annapolis, Md. , 
has given a decision i n favo r of Morga n 
College for the development of seventy 
acres of lan d on Hille n Roa d for Negr o 
residentia l purposes. 
C The Bureau of Education at 
Washington, D. C, is appealing for funds for the 
maintenance of man y worth y Negr o schools 
i n the South because the demands of wa r 
appeals have made it almost impossible to 
rais e sufficient funds for these schools, most 
of whic h have no income save donations. 
C. Mr . F . W . M . Butle r after havin g been 
employed fo r twenty-five years by the Nort h 
Rive r Steamboat Compan y as billin g clerk 
wa s recently appointed agent for the Cornpany at Elizabet h City , N . C , being the 
first Negr o i n this section to hold such 
a position. 
PERSONA L 
LIEUTENAN T GU Y CANADY , a graduate of Clar k University , Atlanta , Ga. , 
was kille d i n action whil e servin g wit h the 
366th Infantry of the American 
Expeditionary Force. He is a son of Rev. and Mrs. H. 
D. Canady, and brother of Dr. H. M. 
Canady. 
C The celebrations of the thirtiet h anniversar y of Dr . M . W . Adams as Dean of 
Atlant a Universit y were ful l of interest and 
appreciation. A portrait of Dr . Adams, 
painted by a student, was presented to the 
institution by the Alumn i Association . 
C First Sergeant 
Thoma s A . Frazie r entered Camp Lee, 
Petersburg, Va., June , 
1918, as a private . I n 
less than five weeks he 
was promoted to the 
rank of Corporal, 
thence to Sergeant and 
then to First Sergeant. 
Since the signin g of the 
armistice , Camp Lee has become the center 
for musterin g out soldiers from all parts of 
the South. In this work, First Sergeant 
Frazier has a very active part. 
C Mrs. Hele n Louis e Dille t Johnson, the 
mother of Jame s Weldo n Johnson, Fiel d 
Secretary of the N . A . A . C. P., and of 
J. Rosamond Johnson, the well known musician, died Januar y 6, i n Ne w Yor k City , 
at the age of seventy-six years. 
C The erection of a monument i n memory 
of Private Henry W. Richardson, 317th 
Labor Battalion, who died and was buried at 
sea on his way to France with the 
American Expeditionary Force, is being planned 
for the U . S. Nationa l Cemetery at Ne w 
Albany , Ind., his home town. His officers 
and comrades have raised a fund fo r the 
memorial. 
C George P. White , a Negr o member of 
the 55th and 56th Congress from Nort h 
Carolina , is dead at Philadelphia , Pa . 
C Dr. H . H . Proctor celebrated his fiftieth 
birthday, December 8, at Atlanta, Ga. 
Almost half of this time he has been pastor 
of the First Congregational Church, 
Atlanta, which, has grown from a membership 
of over 100 to nearly 1,000. 
First Sergeant Thorn 
as A . Frazie r 198 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
MEN AND WOMEN TRAINED IN AGRICULTURE 
WILL BE IN GREAT DEMAND AFTER THE WAR 
Secretary Lane is urging that plans and 
surveys and studies be instituted now so that 
when demobilization begins, farms and homes 
may be offered to the returned soldiers on the 
most encouraging terms. 
Unde r the Smith-Hughes Vocationa l Ed ­
ucation Act , the Government is already training Teachers, Agriculturalists and Mechanics 
whose services will be in great demand after 
the war to help these soldiers and rural in ­
habitants adjust themselves to the problems 
of reconstruction. 
Tuskegee Institute offers the Smith-Hughe s Course in : 
Teacher-Trainin g Agricultur e Mechanic s Hom e Economic s 
Splendid opportunities for young men and women of purpose, and an exceptional 
chance for young men who have been placed in deferred classes or exempted. 
You may enroll NOW . 
Address , R . R . MOTON , Principal , Tuskege e Institute , Alabam a 
"Plans for providing the 
returned soldier with land 
are rapidly taking shape. 
* * * Let us not think of 
the individual returned soldier exiled to a tongue of 
green land between the 
stony breasts of western 
mountains * * * but of organic communities of one 
or two hundred farms with 
competent agricultural advisers to brace up the technique of those who are 
willing to learn."—The New 
Republic. 
THE HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE 
Hampton, Virginia 
OBJECT—Founde d in 1868 
by Genera l Samue l C. Arm ­
strong to train selected yout h 
wh o should go out to teach 
and train their people. Th e 
Institute was designed to in ­
struct Negr o yout h i n morality, industry, and thrift. 
HAMPTO N TODAY—A n 
industria l village wit h goo 
boardin g students; 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; instruc ­
tion farm of 835 acres; and 
200 teachers and workers. 
Hampto n stands for a "sound 
body, a trained capacity, and 
an unselfish outloo k o n life. " 
Hampto n is o n the State of 
Virgini a list of approve d 
four-year secondary schools. 
COURSE S — Recentl y revised four-year courses in 
Teache r Training ; Hom e 
Economics; Business; Agri ­
culture; and 13 Trades. 
OVE R 650 HAMPTONIAN S HAV E BEE N 
I N NATIONA L SERVIC E 
Th e youn g men are under militar y discipline, and are formed into a battalion 
wit h student officers. 
JAME S E . GREGG , D . D. , Principal 
Mention Th e CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 109 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar , High , Normal, Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , Principal. 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Founded in 1867, for the training of Negro Leaders. 
Beautiful and healthful location. First class equipment. 
A Theological Seminary. College courses leading to the A . B. degree — Classics, 
Science, Education, Social Service, Music. Manual training for both sexes. Large 
attention given to debating and public speaking. Nurse Training. Agriculture. 
Graduates enter professional courses in the best Northern Universities. Alabama 
grants first grade teachers' certificates to graduates in Education. 
The product of the College noted for fine character and efficient service. 
Rev. FREDERIC K A. SUMNER , President. 
Bel l Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send lor Enrollment Blank and full information 
' Day and Evening Classes 
Our students hold positions at the Nav y 
Yard , Arsenal , various camps and "over 
there." Al l are receiving excellent salaries 
and highest praise. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo u Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce , 0 . 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
South College Ave. and N . 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October i , 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age , sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worth y traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object. 
Efficiency our aim. 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Ave. Phils., Ps. 
TEACHER S A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teackers and schools and relieves 
teachers of tke embarrassment of job hunting. 
We hare had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas. Delaware. District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky. Mary, 
land, Mississippi, Missouri, New York. North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma. Pennsylvania, Rhode Island. 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia sad Wear 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS' AGENCY 
l1493 New York Avenue Washington. D. C. 
Mention THE CRISIS . 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Operating for the present only in Virginia, The 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
HOM E OFFICE : 
527 NORTH SECOND STREET RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
Is not only paying claims as provided in the policy, to many of our gallant soldier 
boys, but is standing like a stone wall of protection to the thousands of loved ones 
left behind. 
In many instances were it not for the foresight shown by these loving husbands, 
fathers and sons in providing their families with Southern Aid Policies, there would 
be untold suffering in some of the homes of these brave soldier boys. 
By paying promptly sick, accident and death claims to policy holders in the soldiers' homes and purchasing Liberty Bonds, the Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., 
is helping mightily to keep up the morale of our bronze gladiators. 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., is the only insurance organization issuing 
a guaranteed continuous payment policy for sickness and accidents and an undiminished Death Claim after death. 
A Virginia Home without a Southern Aid Society's Policy is not finished. 
JOIN NOW ! 
A. D. PRICE, B. L. JORDAN , W. A. JORDAN , 
President Secretary Assistant Secretary 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 201 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM , N. CAROLIN A 
The Oldest, Largest and Strongest 
Old Line Legal Reserve Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Assets nearly One-Half Million dollars. Owns $160,000.00 in 
Government Bonds. 
The following Editorial appeared in the "Durham Daily Herald," 
Ma y 10, 1918: 
A SUBSTANTIA L ENTERPRIS E 
(Editorial) 
The Nort h Carolin a Mutua l and Provident Association , a business enterprise owned, controlled and actively managed by colored 
men of Durham, has developed into an important asset of the 
city durin g its nineteen years of existence. It is no idle boast nor 
advertising motto that this company is the " largest and strongest 
Negr o insurance company in the world. " It is just that and more. 
It is managed alon g the most modern lines and is a business whic h 
not only the colored people may be proud of, but one whic h also 
deserves a high place amon g the new insurance companies of the 
southern states. 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$1,736,504.50 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $50 0 to $5,000. 
POLICIE S WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS , IN ­
CLUDIN G A PERMANEN T DISABILIT Y CLAUSE . 
John Merrick, President A . M . Moore , M . D. , Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M . Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E . R. Merrick, Ass't Sec'y 
Mention THE CRISIS 20 2 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TH E MESSENGER 
Edited by Chandler Owen and A. Philip Randolph 
Reconstruction and Peace Number Articles on: 
TH E REA L STATU S O F TH E NEGR O 
AFTE R TH E WA R 
by Chandle r Owen 
LYNCHING : CAPITALIS M IT S CAUSE — 
SOCIALISM , IT S CUR E 
by A . Phili p Randolp h 
TH E ETHICA L BASI S O F SOCIALIS M 
by George Frazie r Mille r 
COMMENT S 
"Yo u both write clearly, forcefully, in diction that isi tine, and with ample knowledge and 
grasp of your themes. One may dispute your 
opinions, hut not criticize with much success 
your presentation." 
Thomas W. Churchill, forma President of 
the New York City Board of Education. 
"As a former Professor of English, permit me 
to congratulate you both on the skill ami 
vivacity with which you both write. But far 
more important to me than the style of your 
writing is the substance, the courage and significance of what you have to say." 
H IV. L. Dana, former Professor of 
English and Comparative Literature for 
ten years in Columbia University, N.Y.C. 
"We wish you great success and are thankful 
that we have such fearless and able periodicals 
as Th e Messenger and Th e Liberator to dare to 
speak out NO W when others grow silent and 
submit to be muffled." 
Archibald H. Grimbc, President of tinNational Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, Washington, D. C. 
"I have just read the current copy of your 
magazine. It has a lot of good stuff in it." 
Roger N. Baldwin. 
I want to express to you my pleasure at the publication of a magazine, edited by colored men, that 
makes as its cornerstone the solidarity of labor, and 
the absolute need of the Negro'3 recognizing this solidarity. As a socialist of many years standing, I have 
looked cloesly at. lb© young colored men and women, 
graduates from our colleges, hoping to find some of 
them imbued with the revolutionary spirit. I have 
found a few. and I have been especially happy to sec. 
here in New York, two good socialists of college training who are giving up their life to the spread of socialist thought. Mary White Ovington. 
15 cents a cop y $1.50 a year 
TH E MESSENGE R PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
2305 Sevent h Ave. , New Yor k 
Suburban Homes with all modern improvements on 
electric car line connecting Washington, Baltimore, 
Annapolis and Camp Meade. Aut o road. 30 minutes' ride to city. 
Near Washington, D. C. 
Lots 60 by 150. $270, $10 down. $5 monthly. Houses 
built to order after $100 or more is paid on lot. 
Fertile land, (rood elevation, gardens, chickens, etc. 
Store, school, churches, community club. Booklet free: 
Thos. J . Callowa y 
1403 Ne w Yor k Avenue 
Washington, D . C. 
I live 
{ there \ Among Friends 
1 5 PHONOGRAPH 
RECORDS FOR $1.00 
Al l Good Title s 
Ca n be Haye d o n An y Dis c 
Machin e 
Sent Parce l Post Prepaid 
Anywher e i n th e TJ. and Enclos e 
Money-Orde r o r Currenc y 
Independent Dru g Co . 
Dept. X . 204 So. Wabas h Ave . Chicago . III. 
Colored Dolls for 
Your Children 
Teach your children pride of race and appreciation of race. Earl y impressions are lasting. These beautifully dressed, unbreakable, 
brown skin dolls designed and made by colored 
girls in a factory owned and controlled entirely 
by colored people. These arc not the old time, 
black face, red lip aunt Jemima colored dolls 
but dolls well made and truly representative of 
the race in hail" and features. 
16 inches with long flowing curls, beauti-
' full y dressed $3.50 
1G inches with marce l wave, nicely 
dressed 3.00 
16 inches Buste r Brow n style hair , very 
neat 2.50 
Soldier boy in ful l unifor m 1.50 
So far as we know this is the only Negro 
doll factory in the world. 
BERR Y and ROSS, Inc. 
Factory : 36-38 W . 135th St. 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
H . S. Boulin , President, 
Dr . E . Rawlins, Vic e President, 
Counsellor P. Ifield, Genera l Manager , 
S, Reid , Business & Sales Manager . 
AGENT S WANTE D WRIT E FO R TERM S 
Only those who mean business need writ e us. 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th ST. , PH I LA. , PA . 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping 
Ou r students recently appointed at the Nav y 
Yard , Arsenal, and Post Office as stenographers and clerks are receiving Bi g Salaries— 
male and female stenographers are averaging 
$1800 per year. We are informed that one 
of our male students is a stenographer in 
France. 
SCHOO L OPENE D OCTOBE R 15th 
THRE E MONTH S COURSE— 5 lessons a week. 
Apt students can pass Civil Service Examination at end of course. 
EIGH T MONTH S COTJRSE— 2 lessons a week. 
W e advise students to take this course because it gives more time for lesson preparation 
and practice. 
Edwar d T . Duncan , President 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
Al l Races 
Prepare In the beat school of its kind In the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civi l Service Training , and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Communit y Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 8S 
Lenox Avenue and 135th It., Ne w York City . 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fit * W . Mottley. President 
Farmer s and people interested in agriculture. 
Subscribe to February issue 
Modern Poultry Business 
THREE 
MONTHS 
TRIAL 1 2 Cent s 
HEL P 
U S T O 
SUCCEE D 
Edited by a Colored American, who is a Cornell graduate, a teacher and farmer. 
3 4 Cornhill . Boston, Mass. 
Mention TH E C RISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 203 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y n ATLANTA , GA . 
$25.00 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War'* combined with "History of the Negro Race,'' 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
M y courie in Penmanship , Bookkeeping , and Shorthan d 
throug h the mail wil l prepare you (or the position worth 
while. Write for information. 
A. D. Nolley, M. Pen., 519 Michigan Ave.,Buffalo, N.Y. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY 
Contains 280 Pages, 16 Chapters, Historical 
sn d Biographical, 17 Ful l Page Illustrations 
Printed on Vin e Antique Book, Bound in Ful l 
Green Extr a Cloth, Gold Titl e on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price , net $1.26. Postage 
Prepaid II.40. Orde r through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St. Washing-ton, D. C. 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h Schoo l graduate s an d youn g 
wome n o f highe r educatio n an d goo d mora l 
character, betwee n the ages o f 18 an d 35, a 
thre e years' cours e i n the professio n o f nursing . Fo r furthe r informatio n appl y to the 
Superintenden t enclosin g a stamp . 
LAS T CHANC E T O BU Y 
STEWARD'S HAITIAN REVOLUTION 
Al l hut a few were destroyed by fire November 24th, anil the plates have been melted up. 
The price will not be raised hut the supply is 
very limited. 
Pric e $1.25, postage 10e\ Address: 
T, G. STEWARD , Wilberforce , Ohio. 
Books? See the Selected List on 
Inside Back Cover 
A PROPHEC Y FULFILLE D 
Single 
Copy 
25c 
Our Book, "A Tribute for the Negro Soldier" written just 
as the United States entered the World War, said that on 
the basis of the Negro race's history in every age, and every 
clime, the American Negro soldier would make his mark in 
France. He has. Read the facts on which this prediction 
was made. 
BRUC E and FRANKLIN , Publishers 
1309 E . 18th Street AGENTS WANTED Kansa s City, Mo . 
Something Everybody Needs 
W o ar c offering three of the biggest bargains of the day in the 
line of Christma s cards. Do not fail to make your purchas e through 
us. Yo u get your cards retail at Wholesal e prices. 
W e place in every order cards appropriat e to send to the Boy s at 
Cam p or Abroad. Now is the time to order, if you want your cards 
to reach over seas for Christmas, 
Send stamps or money for the set you desire. Wonderfu l assortment for 12c. 
Qualit y sets at 25 and 50 cents. No like bargains obtainabl e 
anywhere . 
TH E TRUE BLU E CALENDA R 
This pictur e having become so popular we have responded to many 
requests by makin g a beautiful calendar which we wil l send you 
for 30<f. 
JULIA N R. MILLER , Jr . 
1201 SPRUC E STREE T PHILADELPHI A 
Mentio n TH E C RISIS . 204 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOKS BY 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
1. A n Appeal to Conscience (just off the press—Macmillan ) $ .60 
2. Race Adjustment (publishers' price, $2) i-5° 
3. Out of the House of Bondage (publishers' price, $1.50) 1.25 
4. The Three Books Listed Above (publishers' price, $4.10) 3.00 
5. The Disgrace of Democracy (100,000 copies distributed) 10 
6. The Negro's Place in the New Reconstruction (Read y about 
Tan. 15, 1919) 10 
Ad d 10% for postage to all orders. Remittance invariably in advance. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
KELLY MILLER, Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Inform yourself as to 
THE EXODUS OF TH E 
NEGROES 
By reading 
Dr. Carter G . Woodson's 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO 
MIGRATION 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This book is unique in that it is the 
first and only scientific treatise in 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
wh y the Negroe s have migrated, 
where they have gone and what they 
have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Send all orders to the author 
1216 You Street, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 
"An Art Treasure at Home" 
W m. Edouar d Scott offers a rare 
opportunity to have a rare art treasure in you r home. Send a photograph of yourself or you r son or you r 
brothe r wh o is "ove r there" and he 
wil l paint a beautiful portrait of him ; 
one that wil l retain color for one 
hundred years. Absolut e lightness. 
Guaranteed both in colo r and form 
and beautifully framed to hang. 
PRICE S 
8 x 10 $25.00 
16 x 20 50.00 
24 x 30 100.00 
Terms: One-half down , balance on receipt of portrait, if absolutely satisfactory. 
Mr . Scott is a graduate of the Ar t 
Institute, Chicago , Julia n Academy , 
Paris, Franc e and the Beau x Arts, 
Paris. H e also studied three years' 
wit h H . O. Tanne r and has exhibited 
in the Roya l Academy , London , Eng ­
land, Salon, Paris and in most of the 
large Ar t Gallerie s of the Unite d 
States. 
Address: 
William E. Scott, "^."i,* " 
Telephone—Wentwort h 8810 
1124 N . Senate Ave. , Indianapolis. Ind. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 205 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concern 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
12S W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano 
"Sh e ha s one of the best voices that Go d ha s given 
her race."—Lo s Angele s Times. 
"Specia l prais e must be given Mrs. Florenc e TaJ -
bert wh o beside he r natura l gift ha s already reached a 
hig h plan e of professional accuracy." — Boraia n De -
vrles In Chicag o American . 
Engagements accepted for Concerts. Recitals, Oratorio . 
659 28th Street, Detroit, Mloh . 
Clarenc e Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron Whit e and his Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season/* Fo r terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
JOSEPHINE JUNIUS 
CONTRALT O 
"Mis s Juniu s is th e possessor o f a contralt o 
voice , lovel y i n quality , whic h sh e use s artistically."—Osca r Saenger. 
AVAILABL E FO B CONCERT S 
202 "W. 140th Street New Yor k City . 
CLEOT A COLLIN S 
LYRI C SOPRAN O 
"Miss Collins possesses a voice of wonderful qualit y 
whic h she manage s with admirabl e taste an d skill . He r 
personal char m an d beauty enhanced the pleasur e enjoyed 
fro m the really excellent progra m presented. Th e audienc e 
of musi c lovers in attendanc e were enthusiasti c In thei r 
appreciation o f the talented young lady."—Newar k Dail y 
News. ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
103 W . 143d St. New Yor k City . 
BUST S O F 
Booker T . Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen . $1.50 each. The 4 busts 
far $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
TH E ISAAC HATHAWA Y AR T CO . 
71S S. HICKOR Y ST , PIN E BLUFF , ARK . 
MUSIC ARRANGE D 
COMPOSED , ENGRAVE D 
PRINTE D & PUBLISHE D 
MELODIE S PU T T O SON G POEMS—TITL E PAGE S DESIGNE D 
We aell everythin g i n ehmet musi c 
BUTLE R MUSI C COMPAN Y 
1431 Broadway , New Yor k Cit y 
HONOR AND JUSTICE TO ALL 
TRU E SON S O F FREEDO M 
OU R COLORE D HEROE S 
8T H COLORE D REGIMEN T 
Latest Colored Patrioti c Picture**, Siz e 10x20. lleUl l 25c, 
Publisher s rates u> agents an d dealers. 15 by mall , $1.00: 
100 by mall . $5.50) 500 by express, $22.50; 1,000, $40.00. 
Illustrated catslog flee. 
HANZE L SALE S COMPAN Y Northsldc , Pittsburgh, p. . 
HOM E DRY 
CLEANING! 
AewbcwkjUBt published. A little treasure for every 
woman. Telle how to Dr y Clean anything at home 
from a necktie to a carpet. Saves time and money. 
Enclosoaeilverdimein this advertisement and return it to us for descriptive circular and we will 
• ndyou freeof charge our recipe "How to Clean 
nm l Cur l Feathers and Plumes." ' 
THE ADAMS CO., 156 Fores t Ave . Cincinnati, Ohio 
HOTE L WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for Firtt-Cla; People 
3427 Sout h Par k Annus , Chicago . III. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
Th e most wonderfull y Idea l spo t whe n youn g an d 
ol d cast asid e fo r th e tim e al l th e can e an d worrie s 
o f thei r strenuous, nerv e rackin g routin e Uve a an d 
rom p an d pla y onc e mor e a s childre n an d enjo y t o th e 
ful l natur e I n al l he r wondrou s glory . Th e waters o f 
th e lak e an d surroundin g trou t stream s ar e fairl y 
teemin g wit h gam e fish o f th e best varieties. 
D o yo u enjo y bathing , boating , fishing, huntin g f 
D o yo u enjo y roaming throug h th e wood s trickin g 
wil d flowers an d wil d berrie s f 
D o yo u wan t a plac e t o g o wher e yo u ca n buil d o p 
you r health , vitality , energ y an d business efficiency ? 
D o ye n enjo y minglin g wit h th e active , thinking , 
progressiv e peopl e o f th e day—peopl e wh o d o thing s f 
D o yo n believ e I n progress an d d o yo u wan t t* 
hav e a par t I n on e o f th e mos t progressiv e move - t 
rnents o f th e time t Surel y 1 
The n yo u wil l b e Intereste d in , an d wan t t e 
ow n a lo t o f you r ow n I n Beautifu l Idlewild , , 
Michigan . I f yo u ac t a t onc e yo u ca n se ­
cur e a beautifu l lot fo r onl y 124.1 0 eaon , 
16.0 0 cash ; $1.0 0 pe r week . Whe n you r 
payments ar e complete d th e lo t wil l b e 
transferre d t o yo u b y a n absolut e 
warrant y dee d wit h abstrac t showin g 
clea r title . 
Good live energetic 
agente wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg. 
So. Dearbern S t 
Chicago, ILL. 
Mentio n THE CRISIS 206 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Roland W. Hayes 
Phonograph Records 
NO W READ Y AN D O N SAL E 
(Order by Number) 
No . I. Swin g Low , Swee t Chario t $1-50 
Negr o Spiritual , b y Harr y T . Burleigh . 
No . 2. Vest i L a Glubb a (Pu t o n You r Smock). . .$2.00 
Arios o fro m Pagliacci . Orchestra l Accompaniment , 
Leoncavallo . 
No . 3. Twiligh t $1.00 
B y Katherin e A . Glen . 
N o 7. B y an d B y $1.50 
B y Harr y T . Burleigh . 
AGENT S 
BOSTON , Mass. , A . J . Jackso n & Co. , 13 0 Bovlsto n St . 
BOSTON , Mass. , Harol d Whltham , 17S1 Washingto n 
S t 
BOSTON , Mass. , Hicks , Lane y & Eaton , 79 8 Tre -
mon t St . 
BOSTON . Mass. . R . A . Dinsmore . 122 1 Tremon t S t 
CAMBRIDGE , Mass. . Mrs . G . W Nowell . 89 0 Mai n S t 
SPRINGFIELD . Mass. , J . W . Adams , 15 0 Easter n Are . 
WOBURN . Mass. , Edwar d Caldwell , 38 8 Mai n St . 
DETROIT . Mich. , Mis s Grac e L . May , 25 3 Woodlan d 
Ave . 
MONTGOMERY , Ala. . Wm . G . Porter , 36 8 Margare t 
S t 
TUSKEGEE , Ala. . Arthu r Logan . Tuskege e Institute . 
BIRMINGHAM , Ala. , Mis s E . O . Wyatt , 131 9 Ave ­
nu e H . 
JACKSONVILLE , Fla. , J . M . Robinson . Jr. . 192 4 
Eas t S t 
BALTIMORE . Md. . W . H . Roberts , 23 5 N . Amit y S t 
PORTLAND , Ore. , Mrs . E . D . Cannady , 401 Buchana n 
Bldg . 
PHILADELPHIA . Pa. , Mrs . Margare t Corbett , 194 1 
Bainbridg e S t 
SA N FRANCISCO , Cat , Harr y O . Johnson , Securit y 
Saving s Bank . 
OAKLAND , Cat . Mr s A . M . Smith . 494 Mos s Ave . 
CHARLESTON . S . C , E . B . Lawrence , 470 Kin g S t 
NORFOLK . Vs. , Mis s B . C . Smith , 82 2 Avenu e A . 
PITTSBURGH , Pa. , Mrs . Chas . H . Trusty , 82 0 Ana -
hel m S t 
WASHINGTON . D . C , Dr . .C . Sumne r Wormley , 99 7 
Florid a Ave . 
SPRINGFIELD , III. . Mis s Alic e E . Williams , Bo x 
131 , Chatham , ni. 
MADISONVILLE , Ky. , J . A . Watson . 117 Mai n S t 
LOUISVILLE , Ky. . Mrs . H . W . Jordan , 82 2 W . Wal ­
nu t St . 
LOUISVILLE , Ky. . Columbi a Phonograp h Co . 
PROVIDENCE . R . I. , Mis s Fiorin a M . Williams . 29 7 
Thaye r S t 
NE W YOR K CITY . N . Y „ Dr . Harr y C . Blue , 563 
Leno x Ave . 
MONTCLAIR . N . J „ Jame s D . Williams , 7 Walnu t 
PI . 
COLLINGSWOOD , N . J. . Mr . R . M . Taylor , 501 Par k 
Ave . 
WACO . Texas . Mis s Lul a Mayes . 1127 N . 7t h St . 
MERIDIAN , Miss. . L L . Foster . 120 7 26t h St . 
INDIANAPOLIS . Ind „ W . H . Roberts. 601 Wes t S t 
WILMINGTON . Del. , Mrs . Elizabet h D . Banton , 924 
Frenc h St . 
GREENVILLE . S . C , Mr . Jame s R . Kennedy . 63 0 
Pendleto n St . 
CHARLESTON . W . Va. . Mr . Ednar d C . Lewis , Bo x 
1204 . 
WILLIAMSBRIDGE . N . Y „ Mr . Rober t H . O . Young , 
743 E . 218t h S t 
DETROIT . Mich. . Mr . W . Arnol d Hooper . 047 St . 
Antoin e St . 
TULSA , Okla. . Mr . Harriso n M . Maiill . 3051 % N . 
Hartfor d Ave . 
ATHENS , Ga. . l>r. Charle s Walton . 121114 Clayto n St . 
DAYTON . 0. . Mr . It. 1'. McGregor , in n rmilia c St . 
CHICAGO . III. . Mr . Davi d Mitchell , 6428 Eberhar d 
ATC. 
PARKERSBURG . W . Va. . Mis . Jame s E . Edmondson , 
.'.PI ."'lb St . 
ST . LOUIS . Mo. , .Mr. Claborn e Riddle , 1208 W . Col o 
Brilltaute . 
NE W YOR K CITY . Th e Pac e & Hand y Musi c Co. , 
Inc. . l.",47 Broadway . 
STAMFORD , Conn. , Mr . Emmct l Lewis , Bo x 277. 
Reliable and energetic Agents wanted in 
cities not here mentioned. 
Roland W , Hayes, Tenor, Recitals, Concerts, 
Oratorio, Opera, Bookin g engagements for 
Continenta l Tour , season 1919. Fo r terms, 
dates, etc. please write . 
Roland W. Hayes 
3 WARWICK ST. BOSTON, MASS. 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Patent s secured o n easy terms 
Writ * for particulars. 
JOS. H. STEWART, Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave.. N.W. , Washington, D. C. 
Central 104-W 
Main 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTOEKITAT-LA W NOTAB T Pvaue 
160 7 Williamson Building QereUncu Ohis 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R MORRIS 
ATTORNE Y AN D COOHSBXLOB-AT-LA W 
818 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNE Y -AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel MJTTert HUT Cable Addrean, Bpbea 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTOaaSY asrs) Couasiuoa -AT-LA V 
14 gcaosl Street Boston. Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Aahbie Hawkins George VV. P. McMechea 
HAWKINS & McMECHEN 
ATTOSMSYS-AT-LA W 
SI East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
Fo r all Lodg e an d Churc h Societie s 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L. JONES , Pres. 
N. E. Cor. Sth and Plum_Sts., Cincinnati, Ohio 
CU T YOU R OW N HAI R 
The Duplex Hai r Cutter is the greatest invention of the age. Just comb your hair and it cuts 
at the same time. Easier than shaving. A 
woman or child can use it. Wort h $5. 
Sample sent postpaid for $J . Send today. 
Mone y back if not satisfied. Agents wanted. 
HONO R SALE S CO. , 
611 N . 43rd St., Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mrs. X . Watso n Rudd , 
154 West 131st St. 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
has placed 
upon the market her new 
SOS E NINO N NT/FEE T FOWDEB . 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, railroad and factory employees, dancers and all persons 
who are required to stand or wal k to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—Writ e fo r particular!. 
AliEWS^CO 7 WEEKL Y 
umm cuasT m ct 4917 'stums wa , M* , M . 
Mentio n THE CRISIS . A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mar y White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNE Y (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.25 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) ... . 1.10 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson) . . 1.25 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyma n 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York When Our Soldier Boys 
"Come Marching Home" 
How Must the Girls Greet Them? 
"TH E KASHMIR WAY " 
Wit h smooth, clear skin and soft, pretty hair. 
Ou r guarantee: Your money back if you are not pleased. 
Agents wanted. 
KASHMIR SKIN PREPARATION! 
Marvelous—it does the work. 
KASHMIR HAIR BEAUTIFIER J 
50 c EAC H 
8 c POSTAG E 
Free! Free! The Kashmir Beauty Book 
tells you how to be beautiful. 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL COMPANY 
Dept. K, 312 South Clark St. CHICAGO, ILL. 