The CRISIS 
New 
Year 
Number 
King out old shapes of foul disease, 
King out the narrowing lust of gold; 
King out the thousand wars of old, 
King in the thousand years of peace 
King in the bailant man and free, 
The larger heart, the kindlier hand! 
King out the darkness of the land, 
King in the Christ, that is to be! 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson 
January 1919 
TEN CENTS PER COPY ONE DOLLAR PER YEAR HELP CRUSH OUT LYNCHING 
The Anti-Lynching Committee of the N. A. A. C. P. earnestly 
appeals for contributions to its Anti-Lynching Fund—no matter how little, or much—to back President Wilson's crusade 
against lynching—the monster disloyalty to America. 
" I say plainly that every American who takes part in the 
action of a mob or gives any sort of countenance is no 
true son of this great democracy, but its betrayer, and does 
more to discredit her by that single disloyalty to her standards of law and right than the words of her statesmen or 
sacrifices of her heroic soldiers in the trenches can do to 
make a suffering people believe in her, their savior." 
—From President Wilson's Lynchinf 
and Mob Violence Pronouncement. 
President Wilson's appeal must be heeded. The suppression of 
lynching has become a test of national patriotism. Lynching persists because those who practice it believe in it more strongly than the 
opponents of lynching believe in "ordered law and humane justice." 
Eight Negroes were lynched in the ten weeks following the President's pronouncement. No one was arrested or put on trial because 
of tnese lynchings. 
Every lynching must be investigated. The facts must be brought 
home to the people of America. Governors must be appealed to in 
each specific case to uphold the law. (The punishment of lynchers 
has been held to be an affair of local authorities in the States.) The 
pressure of national condemnation must be brought to bear upon 
local authorities everywhere. Public opinion must be aroused until 
it becomes a vital and compelling force. The public conscience must 
be stimulated to decisive action. When aroused, this awakened conscience must be organized, vitalized and centred upon effective means 
of action. 
We appeal for a fund of $10,000. Unless you do your share we shall 
not get it. Send check, money order, or currency to 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
70 FIFTH AVENUE , NE W YOR K 
MOORFIELD STOREY, President JOHN R. SHILLADY, Secretary THE CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOISs AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol. 17—No. 3 JANUARY, 1919 Whole No. 99 
PICTURES 
Pago 
COVER: "RING IN THE THOUSAND YEARS OF PEACE!" Words by 
Alfred Lord Tennyson. 
MEN OF THE MONTH 124 
"DISTURBING THE PEACE, YOUR HONOR!" A Cartoon. By John 
Henry Adams 134 
SOME "BUFFALO" OFFICERS WITH THE AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES 136 
WA R WORKERS AT BRIDGEPORT, CONNECTICUT 141 
A NEGRO SERVICE FLAG, NEW YORK CITY, AND WA R WORK IN 
ATLANTA, GA 143 
ARTICLES 
PEACE ON EARTH. A Poem. Mary J. Washington 115 
WHA T THE STATUTE COVERS AND WHA T IT DOESN'T. Philip 
Goodman 116 
THE WA R WORK COUNCIL. J. W. Cromwell 116 
WELFARE WORK AND NEGRO EMPLOYEES. George W. Blount 117 
THE RETURN. A Poem. Jessie Fauset 118 
TO BISHOP HOOD. A Poem. Joseph S. Cotter 125 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL Il l 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 119 
MEN OF THE MONTH 123 
THE OUTER POCKET 126 
THE LOOKING GLASS 127 
THE HORIZON 135 
THE FEBRUARY CRISIS THE FEBRUARY CRISI S IS THE RECONSTRUCTION NUMBER. THE LEADING ARTICLE WILL BE THE PANAFRICAN MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES. THERE WILL BE PLENTY OF PICTURES, TOO, OF DISTINGUISHED 
COLORED SOLDIERS. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : THE DATE OF EXPIRATION OF EACH SUBSCRIPTION IS PRINTED ON THE WRAPPER. WHEN 
the SUBSCRIPTION IS DUE, A BLUE RENEWAL BLANK IS ENCLOSED. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : THE ADDRESS OF A SUBSCRIBER CAN BE CHANGED AS OFTEN AS DESIRED. 
IN ORDERING A CHANGE OF ADDRESS, BOTH THE OLD AND THE NEW ADDRESS MUST BE GIVEN. TWO WEEKS' 
NOTICE IS REQUIRED. 
MANUSCRIPT S AND DRAWINGS RELATING TO COLORED PEOPLE ARE DESIRED. THEY MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY RETURN POSTAGE. IF FOUND UNAVAILABLE THEY WILL BE RETURNED. 
Entered as second class matter November 2. 1910, at the Post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 108 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training cf Colored Youth in the South. 
THE FALL TERM OPENED OCTOBER 1, 1918. 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University The Cheyney Train­ Wilberforce, Ohio 
(.EttablUhed 18S6) ing School for 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science Teachers and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Govern­ CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
ment for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' For reasonably mature students Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. who have a good secondary 
Courses of Study—College (Scien­ school preparation, and who de­ tific, Classical and Educational) ; Nor­ sire to become teachers, courses mal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theologi­ are offered during the regular 
cal (Regular and English); Academy term in academic work, domestic 
—Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 science, domestic art, physical 
gymnasium just completed. training, elementary school methSchool opened September 17th. For ods, wood and metal working, 
information address and agriculture. Board room and 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, laundry privileges for the year, 
President. $125. Fall term began Wednesday, September 18, 1918. 
Mention TH E CRTSTS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 109 
Atlanta University MOREHOUSB COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) It beautifully located In the Olty of Atlanta , Ga. 
The courses of study include Hig h School. Norma l 
School and Collage, with manual training and domesti c science. Amon g the teachers are graduates 
of Tale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortynine years of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further Information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA . OA . 
11IJ : L U11 1 i . > 11111 : b r 1111111 L L1 1 ] 11MIJ I !l 11 1 U i L111111111111111L111L1111.. : 11.111 1 ^ : 111 :• 11117 ! 111 . i . 1111L1111L111 1 L111111LIN111* ^ 
I KNOXVILLE COLLEGE I 1 Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. | 
E Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. | 
I Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
§ Noted for Honest and Thorough "Work. I 
H Institution offers full courses IN the follow- = 
= ing departments: College. Normal. Hig h = 
1 School, Grammar School, Domestic . Science | 
= and Industrial. 
§ Good water, steam heat, electric lights, | 
§ natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Ex- | 
| penses very reasonable. | 
1 For catalog and other information address | 
PRESIDEN T J. KELL Y GIFFE N 
| KNOXVILLE, TENN. 1 
ailMUilliiliUlilllilllllllNlillllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllliillllllllilllll^ 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
TaHihusM, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalot AUtUt 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, PreMenl 
P. O . DRAWE R 524 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $10 0 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light 
COT/RSZI OF STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two yea. a above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A . B. degree. 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc, write s 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University ATLANTA, GA . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialFirst Semester opened October 2, 1918. lets, trained in some of the best universities in the 
HARB Y ANDREW S KING , President. North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sanr 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Nor An Episcopal boarding school for girls, mat, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nura andeftbe direction of the Sisters of St Mary. Training. Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began October 1, 1918. 
Address: For further information address 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE W . A. FOUNTAIN, PR.SLE W 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. WI U I, I. TUPSTO . •hairma a TRUSTEE Baa.rO. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 110 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religions Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modem Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries' for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session opening October, 1918. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS, President or J. E. Aggrey , Registrar . 
The Agricultural 
an d 
Technical College 
is improving its organization to 
meet the greater demand for skilled 
workmen. Four Strong, Practical 
Departments: 
1. The Academic Department. 
2 . The Agricultural Department. 
3 . The Mechanical Department. 
4. The Department of Vocational 
Training in Agriculture. Short 
Courses in Agricultural and 
Mechanical Branches. 
Th e new Department, No. 4, presents an excellent opportunity to those 
desiring to prepare as teachers of 
Agriculture. 
Write today for terms and catalog 
JAS. B. DUDLEY, President 
GREENSBORO, N. C. 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Depart­ ments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School course is the requirement for entrance to the first year of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the scientific. German la substituted for Greek or Latin. The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each consisting of three years. The first is purely English. Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
I. BRICK AGRICULTURAL, INDUSTRIAL 
AND NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS , Edgecombe County, N. C. 
(ON A. C. L. R. R.) 
THIS SCHOOL OFFERS A FIRST-CLASS HIGH SCHOOL 
BOURSE, INCLUDING DOMESTIC SCIENCE, DOMESTIC Art, 
VGRICULTURE, WORK IN WOOD, Iron AND MECHANICAL 
)RAWING. PIANO AND VOCAL MUSIC, NIGHT SCHOOL. 
A Two Yea r Teacher-Training Course 
IS Open To Hig h School Graduates. 
TEACHERS AND OFFICERS, 22; ENROLLMENT, 315— 
OARDERS, 212. COTTAGES AND BUILDINGS, 23. SCHOOL 
ARM, 1129J4 ACRES. STRONG ATHLETIC, LITERARY AND 
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS. SCHOOL TERM 33 WEEKS. 
LNVIRONMENT FINE. TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH ENIELD, N. C. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION WRITE 
T. S. INBORDEN . Principal, BRICKS , N. C. 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexes WINSTON-SALEM , N . 0 . 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
I n Academic Subjects, 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teacher's Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
For further information communlcat* with 
S. G. ATKINS, Principal SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL. 
Winston-Salem, N . C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE! 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
•npported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page IAK 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
Vol. 17-No. 3 JANUARY, 1919 Whole No. 99 
Editorial 
OLD DESIRES 
THE NEW YEAR," sang the 
Persian poet, "awakens 
Old Desires." Certainly 
at no time during the year 
does the realization of unfulfilled 
hopes weigh so heavily. Today when 
the whole world waits while the delegates at the Peace Table formulate 
the new rights of man, we are conscious that for us discrimination still 
lowers. All Europe rejoices in its 
new gifts—the British proletariat is 
promised a liberal labor program; the 
Czecho-Slovaks are tasting the joys 
of nationalism; France is rid of the 
Prussian menace; Belgium is bidden 
to bind up her wounds. But our men, 
who have helped mightily to awaken 
and preserve the spirit which makes 
these things possible, are returning 
to what 9 
To a country whose plea for a 
democracj includes white men only; 
to a South which says openly that the 
Negro need not because of services 
in this war expect greater privileges, 
that he must be kept "in his place," 
and that the South intends to define 
that place. POLITICAL EQUALITY, ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY, 
CIVIL RIGHTS, JUSTICE before the 
law, all these, our "old desires," are 
as far away as ever, unless we take a 
desperate, unflinching stand. 
One thing is in our favor and that 
is the awakening of the social conscience. Hartley Withers says, 
"Hitherto it has always been assumed, except by a few voices crying in the wilderness, that by the 
force of inexorable economic laws, 
every nation must have its human 
dregs, living in a state of half-clad, 
half-fed misery and making a mockery of the civilization which allows 
their existence." The world knows 
better now. However desirable, however expedient, men may deem such 
a state, society is conscious that no 
scheme of life can be right or complete which dooms those who toil 
hardest, to get the meanest share of 
the good things of life and to have 
no chance of living in the fullest 
sense. 
But this social conscience can avail 
nothing without our own deliberate 
and concerted effort. In this year of 
general reconstruction we black Americans must fight, must push forward, with steadier heart and nerve 
than ever before, until we are well 
over the top. We must do combat on 
our own Western Front. And in order to win, we have got to put aside 
bickering and factionalism, trivial 
jealousies and disputes. See what 
the Southern States, by pooling their 
race prejudice, have been able to accomplish since that other Reconstruction. On, then, black Americans, and 
remember the pass-word—Organization and Co-operation! 
Meanwhile—Happy New Year! 
THE PEACE CONFERENCE 
R. W. E. B. DUBOIS sailed 
for France, December 1, on 
the United States transport, 
Orizaba. The Orizaba made 
a special trip to carry the accredited 
correspondents of American newspapers and magazines, who will report the Peace Conference. 
Dr. DuBois goes in a three-fold 
capacity: he goes as special representative of TH E CRISIS at the Peace 
Conference; to collect first-hand 112 THE
material to go into a History of the 
American Negro in the Great War; 
and finally as the representative of 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for the 
purpose of bringing to bear all pressure possible on the delegates at the 
Peace Table in the interest of the colored peoples of the United States and 
of the world. 
As the representative of the N. A. 
A. C. P., Dr. DuBois will summon a 
Pan-African Congress, to meet in 
Paris, to press the question of internationalization of the former German 
colonies. He has for some time been 
making a study of this question; his 
views on the subject are printed in 
this issue of TH E CRISIS. 
A conference held to consider the 
disposition of the former German 
colonies in Africa will serve, perhaps, 
better than any other means that 
could be taken, to focus the attention 
of the peace delegates and the civilized world on the just claims of the 
Negro everywhere. Dr. DuBois is 
preeminently fitted to call such a conference, because of the experience he 
gained and the connections he formed 
at The Races' Congress in London, 
in 1911, to which he was a delegate. 
"JIM CROW" 
WE colored folk stand at the 
parting of ways, and we 
must take counsel. The 
objection to segregation 
and "Jim-Crowism" was in other 
days the fact that compelling Negroes to associate only with Negroes 
meant to exclude them from contact 
with the best culture of the day. 
How could we learn manners or get 
knowledge if the heritage of the past 
was locked away from us? 
Gradually, however, conditions 
have changed. Culture is no longer 
the monopoly of the white nor is poverty and ignorance the sole heritage 
of the black. Many a colored man 
in our day called to conference with 
his own and rather dreading the contact with uncultivated people even 
 CRISIS 
though they were of his own blood 
has been astonished and deeply gratified at the kind of people he has met 
—at the evidence of good manners 
and thoughtfulness among his own. 
This together with the natural 
human love of herding like with like 
has in the last decade set up a tremendous current within the colored 
race against any contact with whites 
that can be avoided. They have welcomed separate racial institutions. 
They have voluntarily segregated 
themselves and asked for more segregation. The North is full of instances of practically colored schools 
which colored people have demanded 
and, of course, the colored church 
and social organization of every sort 
are ubiquitous. 
Today both these wings of opinion 
are getting suspicious of each other 
and there are plenty of whites to help 
the feeling along. Whites and Blacks 
ask the Negro who fights separation: 
"Are you ashamed of your race?" 
Blacks and Whites ask the Negro who 
welcomes and encourages separation: 
"Do you want to give up your rights? 
Do you acknowledge your inferiority?" 
Neither attitude is correct. Segregation is impolitic, because it is impossible. You can not build up a 
logical scheme of a self-sufficing, separate Negro America inside America 
or a Negro world with no close relations to the white world. If there 
are relations between races they must 
be based on the knowledge and sympathy that come alone from the long 
and intimate human contact of individuals. 
On the other hand, if the Negro is 
to develop his own power and gifts; 
if he is not only to fight prejudices 
and oppression successfully, but also 
to unite for ideals higher than the 
world has realized in art and industry and social life, then he must unite 
and work with Negroes and build a 
new and great Negro ethos. EDITORIAL 113 
Here, then, we face the curious 
paradox and we remember contradictory facts. Unless we had fought 
segregation with determination, our 
whole race would have been pushed 
into an ill-lighted, unpaved, un-sewered ghetto. Unless we had built 
great church organizations and 
manned our own southern schools, 
we should be shepherdless sheep. 
Unless we had welcomed the segregation of Fort Des Moines, we would 
have had no officers in the National 
Army. Unless we had beaten open 
the doors of northern universities, 
we would have had no men fit to be 
officers. 
Here is a dilemma calling for 
thought and forbearance. Not every 
builder of racial co-operation and 
solidarity is a "Jim-Crow" advocate, 
a hater of white folk. Not every Negro who fights prejudice and segregation is ashamed of his race. 
CORRESPONDENCE 
MY dear Mr. Villard: The 
Tennessee Anti - Tuberculosis Association desires 
to submit to you for your 
consideration a plan for the prevention of tuberculosis among the Negroes of the South. 
Nowhere in the South today is there 
any organized effort to fight tuberculosis among the Negroes 
In order that we succeed in this 
campaign for right living by the Negro, we must use their leaders and 
make the results of the campaign a 
matter of race pride and achievement. 
The Negro race as yet is unable 
or unwilling to organize such a movement, and even though their leaders 
were to attempt to develop such a 
movement, it would not have the 
backing of the rank and file of the 
race. 
The plan of the Tennessee Association is to organize a Negro auxiliary, 
with officers and committees, exactly 
duplicating the white organization. 
However, the policy, finances and personnel of the Negro staff will be controlled by the white organization. 
At first, the reasons for the control 
resting in the white organization may 
not be apparent, but it is because that 
only in this way can we guarantee 
the work will be standard, that the 
finances will not be dissipated and 
that the movement will have the backing of the Negro race. 
The next step in the organization 
is the creation of a Joint Committee 
on Negro Health, possibly five members, made up of the president of the 
white organization, two others from 
the white organization and two from 
the colored auxiliary. Of course, the 
representatives of each organization 
will have to be carefully selected, so 
that race prejudice may be eliminated. This is the committee that 
will actually control the Negro work. 
The third step in the interlinking 
of the work is that the Executive 
Secretary of the white organization, 
ex-officio, becomes secretary to the 
colored auxiliary. 
This type of organization will tend 
to train the Negro race in public 
health work, for the white organization will not interfere much with the 
plans worked out by the Negro auxiliary. The fact that the Negro program of work, that both organizations have the same secretary, that 
finances and personnel are controlled 
by the white organization, will almost automatically eliminate the 
dangers that would confront a purely 
Negro movement. 
It also has the further advantage 
that when the colored auxiliary comes 
up against community conditions over 
which they can have no control and 
which are detrimental to their health, 
this condition would go to the Joint 
Committee for conference and from 114 THE CRISIS 
that committee to the white organization. This means that the entire 
strength of both the white and colored organization would be united to 
attack this condition, and in the South 
there are many conditions that cannot 
be removed by the Negro alone. 
This plan of co-operation is not untried, for it has worked well in the 
Memphis Associated Charities, where 
the writer of this letter was formerly 
secretary for five years 
J. P. KRANZ, 
Executive Secretary. 
Dear Sir: 
I am in receipt of your letter of 
July 13. I certainly could not support an association to help the Negro 
which takes the control of that organization away from the colored people themselves. Nor do I agree with 
your contention that this is the only 
way that you can guarantee that the 
work will be standardized and that 
the finances will not be dissipated. 
I have been associated with various 
Negro movements which are entirely 
controlled or chiefly controlled by colored people, and I do not think that 
this libel upon the race is warranted 
by this experience. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD. 
AFTER THE WAR 
A NUMBER of labor and radical bodies are forecasting the 
situation after the war. Colcareful
ored people ought to give 
 attention to these programs. 
The American labor delegates to the 
London conference declare themselves 
in favor of no territorial changes 
after the war "except in the furtherance of the welfare of the people 
affected." The Social Democratic 
League of America has put forward 
a program of reconstruction with 
many excellent points. They stress 
democratic control over industry, the 
need of continuing the national employment service and social insurance, 
the fixing of prices on necessities, the 
taxing of high profits and the fact that 
"every child is entitled both to a broad 
cultural education and to a specialized 
occupational training." 
Unfortunately, there is not a word 
in this whole program which indicates any intention on the part of 
the Social Democratic League to insist that no group shall on account of 
race or color be excluded from the 
democracy which it is advocating in 
future economic affairs. On the other 
hand, the congressional program of 
the Socialist Party frankly declares 
that "the Negroes are the most oppressed portion of the American population, of which they form one-ninth. 
They are the victims of lawlessness, 
including hanging and burning; widespread political disfranchisement, and 
loss of civil rights. They are especially discriminated against in economic 
opportunity." 
It demands: 
"1. That the Negroes be accorded full 
benefits of citizenship, political, 
educational and industrial. 
"2. That Congress shall enforce the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment by reducing the representation in Congress of such states as 
violate the letter or spirit of the 
amendment." 
It is unfortunate that the attitude 
of the Socialist Party during the war 
goes far to nullify this rather late 
espousal of the Negroes' cause. 
CONSUMERS* CO-OPERATION 
CONSUMERS' CO - OPERATION is the organization of 
consumers into buying clubs 
— - for the object of saving the 
middleman's profit. The fundamental 
principles worked out by experience 
since 1834 are these: 
1. The price of shares should be 
low, so that large numbers of working people can own shares. Ten dollars is a usual price. 
2. Sales are made at current retail prices and not at cost. PEACE ON EARTH 115 
3. The resulting profit—i. e., the 
difference between cost and selling 
price, is returned to the members in 
proportion to the amount ivhich they 
buy and not in proportion to the number of shares owned. 
4. Each member casts one vote 
and only one vote in directing the 
affairs of the company, no matter 
how many shares he owns. 
The profits of Consumers' Cooperative Societies may be returned wholly 
to the members, or returned in part, 
while the other part is used for the 
general welfare of the society. Thus 
many societies are able to provide 
health insurance, pensions for mothers, loans for members, club houses 
and recreation. All these are paid 
for out of profits and cost members 
nothing. 
Moreover, the Cooperative profits 
are greater than the merchants', for 
the Cooperative Society does not have 
to advertise; it sells for cash and not 
for credit, and it does not have to 
offer special inducements to its buyers. Assured of the constant patronage of its members, it knows what to 
buy and when, therefore its overhead 
charges are consequently small. 
All this is not theory. It has been 
done. In Great Britain today Cooperative Societies distribute annually one billion dollars' worth of 
goods and the profits and members 
amount to one hundred million dollars a year. Russia has 46,000 societies with 15,000,000 members. Before the war French societies did an 
annual business of 64 million francs. 
In Denmark, 505,000 cooperators did 
an annual business of $1,368,000,000 
during 1915. 
What are we twelve million American Negroes doing? We have held a 
meeting and organized the Negro 
Cooperative Guild. We have a chairman and secretary and six state secretaries. We are going to spend a 
year in study, so that we shall thoroughly understand the movement. 
Next year we are going to move. 
Will you join us and form a class in 
your own town and neighborhood to 
study Consumers' Cooperation? If 
so, write to the editor of this magazine. 
AN EXPLANATION TO CORRESPONDENTS ON THE AFRICAN 
QUESTION 
A CONSIDERABLE numbe r of 
telegrams and letter s received by the N. A. A. C. P. were 
handed by the Secretary to Dr. Du 
Bois for his information just prior to 
Dr. Du Bois' sailing. In the necessarily hasty preparations for sailing, Dr. 
Du Bois inadvertently carried with 
him all of these communications. Correspondents whose letters on the 
African situation are not acknowledged and who have not received information as promised will understand the reason. 
PEACE ON EARTH 
MAR Y J. WASHINGTO N 
ALMIGHT Y GOD, as on Thy thousand Grant, Thou, that we may rise refreshed, 
hills, reborn, 
Thy rolling plains and down each sylvan With courage high, despite war's lingerslope, ing scars, 
The sunlight of another year distills, Our spirits free from petty strife and scorn, 
And bids the world take on new life and And teeming with the message of the 
hope, stars. WHAT THE STATUTE COVERS AND WHAT 
IT DOESN'T 
PHILIP GOODMA N 
MACAULAY said that there were gentlemen and there were sailors in the 
navy of Charles II, but the gentlemen were 
not sailors and the sailors were not gentlemen. Similarly, there are gentlemen and 
there are legislators in the State of Virginia, but the gentlemen are not legislators 
and the legislators are not gentlemen, for 
assuredly no body of gentlemen would 
sponsor "Jim Crow etiquette" in public conveyances. 
A gentleman, as I conceive him, is one 
who would not give pain to another. The 
definition is not mine. It is Eugene Lombard's, and is essentially a gentleman's 
definition of a gentleman. The trouble with 
the middle class American is that he gets 
his definitions from fiction instead of from 
life. Colonel Carter, of Cartersville, is the 
general acceptance of a southern gentleman; whereas in strict truth he is naught 
but a well-fed, thoroughly-soaked vulgarian. 
Colonel Carter and his crew are the very 
ones who see to it that colored folks remain 
in the rear, not alone of cars but of life, 
in the belief that the color of a man's skin 
bears a fixed relation to the color of his 
soul. 
A few weeks ago, I was riding from 
Washington to Alexandria, Va,, and as the 
fore-part of the car was being occupied by 
rough and noisy whites, I elected a seat in 
the rear. After we had gone a short distance, a young Negro got on and sat beside me. Soon a conversation sprang up. 
He was a graduate of Fisk University, 
studying architecture in Washington. In 
his hand he had a copy of Ruskin's "Political Economy of Art, " and then our talk 
was directed to literature. His preferences 
were Pater, Morris, Rossetti, Meredith, 
Hardy, Ruskin and Wilde. He rather 
tolerated Swinburne and Anthony Trollope, 
and wholly despised Shaw. His manner 
was charming and unfeigned; he knew what 
he liked and had excellent reasons for liking what he liked. In our little talk, I found 
him not in the least aggressive; indeed, 
what I learned of his tastes had almost to 
be wrung from him. 
Suddenly our car stopped at one of the 
way stations and the pale-faced hoodlums 
got out. Then the conductor called my attention to a copy of a statute which requires all whites to occupy front seats when 
such seats are empty—this for the greater 
"comfort " (so the statute read) of the 
white passengers. I asked if the matter 
were not one of personal preference, but 
he replied that it was not. My colored 
friend relieved my embarrassment by getting up to let me pass into the aisle, saying 
with a courteous smile, "I hope we shall see 
one another again." 
That is all there is to the story, except 
that I went to the front seat with the 
shame of the white race upon me and there 
I remained in a mental trance until, a little 
later on as we were passing a shed covered 
with circus-posters, I saw a young white of 
about nineteen
Negro girl. As
them, she slunk
board covering,
sight . . . 
 speaking earnestly to a 
 the car came abreast of 
 back suspiciously behind a 
 until she was out of 
Some things, thought I, the statutes of 
Fair Virginia cover, and others they do not! 
THE WAR WORK COUNCIL 
J. W. CROMWEL L 
THE Wa r Work Council has determinec 
on the erection of a Y. W. C. A 
building, involving an expenditure of $200 
000, for the colored branch at Washington 
on a spacious lot fronting Ninth Street al 
Rhode Island
ness (white)
purchase and
published in
abandoned as
 Avenue, opposite the Busi­
 High School. The plan to 
 remodel the Thyson House, 
 the July CRISIS, has been 
 inadequate to local conditions. 
116 WELFARE WORK AND NEGRO EMPLOYEES 117 
Mrs. A. Quivers 
Miner Building,
The success of this 
movement is a culmination of the forethought, 
the intelligence, the persistence and the optimism of one of the 
finest groups of colored 
women in the country. 
It was begun in two 
rented rooms in . the 
 two blocks from the 
Capitol, in 1905. Permanent quarters were 
secured by the payment of $500 cash towards the purchase for $4,300 of a piece of 
property at 429 T Street, N. W. This was 
entirely paid within four years, $6,800 was 
expended on permanent improvements and 
a building fund exceeding $3,000 created. 
The manifest demand for this Y. W. C. 
A. work here was accentuated by the exodus 
from the South, during which a look-out 
committee on hand at the Union Station 
awaited the arrival of all north-bound 
trains to give directions and assistance to 
the fugitives in search of new homes in the 
North and West. Before the assurance of 
aid from the National Association, or even 
recognition by it, the colored organization 
was most active in increasing its building 
fund, adding to its membership, demonstrating its right to be and otherwise strengthening its resources. 
Last year and the one preceding they 
netted nearly $900 from Mardi Gras entertainments. Last March, too, from a Tag 
Day drive they obtained about $600 more, 
and in a rally they 
secured 1,700 paid-up 
members. This was 
beyond the goal at 
which they aimed. In 
addition to this adult 
membership, they have 
started a movement for 
the enrollment of girls, 
to which a trained orMrs. A. E. Cromwell 
ganizer from National Headquarters has 
already been assigned. 
In the Association's thirteen years there 
have been but two presidents, Mrs. B. G. 
Francis, for several years a member of the 
Board of Education, and Mrs. Frances 
Boyce, both women of clear vision, poise and 
equable temperament. To the administrative ability of these two women must be 
added the influence of Miss E. F. G. Merritt, 
Director of Primary Work in the Colored 
Schools; the strict accounting system of 
Miss Marion P. Shadd, Treasurer; Mrs. 
Alice Quivers, Financial Secretary; and 
Mrs. Annie E. Cromwell, Chairman of the 
Household Committee. 
But it was due to the initiative of Mrs. 
Frances Boyce that Mrs. R. L. Dickinson, 
Representative at the National Capital of 
the Wa r Work Council, first became so impressed with the imperative need and the 
deserving qualities of the local branch that 
the purpose and the decision of the Wa r 
Work Council was determined, as announced, to erect this new building and to 
complete and equip it early in the coming 
season. 
WELFARE WORK AND NEGRO EMPLOYEES 
GEORGE
THER E is no individual manufacturing 
nor industrial plant which is contributing so much toward the increased 
benefits for the Negroes in Virginia, as The 
American Chain Company of Virginia, Incorporated, with plants scattered throughout the United States and Canada. 
Aside from making huge chains for large 
anchors, which is the specialty of the particular branch located in the suburbs of 
Norfolk, Va., this company has established 
 W. BLOUNT 
a most admirable precedent in the kindly 
attitude its officers are manifesting toward 
its employees, and is causing other employers of Negro mechanics and laborers to 
awaken to the vital importance of giving 
fair, impartial and honest treatment to 
them. 
When the representatives of The American Chain Company were prospecting with 
the hope of establishing a million dollar 
branch of their business near the city of 118 THE CRISIS 
Norfolk, and before deciding to employ Negroes as mechanics and laborers, they were 
informed by the "best authorities" that Negro mechanics and laborers were not dependable, they were shiftless, indifferent 
and unreliable; their wants were very few 
and they did not see the necessity of working more than three or four days during 
each week, thereby earning just enough to 
satisfy their few wants. 
During these preliminary conferences it 
seemed advisable to confer with some of the 
local public spirited Negro citizens with 
reference to employing Negroes. Among 
those invited were Dr. G. J. Bowens, a 
graduate of Shaw University and a successful physician and surgeon of Norfolk, 
who accepted the invitation and attended 
the conference. He immediately showed 
how the other companies had failed in handling Negroes as mechanics and laborers 
because their hours were too long and the 
pay was too small. The laborer's health, 
safety and happiness were his own affair, 
and not that of his employer. 
If employers are to receive from each 
employee what they have a reasonable right 
to expect, they should give to each a proper 
return. Just in proportion as each employee serves, each should be compensated 
—first, in money; and then in those less 
tangible, but not less essential, returns 
which should form a part of the compensation for any kind of service. 
The Negro as chain-maker was an experiment attempted by The American Chain 
Company largely through the advice and 
persuasion of Dr. Bowens, who was given 
the opportunity to secure the services of 
150 Negro mechanics and laborers, the majority of whom received their training at 
such industrial schools as Hampton, Tuskegee and Greensboro, N. C. 
The experiment has proved a success. 
These men are now making huge anchor 
chains with "wisehanded skill," and not following "blind routine." The plan has succeeded through the willingness and ability of 
the Negroes to master the intricacies -of 
chain-making and the disposition on the 
part of the officers of the company to provide every facility for making the living 
and working conditions of the employees satisfactory. 
The company has provided for the employees a commodious dormitory, equipped 
with every modern sanitary device and convenience, electric lights, running water, 
shower-baths, bath-tubs, lavatories and a 
janitor. There are recreation and reading 
rooms, piano, tennis courts, baseball 
grounds, hand-ball and other facilities for 
healthful recreation. It also maintains a 
modernly equipped boarding department, in 
charge of Arthur M. Williams, in which the 
workers are able to obtain wholesome food 
at actual cost. A steam laundry, in charge 
of James T. Ransome, is maintained by the 
company on a similar basis. 
The most outstanding feature of the admirable attitude of the officers of The 
American Chain Company toward its employees is its concern for their health and 
general welfare. A medical director, Dr. 
G. J. Bowens, is employed full-time, and 
there is a well-equipped infirmary with 
Jennie C. Hopkins, a graduate nurse of 
Freedmen's Hospital, in charge, to help see 
that every precaution is taken to safeguard and conserve the health and physical 
well-being of every employee. 
The workers have organized among themselves a club for social diversions, and from 
time to time speakers are invited to address them. 
The employees are well-housed, well-fed 
and well-paid; they work hard, and they are 
healthy and happy. They also receive 
bonuses for special grades of work. They 
work full-time and over-time whenever it is 
necessary. 
THE RETURN 
JESSIE FAUSET 
I THA T had found the way so smooth With need for compass and for rod, 
With gilly-flowers that beck and nod, And yet with feet that bleed, I pant 
Now find that same road wild and steep On blindly — stumbling back to God! National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
THE FUTURE OF AFRICA 
I N the early days of the European Wa r 
Dr. W. E. Burghardt Du Bois wrote 
an article for the Atlantic Monthly on "The 
African Roots of War. " * Of the many discussions of the cause of the great conflict 
none was more timely or important. In 
the article in question the writer points out 
that today, as so often in the past, the 
wealth of Africa leads to a common lust 
for conquest and exploitation of the native 
population. This was displayed in its most 
barbarous form in the old days of the Belgium Congo Free State and in the recent 
days of the German colonies. But none of 
the colonial powers are without guilt since 
all look upon the natives, not as people to 
be educated and encouraged to self-development, but as ignorant laborers to be used 
for the production of wealth which the European appropriates later to spend in his 
own land. This exploitation carries with it 
intense race prejudice and results increasingly in confining the black man to those 
places where life, for climatic, historical and 
political reasons, is most difficult to live and 
most easily dominated by Europe for Europe's gain. 
This is the picture of Africa today, but 
now, with the end of the war, we look to 
the picture of the Africa of the future. 
This future is being widely discussed and 
will be one of the most important of the 
problems to be decided at the Peace Conference. The N. A. A. C. P. stands on the 
following platform drawn up by Dr. Du 
Bois: 
1. The barter of colonies without regard 
to the wishes or welfare of the inhabitants 
or the welfare of the world in general is 
a custom to which this wa r should put an 
-end, since it is a fruitful cause of dissension among nations, a danger to the status 
of civilized labor, a temptation to unbridled 
* Reprinterl by the N.A.A.C.P . Price 5 cents per 
copy; 50 cents per hundred. 
exploitation, and an excuse for unspeakable 
atrocities committed against natives. 
2. It is clear that at least one of Germany's specific objects in the present wa r 
was the extension of her African colonies 
at the expense of France and Portugal. 
3. As a result of the war, the German 
colonies in Africa have been seized by the 
Allies, and the question of their disposition 
must come before the Peace Conference. 
Responsible English statesmen have announced that their return to Germany is 
unthinkable. 
4. However, to take German Afric a from 
one imperial master, even though a bad one, 
and hand it over to another, even though 
a better one, would inevitably arouse a suspicion of selfish aims on the part of the 
Allies and would leave after the war the 
grave questions of future colonial possessions and government. 
5. While the principle of self-determination which has been recognized as fundamental by the Allies cannot be wholly applied to semi-civilized peoples, yet, as the 
English Prime Minister has acknowledged, 
it can be partially applied. 
6. The public opinion which in the case 
of the former German colonies should have 
the decisive voice is composed of: 
(a ) The Chiefs and intelligent Negroes 
among the twelve and one-half million natives of German Africa, especially those 
trained in the government and mission 
schools. 
(b) Tho twelve million civilized Negroes 
of the United States. 
(c ) Educated persons of Negro descent 
in South America and the West Indies. 
(d) The independent Negro governments 
of Abyssinia, Liberia, and Haiti. 
(e) The educated classes among the Negroes of French West Africa and Equatorial 
Africa and in British Uganda, Nigeria, Basutoland, Nyassaland, Swaziland, Sierra 
Leone, Gold Coast, Gambia and Bechuana119 12 0 THE
land, and the four and one-half millions of 
colored people in the Union of South Africa. 
These classes comprise today the thinking classes, of the future Negro world and 
their wish should have weight in the future 
disposition of the German colonies. 
7. The first step toward ascertaining the 
desires, aspirations and grievances of these 
people should be the calling together of a 
Pan-African Congress, to meet in Paris 
sometime during the sessions of the Peace 
Conference. 
8. If the world after the war decided 
to reconstruct Africa in accordance with 
the wishes of the Negro race and the best 
interests of civilization, the process might 
be carried out as follows: The former German colonies, with one million square miles 
and twelve and one-half millions of inhabitants, could be internationalized. To this 
could be added by negotiation the 800,000 
square miles and nine million inhabitants of 
Portuguese Africa. It is not impossible that 
Belgium could be persuaded to add to such 
a state the 900,000 square miles and nine 
million natives of the Congo, making an international Africa, with over two and onehalf million square miles of land and over 
twenty million people. 
9. This re-organized Africa could be under the guidance of organized civilization. 
The Governing International Commission 
should represent, not simply governments, 
but modern culture—science, commerce, social reform, and religious philanthropy. 
10. With these two principles the practical policies to be followed out in the government of the new states should involve a 
thorough and complete system of modern 
education built upon the present government, religion and customary law of the 
natives. There should be no violent tampering with the curiously efficient African 
institutions of local self-government through 
the family and the tribe; there should be no 
attempt at sudden "conversion" by religious 
propaganda. Obviously deleterious customs 
and unsanitary usages must gradually be 
abolished and careful religious teachinggiven, but the general government set up 
from without must follow the example of 
the best colonial administrators and build 
on recognized established foundations rather 
than from entirely new and theoretical 
plans. 
 CRISIS 
11. The chief effort to modernize Afric a 
should be through schools. Within ten years 
twenty million black children ought to be 
in school. Within a generation young Afric a 
should know the essential outlines of modern 
culture and groups of bright African students should be going to the world's great 
universities. From the beginning the actual 
general government should use both colored 
and white officials and natives should be 
gradually worked in. Taxation and industry 
could follow the newer ideals of industrial 
democracy, avoiding private land monopoly 
and poverty, promoting co-operation in production and the socialization of income. 
12. Is such a state possible? Those who 
believe in men; who know what black men 
have done in human history; who have taken 
pains to follow even superficially the story 
of the rise of the Negro in Africa, the West 
Indies, and the Americas of our day, know 
that the widespread modern contempt of 
Negroes rests upon no scientific foundation worth a moment's attention. It is 
nothing more than a vicious habit of mind. 
It could as easily be overthrown as our 
belief in war, as our; international hatreds, 
as our old conception of the status of women, as our fear of educating the masses, 
and as our belief in the necessity of poverty. We can, if we will, inaugurate on 
the Dark Continent a last great crusade 
for humanity. With Africa redeemed, Asia 
would be safe and Europe indeed triumphant. 
The N. A. A. C. P. has under wa y plans 
for a Pan-African Congress, to be held in 
Paris this winter. Dr. Du Bois sailed on 
the Orizaba, December 1, with a number 
of distinguished newspaper men, to represent the Association and TH E CRISIS at 
Paris and to summon the Pan-African Congress. His departure was a hasty one and 
details of the plans for the Congress are 
not yet in form for publication, but he 
will at once proceed to gather together his 
committee on the other side, as the Tercentenary Committee has been formed on this 
side of the water. The Congress will have 
his admirable statement as a basis for discussion and action. It will meet during 
the sessions of the Peace Conference. 
The meeting at Carnegie Hall, New York 
City, on Monday evening, January 6—the 
date of our annual meeting—will institute N. A. A. C. P. 121 
the Pan-African Movement in the United 
States. This will be one of the most important meetings the Association has ever 
held. The speakers are not yet announced; 
but they will represent colored and white 
leaders of liberal thought. 
REPRESENTATION IN NATIONAL SOCIAL WORK 
On November 29 and 30 the Conference 
on Demobilization and the Responsibilities of Organized Social Agencies was 
held in New York City. Dr. Felix Adler 
presided. The Secretary of the N. A . A . 
C. P., Mr. John R. Shillady, was one of 
the fourteen members of the Organizing 
Committee. Ninety prominent national organizations were invited to take part in 
this Conference, at which various problems 
of reconstruction were carefully discussed. 
Amon g the resolutions adopted by the Conference was the following: 
That every program for national and 
community reconstruction shall adequately 
and consciously include provision for our 
Negro fellow-citizens and for their co-operation therein. 
This resolution was presented to the Conference Committee by the following delegates: 
GEORGE E . HAYNES , 
Director of Negro Economics, 
U. S. Department of Labor. 
For the National League on Urban 
Conditions Amon g Negroes: L. HOLLINGSWORTH WOOD, Chairman; EU ­
GENE KINCKL E JONES, Executive Secretary. 
For the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People: 
JOH N R. SHILLADY, Secretary; JAMES 
W . JOHNSON, Field Secretary; Captain ARTHU R B. SPINGARN, of the 
Legal Committee. 
ANNUAL MEETING 
The annual meeting of the N. A. A. 
C. P. will be held in the Assembly 
Hall of the United Charities Building, 105 
East Twenty-second Street, New York City, 
on the afternoon of Monday, January 6, 
1919, at two o'clock. The session will be 
opened by an address on Reconstruction as 
it affects the Negro. 
There will be reports from officers and 
branches and the following nominations for 
Directors for terms expiring in January, 
1922, will be voted upon: 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New Haven. 
Bishop John Hurst, Baltimore. 
Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York. 
Mr. Joseph Prince Loud, Boston. 
Dr. William A. Sinclair, Philadelphia. 
Captain Arthur B. Spingarn, New York. 
Mr. Charles H. Studin, New York. 
Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York. 
Rev. G. R. Waller, Springfield, Mass. 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Boston. 
A motion will be introduced at this meeting to increase the number of Directors of 
the National Board to forty. 
In the evening, at eight o'clock, there 
will be a mass meeting at Carnegie Hall. 
"The Internationalization of African Colonies" will be discussed. Boxes will cost 
five and ten dollars. All other seats will 
be free. 
ANNUAL CONFERENCE 
THE N. A. A. C. P. will celebrate its 
tenth anniversary in May, 1919. Its 
call to the country was published February 
12, 1909, asking for a national conference, 
to be held in New York, May 31 and June 1. 
This was the first National Conference, 
whose proceedings, published in book form, 
are among the most interesting pieces of 
Association history. 
This May (the date need not duplicate 
that of ten years ago) we should have a 
conference of at least four days, equalling 
in importance that of any national gathering taking place in the United States. 
It should be largely attended by delegates 
from branches and should deal with the 
pressing questions before the Negro of the 
United States at this time—the Ballot, 
Segregation in Public Places, the Problem 
of Reconstruction. Experts should be asked 
to speak and give the results of their investigations. The work accomplished by 
the branches should be fully reported by 
their delegates. Opportunity should be 
given for social intercourse, for the interchange between individuals of experiences. 
The Association held conferences regularly every year until the beginning of 
the European War: in 1909 and 1910, New 
York; in 1911, Boston; in 1912, Chicago; 
in 1913, Philadelphia; in 1914, Baltimore. 
The spring conferences were then discontinued ; but last year New York in the 122 TH E CRISIS 
Christma s holidays agai n called the Association together and held a notable gathering. The memory of the severe weather, 
however, makes it seem desirable to retur n to the forme r sprin g date; therefore, 
this year it is proposed to hold the tenth 
celebration i n May . 
Wher e shall it be? W e make this announcement from Nationa l Headquarters 
and shall be glad to hear from our branches 
i n regard to the matter. 
Wha t branc h wil l offer to conduct, wit h 
the aid of Nationa l Headquarters, a celebration of our Tenth Anniversar y that shall 
redound to al l time to the credit of the 
city tha t gives it shelter? 
Qualifications: The holdin g of great conventions is wel l understood by man y of our 
active workers. We woul d recall to them, 
however, some of the qualifications necessary fo r this conference: 
1. Assurance s of welcome on the part 
of city officials. 
2. A large hal l that wil l seat at least two 
thousand people. 
3. Facilitie s fo r entertaining visitors. 
BOARD NOTES 
AT the Novembe r meeting of the Boar d 
of Directors the resignation of Dr. 
Joh n G. Underhill , of Ne w York , was presented. Business engagements have for 
some time made it impossible for Dr. Un ­
derhill to attend the meetings of the Board . 
His resignation was accepted wit h regret. 
The Board , as empowered by the constitution, elected a new member for Dr. Un ­
derbill's unexpired term. Fro m among a 
number of important, names presented they 
chose Mr . Robert R. Church , of Memphis, 
Tenn. 
In electing Mr . Church , the N . A . A . C. 
P. has placed upon its Boar d the first distinctively southern member. It is less than 
two years ago that the Associatio n began 
the organization of the South upon any 
large scale. Prio r to that time there were 
less than a half-dozen branches i n the 
South; now the Association is represented 
by fifty branches, i n every southern state, 
with a membership of 9,000; and the Boar d 
of Directors felt that this vast territor y 
and large membership should have representation. In Mr . Churc h the Boar d has 
a member who is a prominent citizen of the 
State of Tennessee, a ma n of influence and 
action. 
* * * 
A t the October meeting of the Boar d a 
motion was passed to authorize the As ­
sociation's securing the services of the Rev. 
R. W . Bagnall , of Detroit, as a distric t 
organizer. Mr . Bagnal l wil l give part time 
to the work, devoting himself especially to 
the Grea t Lake s District. Th e Associatio n 
is very fortunat e i n securing a ma n of Mr . 
Bagnall's known abilit y and fine enthusiasm. H e wil l add this wor k fo r the N . A . 
A . C. P. to his already importan t duties 
as rector of St. Matthew's Episcopa l 
Church , Detroit. 
NEW OFFICES 
ON December 1, the N . A . A . C. P . and 
TH E CRISI S moved to the sixt h floor 
of 70 Fift h Avenue , where TH E CRISI S has 
the space identica l wit h its forme r quarters 
and the N . A . A . C. P . adjoins, wit h equally 
large offices. The change is i n every wa y 
fortunate. Wit h the enormous growt h of 
the Nationa l body and the grea t increase 
i n its work, new quarters became impera ­
tive. A t one time it looked as though these 
could not be secured at 70 Fift h Avenue ; 
then the League to Enforc e Peace moved 
away, and we moved into their large , attractive rooms. 
Be sure to come i n to see us whe n you 
are i n Ne w York . 
NEW BRANCHES AND MORE 
MEMBERS 
ON December 1, the N . A . A . C. P . ha d 
a tota l of 152 branches and 41,524 
members. The followin g branche s have 
been added since the last report of branc h 
additions, i n the October CRISIS : 
Ba y City , Mic h 31 
Braddock, P a 64 
Brunswick , Ga 60 
Dallas, Texa s 169 
Davenport, Iowa 50 
Flint , Mic h 50 
Gonzales, Texa s 50 
Jersey City , N . J 50 
Pueblo, Colo 100 
Riverside , Ca l 33 
Urbana , Ohio 64 
Wellsville , Ohio 43 
Ypsilanti , Mic h 50 Men of the Month 
TW O NEGRO LEGISLATORS 
T. GILLIS NUTTE R was bo m in Princess Anne, Somerset County, Md., 
June 15, 1876. He attended the local public school and was graduated from the High 
School in 1893. He received his L.L.B. from 
Howard University, in 1899. The death 
of his father forced him to return to Princess Anne, to care for his mother; while 
there, he was appointed principal in a public school of Fairmont. He filled this position from September, 1899, to June, 1901, 
when he declined a re-appointment, in order 
to enter upon his profession. He was admitted to the Bar of Marion County, Ind., 
November 13, 1901. 
Mr. Nutter was the author of the Amendment to Taxation Laws, passed at the 1915 
session of the West Virginia Legislature. 
He entered the primary for nomination 
for the House of Delegates from Kanawha 
County, W. Va . He had the active support 
of such men as Ex-Governor George W. Atkinson, J. S. Darst, State Auditor; Houston 
G. Young, Secretary of State. He stood 
third in the list of fourteen, six of whom 
were chosen, and was elected by a majority 
of 1,388 votes, over the highest Democrat, 
with less than one-tenth of the vote colored. 
Harry J. Capehart was born in Charleston, W. Va., May 2, 1881. He graduated 
from the Howard University Law School 
in 1913. He was admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of West Virginia 
within one week after his graduation, and 
appeared in his first case before the State 
Supreme Court a year later. He was elected 
a member of the City Council in 1917, which 
position he resigns to enter the Legislature. 
THE PATRIOTISM OF NEGROES 
DAVI D H. RAINES , a Negro, was the 
highest Fourth Liberty Loan purchaser in the State of Louisiana. He was 
born in Vivian, La., in 1865. A t the age 
of twenty-four he married Miss Grace Williams, and to this union twelve children have 
been born, seven girls and five boys. A 
son is with the American Expeditionary 
Forces, and four children are in college. 
Mr. Raines began farming with his 
mother, and each year, as he was able, he 
increased his holdings. Eight years ago 
he started leasing his land to oil companies. 
He is a self-taught man, being among those 
who were denied the privilege of an education. 
Mrs. Helen Sayre is Chairman of Christmas Package Station 16, Chicago, 111.; a 
pioneer member of the American Red Cross 
First-Aid Class; and a member of the 
Daughters of the British Empire. She is 
President of the U. S. Club, formed by a 
group of women to carry on and promote 
patriotic and practical endeavor. These 
women have been actively engaged in Red 
Cross and Liberty Loan drives, and in dispensing refreshments and good cheer to colored troops passing through the Chicago 
yards. Seven of Mrs. Sayre's kinsmen are 
with the Canadian Expeditionary Forces. 
Mrs. Sayre was born in Chatham, Ontario, of Canadian parents. Her father, the 
late Dr. A. R. Abbott, was the first colored 
medical graduate of Toronto University. 
During the Civil Wa r he proffered his services, and was commissioned a surgeon in the 
Federal Army. For several years Mrs. 
Sayre was a Kindergarten Director in, the 
Public Schools of St. Louis, Mo., and ranked 
high in musical and literary circles. She 
was leader and soloist of the choir of All 
Saints' Church. Since her marriage to Dr. 
Benjamin F. Sayre, a Philadelphian, she 
has made her home in Chicago, where she 
has reared four children. 
A RETIRED SCHOOL TEACHER 
MARITCH A REDMOND LYONS, after 
forty-eight and one-half years' active 
service in the New York Public Schools, 
has been retired. Miss Lyons was born in 
New York. The laws of Rhode Island were 
amended by a special act of the Legislature, 
enabling her to enter the Providence High 
School, from which she .graduated in 1869. 
She was appointed in Brooklyn, N. Y., in 
1869, as an elementary school teacher. 
123 MRS. HELEN SAYRE
D, H. RAINES
T. G. NUTTER 
 MISS M. R. LYONS 
 H. J. CAPEHART 
124 T O BISHO P HOO D 125 
After teaching in all grades she was made school tendered her a reception and preAssistant Principal in Public School 83, sented her a gold watch. A public recepwhere for twenty years she controlled from tion was held at her school, when her printwenty to twenty-five teachers, with seven cipal, Mr. Albert E. King, gave in detail 
hundred to nine hundred pupils. Her spe­ commendable points of her career, and letcial work was the supervision of the first ters were read from District Superintendent 
three years, the training of recent ap­ Veit and a former teacher. Miss Lyons 
pointees and pupil teachers. holds a certificate designating her an AsOn her retirement the teachers of her sistant Principal. 
TO BISHOP HOOD 
JOSEPH S. COTTER 
PURE speech, sure speech, speech that 
always blends 
With the rugged mettle of a foe's or 
friend's, 
Is thine, good preacher, thine. 
Fair ways, rare ways, ways that lead us on 
To the fuller morning from a meager dawn, 
Are thine, wise preacher, thine. 
New thought, true thought, thought that 
points the way 
Through doubt's mists and shadows to good 
God's man-wrought day, 
Is thine, brave preacher, thine. 
Old faith, bold faith, faith whose anchors 
still 
Grapple in the fastness of the sane man's 
will, 
Is thine, firm preacher, thine. 
Far dreams, star dreams, dreams that 
hedge us in 
From the rocks of passion and the shoals 
of sin, 
Are thine, great preacher, thine. 
Clean life, serene life, life that knows not 
shame, 
Life that's writ in service on the scroll of 
fame, 
Is thine, loved preacher, thine. 
The late Bishop J. W. Hood of the A. M. E. Zion 
Church. Born May 13, 1831, at Kenneth Township, 
Pa. Died Octoher 31, 1918 at Fayetteville, N. C. 
A CORRECTION 
I N the December CRISIS the N. A. A. C . P. voting of the citizen soldiers. We wish that 
notes credited Secretary Baker with the typographical error had been true. Unbeing "inclined" to accept our suggestion fortunately, the Secretary was "disthat a second order be issued regarding the inclined." The Outer Pocket 
FO R the past month we have been receiving the news of the fight that you have 
had on your hands, and I, as a member of the 
Atlanta Branch of the N. A. A. C. P., and 
a subscriber to TH E CRISIS, am writing to 
assure you that the boys "over here" are 
with you, and trust that you will let nothing cause you to cease, for one moment, in 
the great fight for right and justice that 
you have been waging for these many years. 
It may be of interest to you to know that 
the boys of the 92nd are holding their own, 
and their spirit is undaunted. Their morale 
is high, their determination to make a showing for themselves and the folks at home 
is not to be denied, and their relations with 
the people of this great country are of such 
a nature as to reflect the greatest credit 
upon us as a people, and to give them the 
opportunity to see for themselves that all 
that they have heard of us, from others who 
did not see fit to speak truthfully, was not 
true. 
We are truly living in a country, at present, where democracy and its principles are 
manifested on every hand—for these people 
in France know a man only by the amount 
of good that he contributes to the community or state, and not by the color of his 
skin, or the texture of his hair. It is, 
indeed, a joyous thrill that goes through 
one when he sees these men, who heretofore 
have not had an opportunity to appreciate 
what life really meant, having their first 
chance to experience the rights of manhood, 
and enjoying an equal privilege in every 
way. Such are the conditions for which we 
are fighting, and we pray that when this 
maelstrom is over, the principles for 
which the lives of these black boys have 
willingly been given will be manifested in 
the country that we call home. 
Lieutenant CHARLES A. SHAW , 
American Expeditionary Force. 
I am not of your race, but am greatly interested in its advancement, and believe ALL 
talent and character should be recognized, 
regardless of color or nationality. 
My slogan is, "The Universal Fatherhood 
of God and Brotherhood of Man." 
MADAM E LOZARETO, 
St. Joseph, Mo. 
Everything that increases the morale of 
the American people, that cements all Races 
and Peoples behind the men in the trenches, 
helps vitally to win the war. The laboring 
man, fighting for a living wage and getting 
it; the women, fighting for the right of suffrage and on the high road to it; the colored people, fighting for American citizenship—not more nor full—but just American citizenship, and getting it, will mean a 
united country and victory; anything else 
means a divided country and, well, " A house 
divided against itself cannot stand." 
Must we do our full duty now? Yes, 
that and more, if possible, for to do less 
proves us unworthy of American citizenship. 
SA M B. WALLACE , 
Washington, D. C. 
* * * 
If as a result of this war having been 
fought the Negro will be given the privilege 
to live where he so desires, to ride on the 
train where he so desires, to eat in whatever hotel he so desires and to join whatever labor union he so desires and, in fact, 
if he will be given every privilege that any 
other man enjoys, then the wa r will not 
have been fought in vain. 
I, myself, wish nothing for myself, my 
wife and my children that I do not desire 
to see the colored man, his wife and his 
children have. 
H . C. PIKE, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
* * # 
Never knew until this morning that TH E 
CRISIS existed. While waiting for the colored draftees to come in from Philadelphia, 
Pa., I purchased one from a little colored 
boy. 
I was impressed, very much impressed 
with it The great work the colored 
people are doing outside the army was a 
revelation to me. Would still be in ignorance, had it not been for TH E CRISIS. 
Am writing this because I want you to 
know how much I enjoyed TH E CRISIS, and 
this P. M. will see it on its wa y "over 
there." 
ROBERT W . WILLIAMS , Captain, M.R.C . 
126 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE The Department of Education in the State 
Percy Mackaye in the Jewish Exponent: W e are what we imagine of Louisian , anad ha ousr issuedeeds d a bulletin on the 
Ar e born of dreaming. Europe acts today 
Epics that little children in their play 
Conjured, and statesmen murmured in their 
creeds; 
In barrack, court and school were sown 
those seeds, 
Like dragon's teeth, which ripen to affray 
Their sowers. Dreams of slaughter rise 
to slay 
An d fate itself is stuff that fancy breeds. 
Mock, then, no more at dreaming, lest our 
own 
Create for us a like reality! 
Let not imagination's soil be sown 
With armed men, but justice, so that we 
May for a world of tyranny atone 
And dream from that despair—democracy. * * * 
G. L. Morrill in his book, "On the Warpath," has this to say of Thomas Dixon 
and his works: 
Mr. Dixon is an "unregenerate rebel," 
who is trying to rewrite history and make 
us believe that slavery was right and freedom wrong; the North an enemy and the 
South a friend to the Negro; that the black 
man was better physically, mentally and 
morally in the cotton fields than now in college or professional life; that the colored 
man should be disfranchised, the fourteentli 
and fifteenth amendments abrogated, and 
the Negro deported to Africa. 
Lincoln drew a black-and-white picture 
that Minister Dixon should hang up in his 
study—"There will be some blacks who can 
remember that, with silent tongue, and 
clenched teeth, and steady eye, and well 
poised bayonet, they have helped mankind 
on to this great consummation; while I fear 
there will be some white ones unable to 
forget that, with malignant heart and deceitful speech, they strove against it " 
In the company of Abraham Lincoln, and 
of Jesus Christ, who came to "set the captive free," "Reverend" Thomas Dixon would 
feel very lonesome. But let us have no 
fear. Heaven is a place of love, and a 
minister of hate will be sent on a mission 
to another place. In the meantime, for all 
such race-haters, slanderers, falsifiers, scatterers of firebrands, grave-diggers of the 
skeleton past, and men who do not venerate 
the principles for which the northern soldiers died, may the Golden Gate of San 
Francisco swing shut on its hinges, and the 
Goddess of Liberty in New Yor k thrust out 
hen right hand to smite. 
"Aims and Needs in Negro Public Education in Louisiana." The discussion is frank 
and earnest and the summary concludes: 
"The glory of achievement in our white 
school system is marred by the pathetic 
and pitiable condition of our Negro schools. 
Louisiana in the past fifteen years has built 
up a system of schools for her white children that has commanded admiration and 
respect. Can she not, with the experience 
she has acquired, the means at her disposal, and the spirit to win, begin now to 
complete her crown of glory by completing 
the task she has so well begun and providing a school system for all of her children?" 
Leon R. Harris, of the Brick Mason Department, Portsmouth, Ohio, Works of 
Whitaker-Glessner, has written a remarkable poem, "The Steel Makers," published 
in the company's house organ, "Safety 
Hints." Mr. Harris, we are told in the 
Metal Worker, Plumber and Steam. Fitter, 
was born in Cambridge, Ohio. 
His father was a roving musician and 
never took the slightest interest in him. He 
was separated from his mother at the age 
of two, and from his mother's family when 
four years old, being made a ward of an 
orphan asylum. The asylum placed him in 
the Cambridge grade schools at the age of 
six and he was in the fourth grade when 
they gave him away. This is all the common school education Harris ever received, 
except what he himself obtained from reading and studying at night, and on Sunday. 
Later he was able to work his way through 
Berea College and Tuskegee Institute. Completing his school work, Harris went to work 
in a pipe mill in Birmingham; later went 
to Iowa. It was his intention to attend 
school there, but his longing for a home, 
which he had never had, overcame him and 
he married. Home comforts were a spur 
to Harris' ambition, and from the time of 
his marriage he has worked steadily at good 
jobs. He worked in Iowa and the Northwest for a contracting company for five 
years, then went to North Carolina, engaged in farming and taught the rural 
school in his neighborhood for another five 
years, when he came to Portsmouth and 
worked for the A. Laughlin Co, on Nos. 8, 
127 128 TH E
9 and 10 Open Hearth Furnaces, when this 
concern was engaged in construction work 
for the Whitaker-Glessner Company, and 
has been working for the latter company 
ever since. 
We hope to see something else from the 
pen of this young' man. Below follow two 
stanzas of his poem, which boasts an unusually virile and essentially modern touch: 
What do they see through the furnace door, 
From which the dazzling white lights pour? 
Ah, more than the sizzling liquid ore 
They see as they gaze within! 
For a band of steel engirdles the earth, 
Binds men to men from their very birth, 
Through all that exist of any worth 
There courses a steely vein. 
Of what they make we are servants all, 
They have bound our lives in an iron thrall, 
We do their bidding, we heed their call, 
As they work with willing zeal. 
So tap your heats with a courage bold, 
You're worth to your world a thousand-fold 
More than the men who mine her gold, 
You men who make her steel! 
A VANISHING EPITHET 
FO R many colored Americans Irvin Cobb's 
recent article in the Saturday Evening Post was spoilt when he said, "hereafter n-i-g-g-e-r will merely be another way 
of spelling the word American." 
Bishop Thirkield remarks in the Christian Advocate: 
Not so, Mr. Cobb. The term that will 
stand for the American of color will henceforth be spelled with a capital "N. " The 
word "nigger" must go the way of all terms 
of racial contempt and inferiority, face to 
face with the dauntless heroism and sacrifice of white and black, yellow and red and 
brown on the woi'ld's great battle-front. 
The writer means well, but he does not 
seem to know that the term "nigger" that 
has persisted as a relic of slavery and has 
in it the sting of liquid fire to every selfrespecting Negro—must go. The American 
Negro, with the freedom and rights of a 
man, has arrived. When the first two American soldiers to receive the croix de guerre 
on their wounded breasts, because of dauntless valor in trench defense against a score 
of Huns; and when the record of a race 
shows that it is no accident that they 
have black skins; when the news of this 
battle against such odds sends a thrill along 
the whole American line that breaks into 
cheers, the day has come when the American soldier-millions will no longer tolerate 
any such terms of contempt against a compatriot of any race or color. 
Bishop Mclntyre is right: 
Dago and Sheenv and Chink. 
Greaser and Nigger and Jap: 
 CRISI S 
The devil invented these terms, I think, 
To hurl at each hopeful chap 
Wh o comes so far from over the foam 
To this land of his heart's desire, 
To rear his brood, to build his home, 
And to kindle his hearthstone fire. 
While the eyes with jo y are blurred, 
Lo ! we make the strong man sink, 
And stab the soul with the hateful word : 
Dago and Nigger and Chink. 
* * * 
The bishop points out the astounding callousness of the South and the way in which 
the North reacts to its views: 
It was a chance group of four in a Pullman section—two young women, with marks 
of refinement and good breeding; an army 
medical officer, in charge of a group of 
convalescents just from the battlefields of 
France, and the writer. 
It so happened that one of the soldiers 
was a Negro. A contemptuous remark by 
one of the women led the officer to speak in 
terms of praise of the Negro soldiers. He 
referred to the fact of his having accompanied a group of enlisted men recently to 
the South and of his sux-prise and pain in 
observing the treatment of a Negro who 
was a member of the group. In a railway 
station a colored man was hustled from the 
only dining-room available and the only 
chance for a bite of food and subjected to 
other embarrassment. A t this, the officer 
finally became indignant; he pulled from 
his pocket his government orders, which 
called for first-class traveling accommodations, and seated the colored soldier at a retired table in the dining-room. When it was 
realized that the officer was backed by Uncle 
Sam, the disturbance was ended. 
A t this one of the young women showed 
marked indignation and said that in the 
South "a nigger had to know his place." 
On hearing that offensive designation of 
the Negro, spelled with two g's—a relic 
from slavery days and usually a term of 
contempt—the writer was stirred to indignation and remarked, as he had been called 
upon to do more than once in these days, 
that over 300,000 Negroes were enlisted for 
the war, showing1 a noble spirit of patriotism; that their record would shame all 
slackers; that there was not one internment 
on account of pro-Germanism, though beguiled by Hun propagandists; and that in 
this day, when nearly a third o f a million 
black patriots were taking the places of 
just so many white men of the South and 
North, it was no time to be flinging out such 
terms of reproach and of racial contempt. 
And now may I say that the peril of the 
North today, with its acquisition of perhaps 
three-quarters of a million Negroes, is that 
the attitude of many may be determined by 
the ignorant, but often well-meaning talk TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 129 
o f some southern people, for while the Negr o has many civil rights and educational 
privileges in the North denied him at the 
South, there is often less of sympathy for 
the individual of the race and the same tolerance with the weaknesses and failings 
of an untutored people, unused to freedom, 
than is found among the better classes in 
the South. While this attitude does not 
find expression so frequently in violent outbursts, yet it often manifests itself in contempt o f spirit and in harshness of word. 
An d it is a fact, observed over the years, 
that the southern people in general are persistent propagandists of their views as to 
the Negro. There is such positive assertion 
of their attitude and enforcement of their 
views, often the outcome of race feeling and 
prejudice, that northern people, too, often 
not only surrender, but adopt narrow and 
false views. 
Only a little later the writer got into conversation with the Negro soldier on the Pullman and learned that he was on his way 
to the hospital, wounded and with weakened 
lungs through being gassed in the mighty 
conflict on the Champagne front, and that 
out of 225 of his regiment only sixteen remained alive or without wounds. 
It looks as though the bishop might go 
further and observe that the outstanding 
synonym fo r the old hateful term is "hero." 
COLORED LABORERS 
MR . VA N GELDER, of the Empire Mattress Company, which manufactures 
mattresses for Sears-Roebuck & Company, 
tells an interesting story of his success in 
substituting Negro labor for that of Russians and Poles. He says, according to the 
Literary Digest, in a letter to Julius Rosenwald: 
Beginning with three years ago, the employees consisted mainly of Russians and 
Poles, whom we had taught different 
branches of the work and who had worked 
for me, in most cases from their immigrant 
stage, varying from four to twenty-four 
years. They were an ignorant lot, cringing 
in their servility and totally unaccustomed 
to being treated decently. However, as they 
were taught the work and received good 
treatment they assumed an insolent air of 
independence and became unreasonable in 
their demands. 
Afte r the wa r had been in progress for 
some time and immigration ceased, conditions became critical so I looked about for 
a solution. While I was South on a buying 
trip, I heard of; a colored machinist whom 
I forthwith saw and hired at a much higher 
salary, of course, than he was getting South. 
He proved satisfactory to such a degree 
that I hired all colored men for the felting 
department and placed him at the head of 
same. While he and the other men receive 
high wages (much higher than they hoped 
for), yet the cost of production has decreased considerably and the repairs on machinery is less than half it was under the 
old regime, who were not getting any more 
wages, but were not giving maximum production and in their carelessness broke the 
machinery, thereby increasing the cost of 
the product. 
* * * 
This was the first step. Gradually Mr. 
Van Gelder found it to his advantage to 
hire colored mattress-makers and to place 
colored men in practically all departments 
side by side with white employees. Their 
wages ranged from $18 per week for common hustlers to $30 for mechanics. Then 
came an opening for colored women. He 
continues: 
There is one branch of the work known 
as tufting, which is done by machinery. 
The operation of these machines is so simple and easy that any one can do it, and we 
had boys on them. We were beginning to 
have trouble in securing boys. American 
boys were in general demand and foreign 
boys were not to be had, so in looking over 
the situation I suddenly saw a large field 
I could draw from. Colored women are 
limited in their choice of occupations and 
it occurred to me that it would be a good 
plan to place them on the tufting machines. 
This experiment proved as successful as my 
experience with the men. I then placed colored women on the mattress-filling machines, which require deftness and considerable judgment. 
The success of the entire project so encouraged me that I took a step further and 
placed colored women in the sewing department among white women, and things are 
running very nicely without a hitch anywhere. 
He concludes, significantly: 
They are pleasant and appreciate the 
conditions they are working under and I 
am pleased with their attitude as much 
as with the actual results, that of increased 
production at the same outlay. The improvement made by the change surpasses 
my most sanguine expectations, in other 
words we are receiving a full day's work 
for a full day's pay. 
* * * 
In another part of the country, however, 
there have been made deliberate efforts to 
check development of Negro labor. The 
United States Employment Service has 
boldly misused its authority in this respect. 
The Washington, D. C , National Republican reports the speech of Clifford Williams, 
Director: 
"No more Negro labor must go to Hog 
Island, where it is being ruined by the 130 TH E
Yankees treating the Negroes as well as 
they do white people. Yo u must be on the 
lookout for the labor agent, who has bled 
you white and that steals your stuff at 
night. We have got to co-operate, or we 
will have about as much chance as a onelegged man at a tango party. I am going 
to offer this stuff to you, and will help the 
communities that help themselves." 
The Republican comments: 
While Mr. Gompers was assisting the 
British labor convention to formulate a 
platform demanding that labor should hereafter not be treated as a commodity, an important official of a service, which is working cheek by jowl with the Department of 
Labor, describes the paying of higher wages 
than locally prevail, in a speech to employers, as "stealing your stuff." 
* * * 
The same situation is arising in South 
Africa. Says the New York Evening Post: 
The Transvaal is now discussing whether 
unskilled labor shall be the exclusive property of Kaffir natives, or whether white men 
shall be employed for such work. There is 
considerable difference of opinion in the 
matter, and although certain interests oppose the employment of white men at comparatively high wages, several newspapers 
and organizations are strongly in favor of 
educating white men to perform all the important work of the country. 
This would bar| the Kaffir from employment of any kind. After all this horror 
and bloodshed, still the world does not realize the inevitable relationship between 
economic oppression and disaster. 
RECONSTR UCTION 
TH E real reconstruction is not concerned 
with new boundary lines in Europe, 
the- rehabilitation of her peoples, or even a 
change in the apportionment of the German colonies in Africa. If the world is 
not soon to know again the horrors of a 
war, which will exceed even our present 
knowledge, there must be a concerted effort 
to reconcile the aims and wishes of 900,000,­
000 people of color with the attitude and 
demands of .500,000,000 white men. In the 
United States the problem hinges on labor 
conditions and franchise; in the world at 
large, the problem is embraced in President 
Wilson's formula, "self-determination for 
small nationalities." 
Prejudice, engendered by the war, has 
kept the public well-informed of Germany's 
unspeakable brutality in Africa, from the 
bloody trail left by Karl Peters in East 
 CRISI S 
Africa, in 1884, down to the literal wiping 
out of 200,000 Hereros nearly thirty years 
later. But what of other nations? Ha s 
the development of Moroccan resources by 
France, for instance, been for; the sake of 
Morocco, or of France? 
* * * 
Kuman F. Markfez writes in the New 
York Evening Post: 
The abolition of tribal warfare and the 
diminution of illiteracy, brought about by 
the French occupation of Morocco, are consummations that properly evoke our gratitude. Equally encouraging are such manifestations of progress as the establishment 
of modern systems of sanitation, transportation, and communication, where the crudest primitiveness survived even to this decade Ar e the natives or the French 
investors deriving the major benefits from 
these innovations? Moreover, in the vast 
process of pioneer building, did the native 
laborers receive a wage proportionate to 
the pay of French workmen? 
In the conduct of schools, is free scope 
given to indigenous culture, to the expression of Moroccan art and folkivays, or is 
European culture superimposed upon native 
customs, having its fruition in a nondescript 
race of hybrids? It might be enlightening 
to know what proportion of the total Moroccan budget is devoted solely to native 
schools. Lord Cromer, for many years 
British Administrator of Egypt, in his "An ­
cient and Modern Imperialism," refers to 
the verdict of M. Boissier, a leading authority upon the subject of French dependencies, 
that the learning of the French language 
by the natives both of Algeria and Annam 
has not led to a rapprochement between 
them and the French. In plain words, M. 
Boissier asserts "the two races live in hostile 
camps." Has the result been different in 
Morocco? 
Similarly, considering the rapid growth 
of the European population in Casablanca, 
one wonders to what extent the facilities of 
the hospitals and dispensaries were used 
solely by natives. 
The services afforded the Moroccan farmer are valuable and are not to be underestimated, but may we not be told who controls the agencies, such as grain elevators 
and commission houses, through which farm 
products are distributed? 
Mr. Hubbard states, "Morocco today is 
no more an African but a European country." Is this the goal for which democracy 
should strive, and is this paternalistic method of administration compatible with the 
President's formula? Would it not be far 
more consistent with the ideals of democratic government to aid the Moroccans in the 
preservation and development of their unique culture? Would not the initial step 
toward the application of democracy's prin­TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 13 1 
ciples be the rigid regulation of foreign investments? 
* * * 
The italics are ours. Is it not conceivable to the arrogant Caucasian that darker 
peoples may have their own notions of civilization, which contacts with the lines of 
white development make them eager to preserve? It is to be hoped that the Peace 
Representatives will learn this one thing. 
The Brooklyn Eagle says: 
Interesting to philosophical students of 
racial problems is the prospective attitude 
of the yellow men of the Far East. Of 
course, the 315,000,000 in India will be represented only through the delegates of Great 
Britain. But aggressive Japan, with nearly 
60,000,000, and non-aggressive China, with 
approximately 325,000,000, both having declared wa r on Germany, will have the full 
status of belligerent powers. That Japan 
may "advise" China, and Peking may make 
Tuan Chi-jui, a pro-Japanese, the head of 
its representation is probable. And it is 
already prophesied that the yellow men will 
demand an agreement that in the future 
there shall be no racial discriminations 
against them throughout the world. 
* * * 
The economic struggle, the attempt of 
each nation to place its own product, the 
frenzied search for new markets—all this 
must be considered and re-adjusted in any 
real effort at reconstruction. The idea, 
Afric a for Africans, must be faced. The old 
concept of Africa, as a place merely for 
European exploitation, might just as well 
be changed now as ever. The world cannot 
know peace until then. The Manchester, 
England, Guardian faces this issue squarely: 
The vice of European expansion in Africa 
is that personal gain—the gain of the shareholder in Europe, or of the white man in 
Africa—has colored too strongly the treatment of the native. Africa has been looked 
upon too much as the home of raw materials welcome to European industry, and 
of an even cruder raw material—native 
labor and native sweat. In the new era, 
which must come to Africa after this war, 
the claim of the Negro as a man, and the 
claim of Afric a as for the most part the 
home of the Negro, must be heard and met. 
The ears of such men as Karl Peters would 
have been deaf to any such claim. 
THE SILLY SOUTH 
FEDERA L suffrage has caused many discussions, but surely none appealing to 
so many different emotions as does the 
speech made by one Harry Gamble before 
the New Orleans Press Club. The reader 
cannot help feeling disgust, surprise, anger, 
and above all, an impulse to "inextinguishable laughter." If this speech is representative, then the South lacks both logic 
and humor. Democracy anywhere, everywhere, but none in the United States, raves 
Mr. Gamble: 
We have had abatement, not settlement; 
students of events must see that with our 
state laws nullified, the Negro wearing the 
uniform of the country, his education creeping on, and above all the renewed attempt 
of Washington to put its hand on State 
Suffrage and Northern Democrats vying 
with Northern Republicans to gain political 
advantage thereby; with these things plainly in view, dead indeed must be the perception that does not recognize an early 
disturbance of race relationships in the 
South. As for me, I profess to be no wiser 
than other men. I blink horrid truth as 
often as my fellows. I hide my face from 
disagreeable prospects as weakly as another. I bury my face in the sand of indifference and inattention and imagine that 
repulsive facts have passed by, like others 
do. I claim no omniscience, but I know the 
South cannot live in peace and security so 
long as the leering, taunting demon of social and political equality between the races 
stares at us from the hopeful faces of a 
black population almost equal to our own. 
* * * 
Like Tully, he pleads thus with his country women: 
Let our women refuse this poisoned, 
treacherous bribe from Washington and demand the vote at home. 
When they take it from the states, they 
can give it back, if their black sisters should 
prove unmanageable; to Washington, they 
can give nothing back, though their black 
sisters should move from kitchen to drawing-room. 
Do we hear thosa soft tones that soothe 
us in our many sorrows, which croon our 
babes to sleep, and which gently cheer us 
on in our fainting struggles—do we hear 
them turned hard and cynical, saying "Our 
men have always managed, they can always 
manage." 
My God! Has the feeling between the 
sexes come to this: that the female says 
to the author of her being; to the brother 
whose life lies between her and danger or 
dishonor; to the husband of her bosom; to 
the son she bore, whom never before the 
mother forgot; does she say with the cold 
indifference of the Egyptian task-master to 
the toiling, failing Israelite: "Yo u have 
borne this burden—you can bear more. It 
is my pleasure to take what I want—the 
way I want it—when I want it; yours is 
the duty to provide and to protect." 
* * * 
TH E CRISIS reads with much pleasure: 
There is an increasing number of sincere, 
honest and energetic men and women of  I 
132 TH E
high standing in other sections who are 
oppressed with a sense of the Negro's condition 
They have wealth in millions, which will 
be spent in ignorantly marring the peace 
of our country. New publications, ably 
edited jointly by white and black, in increasing numbers, are openly established 
to bring about) complete social and political 
equality between the races. When you find 
such noble women as Miss Jane Addams and 
Helen Keller as Associate Editors and on 
the Managing Board of Directors of these 
publications, know that the party is respectable and powerful. Yo u must realize 
that our danger lies in the very fact of 
their high standing and sincere purpose, 
combined with a complete want of understanding of the question they deal with. 
When you learn that the most conspicuous 
national leader for the Woman Suffrage 
Federation Amendments—who by some fantastic turn of events has become the leader 
ef our southern women—in a contribution 
to a very ably-conducted Negro magazine 
lately declared that it was strange and cruel 
and undemocratic that the white militant 
women suffragists in prison at Washington should object to the enforced intermingling with Negro women; when you 
learn that in their hot zeal these people 
would not hesitate to spend great sums in 
your very midst to accomplish what Banks 
and Butler could not do with blood and 
iron, the subjugation of the white man's 
spirit; I say, when you see such persons, 
with such power and such sentiments, combined with lack of knowledge or sympathy 
for our awful plight, who are cunning 
enough to become leaders of your own women—is it not time that you should look 
about you? 
* * * 
It is interesting to note that the South 
is perfectly aware of the Negro's right to 
lawful ambition and to read Mr. Gamble's 
ingenuous confession that the white man's 
reflex to lynching constitutes a punishment equal to1
 the crime: 
Think you the Negro is content and hopeless? No. Being men and looking into 
your own hearts, you ought not to expect 
it. The sooner you recognize this, and give 
some part of your minds to plans for mutual 
peace, and his proper advancement, the 
less will be our inevitable distress. I say 
inevitable because I repeat that, with the 
best and most prudent management, in our 
crowded condition, it is almost hopeless to 
expect anything less than contacts which 
will at times, in the language of Jefferson, make human nature shudder. The 
people among us who imagine that the 
status of the Negro is fixed, his question 
settled, and peace will reign forever, and 
who will not pause to consider a fact, though 
it stare grinningly at them like a death's 
head, will be the very ones who, finally 
 CRISI S 
shocked into an awakening, will in the terror and fear that follow sudden discovery 
grab gun, and rope, and torch, and commit acts alike upon guilty and innocent, 
disgraceful to humanity—and which will 
take out the savor of their own lives.
have looked upon gray and grizzled men, 
some of them my blood kin, who, when 
little more than tender boys, were called 
by stern necessity to stand between their 
women and the black horde; and I saw 
that in their faces, in the unguarded moment, which taught me, that there can be 
no pleasant memories of slaying and killing. 
* * * 
But here is the gem! Universal suffrage 
in the United States must be stamped out, 
says Mr. Gamble. The men who have been 
establishing a democracy abroad must be 
spared the shock of finding democracy at 
home. He actually develops this paradox! 
And above all, for our husbands', brothers,' and sons' sake—who go forth to battle in a foreign land that democracy may 
live—let us beware that our negligence at 
home does not bring reproach in their returning eyes. Wha t answer will we make 
to these victorious legions when again they 
shock our shores with their martial tread 
—and cry, "Wha t Ho—Father, mother, 
wife, sister—what is the state of the country? Is all well? " Wher e will those hide 
their heads who could but make the fearful answer, "You r cause and your absence 
was our opportunity—while with mighty 
hammer you struck world-resounding blows 
for the freedom of men; we did with scarce 
heard clinking prepare new shackles for 
your returning feet." Be careful what you 
do, my southern countrymen and countrywomen, lest you betray the South, and find 
too late that the war-weary and broken 
bodies of her warrior sons may yet have 
strength to curse your handiwork. 
FOR EUROPEAN EYES 
T'H E day that heralded the establish­
•*• ment of democracy in Europe marked 
its utter failure in the United States. A Negro was lynched in Alabama, "after a running fight with officers, following a disturbance he was said to have created." 
Walter B. McClane writes in the Boston, 
Mass., Herald: 
As I read your paper, I hear the children on the the outside blowing horns, beating upon tin pans, ringing bells and cheering, and I see them marching up and down 
the street proudly waving their flags, because democracy has triumphed and' the 
cause of liberty has been vindicated As 
I read further I come to the heading, "Ala ­
bama Mob Lynches Negro, " because, it was 
said, he created a disturbance. This is sad 
news to read in a civilized country on any TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 13 3 
day, but especially on a day when the world 
is celebrating the victory of democracy over 
autocracy and the vindication of the cause 
of freedom and justice. If our great country does not destroy the vile system of 
"lynch law" as one of its first reconstructions efforts, it will stand before the civilized world as a nation of hypocrisy and 
sham. Just as truly as God has frowned 
upon Germany for her atrocious acts and 
oppressions, so,- too, He will frown upon 
America. Germany has sown murder and 
revolution throughout the world and she is 
today reaping murder and revolution. America is allowing her citizens to murder the 
weak and helpless and defenceless, and 
America will reap the fruits of her sowing 
if she does not abolish "lynch law." I 
write with no bitterness, with no spirit of 
hatred or revenge. I believe and hope that, 
just as the soul of America has spoken 
for the oppressed, and those treated unjustly throughout the world, so, too, America, true to the traditions of America, will 
speak out against the iniquitous habit of 
lynching her citizens and blot out forever 
the stain and source of weakness and thereby demonstrate the potency of the constitution and set forth the effectiveness of the 
laws of this republic. 
Edward F. Rivers says in the same paper: 
Lynching of Negroes is one of the "dudshells" of the Civil Wa r and Reconstruction that has never been attended to properly. Is it too much to hope that some belated steps may be taken in the coming days 
of readjustment to prevent the explosion 
of these "dud-shells" of mob violence? 
LAST ECHOES 
TH E war is over, but to the very end 
the Negro soldier is reaping wellmerited praise. The Brooklyn Standard 
Union says: 
Of the American Negro soldiers it has been 
frequently said since we have been fighting 
in France, that they are decidedly the most 
cheerful troops who have spilt blood in this 
war, and as highly courageous as any who 
have shouldered guns ... . Under his 
smile and ready laugh or grin, the colored 
man has the qualities of the fighter—coolness, patience, steadfastness, optimism, 
pluck and, of course, courage. All these 
have been brought out in recent months, and 
honors have fallen upon him in France, in 
a manner that is cause for national pride. 
In every department of the Army, from 
wireless telegraphy to the sanitary squad, 
the Negro has played his part and played 
it conscientiously, and it is gratifying to 
know that this city has contributed a very 
large number of Negro fighters to the nation's army, for the percentage of volunteers here has been high. Easy to mould 
to the requirements of discipline, happy 
under any and all circumstances, he is an 
exemplary soldier. On the charge he sees 
red, as the fighter should, and in rest billets, or even in the trench, he seldom loses 
his cheerful outlook upon life. 
v * + 
The Philadelphia, Pa., Evening Bulletin 
comments on French fairness in citations 
for bravery. Americans please copy. 
Among the honors which France has bestowed upon American soldiers none is more 
interesting than the "citation" by which the 
entire 369th Regiment is given the coveted 
croix de guerre or war cross. This regiment was composed wholly of colored troops, 
although the higher officers were white men 
of long military experience. Originally a 
New York unit, its recruits came from 
many states. 
The citation is for gallantry in the September and1
 October offensive in the Champagne sector, and while it deals in considerable detail with the valor of particular 
officers, it praises the courage and tenacity 
of the whole regiment, which suffered heavy 
losses. Only a few regiments have received 
such distinction, for the French are chary 
about distributing honors lest they become 
cheap. 
The incident illustrates the lack of racial 
prejudice in the French. It has been said 
that in the first year of the war France 
would have been defeated had it not been 
for the services—largely voluntary—of 
African troops, who rushed to her aid and 
displayed prodigies of valor. They broke 
the German line and reached the open but, 
lacking support, had to retire. 
American colored troops have done their 
whole duty in this war. This country 
should not be less willing than France to 
give full acknowledgment of their services. 
* * * 
The citation reads: 
Citation for Croix de Guerre, aivarded 
the 369e Regiment d'Infanterie, U. S. 
(formerly the Fifteenth New York Infantry), for its operations as a combat unit 
of a French division, in the great offensive 
in Champagne, September and October, 
1918, by the French Commanding General. 
Under command of Colonel Hayward, who, 
though injured, insisted on leading his regiment in the battle; of Lieutenant Colonel 
Pickering, admirably cool and brave; of 
Major Cobb, killed; of Major Spencer, 
grievously wounded; of Major Little, a true 
leader of men; (he 369th R. I., U. S., engaging in an offensive for the first time in 
the drive of September, 1918, stormed powerful enemy positions energetically defended, took, after heavy fighting, the town of 
S , captured prisoners and brought back 
six cannons and a great number of machine guns. "DISTURBIN G TH E PEACE, YOU R HONOR! " The Horizon 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
A T her New York recital, Grace Hof­
*• heimer played a "Negro Rhapsody," 
by Albert Spaulding. 
American soldiers in London recently 
paraded behind a Negro band of forty 
pieces. The parade halted in front of Buckingham Palace, and disbanded; then the 
band proceeded to the parade grounds, 
where it rendered to thousands of persons 
a concert lasting an hour. 
A number of compositions written after 
Negro folk-songs, or in the Negro idiom, 
are listed among recently published novelties: "Swing Low " has been arranged for 
voice and piano by James H. Rogers; 
"Doan' You " is a dialect song of worth 
by Robert H. Terry; "Serenade Negre," a 
violin number composed by Macmillan, appeared on the recital program of Richard 
Czerwonky at .ffiolian Hall, New York City, 
in November; William Stickles' dialect song, 
"The Whippoorwill," heard with great 
pleasure in manuscript form, is soon to be 
published by Schirmer Company; "Negro 
Lament" is a Negro Spiritual arranged for 
voice by John T. Howard, Jr. 
In a recital of "Songs of Outlaws" 
Yvette Guilbert, exponent of French chanson, gave an old Negro song, "I Love That 
Man, " as an example of the sentimental 
life of the outlaw. 
Mabel Garrison, soprano, of the Metropolitan Opera Company, presented two NegTO songs on her recital program recently 
given in New York City: "Nobody Knows 
De Trouble Ah Sees," by J. Rosamond Johnson, and "De 01' Ark's a-Moverin'." 
A t Tulsa, Okla., through the efforts of 
the Council of National Defense, 2,000 colored persons held a."Sing, " under the direction of Robert B. Carson and Dr. C. E. 
Smith. 
Of a new set of "Negro Spirituals" arranged by H. T. Burleigh, Musical America says: "These four Spirituals are as 
fine as anything he has done. Every one 
of them is a melody of distinctive quality 
and the treatment he has given them is perfect. As for Mr. Burleigh's harmonic 
scheme in 'Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child,' we are tempted to say that 
not until we knew his setting did we realize what a remarkable tune it was. The 
old-time harmonic dress to this melody has 
never set off the fullness of its pathos. But 
as it is here, with the counterpoint that 
Mr. Burleigh has added, it is an artistic 
entity that commands immediate attention. 
It ought to find a place in the repertoire 
of those of our concert singers who appreciate what H. T. Burleigh is doing for 
them in preparing these spirituals for concert use." 
A most successful concert was given in 
Symphony Hall, Boston, Mass., on November 21, by Roland W. Hayes, tenor, assisted 
by a small orchestra and William S. Lawrence, pianist. 
William S. Lawrence, pianist, who was 
heard in Symphony Hall, as an assistant 
artist to Roland W. Hayes, disclosed marked 
talent deserving notice. The reviewers give 
him credit for the artistry displayed in the 
following numbers: MacDowell, "To the Sea 
and Danse Andalouse"; Cyril Scott, "Lotus 
Land"; Debussy, "Clair de Lune" ; Chopin, 
"Polonaise Op. 40, No. 1, Nocturne, Op. 15,' 
No. 2, " "Valse in E Minor." 
An exhibit of smaller pieces of sculpture 
by Meta Warrick Fuller, arranged by Mrs. 
Maud Cuney Hare and Mrs. C. Henri Robbins for the Soldiers' Comfort Unit of Boston, during November, resulted in the following comment from the Boston Transcript: "Here is a colored woman's work of 
an arresting interest. It shows technical 
skill, well-trained—with gleams of unmistakable excellence. Besides her technical 
merit—good modeling, anatomical knowledge—there is a certain 'gesture' in her 
work of the 'fine careless rapture' that is 
revealing and convincing, especially in certain portrait statuettes and odd charactertypes. It has always been 'The Listener's' 
belief that one broad 'way out' open to 
135 International Film Service. 
SOME "BUFFALO" ' OFFICERS WIT H TH E AMERICAN EXPEDITIONAR Y FORCES THE HORIZON 137 
all, for this young sculptor's race, lies 
through the fine arts. In fact, in every field 
of art, music, painting, sculpture, poetry, 
already there are living examples to prove 
it. Art is the purest democracy in the 
world—ever has been, and ever must be." 
Five hundred Negroes of the Development Battalion at Camp Upton, N. Y., recently gave a concert of plantation melodies 
for the troopers. 
The choir of Mount Olivet Baptist 
Church, in New York City, has held its 
third annual Musicale. In addition to a 
miscellaneous program , Mendelssohn's 
"First Walpurgis Night " was offered to 
a. large and appreciative audience. 
May Howard Jackson, the well-known 
sculptress, announces that her studio at 221 
West 138th Street, New York City, will 
hereafter be open gratis to the public from 
10 A. M. to 5 P. M. daily. This artist besides achieving distinction in workmanship 
and technique has also the charm of originality in choice of subject. She hao attempted to embody in her work certain aspects of the American color problem, and in 
this she has succeeded marvelously. Among 
her groups of this character, the "Mulatto 
Mother and Her Child" and "Brotherhood" 
have won very special, attention. One is immediately struck by the dignity of her treatment and the scope of her vision. Mrs. 
Jackson will be in her studio daily from 
2:00 to 4:00 P. M. and at this time will take 
pleasure in receiving visitors and in discussing her work with them. 
THE WA R 
BECAUS E her father was a Civil Wa r 
veteran, Miss H. M. L. Brown, the 
only Negro High School graduate at Lexington, Mass., was given the honor of unveiling the "Roll of Honor," at Lexington. 
Clubs for colored soldiers and sailors 
have been established by The Wa r Camp 
Community Service in the following cities: 
New York ; Boston; Camp Dix, N. J.; Baltimore; Alexandria, Hampton, Petersburg, 
Newport News, Norfolk, Richmond, Va.; 
Ashville, Southart and Charlotte, N. C ; 
Greenville, Charleston, Spartanburg and Columbia, S. C ; Atlanta, Augusta and Macon, 
Ga.; Pensacola and Jacksonville, Fla.; Montgomery and Anniston, Ala.; Detroit; Chillicothe, Ohio; Louisville; Rockford, 111.; Des 
Moines; Camp Funston District; Indianapolis; Little Rock; Waco, Galveston and 
San Antonio, Texas. 
Out of fifty-six colored candidates detailed for Machine Gun instruction at Camp 
Hancock, Georgia, forty-two were graduated. 
Twenty-thousand Negro draftees, qualified for limited service, are to be furloughed for extension work on Camps 
Bragg, North Carolina; Knoxville, Kentucky; Jackson, South Carolina; and at 
Ordnance Supply stations, where a shortage of labor exists. 
Bob Scanlon, the Negro pugilist with the 
"Daredevil Americans of the Foreign Legion," after jumping over two dead Germans, for a fist-to-fist fight with a Hun, 
was killed by an automatic revolver. He 
created a sensation in London by flying 
in a machine of his own construction and 
landing safely in an embankment, although 
his machine was demolished. A t a London hospital, instead o f permitting the use 
of an anaesthetic in the amputation of a 
finger, he calmly looked on, joking the while. 
When American military elements asked 
for the segregation of Negro American 
fighters in France, Marshal Foch replied: 
"When General Pershing came to France, 
he found a black man at the head of the 
French Army. France has no color prejudice, and persecutes no man on account of 
color or creed." The man in question was 
General Dodds. 
First Sergeant Clarence S. Janifer, M. 
R.C., a medical student of Howard, received the Croix de Guerre, while his division was with the Fourth French Army. 
Lieutenant W. M. Johnson, of the 366th 
Infantry, a Negro resident of Omaha, Neb., 
has been appointed Mayor of several villages in France, occupied by American 
troops, because of his familiarity with the 
French language and customs. 
The Personnel Division of the Y. M. C. 
A. announces that there are ninety Negro 
secretaries in camps and twenty-eight overseas. 
Among women's organizations to be presented Honor Banners, for the best work 
in the Fourth Liberty Loan drive at Baltimore, was the Colored Division of the 
Maryland Council of Defense. 
Negro troopers with the American Army 138 THE CRISIS 
TH E FLA G OF TH E "FIGHTIN G FIFTEENTH " 
in France brought down a German plane in 
less than fifteen seconds. They made onehundred bullet penetrations. 
Five hundred Negro women at Norfolk, 
Va., registered with the Federal authorities for manual work, to relieve Negro 
men for Government work. 
Maitland Jacobs, a colored boy of Pittsfield, Mass., when leaving for camp, carried 
a blanket that was used by his grandfather in the Civil War. He has since 
been commissioned Lieutenant. 
Heriry D. Taylor, a graduate of Lincoln 
University and a recent graduate of the 
Medical Department of McGill University, 
has been commissioned as First Lieutenant 
in the Canadian Army Medical Corps. 
Doctor W. E. B. DuBois, Major Moton 
and Mr. Lester A. Walton sailed December 1, 
on the Orizaba, a special U. S. transport for 
reporters of the Peace Conference. 
Corporal M. Harry Davis, of Frederick, 
Md., was wounded and gassed twice, while 
serving as a Machine Gunner with the American Expeditionary Forces. He has returned to the states and been honorably discharged. 
The Division of Films Committee on 
Public Information has made a contract 
with the Downing Film Company, with offices in the Astor Theatre Building, New 
York City, for the distribution and exploitation of the two-reel film, "Our Colored Fighters." 
Twenty-five colored women are taking a 
course in Motor Mechanism, under the 
Maryland Council of Defense. 
Fire swept the camp occupied b y two 
companies of the 25th U. S. Infantry, at 
Yuma , Arizona. In addition to being left 
shelterless, the 320 Negro troopers lost all 
their arms, equipment, bedding, extra clothing and personal effects, including a large 
number of Liberty Bonds. 
A number of striking comments have 
been made on the wa r work of the American 
Negro by West Africa, a weekly newspaper published in London, England, and 
edited by Albert Cartwright, a native African. 
Sixteen hundred and seventy-five Negro 
soldiers at Camp Beauregard, La., have 
volunteered for harvesting, under provision 
made by the Wa r Department. 
The Arkansas Negro Baptist Association 
has voted to send Dr. E. C. Morris, of 
Helena, its president, to the Peace Conference. 
The Executive Committee of the National Race Congress of the United States 
has named five delegates to the "international conference of the darker races of 
the world" : J. R. Hawkins, Rev. W. H. 
Jernagin, William Harrison, Rev. ;A. J. 
Stokes, Dr. J. M. Waldron. 
The Surgeon-General's office reports that 
colored medical officers have been assigned 
to all colored organizations with colored 
line officers. 
A press dispatch says: 
A regiment of these "Black Devils," as 
they are called by the Germans, known as 
the "Buffaloes," alone captured three hundred Germans. The Germans apparently 
seemed fearful of their safety when they 
faced these shouting colored boys, and in 
many cases gave themselves up without 
conflict as prisoners. 
When informed they would be relieved by 
fresh troopers after holding their line for 
neai-ly thirty-six hours of continuous fighting, the Buffaloes reported that they needed no relief, but began pressing "Heinie" 
back farther. 
News has reached Paris that north of the 
Ardr e River, American colored troops, along 
with British and Italian troops, were thrown 
into the fray. The attack of the Italians 
was feebly developed and rapidly crushed. 
But the black troops pushed forward with 
the British and French in support. Between the forests of Fere and Riz the colored troops fought their way forward. THE HORIZON 139 
INDUSTRY POLITICS 
T'H E shortage of Negro farm labor in 
the South has made it necessary for 
women of the "first families" in Georgia to 
become such laborers. 
In New York City, Negro waiters and 
cooks have taken the places of white strikers at the Vanderbilt and Plaza Hotels; colored girls have been installed in the diningrooms of the Judson and Albert Hotels. 
Sam Keetor, a colored man, in Magaffir 
Co., Ky., has acquired a thousand acres of 
land, and is known as the Eastern Cattle 
King. 
MEETINGS 
TWO thousand Negroes meeting in New 
York City, adopted resolutions demanding that captured German colonies in 
Afric a be turned over to the natives; that 
if the lynching of Negroes was not stopped 
in America a revolution of 12,000,000 Negro citizens might be used to stop it. 
The Colored Committee of the Women's 
Auxiliary of the Diocese of Pennsylvania, 
which looks after the interests of the missions for colored people, especially in the 
Southern States, has held its regular 
meeting and elected Mrs. Walter Faro, President. 
A t the annual meeting of the Maryland 
State Colored Teachers' Association, held 
in Baltimore, George W. Murphy was reelected president. 
The Anti-Vilification League has been 
organized in Chicago, 111., to co-operate 
with the Chicago Branch of the N. A. A. C. 
P. The work will be similar to that carried 
on by the Anti-Defamation League of the 
Jewish race, i. e., combating insidious and 
pitiless propaganda of race hatred, which 
makes its appearance in the press, in the 
moving-picture and on the stage. 
The twenty-eighth annual Negro Conference of the South will be held at Tuskegee Institute, January 22-23. 
The National League on Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes held a two days' conference of executive secretaries and members of its national and local executive 
boards during November at Columbus, 
Ohio. The discussions consisted principally of the work of reconstruction that confronts the country at this time. 
A POLICE canvass made in eighty pre­
*• cincts of fourteen wards, St. Louis, 
Mo., showed the registration of 3,379 Negroes not entitled to vote. 
Three Negroes were elected to the Legislature in Chicago, 111.: S. B. Turner, A. 
H. Roberts and W. B. Douglass. 
CHURCH 
TH E C. M. E. Church has purchased, 
through Bishop R. A. Carter, the 
$100,000 building of the Fifth Avenue M. 
E. Church, at Robey Street and Park Ave ­
nue, Chicago. Formal opening of the edifice was held November 3. One of the 
features of this church is a $10,000 pipe 
organ. 
The Methodist Episcopal Church and the 
Methodist Episcopal Church South will hold 
a "World's Fair of Methodism," at Columbus, Ohio, June 20 to July 17, 1919, in commemoration of the coming of peace and the 
centennial of its missionary activities. 
Among the features will be a village representing Africa, peopled by native inhabitants, in native dress, and a pageant illustrating the development of Methodism from 
the days of John Wesley to the present. 
The program of missionary work throughout the world, which will involve an expenditure of $115,000,000, will be visualized 
by transporting almost bodily native villages 
from the various foreign fields to the buildings of the Ohio State Exposition Grounds. 
An assemblage of Negroes in Tremont 
Temple, Boston, which had gathered to hold 
a service commemorative of the life of the 
late Mrs. Geraldine Louise Trotter, passed a 
resolution in her name, appealing to President Wilson to ask Congress for an antilynching law, and for measures to end discrimination against Negroes in the army 
and navy and in civil life. 
Bishop A. P. Camphor, after two years' 
absence, has arrived in America from his 
residence at Monrovia, Liberia. He came 
by way of France, where he preached and 
lectured to Negro Labor Battalions. 
Dr. W. Augustus Jones has been elected 
Field Secretary and General Director of 
the $25,000 campaign of the National Baptist Foreign Mission Board, with headquarters at Louisville, Ky. His salary will be 
$2,000 per year and expenses. 140 THE CRISIS 
TH E CONTRIBUTION S OF WHIT E AN D COLORED WORKER S A T TH E MURDOC K SHI P YARD , 
JACKSONVILLE, FLA. , TO TH E AMERICA N RE D CROSS 
The Kev. J. ri. Dorsey, one 01 tour colored Catholic priests in America, has been 
appointed pastor of St. Monica's Catholic 
Church, Baltimore. He was ordained to 
the priesthood in 1902 at St. Francis Xavier 
Church. 
St. Mark's Methodist Church, in New 
York City, on the last Sunday in October, 
collected $9,337, made up of small gifts. 
The Rev. William H. Brooks is pastor. 
EDUCATION 
TUSKEGE E INSTITUTE has been 
made a gift of $1,000,000 by the late 
Mrs. Russell Sage. 
W. B. Crittenden, formerly Dean of 
Livingstone College, Salisbury, N. C , is 
now Principal of the Vicksburg, Miss., Industrial School. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
TH E thirteenth annual meeting of the 
Atlanta Mutual Insurance Company 
reports assets of more than $2,500,000. A. 
F. Herndon, who organized the company 
thirteen years ago, and J. C. Lindsay were 
re-elected President and General Manager, 
respectively, as were C. C. Shanks, Secretary-Auditor, and the rest of the Board 
of Directors; R. W. Chamblee was elected 
Vice-President, and also General Manager of 
Straight Life Department; Norris Herndon, Director, and E. M. Martin, Jr., Manager of the Agents' Division. 
After listening to 1,200 Negroes singing 
folk-songs at his meeting in Providence, 
Rhode Island, the Rev. Billy Sunday said: 
"If the Negro is good enough to fight in 
the trenches and to buy Liberty Bonds, his 
girl is good enough to work along side of( 
any white girl in the munition factories." 
On October 20 the Independent Order 
of St. Luke dedicated a $30,000 building, 
at 125-7 West 130th Street, New Yor k City. 
Tax returns for the year 1918 on all Negro property in the State of Georgia show 
a total increase of $47,423,449, an increase 
of $7,135,528 over 1917; Negro farmers 
added $3,000,000 worth of hogs, horses and 
other cattle; and $700,000 was spent in 
automobiles. 
The Wag e Earners' Savings Bank, Savannah, Ga., reports its increase in business over 1917, $167,251.78; the number of 
depositors increased 2,518, making a total WA R WORKER S A T BRIDGEPORT , CONNECTICU T 142 THE CRISIS 
of 11,315; the assets are $586,531.97; the 
paid-in capital is $50,000, with a surplus 
of $35,301.94. The bank has existed 
eighteen years. L. A. Williams, who is 
president and one of the founders, and the 
Board of Directors were re-elected. 
A twenty-five per cent dividend has been 
declared on the defunct Savings Bank of 
the Order of True Reformers, Richmond, 
Va., which was forced to close in 1910. 
The distribution of money in hand, $100,­
000, will be made through the Mechanics' 
Savings Bank. 
Dr. William E. Quinn, a widely-known 
physician in Chicago, 111., has deeded his 
residence at 3160 Indiana Avenue, to be used 
as a social center for Negroes. 
In St. Louis, Mo., a hotel of seventy 
rooms, "The Grand Central," has been 
opened for Negroes, 
The main building of Lincoln Institute, a Negro normal school at Jefferson 
City, Mo., through a defective wire catching 
fire has been damaged to the extent of 
several thousand dollars. The state carried no insurance on the building. 
Beatrice F. Duncan, a colored woman, 
has been Assistant-in-Charge of the Volunteer Red Cross Workers of the Boston 
City Hospital for the past six months. 
The Municipal Contagious Disease Hospital, of Chicago, has opened its doors to 
the employment of four colored registered 
graduate nurses: Misses Evelyn S. Pearl, 
of Douglass Hospital; Goldie Walker, of 
Provident Hospital; Beatrice E. Porter and 
Josephine Lightfoot, of Freedmen's Hospital. The smallest compensation paid 
these nurses is seventy-five dollars per 
month, besides lodging,' board and laundering. 
The Census for Mortality Statistics for 
1916 shows a decrease in Negro mortality. 
The rate in cities which have 10 per cent, 
or more of their population colored has 
averaged 25.5 per thousand of population 
in the last five years, as against 28.7 in the 
years from 1901 to 1905. The tuberculosis 
rate is still high, ranging from 627 deaths 
per hundred thousand of population in New 
Orleans, to 248 in North Carolina. The 
rate for Negroes in the whole registration 
area was 20.5 per thousand, as compared 
with -13.5 per thousand for whites. The 
rate for tuberculosis of the lungs was 312 
per hundred thousand, as compared with 
110 for the whites. 
PERSONAL 
SO L BUTLER, a Negro half-back, scored 
both touch-downs of Dubuque Seminary's victory over Grinnell College, 13-0. 
Hilliard Taylor, a Negro bank messenger 
of Richardson, Hill & Co., Boston, has been 
retired and pensioned at full pay by his 
employers after fifty years' service. 
John Brown, a Negro, who has been in 
the employ of the Santa Fe since the road 
was built from Atchison to Topeka, Kan., 
has been promoted to Assistant Custodian 
at Topeka. 
William F. Pettiford, a young colored 
man, has been appointed auto-driver at the 
Sixth District Police Station, in the 01 ­
neyville Section, Providence, Rhode Island. 
Mrs. R. L. Barnes, of Savannah, Ga., for 
over twenty years Grand Worthy Counsellor of the Grand Court of Calanthe, is 
dead. From a few hundred members and 
little money the Order grew to a membership of several thousands, with a corresponding increase in money. 
Jerry West, a colored foreman in the 
Shipping Department of the Hydraulic 
Pressed Steel Company, Cleveland, Ohio, 
won the first grand prize in a suggestion 
contest among white and colored employees. 
He submitted an improved design for a 
car-loading conveyor. r 
John Dodson, a colored man of Brooklyn, New York, has been appointed Superintendent of the Submarine Boat Corps at 
Port Newark, New Jersey. 
The third anniversary of the death of 
Booker T. Washington was celebrated November 14, at Tuskegee Institute and in 
several cities. 
W. J. Curry, of the Post Office Department, Washington, D. C , has been promoted to a $1,700 clerkship. 
"Battling" Jim Johnson, a widely-known 
Negro boxer, died during November at 
Boston, Mass. 
The U. S. Department of Labor has 
appointed Mrs. Helen B. Irvin, a colored 
woman, as Special Assistant on Economic 
Problems of Negro Women Wag e Earners. 
Dr. S. S. Hill, of Montclair, N. J., has 
been appointed a Dental Interne at the Kansas City, Mo., General Hospital. THE HORIZON 145 
A Service Flag in a Negro District, West 39th Street, between 9th and 10th Avenues, New York City, 
It contains 81 stars but the record has since been changed to ISO 
War Work in Atlanta, Ga. 144 THE
G. I. Currin of Dover, Okla., is dead. 
For nineteen years he was Grandmaster of 
Oklahoma Masons, and during this time a 
$40,000 Masonic Temple was erected and 
paid for at Boley. 
Dr. W. Harry Barnes of Philadelphia, 
Pa., has been appointed Acting Assistant 
Surgeon in the U. S. Public Health Service 
by Surgeon General Blue, and ordered to 
report for active duty in Boston. 
James M. S. Hamilton, a colored man, 
has for fifty years been subscription clerk of 
THE NATION and since 1881, for THE 
EVENING POST. Since the latter paper 
has been sold Mr. Hamilton continues with 
The Evening Post and gives up his work 
with The Nation. 
Walter J. Singleton, who has been connected with the Bureau of Insular Affairs, 
Wa r Department, for twenty years, has been 
designated to inspect and superintend the 
shipment of all currency made by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Treasury 
Department, for the Philippine Government. 
Two colored physicians, Doctors Whitehead and Lazatt, have been assigned to 
work at the State Board of Health, New 
Bedford, Mass. 
Mrs. Gertrude Durden-Rush, of Des 
Moines, Iowa, has been admitted to the 
Bar. 
FOREIGN 
ABIL L adopted by the Chamber of Deputies, Paris, gives full citizenship 
rights to native Musulmans and Algerians 
twenty-five years of age, not condemned for 
political crime. Tribute was paid to the 
Algerian sharpshooters in the late war, and 
in recognition of their refusal to surrender at Sedan, in the Franco-Prussian 
War. 
GHETTO 
T'H E School Commissioners of Baltimore, 
-•- Md., have recommended to the Board 
of Estimate, a budget for 1919, which discriminates against Negro teachers as follows : 
Colored High School Teachers, male (white) $1,200-$2,000 
Colored High School Teachers, male (Negro) $1,000-$1,400 
Colored High School Teachers, female (white) $1,110-$1,500 
 CRISIS 
Colored High School Teachers, female (Negro ) $800-$l,300 
A t the Training School for 
Colored Pupils: 
White teachers $1,000-$1,600 
Negro teachers $1,000-$1,300 
The maximum for Negro Heads of 
Departments: 
White $2,200 
Negro $1,500 
The Colored High School still occupies an 
inadequate building, without gymnasium, 
swimming-pool, athletic grounds, shops, or 
other improvements, regardless of the fact 
that Negro citizens pay taxes on $48,000,000 
worth of property. A protest is, naturally, 
being made. 
CRIME 
A N unsuccessful attempt to lynch Russell High, a Negro, in WinstonSalem, N. C , on a charge of shooting a 
farmer, the county sheriff and attacking 
the farmer's wife, resulted in the death ot 
four persons and injury to more than 
twenty. 
A press report of December 12 says: 
Negro refugees from Green River, Wyo. , 
arriving here to-day, declared that all colored men, women, and children had been 
ordered to leave that town following the 
lynching Tuesday of Edward Woodson, a 
Negro charged with killing a railroad 
switchman and wounding another. 
Nearly all left their possessions in Green 
River, having been given only until last 
night to leave. 
The Buffalo, N. Y., Express says: 
The authorities of Winston-Salem, N. C , 
where a serious outbreak of mob violence 
against Negroes occurred on November 17, 
have arrested a number of persons accused 
of participating in the riot and promise to 
prosecute them to the fullest extent of the 
law. W e shall see what we shall see. 
The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Sheffield, Ala., November 12, George 
Whiteside, hanged; charged with the murder of a policeman. 
Culpepper County, Va., November 24, 
Allie Thompson; charged with assaulting a 
white woman. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 145 
MEN AND WOMEN TRAINED IN AGRICULTURE 
WILL BE IN GREAT DEMAND AFTER THE WA R 
Secretary Lane is urging that plans and "Plans for providing the 
returned soldier with land surveys and studies be instituted now so that 
are rapidly taking shape. when demobilization begins, farms and homes * * * Let us not think of may be offered to the returned soldiers on the the individual returned sol­ most encouraging terms. dier exiled to a tongue of 
green land between the 
stony breasts of western 
mountains * * * but of or­ Under the Smith-Hughes Vocational Ed­ ganic communities of one ucation Act, the Government is already train­ or two hundred farms with ing Teachers, Agriculturalists and Mechanics competent agricultural advisers to brace up the tech­ whose services will be in great demand after 
nique of those who are the war to help these soldiers and rural inwilling to learn."—The New habitants adjust themselves to the problems Republic. of reconstruction. 
Tuskegee Institute offers the Smith-Hughes Course in: 
Teacher-Trainin g Agriculture Mechanics Hom e Economics 
Splendid opportunities for young men and women of purpose, and an exceptional 
chance for young men who have been placed in deferred classes or exempted. 
You may enroll NOW. 
Address, R. R. MOTON , Principal, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 
THE HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE 
Hampton, Virginia 
OBJECT—Founded in 186 8 
by General Samuel C. Armstrong to train selected youth 
who should g o out to teach 
and train their people. The 
Institute was designed to instruct Negro youth in morality, industry, and thrift. 
HAMPTO N TODAY—A n 
industrial village with 900 
boardin g students; 1,100 
acres; 14 0 buildings; instruction farm of 83 5 acres; and 
200 teachers and workers. 
Hampton stands for a "sound 
body, a trained capacity, and 
an unselfish outlook on life." 
Hampton is on the State of 
Virginia list of approved 
four year secondary schools. 
OVER 650 HAMPTONIANS HAVE BEEN COURSES — Recently reIN NATIONAL SERVICE vised four-year courses in 
Teache r Training; Home The young men are under military dis­ Economics; Business; Agri­ cipline, and are formed into a battalion culture; and 1 3 Trades. with student officers. 
JAMES E. GREGG, D. D., Principal 
Mention The Crisis. 146 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNE,
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL South College Ave. and N. 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October i, 1918 . Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age , sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has goo d character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object. 
Efficiency ou r aim . 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Ave. Phila., Pa. 
Bell Phon e Spruc e 1924 30-Da y Syste m Positio n 
Derrick 
Shorthand School Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send JOT Enrollment Blank "nj Jull injormalion. 
Day and Evening Classes 
Our students hold positions at the Navy 
Yard, Arsenal, various camps and "over 
there." Al l are receiving excellent salaries 
and highest praise. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau Will Help Yo u Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , 0 . 
Catalog. 
Principal 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE, 
2227 S. 17th ST. , PHILA. , PA . 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping 
Our students recently appointed at the Nav y 
Yard, Arsenal, and Post Office as stenographers and clerks are receiving Big Salaries— 
male and female stenographers are averaging 
$1800 per year. W e are informed that one 
of our male students is a stenographer in 
France. 
SCHOO L OPENE D OCTOBE R 15th 
THRE E MONTH S COURSE—5 lessons a week. 
Apt students can pass Civil Service Examination at end of course. 
EIGH T MONTH S COURSE—2 lessons a week. 
W e advise students to take this course because it gives more time for lesson preparation 
and practice. 
Edwar d T . Duncan , President • 
STENOGRAPHERS WANTED All Race i 
Prepare in the beat achool of ita kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Cm l Service Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 8 9 
Lenox Avenae and 135th It. , Ne w Yor k City. 
Open Alt Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W . Mottley, President, 
with all modern
Suburban Homes improvements on 
electric car line connecting Washington, Baltimore, 
Annapolis and Camp Meade. Auto road. 30 minutes' ride to city. 
Near Washington, D. C . Lots 50 by 1&0, $270, $10 down. $5 monthly Houses 
built to order after $100 or more is paid on lot. 
Fertile land, pood elevation, gardens, chickens, etc. 
Store, school 301, cnurcnes churches, communit communit y CIUD club.. Booklet tree f: 
Thos. J. Callowa 3allowayy C I 1 
1403 Ne w ~~ 
Washington, a761"1 6
orf ° D I the™ I 
M y cours e in Penmanship, Bookkeeping , an d Shorthan d 
throug h the mail will prepar e yo u fo r th e positio n wort h 
while . Write for information. 
A. D.Nolley,M.Pen., 519MichiganAve.,Buffalo, N.Y. 
A live agency furnishes the. TEACHERS connecting medium in * busilieu way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, Ne w York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania. Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and Wear 
Virginia. 
TH Z MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENCY 
14 U New York ATOMS* Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE 147 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Prompt Payment of Claims 
Naturally we are proud of our record in the payment of claims. 
Big or little, we give them the same careful scrutiny and attention, and pay them all promptly. 
The recent Influenza Epidemic has been no respecter of Persons 
and many people in the Prime of life were stricken down. 
Among the Influenza Claims paid by us were the following: 
Dr. D. E. Payne, Cordele, Ga $2,000 
Mrs. Ida Almond, Elberton, Ga 500 
Sylvester Bibbs, San Antonio, Texas 1,000 
Joseph P. Hicks, Houston, Texas 1,000 
John H. Anderson, Social Circle, Ga 1,000 
Rufus G. McCrary, Pelham, Ga 2,500 
Thomas B. Dunlap, Tyler, Texas 1,000 
It is consoling to know that your insurance is carried with a strong 
company, administered on the principle of fair dealing to all men.. No 
matter what the amount, nor how sudden the claim, STANDAR D 
LIF E Pays, and Pays Promptly in Full. 
STANDAR D LIF E INSURANC E COMPAN Y 
Home Office, 200 Auburn Ave. 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
HEMAN E. PERRY, President HARRY H. PACE, Secretary-Treasurer 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 148 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Operating for the present only in Virginia, The 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
HOM E OFFICE : 
527 NORTH SECOND STREET RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
Is not only paying claims as provided in the policy, to many of our gallant soldier 
boys, but is standing like a stone wall of protection to the thousands of loved ones 
left behind. 
In many instances were it not for the foresight shown by these loving husbands, 
fathers and sons in providing their families with Southern Ai d Policies, there would 
be untold suffering in some of the homes of these brave soldier boys. 
By paying promptly sick, accident and death claims to policy holders in the soldiers' homes and purchasing Liberty Bonds, the Southern Ai d Society of Va., Inc., 
is helping mightily to keep up the morale of our bronze gladiators. 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., is the only insurance organization issuing 
a guaranteed continuous payment policy for sickness and accidents and an undiminished Death Claim after death. 
A Virginia Home without a Southern Aid Society's Policy is not finished. 
JOIN NOW ! 
A. D. PRICE, B. L. JORDAN , W. A. JORDAN , 
President Secretary Assistant Secretary 
Mention TH E CIISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 149 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM, N. CAROLINA 
The Oldest, Largest and Strongest 
Old Line Legal Reserve Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Assets nearly One-Half Million dollars. Owns $160,000.00 in 
Government Eonds. 
The following Editorial appeared in the "Durham Daily Herald," 
May 10, 1918: 
A SUBSTANTIAL ENTERPRISE 
(Editorial) 
Th e North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association, a business enterprise owned, controlled and actively managed by colored 
men of Durham, has developed into an important asset of the 
city during its nineteen years of existence. It is no idle boast nor 
advertising motto that this company is the " largest and strongest 
Negr o insurance company in the world." It is just that and more. 
It is managed along the most modern lines and is a business which 
not only the colored people may be proud of, but one which also 
deserves a high place among the new insurance companies of the 
southern states. 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$1,736,504.50 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILITY CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore, M. D., Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M. Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick, Ass't Sec'y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 150 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately 
Acid res I 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y :i ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
A n aggressive exposur e b y an Anglo-Saxo n champion o f equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity fo r 
clear understandin g an d up-to-date propaganda . Be ­
long s in the library o f ever y friend o f social justice . 
Pric e 25 cents. Sen d orde r to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY Contain ! 296 Pagei, IS Chapters, HUtorica l 
an d Biographical, 17 Full Pag e Illustrations 
Printe d on Fine Antiqu e Book , Eoun d in Full 
Gree n Extr a Cloth, Gol d Titl e o n Fron t Cove r 
and Shelf Back . Price , ne t $1.25. Postag e 
Prepai d $1.40. Orde r throug h an y bookselle r 
or direct fro m the author. Addre M 
JOHN W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann St. Washington. D. C 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. Offers to Hig h Schoo l graduate s an d youn g 
wome n o f highe r educatio n and goo d mora l 
character, betwee n the ages o f 18 an d 35, a 
three years' cours e in the professio n o f nursing. Fo r furthe r informatio n apply t o the 
Superintenden t enclosin g a stamp. 
211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
The Whittaker Memorial Hospital 
Training School for Nurses $25.00 PER WEEK Offers a three yea r cours e o f training to wome n wh o 
wish to ente r the nursin g profession . Favorabl e ap­ may be mad e in commission s b y parties handling plicants must be ove r IS years o f age , o f goo d health, "Histor y o f Negr o Soldiers in Spanish-America n nf e"ood mora l characte r and must have had two years War " combine d with "Histor y o f the Negr o Race,' ' high school training or its equivalent. 400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. Applicatio n blanks will be sent o n request. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N L1LL1E A. WYNN, R. N. Superintendent 154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K Orcut t Avenu e an d 29t h St., Newpor t News , Va . 
A PROPHEC Y FULFILLE D 
Our Book, " A Tribute for the Negr o Soldier " written just 
Single as the United States entered the Worl d War, said that on 
p „ the basis of the Negr o race's history in every age, and every 
clime, the American Negr o soldier would make his mark in 
25c France. He has. Read the facts on which this prediction 
was made. 
BRUCE and FRANKLIN, Publishers 
1309 E. 18th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
Something Everybody Needs W e ar e offerin g thre e o f th e biggest bargain s o f th e da y in th e 
lin e o f Christma s cards. D o no t fail t o mak e you r purchas e throug h 
us. Yo u ge t you r card s retai l a t Wholesal e prices. 
W e plac e in ever y orde r card s appropriat e t o sen d t o th e Boy s a t 
Cam p or Abroad . No w is th e tim e t o order, if yo u wan t you r card s 
to reac h ove r sea s fo r Christmas. 
Send stamp s or mone y fo r th e se t yo u desire . Wonderfu l assortmen t fo r 12c . 
Qualit y sets a t 25 an d 50 cents. N o lik e bargain s obtainabl e 
anywhere , 
TH E TRU E BLU E CALENDA R 
This pictur e havin g becom e so popula r w e hav e responde d t o man y 
requests b y makin g a beautifu l calenda r whic h w e wil l sen d yo u 
fo r 30c 1. 
JULIAN R. MILLER. Jr. 120 1 SPRUC E STREE T PHILADELPHI A 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 151 
A Necessary Guide for the Reconstruction Period 
TH E STOR Y OF HAMPTO N and of 
ARMSTRONG 
Told by 
Dr. FRANCIS G. PEABODY 
in 
EDUCATIO N FO R LIF E 
Hon. FRANKLI N K. LANE, Secretary of the Interior, says of it: 
"Yo u have given me two o f the most delightful evening s I have had in a long time. I 
have spent them with Francis G. Peabody's boo k on 'Educatio n Fo r Life. ' Ther e are few 
me n in the Unite d States wh o write such English. I read pages o f it to Mrs. Lane . Th e 
boo k is not onl y a brilliant piec e of work , but it is as healthful and stimulating as sunshine 
itself. " 
Dr. ROBERT R. MOTON , Principal of Tuskegee, said of it just before sailing 
for France on his mission for the U. S. Government: 
"Th e happenings o f the past four years have shown , as perhaps nothin g else has, the real 
need and practical value o f the type o f education which Genera l Armstron g emphasized at 
Hampton , whic h in n o sense antagonize s any other form o f education. " 
EMMET T J. SCOTT, Special Assistant to the Secretary of War, says: 
"Mr . Peabody's boo k should be in the home o f ever y thinking American , whateve r his 
color, cree d o r race. " 
Illustrated $2.65 Postpaid 
—+ 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON 
Builder of a Civilization 
(The Authorized Biography) 
By 
EMMETT J. SCOTT and LYMA N BEECHER STOWE 
At the celebration held in Chicago after the Spanish War, Booker Washington 
said: "W e have succeede d in ever y conflict, excep t the effort to conque r ourselve s in the blotting 
out o f racial prejudice . . . . Until we thus conque r ourselves, I make nn empty statement 
whe n I say that w e shall have , especially in the Souther n part o f our country , a cance r 
gnawin g at the heart o f the Republi c that shall on e da y prov e as dangerou s as an attack 
from an army withou t o r within. " 
Thus spoke this great Negro prophet at the close of the lust zvar. His words are of the 
highest value to both races in connection with racial readjustment aiicr this war. 
Hon. P. P. CLAXTON , Commissioner of Education of the United States, says 
of it: " I wish ever y man and woma n in the United Stales wh o has any influence in determinin g the policie s o f the countr y might read the book. " 
Illustrated $2.15 postpaid 
Order through the Publishers, DOUBLEDAY, PAGE 85 CO., GARDE N 
CITY, N. Y., or through 
TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 152 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOKS BY 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
1. An Appeal to Conscience (just off th e press—Macmillan ) $ .60 
2. Race Adjustment (publishers' price , $2) I -5 ° 
3. Out of the House of Bondage (publishers' price , $1.50) 1.25 
4. The Three Books Listed Above (publishers' price , $4.10) 3-°o 
5. The Disgrace of Democracy (100,000 copie s distributed ) 10 
6. The Negro's Place in the New Reconstruction (Read y abou t 
Jan . 15 , 1919 ) 10 
Add 10% for postage to all orders. Remittance invariably in advance. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
KELL Y MILLER , Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Inform yourself as to 
TH E EXODU S O F TH E 
NEGROE S 
By reading 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson's 
A CENTUR Y O F NEGR O 
MIGRATIO N 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This book is unique in that it is the 
first and only scientific treatise in 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
wh y the Negroe s have migrated, 
wher e they have gone and what they 
have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Send all orders to the author 
The CRISIS 
Calendar 
for 1919 
is a TERCENTENAR Y CALENDAR, commemorating the 
landing of Negroes at Jamestown, 
Va., in 1619. The calendar contains valuable historical information concerning the Negro race in 
America and every page carries 
the face of an interesting Negro 
child. 
1216 You Street, N. W. PRICE 2 5 CENTS 
Washington, D. C. The Crisis, 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 153 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available (or Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningaide 
126 W . 134th Stm t New Yor k Cit y 
FLORENCE COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano 
"Shis has one of the best voices that Got! has given her race."—Los Angeles Times. "Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Tal­ bert who beside her natural gift has already reached a high plane of professional accuracy."—Herman De­ vries in Chicago American. Engagements accepted for Concerts. Recitals. Oratorio. 659 28th Street. Detroit, Mich. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of C 1 a r e n c-e . 
Cameron Whit e and his Con- ' | 
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
JOSEPHINE JUNIUS CONTRALT O 
"Miss Juniu s is the possessor o f a contralto 
voice , lovel y in quality, whic h she uses artistically."—Osca r Saenger. 
AVAILABL E FO R CONCERT S 
202 W . 140th Street Ne w Yor k City . 
CLEOT A COLLIN S LYRI C SOPRANO 
"Miss Collins possesses a voice of wonderful quality 
which she manages with admirable taste and skill. Her 
personal charm and beauty enhanced the pleasure enjoyed 
from the really excellent program presented. The audience 
of music lovers in attendance were enthusiastic in their 
appreciation of the talented young lady. "—Newark Daily 
News. ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
103 "W. 143d St. Ne w Yor k City. 
M 
I 
^ifiiiii 
BUST S O F 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglaaa, Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. $1.50 each. The 4 buata 
lor 55.00. Agenta wanted. Send al once. 
THE ISAAC HATHAWAY ART CO. 713 S. HICKORY ST , PINE BLUFF, ARK. 
 ADVERTISER 
DON'T MISS THE SERIES t Twelve {I'D famous Colored musicians commencing 
with the "COLERIDGE-TAYLOR NUMBER" wllh an original cover drawing by race artist in Uie 
Jtinuary. HMD, edition of "THE MUSIC MASTER" Order promptly. $1 a year, Copy 12c. mulled. Addross: Wellington A. Adams, 1911 Ninth St. N. w , Washington, D. C. 
February—Harry T. TturU'lgh Numhor! 
"Our Colored Heroes" "The Colored Fighters" 
Size 1G x 20. Greatest Patriotic Pictures ever pub­ lished of our colored warriors. The Heroes of Democ­ racy. Millions will be sold. Agents wanted the world ovor. 40 other designs of War Pictures. Soiling price 25c. Wholesale prlco 2D, $1.75; GO, $3.00; 100, $5.50; 500, $22.50; 1,000, $40.00. Largo catalog free. 15 assorted samples of Negro subjects, $1.00 postpaid. HANZEL SALES COMPANY Publishers of war pictures of merit 12 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
HOM E DR Y 
• CLEANING I New book iust published. A little treasure for every woman. Tells how to Dry Clean anything at home from a necktie to a tiarpet. Saves time and money. Enclose a silver dime in thip advertisement and re­ turn it to ua for descriptive circular and we will •endyon free of charge our recipe "How to Clean and Curl Feathers and Plumes," * THE ADAMS CO., 156 Forest Ave. Cincinnati, Ohio 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 Sout h Park Avenue , Chicago , III. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young tad old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries of their strenuous, nerve racking routine lives and romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the full nature In all her wondrous glory. Hie waters of the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, /
progressive people of the day—people who do things? /
Do you believe In progress and do you want to /
have a part In one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely 1 / 
Then you will be interested In, and want to > 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, /
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- # 
cure a beautiful lot for only 124.5 0 each, /
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your / 
payments are completed the lot will be /
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing 
clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg. / V ^ 
So. Dearborn St. /$ * ' 
Chicago, 10. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 154 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Roland W . Hayes 
Phonograp h Record s 
Now ready and on sale 
(Order by Number) 
No. i. Swing Low, Sweet Chariot.$1.50 Negr o Spiritual, b y Harr y T. Burleigh . 
No. 2. Vesti La Giubba (Put on 
Your Smock) $2.00 Arios o from Pagliacci, Orchestra l Accom ­
paniment, Leoncavallo . 
No. 3. Twilight $1.00 B y Katherine A . Glen. 
No. 7. By and By $1.50 B y Harr y T. Burleigh . 
AGENTS 
BOSTON , Mass., A. J. Jackson & Co.. 130 Boylston St. 
BOSTON , Mass., Harold Whitham, 17S1 Washington 
St 
BOSTON . Mass.. Hicks, Laner & Eaton, 79S Treraont St. 
BOSTON . Mass., R. A. Dinsmore, 1221 Tremont StCAMBRIDGE , Mass.. Mrs. G. W. NoweU, S90 Main St. 
SPRINGFIELD . Mass., J. W. Adams. 150 Eastern Ave. 
WOBURN , Mass.. Edward Caldwell. 3SS Main St. 
DETROIT . Mich. , Miss Grace L. May. 253 Woodland 
Ave. 
MONTGOMERY , Ala. , Wm. G. Porter, 36S Margaret 
St. 
TUSKEGEE , Ala. , Arthur Logan, Tuskegee Institute. 
BIRMINGHAM , Ala. . Miss E. 0. Wyatt, 1319 Avenue H. 
JACKSONVILLE , Fla. , J. M. Eohinson. Jr.. 1924 
East St 
BALTIMORE . Md. . W. H. Roberts. 235 X. Araitv St 
PORTLAND , Ore. . Mrs. E. D. Cannady, 401 Buchanan 
Bide. 
PHILADELPHIA . Pa. , Mrs. Margaret Corbett. 1941 
Bainbridge St. 
SA N FRANCISCO , Cat , Harry O. Johnson. Security 
Savings Bank. 
OAKLAND . Cal. . Mrs. A. M. Smith. 494 Moss Ave. 
CHARLESTON , S . C , E. B. Lawrence. 470 King St. 
NORFOLK . Va. . Miss B. C. Smith. 822 Avenue A. 
PITTSBURGH . Pa. . Mrs. Chas. H. Trusty, S20 Anaheim St. 
WASHINGTON , D . C . Dr. C. Sumner Wormley. 997 
Florida Ave. 
SPRINGFIELD . III.. Miss Alice E. Williams. Box 
131. Chatham. 111. 
MADISONVILLE . Ky. , I. A. Watson. 117 Main St. 
LOUISVILLE , Ky. , Sirs. H. W. Jordan. S22 W. Walnut St. 
LOUISVILLE . Ky. , Columbia Phonograph Co. 
PROVIDENCE , R. I., Miss Fiorina M. Williams. 297 
Thaver St. 
NE W YOR K CITY , N . Y. . Dr. Harry C. Blue. 563 
Lenox Ave. 
MONTCLAIR , N . J. , James D. Williams. 7 Walnut 
PI. 
C0LLINGSW00D , N . J. , Mr. R. M. Taylor, 501 Park 
Ave. 
WACO . Texas . Miss Lula Maves. 1127 N. 7th St. 
MERIDIAN . Miss.. L. L. Foster. 1207 26th St. 
INDIANAPOLIS . Ind. . W. H. Roberts. 601 West St. 
WILMINGTON . Del. , Mrs. Elizabeth D. Banton. 924 
French St. 
Reliable and energetic Agents wanted in 
cities not here mentioned . 
Roland W. Hayes, Tenor. Recitals, Concerts, 
Oratorio, Opera, Booking engagements for 
Continental Tour, Season 1918-1919. For 
terms, dates, etc. please WTite. 
Roland W . Hayes 
3 Warwick Street 
BOSTON MASS. 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Patents secured on easy terms Writ * for particular!. 
JOS. H. STEWART , Attomey-at-Law, 494 Louisiana Ave. , N.W. , Waahington, D. C. 
,i„ . „„ . /Centra l 104-W T Telephone. <M a i n 6 j
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTOEHEY-AT-LA W NOTAE Y PVBLI C 
160 7 William aon Building Cleveland. Qhls 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS ATTORNE Y AN D COOMSEIXOE-AT-LA W 
818 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH ATTOaMEY-AT-LAW 
Office!: Suite 802 Syke j Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis 
TaL UtTTin HUT CkU Address, Epbeo 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATtour r AMB COUIIISIXOA-AT-LA W 
14 School Street Bosun , Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Aahbie Hawkins George W . P. McMccben 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN ATTOEKEYE-AT-LA W 
2 1 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L. JONES , Pres. 
N. E. Cor. Sth and.Plum^Sts., •Cincinnati, Ohio 
AGENTS WANTE D Men , wome n and high schoo l students can coin 
money selling the most beautiful patrioti c picture s 
eve r mad e fo r colore d people . "Colore d Heroes " 
just published showin g ou r colore d soTHierc fn 
action in France . "Colore d Ma n N o Slacker " 
16 x 20. Fiv e beautiful colors. Ove r 200 % 
profit. Ever y hom e wants them. Altio the 
memoria l edition o f the "Lif e and Work s o f 
Booke r T. Washington. " A Dollars wort h o f 
samples fo r 25£ postage . 
Huse Sales Co., Atlanta . Ga. 
Mrs. M. Watso n Rudd, 
154 Wes t 131st St. 
Ne w Yor k Cityhas placed 
upon the marke t her new 
ROSE NINO N NTJFEET POWDER . 
It is especially recommende d fo r soldiers, clerks, railroad and factor y employees, dancers an d all persons 
wh o are required to stand or wal k to an y extent. 
Agents Wanted—Writ e for particulars. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY , (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.25 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.25 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G . Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G . 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W . C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York When Our Soldier Boys 
"Come Marching Home" 
How Must the Girls Greet Them? 
"THE KASHMIR WAY " 
Wit h smooth, clear skin and soft, pretty hair. 
Ou r guarantee: Your money back if you are not 'pleased. 
Agents wanted. 
KASHMIR SKIN PREPARATION 
Marvelous—it does the work. 
KASHMIR HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
50c EAC H 
8c POSTAG E 
Free! Free! The Kashmir Beauty Book 
tells you how to be beautiful. 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL COMPANY 
Dept. K, 312 South Clark St. CHICAGO, ILL. 